www.ebook3000.com

Legal Philosophy

www.ebook3000.com

Legal Philosophy
Stephen Riley
Sheffield Hallam University

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England
and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at:
www.pearson.com/uk
First published 2013 (print and electronic)
© Pearson Education Limited 2013 (print and electronic)
The right of Stephen Riley to be identified as author of this Work has been asserted by him in accordance with the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the prior 
written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the 
Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
Contains public sector information licensed under the Open Government Licence (OGL) v1.0. http://www.national-
archives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/open-government licence.htm.
Pearson Education is not responsible for the content of third-party internet sites.
ISBN 978-1-4082-7734-8 (print)
978-1-4082-7888-8 (e Text)
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
16  15  14  13  12
Typeset in 10/14 pt Giovanni by 75
Printed and bound by in Great Britain by Henry Ling Ltd, Dorchester, Dorset
www.ebook3000.com

v
Contents
Preface
xi
  Introduction
1
Law and philosophy
1
Critical concepts
1
Some debates between law and philosophy
2
Why concepts?
4
The underlying argument of the book
5
  1 Justice
7
Introduction
7
1 Ends
11
Introduction
11
a
Judgment
12
b
Desert
13
c
Truth
15
2 Means
17
Introduction
17
a
Adjudication
17
b
Impartiality
19
c
Equality
21
3 Individuals
23
Introduction
23
a
The individual’s good
24
b
Rights
25
c
Status
27
4 Collectives
28
Introduction
28
a
The common good
29
b
The rule of law
31
c
Authority
33
5 Philosophy and justice
35
Introduction
35
a
Meta-theory
36
b
Scepticism
39
c
Pragmatism
41
Questions
43
Concepts and methods: Theorising
44
Further reading
46

vi
CONTENTS
  2 Person
47
Introduction
47
1 Facts and values
50
Introduction
50
a
Humans and persons
51
b
Science and facts
52
c
Humanity and human nature
54
2 Aristotle
55
Introduction
55
a
The human species
56
b
Political animals
57
c
The situated person
59
3 Humanism
61
Introduction
61
a
Humanity and persons
62
b
Liberty
63
c
Fraternity and equality
65
4 Feminism
66
Introduction
66
a
The second sex
67
b
Nature as ideology
69
c
Identity politics
71
5 Freedom
72
Introduction
72
a
Freedom as liberty
73
b
Freedom as rationality
75
c
Freedom as autonomy
77
Questions
79
Concepts and methods: Ideas and ideology
81
Further reading
84
  3 Good
86
Introduction
86
1 The good
89
Introduction
89
a
The human good
91
b
A good life and justice
93
c
Happiness and harmony
94
2 Plato
96
Introduction
96
a
The good and the individual
97
b
The good and the state
98
c
Contemporary Platonism
100
3 Natural law
101
Introduction
101
a
Early natural law
103
b
Natural law and religion
105
c
Modern natural law
107
www.ebook3000.com

vii
CONTENTS 
4 Utilitarianism
111
Introduction
111
a
Hedonism
111
b
Utilitarianism
114
c
Variants of utilitarianism
116
5 Place and property
119
Introduction
119
a
Property
120
b
Environment
121
c
Capability
124
Questions
125
Concepts and methods: Values
126
Further reading
129
  4 Right
130
Introduction
130
1 Right
132
Introduction
132
a
Right and truth
133
b
Right answers
135
c
Right as justice
137
2 Right as correspondence
138
Introduction
138
a
Kant: right as duty
140
b
Hegel: right made social
142
c
Marx: right made material
144
3 Right as coherence
146
Introduction
146
a
Hobbes: right as contract
147
b
Mill: right as liberty
149
c
Rawls: right as fairness
151
4 Rights
153
Introduction
153
a
Hohfeld: distinguishing rights
154
b
Dworkin: rights as trumps
156
c
Nozick: rights as constraints
158
5 Human rights
159
Introduction
159
a
From natural rights to human rights
160
b
Particularity versus universality
162
c
Human rights and liberalism
164
Questions
166
Concepts and methods: Logic
167
Further reading
170

viii
CONTENTS
  5 Rule
171
Introduction
171
1 Rules
173
Introduction
173
a
Rules as commands
174
b
Forms and functions of rules
176
c
Formalism and anti-formalism
179
2 Positivism
182
Introduction
182
a
Origins of positivism
183
b
Logical positivism
184
c
Legal positivism
186
3 Hart
189
Introduction
189
a
The concept of law
190
b
Primary and secondary rules
192
c
Hart and his critics
194
4 Wittgenstein
197
Introduction
197
a
Rules and sense
198
b
Rule scepticism
200
c
Anti-scepticism
202
5 Disobedience
204
Introduction
204
a
The Socratic paradox
205
b
The authority of legal systems
207
c
The authority of individual laws
209
Questions
211
Concepts and methods: Rules and exceptions
212
Further reading
215
  6 Norm
216
Introduction
216
1 Norms and normativity
219
Introduction
219
a
Law as binding
220
b
Normativity and the jurisprudential schools
223
c
Classifying norms
225
2 Kelsen
226
Introduction
226
a
Kelsen’s critical project
226
b
A pure theory of law
228
c
The Grundnorm
230
3 Law and social norms
232
Introduction
232
a
Law and history
233
b
Law and sociology
236
c
Law and economics
238
www.ebook3000.com

ix
CONTENTS 
4 Realism
240
Introduction
240
a
Realism and normativity
241
b
Scandinavian realism
243
c
American realism
245
5 Force and power
248
Introduction
248
a
Norms and repression
249
b
The force of law
251
c
Critical legal studies
253
Questions
255
Concepts and methods: Critique
256
Further reading
261
  7 Law
262
Introduction
262
1 Foundations
264
Introduction
264
a
Transcendent
267
b
Immanent
268
c
Self-subsisting
271
2 Forms
274
Introduction
274
a
Historical and territorial
275
b
Atemporal and atopic
278
c
Diachronic
281
3 Functions
284
Introduction
284
a
Constitute
285
b
Regulate
287
c
Justify
290
Questions
294
Concepts and methods: Knowledge
295
Further reading
298
Glossary of philosophical terms
299
Bibliography
302
Index
309

Join over 5,000 law students succeeding with MyLawChamber
Visit www.mylawchamber.co.uk/riley to access a wealth 
of tools to help you develop and test your knowledge of 
legal philosophy, strengthening your understanding so 
you can excel. 
●Podcasts which examine the work of leading theorists in more detail
●Discussion questions to help you get to grips with some of the more difficult concepts
●Diagrams to help you visualise the connections between concepts and theories
●Weblinks to help you read more widely around the subject and really impress your 
lecturers
www.ebook3000.com

xi
This book is an analysis of seven concepts crucial to philosophical discussion of law. 
It presumes no knowledge of existing philosophical debates. It begins discussion at 
a fundamental and, it is hoped, immediately intelligible level. By understanding the 
meaning of these seven concepts and the work they can do in analysis of law, major 
texts in the jurisprudential tradition should become accessible, and the relevance of 
philosophy for law should become clearer.
Using this book
This book reflects the belief that law is suffused with philosophy, and it serves as an 
introduction to the most important ideas shared by law and philosophy. A range of 
legal instruments and legal sources are used to illustrate the presence of philosophi-
cal ideas within law’s raw materials.
The text is intended to cover a considerable amount of scholarly ground and 
be accessible to those without a philosophical background who will nonetheless 
be asked to use legal theories. It contains questions to draw out ideas discussed in 
the text, along with suggestions for further reading. Common philosophical terms, 
distinctions and tools are highlighted in the ‘concepts and methods’ sections. A 
glossary provides definitions of some philosophical ‘terms of art’ used in the text.
In short, the book is a starting-point for some difficult ideas and texts, and, ac-
cordingly, it ends where other texts in the philosophy of law begin: with discussion 
of the meaning of ‘law’. The chapters can be read in any order according to the needs 
and requirements of different courses. Nonetheless, there is a logical development 
of ideas and analytical tools across the chapters, starting with intuitive ideas about 
justice in the first, through to a synthesis of ideas and arguments concerning law in 
the last. The book’s unifying themes are outlined in the introduction.
The book reflects the interests and tastes of the author, namely both Anglo-
American and Continental philosophy, and both domestic and international law. 
It is hoped this will not disadvantage the reader but, on the contrary, expose them 
to the breadth of approaches used by legal researchers and philosophers today. The 
legal materials are from the United Kingdom unless otherwise stated. They are for 
illustrative purposes and should not be treated as law in force.
Preface

xii
PREFACE
I would like to thank Owen Knight at Pearson for his initial enthusiasm for 
the project and unflagging support thereafter. My colleagues (past and present) at 
Sheffield Hallam University – especially the stalwarts of the staff reading group, 
Miroslav Baros, Sam Burton, Cathy Morse, Martin O’Boyle, Phil Rumney and 
Chalen Westaby – have been unwitting accomplices. I am particularly grateful to 
Lesley Klaff for sharing her passion for the subject and for allowing me to experi-
ment with her Legal Theory syllabus. Many of the ideas in the book were introduced 
to me by Professor Paul Roberts (University of Nottingham), Dr David Seymour 
and Professor Peter Rowe (Lancaster University): my thanks to them. Dr Phil Riley 
kindly read, commented on, and improved, the drafts. All remaining faults are my 
own. It would not have been possible without Ruth’s patience, while she herself 
worked on significant outputs: the book is dedicated to her.
www.ebook3000.com

11
Law and philosophy
If myths are to be believed, being a philosopher and being a lawyer are two very 
different ways of living, working and thinking. Lawyers use their time getting things 
done. Philosophers think about thinking. These two different vocations – one ac-
tive, one contemplative – have nothing in common. These caricatures are false 
(although, like any caricatures, they contain a grain of truth). Even where they are 
in conflict – when lawyers want to get things done and philosophers want to get 
things right – both are working on similar problems.
What problems do law and philosophy share? They are concerned with how peo-
ple live their lives; they are concerned with justice in human affairs. Both demand 
clarity in discussing human life; both want to determine how we can, and should, 
order ourselves as a society. In short, lawyers and philosophers face the same prob-
lems: clarifying ideas and putting ideas into practice.
This book is an introduction to those ideas shared by philosophy and law, and 
it is ideas that give the book its structure. Understanding the concepts ‘person’, 
‘good’, ‘right’, ‘rule’, ‘norm’ and ‘justice’ requires more than checking a dictionary. 
It is to ask what these words have meant, are used to mean and should mean; and 
with clarity on these ideas we have a better sense of what is at stake in both law and 
philosophy. However, this book does not seek to define these ideas exhaustively or 
definitively. In a more limited way it seeks to show that there are concepts, problems 
and practices shared by lawyers and philosophers, not least the idea of being critical.
Critical concepts
Philosophy is critical because it is a discipline with no unassailable assumptions, no 
‘orthodoxy’, other than that its practitioners should be critical of ideas. Philosophers 
are committed to criticism because the problems that fall within its scope – multi-
farious questions from the organisation of society to the relationship between the 
world and language – are worthy of the most rigorous analysis necessary to find 
rational solutions.
Law is critical because it has to make judgments and decisions, on the basis of 
general rules, about what people are entitled to. Lawyers are critical with a pur-
pose: to realise justice, or as close to justice as is humanly possible. Drawing both 
Introduction

INTRODUCTION
2
together, law needs answers to social problems, while philosophy needs answers to 
perplexing human problems. In both cases they need the right answers. Therefore, 
criticism as practised by lawyers and philosophers is not cynicism. It is insistence on 
finding what is true, right or just.
Getting to the right answer is not something that we have to struggle with every 
time there is a problem. There are ways of getting to answers that are reliable, that 
are useful or that are socially agreed upon. Everyone, including lawyers and phil-
osophers, have traditions. However, while law and philosophy have long traditions, 
they have only qualified respect for tradition. Without criticism of our inheritance 
from the past, our ideas and practices stagnate. Lawyers and philosophers, perhaps 
more than other scholars, have a responsibility to criticise their traditions. Being 
critical with a purpose is not only to take a position on other people’s problems, but 
requires being critical about the perspective with which we ourselves begin. Without 
law and philosophy being critical about themselves they would not be useful or 
interesting parts of people’s lives, they would be historical curiosities.
This gives us a first meaning of critical – probing other people’s ideas and one’s own – 
and lawyers and philosophers, in different ways, are specialists in this field. Dealing 
with specialists of any kind, particularly specialists in criticism, means dealing with 
terminology, abstractions and complexities. Human life is a complicated thing, and we 
have to ‘abstract’ from that complexity simpler ideas. Simple ideas are the life-blood of 
philosophy because philosophy aims to ‘state the obvious’ as clearly as possible in order 
to show where ‘the obvious’ hides problems and imprecision (Hacker, 1997). Law has 
a habit of taking simple ideas, like ‘right’ or ‘responsibility’, and making them complex 
through debate and refinement (Katz, 2011). Here is a second meaning of ‘critical’: some 
ideas are essential, critical for getting things done. It is critical for lawyers to have a clear 
understanding of certain ideas, and critical for philosophers that they do not settle for 
anything less than perfect clarity in these ideas.
Some debates between law and philosophy
While law and philosophy have some broad areas of agreement on critical problems, 
and the tools needed to solve those problems, there are nonetheless tensions, not 
least the practising lawyer’s desire to have a stable set of concepts (rules, principles 
and a shared vocabulary) which are not called into question every time legal discus-
sion takes place. The philosopher, conversely, views these concepts with suspicion. 
Taking one example, all legal systems contain the idea ‘adult person’ (it is a status 
that is granted to a person once they reach a certain age). Philosophy considers 
‘person’, along with ‘adult’, to be words enmeshed within a web of debates about 
language, meaning and the rights and responsibilities of an individual.
Legal institutions have to make decisions without constant dissection of their vo-
cabulary. And, as a consequence of the need to cut away some ‘purely’ philosophical 
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION
3
debates and prioritise those ideas central to law’s functioning, a specialised disci-
pline of ‘jurisprudence’ – lawyers’ own distinctive philosophical tradition – has 
emerged where the practice of law is set aside in the pursuit of clarifying basic legal 
ideas. In jurisprudence, ‘law’ itself quickly becomes a core object of enquiry, and the 
discipline of jurisprudence is predominantly a forum for discussion of the word, the 
idea and the ideal of, law (Hart, 1994; Ross, 2004). This is an argument fought pri-
marily between two schools of thought – legal positivism and natural law – schools 
who disagree over the fundamental, starting, assumptions. Positivists insist that the 
sources of law are primary; the natural lawyers insist that the ideals giving rise to law 
are the proper foundation for philosophical debate. This is the framework within 
which jurisprudence is still conducted and taught today, albeit with developments 
in both schools (and other rival schools) allowing a more nuanced, less monumen-
tal, clash over where debate should begin and go (Del Mar (ed.), 2011).
The relationship between law and philosophy is wider than this debate suggests. 
Not least because there are common questions about law that generate philosophi-
cally interesting answers. For instance, why do many people not like lawyers? It 
cannot be that they make money out of people’s misfortunes. If that were the case 
people would dislike surgeons with equal ferocity. The answer is, perhaps, that we 
see lawyers falling short of an ideal: the pursuit of justice. In courtrooms, manipula-
tion and rhetoric seem more abundant than noble ideals. In learning law we find it 
‘replete with loopholes [and] the teaching of their exploitation is a mainstay of legal 
training’ (Katz, 2011: 10).
Another question: why, if we want to understand our fellow human beings, 
would we turn to literature, psychology or history, but are unlikely to turn to law? 
Despite centuries of experience being distilled in legal texts and legal practices it is 
assumed that humans are poorly or inaccurately understood by law (Shklar, 1986). 
Perhaps because law is as much an instrument of power as it is a reflection of the 
human condition. Perhaps because law seems to simplify human action and human 
existence in a way that misses vital, interior, aspects of our lives. These are just two 
of the kinds of questions that lead into philosophical reflection on justice, persons 
and other critical terms that law uses, but has no authority to monopolise.
For these reasons, this text assumes that there is no strict division between ‘legal 
philosophy’, ‘legal theory’, ‘jurisprudence’ and general philosophy. There is enough 
overlap between these disciplinary categories to make distinction unnecessary. An 
argument could be made to insist that law is a social institution and as such gener-
ates specific questions about how that institution exists and how it should function. 
However, the assumption of this text is that law – as an institution, as a set of rules 
and as an ideal – provokes questions concerning knowledge, obligation and author-
ity that are part of the wider philosophical tradition. Consequently, while the text 
addresses a limited number of concepts, it covers an extremely wide range of ideas, 
schools and concepts in pursuit of clarifying fundamental ideas.

INTRODUCTION
4
Why concepts?
The format and structure of the book requires further comment and justification. 
Texts in the philosophy of law tend to adopt a ‘canonical’ approach, setting out a 
number of well established schools of thought (principally positivism, natural law 
and realism) and then explain the ideas of the schools’ main exponents. This text 
does not seek to do this. There are many books already available that do this well, 
and these are highlighted in the ‘further reading’ sections of the chapters.
The approach taken here is to begin with concepts shared by law and philosophy 
and demonstrate that these concepts cut across schools and traditions. This encom-
passes the traditional canons of jurisprudential thought, but it is not driven by the – 
different and sometimes incompatible – starting assumptions of those schools. Nor 
does it seek to chart the development of, and relationships between, key thinkers 
in these schools. Rather, it is concerned with the extent to which these schools and 
thinkers contribute to explaining core concepts. Structuring enquiry around con-
cepts shared by law and philosophy is not a new idea and is broadly in line with 
the approach of Critical Legal Studies (see Chapter 6). This school of thought insists, 
among other things, that law and philosophy must reconnect with one another after 
a long period in which they functioned in isolation from one another, to neither 
discipline’s advantage (Douzinas and Gearey, 2005).
Seven concepts are major battlegrounds of argument; they are concepts necessary 
for accurate, critical and reflective understanding of law. They account for how law 
could be said to have a foundation (justice or persons), a justification (the good 
or the right) or a particular structure (rules or norms). It is suggested that for each 
of these concepts there is a central area of debate and disagreement which can be 
stated as follows. Discussion of justice can be divided between positions that argue 
law has a unique relationship with justice, and positions that see a close relation-
ship between legal and political justice. The idea of the person lies somewhere be-
tween ‘human’ as a factual category and ‘personhood’ as a value. The idea of the good
is split in its meaning between a narrow idea of usefulness, and a complex idea of 
human happiness. The idea of right, as an adjective, points to law producing ‘right 
answers’; right, as a noun, is a possession (my rights) or something granted by a law-
giver (legal rights). The idea of a legal rule can be understood either as a command 
or as something accepted as an obligation. The idea of a norm is located somewhere 
between a rule and a pattern of behaviour. Finally, the idea of law is itself divided 
between being something real and something ideal.
These are philosophical debates because looking at what lawyers do in order to 
clarify them would be to assume that legal institutions must possess a settled and 
authoritative insight into law. This assumption is challenged because it does not 
capture the creative responsibilities of judges (Dworkin, 1998) or the social prac-
tices that allow law to exist at all (Delacroix, 2006). Furthermore, we should not 
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION
5
assume that the schools of legal philosophy have the right starting-point. These 
schools should be questioned, not allowed to define the questions. In short, the 
benefit of starting with these concepts is sustained engagement with ideas that are 
fundamental across schools and disciplines.
The underlying argument of the book
This book can be read as constituting an argument about law as an object of philo-
sophical enquiry. The following line of argument, while it does not have to be ac-
cepted in order for the book to be intelligible, makes this explicit.
The objectives of the philosophy of law are two-fold. First, to give an account of 
what ‘law’ means to those inside and outside legal institutions. Second, to engage 
with philosophical questions generated by legal rules, practices and institutions. The 
first is a focused conceptual enquiry into meaning; the second draws legal debates 
out of the courtroom and into a philosophical forum. Accordingly, the best place 
to commence the philosophy of law is with our intuitions about ‘justice’: justice 
weaves through both the narrow conceptual question of the meaning of ‘law’ and 
wider discussions about rules and practices. In other words, understanding ‘justice’ 
demands that we map out where justice applies and what forms justice could take. 
More specifically, theories of justice often need further justification in the needs and 
interests of persons, singularly or collectively.
Persons can be understood in a range of ways, but each frame of reference gen-
erates a question with respect to the division between facts and values. However 
much we can know (scientifically or psychologically) about humans, there is still a 
further step needed to turn these facts into the values (obligations, duties or expecta-
tions) associated with personhood. This stark division between fact and value can 
be bridged with the idea of ‘the good’ and its various manifestations in legal and 
moral philosophy. What is good for us as persons must create values. However, this 
also raises suspicions about how appropriate the (predominantly moral and ethical 
vocabulary) of goodness is in capturing the concept of law. Thus, ‘the good’ is con-
trasted with ‘the right’ understood as the prioritisation of a certain kind of coherence
closely related to law and legality.
The coherence demanded by ‘right answers’ and ‘legal rights’ lends weight to the 
idea of law being best captured in its rules, rules which are capable of generating 
right answers in logically defensible, and rights-preserving, ways. But scepticism 
about the efficacy of rules alone – given their close relationship with habitual be-
haviour and the sense of obligation – demands their partial dissolution into ‘norms’. 
Norms are sets of expectations, practices and obligations that give order to our 
world without necessarily taking the form of rules.
These lines of enquiry, together, leave us marginally closer to where we aimed. 
That is, a philosophical relationship with the word ‘law’ which encompasses an 

INTRODUCTION
6
‘internal’ point of view (the practices and institutions of law) and an ‘external’ point 
of view (law as a dimension of our social practices and social ideals). We should 
be left with an idea of law which is far from a ‘brooding omnipresence in the sky’. 
Rather, we should understand ‘law’ as denoting certain ideas and practices – ideas 
and practices with distinctive sources, forms and functions. We should also be left 
with a clearer idea of where and why the practice of law gives rise to philosophi-
cally significant debates, along with philosophical techniques with which to analyse 
these debates.
www.ebook3000.com

77
Justice
1
This chapter is intended to be an example of philosophical analysis. It is structured 
around common or intuitive ideas about how law and justice are connected. But 
it concludes with fundamental debates about meaning, knowledge and ethics. 
How do common or intuitive ideas lead into fundamental philosophical debates? 
Collecting intuitive ideas and then classifying them is a necessary first step in philo-
sophical analysis. It is precisely this classification that leads to more fundamental 
types of philosophical questioning: what to classify and how to classify.
The remainder of this introduction provides an overview of the ideas and catego-
ries adopted in the chapter. It also sketches a basic opposition within which ques-
tions about justice can be contextualised. On the one hand, an insistence that justice 
and law have a unique relationship; on the other, the belief that justice is something 
sought by all individuals and institutions.
Justice is among the most important philosophical terms associated with law. 
However, there are no uncontested accounts of justice and no single idea is denoted 
by ‘legal justice’. Its meaning is historically variable, contested and arguably depend-
ent on our perspective. For instance, justice stands outside law: law can meet, or fail 
to meet, the standard of justice. Justice is also within law: law is the aspiration to 
achieve, or to deliver, justice. This standard, or aspiration, demands clarification. Is 
justice a standard which applies to legal decisions, legal procedures, or all and any 
social institutions? And, if justice has a special relationship with law, do different 
fields of law possess their own standards of justice, or does one standard apply 
across all legal activities?
Could ‘legal justice’ represent the same standard in every field of legal activity? The 
following line of enquiry suggests some problems with such a proposition. The idea 
of a court coming to ‘the right legal answer’ might be common to all fields of legal 
activity, but law is more than the activity of courts, because courts can only func-
tion where there are rules. Therefore, legal justice must, at the very least, combine a 
Introduction

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
8
concern with rules and with decisions. The idea of ‘giving people what they deserve’ 
might better capture this combination. However, note that ‘giving people what they 
deserve’ is also provided by non-legal institutions and practices, through arbitration 
processes and political policies. For this reason we might choose a slightly narrower 
definition of justice, for example ‘holding people to account for their actions’. But 
while this would hold good for criminal or administrative law, it would seem less 
appropriate for family or contract law. Clearly, defining the relationship between law 
and justice requires prior analysis and classification in order to yield clear answers. Are 
we only concerned with legal practices (and what do we mean by ‘legal’?) and how 
general, or specific, do we need our definition of justice to be?
Without having to decide in advance exactly what we want to find, we can clas-
sify our ideas of justice under general categories. This chapter uses four broad cat-
egories. The first is ‘ends’, meaning goals or objectives. The second is ‘means’, i.e. 
instruments by which we bring about ends. Third, ‘collectives’ denotes collections 
of people. Fourth, ‘individual’ denotes any single person within a collection of peo-
ple. These categories begin to draw some distinctions without presuming too much 
about the kind of answer we want to find.
The category ‘individual’ captures the fact that law, and social life as a whole, 
is made up of individual actions and individual needs. But individuals also form 
collectives. Collectives encompass nations, groups, communities or families who 
have joint interests which sometimes override the preferences, or even the interests, 
of the individuals that form them. We also have to consider goals, what it is ac-
tivities aim to achieve. Law is goal-oriented: it intervenes in social life in particular 
ways for particular reasons. But it does so with a unique set of means, i.e. the tools, 
practices and decisions which allow it to fulfil certain kinds of goals but also limit 
the kinds of goals it seeks. Law can seek to resolve conflicts but does not have the 
means to solve all social problems. This chapter begins with some important de-
bates about what is distinctive in law’s ends and its means, and by questioning what 
the relationship between the two might be.
The difference between ends and means also plays a large role in drawing a cru-
cial distinction: the difference between law and politics. Law seems to have a closer, 
more intimate, relationship with justice than any other social practice because, not 
only legal outcomes are assessed as just or unjust, the very practice of law, regardless 
of its outcomes, seeks to be just. Politics, ‘the art of the possible’ or ‘the science of 
government’, is judged less by its practices than by its immediate outcomes. Law 
has to seek and demonstrate justice at all times. It is not enough for laws to ‘look 
good on paper’, or for judges to choose good outcomes at whim. Justice must be 
done and be seen to be done through the use of legal means. That is, everyone, at all 
stages in a legal process, should see that just practices are being maintained.
However, isolation of what exactly is being demanded here is difficult. Many of 
the things we want a legal system to aspire to – for example, equality or fairness – are 
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION
9
not distinctively legal virtues at all but are generally good and desirable. Moreover, 
legal justice could be said to ultimately serve social ends (such as the resolution of 
conflicts or social stability) rather than being an ‘end in itself’: law is not just, but 
many of things that it seeks to bring about are. In short, as a means to social or 
political justice, law might be seen as merely a ‘handmaiden’ to more fundamental 
aspirations such as economic justice or the common good. We must decide whether 
law’s aspiration to maintain just practices is enough to make its claim to justice su-
perior to that of politics. Or whether, on the contrary, law is squarely a part of, and 
dependent upon, wider social and political objectives and aspirations.
A different way to consider law’s claim to a special relationship with justice is to 
ask whether they have a necessary relationship or a contingent relationship. That is, 
does justice always necessarily accompany law? Or, is law associated with justice be-
cause our traditions, our language and our culture, have taught us to link the words 
law and justice? There are strong currents of thought, flowing from Ancient philoso-
phy, that grant only a contingent link between law and justice. This denies that there 
is a necessary relationship between ‘legal’ and ‘just’, not least because many things 
can be labelled ‘legal’ without having a special claim to our approval. In fact, there is 
much philosophy, to this day, which is sceptical of a necessary relationship between 
law and justice.
From the perspective of the lawyer, such scepticism might well appear wrong-
headed. Everyone, it could be argued, would rather have their disputes settled by a 
court than a duel, and would rather have their interests protected by the state than 
through their own resources. Law’s special kind of dispute settlement, and its assur-
ance of equality between parties, is enough to make the link between law and justice 
necessary, not contingent.
Clearly, ideas look different from different perspectives, and this ‘common sense’ 
intervention by lawyers should encourage us to contrast perspectives inside and 
outside law. Oliver Wendel Holmes (1841–1935) sought a viewpoint outside law in 
order to be ‘realistic’ about what law does in our society. He imagined the perspec-
tive of the ‘bad man’. For the bad man law is, above all, a threat (Holmes, 1897). 
Conversely, Ronald Dworkin (b.1931), in order to make sense of how law can be 
said to provide right answers to difficult disputes, finds an ideal point of view inside 
law, the judge ‘Hercules’ (Dworkin, 1977). For Hercules, law is a story of society’s 
self-creation. Drawing upon both perspectives, law is both a threat and the story of 
our society’s evolution.
By the same token, the meaning of justice depends upon whether we are inside 
or outside law. From a social or political perspective outside legal institutions, legal 
systems offer a distinct form of justice: law provides the best means for adjudicating 
disputes. From within a legal system, justice is often found in what is beyond legal 
procedures, processes and adjudication, namely individual needs, moral rights or 
political principles. Put this way, the question of law’s relationship with justice does 

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
10
not demand isolating a certain property that law possesses. It demands determining 
what the word ‘justice’ means, and whether it is owned by any one group: lawyers, 
politicians or ethicists. If one group offers the definitive meaning of ‘justice’ we 
have a single answer to what justice is. If it is not owned by any particular group 
we might, perhaps, have to treat justice as a complex concept that will always have 
different, and competing, meanings.
One common philosophical means to widen the range of perspectives brought 
to bear on a complex debate is to return to historical discussions. The philosophical 
works of the Ancient world offer us familiar problems in an unfamiliar context. We 
find ideas that are sometimes wildly different from own, but also familiar concerns 
and interests. Significantly, we also find a sustained effort to provide definitions 
of important ideas. The Ancients – Greek and Roman thinkers stretching from, 
roughly, 500BCE to 500CE – often (though not uniformly) agreed that justice 
should be defined as a virtue. A virtue is an ideal, or a tendency to act in a certain 
way. Such ideals provide a template or aspiration for both institutions and individu-
als (Winthrop, 1978; Cicero, 1998).
By treating justice as a virtue, justice is held to be independent of the state and 
its legal system. It is a standard by which collective decisions and personal actions 
can be judged. This reflects, in part, the fact that Ancient social institutions were 
on a smaller scale and more integrated into social life. The individual is not ‘set 
against’ the state; free individuals participated in every aspect of the state. For this 
reason, Ancient philosophers were far more attuned to the fact that courts are a 
human creation – and susceptible to the same vices of weakness and corruption – 
and for that reason should be judged by the same standards by which we judge 
individuals.
Put another way, the Ancients are far from assuming that law has a special status 
superior to politics. Both concern governing a body of people, and both are arenas 
where persuasion can be as important as truth (Carey, 2012). In contrast, our own, 
modern, understanding of justice is coloured by the assumption that legal systems 
have already proven their worth (their fairness, their independence or their useful-
ness) and that our only task is to successfully isolate which property (fairness, inde-
pendence or usefulness) is the ultimate source of that worth.
We now have two approaches to justice to compare. The modern assumption 
that law is a distinct social institution and any theory of justice must take account 
of this independence, and the Ancient assumption that justice is equally the 
measure of law, politics and the individual. The modern assumption, that law is 
an independent set of procedures to arbitrate between disputing parties, suggests 
that law and justice are related precisely because law is aloof from wider social 
forces. The Ancient philosophers have a critical standard, a virtue, by which to 
judge a range of practices of institutions; they caution us against being too quick 
to separate law from other social forces. From this perspective we have yet to prove 
www.ebook3000.com

1 ENDS
11
that a division between law and society, or law and politics, captures everything 
we mean by ‘justice’.   
1  Ends 
 
 Introduction 
 We begin with ‘ends’ because, whatever else we can say about it, law surely seeks to 
achieve something. That ‘something’ may be complex but, like any other organised 
human activity, law is purposive, i.e. goal-driven. 
 ‘Ends’ are goals, end-points or objectives. A person’s goals and objectives may be 
monumental or trivial. Either way, ‘goal-oriented activity’ is the most fundamental 
aspect of human practices. Humans do not simply react to their environment like 
animals. Humans choose courses of action in order to fulfil ends such as their hap-
piness, their well-being or their survival. 
 Law’s ends could be said to be both practical (‘solving problems’) and ideal (‘realis-
ing our potential as a society’). At the practical level, we could treat justice as the out-
comes of trials and courts. Using established courts of law solves problems that cannot 
be solved in any other way: courts produce decisions that are acceptable to two other-
wise opposed parties, and they produce a public record of how disputes are likely to 
be settled. These ends are important. Conflicts between individuals that are not settled 
by law can escalate into revenge; law offers remedies to problems that close a chapter 
in people’s lives. In addition, a public record of the actions of courts allows people to 
know what remedies are available to them and when to try to avoid the courts. 
 A conflict being arbitrated by a third party is no guarantee of a good decision; and 
this indicates a second broad set of goals: realising certain kinds of ideals. Law is not 
simply aiming to reduce the overall conflict in the world, it is seeking to bring about 
particular kinds of solutions to particular problems. One candidate for the specific 
objective of legal decisions is the idea of  giving people what they are owed . This seems 
to capture much of what is delivered by law, and where law fails to do this we feel 
that an injustice has taken place. If I have been denied what I am owed (for example 
payment for work) I could seek some kind of political change to ensure that this 
does not happen again, but I am more likely to seek a legal remedy to ensure I get 
what I am owed. While self-serving, this is also  just, as the remedying of a wrong 
through a public (authorised and transparent) process of putting it right. However, 
in order to ascertain what people are owed there needs to be fair examination of 
the facts of the case, the submissions of two parties. Consequently, law must seek 
judgment based on truth and facts: law is not simply about judgment, but about 
judgment on the basis of the fullest available evidence. Accordingly, among the 
 ideals towards which law aims, we must consider truth and truth-finding.  
1  Ends

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
12
1a Judgment
Judgment is central to human life and activity. In the broadest sense we exercise judg-
ment all the time from choosing what to wear or when to cross the road. Legal judg-
ment clearly has a special status. It is an authorised form of judgment with an especially 
authoritative status. Whatever the society we inhabit, only specific people in specific 
(institutional or ritualised) contexts will be authorised to make legal judgments, and 
because of this their judgment is especially authoritative. Common law legal systems 
give such authoritative weight to judgments that judges and courts are said to ‘make 
the law’ and not just interpret or apply it. At the same time, in modern legal systems 
legal judgment will be constrained by the rules of procedure governing courts and of-
ficials. For this reason we are unlikely to treat a judgment as authoritative (‘expert’ or 
‘definitive’) unless it is authorised (originating from a duly constituted court).
Judgment in every context is a process of taking the particular (particular people, 
circumstances, needs and relationships) and bringing the particular under a general 
rule. The particular is treated as failing within general – public and universal  – 
categories. This is true whether we are judging a work of art, a sporting event or a 
case: does this action fulfil our general standards of a good, justified or reasonable 
action? Law is distinctive in possessing an extensive set of general rules for public 
conduct under which particular instances and circumstances can be brought. Law’s 
judgments do not always take the form of commands, but are also generalisations 
about the rights and duties of individuals (see Chapter 5). So, legal judgment can be 
said to concern, on the one hand, the context and authority of the people making 
the judgment. On the other, judgment concerns the rules – the public and generali-
sations about conduct – that legal professionals are called upon to use in judgment. 
These two elements of judgment will be considered at greater length.
Legal judgments are uniquely authorised judgments made by uniquely author-
ised people. Why are they authorised judgments? We, as an electorate, authorise laws 
because they are made by our representatives. In this sense the authority of legal 
decisions flows directly from the authority possessed by democratic institutions and 
practices. But legal institutions and legal officials seem to have their own independ-
ent authority to make judgments. Those who make judgment on law are uniquely 
authorised people; authorised to make decisions and trusted to use the right meth-
ods of judgment. As such we can understand legal justice as the considered judg-
ment of a qualified legal professional (West, 1998).
This discussion of the authorisation to judge can be contrasted with a focus on 
the process of judgment itself. This, as suggested, can be understood as the particular 
brought under the general. Law has many general rules and the task of lawyers is to 
give the best account of how a particular set of actions can be encompassed within 
general rules (Schauer, 1991). The outcome of a legal process might be said to be 
the successful joining of the general (rules) with the particular (facts). The best ‘fit’ 
www.ebook3000.com

1 ENDS
13
between the two is the objective of any court and this may well be part of what is 
articulated by legal justice: the careful matching of public generalisations (rules) and 
particular events (facts). Much more could be said about this, not least because it pre-
sumes a great deal about the value and justification of those general rules and about 
what facts are to be considered relevant. Some general rules are bad rules; some facts 
about the world are always excluded by legal decision-making (see Chapters 5 and 6).
For this reason, it can be concluded – provisionally – that judgment is impor-
tant because of its relationship with authority, less its relationship with rules and 
processes. Rules run out (law does not anticipate every possible state of affairs), not 
all facts need to be brought under rules (law ‘does not concern itself with triviali-
ties’), and because ‘hard cases make bad law’ (Coval and Smith, 1982: 457; see also 
Chapter 5). In other words, legal judgment may have to be, in some instances, a 
moral decision, a policy decision, or a pragmatic decision (see Chapter 6). It will, 
nonetheless, be an authorised judgment.
EXAMPLE
Sweezy v New Hampshire 354 US 234 (1957) (US Supreme Court)
Sweezy had been prosecuted under a New Hampshire law prohibiting ‘subversive activity’. 
He had delivered a lecture that appeared to align him with the Communist Party and was 
therefore ‘subversive’. Other than to insist that he was a member of the Progressive Party, 
not the Communist Party, he refused to cooperate with police questioning and was con-
victed of contempt of court. Here the United States Supreme Court is considering whether 
the law prohibiting ‘subversive activity’ was unconstitutional given that the standard of 
proof needed to establish it was vague. It is a question of judgment, here understood as 
a kind of balancing, rather than the simple application of a rule.
To be sure, this is a conclusion based on a judicial judgment in balancing two contending 
principles – the right [. . .] of a citizen to political privacy, as protected by the Fourteenth 
Amendment, and the right of the State to self-protection. And striking the balance implies 
the exercise of judgment. This is the inescapable judicial task [of] this Court. It must not 
be an exercise of whim or will. It must be an overriding judgment founded on something 
much deeper and more justifiable than personal preference. As far as it lies within human 
limitations, it must be an impersonal judgment. It must rest on fundamental presupposi-
tions rooted in history to which widespread acceptance may fairly be attributed. Such a 
judgment must be arrived at in a spirit of humility when it counters the judgment of the 
State’s highest court. But, in the end, judgment cannot be escaped [. . .].
1b Desert
Desert, i.e. what is deserved by someone, can be understood as that which a person 
is entitled to on the basis of their rights, their needs or their interests. Desert is not 
what a particular person wants, rather what they are entitled to, and law is clearly 

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
14
more concerned with the latter than the former. Law will usually entail a loser as 
well as a winner, and involves duties as much as rights. While ‘getting a good out-
come’ might be what we want from law, it is an incomplete account of legal justice. 
Getting what you want is achievable by many means. ‘Getting what you are entitled 
to’, in contrast, looks more like a just outcome.
If we were pushed to clarify what constitutes the ‘right legal outcome’ we might 
be tempted to say that it is not simply one or more parties being made happy, but 
rather the outcome delivering what the parties deserved. In other words, desert and 
‘the right outcome’ are closely related: law determines what is owed, whether in 
financial terms, or in terms of recognising an individual’s value or status. The latter 
is not unlike being ‘owed an apology’ or ‘owed an explanation’, it concerns having 
the right to be treated in a particular way (Marmor, 2004). While none of us has an 
obvious right to be rich, or famous, or happy, it seems true, by definition, that we 
have a right to what is owed to us.
How we determine what is owed to us is contested because it invokes both ideas 
of property and, in more abstract terms, our ‘rights’. The ‘corrective’ capacity of law 
(see discussion of Aristotle, below) is not only its ability to compel the return of 
property, but to correct an ‘imbalance’ between two parties. Where there is conflict 
over a contract or a duty, what is owed is less a distribution of property from one 
party to another than a determination of ‘what judges owe it to the parties to con-
sider’. This may include how we deserve to be treated as consumers or as individuals 
expecting the discharge of a duty of care.
‘To give everyone his own’ sounds splendid. Who will dispute it? The only trouble is that 
this formula presupposes that I know what is due to each person as ‘his’ (i.e. as his right).
The formula is thus devoid of meaning, since it presupposes the legal position for which 
it should be the basis. (Ross, 2004: 276)
Being ‘owed’ can therefore possess at least two meanings. First, what someone is 
entitled to given the particular facts of the case and applicable general rules. Second, 
being owed certain rights and responsibilities given our specific status or legal 
relationships.
These two ideas were turned against one another by Plato (c.438–c.348BCE). In 
his Republic (Book I) he examines the view that justice is giving to a person what 
they are owed. Plato raises the objection that we might owe our neighbour weapons 
that we borrowed from them, but that it would not be just to return them if the 
neighbour had gone mad and would harm themselves and others (1997: 975). The 
neighbour may be owed their property under law, but there might be a more general 
rule that we do not deserve to have our legal rights respected when we are likely to 
abuse them. Plato’s argument asks why we should strive to give people what they 
are owed, and demands further clarification of the general rules of when and where
people deserve things. Plato seeks, ultimately, to argue that desert takes second place 
to certain things that are intrinsically desirable (see Chapter 3), and that we must 
www.ebook3000.com

1 ENDS
15
determine desert on moral, psychological, and political grounds prior to determin-
ing its legal meaning.
EXAMPLE
Cowan v Cowan [2001] EWCA Civ 679
This case discussed the controversial, and now largely defunct, idea of ‘reasonable re-
quirements’ in divorce settlements under the Matrimonial Causes Act 1973. ‘Reasonable’ 
is a slippery idea that allows judges to look outside legal rules to the broad context of 
a case in order to decide whether something is justified; ‘requirements’ roughly denotes 
living expenses. Here the court has to determine a divorce settlement (involving substan-
tial assets) and the extent to which ‘reasonable requirements’ is something constant 
(‘objective’) or a more nuanced question of desert relative to the wealth of a partner 
(‘subjective’).
Perhaps [‘reasonable requirements’] could be criticised for masking what was in effect a 
judicial attempt to achieve the applicant’s or the respondent’s deserts. But the statute 
nowhere speaks of deserts or entitlement as being within the judicial objective. So to 
lodge deserts within the permissible evaluation of respective needs was unjustifiable. But 
lodging it solely within the permissible evaluation of respective contributions also seems 
to stretch the bounds of that concept beyond what Parliament intended. The evaluation 
of deserts is at the core of the court’s quest for a fair outcome. [On the basis of another 
similar case, the law has now moved] the basis of the award firmly away from a subjective 
evaluation of desert to a more objective assessment of entitlement.
1c Truth
Truth and knowledge are the objectives of philosophy. Philosophy is a discipline 
concerned with the most basic questions of what we know, how we know and 
whether knowing something is the same as it being true (see Baggini and Fosl, 2010: 
167–70). Philosophers can set the bar of truth high, demanding a perfect corre-
spondence between our ideas and reality; where the standard is this high, many 
claims to knowledge will be met with scepticism. Conversely, a more ‘deflationary’ 
approach to truth allows for different kinds of certainty in difference spheres of 
human activity. This allows for a more flexible understanding of truth as something 
important, but potentially dependent on the context in which the word ‘truth’ is 
being used.
Courts need to find truth among facts submitted by two parties; justice cannot be 
achieved if judgment is founded on falsehoods and lies. However, the relationship 
of truth and law is complex, not least because a legal judgment has to be justified on 
the basis of proof: a combination of evidence (which may be contested) and judicial 
use of rules (which is a doubly difficult task of deciding which rules should be ap-
plied and how they should be applied). Law’s relationship with justice is not always 

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
16
articulated in the language of truth, but it can be found in the pursuit of proof as 
the means of reaching judgment.
Another way to express this difference is to return to authorised and authori-
tative accounts of judgment. In historical research and in the social sciences, 
scholars bring together as much information as they can to create an authoritative 
picture of an event or historical epoch. This involves studying and synthesising a 
substantial range of sources. The more information used, the more authoritative 
the account. Fully authoritative judgments require objectivity (distance from the 
events and the actors) and should generate consensus in judgment. Legal tribunals 
use a more limited range of sources to bring the particular under specific general 
rules, namely those rules recognised to be legal rules. Courts are authorised to do 
this, and only this. They are authorised to draw conclusions (of guilt or of lia-
bility) only on the basis of specific kinds of information and with specific rules. 
The conclusions that they draw are therefore uniquely authorised judgments 
based on proof. But they are not authoritative judgments about an event or events 
(see Luban, 1989: 2156f). They exclude the kinds of general rules necessary for 
complete historical narratives (e.g. theories about psychology, culture and wider 
historical forces and trends) and they do not aspire to give an account of events 
which receives universal approval.
In the spheres in which it functions – human actions, human affairs, human con-
flicts – law has created and refined a mass of general rules and particular examples 
of how answers to questions can be sought. In private law, dealing with disputes 
between individuals, these answers may be found on the balance of probabilities, 
i.e. likelihoods. In criminal law, where proof beyond reasonable doubt is required, 
we have a standard that aspires to be as close to the truth as is humanly possible to 
the exclusion only of radical, sceptical, doubts based on the uncertainty of every-
thing or the impossibility of any truth. This may not be enough to satisfy philo-
sophical scepticism, but it is a far more stringent standard of truth than we normally 
bring to bear when we evaluate other people’s actions and desert. So, while philoso-
phy could puncture many of law’s claims to the truth by stressing how difficult it is 
to call something ‘true’ or ‘certain’, law, because of its analysis of proof and tiers of 
EXAMPLE
R v B [2010] EWCA Crim 4
This case involved evidence from a four-year-old victim of a sexual abuse. It was important 
for the prosecution that the child’s evidence be given to the Court; the original prosecu-
tion succeeded, in large measure, because of the child’s testimony. The defendant ap-
pealed against the conviction on the basis that the witness did not understand truth. ➨
www.ebook3000.com

2 MEANS
17
judicial scrutiny, has a strong claim to being the best means of finding truth within 
the complex arena of human affairs.  
2  Means 
 
 Introduction 
 ‘Means’ are the tools, the instruments, and the intermediary steps, that are used in 
order to achieve ends. The means employed by law serve to distinguish it from other 
social activities. These means could be said to include the evaluation of evidence 
and arguments, the use of rules, or the use of reasonable and logical arguments. 
These means can be separated from specific ends becoming ‘ends in themselves’. 
The outcome of evaluating evidence, using rules or framing arguments may, or may 
not, lead to a good outcome for the parties. But the very use of these legal tools is 
justified and desirable. Without them, judgment, desert and the discovery of truth 
could only be realised through force or fate. For this reason law is often described as 
the ‘administration of justice’: legal institutions administer, through their processes, 
justice. At the same time we can ask whether the distinctive procedures used by a 
legal system are actually a means to further political and social ends such as happi-
ness, social stability or progress.  
 
2a  Adjudication 
 While the outcome of a legal process will be a judgment, the  process of coming to a 
decision is adjudication between two competing parties. Note that law and courts 
have not always had the close relationship that we find now. In pre-modern Europe, 
law ‘merchants’ would have toured the land offering legal remedies at a price, and 
legal decisions were either not recorded, or recorded in a way that was only acces-
sible to educated specialists ( Twining, 2009 : 282–3). ‘Law’ would not be treated 
2  Means
The conviction is upheld because the child could distinguish truth from falsity. For similar 
reasons, philosophical ideals of truth can be distinguished from the opposition ‘true and 
false’ which is a normal, rarely problematic, part of our vocabulary. 
 The question in each case is whether the individual witness, or, as in this case, the indi-
vidual child, is competent to give evidence in the particular trial. The question is entirely 
witness or child specific. There are no presumptions or preconceptions. The witness need 
not understand the special importance that the truth should be told in court, and the 
witness need not understand every single question or give a readily understood answer 
to every question. Many competent adult witnesses would fail such a competency test. 
Dealing with it broadly and fairly, provided the witness can understand the questions put 
to him and can also provide understandable answers, he or she is competent.  

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
18
as a body of rules, or an institutional tradition, but as a problem-solving tool. 
Nonetheless, this is recognisably legal because a third party adjudicated between the 
disputants, allowing outcomes that the two parties, alone, could not have reached.
A common shorthand for legal justice is ‘having one’s day in court’; here justice 
is nothing more, and nothing less than, having one’s perspective heard in a court-
room (Marmor, 2004). Implicit in this is the assumption that one’s views and ‘side 
of the story’ will be heard and respected, and that a judge or jury will have ample 
opportunity to hear one’s position fully and fairly articulated. It says nothing about 
winning the case or any other kind of remedy. Justice is, rather, access to the legal 
process and being subject to the means that a legal process employs.
If one cannot participate, then one is denied one’s day in court. The principle contributes 
to dispute resolution, because parties that have been able to participate are more likely to 
accept a decision; although they might not agree with the decision, they are more likely to 
comply with it. (Bayles, 1986: 54)
This leaves much to explain as an account of legal justice. It does not specify what 
needs to happen in court or, rather, it already presupposes that there will be a fair
hearing. Being convicted by a court established to imprison anyone undesirable to 
a tyrannical regime might, literally, mean a day in court, but not justice. It might 
be possible, in rejoinder, to say that ‘a court that does not provide justice is not a 
real court’, but this is only to defer the question of what means are employed by a 
‘properly constituted court’.
Having a fair hearing is part of what is captured in the idea of ‘natural justice’: 
that we should hear the other side of the argument and that we should be able to 
proffer whatever evidence is material to our case. Fairness is here related to certain 
procedural and institutional arrangements. What makes particular institutional ar-
rangements fair? It is significant that courts around the world demonstrate signifi-
cant variation in who has to be in a court (many courts do not require juries) and 
what can be done in them (spoken evidence is by no means a requirement of every 
trial). Note also that in many instances we would still want to argue that outcome is 
important. A well conducted trial still fails to deliver justice if the ultimate decision 
is wrong-headed or perverse; sometimes we can identify what the ‘just outcome’ 
should have been, in moral terms, even if we think a legal procedure was fair.
Adjudication is, in other words, a rather sparse understanding of legal justice. No 
specific procedure is identified and no kind of outcome is required. It is simply a 
question of having access to legal procedure and being heard by a court. However, 
even in these general terms, ‘having one’s day in court’ does imply that one has a 
right to dispute settlement on an equal footing with other parties or with one’s oppo-
nent. Adjudication is no justice at all if it involves being treated cursorily or arbitrar-
ily or if there is clear imbalance between the parties. Nonetheless, beyond minimum 
expectations of fairness, this conception of legal justice leaves much unsaid. It may 
well also be a reflection of an attitude found in particular jurisdictions, jurisdictions 
www.ebook3000.com

2 MEANS
19
with long-standing legal and constitutional arrangements, where it is assumed that 
courts themselves are, in the main, fair institutions.
EXAMPLE
~,&6,' &RQYHQWLRQ 5HJXODWLRQV DQG 5XOHV ,QWHUQDWLRQDO &HQWUH IRU
6HWWOHPHQWRI,QYHVWPHQW'LVSXWHV
The ‘International Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States 
and Nationals of Other States’ (the ICSID Convention) was created by the World Bank to 
resolve complex trade disputes concerning nationals of one country trading with, or invest-
ing in, a state that is not their own. Such disputes are made difficult by differences in legal 
systems and by suspicions that the courts of one country may favour their own nationals. 
Given that these arbitration processes can involve large multinational entities they can 
involve high financial stakes. Nonetheless, these adjudications are outside the normal 
structures of national and international law and do not create precedent for other similar 
cases. Note the problems created when parties themselves are allowed to influence the 
means by which their dispute is adjudicated.
Article 34: (1) It shall be the duty of the Commission to clarify the issues in dispute 
between the parties and to endeavour to bring about agreement between them upon 
mutually acceptable terms. To that end, the Commission may at any stage of the proceed-
ings and from time to time recommend terms of settlement to the parties. [. . .]. (2) If 
the parties reach agreement, the Commission shall draw up a report noting the issues 
in dispute and recording that the parties have reached agreement. If, at any stage of 
the proceedings, it appears to the Commission that there is no likelihood of agreement 
between the parties, it shall close the proceedings and shall draw up a report noting the 
submission of the dispute and recording the failure of the parties to reach agreement.

E ,PSDUWLDOLW\
Having one’s day in court clearly presumes certain minimum procedural standards 
will be fulfilled, foremost among them being that the parties will be treated with 
impartiality. This idea is often embodied in the image of Justice as a blindfolded 
judge who weighs up the arguments of two parties while ignorant of their personali-
ties, i.e. their characteristics beyond their basic standing and rights as legal persons 
(see Chapter 2). Impartiality requires adjudication on the merit of the parties’ evi-
dence rather than on the status of the party offering it. Furthermore, this is necessary 
for just adjudication of conflicts because we assume that that rights and wrongs of 
the dispute are independent of the character or status of the disputants.
Blindness to the identities of the parties might fall short of legal justice if a judge 
or adjudicator paid no attention whatsoever to the needs or personalities of the par-
ties to the case. For instance, law has been rightly criticised for failing to acknowledge 
imbalances of bargaining power between private individuals and the businesses that 

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
20
they form contracts with (Caudill and Gold, 1995: 141f). It is a recurrent criticism 
of law that it seeks to come to decisions in spite of, or in opposition to, the needs 
and particularity of individual human beings (see Chapter 7).
Having one’s case judged impartially is articulated by lawyers themselves as 
‘natural justice’ (the phrase ‘natural justice’ can be traced to Aristotle (1987: 412)). 
These are the basic structural characteristics of legal decision-making, including 
the employment of judges who do not have a direct interest in the outcome of 
their decision. It also recalls the Ancient conception of justice as a personal virtue 
rather than a public duty. If legal justice is reducible to impartiality, such im-
partiality is achieved in part through the skill and authority of judges. As Judith 
Shklar puts it:
To pursue impartiality, fair-mindedness, an impersonal state of mind, the self-control to 
recognize and curb one’s prejudices – all this surely is qualitative, a matter of content and 
character. Since all of this is done in the service of only one ethical ideal [justice] and since 
this ethical ideal includes the formal attributes of law, the distinction [between ethics and 
law] becomes insignificant. (1986: 115)
This is not yet to specify what impartiality consists of. It is clear, in general terms, 
that law should attend to certain things and ignore others, but this requires making 
a decision on what counts as legally relevant characteristics. In a criminal case, an 
individual may have a character that is morally objectionable, but we assume that 
the law will attend only to how and where their actions are relevant for the case at 
hand. Otherwise law becomes a way of punishing people for their character rather 
than finding what they deserve. Conversely, character is sometimes relevant as evi-
dence of a ‘propensity’, and courts makes generalisations about what ‘reasonable’ 
people are likely to do in certain circumstances. Those appeals to ‘character’ and 
‘reasonableness’ are themselves governed by general rules, ensuring that everyone 
is judged by the same standard. It is, therefore, through law’s general rules and, by 
extension, its abstractions that impartiality is maintained. Law ‘judges us i/ not in 
all our particularity but as identical abstract beings; ii/ by reference to general and 
objective standards equally applicable to all such beings’ (Lucy, 2009: 482, emphasis 
in original).
Thus, the idea of reducing impartiality to ‘giving weight only to legally relevant 
characteristics’ is more complex than we might have hoped. Not only does this 
entail abstraction (and therefore a certain blindness to our particularity as individu-
als, see Chapter 2), but in most legal contexts the two parties are in a position to 
contest the other’s assertion about what is ‘legally relevant’ in that context. We could 
claim that legal justice amounts to those procedures and rights that allow two par-
ties to have a fair contest in court without irrelevant questions of identity and status 
coming into play. However, those procedures and rights do not prevent ad hominem
arguments being used in courts. Ad hominem arguments are where the person, as the 
origin of an argument, is attacked rather than the argument itself. Such arguments 
www.ebook3000.com

2 MEANS
21
are common in politics (where, for example, a politician is criticised not on their 
policies but on the basis of their track-record or personal life), but fall short of rigor-
ous standards of rational argumentation and rarely have a place in philosophy. Law 
falls somewhere between politics and philosophy in this respect: it is impossible to 
conduct a case simply by attacking someone else’s character in court, but equally 
an opponent’s actions, conduct, reliability or reasonableness may be relevant to 
the facts or the findings. Again, law, especially through the idea of reasonableness, 
makes assumptions about how individuals should have acted. So, impartiality is 
opposed to rank injustice through prejudice, but it can mean being judged on the 
basis of generalisations.
EXAMPLE
Commonwealth v Nicola Sacco & another (1926) 255 Mass. 369 (United 
States)
This is from Judge Thayer’s speech to the jury in the case of Sacco and Vanzetti, a notori-
ous US case where two Italian-American anarchists were (in all likelihood) wrongly con-
victed of a robbery and first-degree murder and sentenced to death. The case involved 
much rhetoric about justice as well as blatant manipulation of racial fears. Here Thayer 
articulates the ideal that was fallen well short of in the case.
Let me repeat to you what I said to another jury in a similar case: Let your eyes be blinded 
to every ray of sympathy or prejudice but let them ever be willing to receive the beauti-
ful sunshine of truth, of reason and sound judgment, and let your ears be deaf to every 
sound of public opinion or public clamor, if there be any, in favor or against these defend-
ants. Let them always be listening for the sweet voices of conscience and of sacred and 
solemn duty efficiently and fearlessly performed. [. . .] In the administration of our laws, 
criminal or civil, there is and should be no distinction between parties. For if it ever should 
so appear in some cases, this, gentlemen, is not the fault of the integrity of the law but 
rather due to the weakness of human beings in the administration of the law, all classes 
of society, the poor and the rich, the learned and the ignorant, the most powerful citizen 
as well as the most humble, the believer as well as the unbeliever, the radical as well as 
the conservative, the foreign-born as well as the native-born, are entitled to and should re-
ceive in all trials under our laws the same rights, privileges and consideration as the logic 
of law, reason, sound judgment, justice and common sense demand. I therefore beseech 
you not to allow the fact that the defendants are Italians to influence on prejudice you in 
the least degree. They are entitled, under the law, to the same rights and consideration 
as though their ancestors came over in the Mayflower.

F (TXDOLW\
If impartiality is related to law’s tendency to work with abstractions, those abstrac-
tions have to be justified, not simply on the basis of legal convenience, but also as 
a contribution to the best possible outcomes. This may well be achieved through 

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
22
tying impartiality to equality: law should use only those abstractions which serve to 
ensure equality between the parties. Equality is the basic assumption that persons 
are equal, not because this is a convenient generalisation but because they should 
be treated as equal to ensure just outcomes.
A saying by Anatole France captures the problem in this idea of equality: ‘the 
majestic equality of the laws [. . .] forbid[s] rich and poor alike to sleep under [. . .] 
bridges, to beg in the streets, and to steal [. . .] bread’ (quoted in Oldfield, 2003: 
452). In other words, law provides a certain kind of equality isolated from social
facts and social problems. There are different kinds of equality – social equality, 
equality in outcomes, equality in treatment – and this makes unequivocal claims 
about equality difficult to make. The equality achieved through law’s abstractions is 
not the equality of ‘equal resources’, ‘equal pay’ or ‘equal opportunity’.
Equality is simultaneously a metaphor, a fiction and one of our most impor-
tant ethical and legal ideas. It is a metaphor based on the mathematical principle 
of abstract quantities being entirely exchangeable; two numbers are equal if they 
can be exchanged for one another in every calculation. This helps to explain the 
‘fiction’ of equality: no two people are mathematically equal, people are never 
exchangeable with one another, and no two people are equal in their properties 
and capabilities. Nevertheless, out of this abstraction arises the powerful idea 
that people should be treated as equals. Equal treatment is therefore an obligation
placed on those with power. This suggests that particular caution is needed in 
discussion of equality.
The claim ‘people are equal’ is true only if we have a specific, legal and moral, 
understanding of personhood (see Chapter 2). The equality of persons exists in spite 
of the fact that humans are born with different talents and abilities and have, acci-
dentally or deliberately, different social statuses. It is legally and morally defensible 
to say that differences in status and ability should be treated as unimportant. A more 
basic, and more universal, set of duties, rights or actions should be the only aspect 
of our lives of concern to law.
Equality, then, underpins both the value of having one’s day in court (we are all 
equally entitled to a legal remedy) and impartiality (we should be treated as equals 
so far as our claim to a legal remedy is concerned). We remain, nonetheless, in the 
realm of means, the means by which we have our claims heard and the means by 
which a court approaches our claims; law’s relationships with equality lies in the 
treatment of people, not the nature of people. Equality, and the difficulty of making 
sense of its application to otherwise unequal humans, will be returned to in later 
chapters, but it is significant that legal justice should be associated with so complex 
and shifting a term. This goes some way towards allowing us to say that justice 
has changed through time as humans’ defence of equality has increased. It also 
encourages us to ask more difficult questions about the foundational assumptions 
at work in law, politics and morality. If as crucial an ideal as equality is premised 
www.ebook3000.com

3 INDIVIDUALS
23
on metaphor (and in some respects a contradiction of reality) can law be said to 
be founded upon convenient, if valuable, fictions rather than incontestable insights 
into truth and reality?  
EXAMPLE 
81 &RPPLWWHH RQ (FRQRPLF 6RFLDO DQG &XOWXUDO 5LJKWV ~*HQHUDO
&RPPHQW$UWLFOH81'RF(&
 This is an analysis of the meaning of Article 3 of the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights: the equal right of men and women to the enjoyment of all 
economic, social and cultural rights. It offers different but nonetheless powerful meanings 
of ‘equality’. Law’s equality is formal – it is an abstraction – and can be contrasted with 
substantive – or real – equality in people’s lives. 
 Guarantees of non-discrimination and equality in international human rights treaties 
mandate both de facto and  de jure equality.  De jure (or formal) equality and  de facto (or 
substantive) equality are different but interconnected concepts. Formal equality assumes 
that equality is achieved if a law or policy treats men and women in a neutral manner. 
Substantive equality is concerned, in addition, with the effects of laws, policies and 
practices and with ensuring that they do not maintain, but rather alleviate, the inherent 
disadvantage that particular groups experience. [. . .] Substantive equality for men and 
women will not be achieved simply through the enactment of laws or the adoption of 
policies that are gender-neutral on their face. In implementing Article 3, States parties 
should take into account that such laws, policies and practice can fail to address or even 
perpetuate inequality between men and women, because they do not take account of ex-
isting economic, social and cultural inequalities, particularly those experienced by women.  
 ,QGLYLGXDOV
 
 Introduction 
 The ends and the means associated with law can be said to protect or give value to 
the individual. Activities and processes which protect the status and value of the 
individual (having one’s day in court, or equality) contribute to the moral and legal 
acceptability of a state as a whole. Any state or society that failed, systematically, to 
protect individuals in the pursuit of wider social, economic or political goals would 
be considered objectionable or illegitimate. The extent to which a state should be 
considered to be nothing more than the sum of the individuals within it, or as, 
conversely, more than the sum of its parts, is principally a question for political 
and social philosophy. But it is one that we will encounter again in different guises: 
law’s relationship with utilitarianism ( Chapter   3 ), and how it is that a ‘right legal 
answer’ could be said to be an answer corresponding to a ‘society’s principles’ 
( Chapter   4 ). 
 ,QGLYLGXDOV

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
24
Our present concern is with the extent to which justice is dependent upon pro-
tecting or advancing the interests of the individual. Any system or process that ig-
nored the needs of individuals would make a questionable contribution to justice, 
but it is difficult to state categorically that law’s claim to justice is its systematic 
contribution to the well-being, the welfare, or the flourishing, of every individual. 
We could argue that this contribution to the well-being of the individual is a by-
product of a more general contribution to the overall interests of the collective (the 
state or society). It may also be the case that the essence of law and legal processes 
is a synthesis of both of these kinds of priorities, the individual and the collective.

D 7KHLQGLYLGXDOVJRRG
Legal systems protect and prioritise individuals to varying degrees. Some emphasise 
the interests of the collective; some seem to favour the individual over the collective. 
These priorities generate important problems for moral and political philosophy; 
the priority of one or the other depends upon assumptions about what is good, 
what is right and what is possible. In addition, there seems to be no way to say 
one has priority without easily identifying counter-examples of where the other 
is important. One illustrative debate concerns the expense of criminal justice sys-
tems. Criminal justice systems are expensive because they afford protections and 
rights to those suspected of crimes. If those individuals are guilty of crimes then it 
looks as though society is lavishing great expense on anti-social individuals. In ad-
dition, prioritisations often achieve the opposite of what they are aiming at. If we 
prioritise the individual at all costs we might give rise to a society so focussed on 
the individual that it loses all collective bonds and duties; this may be damaging to 
individuals within that society. Conversely, a state which prioritises the collective to 
the detriment of the individual has to explain how it is that the state can have any 
legitimacy if it is wholly tailored to the benefit of an abstract thing (state or society) 
with limited concern for the real individuals within it.
It is not the task of a legal system to make final statements on the ultimate prioriti-
sation of individual and collective; any such prioritisation is likely to generate ‘antin-
omies’, contradictory obligations that cannot be fulfilled or resolved (see Spragens, 
1993). However, in its day-to-day functioning law is called upon adjudicate between 
the claims of collective and individual in countless ways. For example, when build-
ing projects harm the interests of individuals but would bring wider social benefits 
(Dworkin, 1998: 20f). Or where decisions are made in the light of a ‘floodgate prob-
lem’ that a different outcome might create (Bix, 2004: 199). Or where a suspect is not 
prosecuted because they are unlikely (on a balance of probabilities) to be convicted, 
therefore time and money can be saved by avoiding prosecution.
There are good reasons to say that, despite the problems and paradoxes gener-
ated by the interplay within law of individual and collective, the individual’s good 
www.ebook3000.com

3 INDIVIDUALS
25
should take priority. This is not to say that the interests of the individual should 
always and everywhere over-ride collective goals; rather that any legal system needs 
to make decisions based on the fundamental interests of human beings. This could 
be said to be trivially true in the sense that any social institutions must have some
justification in human interests at some point or they would have no justification 
whatsoever. It might also be said to be the more substantial moral claim that, in 
social and legal conflicts, the fundamental tenet of decision-making should be the 
basic needs and requirements of the human being. For example, Finnis’ natural law 
position (Chapter 3) roots the common good in the reasonable demands of the 
individual; Marx’s materialism (Chapter 4) stresses the priority of real human needs 
over ownership. Finnis and Marx have very different views of what a state is and 
what it is for, but both agree that the good of the individual is the building block 
of any just social system.
EXAMPLE
Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied 
Palestinian Territory ,QWHUQDWLRQDO &RXUW RI -XVWLFH  -XO\ 
6HSDUDWH2SLQLRQRI-XGJH.RRLMPDQV
Much international law created in the last 50 years protects the interests of the individual, 
not just the state of which they are a citizen. However, the enforcement of international 
treaties is problematic because the rules may run counter to a state’s wider social and 
political commitments, including the safety and security of citizens. Israel is party to a 
number of international treaties but faces problems implementing them because of inter-
nal security problems.
The situation in and around Palestine has been for a number of decades not only a virtu-
ally continuous threat to international peace and security but also a human tragedy which 
in many respects is mind-boggling. How can a society like the Palestinian one get used 
to and live with a situation where the victims of violence are often innocent men, women 
and children? How can a society like the Israeli society get used to and live with a situ-
ation where attacks against a political opponent are targeted at innocent civilians, men, 
women and children, in an indiscriminate way? [. . .] Every State, including Israel, has 
the right and even the duty [. . .] to respond to [terrorist] acts in order to protect the life 
of its citizens, albeit the choice of means in doing so is limited by the norms and rules 
of international law.
3b Rights
‘Right’ is arguably the most ambiguous word in the legal lexicon. We can de-
scribe a legal decision as ‘right’; we can also use ‘right’ to name something that is 
possessed by an individual and grants them various powers. In other words, we 

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
26
can distinguish a right decision (i.e. describing a decision), and a general respect 
for legal rights within the legal process. We also find, in other jurisdictions, de-
scription of law as a whole as ‘right’: this combines the very idea of legality with 
right decisions and legal rights. Here the word law has stronger moral connota-
tions than it possesses in English, and ‘law’, ‘right’ and ‘justice’ become virtually 
synonymous.
We normally conceive of rights as possessed by, or accruing to, individuals. The 
exercise of rights is considered to be one of the crucial dimensions of being human, 
and a person can be said to be a ‘rights-holding human’ (Ohlin, 2002; see Chapter 
2). While many philosophers stress the priority of duties over rights, it can be ar-
gued that rights have a more important role to play in our thinking about law. Law 
is not only called upon to adjudicate between individuals but to mediate conflicts 
between the individual and the collective. Often a state or society may have good 
reasons for prioritising the needs of many over the needs of a minority. For in-
stance, tort law imposes liability for acts which are accidental but which have to be 
deterred for everyone’s good. There is some claim to justice in this kind of ‘social 
engineering’, namely seeking to ensure benefits or protections for as many people 
as possible. Nonetheless, law ensures through rights that individuals’ interests are 
not routinely sacrificed in favour of the demands of a larger group of people or of 
efficiency. Law is better characterised as a set of rights than it is as a form of social 
engineering (Dworkin, 1998: 93–4).
Many problems remain with the idea of, and the functioning of, rights. They are 
inefficient from a social perspective because they prevent easy or uncontested social 
or economic decisions. They have an unclear foundation: do they arise from the 
ability to control the actions of others or from the ‘interests’ of the possessor? More 
specifically, they have an unclear relationship with law: are they the ‘possession’ of 
the individual or are they the creation of legal language and legal processes alone? 
This is discussed further in Chapter 4, but their function in discussion of justice is 
clear: they are an assertion that law should respect the individual not simply serve 
social and political ends.
EXAMPLE
Teixeira de Castro v Portugal(&+5$SSOLFDWLRQQR
Rights are cast in a poor light when they are granted to suspects in police investigations. 
Even where the police have strong evidence, they may be prevented from certain kinds of 
policing because of suspects’ rights. Here a known drug dealer was encouraged by under-
cover police to deal harder drugs. This enticement amounted to the absence of a fair trial 
under Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights (1950).
➨
www.ebook3000.com

3 INDIVIDUALS
27
3c Status
Legal rights emphasise that when the state and individuals are in conflict ‘might 
does not make right’. The state is capable of side-lining or overriding the interests of 
the individual, but the granting of rights to individuals promotes their interests 
even at the expense of collective losses. The importance and status of individuals 
has not always been assured, and it remains the case in many political contexts that 
individuals are treated as secondary to collective needs. However, any legal system 
where rights are powerful and peremptory (see Chapter 4) is a system which respects 
the individual, and this respect itself has a claim to being justice.
Where a legal system (as opposed to authoritarian rule) exists, the state has no 
absolute right to act as it wishes, and the needs of the collective never automatically 
outweigh the needs of minorities. This is evidenced by administrative decisions 
where the actions of the state are assessed by their reasonableness, and in crimi-
nal justice where time and expense is expended ensuring that innocent people are 
not wrongly convicted of crimes. The status that we afford to the individual – as a 
‘rights-holder’ or as a person worthy of respect – ensures that our legal system is ex-
pensive and inefficient. Such inefficiency is a reflection of the status we attribute to 
every individual regardless of their actions or their social status. Before the law, indi-
viduals are equal and have a fundamental status that cannot be revoked arbitrarily.
Another way of articulating the idea of status is as ‘recognition’. Recognition is the 
other side of status: the demand that the state recognises individuals as having a par-
ticular status. Recognition can be achieved through the attribution of rights, but recog-
nition is also afforded through the just practices that we expect from legal institutions. 
Criminal law is a cumbersome way of controlling crime, but the state recognises the 
status and rights of suspects, not just victims; by avoiding inhumane punishments the 
state is extending basic recognition to the convicted. While this is a minimal relation-
ship (the state recognises all persons as possessing certain basic rights) it nonetheless 
indicates a fundamental orientation towards the individual, rather than the demands 
of the majority. Indeed, it has been argued that such recognition is the foundation 
of the modern state and modern legal systems. Such systems do not simply exercise 
authority, they are the necessary for us to be treated as fully human (Honneth, 1995).
The use of undercover agents must be restricted and safeguards put in place even in 
cases concerning the fight against drug-trafficking. While the rise in organised crime un-
doubtedly requires that appropriate measures be taken, the right to a fair administration 
of justice nevertheless holds such a prominent place that it cannot be sacrificed for the 
sake of expedience. The general requirements of fairness embodied in Article 6 apply to 
proceedings concerning all types of criminal offence, from the most straightforward to the 
most complex. The public interest cannot justify the use of evidence obtained as a result 
of police incitement.

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
28
 &ROOHFWLYHV
 
 Introduction 
 By ‘collective’ we can indicate any collection of individuals. It is possible to conceive 
of collectives in a number of different ways. A state is a legal entity, the totality of 
individuals within a defined territory. A society is a cultural entity within which in-
dividuals have shared values and, to a greater or lesser extent, an interest in the wel-
fare of people beyond their immediate friends and families. A nation is a historical 
entity wherein individuals are thought to have a bond of a shared past and, growing 
from this, common values. A community is a group of individuals, smaller than 
a state or society, which has the most clearly defined bonds of culture and value. 
The Roman philosopher Cicero (106-43BCE), whose work is an important source 
of ideas in the natural law school of legal philosophy ( Chapter   3 ) is one of many 
philosophers to see such bonds, and their maintenance through law, as the essence 
of justice: ‘men have a single way of living with one another which is shared equally 
by everyone, and [. . .] all are held together by a natural goodwill and kindliness and 
also by a fellowship in justice’ (1998: 109). 
 The extent to which these ‘entities’ have any clear being or existence is a moot 
point. We are talking meaningfully, but also metaphorically, when we talk of the 
 &ROOHFWLYHV
EXAMPLE 
N v  Sweden(&+5$SSOLFDWLRQQR
 Individuals seek asylum for a number of reasons, most commonly an experience of, and 
fear of further, persecution. Difficult decisions have to be made by states who wish to 
respect the interests of these individuals, but face collective demands for control on im-
migration. The rights and status of asylum seekers is determined by assessments of risk 
and threat, rather than the more complete status ensured by nationality. Here the Court 
is required to make an assessment of the potential for, and significance of, ‘ill-treatment’. 
 The Court firstly observes that women are at particular risk of ill-treatment in Afghanistan if 
perceived as not conforming to the gender roles ascribed to them by society, tradition and 
even the legal system. The UNHCR thus observed that Afghan women, who have adopted 
a less culturally conservative lifestyle, such as those returning from exile in Iran or Europe, 
continue to be perceived as transgressing entrenched social and religious norms and may, 
as a result, be subjected to domestic violence and other forms of punishment ranging 
from isolation and stigmatisation to honour crimes for those accused of bringing shame 
to their families, communities or tribes. Actual or perceived transgressions of the social 
behav ioural code include not only social behaviour in the context of a family or a commu-
nity, but also sexual orientation, the pursuit of a professional career, and mere disagree-
ments as to the way family life is conducted. 
www.ebook3000.com

4 COLLECTIVES
29
‘will of the nation’, the ‘desires of the state’ or the ‘demands of the community’. 
However, it is clear that with the ideas of nation and of community the whole is to 
be treated as more than the sum of the parts, that individuals must sometimes put 
their own interests second to those of their collectives, and that common bonds 
and common identity brings at least as many duties as it does rights. Conversely, it 
is generally, though not always, assumed that in states and societies individuals are 
to be considered rights-holders with interests that may diverge from the interests of 
the whole.
Law is clearly at the heart of state and society. The state promulgates law, while 
society demands law. Nations and communities tend to have a more ambivalent 
relationship with law. Law is secondary to the more basic, more organic, bonds that 
are at the heart of groups with shared values. Accordingly, the conception of legal 
justice related to collectives is not simple and depends upon what kind of social 
grouping is considered primary. This is not to say that law is always secondary to 
political conceptions of the good of the community, state or nation. Communities 
make rules, have a ‘scheme of principles’ (Dworkin, 1998: 211), or can share a ‘mor-
ality of duty’ (Fuller, 1969: 15).
4a The common good
The phrase ‘the common good’ encompasses different positions all pointing to the 
idea of the collective (state, society or nation) having its own set of interests, needs 
or demands over and above the interests of particular individuals within that col-
lective. This could be wealth (the ‘commonwealth’), but it may also be the more 
abstract ideas of stability or security (the ‘national interest’). Law and legal justice 
may well contribute to this common good. Without good legal outcomes and fair 
legal institutions it might be that collective practices such as honesty, fair-dealing or 
promise-keeping lose their value and, thereafter, wealth, stability and security would 
be threatened.
In essence, law underpins a crucial aspect of social life: stable expectations 
between individuals. This can be understood as law being a resource in the back-
ground of social life waiting to correct problems generated by its political ordering. 
It can also be a more substantial idea, expressed by Aquinas and others (Chapter 3) 
that law has a role in determining social roles and responsibilities:
[Laws] only command things that can be ordered to the common good, whether im-
mediately, as when things are done directly for that good, or mediately, as when lawmakers 
ordain things belonging to good training, which trains citizens to preserve the common 
good of justice and peace. (Aquinas, 2002: 63)
This ‘mediate’ contribution to the common good finds expression in communitar-
ian philosophies and in modern natural law. Communitarianism holds the common 
good to be more than the sum of the happiness of individual members (Taylor, 1992). 

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
30
It is a natural or organic relationship – be it common history or solidarity – which 
prioritises responsibilities over the immediate interests of individuals. A different, but 
compatible, approach is offered by Finnis’ modern natural law position (see Chapter 
3) where both individual and collective harmonise in pursuit of the reasonable. The 
governance of a state, like the choices in our lives, should conform to certain basic – 
reasonable – assumptions about what shape human lives should take (Finnis, 2011: 
164). However, because we cannot expect unanimity in every social decision, political 
leadership is necessary:
The greater the intelligence and skill of a group’s members, and the greater their commit-
ment and dedication to common purposes and common good [. . .], the more authority 
and regulation may be required, to enable that group to achieve its common purpose, 
common good. (Finnis, 2011: 231, emphasis in original)
There is an attempt to place determination of the common good on scien-
tific footing in utilitarianism (Bentham, 2007). This stresses the role of law in 
ensuring that social institutions and practices work towards maximising happi-
ness for the greatest number of people (Chapter 3), and some elements of the 
communitarian, natural law and utilitarian positions can be found in ‘historical 
jurisprudence’. This movement, at its peak in the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries, sought to justify the value and authority of legal systems on the basis 
of their historical origins (Chapter 6). It did not simply chart the beginnings of 
legal systems, but rather sought to find value, explanation and justification in 
those origins. Distinctive legal systems have developed in response to the values 
of different social groups. Accordingly, national legal systems should not seek to 
harmonise with one another (for instance on the model of the European Union), 
but should respect the particularity of different legal cultures, acknowledging the 
intimate relationships between national laws and social values. This is commu-
nitarian to the extent that law has a role in maintaining strong bonds and shared 
values. It is also utilitarian in so far as the individual is subsumed into the needs 
of the majority.
In contradistinction to such ‘localised’ (national or regional) ideas of the com-
mon good, there are universalising approaches which stress the commonalities be-
tween humans, within humanity and across national and territorial divides. Chapter 
2 unpacks some of the assumptions and philosophical questions at work in these 
claims associated with humanism and liberalism. Suffice it to say, there are – philo-
sophical and legal – tensions between seeking commonalities between people and
respecting difference, a tension frequently manifest in international law. Through 
treaties, international law seeks harmony, and to a degree uniformity, between 
states. It also, through the principle of self-determination, defends the creation of 
wholly new social entities on the basis that groups themselves best determine what 
their common good is.
www.ebook3000.com

4 COLLECTIVES
31

E 7KHUXOHRIODZ
One recurrent and powerful idea concerning the justice of law is that there can be 
rule by law. Such a rule by law is, in positive terms, a social order organised under 
rules, rules providing impartiality, fairness and stability. A rule of law is also, in 
more negative terms, social ordering which rejects the interests and prejudices of 
individuals, particularly those with power, and exchanges subjectivity for order and 
predictability. The significance of the rule of law is to separate law from other social 
forms of force, compulsion or authority and make rules themselves an objective 
and fair basis for conducting social affairs. Rules of law are dispassionate and non-
arbitrary guidelines with which a society can gain its social, economic and political 
bearings.
This ideal is potent one, foreshadowed by Greek and Roman thought, and it gives 
law a fundamental place in our understanding of social existence. While it is para-
doxical that humans would want to exchange the rule of humans for impersonal 
and mechanical rules, this is intelligible as a counter-weight to the dangers that 
we find in rule by humans. Humans are self-interested and corruptible, rules are 
disinterested and incorruptible. If we conjoin this idea with natural law ideas of a 
EXAMPLE
Hevra Kadisha [Burial Society] of the Jerusalem Community v Lionel
Aryeh Kastenbaum 6XSUHPH &RXUW RI ,VUDHO &LYLO $SSHDO 
(P.D. 46(2) 464)) (1992)
The common good does not demand uniformity from individuals. It means reasonable – 
rational and fair – settlement of disputes for everyone’s benefit. Here an individual sought 
to modify the prevailing burial rituals of Israel in order to respect his wife’s wishes and 
culture. The Court identifies the common good with a balance between individual expres-
sion, prevention of harm and respect for familial bonds.
The question is predominantly one of public law. In a free society there is room for vari-
ous opinions, and the existence of liberty is proven by the creation of the correct balance 
in which we strive to allow every individual to achieve personal expression in the manner 
which he shall choose. This is the essence of tolerance, in that it allows a variety of 
opinions, liberty in argument, and freedom of conscience, so long as they pose no danger 
to the general public or other individuals. Individual liberty extends until the point that it 
abrogates law or significantly harms others; the degree of harm is measured with respect 
to the ‘reasonable man’, and not in accordance with subjective sentiments. [. . .] Every 
person has the right to properly respect his deceased loved ones [. . .], in accordance with 
his lifestyle and tradition, so long as this does not infringe upon the legitimate feelings 
and interests of others. A cemetery is not only a place to bury the dead; but also a place 
for the expression of love and honor, that those living bestow upon the dead.

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
32
divine (or at least non-human) origin of law, law becomes a powerful force external 
to humans and which rightly governs our activities (Chapter 7). The rule of law 
demands the independence of legality from the pragmatism of politics, and gives 
impetus to, among other things, an insistence on a separation of powers between 
the legislature, executive and judiciary. Wieacker sees this separation of powers as 
part of an even wider process of ‘legalism’ which makes rules a safeguard against the 
arbitrary and irrational:
[L]egalism has bestowed upon Europe an immeasurable gain in rationality in the external 
world. [L]egalism has unburdened social conflicts from the force, emotions, interests, and 
prejudices which [. . .] has more frequently produced emancipatory rather than repressive 
results. As against public authorities, legalism assures the individual of greater legal cer-
tainty, and in criminal and civil procedure it has always signified freedom from the arbi-
trariness of irrational forms of proof and proceedings, and later, above all, greater strategic 
equality in litigation. (Wieacker, 1990: 24)
However, even allowing that rule by law is synonymous with rational governance 
of human affairs, a number of conceptual problems render it difficult to substitute 
for justice. First, and most obviously, law is made by people and as such is never 
wholly excluded from the vicissitudes of politics. Second, the rule of law itself seems 
compatible with any form of legislation, good, bad or indifferent. A law that serves 
immoral ends may share all the same legislative characteristics with one that is mor-
ally acceptable; the ideal of a rule of law gives us no grounds for distinguishing the 
two. Finally, the rule of law seems to synthesise two more fundamental ideas. The 
idea of order: a society can be governed by rules in a way which is desirable and 
sustainable; and the idea of consent: a society can be governed by rules that are not 
simply created by whim, but which ‘we the people’ would choose. Both order and 
consent are, in their own ways, valuable collective goals and principles. However, 
it is not always possible to say that the rule of law provides both. The rule of law 
might provide social order without social consent, and we consent to rules that may 
be contrary to good social order. In short, the idea of the rule of law may well be a 
way of brushing aside difficult questions about the basis of consent, and the kind of 
order that should be pursued by a collective (Unger, 1986: 44–9).
EXAMPLE
~5XOHRI/DZ,QGLFDWRUV,PSOHPHQWDWLRQ*XLGHDQG3URMHFW7RROV7KH
United Nations) 2011
Jointly published by the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations and 
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, this is the United 
Nations’ first systematic account of the basic criteria for ‘the rule of law’ and how it can 
be measured in post-conflict states. Here the four basic criteria of the rule of law are ➨
www.ebook3000.com

4 COLLECTIVES
33

F $XWKRULW\
The relationship a collective has with authority is a good gauge of its fundamental 
values and its perception of justice. All collectives need authorities – people and 
bodies with power – to make decisions on behalf of the group as a whole. However, 
perceptions of human, legal, authority can range from natural, necessary and in-
contestable (Aquinas, 2002: 185), to oppressive, illegitimate and dangerous (Paine, 
1969: 63–4). Authority, implying as it does the ability to dictate the actions of the 
individual for collective benefit, has always generated a variety of reactions; but 
historical comparison shows changes in our relationship with authority, changes 
which, to a degree, have altered our understanding of the relationship between law 
and justice.
In pre-modern Europe (i.e. prior to the seventeenth century) understanding of 
authority was tied to religious or divine authority. Church and state could claim 
direct authorisation from God, and authority could be construed as a strict, hierar-
chical, dissemination of authority downwards from God. Even where the authority 
of the Church or state was challenged (as during the Reformation) this was a chal-
lenge on the basis of another divine source, God revealed through religious texts 
(Copleston, 2003). There was no doubt that absolute authority existed, authority 
that legitimately dictated the actions of the individual and the collective. In such a 
context, law – whether its source was divine will alone, or divine will made real in 
the laws of the state – could be equated with justice. Any inadequacies in law and its 
remedies were attributable to the human corruption in the administration of justice 
rather than in justice itself (Cicero, 1998: 126; Aquinas, 2002: 65).
The modern world saw a shift in the understanding of authority. Scepticism of 
divine and human authority became acceptable; more optimism about the value of 
individual conscience and rationality meant more authority was invested in the indi-
vidual. This shift towards the individual means that while collective authority – the 
authority of the state and of the law – remains our core understanding of authority, 
outlined. They are not binding international law, but would constitute persuasive material 
in international political and legal discussions.
Performance: Institutions provide efficient and effective services that are accessible 
and responsive to the needs of the people. Integrity, transparency and accountability:
Institutions operate transparently and with integrity, and are held accountable to rules and 
standards of conduct. Treatment of members of vulnerable groups: How criminal justice 
institutions treat minorities, victims, children in need of protection or in conflict with the 
law, and internally displaced persons, asylum-seekers, refugees, returnees, and stateless 
and mentally ill individuals. Capacity: Institutions have the human and material resources 
necessary to perform their functions, and the administrative and management capacity, 
to deploy these resources effectively.

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
34
such power that the collective possesses is in part attributable to the authority that 
has been invested in the state or the law by individuals themselves. While explored 
more fully in later chapters (see Chapters 5 and 6), this can be considered in terms 
of the justice provided by stable constitutional arrangements.
The theorist Robert Alexy invites us to see the contradiction in an imaginary con-
stitutional statement: ‘X is a sovereign, federal, and unjust republic’ (Alexy, 2004: 
164). This sounds wrong because the constitution of the state, as a structure organ-
ising and distributing authority, simply is just. A constitution – the organisation 
of authority within a state – has claim to justice in its own right. The granting of 
authority within a state could be held to be an important, though in some respects 
narrow, issue of the value of constitutional law. However, all legal activities could be 
construed as depending upon the correct attribution of the power to make a decision,
whether it is attributed to a judge or other official. The authority of law is therefore 
the law of authority: law structures the activity of decision-making. In other words, 
while the existence of laws may depend upon the power to make laws, the authority
to make laws remains, as it was in the pre-modern period, something other than 
pure power.
EXAMPLE
JGE v The English Province of Our Lady of Charity / the Trustees of the 
Portsmouth Roman Catholic Diocesan Trust>@(:+&4%
Authority, and the legal responsibilities which flow from authority, can be construed in 
many ways in law. To exercise authority is not only to be a person or body capable of mak-
ing decisions, but often to exercise powers delegated from a greater authority. The limits 
of that delegated authority may be unclear, as is the case here, where a priest exercised 
authority, in a general sense, as a religious practitioner. Is such delegated authority paral-
lel to that of someone who is employed? If so, their employer would have to take some 
responsibility for their actions, in this case tortious and criminal actions.
I am satisfied, as I have already noted, that the relationship between Father Baldwin and 
the Defendants was significantly different from a contract of employment; no real element 
of control or supervision, no wages, no formal contract and so on. But are those differ-
ences such that the Defendants should not be made responsible for the tortious acts 
of the priest acting within the course of his ministry? There are, it seems to me, crucial 
features which should be recognised. Father Baldwin was appointed by and on behalf of 
the Defendants. He was so appointed in order to do their work; to undertake the ministry 
on behalf of the Defendants for the benefit of the church. He was given the full authority 
of the Defendants to fulfil that role. He was provided with the premises, the pulpit and the 
clerical robes. He was directed into the community with that full authority and was given 
free rein to act as representative of the church. He had been trained and ordained for 
that purpose. He had immense power handed to him by the Defendants. It was they who 
appointed him to the position of trust which (if the allegations be proved) he so abused.
www.ebook3000.com

5 PHILOSOPHY AND JUSTICE
35
 3KLORVRSK\DQGMXVWLFH
 
 Introduction 
 The foregoing candidates for law’s relationship with justice each indicate an im-
portant way in which law and justice could be said to be related. Some seem more 
complete or defensible than others, but no one candidate appears to capture their 
relationship completely. Furthermore, some seem more dependent upon perspec-
tive than others, i.e. our historical perspective and our perspective inside or outside 
legal institutions. The intention of this final section of the chapter is to consider 
how generalisations about justice are possible given this range of candidates, and 
given the possibility that everything we say about justice may well depend upon our 
perspective. Two initial questions can be given sharper outline:  are generalisations 
about justice possible, and, if so, does justice have a distinctive, special or unique 
relationship with law? 
 The Ancient world offers some of the most fruitful perspectives on these ques-
tions, and Aristotle’s work in particular focuses on disagreements surrounding 
justice. Aristotle’s discussion of justice (in Book V of his  Nicomachean Ethics ) seeks 
to dissect ideas of justice, giving first a general definition (justice is related to ‘excel-
lence’ (1987: 410)), giving specific definitions related to law and politics, and finally 
giving examples of its use. Foremost is the virtue of justice, a disposition to act in a 
just way towards others. Justice is ‘that kind of state which makes people disposed 
to do what is just and makes them act justly and wish for what is just’ (1987: 407). 
Justice is the best of the virtues because it is the most ‘complete’, i.e. it encompasses 
all other desirable actions. 
 He notes that we also apply justice to the state, in judging whether actions con-
tribute to the common good. In this wider context, politics offers  distributive justice, 
distributing wealth and power ‘among those who have a share in the constitution’ 
(1987: 411). This political justice demands that we understand  natural justice, i.e. 
that certain things are always right, wrong or necessary in personal and social con-
duct. However, both political and distributive justice require laws made by ‘human 
enactment’ (1987: 412). Legal practices provide a  remedial ,  corrective or  rectifying jus-
tice to ensure that political and natural justice are realised; principally, to determine 
what is owed or what is deserved. Thus, politics decides what people need or are 
entitled to on the basis of their social status, but such things ‘are not just by nature 
but by human enactment [and] are not everywhere the same, since constitutions 
are not everywhere the same’ (1987: 412). It is legal justice that remedies errors and 
problems arising from different kinds of political distribution, thus the means and 
ends of legal justice may well differ depending upon the political context. 
 This analysis is useful and enduring. It reflects the fact that many of our candi-
dates for legal justice concern solving problems rather than guiding the individual 
 3KLORVRSK\DQGMXVWLFH

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
36
or collective to a single goal or objective. It also indicates that while law can be 
associated with things that seem timeless or necessary (natural justice), legal in-
stitutions have their own distinctive job supporting and correcting the social and 
political realisation of political and natural justice. However, is ‘legal justice’ differ-
ent but equivalent to ‘political justice’, or should we see law, in its corrective role, as 
a ‘handmaiden’ to politics? Also, does this provide sufficient clarity on where and 
how we should use the term ‘justice’?
In answering these questions we have to note that Aristotle assumes there is a di-
vision that can be drawn between law and politics; it is this that allows him to iden-
tify different kinds of justice. From our perspective, in the modern world, are we able 
to make the same assumption? Two, almost contradictory, assessments of Aristotle’s 
division can be made. First, the relationship between law and politics is surely an 
intimate one. This is, negatively, because both law and politics are characterised by 
rhetoric and persuasion, but is also because both have a close relationship with the 
common good. The common good may be thought to require good governance; 
good governance can only be achieved under constitutions safeguarded by legal 
institutions. Power without authority is characteristic of the failed state or the mafia 
clan. If a state is constituted in a just way it employs, and is organised under, laws.
Conversely, while intimately related, we usually have no difficulty identifying 
something as legal rather than political. This may be because we already inhabit a 
state that is constituted in a justifiable way, i.e. where political authority is exercised 
under, and constrained by, rules of law. This means we are able to see where law is 
separated from politics – where law governs, or is in tension with politics – and 
we have, therefore, no problem using the word ‘legal’ to denote something other 
than ‘politics’. Admittedly, to identify something as legal rather than political is not 
to say that it is just or to be preferred. However, we can at least draw a meaningful 
distinction between law and politics, and it may be that, from our modern perspec-
tive, it is the very possibility of distinguishing the two that gives us our most basic 
understanding of justice.
Clarification of justice could therefore take three routes. First, like Aristotle, defin-
ing or stipulating what ‘justice’ means. Second, through closer attention to the ways 
in which ‘justice’ depends upon, or is necessary for, distinguishing law and politics. 
Or, third, attending to the ways of seeing and describing social activities that allows 
law and politics to be distinguished. These will be considered in terms of ‘meta-
theory’, ‘scepticism’ and ‘pragmatism’.

D 0HWDWKHRU\
A decisive philosophical move would be to find a single over-arching theory that 
determined precisely what justice is, and then use this to distinguish the proper 
division of labour between law and politics. Such a theory would overarch other 
www.ebook3000.com

5 PHILOSOPHY AND JUSTICE
37
theories and draw together all the lines of enquiry that have been followed so far. 
This would be a ‘meta-theory’, a theory about theories, which decisively answers 
conceptual questions about all the uncertainties and conflicts within its province. 
Such a theory would be ambitious – identifying clearly when the word justice 
should or should not be used or saying definitively what the demands of justice 
are – but, if successful, would provide a theoretical framework that accounts for all 
relevant ideas, questions and anomalies. Three kinds of meta-theoretical perspec-
tives are offered here: the first is related to equality, the second to fairness and the 
third to freedom.
Equality is a good candidate for an overall theory of justice because it points to 
common denominators between means, ends, collectives and individuals. Aristotle 
offers an argument concerning the basis of equality, namely that things equivalent 
to one another should be treated alike, and those unlike should be treated as unlike 
(1987: 415–16). What this stresses is that in order to decide how to treat people 
equally, or find the most equal distribution of a resource, there must be a prior de-
cision of what counts as equivalent to another thing. Apples and bread cannot be 
treated equally as instances of fruit, but we could treat them equally as food. Men 
and women cannot be treated as biologically identical, but we can treat them equally 
as persons with rights. Husserl unpacks the importance of this prior decision:
The concept ‘equality’ involves a relation. We must have at least two things – a and b – 
before we can speak of equality. The statement that a and b are equal presupposes a com-
parison. In comparing a and b we must refer to a something which is neither a nor b. In 
order to establish the existence of equality between a and b we need c, which serves as the 
tertium comparationis [the third part of a comparison]. (Husserl, 1937: 274)
This recalls discussion of law as a means: while law does not always provide 
the best outcomes it is the best instrument for deciding when and how competing 
claims should be compared; it provides the extra ‘relations’ needed for equality. The 
idea of the person is one such term; it assures a set of basic rights for each individual 
(see Chapter 2). This should also recall discussion of ends and means: in determin-
ing desert, law does not decide on what it would be best for people to have, but 
rather what they deserve when treated as equal members of a society equally entitled 
to certain basic rights.
Ronald Dworkin’s work is the fullest exploration of an equality-based perspec-
tive on law and justice (1998). In essence, the function of law is to ensure, through 
the recognition of legal rights, that equality takes priority over political decision-
making; law is the means by which we ensure that the state is neutral about what 
or who we are as persons and are given equal concern when decisions are made or 
disputes arise.
Fairness might serve as an overarching principle of justice, though it is more 
clearly a means rather than an end and therefore less ambitious in its scope 
than equality. Being treated fairly may be a necessary (indispensible) though not 

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
38
sufficient (complete) condition for a good life. We do not expect our legal system 
to provide us with everything that we need, but we do expect it to acknowledge our 
rights and respect our interests when we have disputes with others. The political 
theorist John Rawls (1921-2002) was concerned less with the procedural aspects of 
rights and more concerned with how a social system could be granted the status of 
fair from its foundations upwards. The best way to ensure this, says Rawls, is to make 
the rule of law primary in the structure of the state, and thereby ensure that politics 
behaves like law in its political and economic relationship with the individual. That 
is, the relationship between state and individual is contractual, and the role of the 
state is to ensure that whatever political or economic structures are in place, they ap-
pear reasonable (justified and rational) to individuals anywhere within its political 
and economic structures: ‘[t]he merit of the contract terminology is that it conveys 
the idea that principles of justice may be conceived as principles that would be cho-
sen by rational persons’ (1999: 14). For Rawls, justice flows from our accepting this 
initial account of fairness: a law-like, contractual and widely acceptable, relationship 
between individual and state. In addition, it is this that allows Rawls to say that 
‘justice is the first virtue of social institutions’ (1999: 3). If justice is fairness, and we 
agree that fairness depends upon law-like neutrality and equality between parties, 
then all social institutions should exhibit the virtues of neutrality and equality we 
find in law (for further discussion of Rawls see Chapter 4).
There might be merit in reducing both political and legal ideas of justice to the expan-
sion or maintenance of freedom. Freedom is a problematic term which encompasses 
positive freedoms to act and negative freedoms from certain constraints or impositions 
(see Chapter 2). The centralisation of freedom has no real precursors in the Ancient 
world because, arguably, a concern with the freedom of the individual is an eminently 
modern concern related to the status of the individual and the power of the state. In the 
work of Robert Nozick (1938-2002) the demand shared by political and legal justice is 
our entitlement not to have oppressive burdens placed upon us. Assuming that we must 
inhabit a state – and therefore do not possess untrammelled freedom – we nonetheless 
possess a range of rights which delimit the powers of the state. Rights do not provide 
us with an end-state or goal but act as ‘side constraints’ on the state ensuring our free-
dom: ‘[rights are] side constraints upon the actions to be done: don’t violate constraints 
C. [. . .] The side-constraint view forbids you to violate [. . .] moral constraints in 
the pursuit of your goals’ (Nozick, 1974: 29). In other words, Rawls cannot guarantee 
the justice of the state simply by making us accept his idea of fairness. Being born into 
a state is not a choice or contract, and for this reason the state is, above all, obliged to 
interfere as little as possible with the citizens that fall within its control.
Treating us with respect by respecting our rights, [the minimal state] allows us, individually 
or with whom we choose, to choose our life and to realise our ends and our conception of 
ourselves, insofar as we can, aided by the voluntary cooperation of other individuals pos-
sessing the same dignity. How dare any state or group of individuals do more. (1974: 334)
www.ebook3000.com

5 PHILOSOPHY AND JUSTICE
39
The state should be a minimal ‘night watchman’ which ensures that freedom 
and property are protected. In this theory, law is important for justice only to the 
extent that it enshrines the negative liberties (the ‘freedoms from’) that are natural 
and just without the need for any further justification. This means that while legal 
rights are important, justice is not legal equality but the safeguarding of freedom in 
spite of the state.
EXAMPLE
~7UHDW\RI/LVERQDPHQGLQJWKH7UHDW\RQ(XURSHDQ8QLRQDQGWKH7UHDW\
HVWDEOLVKLQJWKH(XURSHDQ&RPPXQLW\VLJQHG'HFHPEHU
Constitutions provide a kind of meta-theory for law: a justification of other legal rules, 
and final arbiter of tensions between rules and institutions. The Lisbon Treaty is a typical 
example of a modern constitutional document (albeit for a very atypical legal creation, the 
European Union). Equality and freedom are explicit, fairness implicit.
Drawing inspiration from the cultural, religious and humanist inheritance of Europe, from 
which have developed the universal values of the inviolable and inalienable rights of the 
human person, freedom, democracy, equality and the rule of law, [. . .] The Union is 
founded on the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule 
of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minori-
ties. These values are common to the Member States in a society in which pluralism, non-
discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail. 
[. . .] The Union’s aim is to promote peace, its values and the well-being of its peoples.
5b Scepticism
It is clear that ‘legal justice’ appears in a range of different forms – not only in differ-
ent institutions and practices but also in both ends and means – which are not only 
different, but also potentially mutually incompatible. For instance, the common 
good might not be compatible with everyone having their day in court: legal pro-
cesses are expensive and can slow social change. The rule of law might not be com-
patible with the status of particular individuals: rules should be impartially applied, 
but this does not guarantee that every individual has the status and recognition they 
deserve. These tensions may well lie in the ambiguity of ‘justice’ itself. The term is 
equivocal on at least four axes: in terms of values, virtues, means and ends. With 
that level of ambiguity at work, ‘scepticism’ – in the philosophical sense of deep and 
sometimes total doubt and suspicion about an idea – might be the best philosophi-
cal approach. Two kinds of scepticism are relevant here, linguistic and conceptual.
At the very least we can say that the word ‘justice’ is unclear. Justice is claimed by 
three spheres of activity (law, politics and individual virtue); ‘justice’ drifts between law, 
politics and ethics without being owned by any of them. Law not only fails to have a 

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
40
monopoly on the word justice but, paradoxically, legal invocation of justice frequently 
points to things outside legal systems (political principles or individual virtues). The 
word ‘justice’, then, is not only overlaid with various historical meanings, but may well 
depend upon those different contexts to have any meaning at all. This gives weight to 
a sceptical conclusion that ‘legal justice’ as a phrase might be treated as nothing more 
than a rhetorical flourish used to approve of certain kinds of activities, but which 
should be denied substantial theoretical, or moral, importance (Fuller, 1969: 12).
Conceptual scepticism is also warranted in relation to legal justice. It is at an un-
clear intersection between actions and outcomes. We want people to be just, and we 
want the outcomes of their actions to be just. This may be its strength. It is a useful 
way of criticising means, ends and motives. Indeed, the oft-quoted Latin phrase ‘lex
inusta non est lex’ – an unjust law is not a law – has been used, and interpreted, in 
a variety of ways in legal philosophy in order to criticism the means and ends of 
law (see Bix, 2004: 127). In broad terms it indicates that justice exists as a standard 
outside law by which to judge law. Nonetheless, this standard remains unclear: is 
it equivalent to divine will, to morality or to a standard unique to laws? In essence, 
justice has no stable ‘referent’; it does not pick out, or refer to, any single thing in the 
world. Furthermore, a sceptical response could insist that justice is therefore indefin-
able or, differently, that questions about its definition are meaningless.
A radically sceptical approach to ‘legal justice’ would insist on the impossibility of 
law being justice. This position, associated with some scholarship in critical legal stud-
ies (CLS) (though not always, see Chapter 6), suggests that all attempts to judge human 
action and activity by stable standards are philosophical mistakes masking power. Any 
claim to justice on the part of law is an ideological smokescreen for decisions made 
on the basis of force, politics or vested interests. Such a position is dependent upon a 
particularly sceptical view of truth and of power. An especially sceptical philosophy has 
to be at work here because legal decisions rarely look as if they are merely the exercise 
of power: they have some claim, at least, to consistency (see Chapter 4). While this 
kind of radical criticism of law recalls the Ancient philosophers’ suspicion about the 
relationship between law and power, the Ancient philosophers still felt able to appeal 
to truth and other meta-theories of justice (Morrison, 1997). In the most sceptical ap-
proaches to law, even these lines of escape are withdrawn.
EXAMPLE
Bradwell v The State  86  :DOO   8QLWHG 6WDWHV
Supreme Court)
One reason to be sceptical of law’s ability to deliver justice is that the legal profession, on 
whom so much depends, has long been populated by a limited and privileged segment of 
society that might not have any sensitivity to the pressures and needs of those petitioning ➨
www.ebook3000.com

5 PHILOSOPHY AND JUSTICE
41
5c Pragmatism
Philosophical pragmatism insists that the true is the useful or efficacious. 
Pragmatists are sceptical of extravagant philosophical claims about truth, but they 
do accept that concepts and ideas can be shown to be real by virtue of their having 
a verifiable impact on reality: usefulness in practice, or the ability to make a distinc-
tion (see Patterson (ed.), 1996: 385f). We can therefore be pragmatic in two senses. 
Pragmatism in a ‘loose sense’ would look to salvage whatever is useful from the fact 
that we commonly use the idea of justice. One way or another, ‘justice’ is something 
we use in philosophy, in law, and beyond. A more fundamental philosophical prag-
matism about knowledge would suggest that because ‘justice’ has some use, it also 
has some truth: our belief in the importance of justice changes us and the world.
In terms of pragmatism in the ‘loose sense’, it is tempting to concede our political 
or social order takes primacy over legal justice and that law contributes to a stable 
social order. We talk about law, we appeal to laws and we use social institutions, 
and without these things we would have a less harmonious society. Law is a useful 
means because it brings consistency to human affairs; how it does this does not 
really matter. This recalls appeal to ‘the common good’ because law works alongside 
politics to bring about a number of good collective ends.
Epistemological pragmatism – the association of truth and knowledge with verifi-
able usefulness – would indicate that we know legal justice by its social effects and 
by no other means. Only that which has some kind of impact on reality is real; 
only that which allows us to make a difference in the world can be classed as true 
or false. This is not a well-rounded theory of truth; we would wish to insist on the 
a court. This goes too for the gender distribution of legal practitioners. In a predominantly 
male profession, the lives and experiences of women cannot be said to be perfectly rep-
resented or understood. In the present case, an application for a woman to practise law 
is rejected on the basis of notions which seem otherwise just (the divine, harmony and 
‘maxims of jurisprudence’).
The natural and proper timidity and delicacy which belongs to the female sex evidently un-
fits it for many of the occupations of civil life. The Constitution of the family organization, 
which is founded in the divine ordinance as well as in the nature of things, indicates the 
domestic sphere as that which properly belongs to the domain and functions of woman-
hood. The harmony, not to say identity, of interest and views which belong, or should 
belong, to the family institution is repugnant to the idea of a woman adopting a distinct 
and independent career from that of her husband. So firmly fixed was this sentiment in 
the founders of the common law that it became a maxim of that system of jurisprudence 
that a woman had no legal existence separate from her husband, who was regarded as 
her head and representative in the social state, and, notwithstanding some recent modi-
fications of this civil status, many of the special rules of law flowing from and dependent 
upon this cardinal principle still exist in full force in most states.

CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
42
difference between a useful delusion that makes us happy and a useless fact which 
still ‘holds good’. By this standard, however, justice has meaning as part of a two-way 
causal relationship between society and justice. Social activity generates different 
conceptions of justice over time (the Greeks associated justice with virtue, and we 
associate justice with the independence of the legal system as a means to a number 
of different ends). Justice in turn has some impact on how society views distribution 
and correction (justice as an ideal, even a complex and confused ideal, can be used 
to criticise social practices). In short, this idea, complex as it is, forms part of how 
we see the world and in that sense has meaning as a tool with which to discuss and 
analyse the world: ‘[t]ruth and justice are both partly a matter of experimentation, 
of finding out what works and trying out different forms of life’ (Singer quoted in 
Patterson (ed.) 1996: 391).
Mindful of both the meta-theoretical and sceptical approaches to legal justice, it may 
be that a pragmatic middle ground is possible. It would be pragmatic, broadly speak-
ing, to conclude that each meta-theory has some claim to plausibility and that there is 
merit in ‘seeing what works’ – what makes sense or what makes a difference – when we 
think about law and justice. This could be augmented by pragmatism in a philosophi-
cal sense: justice is a useful means of criticising social practices including law and to 
that extent it has some claim to meaning.
EXAMPLE
West Virginia State Board of Education v Barnette 319 U.S. 624 (1943) 
(US Supreme Court)
In this celebrated dissenting judgment, Justice Frankfurter defends the right of a minority, 
on grounds of conscience, to refuse to salute the national flag. Frankfurter is sceptical 
of justice being found exclusively in the words of a constitution: it has to be found in the 
convictions and habits of a people.
Our constant preoccupation with the constitutionality of legislation rather than with its 
wisdom tends to preoccupation of the American mind with a false value. The tendency of 
focusing attention on constitutionality is to make constitutionality synonymous with wis-
dom, to regard a law as all right if it is constitutional. Such an attitude is a great enemy of 
liberalism. Particularly in legislation affecting freedom of thought and freedom of speech 
much which should offend a free-spirited society is constitutional. Reliance for the most 
precious interests of civilization, therefore, must be found outside of their vindication in 
courts of law. Only a persistent positive translation of the faith of a free society into the 
convictions and habits and actions of a community is the ultimate reliance against un-
abated temptations to fetter the human spirit.
www.ebook3000.com

43
QUESTIONS
Section 1
●Does law aim to make people happier? Does it aim to make people better? Or does law 
aim to control? Does the answer to these questions depend upon whether we are inside 
or outside a legal system?
●Does making a legal judgment differ as a mental process from other kinds of judgment? 
For example a quick decision made while driving?
●Do legal processes provide certainty? If so, does this happen only after a decision is reviewed 
by a higher court? If not, on what basis, and by what standard, do they fall short of certainty?
Section 2
●Do the means used by law (e.g. impartiality or procedural fairness) require any further 
justification? Are they useful? Is their use obligatory?
●Should law be ‘blind’ to the identities of the parties to a conflict? Is this possible or desirable?
●Does ‘treating people equally’ make sense of what laws and courts do without reference 
to other goals such as allowing freedom, or allowing the truth to be heard?
Section 3
●Are all human activities, including law, intended to ultimately make individuals happier?
Is there any human activity that cannot be explained by the pursuit of happiness?
●Can rights be equated with justice given that they are closely related to the interests of 
individuals, not the state?
●If humans have an important status – are deserving of special kinds of treatment and 
respect – could this status exist without law?
Section 4
●Does law help or hinder the common good? Are, for example, criminal law and financial 
law more helpful for the common good than human rights or constitutional law?
●Does the idea of the ‘rule of law’ make sense if laws are made by Parliaments who de-
cide upon the rules and the exceptions to the rules?
●Are all ideas of authority ultimately explicable in terms of the power or force that people 
possess to impose their authority?
Section 5
●If all ideas of justice had to be summarised in one word, would ‘equality’, ‘fairness’ or 
‘freedom’ come closest? Could we substitute all uses of the word ‘justice’ for equality, 
fairness or freedom?
●Is the word ‘justice’ hopelessly vague on the basis that it has a long history and is used 
in very different contexts?
●Do we need a theory about the meaning of the word ‘justice’ or is it sufficient to accept 
that people ‘know what they mean’ when they use it?
4XHVWLRQV

&RQFHSWVDQGPHWKRGV7KHRULVLQJ

6HWWLQJGRZQWKHDSSHDUDQFHV
Collecting together intuitions or common ideas about something such as justice 
does not seem to be a systematic, or even philosophical, way to approach a ques-
tion. We might assume that a properly philosophical approach requires abstrac-
tions and a technical vocabulary. Collecting together common ideas was, in fact, 
Aristotle’s approach to philosophy – he termed it ‘setting down the appearances’ 
(1987: 431) – and he considered this the only way to approach an enquiry, be it 
enquiry in the natural sciences, theology or the social sciences. Some common ideas 
are found wanting: confused, inadequate or insufficiently general. However, sifting 
through common ideas and received wisdom also shows where ideas are resilient, 
attractive or indispensible: ‘if we both resolve the difficulties and leave [. . .] repu-
table opinions undisturbed, we shall have proved the case sufficiently’ (1987: 431). 
Comparing these common ideas is the best way to ensure that philosophical reflec-
tion is rooted in the world, not pure inventions of the human mind.
 
Theorising
The foregoing analysis of justice has been conducted as a theoretical enquiry. What 
exactly does this mean? The Greek word theoria means to ‘contemplate’ or ‘survey’. It 
is, then, both to think in a sustained way about something and to get an overview 
of it. We have not simply been discussing the ‘facts’ of the matter as discovered, 
for example, in the workings of a Court. Rather, theorising involved interrogation 
of what particular words such as justice mean, how some accounts (of justice) are 
better than others, and how ideals (concerning justice) might be difficult to find in 
reality. Such reflections are theoretical by virtue of having no immediate practical 
importance (they would not necessarily change how a practitioner did their job), 
but they do involve evaluation and not simply description.
Analysis of language and evaluation of ideas are central to theorising. Analysis of 
meaning is important because meaning can change depending upon who is using 
certain words and in what context; without clarity on shared or agreed meanings, 
theoretical discussion would become senseless. This is an evaluative practice, de-
manding clarity on why some meanings are better than others. It is also a classifica-
tory practice asking on what grounds we should compare things, people or ideas. 
For instance, should reality, or ideals, be our primary concern when we are analysing 
social institutions? It is always the case that the real diverges from the ideal. Many 
44
CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
www.ebook3000.com

rules and procedures ‘look good on paper’ – are fair and reasonable – but have been 
unworkable in practice. In different manifestations, this tension between life as it 
is, and life as it should be or we how want it to be, is a recurrent feature of law, but 
should these two perspectives on reality be compared at all? The tension between 
facts and values is central to Chapter 2, and the relationship between the two is one 
of the most fundamental questions posed in legal philosophy.

5DWLRQDOLVPDQGHPSLULFLVP
Clarification of concepts is always characterised by a philosophical struggle between 
the importance of ideas and the importance of facts. On the one hand, in order to de-
cide whether a concept is clear and unambiguous, we can test it against our other ideas 
to see whether it ‘makes sense’ in our own minds. On the other hand, all of our ideas 
begin with factual experiences. However sophisticated our thinking – our analysis, our 
memory and our imagination – mental processes begin with the factual world and, if 
they are to be useful, must retain some kind of relationship with the facts of the world.
These competing approaches to concepts are, in a crude way, articulations of 
rationalism and empiricism. Rationalism insists that knowledge is possible simply 
through the interrogation of ideas and the working of our minds as rational beings. 
Empiricism argues that anything worthy of the name ‘knowledge’ must have a basis 
in the facts of the world. There is no need to ‘side’ with one position or the other 
in order to do philosophy, but any analysis of concepts sooner or later runs up 
against the question of whether concepts gain their validity from ideas or from facts 
(Patterson (ed.), 1996: 376).
Scepticism
Scepticism is on a spectrum from the mildly argumentative to ‘global scepticism’ 
about everything that exists. Scepticism can be a route to ‘first principles’, as in the 
work of the rationalist René Descartes (1596-1650), where Descartes used radical 
scepticism to clear away what he knew and begin knowledge afresh. This was a 
‘global scepticism’ used to refound his knowledge on firmer foundations. Such radi-
cal scepticism is still used to draw knowledge claims, and ethical claims, into doubt.
Scepticism denotes a range of theoretical approaches which insist that knowledge 
(i.e. certainty or truth claims) must admit certain kinds of limits, or else run the risk 
of over-reaching the boundaries of knowledge. ‘Fact scepticism’ involves denying 
that our assertions about facts have a necessary relationship with states of affairs in 
the world. ‘Rule scepticism’ involves insisting that claims about rules are valid only 
to the extent that they describe certain regularities in the world, not that there is a 
special kind of ‘force’ in rules. These scepticisms will be returned to (Chapter 5). 
Suffice it to say, while philosophers do engage in radical scepticism (e.g. the ‘Matrix’ 
CONCEPTS AND METHODS: THEORISING
45

claim that everything we see is an illusion created by evil beings) other forms of 
scepticism are more relevant for legal concepts where they test the limits of what we 
can claim as certain or necessary.
 
Pragmatism
There is held to be a disjunction between theorising and practical activities; the former 
is ‘merely’ thinking, the latter doing. Pragmatism, as a theoretical position, breaks 
down this barrier and demands that every theoretical claim must have some practical 
correlate or consequence. This is not to say everything we think or believe has to be 
useful, but we would want everything we think or believe to denote something, draw 
a distinction, mark a difference or describe a state of affairs. If it fails to do these kinds 
of things then it ceases to be a useful idea and ceases to have any claim to knowledge 
of the world. Pragmatism is not a perfect theory of truth: we can imagine having ideas 
or parts of our vocabulary that were not useful in any obvious way and did not draw 
useful distinctions. Nonetheless, philosophical pragmatism is helpful in bringing theo-
retical debates back to the use of concepts. In addition, when engaged in conceptual 
enquiry about law, the pragmatists’ stress on use is a corrective to extravagant claims 
about concepts, particularly those with as long, and complex, a history as justice or law.
CHAPTER 1 JUSTICE
Further reading
On the general topic of justice, Robert Alexy’s article (2004) locates these debates within 
the ‘discipline’ of legal philosophy, Tom Campbell’s book Justice (2001) provides an excellent 
overview of philosophical debate about justice, and Franz Wieacker’s article (1990) covers 
similar ground in a way that is more centred on the history of law. Gerhart Husserl’s ‘Justice’ 
(1937) grapples with some of the more difficult questions about equality and judgment. 
On the philosophy of justice, Spragens (1993) offers a comparable, but slightly different, 
scheme of approaches to the classification of (meta-theoretical, sceptical and pragmatic) 
philosophies of justice used here (he identifies ‘hegemonic’, ‘sceptical’ and ‘pluralistic’ 
accounts). Winthrop (1978) gives a clear analysis of Aristotle’s position. Both Robin West’s 
article (1998) and Del Mar’s New Waves in Philosophy of Law (2011) place discussion of 
justice within the context of ‘traditional’ legal scholarship and the challenges which compet-
ing ideas of justice can present to such scholarship.
Visit www.mylawchamber.co.uk/riley to access tools 
to help you develop and test your knowledge of legal 
philosophy including Podcasts on leading thinkers and 
theories, discussion questions, diagrams showing 
interrelations between concepts, and weblinks
46
www.ebook3000.com

47
47
Each of the philosophies of justice considered in the last chapter depended upon an 
idea – equality, fairness or freedom – which itself relies upon a particular dimension 
of humanity: human rationality, human nature or the status of the person. Justice 
is achieved through making humans equal persons in the eyes of the law, by making 
social institutions fair because they are institutions reasonable people would consent 
to, or by exchanging the natural freedom of the human for the social freedom of the 
citizen. For arguments about justice to be settled we need a clearer understanding of 
the relationship between law and the person.
To the extent that the institution of law – a body of practices and procedures – has 
a basic idea of a person, it might be said that there are working assumptions in dif-
ferent spheres of law. For example, we are familial beings in family law, contracting 
beings in contract law. Law may need nothing other than these working assumptions 
because it is an institution which aims to govern human affairs or make human af-
fairs predictable. Legal institutions are not created in order to dictate what humans are 
or should be, but to regulate their lives together. However, this is to refuse to acknowl-
edge something that already takes place in law. To treat someone as a being capable 
of entering into a contract is to treat them as rational beings capable of free decisions. 
To treat someone as a member of a family is to make assumptions about biological 
links or about caring relationships. That humans are rational, or free or biologically 
‘linked’ might be treated as obvious in some contexts, but these are not simple claims.
While we need clarity in the meaning of ‘person’ this demands entering into 
some of the most complex and vexed debates in philosophy. Philosophical analysis 
of the person not only encompasses ethical questions about character and obliga-
tion, it also triggers epistemological questions about knowledge. Is it possible for 
humans to have a perspective ‘outside’ humanity from which our nature and poten-
tial can be analysed? Or is humanity, as Protagoras said, ‘the measure of all things’ 
(see Plato, 1997: 169), in which case we alone can decide upon our nature and our 
Person
2
Introduction

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
48
potential? Our obligations depend upon what we are and what we can be. Is human 
self-reflection firm enough a foundation to answer such questions?
One way to demonstrate this complexity is to draw a difference between humans 
and persons. It might seem that nothing rests on this difference; the words denote 
the same categories of things, and confusion rarely flows from using one rather 
than the other in ordinary language. However, it is more accurate to say that while 
‘human’ is a broad factual category, ‘person’ has a more specific meaning due to its 
close relationship with law. A person is a human recognised, protected and gov-
erned by law. In the language of ‘humans’ there is something natural or ‘pre-legal’ 
at work. In the language of ‘persons’ we find humans possessing legal status. When 
this status begins, and what this status entails, are questions that have reappeared 
throughout philosophical traditions. They demand that we know what is ‘human’ 
in a general sense, and what law contributes when it recognises humans as persons.
More specifically, it gives rise to the question of whether legal systems simply 
decide which rights accrue to the legal person, or whether there is a more compli-
cated process here based on the demands, or the needs, of the person. We cannot 
assume that the values we attach to a human by recognising them as a person are 
universally agreed values. Indeed, Colin Dayan argues that law’s relationship with 
personhood is precisely where illegitimate and dangerous ideas can enter into, 
and be made legitimate, by law: ‘Law renders the meaning of persons shifting and 
tentative: whether in creating slaves as persons in law and criminal as dead in law’
(2011: xii, emphasis in original).
To determine the meaning of human in a ‘non-legal’ sense is, arguably, impos-
sible. Humans are beings capable of being subject to, or subjecting themselves to, 
laws. An adult human who has no sense of what is expected of them by other people 
is exceptional as a human. If, however, there is a necessary relationship between hu-
mans and law (we have always wanted or needed law), this relationship also appears 
highly variable and contingent (we change law and law changes us).
Moreover, ‘human’ is not an unchanging or unchallenged category; it can be 
understood in contradictory ways. A doctor’s conception of a human as a bio-
logical machine is far removed from a religious idea of humans as images of God. 
The ‘being’ of human beings can be understood as static, changing or evolving. 
This is apparent if we consider the opposites (antonyms) of ‘human’. Human has, 
variously, ‘animal’, ‘inhuman’ and ‘natural’ as opposites. Humans are distinct from 
other animals, though not clearly. While we are animals in zoological terms, we 
often treat our capacities – including complex communication, the capacity for 
self-reflection and sustained reflection on the past – as drawing a decisive dividing 
line. We are inhuman where we fail to exhibit basic levels or recognition, empathy or 
respect towards others. The idea of inhumanity is crucial to humanitarian law and is 
associated with the idea of degradation: inhuman acts degrade humans to a lower 
status than they deserve (the status of animals).
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION
49
Furthermore, we are not the natural world; we are social beings and are not, argu-
ably, part of the patterns of cause and effect that characterise nature. It is here that the 
idea of law returns. ‘Law’ and ‘the social, rather than natural, existence of humans’ 
may be synonymous terms. Human life has always been governed, or at least ideally 
governed, through the stable expectations that are associated with harmonious social
life. In addition, to be a special, social, animal is less a matter of distinctive human 
thought and more related to our necessary relationship with law and laws.
Using ‘nature’ as a dividing line between human and non-human is made com-
plicated by those philosophical traditions that treat humans as fundamentally di-
vided between natural parts (the body) and non-natural (or perhaps supernatural) 
minds or souls. The natural is not only part of us but, in some currents of philo-
sophical thought, something problematic to be tamed or denigrated if we are to be 
fully human (Plato, 1997: 1064; Kant, 1948: 66). We are natural beings, but we have 
a responsibility to become ‘less natural’. This is not only a process of ‘socialisation’ 
that demands we dampen our natural or automatic behaviours and reflexes (see 
Chapter 6), but a more fundamental ‘project’ for humanity to shed its inheritance 
from nature. Our laws and our law-abiding behaviour are the most important mani-
festations of this progressive project.
In the light of these complexities, what generalisations can be made about hu-
mans and persons? The answer depends, crucially, on the difference between facts 
and values. A range of different approaches to our species are possible, all of which 
claim some authority to state what we as individual humans are. Some accounts of 
human beings stress the facts of biology, psychology or geography (Delaney, 2001). 
Some draw out the values and responsibilities that being human can be said to 
include (Glover, 2001). From these answers a range of different conclusions can be 
drawn about what law does for humans and what law should do. However, all of 
these different perspectives turn upon the division between facts and values. Facts 
concern what is the case, what has been the case, or what is potentially the case. 
Facts are the furniture of the world and the ‘states of affairs’ that these facts, together, 
constitute. Values are what should be the case, what we want to happen, and what 
states of affairs we should bring about. Values are not ‘states of affairs’, they are judg-
ments about states of affairs.
These are, as will be discussed below, two different ways of thinking about the 
world and, arguably, two wholly incompatible ways of talking about the world. After 
all, if values do not describe the world then it is problematic to use them as ways of 
talking about the world. Suffice it to say, we concern ourselves with both facts and 
values (generally, and in law), and we have to be wary of blurring the difference, but 
it is difficult to disentangle them completely. Values have to be grounded in facts; 
claims about values are of no use to us if they are opinions without a sound basis. 
Conversely, facts always have to be judged in the light of values; that certain things 
are the case does not mean we have to accept or approve of them.

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
50
 How does the fact/value division have an impact on our understanding of law? 
With respect to law-making it might be argued that our values should be at the fore 
of all our laws. Conversely, we can argue that the facts of law – the rules and obliga-
tions commanded by law-makers – are a clear and predictable set of facts. It is this 
very stability and predictability which, alone, makes law valuable. The  methodological
consequence of this is that whenever we choose values or facts to be our focus we 
choose an interpretive framework for understanding law. An emphasis on facts or 
values colours our entire understanding of laws and legal practices, and to try to see 
both perspectives at once is difficult.  
1  Facts and values 
 
 Introduction 
 Consider a case where a Court has been asked to take a house away from a family 
because they have failed to keep up payments on a mortgage. Is it possible to keep 
the facts and values separate? The case could be summarised briefly: the family 
failed to fulfil a legal obligation to keep up payments; the Court has to follow a 
rule that obliges it to deny possession of houses to those who fail to repay loans. 
Where are the facts and values here? The Court has factual evidence to consider; the 
Court itself is constituted by a set of behavioural and institutional facts concerning 
authority, personnel and procedure. These facts would, of course, look different 
from the point of view of the family whose lives will be changed by the decision; 
they are concerned with the values of family, responsibility and their basic human 
needs. Moreover, there is the value we attach to legal decisions and the obligations 
that they help to maintain. Are these facts and values both strands of the same story 
or do they constitute two different stories? 
 The value we attach to certain states of affairs – individual happiness, access to basic 
goods such as housing and food, and predictability in how we are treated by  others – is 
one way of bridging the gap between fact and value. Being human means we inevitably 
value certain things because we have biological needs, and we have expectations about 
what is due to us as members of a social world. These bridges between fact and 
value – physical need and social expectations – are important, but need further analy-
sis. First, is there consensus on what needs we have over and above the biology of 
human survival? The answer, in part, is that ‘ought implies can’ ( Kant, 1929 : 473): our 
legal rights may well depend upon what it is practically  possible for the state and others 
to fulfil. Second, are social expectations necessarily the same as legal obligations? The 
answer is that we can expect, because of law, the clear and predictable application of 
rules, but this is not the same as having all of our expectations met. 
 Law does not provide a simple bridge between fact and value. However, all law 
is a demonstration that we do not simply exist but  co-exist . Moreover, the close 
1  Facts and values 
www.ebook3000.com

1 FACTS AND VALUES
51
relationship between law and ‘persons’ – the Greek persona is associated with the 
idea of a ‘mask’ – indicates two points of intersection between fact and value. The 
suppression or masking of the natural human animal in human societies, and the 
need for humans to inhabit social groups in order to be recognised as something 
more than an animal.
1a Humans and persons
Psychology, philosophy, law and science all claim to have a good, and useful, ac-
count of what it is to be human. Psychology starts with our capacities for perception 
and behaviour and finds regularity or predictability in these capacities for percep-
tion and behaviour. Science starts with biology and finds commonality between 
individual humans as biological beings.
Law and philosophy have rather more uncertain starting points. For both, the 
‘subject’ is important. In philosophy we are first of all the subject of experience. 
That is, we are the recipients of ‘data’ about the world; we are subjects in a world 
of objects. In law we are, in the first instance, subject to law. That is, we cannot opt-
out of being governed by laws, wherever or whoever we are. These are both general 
characteristics of being human but draw out rather different things. To be a subject 
of experience still leaves unanswered what does the experiencing. Are we essentially 
our minds or our bodies? In addition, to be subject to law still leaves unanswered 
why we are subject to law. Because we have to be, or because we have chosen to be, 
subject to law?
Psychology, philosophy, law and science overlap in many different ways. Law 
and science both see us as subject to laws: of society and of the physical world 
respectively. Law and psychology both depend upon a notion of self-conscious 
ability to choose our actions: we may be subject to laws but also retain the capacity 
for choice and self-determination. These four disciplines together locate us within 
physical and social worlds that govern us; but physical and social worlds from 
which we are distinguished as individuals because of our capacity for choice and 
independent willing.
Consequently, alongside ‘humans’ and ‘subjects’, third and fourth categories of 
‘individuals’ and ‘persons’ should be distinguished. We can distinguish humans as 
a species from individuals, who are part of, but are not definitively characterised by, 
their membership of the human species. An individual exists whenever particular 
humans are individuated from the mass of the human species. The idea of a person
is a more specific form of individuation which emphasises that individuals are em-
bodied and self-conscious human beings. In an influential passage by John Locke 
(see Chapter 3), person is treated as a specialist (‘forensic’) term encompassing 
humans, their self-consciousness, and their capacity to act lawfully:
[Person] is a forensic term appropriating actions and their merit; and so belongs only to 
intelligent agents capable of a law, and happiness and misery. This personality extends 

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
52
it self [sic] beyond present existence to what is past, only by consciousness, whereby it 
becomes concerned and accountable, owns and imputes to it self [sic] past actions. (Locke, 
1975: 346, emphasis and capitals removed)
Persons are not an interchangeable part of a species; they are distinctive be-
ings having individuality and individual status. This individuation and granting 
of status is given in part through law, but also social and political processes more 
generally. It is questionable whether we could be a person if we were denied, or 
excluded from, relationships with other people. So, whereas talk about individuals 
can be another way of talking about humans in general, the language of person 
contains all that we think of as distinctive about humans: that we are self-reflective, 
conscious, and that certain duties and rights accrue to us. Persons are more than 
biological entities.
EXAMPLE
7KH ,QVWLWXWHV RI -XVWLQLDQ %RRN , 7LWOH 9,,, ~2I 3HUVRQV &(
TXRWHGLQ/HHSSz
The word ‘person’ (persona) has Latin origins and it is in Roman law that we find the first 
codification of the nature and rights of persons. Free born adults are sui juris, they have 
legal status in their own right. Slaves also had legal status within the Roman Republic 
(from around 510BCE), albeit a qualified status of alieni juris; this qualification means 
that their legal status is related to the interests of their master.
[S]ome persons are sui juris, others are alieni juris: and of these last some are in the 
power of parents, others in the power of masters. [T]oday no men subject to our rule are 
allowed to do violence to their slaves without lawful cause or beyond measure. [. . .] [I]t 
is in the interests of masters that relief against cruelty or starvation, or intolerable wrong, 
should not be denied to slaves who justly invoke it.
1b Science and facts
In developed societies science is held to give the most authoritative account of re-
ality, of the ‘hard facts’ of the world. Science offers facts and theories that are reliable 
and trustworthy. Scientific ideas are persuasive because they offer a high degree of 
certainty. Depending upon the science, we can find the seemingly absolutely certain 
(e.g. that living creatures have a limited life-span) to the highly probable (that cer-
tain substances are bad for humans).
There are a range of scientific disciplines and approaches from the ‘hard sciences’ 
of physics and medicine to the ‘human sciences’ such as anthropology. The human 
sciences are less concerned with finding scientific laws and more concerned with 
explanations in terms of complex inter-relations of culture, perception and meaning. 
www.ebook3000.com

1 FACTS AND VALUES
53
Whatever the scientific discipline, science is a good route to determine what is cer-
tain about humans, what they need, and what they can be expected to do in differ-
ent situations. Above all, science reminds us that we are biological entities, and that 
a number of common and predictable characteristics, tendencies and capacities flow 
from this (Monroe et al., 2009).
However, science also seems to overstate what can be predicted about humans. 
We certainly share biological characteristics, but we are also characterised by a high 
degree of uncertainty. These uncertainties – even concerning what we ourselves 
will do in the future – seem to be part and parcel of being human. Moreover, even 
if science did promise to make us predictable, it could not necessarily tell us how 
we should organise society. Given that people will always have different needs and 
commitments, could there be a single, scientific, idea of a good society? For in-
stance, does science dictate that society should become ordered such that the risk of 
personal harm is always minimised? This seems logical, and could, presumably, be 
measured and managed scientifically, but it takes no account of individuals’ desire 
to have a private sphere where the state should not intervene, and it takes no ac-
count of the value of democratic decision-making. In short, can we derive values from 
the facts found in science? Together biology and anthropology tell us a great deal 
about what we are and where we have come from, but do not necessarily generate 
values to live by (Arendt, 1998).
EXAMPLE
Daubert v Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals Inc8686
Supreme Court
In the US Supreme Court case Daubert the Court had to consider what judges should do 
if they are faced with conflicting scientific evidence, in this instance concerning pharma-
ceuticals and their possible side-effects. It was conceded that judges cannot be expected 
to be scientists, but that there are a number of tests that can be used to gauge whether 
something can be called ‘scientific’, principally by virtue of the methods used. This is im-
portant for a number of reasons, not least because it makes clear that science does not 
provide a single authoritative voice but has its own conflicts and controversies.
Faced with a proffer of expert scientific testimony [. . .] the trial judge [. . .] must make a 
preliminary assessment of whether the testimony’s underlying reasoning or methodology 
is scientifically valid and properly can be applied to the facts at issue. Many considera-
tions will bear on the inquiry, including whether the theory or technique in question can be 
(and has been) tested, whether it has been subjected to peer review and publication, its 
known or potential error rate and the existence and maintenance of standards controlling 
its operation, and whether it has attracted widespread acceptance within a relevant sci-
entific community. The inquiry is a flexible one, and its focus must be solely on principles 
and methodology, not on the conclusions that they generate.

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
54
1c Humanity and human nature
Do humans form a single group? The scientific category of the human species, Homo sap-
iens, is a convenient classification, but does not tell us whether we really have anything 
(psychological or cultural) in common with all other humans, past, present or future. 
One alternative way of expressing the sense that all humans do have something in com-
mon is by using the term ‘humanity’. All past and future humans might fall within this 
category. Humanity seems to capture more of what we mean by persons – humans with 
rights and responsibilities – rather than just biological humans. Furthermore, it seems to 
capture the significance of what persons share in terms of values and not just facts. The 
term humanity is a value as much as a category: the opposite of humanity is inhumanity.
However, this generates two questions. What it is that gives us this common 
property of ‘humanity’? If it is something biological, this does not account for what 
appears to be distinctive about persons (we value persons as something more than 
instances of a biological species). If it is a mental characteristic, we will encounter diffi-
cult cases of individuals whose thinking is not fully or distinctively human (e.g. young 
children) or those who do not seem to share whatever values are said to be character-
istic of humanity (e.g. criminals who refuse to accept the binding obligations of law).
A middle ground between the facts of biology and the value of humanity would 
be ‘human nature’. This suggests that we may have, by virtue of our embodiment 
(our vulnerability and our physical needs) or because of innate shared dispositions 
(to want to be with others, to want to act in certain self-interested ways), characteris-
tics that are more or less consistent across time and culture. While this is often a use-
ful way of talking about common traits and actions among humans it is frequently 
confused. Contradictory things are said to be human nature (to care for others and 
to be selfish; to be social and to be aggressive), and human nature is rarely a useful 
contribution to understanding law. ‘Human nature’ might be used to explain the 
drive to create laws regulating social conduct; it might also be used to suggest that 
humans are inevitably disposed to break the law for their own benefit.
It could be said that as soon as we cease to use the bare language of biology to 
describe humans we inevitably begin to talk about values. This is explicit when we 
talk of persons. Appeal to ‘humanity’ as the whole grouping of humans similarly 
straddles the fact/value divide. ‘Human nature’ can be used to introduce many dif-
ferent values into discussion. Each of these terms has a long philosophical pedigree, 
and certainly each plays a different role in our perceptions of what we are.
EXAMPLE
&ULPHV$JDLQVW+XPDQLW\DQG:DU&ULPHV$FW&DQDGDV
In international law it is relatively common to appeal to ‘humanity’. International law aims 
to speak for all humanity, offering basic minimal standards that can be adhered to by all 
➨
www.ebook3000.com

2 ARISTOTLE
55
2  Aristotle 
 
 Introduction 
 All of the humanities – the disciplines concerned with the nature and improvement 
of humanity – involve collection of facts about humans and the derivation of values 
from those facts. These facts (psychological or biological facts) are used to deter-
mine what is necessarily valuable to humans, thereby bridging fact and value. The 
Western philosophical tradition in particular emphasises what is  good for humans, 
the subject of  Chapter   3 . While an attractive starting point for legal, political and 
ethical discussion, attention to the good does not provide a simple relationship 
between human needs and social structures. We might agree with Thomas Hobbes 
(1588–1679) that human life is ‘nasty, brutish, and short’ (1996: 84; see  Chapter   4 ) 
and this may generate some radical conclusions about what humans should do. We 
might decide that humans are, above all, vulnerable biological beings and use this 
to legitimise paternalistic or authoritarian government with no concern for human 
freedom. We might, conversely, want to prioritise human freedom and therefore call 
for the minimisation of the power of the state. Nonetheless, starting with facts – any 
facts – seems to be a sound, concrete way of deciding which laws are the best for 
humans to live under. 
 Aristotle premises his influential political and ethical philosophies on the claim 
that we are a distinct biological species characterised by a unique kind of socia-
bility. Both of these elements are important for understanding Aristotle’s position: 
humans form a natural biological group, and like other biological groups we are 
sociable, albeit in a way that is distinctively ours. There are different explanations 
2  Aristotle
nations. People and groups who attack vulnerable civilians are termed the ‘enemies of all 
humanity’ ( hostis generis humanitas ) and widespread crimes against innocent people are 
‘crimes against humanity’. The idea of crimes against humanity has long existed in order 
to describe acts such as piracy that are objected to, and policed, by all nations. Canada 
passed this Act, giving a definition of crimes against humanity, in order to become a Party 
to the Statute of the International Criminal Court, a permanent Court with jurisdiction over 
grave international crimes.
 ‘Crime against humanity’ means murder, extermination, enslavement, deportation, im-
prisonment, torture, sexual violence, persecution or any other inhumane act or omission 
that is committed against any civilian population or any identifiable group and that, at the 
time and in the place of its commission, constitutes a crime against humanity according 
to customary international law or conventional international law or by virtue of its being 
criminal according to the general principles of law recognized by the community of nations, 
whether or not it constitutes a contravention of the law in force at the time and in the 
place of its commission. 

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
56
of why humans form societies. Aristotle asserts that nature itself is the origin of 
human groups; it is natural for family groups to form and for these groups to join 
others (1987: 507–10). The accumulation of large human groupings through the 
joining together of families is appealing as a starting assumption; it suggests that 
humans have been constant in their needs and behaviour, and it justifies the exist-
ence of larger groups (such as states) on the basis that they have natural origins 
in natural groups.
The final association, formed of several villages, is the state. [S]elf-sufficiency has been 
reached, and while the state came about as a means of securing life itself, it continues in 
being to secure the good life. Therefore every state exists by nature, as the earlier associa-
tions too were natural. (1987: 509, emphasis in original)
This story of natural sociability is still prevalent in philosophical, political, biologi-
cal and sociological thought. It is, nevertheless, challenged (see Chapter 4).
Not only has nature equipped us to live in groups but, like any natural species, we 
have the potential to flourish in good conditions and struggle in poor conditions. 
This idea of our flourishing, as biological entities, underpins Aristotle’s argument 
that there is, by objective standards, a ‘good human life’. It is this idea of a good 
human life that has given Aristotle’s thought its longevity and attractiveness to legal 
and other philosophers. It makes sense of human lives and human institutions – 
they are necessary conditions for realising our natural goals – and such institutions 
can be judged by the objective standard of their contribution to human happiness. 
This is clearly a strong basis for analysing, and criticising, law.
2a The human species
Humans can be classified as biological entities. However, while we now expect evo-
lution over time to be a characteristic of biology, Aristotle, like his contemporaries, 
assumed that biological species and types have, and will remain, unchanged. This 
static biological core is an ‘essence’; and for Aristotle we are essentially creatures who 
live together in groups, cooperate and share. Aristotle’s analysis of this essence is 
clearly and recognisably biological. We flourish and thrive as human beings where 
we are in a social situation which allows us to live without want, fulfil ourselves as 
persons and pursue our goals. We fail to flourish when we are denied the ability to 
live in a good culture where we are free to act as we should.
We are therefore, in essence, communal and communicating animals for whom 
the absence of other people to live and communicate with is unnatural. ‘[M]an is 
a political animal in a sense in which a bee is not, or any other gregarious animal. 
Nature, as we say, does nothing without some purpose; and she has endowed man 
alone among the animals with the power of speech’ (1987: 509). We are not alone 
in being social animals, but we are creatures for whom social interaction, character-
ised by speech, is central to our being.
www.ebook3000.com

2 ARISTOTLE
57
We therefore need others around us to fulfil our function as members of the 
human species. ‘Fulfilling a function’ as humans sounds artificial to modern ears. 
We are used to thinking of ourselves as persons, with the right to determine our ac-
tivities in life rather than as biological entities with functions. Nonetheless, Aristotle 
insisted that all living beings have a goal (telos) of becoming what nature intended 
us to be. Our goal is to live a flourishing life, which is necessarily an active life. Like 
any biological entity we have to grow and change; a human life is never simply the 
passive possession of certain essential characteristics. Furthermore, we grow and 
change in the company of others with whom we learn to live harmoniously while 
pursing our own goals and objectives. Nature’s telos provides us with a relatively 
modest goal – to live, as far as possible, harmoniously with other people – but it 
demands that we work to cultivate that harmony.
EXAMPLE
(XURSHDQ&RQYHQWLRQRQ+XPDQ5LJKWV$UWLFOH
The importance of drawing a line between our private, familial, lives and the wider needs 
of the state and society can be found clearly in the European Convention on Human 
Rights. Article 8 provides a clear insistence that people be allowed to pursue their lives 
without unnecessary interference. The second section of Article 8, however, accepts that 
this right is qualified substantially by the demands of society. Aristotle would agree with 
such qualifications.
1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his 
correspondence.
2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right except 
such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the 
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country, 
for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the 
protection of the rights and freedoms of others.
2b Political animals
This is what Aristotle means when he insists that we are ‘political animals’. We 
naturally spend time with other people, and this is essential for us, but human 
sociability also requires political decisions (in the widest sense) about how to deal 
with competing interests and arguments. In other words, we live best within a so-
cial system that allows us to pursue personal goals and ends, even though this may 
well involve some difficult (pragmatic and practical) decisions about how to live 
with other people pursuing different ends (see Finnis, 2011: 164–5). Consequently, 
Aristotle’s view of social and political activity has two dimensions: an insistence that 

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
58
sociability is natural for humans, and sensitivity to the day-to-day complexities that 
this entails. This view of human life is not unlike the view of human coexistence we 
find implicitly within law. We can expect, even demand, a certain level of sociability 
from individuals, and many of these expectations are realised in laws from freedom 
of assembly to road traffic rules. We also expect people’s lives to be complicated and 
sometimes antagonistic. Such antagonisms are the stuff of tort and criminal law.
The political animal is, therefore, neither political nor animal in the modern 
senses of the words. We are political because we have to cooperate with others and 
make compromises, whether or not we are involved in the running of the state. We 
are also animals for whom such political activity is part of our growth into maturity. 
While we are naturally social, we have to practise, and grow into, being good social 
actors. We are not human in any normal sense without this social dimension to our 
lives: ‘man is by nature a political animal. Anyone who by nature and not simply by 
ill luck has no state is either [. . .] subhuman or superhuman’ (1987: 509).
The political animal learns to, and has to, control itself through the exercise of 
virtue. While we are naturally social, we nonetheless have to work to cultivate good 
ways of dealing with others and avoid anti-social excesses in our activities. So, virtue 
for Aristotle is not a purely personal characteristic but encompasses civic, political, 
social and personal virtues. We need to cultivate moderate needs, tastes and wants 
and avoid excesses (vices). Not only is this moderation necessary for human coexist-
ence, it is necessary to be fully human. In other words, if all truly human living is 
social, and sociality requires the exercise of virtues, then virtues are necessary to be 
fully human. Vice or excess is, conversely, contrary to a flourishing social life and, 
to that extent, inhuman. In sum, Aristotle’s view of ‘virtue’ is not of repressive social 
mores (as the term virtue connotes in English), rather, it is a way of living which 
seeks moderation while pursuing the kind of life that is right for us.
Law helps us to lead virtuous lives. While law alone does not make us virtuous, it 
certainly guides us towards the public practices and personal dispositions that allow 
each individual to flourish in society. Good law is not, however, a single unchanging 
set of commands but the product of participatory politics where a range of views 
and voices contest, debate over and create laws suitable for their particular com-
munity. Accordingly, Aristotle is not a utopian with a model of a perfect state, but a 
(pre-modern) democrat with a dynamic view of good politics and good law. Indeed, 
Aristotle conceded that a flourishing life could be achieved in different communi-
ties, albeit that some communities are better than others; he has a preference for 
communities small enough for individuals to participate directly in politics (Barnes 
(ed.), 1995: 248–9). Nonetheless, he accepts that different communities have differ-
ent merits and that social conditions can and do change over time, and he strongly 
criticises majoritarian systems where the many dictate to the few. A community 
which defended the needs of the poor, or the rich, or any class exclusively, is poorly 
governed. A balance of interests has to be represented.
www.ebook3000.com

2 ARISTOTLE
59
2c The situated person
Aristotle’s philosophy is coldly biological in some respects: we flourish or deteriorate 
according to whether we can put down roots in a good society. However, Aristotle was 
also sensitive to the irreducible differences between persons, and the difficulties and 
tragedies that can befall them. We are not merely instances of the human species, but 
have unique personalities and capacities. In the modern world we understand this 
uniqueness in a particular way. That is, that we are free human beings who are at lib-
erty to choose our path in life, our roles, our commitments and our values. Aristotle, 
and the Ancient world, would not recognise this radically individualistic conception 
of identity. Rather, we are born into communities and social structures that define who 
we are and what our responsibilities are. We are always ‘situated’ in a historical and 
cultural context (the term is not Aristotle’s but used by contemporary philosophers 
influenced by Aristotle (see Taylor, 1992)). We naturally have familial and social ties 
that determine who we are dependent upon and to whom we have obligations. This 
means that a strict division between fact and value is not meaningful: who you are, 
as a fact, determines what you should be, or are obliged to do. Values are not chosen, 
they are given. Some obligations fall upon us, whether we choose them or not.
EXAMPLE
Mabo v Queensland>1R@&/5$XVWUDOLDQ+LJK&RXUW
The pursuit of a flourishing life for individuals in one group may well run into conflict 
with a country’s laws as a whole. This is accentuated where an external power has taken 
control of land and disrupted the rights and freedoms of a pre-existing community. This 
is central to the major Australian land-rights case, Mabo. It concerned the right of the 
Meriam people to possession of land, the Murray Islands, which, it was contended, had 
passed to the British Crown on taking possession of Australasia. A number of things are 
at issue, including, implicitly, the question of whether pre-existing native practices consti-
tuted law. It begins with a description from an eighteenth-century observer. A simple, but 
questionable, conclusion is drawn from this description.
It seems that before European contact social cohesion [among the Meriam people] was 
sought by the combined operation of a number of factors. Children were inculcated from 
a very early age with knowledge of their relationships in terms of social groupings and 
what was expected of them by a constant pattern of example, imitation and repetition with 
reinforcing behaviour. It was part of their environment – the way in which they lived. [. . .] 
Initiation and other group activities reinforced these patterns. A sense of shame was the out-
come of a failure to observe. It could be reinforced by group pressures leading to retribution. 
Ultimately force might be resorted to by those who had access to the means of exerting it. 
Sorcery, magic and taboo were obviously important cohesive factors and a source of sanc-
tion. [. . .] The findings show that Meriam society was regulated more by custom than by law.

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
60
Social life is therefore a mixture of obligations to others, and the obligation to 
fulfil one’s own potential. Being human is not about the pursuit of a perfect life, it 
is about finding a balance between different obligations, social pressures and our 
own natural capacities and instincts. In this picture of social life some people will 
be denied, through luck and chance, the opportunity to live in a healthy flourishing 
society that supports them. In these instances, even the effort to live a good life can 
be frustrated, and people forced into tragic situations where nothing they can do 
will be good or right despite their best efforts (Nussbaum, 1986).
The possibility of tragic choices between equally undesirable outcomes preoccu-
pied the Ancient Greeks. Greek tragedy, particularly in Sophocles’ Antigone (1984), 
had dramatised the tensions between obeying the ‘law of the land’ and ‘natural law’, 
bonds and obligations among family members. Antigone is obliged to do both, but 
obeying either law would lead to unhappiness. At a more personal level for Aristotle, 
the first great Athenian philosopher, Socrates (c.470–399BCE), had been put to 
death by the state for seeking to question received assumptions and prejudices held 
by his fellow Athenians. In both cases, Antigone and Socrates, we find an assertion 
that we are obliged to obey the laws of the land. At the same time, both, ultimately, 
maintain that pursuing what we think is right can be a greater or higher obligation. 
Though such tensions are not always tragic, Aristotle’s position is valuable in insist-
ing that even where we want to do good, life and law often make this difficult for us. 
The tension between individual fulfilment and the law of the land is, says Wieacker, 
still in evidence today:
All human law, being the work of humans, is condemned to reflect the misery as well as 
the greatness of human endeavour. The misery of human law reveals itself as soon as we 
realize the need to resort to compulsion, sanction, and punishment, in other words the 
very elements of positive law that stand accused today as ‘repressive.’ It also shows up in 
the insufficient fulfilment of personal expectations and needs, as well as in [. . .] the merely 
formal justice of general norms. (1990: 2)
EXAMPLE
Apology3ODWR
The trial and execution of Socrates is the most important event in the long relationship 
between law and philosophy. The law of the land demanded Socrates’ execution de-
spite the charges against him (irreligion and corruption) being unfair; at the same time 
Socrates insisted on respecting the decision of a Court of law. The problem of a binding 
but nonetheless unjust law remains a central one for legal philosophy, as does the wider 
question of whether law (social rules) and philosophy (the pursuit of truth) are necessar-
ily antagonistic. Plato’s account of this trial is not an ‘apology’ in the sense of accepting 
blame. Rather it is a description of Socrates’ evidence in Court and of his self-justification 
on the basis that he had obligations that his fellow countrymen could not understand.
➨
www.ebook3000.com

3 HUMANISM
61
 +XPDQLVP
 
 Introduction 
 Humanism translates ‘human’ directly into a set of values. There are a range of ideas 
and positions that claim to be humanistic, meaning, roughly, that they consider 
individuals and their welfare to be central to their view of the world. Specifically, 
humanism (the ‘-ism’ suffix denoting a system of ideas) suggests that humans, and 
the values connected with humans, can be said to provide a complete, or at least a 
powerful, system of ideas for politics, law and society. 
 Humanism as a term can be traced to the Renaissance, that period of European 
history (the fourteenth to the sixteenth century) driven by a rediscovery and re-
vitalisation of Ancient philosophy, including Aristotle and Roman philosophers. 
The Renaissance put these ideas into action primarily in the area of education, 
stressing the cultivation of rhetoric, logic and other practical skills necessary for an 
active, flourishing, social life. However, education in these ‘humanities’ formed part 
of a wider movement re-evaluating humans’ place in the universe. While medieval 
Europe had seen humans largely as part of a hierarchy of Creation (with humans 
little more than animals in need of salvation from the suffering of life on earth) 
the Renaissance placed humans much closer to God. Humans are  imago dei , made 
in the image of God. As such, Renaissance Humanism represented a radical re-
evaluation of what humans are, and therefore what is owed to them ( Copleston, 
2003 : 207–30). 
 Humanism has come to have a number of confusingly different ideas associated 
with it, but they tend to share with Renaissance Humanism a strong view about 
how all humans should be treated. They should be treated as valuable in them-
selves, and their lives and welfare should not be sacrificed as a means to achieve 
collective goals. It is these ideas that in turn fuelled the revolutionary period of the 
eighteenth century with its revolutionary tricolour of liberty, fraternity and equality. 
These were held to be universal values and standards applying to humans by virtue 
of their being humans. Humanism locates the origins of  law in humans themselves, 
and implies that the content of law should be driven by the universal moral status 
 +XPDQLVP
 [Socrates]: Indeed, men of Athens, I am far from making a defense now on my own behalf, 
as might be thought, but on yours, to prevent you from wrongdoing by mistreating the 
god’s gift to you by condemning me; for if you kill me you will not easily find another like 
me. I was attached to this city by the god – though it seems a ridiculous thing to say – 
as upon a great and noble horse which was somewhat sluggish because of its size and 
needed to be stirred up by a kind of gadfly. It is to fulfil some such function that I believe 
the god has placed me in the city. I never cease to rouse each and every one of you, to 
persuade and reproach you all day long [. . .].  

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
62
of persons: law is found in, and should seek to sustain, human liberty, equality and 
fraternity. However, as we shall see, for all the immediate appeal of these principles 
they do not always easily translate into law and may well be, especially in the case 
of liberty, antagonistic to it.

D +XPDQLW\DQGSHUVRQV
The common thread between humanisms is a concern with what is owed to all hu-
mans, or, in other words, a centralisation of what is, and should be, universal in human 
conduct towards and between humans. This enriched idea of the person derived from 
Roman law, i.e. a person is a free-born human or a slave made subject to law and given 
status by law. Roman universality, however, was in many respects a pragmatic uni-
versality, enclosing conquered peoples within the scope of Imperial law. Humanism 
stresses that all persons are deserving of equal recognition by law, because each person 
– regardless of local laws – shares the elevated status as imago dei (Copleston, 2003: 
421). Among some philosophers this shared status was said to form the basis of ‘cos-
mopolitanism’: the idea that our rights and duties transcend individual states, and that 
law was something shared by all peoples. In practice, Renaissance Humanism did not 
eradicate inequalities and injustices, nor was the rhetoric of equality and cosmopoli-
tanism matched by a successful politics of social equality. Nonetheless, it set in train a 
philosophical reappraisal of what was owed to humans as humans.
The Renaissance changed the cosmological rank of humans, elevating them from 
near the bottom (close to the physical world of Creation, but above animals) to near 
the top (in God’s image and a fingertip away from God). This reappraisal of humans 
as a collectivity can be seen as the birth of ‘Humanity’ as a concept. While we take it for 
granted that there is such a thing as humanity – humans in general – and while there 
have always been perceptions of commonalities between humans, the Renaissance 
created Humanity as the distillation of all that is best in humans. Humanity became 
an entity in its own right, possessing agency (Humanity ‘acts’ and ‘wills’) and pos-
sessing a moral and historical destiny (Humanity makes demands on each of us in its 
progress towards greater self-consciousness and harmony). This Humanity is not the 
class of all humans: it is our ideal selves constituting our ideal ruler.
The ‘person’ of the Renaissance – aspiring to and judged by the standards of 
humanity – in time became the ‘citizen’ of the Enlightenment. The notion of the 
citizen signals a political and philosophical augmentation of the category of the 
person. First (and philosophically), personhood was universalised, i.e. everyone, re-
gardless of social station, has an elevated status due to intrinsic natural reason and 
freedom. Second (and politically), this demanded a real democratisation of social 
practices and institutions. The idea of a person becomes an irreducibly democratic 
concept involving a rejection of cosmological and social hierarchies. The destiny of 
Humanity could now be equated with the emancipation of all individuals into the 
status of rights-holding citizen.
www.ebook3000.com

3 HUMANISM
63
The person of the Renaissance, with their intrinsically elevated status, is still a rec-
ognisable part of the modern era alongside the citizen of the Enlightenment (with 
inalienable rights and duties). The notion of the citizen is nonetheless problematic. 
It seeks to combine the particular (a citizen of this state) with the universal (citizens 
are all, and any, law-abiding individuals) and accordingly finds different expression 
in different legal cultures. For example, the citizen of the United States is predomi-
nantly characterised by rights, the French citizen is predominantly characterised by 
duties (Quinton (ed.) 1967: 153–9).
EXAMPLE
7KH ([HFXWLRQ RI &KDUOHV ,  -DQXDU\  TXRWHG LQ /DXJKODQG

The trial of Charles I has significance as the legal rejection, by common people, of the 
natural elevation of sovereigns. However, the English Revolution was too early to allow 
truly democratic and revolutionary ideas to bear political fruit. Consequently, the English 
remain subjects, not citizens. The following is from the speech made by Charles on the 
day of his execution. Liberty, he argues, lies in the strong government of a monarch; by 
deposing the monarch the people themselves have been harmed.
I desire their [the people’s] liberty and freedom as much as anybody whomsoever; but 
I must tell you that their liberty and freedom consist in having of government, those laws 
by which their life and their goods may be most their own. It is not for having share in 
government, sirs; that is nothing pertaining to them; a subject and a sovereign are clear 
different things. And therefore until they do that, I mean that you do put the people in that 
liberty, as I say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves. Sirs, it was for this that now 
I am come here. If I would have given way to an arbitrary way, for to have all laws changed 
according to the power of the sword, I needed not to have come here; and therefore I tell 
you (and I pray God it be not laid to your charge) that I am the martyr of the people.

E /LEHUW\
The first element of the revolutionary tricolour is liberty, being both a specific 
defence of the physical liberty of the individual against arbitrary treatment by 
the state and a general defence of persons’ need to choose their own destiny. The 
Enlightenment and the revolutionary era emphasised freedom and self-creation, i.e. 
humans taking it upon themselves to become something new. This commitment to 
change, growth and progress is only partially captured in the language of liberty. In 
fact, the idea of autonomy is more appropriate. To be auto-nomos – in a literal transla-
tion from the Greek, to be ‘self-legislating’ – is to take upon oneself the power and 
status of law-giver and being able to exercise and create laws.

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
64
There is clearly a close relationship between freedom or autonomy and human-
istic ideals. As Raz asserts:
[H]umanism calls for respecting the autonomy of persons, that is, their right and ability to 
develop their talents and tastes and be able to lead the kind of life they are committed to. 
The areas of a person’s life and plans which have to be respected by others are those which 
are central to his own image of the kind of person he is and which form the foundation 
of his self-respect. (2009: 280)
This emphasis on the individual person’s choice and self-determination is related 
to that fact that, in the revolutionary era, ‘we the people’ had taken over the pow-
ers of the sovereign in order to become, en masse, the sovereign. This foreshadows 
the iconoclastic trajectory of modernity wherein humanity took it upon itself to 
become the law-giver, ultimately challenging God himself as ultimate source of law 
(Chapter 7). The revolutionaries in France and America would not have seen their 
actions in these terms and would have rejected any radically irreligious conclusion 
to their political project. Nonetheless, this is in some respects the logical conclusion 
of the liberty pursued from the Enlightenment onwards.
One group of humanists, Existentialists, took this libertarian project to its logical 
(and potentially absurd) conclusion. These were twentieth-century humanists who 
saw liberty and autonomy as the most important dimension of the ‘modern condi-
tion’, but who stressed the burdens that this entailed and not just the benefits. Insisting 
that existence precedes essence – the fact that we are precedes what we are  – the 
Existentialists argued that we are thrown into the world without any natural or essen-
tial way to be. We cannot appeal to the facts of nature to determine how to act because 
nature does not provide an essence, a proper way to be, for humans (see Moran, 2000: 
238–40). Nor can we appeal to any distinctively human values because these will al-
ways be temporary by virtue of the fact that humanity is never a single thing, only the 
sum of people here and now. For the Existentialists, ‘People are not essentially anything 
whatever, except that they are essentially free. They are free to choose what they will be, 
and collectively they are free to choose what humanity will be’ (Solomon, 1988: 178). 
Some Existentialists insisted that this nonetheless represented a kind of humanism in 
that, as free humans, we have a duty to act freely, and never to masquerade as ‘un-free’ 
creatures at the mercy of others or of nature (Sartre, 2007). However, it also represents 
an ethic of liberty that runs close to the nihilistic, in so far as its injunction is to be 
free at any cost, but never to determine or insist upon any particular course of action.
EXAMPLE
Frasik v Poland(&+5$SSOLFDWLRQQXPEHU
Such is the political, legal and ideological significance of liberty that most states accept 
(through signing international treaties) that liberty should be taken from people as rarely 
➨
www.ebook3000.com

3 HUMANISM
65

F )UDWHUQLW\DQGHTXDOLW\
The two remaining revolutionary principles are fraternity and equality. Together 
these point to the importance of ‘levelling’ the social structure such that all people 
are not only equal in an abstract sense, but recognised and respected as rights-
holding citizens.
Equality has a long philosophical history and found its first and most influen-
tial expression in Aristotle’s work. In his dictum that ‘like cases should be treated 
alike, and unlike cases treated as unlike’, Aristotle offered a deceptively simple 
structure for understanding what we mean by equality (see Chapter 1). Part of 
what he is arguing for is captured in the simple notion of mathematical equality, 
that something is quantitatively equal to another thing. This cannot be all that 
is meant, however, because judging human actions and human needs is rarely 
a question of mathematical measurement, not least because we have to decide 
when two things should be compared and thereby considered capable of being 
equal. Consequently, equality in human affairs is often a question of ignoring ir-
relevant differences, most frequently differences such as colour, race or sex which 
are grounds on which two people should rarely, in legal contexts, be compared. 
This can also be expressed in terms of desert: two persons equally deserve some-
thing if they have an equal claim to it when all other legally and morally irrel-
evant circumstances and personal characteristics are excluded. ‘If a law provides 
for the relief of poverty then the requirement of the principle that “Like cases be 
treated alike” would surely involve attention to the need of different claimants of 
relief’ (Hart, 1994: 163). In these terms, we can make sense of the otherwise false 
assertion that all people are equal. In prescriptive terms, persons should be judged, 
participate and be considered on the basis of relevant characteristics (merit, 
need, entitlement) not on the basis of irrelevant characteristics. Failure to do this 
would entail that real but irrelevant differences can become morally objectionable 
inequalities of treatment.
as possible, including that of prisoners. While convicted criminals usually lose their liberty 
of movement and choice, this should not be amplified (it is held by the European Court of 
Human Rights) through additional losses of freedom and choice.
Personal liberty is not a necessary pre-condition for the exercise of the right to marry. 
Imprisonment deprives a person of his liberty and also – unavoidably or by implication – of 
some civil rights and privileges. This does not, however, mean that persons in detention 
cannot, or only very exceptionally can, exercise their right to marry. As the Court has 
repeatedly held, a prisoner continues to enjoy fundamental human rights and freedoms 
that are not contrary to the sense of deprivation of liberty, and every additional limitation 
should be justified by the authorities [. . .]. [There is] a non-exhaustive list of rights that 
a detained person may exercise.

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
66
 Fraternity, ‘brotherhood’, is a more opaque, but also potentially richer, concept than 
equality. That is to say, fraternity is a term without clear meaning or scope, but captures 
much of what humanists understand as their moral and legal commitments. Over 
and above the much thinner commitment to equal treatment, fraternity is an essen-
tially modern concept denoting ethical commitments beyond family and community. 
Although Aristotle would have accepted that we have responsibilities to our state as well 
as to our families, fraternity indicates a far broader moral and ethical attachment to all 
persons around us, an attachment demanding recognition of others’ value and solidar-
ity in the face of others’ needs. The problem with such a demand is its positing an un-
derlying link, a brotherhood, which transcends particularity, which generates a natural 
solidarity with others, and which renders personal and cultural difference irrelevant. 
Like other theories positing an underlying uniformity or solidarity between humans, 
fraternity leaves those who are, one way or another, ‘different’ excluded or ignored.  
EXAMPLE 
Coleman v  Attridge Law(XURSHDQ&RXUWRI-XVWLFH&DVH&
>@&0/5
Considering equality and non-discrimination, the European Court of Justice argues (drawing 
on the legal philosophy of Ronald Dworkin) that both are reducible to the idea of human dig-
nity. This idea is said to transcend any political disagreements within and between states.
 At its bare minimum, human dignity entails the recognition of the equal worth of every 
individual. One’s life is valuable by virtue of the mere fact that one is human, and no life 
is more or less valuable than another. As Ronald Dworkin has recently reminded us, even 
when we disagree deeply about issues of political morality, the structure of political insti-
tutions and the functioning of our democratic states we nevertheless continue to share a 
commitment to this fundamental principle. Therefore, individuals and political institutions 
must not act in a way that denies the intrinsic importance of every human life. [. . .] The 
most obvious way in which such a person’s dignity and autonomy may be affected is when 
one is directly targeted because one has a suspect characteristic. Treating someone less 
well on the basis of reasons such as religious belief, age, disability and sexual orienta-
tion undermines this special and unique value that people have by virtue of being human.  
 )HPLQLVP
 
 Introduction 
 Feminism has a range of meanings, but it has always involved drawing attention to 
the differences in treatment, differences in opportunity and differences in lives ex-
perienced by men and women. It also stresses that what has been treated as ‘human’ 
 )HPLQLVP
www.ebook3000.com

4 FEMINISM
67
often includes assumptions and value judgments about what is ‘normal’ for men 
and for women, namely inequality. In other words, while humanists, among others, 
have propounded liberating ideas about what humans are capable of and entitled 
to, such positions also betray blindness to those outside the public sphere and out-
side the traditional class of philosophical, political and social actors. What is tell-
ingly described as ‘Man’ or ‘Mankind’ has systematically, and in the guise of what is 
‘natural’ or ‘rational’, excluded women.
Recalling the revolutionary era and its trio of values, equality and liberty were 
demanded by and for a relatively small class of wealthy men. Note also that appeal 
to fraternity not only used a language of ‘brotherhood’ but, more fundamentally, 
presupposed uniformity within humanity, ignoring differences between the sexes. 
This was a defence of revolutionary cosmopolitanism, but in practice was character-
ised by the narrow concerns of one, male, political class.
Some pre-twentieth-century philosophy can be identified as ‘feminist’ in that it 
sought to place women at the centre of enquiry. Mary Wollstonecraft’s (1759–97) 
work Vindication of the Rights of Woman is the most important of these. This text, 
a rhetorical addition to Wollstonecraft’s more general defence of the French 
Revolution, unpicked the contradictions and hypocrisies of the Revolutions’ con-
servative critics, not least their horror at the Revolution throwing the ‘natural’ divi-
sion between the sexes into disarray (Wollstonecraft, 1997: 226f).
Despite some radical political and philosophical differences (Humm, 1992), 
feminist philosophies share a critical perspective on law: law has been a tool of 
inequality, oppression and injustice. Wollstonecraft’s position and contemporary 
thought share the assumption that women have been both unconsciously and de-
liberately excluded from fundamental social struggles and ideological changes, and 
that law must be made to recognise the status, value and contribution of women to 
‘mankind’. From this starting assumption at least two further lines of enquiry and 
analysis are important:
The first stresses women’s differences from men and posits that women have a particular 
contribution to make to the practice of law which will mean greater fairness and justice for 
all parties in dispute. The second approach maintains that gender differences result from 
male domination which the law both reflects and perpetuates. Legal reform cannot change 
basic social inequalities because law reproduces them. (Roach Anleu, 1992: 423–4)

D 7KHVHFRQGVH[
Although not a universally agreed upon basis for criticism and analysis (see Kruks, 
2005), Simone De Beauvoir’s (1908–86) The Second Sex (1988) engages with a spec-
trum of issues crucial to feminism. The idea of a second, or secondary sex, refers to 
a way of thinking (with theological origins, but still prevalent) that womanhood 
and femininity are derived from men and masculinity. Rather than these two sexes 
being qualitatively different (in itself a contentious assumption), there is an implicit 

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
68
assumption that these qualitatively different sexes possess a natural order of prior-
ity with masculinity first and femininity second. ‘Thus humanity is male and man 
defines woman not in herself but as relative to him; she is not regarded as an au-
tonomous being’ (De Beauvoir, 1988: 16). The reasons for this may well be partly 
historical and theological, involving acceptance of biblical idea that woman (Eve) 
was created after man (Adam) as a means of keeping Adam company and allowing 
Adam to produce offspring. This idea is however more complex, and insidious, than 
the acceptance of biblical stories. It is found throughout Western thought in the 
implicit assumption that women are men minus certain characteristics. For example, 
for Aristotle women are men without rationality; for Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) 
women are conceptualised as men lacking a penis (see Chapter 6): ‘[Freud] assumes 
that woman feels she is a mutilated man’ (De Beauvoir, 1963: 63). Such discourses 
of female absence and inadequacy continue to flavour Western cultural assumptions 
about women and, for De Beauvoir, are the main barriers, in male and female think-
ing, to social change and justice.
De Beauvoir was working within the Existentialist tradition and she shares with 
other thinkers in this tradition an interest in ‘the other’. The ‘other’ is the opposite to 
‘us’ – those people and groups who are perceived by us to be different, alien, foreign 
or inferior – who, through their difference, allow us to understand ourselves better. 
De Beauvoir’s analysis identifies women as humanity’s ‘other’. In other words, our 
cultural self-consciousness has been implicitly informed by the idea that ‘we’ (men) 
derive our identity in comparison with ‘them’ (women). This is not hard to discover 
when we consider the literature of the last two millennia and discover themes to the 
effect that we should value and applaud ‘masculine values’ (strength, courage, hard-
ness) and denigrate and reject ‘female values’ (care, modesty and sensitivity) (e.g. 
Cicero, 2000: 44). Moreover, this orientation between ‘us’ and our ‘other’ informs 
our relationship with different, new and unfamiliar cultures. It is common to find 
appeal to ‘our’ ‘masculine’ culture, contrasted with the ‘weaker’ ‘female’ cultures. 
This was particularly true of European understandings of the ‘orient’, the Asian, Arab 
and Islamic world of the European imagination that was understood not in its own 
terms but as weak, fundamentally ‘feminised’ cultures addicted to luxury and vice 
(Said, 1978). Such is the potency and ubiquity of the ideology of ‘the second sex’.
EXAMPLE
+DWKDZD\V&DVH0RGHUQ
Women’s physical and economic vulnerability, their supposed ‘proximity to nature’, and 
various biblical passages, have meant that accusations of witchcraft are more commonly 
levelled at women. The motivation behind witchcraft accusations vary, but are generally 
➨
www.ebook3000.com

4 FEMINISM
69

E 1DWXUHDVLGHRORJ\
One way in which these myths about a hierarchy of the sexes have been sustained 
is their shrouding in arguments concerning what is ‘natural’. These are arguments 
insisting that it is ‘natural’ for women to have a certain kind of status and certain 
kinds of roles, and that it would therefore be somehow ‘artificial’ if their role in soc-
iety were to change. In fact, such appeals to ‘natural’ behaviours, roles and instincts, 
disguise oppression. Facts, states of affairs, do not translate directly into values 
concerning, for instance, a division of labour between the sexes. Nonetheless, vari-
ous crude arguments concerning ‘natural roles’ in society are reproduced across the 
political and philosophical spectrum. One important variation of this kind of argu-
ment consists in locating women ‘closer to nature’ than men. Because of childbirth 
and because of the physical make-up of women necessary for childbirth, women are 
thereby located ‘closer’ to nature, as opposed to men located closer to the rational 
and therefore God. Women are ‘naturally’ equipped for nurturing and caring roles 
in the family, less rational and, importantly, more bound by the ‘necessity’ that char-
acterises nature. Men are more capable of being free through the exercise of reason; 
women are enslaved by the structures and necessities of nature and are, therefore, 
less able to exercise freedom (see Aristotle, 1987: 508).
Nature and the natural also become tools of oppression when social expectations 
have met with modern notions of ‘public health’. A relatively recent idea (emerg-
ing over the last few centuries) addressing the general conditions and health of the 
mass of (working) people, public health has been concerned with the threats posed 
by poverty and industrial and environmental pollution. These threats included 
reducible to the manipulation of popular fears. At some points law has been complicit with 
this manipulation; here judges were rather more suspicious.
One Hathaway, a most notorious rogue, feigned himself bewitched and deprived of his 
sight, and pretended to have fasted nine weeks together; and continuing, as he pre-
tended, under this evil influence, he was advised, in order to discover the person sup-
posed to have bewitched him, to boil his own water in a glass bottle till the bottle should 
break, and the first that came into the house after should be the witch; and that if he 
scratched the body of that person till he fetched blood, it would cure him; which being 
done, and a poor old woman coming by chance into the house, she was seized on as the 
witch, and obliged to submit to be scratched till the blood came; whereupon the fellow 
pretended to find present ease. The poor woman hereupon was indicted for witchcraft, 
and tried and acquitted at Surrey Assizes before Holt, Chief Justice, a man of no great 
faith in these things; and the fellow persisting in his [. . .] wicked contrivance, pretended 
still to be ill, and the poor woman, notwithstanding the acquittal, forced by the mob to 
suffer herself to be scratched by him. And this being discovered to be all imposition, an 
information was filed against him.

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
70
a number of putative ‘mental health problems’, although such problems do not 
reflect the clinical criteria used today but rather concern a whole range of ‘deviant’ 
behaviours contrary to dominant social values. Promiscuity and prostitution were 
forms of deviance from norms that fell within the scope of public health, and the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries generated ideas of public health that justified 
the incarceration of women for such deviance (Luker, 1998). For example, the incar-
ceration of prostitutes was a public health measure made on the basis of protecting 
the population from sexually transmitted diseases, the assumption being that it was 
prostitutes who were responsible for the spread of such diseases, not their customers 
(Bridgeman and Millns, 1998). At worst, sterilisation of women was justified on the 
basis of the public health benefits of ‘deviant’ women being prevented from repro-
ducing. With complicity between society and law, women were identified as public 
health risks and robbed of reproductive autonomy, a step ultimately premised on 
what is thought to be ‘natural’.
There are a number ways in which these appeals to the natural can be criticised 
and resisted, the main route being a distinction between sex (concerning physical 
reproductive characteristics) and gender (being structures of personality, associated 
with, but not determined by, sex). Sex may give individuals certain physical charac-
teristics, but these do not entail that their gender is predetermined. Indeed, gender 
may be a far more flexible and variable thing than we are lead to believe. Using such 
a distinction allows resistance to simplistic appeals to nature and the natural and 
allows a more sophisticated psychology of identity.
EXAMPLE
Re D. (A Minor)>@:/5
The case concerned whether a young girl, with a severe but treatable mental condition, 
should be sterilised, and whether this decision could be made on the basis of agree-
ment between the mother and a paediatrician. Here we see the Courts take a strong line 
against scientific wisdom and in favour of reproductive autonomy, at least to the extent 
that the girl’s parent should wait until her daughter reaches eighteen to decide whether 
she has the capacity to make a decision about parenthood.
I cannot believe, and the evidence does not warrant the view, that a decision to carry out 
an operation of this nature performed for non-therapeutic purposes on a minor can be 
held to be within the doctor’s sole clinical judgment. [. . .] A review of the whole of the 
evidence leads me to the conclusion that in a case of a child of 11 years of age, where 
the evidence shows that her mental and physical condition and attainments have already 
improved, and where her future prospects are as yet unpredictable, where the evidence 
also shows that she is unable as yet to understand and appreciate the implications of 
this operation and could not give a valid or informed consent, but the likelihood is that in 
➨
www.ebook3000.com

4 FEMINISM
71

F ,GHQWLW\SROLWLFV
If the category ‘women’ has been determined by a group benefitting from structures 
of domination, should this very category be treated with suspicion? Allied to the 
separation of sex and gender, interrogation of this notion of ‘woman’ and ‘women’ 
yields fruitful ways of unpacking and understanding systems of domination. It is 
through these kinds of questions that we can chart the development of feminism as 
it is presently understood. This historical development is roughly divided into three 
‘waves’ of feminism.
The first wave is a predominantly political grouping of the turn of the twentieth 
century driven by the Suffrage movement. This well organised, politically incendi-
ary, and sometimes militant demand for voting rights was politically clear in its 
objectives, if philosophically limited. This was an inspirational movement with nar-
rowly focussed goals, but it awaited the arrival of other social and economic changes 
following the First World War for the realisation of full enfranchisement. Voting had 
clear symbolic value as the final realisation of the Enlightenment and revolution-
ary goals of equal status and universal acknowledgement. The Suffrage movement 
did not, conversely, have a comprehensive view of how structures of inequality and 
oppressive thought were fundamentally enmeshed in culture and society, including 
within the idea of the natural.
The second wave emerged roughly in the 1960s and continues to have relevance 
today. This position sought to reclaim womanhood as a distinctive form of being 
entailing distinctive rights, rights not being met by the prevailing social and eco-
nomic structures. Philosophically, this can be seen as a combination of biology 
and essentialism: there is a distinctive female sex with a distinctive essence and 
with distinctive needs. These translated into political demands for social equity and 
cultural liberty, and have supported a militant feminism encouraging women to 
seek self-determined forms of life. This was a radical position demanding concrete 
political change. It also involved fruitful use of the sex/gender division: ‘The distinc-
tion between “sex” and “gender” was a key analytic of early Second Wave feminist 
theory; and many of the readings of Beauvoir [. . .] criticized her for inconsistency 
[in the use of these terms]’ (Kruks, 2005: 295). However, even this distinction could 
not capture the subtleties of individual personality, individual need or individual 
situations within existing cultural and familial ties (Humm, 1992).
later years she will be able to make her own choice, where, I believe, the frustration and 
resentment of realising (as she would one day) what had happened could be devastating, 
an operation of this nature is, in my view, contra-indicated. [. . .] For these, and for the 
other reasons to which I have adverted, I have come to the conclusion that this operation 
is neither medically indicated nor necessary, and that it would not be in D’s best interest 
for it to be performed.

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
72
 Out of these philosophical limitations a third wave of anti-essentialist feminism 
emerged seeking a more sophisticated understanding of female identity and the 
ways in which identity, commitment and social bonds are created and maintained. 
This is a philosophically clear position seeking a flexible account of how femininity 
and womanhood can be understood without the reduction of identity to antago-
nistic binary categories. 
 During the 1990s, with the poststructuralist tide in feminist theorizing running high, the 
sex/gender distinction itself came to be put into question: biology was not a factual sci-
ence but itself a highly politicized discursive practice; ‘sex’ was as much a social/discursive 
construct as ‘gender’.   ( Kruks, 2005 : 295)  
 Flowing from this is also an attendant loss of political focus. While this contempo-
rary form of feminism reflects more accurately differences in identity and situation – 
i.e. the dangers of rigid classifications of identity – its political focus is less clear.  
EXAMPLE 
~81 &RQYHQWLRQ RQ WKH (OLPLQDWLRQ RI $OO )RUPV RI 'LVFULPLQDWLRQ
DJDLQVW:RPHQ$UWLFOH
This international treaty outlines a range of rights (including reproductive rights and 
choice of nationality) and imposes a number of duties on states (including the revocation 
of all and any discriminatory law). In Article 5 it demands positive steps by the state to 
shape cultural perceptions of women, and cultivate acknowledgment that childrearing is 
not a solely, or naturally, female activity.
 States Parties shall take all appropriate measures: (a) To modify the social and cultural 
patterns of conduct of men and women, with a view to achieving the elimination of preju-
dices and customary and all other practices which are based on the idea of the inferiority 
or the superiority of either of the sexes or on stereotyped roles for men and women; (b) 
To ensure that family education includes a proper understanding of maternity as a social 
function and the recognition of the common responsibility of men and women in the up-
bringing and development of their children, it being understood that the interest of the 
children is the primordial consideration in all cases.  
 )UHHGRP
 
 Introduction 
 In this chapter we have not only described humans and patterns of human behav-
iour, we have also been concerned with what humans  should do. That we have any 
responsibilities at all – individually and collectively – does depend upon at least one 
prior assumption, namely that we are free. Having obligations must presuppose the 
 )UHHGRP
www.ebook3000.com

5 FREEDOM
73
possibility of fulfilling those obligations. The most basic condition of fulfilling any 
obligation is being free to fulfil it. Any discussion of obligations and responsibilities, 
be they moral or legal, requires that we have some understanding of human freedom.
We live and act as humans assuming that, without evidence to the contrary, every-
thing we do is freely chosen, that we are the ‘author’ of all our actions. Moreover, 
we hold other people responsible for their actions through judging and punishing 
them. Attribution of responsibilities varies on the basis of individuals and contexts; 
it is common to attribute social responsibilities from the moment an individual 
becomes an adult (though criminal responsibility begins earlier) and some respon-
sibilities depend upon adults choosing to voluntarily enter into a legal relationship. 
However, it makes no sense to talk of responsibility if the individual is not the ‘au-
thor’ of their actions: there must be some kind of causal relationship between what 
we intend to do and what we actually do.
That humans are the causes of events in the world is clear. However, it is crucial 
in law to determine the extent to which individuals are responsible for the out-
comes of their actions. Furthermore, law recognises degrees of culpability, degrees 
of causation and degrees of rationality among individuals and therefore degrees of 
responsibility. Yet areas of law attribute responsibility without evidence of freely 
chosen decisions; tort, the area law of most concerned with accidents, attributes 
causal responsibility without conscious responsibility. It also makes no sense to try 
to make human life predictable through laws if people’s actions are not chosen and 
are therefore unpredictable both for ourselves and others. Nonetheless, social life 
and individual psychology are characterised by the uncertain and unpredictable.
Therefore, arguably the most important, and most vexed, point at which the idea 
of the person and law meet is in law’s basic assumption that we are free and respon-
sible, and in philosophy’s insistence that human freedom is neither assured nor 
always coherent. Both law and philosophy are concerned with humans as subject 
to causal forces, but philosophy in particular has a wider concern with the causal 
compulsion arising from nature and the natural world, and the possibility that this 
might make ideas of freedom illusory or illegitimate.

D )UHHGRPDVOLEHUW\
The competing facts and values of personhood inevitably meet at the idea of 
freedom. In Aristotle’s work we are said to have an inheritance from nature, our 
sociability, which shapes our lives as humans but does not mean that we are slaves, 
robots or animals. We are more than the sum of our biological inheritance and our 
social context because we make choices, act, change ourselves and our environ-
ments, and can be – to a degree – the author of our own destiny. Aristotle, along 
with other thinkers, demonstrates a tendency to supplement the biological facts of 
the human species with the claim that we are freer than other parts of the natural 
world; physically and psychologically freer.

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
74
Philosophies that centralise the value of humans and persons have to give some 
account of how the capacity for free action can be reconciled with the mechanistic 
forces of nature. The special status of humans as part of, but in crucial respects dif-
ferent from, nature is assumed but not proven. Humanism takes this exceptional 
status as a core value, as do the Existentialists, who treat it as the meeting-point 
of human facts and values. Feminism (and in some respects humanism) aims to 
liberate individuals from ideas and social structures that limit the freedom of the 
individual to understand themselves in a way free from illegitimate assumptions.
These philosophies can, therefore, be linked together by way of the idea of free-
dom, but this does not mean that we are pursuing a single idea or concept. ‘Freedom 
to choose actions’, ‘freedom from certain ways of thinking’ and the ‘freedom found 
in our collective lives together’ can be seen as radically different kinds of ideas that 
do not cohere into any single idea of ‘freedom’. The main connotation of freedom 
is that of the person living, acting and choosing with as few external social forces, 
as few constraints, as possible. So, living in a natural, wild, environment, while no 
doubt a hard life, would be free from social constraints and pressures. This can be 
opposed to living in a large, complex, social environment where laws, rules, expec-
tations and demands are ubiquitous (see discussion of Max Weber, Chapter 6). For 
Aristotle, neither of these lives would be ‘natural’: we are political animals requiring 
fully social lives and also participating in the running of the state. There is then a 
middle-ground implicit in Aristotle (as in other legal and political philosophies). To 
the extent that we have to live socially we have no untrammelled freedom. However, 
social life does not have to be characterised purely by regulation, it is also charac-
terised by participation.
It is law itself that makes this middle-ground possible. It provides the structure of 
our social lives together, but it also polices the boundaries between the public realm 
of collective action and the private realm of choice and self-creation. Law controls 
and oppresses, but it also makes space for freedom. How these lines are drawn and 
policed depends upon changing ideas within and beyond law (Alldridge and Brants 
(eds), 2001), but law remains a crucial means of balancing the relinquishing of cer-
tain kinds of freedom (complete natural freedom) with the creation of other kinds 
of freedom (a private sphere of choices and self-realisation).
This might encourage us to abandon the problematic term freedom in favour 
of ‘liberty’. ‘Freedom’ is closely associated with the untrammelled freedom of the 
natural world, whereas liberty is much more naturally associated with the freedoms
that are found in, or granted by, the state. Liberty encompasses the humanist and 
revolutionary idea of the constitutional state as the synthesis of natural freedoms 
and social expectations; the liberties granted by a constitutional state are arguably 
the closest that humans (as citizens) will now come to freedom in the modern 
world. The merit of this division also allows us a critical perspective on law. The lib-
erties granted by the state may still fall short of what we consider to be our natural 
www.ebook3000.com

5 FREEDOM
75
freedoms. After all, the state may offer or create liberties incompletely, it may draw 
the line between public and private badly; and liberty is still not freedom in the full-
est sense. Anarchism, the political position that always places freedoms above legal 
liberties, reminds us that there is more to freedom than what we are granted by the 
state. Furthermore, while anarchy might appear unattractive from the perspective of 
well-regulated states, it is a competing claim about freedom to place alongside the 
complex, and perhaps repressive, liberties of the modern state.
EXAMPLE
~(8 &RXQFLO )UDPHZRUN 'HFLVLRQ RI  -XQH  RQ &RPEDWLQJ
7HUURULVP-+$
Terrorism has become a central preoccupation of states since the terrorist attacks of 
2001 on New York. While it is often said that ‘one man’s terrorist is another man’s free-
dom fighter’, the freedom fought for in these attacks was unclear. In fact, the goals of 
terrorists are complex and often unclear, and accordingly, definitions of ‘terrorism’ have 
to separate the (wide and unclear) goals of terrorists from their (more narrowly defined) 
immediate aims. The European Union offers a definition of terrorist aims and specific acts 
linked to those aims.
‘Article 1 Terrorist offences [are offences with the aim of]: seriously intimidating a popu-
lation, or / unduly compelling a Government or international organisation to perform or 
abstain from performing any act, or / seriously destabilising or destroying the fundamen-
tal political, constitutional, economic or social structures of a country or an international 
organisation [. . .].
[Terrorist offences can encompass]: (a) attacks upon a person’s life which may cause 
death; (b) attacks upon the physical integrity of a person; (c) kidnapping or hostage taking; 
(d) causing extensive destruction to a Government or public facility, a transport system, 
an infrastructure facility, including an information system, a fixed platform located on the 
continental shelf, a public place or private property likely to endanger human life or result 
in major economic loss [. . .].

E )UHHGRPDVUDWLRQDOLW\
To identify freedom and rationality is one of the most important threads of the 
Western philosophical tradition. In essence, because of a capacity for certain kinds 
of thinking, it can be claimed that we are or can be separated from the natural 
world. If the natural world is bound by inexorable causal links (that effect always 
follows cause), human thinking, in contrast, is not bound by such links. This makes 
us not only capable of unique achievements but also divides us decisively from the 
rest of the natural world and the universe.

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
76
There are two ways to understand this equating of rationality and freedom. The 
first is a purely philosophical argument: free will, possessed exclusively by humans, 
is the one crucial exception to the otherwise purely mechanistic structures of the 
cosmos. The second is an ethical and political argument: that we as humans have 
a responsibility not only to realise the distinct potential given to us by reason, 
we must also pursue social structures and collective ways of living that are rational, 
because there is a responsibility to create social environments where as many people 
as possible have the opportunity to cultivate and exercise their reason.
The philosophical argument is by no means a compelling position at first glance. 
There are pragmatic reasons to want to exempt humans from the physical world: 
to attribute rationality and freedom to them because this allows us to respond to 
human action on the basis that it is chosen action. Without this assumption, persua-
sion and justification would be meaningless. Conversely, there is no way to prove 
that humans exist, physically or mentally, outside the causal chains of nature. One 
worldview assumes a mechanistic universe; the other assumes a universe with a 
special exception contained within it. There are no other means by which these two 
claims could be adjudicated. We have to assume the existence of one or the other, 
but could never disprove the other position without relying on the assumption 
that we began with: that everything is caused or mechanistic causes do not apply to 
human rationality. The ‘compatibilist’ position, which argues that the two positions 
are reconcilable (see Flew (ed.), 1979: 125–6), does not resolve these tensions; it 
says that everything is ‘caused’ (in one sense), but some things (many human ac-
tions) are not ‘caused’ (in another sense), because they flow from the choice of the 
individual. This position is defensible to the extent that it says that we should treat 
the word ‘choice’ as meaningful – some acts can be categorised as ‘chosen’ others 
not – while allowing strict causal determinism to hold more generally.
Law is equally equivocal because it does not draw a dividing line between caused 
and free actions but rather maintains – in some limited contexts – that what is ex-
perienced as a choice is sometimes a compulsion. The problems generated by this 
pragmatism are most obvious in criminal law, where we hold individuals to be re-
sponsible for their acts and are therefore candidates for rehabilitative (reformative) 
and retributive (desert-based) punishment. There is no opportunity in criminal law 
to argue that the defendant was acting out the consequences of causal forces outside 
their control. There is, for example, no defence of genetic predisposition to act in a 
certain way and limited chances of a successful defence of mental illness. Of course, 
even if law accepted a purely causal, involuntary, account of all and every crime, this 
would not wholly invalidate criminal law and punishment: legal processes are causal 
interventions that bring about a different set of effects that may be socially desirable 
(i.e. the incarceration of dangerous individuals or the deterrence of others). In fact, as a 
set of causes and effects in its own right we are no doubt better with criminal law than 
without it. Nonetheless, this pragmatic assumption of freedom does not square with 
www.ebook3000.com

5 FREEDOM
77
some of the more benign therapeutic ideas of punishment (that punishment allows re-
form and fundamental change in an individual), nor do they make sense of retribution 
(proportionate punishment) where the state is thought to have a duty to punish in 
order to communicate its disapproval of certain kinds of acts. Punishment is senseless 
if disapproval will make no difference to the actions that people will take in the future.
EXAMPLE
United States v Dusky864XRWHGLQ$UULJR
Whether someone is able to be prosecuted for a crime depends upon certain minimum 
assumptions about the rationality and freedom of the individual. Articulated in the United 
States in terms of ‘competency to stand trial’, the test of competency is derived from 
the Dusky case and its demand that the defendant have a sense of what is a stake in 
the case (even if they do not fully understand it) and have enough cognitive capacity to 
participate in a trial (even if they have no wish to participate). It is a short, and potentially 
contradictory, test.
It is not enough for the district judge to find that the defendant [is] oriented to time and 
place and [has] some recollection of events. [T]he test must be whether [one] has suf-
ficient present ability to consult with [one’s] lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational 
understanding and whether [one] has a rational as well as factual understanding of the 
charges against [oneself].

F )UHHGRPDVDXWRQRP\
If we conceive of ourselves as free in the sense of ‘the freedom of nature’ or ‘freedom 
from causal determinism’, we are likely to run up against limitations, barriers and 
incoherence. Everywhere there are limits on what we can do; at some time or another 
we realise that, in the past, we felt we could choose otherwise in our actions but were 
mistaken. Aspiring to freedom in these senses is to ask for a different world where we 
are not social beings and not natural beings but gods choosing everything, including 
what we choose. This pride in humanity is understandable – we are rational and want 
to feel as though we are not slaves – but not philosophically defensible. What philoso-
phers have tried to defend, in a less ambitious line of enquiry, is the idea we that we are 
each autonomous: sources of law. We can impose rules upon ourselves (when we act 
legally or morally), and can make decisions about what would be right for everyone.
This hints at excessive pride or hubris. It suggests that we are each law-makers and 
law-givers, and it threatens a paradox. We are free because we are each able make laws; 
if laws constrain action then, if we are law-makers, we are sources of constraints, not 
freedom. However, separating freedom as liberty and freedom as rationality at this point 
makes the claims about autonomy more intelligible. If we are rational we should be 

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
78
able to make our actions coherent (as opposed to impulsive patterns of behaviour), 
choosing desirable objectives and recognising limits to our objectives. To make laws that 
we apply to ourselves is to choose a coherent, and therefore desirable, life rather than 
one that is at the mercy of whim and accident. If we have exchanged absolute freedom 
for the liberties of the state, then there must be limits placed upon our actions, and it is 
better that those limits arise from our own freely chosen constraints rather than wholly 
external (‘heteronomous’) impositions of law. So, the ideal of autonomy is partly nega-
tive: we have to reject the twin tyrannies of an incoherent life at the mercy of fate, and a 
life at the mercy of laws chosen by other people. The ideal is also positive: with the use 
of reason we become the author of our actions, we use laws to liberate and not constrain 
ourselves, and we thereby become sovereign individuals both free and law-giving.
These ideas of autonomy, given their fullest realisation in the work of Immanuel 
Kant (1724-1804), provide foundations for understanding law and the state as a whole. 
First, and broadly, the state and law-givers should work on the assumption that indi-
viduals have the capacity to be autonomous; to assume otherwise is to treat individuals 
as slaves or automatons. Second, and more specifically, if the laws that individuals are 
imposing on themselves are rational, then they are not only coherent for that indi-
vidual but should exhibit coherence with the laws that every other individual discovers 
through rational deliberation. In other words, rational laws are the same whosoever 
lights upon them in their own thinking and deliberating. On this basis, the state can 
make laws that have universality (everyone would choose them) and absolutely bind-
ing force (because they are founded on rational principles that every rational being can 
or does subscribe to). Here we have a potential solution to the problems created by 
freedom as liberty and rationality. Laws are not contrary to what is natural because they 
can be said to arise from capacities arising naturally within us: the capacity for rational-
ity. In addition, rationality does not lead to freedom because it immediately exempts 
us from cause and effect: it leads to freedom because, through law-making, we choose 
something other than a life of chance, accident and obedience to others.
Does this provide a final meeting point of fact and value? Freedom as autonomy 
suggests that we are rational beings and what we should do is act as rational beings 
by imposing coherent laws upon ourselves. The role of the state is to create laws that 
coherently combine liberty and rationality. Such an idea, in different guises, has in-
formed much thinking about law and society in the modern era (see Chapter 4); and 
as a starting-point for both the facts of law (what it should contain) and the value of 
law (why we have law at all) it is one that has an attractive, if thin, conception of hu-
mans, their freedom, and their potential, at its heart. It is a starting-point, however, 
that can be reread and reconsidered by all of the currents of thought addressed in 
this chapter. Does it make sense of our biology and our psychology? It is far removed 
from our natural instincts and our potential for irrationality, but it also accords with 
ideas of a social and political animal demanding a well ordered state. Also, does 
it fully encompass the value-driven ideas of the human found in humanism and 
www.ebook3000.com

79
QUESTIONS
feminism? The drive for autonomy, on the face of it, should not generate the blind-
spots and inequalities to which humanism and feminism draw attention. However, 
it certainly involves ambitious claims about reason – the universality of certain ideas 
and the capacity for the mind to understand its own workings – that are difficult to 
maintain if we take a more historical perspective on what has counted as ‘rational’ 
in human society (Chapter 6). In sum, autonomy gives rise to a foundation for law, 
but at the expense of a problematic idea of the person and their rationality.
EXAMPLE
First National Bank of Boston v Bellotti  86   8QLWHG
States Supreme Court
‘Legal persons’ are groups of individuals treated as a single individual for the purposes 
of gaining collective legal powers and legal duties. The idea of the personhood of a cor-
poration was first used in Roman law (Lee, 2007: 103). The ‘legal person’ is interesting 
because it is a person but not a biological human; we can ascribe agency and interests 
to it, but not needs and vulnerabilities. This appears to be the logical conclusion of tak-
ing autonomy as the most important dimension of law: the capacity to make decisions 
and choices is given priority over biology. The US’s Fourteenth Amendment ensures equal 
applicability of constitutional rights to all persons. In the present case, it was held that 
constitutional protections should be granted, though not without limits, to corporations.
[T]he Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court held that the First Amendment rights of a 
corporation are limited to issues that materially affect its business, property, or assets. 
The court rejected appellants’ claim that the statute abridges freedom of speech in viola-
tion of the First and Fourteenth Amendments. The court found its answer in the contours 
of a corporation’s constitutional right, as a ‘person’ under the Fourteenth Amendment, 
not to be deprived of property without due process of law. Distinguishing the First 
Amendment rights of a natural person from the more limited rights of a corporation, the 
court concluded that ‘whether its rights are designated “liberty” rights or “property” rights, 
a corporation’s property and business interests are entitled to Fourteenth Amendment 
protection. [. . .] [A]s an incident of such protection, corporations also possess certain 
rights of speech and expression under the First Amendment.’
Section 1
●The word person stems from persona meaning ‘mask’. Are we, to the extent that we are 
social beings, masking or hiding our natural human selves?
●To what extent should we distinguish ourselves from animals? Is it plausible to see our-
selves as distinct from animals when we share the same kinds of biological needs?
4XHVWLRQV

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
80
●If our most basic, survival, needs are biological ones such as food and shelter, is there 
a moral and/or legal obligation to provide these for all humans?
●‘Humanity as a classification is useful, but humanity as a value is incoherent because it 
presumes that we can distinguish our behaviour from that of all other animals.’ Consider 
this in relation to the prohibition of crimes against humanity.
Section 2
●If humans are ‘political animals’ in Aristotle’s sense of the term, does this entail that 
everyone has the right, the need or the duty to engage in political and legal decision-
making? Are we also ‘legal animals’?
●Consider the meaning of ‘virtue’. To what extent does this seem something to aspire to 
or cultivate, or conversely, something repressive?
●Consider whether your values are dependent upon on your background or upon your own 
freely chosen decisions about how to live. Are these separable?
6HFWLRQ
●Does humanity’s history – including both great achievements and great inhumanity – 
provide any guide to our obligations as individuals? Does humanity’s history offer any 
evidence of (moral or psychological) progress?
●Which of the two revolutionary maxims is most coherent or defensible? ‘Liberty, frater-
nity and equality’ or ‘life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness’?
●Do we have obligations to those on other continents? If not, where do the limits of 
obligation end? If so, are those obligations premised on fraternity, i.e. a fundamental 
bond between humans?
6HFWLRQ
●Does our culture characterise people as generally ‘lacking fulfilment’? How is this lack 
understood – spiritual, material or physical? – and does it take different forms for men 
and women?
●Has our culture made feminism redundant (e.g. through equal opportunity laws) or has 
our culture, rather, discredited feminism by implying that it demands too much or the 
wrong things?
●Are we born with gender qualities? Does gender on the one hand, and sex on the other, 
have legal consequences not possessed by the opposing term? Consider reproductive 
rights and freedom of expression.
6HFWLRQ
●Is the ‘liberty’ found in citizenship superior or inferior to ‘natural freedom’?
●Does rationality make us free? If so, can freedom be understood in a wholly ‘internal’ or 
‘mental’ way without reference to human action?
●Is there a difference in degree, or in kind, between the capacity for responsibility found 
in children and in adults?
www.ebook3000.com

CONCEPTS AND METHODS: IDEAS AND IDEOLOGY
&RQFHSWVDQGPHWKRGV,GHDVDQGLGHRORJ\
Ideas and ideology
Our main objective in this chapter, and book, is to clarify certain ideas. Ideas are 
both our starting-point and end-point. We have a common language in which we 
find and express ideas; and we face a philosophical challenge to clarify those ideas 
for accurate understanding of law. In this sense we need to keep at the forefront of 
our thinking that, while ‘setting down the appearances’ is a good basis for philoso-
phy (see Chapter 1) it is a preliminary task in the pursuit of clear discussion and 
analysis.
Note that we have used the terms ‘ideas’ and ‘concepts’ interchangeably. For the 
purposes of this chapter no difference needed to be drawn. However, there is a 
philosophical distinction to be drawn between ideas – meaning anything mentally, 
and privately, owned by thinking beings – and concepts which are categories shared, 
publically, by language users. Accordingly, emphasis is placed in this book on con-
cepts: shared categories used for thinking and debating.
Ideas can be more than something we possess or share. They can be treated as 
entire systems of thought and action. The various ‘isms’, from conservatism, to 
communism, to environmentalism, represent political positions, ideologies, as much 
as philosophical ideas or systems. They are ‘ideologies’ in a neutral sense of being 
systems of ideas or structures of discussion. They are also potentially ideologies in 
the pejorative sense: having a rigid hold on the way people think and deliberately 
resistant to critical interrogation.
Not all ideologies purport to be fully rounded, complete, philosophies. 
Nonetheless, ideologies offer a lens through which otherwise disparate and uncon-
nected facts can be filtered and structured. Many ideologies create ‘orthodoxies’ that 
suggests that the truth can only be found in a particular way. Orthodoxy has benefits 
over ‘epistemological pluralism’ (the idea that there are ‘many truths’). After all, ‘the 
truth’ is something we take to be a unitary thing, not something allowing contradic-
tion or variation, but this kind of orthodoxy can also be unhelpful and reductive (it 
provides simple explanations where complex explanations are needed).
Analysis of law and laws is not always well served by ideological analysis. For 
example, to see law through a ‘materialist’ lens (i.e. that only the material form and 
consequences of law has reality) does not do justice to the ideas, concepts and per-
ceptions that make up the non-material dimensions of law (see Chapter 6). Equally, 
to see law as the pale reflection of an ideal (i.e. justice) may neglect the value and 
everyday legal decisions and the normal, cultural and social, activities within which 
81

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
82
law is made real. The ‘life of the law’ has been described as experience, meaning, 
among other things, that it is not reducible to a single process or set of ideas: it is 
an evolving social practice.

2EMHFWLYHDQGVXEMHFWLYH
This is a distinction with a long philosophical heritage and which also features fre-
quently in legal philosophy. Roughly we, as conscious humans, are subjects: we are 
subjects of experience and we are subject to forces and influences outside ourselves. The 
non-conscious world consists of objects of various kinds: i.e. the physical objects which 
are the objects of our experience. The division is important but nonetheless unstable: 
other subjects (people) may appear to us as objects; objects may be subject to forces 
outside themselves. In fact, some philosophers have rejected the existence of one or 
other of the side of the classification. Idealists, for example, argue that objects only exist 
as ideas for subjects (see Kant, 1929: 345); behaviourists encourage us to replace discus-
sion of subjective mental states with descriptions of behaviour (see Winch, 1958: 80f).
Dividing objective from subjective is important for revealing humans’ distinctive 
relationship with the world. Whatever the status and power of the human mind, it 
certainly means that we cannot be adequately understood using the vocabulary of 
the physical sciences alone; but the meaning of the division between objective and 
subjective in law is often context-specific: the division as it is used in contract law 
may vary from that found in criminal law. In addition, law often involves deciding
what someone’s subjective state of mind is, rather than taking their word for it. 
Making a decision as to what was going on in someone’s mind is clearly difficult, 
but law contains processes for attributing certain types of thought (e.g. that of a rea-
sonable person). This stems from the need to achieve certainty in law, and because 
individuals may not be a reliable guide to their own motives, intentions and beliefs.

8VHVRI~QDWXUH
‘Nature’ is not only a component of some natural law theories (see Chapter 3), but 
has been a perennial component of legal and political debate. Appeal to nature 
allows us to overcome the fact/value division or reconfigure it into something less 
rigid; it also allows criticism of law as ‘unnatural’. Here ‘nature’ is more than simply 
the sum of knowledge we have about the natural world, it is a key concept used 
to distinguish the goods determined by nature from goods determined by human 
convention. The basic good of survival may have a greater claim on us than political 
rights; conversely, if we are, by nature, political animals, both basic survival needs 
and civil and political rights should have equal legitimacy.
As with appeal to human nature, we should be cautious of the use of nature to bolster 
arguments concerning what form law should take and the use of nature to overcome 
the fact/value distinction. Nature is a way of bringing human goods and/or a good life 
www.ebook3000.com

83
CONCEPTS AND METHODS: IDEAS AND IDEOLOGY
into legal and political discourse. It is also a way of insisting that all law and politics 
should take a particular shape. This is a far more problematic claim. The natural is often 
contrasted with the rational. However, in the natural law school this contrast is denied 
(Finnis, 2011: 29-33). The natural is said to be rational: the fundamental structure of 
humans is such that it generates incontrovertible, rational and reasonable, value claims.
Associating nature with God, other than in that strand of natural law associated 
with monotheistic religion, is not a necessary component on natural law theory. 
Natural law is unified in its concern with the necessary and the rational, not in 
identifying obligation with God’s will. Nevertheless, it is common to hear echoes 
of theology in natural law and, to a degree, positivism. Law, like God, demands 
obedience, even where the justification for its rules may be unclear to us (Austin, 
1995). This points to a paradox shared by theology and some legal philosophy. 
God’s rules must be followed. However, are God’s rules good because they are willed 
by God, or are they willed by God because they are good? Accepting the first argument 
places authority over and above goodness; the second makes goodness something 
higher than God’s authority. Neither conclusion is satisfactory. One makes obedi-
ence, rather than morality, central to religion and theology, the other makes God 
subservient to other, higher, moral principles. Equally, law demands and we obey, 
but is it the nature of obedience itself, or the reasons for obedience, that make law ‘bind-
ing’? The resolution of this paradox demands attention to the nature of legal rules 
(Chapter 5) and the ‘normativity’ of law (Chapter 6).

5HIOHFWLRQDQGVHOIUHIOHFWLRQ
Underlying many of the ideas discussed so far is the simple fact that humans reflect 
on themselves. We as a species have always been of interest to ourselves, and we each 
have a unique perspective on humanity. Such self-reflection and self-consciousness 
are at the root of humans’ claim to knowledge and truth. Be it the work of the 
human sciences or personal self-reflection, reflection is central to philosophy in 
the sense that knowledge (truths about the world) seem to be possible by thinking
about the world. This is not equivalent to day-dreaming: it is looking for knowledge 
in what we perceive and how we perceive. For example, we sometimes come to 
realise or understand something fully, not through an additional piece of informa-
tion, but because over time we ‘see’ something that we didn’t see before. Equally, 
reflecting on the gap between our expectations and reality is an important precur-
sor to understanding. If something seems strange, confused, anomalous, then in all 
likelihood this same ‘dissonance’ will have been experienced by other people. These 
dissonances are the route to further, deeper, reflection.
These kinds of self-reflection depend upon the fact that we seem to have privileged 
access to our own thoughts. What we think about is distinctly ours and not imme-
diately accessible to other people. Self-reflection encompasses being aware of what 
we perceive (e.g. shapes, colours and movement around us), it is also consideration 

CHAPTER 2 PERSON
84
of what made us do certain things or behave in a certain way. Self-reflection is a way 
of clarifying our perceptions, which for various reasons may be unclear or decep-
tive. There is no ‘right way’ to reflect, other than carefully and in a sustained way: 
perceiving ourselves and the world is something which takes time (not least because 
the world is characterised by time and change). Note that what we anticipate often 
has an impact on what we see; we always use assumptions and expectations when 
we reflect, even upon our own thinking. While we cannot escape from many of our 
fundamental assumptions and prejudices, we can try to be aware of them.
The idea of a ‘reflective equilibrium’ is simply that we should compare the outcome 
of our theories with our intuitions about what the right answer to a problem should 
look like. This methodological tool is an attempt to balance our theorising and our intu-
itions in order to avoid reaching counterintuitive or unobtainable conclusions about our 
political or moral questions. It is a way of avoiding the grip of ideology on our thinking.
Reflective equilibrium is a way of adhering to the maxim ‘ought implies can’. If 
we are to make decisions about what is obligatory, such obligations must, at the 
very least, be obtainable. More specifically, seeking reflective equilibrium is a way of 
ensuring that ideas that look universal or unconditionally obligatory do not neglect 
the particular and the local. Certain ideas about moral obligations (particularly 
those associated with utilitarianism, see Chapter 3) aspire to a ‘scientific’ account 
of morality using a measurable index of what is valuable (namely happiness). 
However, the calculations that it employs to gauge happiness, and the very idea of 
happiness itself, cannot be claimed as ‘universal’ without ignoring or at least down-
playing different cultures’ ideas of happiness and the means of achieving happiness.
The idea of reflective equilibrium was used by John Rawls as a dimension of his 
theorising about justice and fairness (Rawls, 1999: 18). Rawls held that while it is 
possible to propose theories about justice and the state which appear persuasive, 
these have to be tested against other moral principles that we hold. Where there 
is tension or contradiction (either in the moral principles or the theory), one will 
have to be amended or compromised in order to ‘[yield] principles which match our 
considered judgments duly pruned and adjusted’ (1999: 18). Such a process ensures 
that neither our theories, nor our cherished moral principles, escape scrutiny when 
we are attempting to determine substantial moral or political commitments.
Further reading
Aristotle’s Politics (various editions) is both readily intelligible and essential to understand-
ing Western legal and political thought. Jonathan Glover’s Humanity (2001) along with Tony 
Davies’ Humanism (1997) are useful, and wide-ranging, introductions to the significance 
of humanity. For an analysis of personhood in legal contexts see Ohlin (2002); Robert 
C. Solomon’s Continental Philosophy Since 1750 (1988) remains unparalleled as a clear 
www.ebook3000.com

85
FURTHER READING
introduction to the significance of selves and selfhood in twentieth-century continental 
philosophy. For a wider ranging historical account of personhood, combining the legal and 
philosophical, see Donald Kelley’s The Human Measure (1990).
Martha Nussbaum’s The Fragility of Goodness (1986) is a comprehensive account of how 
the Ancient Greeks combined questions of personhood and ethics. Bridgeman and Millns’ 
Feminist Perspectives on Law (1998) is an excellent compendium of debates and materi-
als on law and feminism. On the methodological issues raised in this chapter, short, clear, 
descriptions can be found in Baggini and Fosl’s The Philosopher’s Toolkit: A compendium of 
philosophical concepts and methods (2010).
Visit www.mylawchamber.co.uk/riley to access tools 
to help you develop and test your knowledge of legal 
philosophy including Podcasts on leading thinkers and 
theories, discussion questions, diagrams showing 
interrelations between concepts, and weblinks 

86
Good
3
This chapter builds upon ideas of the human, the person and the relationship between 
facts and values. The idea of goodness bridges the facts of human life and the values we 
associate with law and does this through a range of ideas, principles and properties. 
These are familiar ideas: that ‘it is always good for humans to do x’; ‘it is always good 
for humans to possess x’; ‘a good human life demands x’. They nonetheless require 
careful analysis and closer attention to the values associated with law and with persons.
A number of different philosophical ideas invoke the language of goodness. Ideas 
of ‘a good life’, the ‘instrumentally good’ and the ‘intrinsically good’ – once distin-
guished – help to make sense of what law is and what law aims to achieve. These 
ideas point, respectively, to law creating a world where a good life is possible, law 
being an instrument for bringing about human happiness, and law being a point at 
which facts and obligations meet.
A ‘good human life’ is something that law might assist us in maintaining or 
achieving. This in itself is a complex claim, but the relationship between ‘good’ 
and ‘law’ also shifts between ideas of ‘what is good about legality’ and ‘what goods
law should provide’. These are different kinds of questions, and they each touch 
arguments about the person, encountered in the last chapter. Legality itself is instru-
mentally good (i.e. useful) because it creates a world where other human goods are 
possible. Agreeing what these further goods are depends upon our view of humans 
and persons. The essentially social animal of Aristotle’s philosophy needs both a 
good society and personal virtue; the autonomous person of the Enlightenment 
needs to be free from the slavery of other people’s will.
We may also want to argue that law as a whole is intrinsically good: law is not just 
useful, it is inherently valuable. Such inherent value might be said to arise from the 
value we attach to the person. Persons could not exist without legal recognition, and 
to that extent alone, law might be intrinsically justified. If, conversely, our view of the 
human centres on the free, natural, individual then law might be considered, at best, 
a ‘necessary evil’ providing basic securities rather than being inherently valuable.
Introduction
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION
87
These different uses of the word good are divided – philosophically and in ordi-
nary language – between the objective and the subjective. Many legal and political 
disputes could be resolved if there were a single good way for all humans to be, 
or for there to be a shared, comprehensive, list of things that it would be good for 
all humans to have. An objective standard of what is good for us as humans would 
undoubtedly make legal and political decision-making easier: there would be unas-
sailable demands made by us as individuals, and clear aspirations for us as a society. 
While philosophically desirable, it is also difficult, and perhaps morally question-
able, to insist upon an objective good for humans. If freedom (understood as liberty 
or as autonomy) is a crucial dimension of individual and social being, then any 
claim about the, objectively necessary, ingredients of a good life is unattractive. It 
may, by the same token, be good for individuals to determine, subjectively, their 
own interests, objectives and ideals, however much prevailing ideas of ‘a good life’ 
may run contrary to them. Moreover, human lives are always more complex – more 
historically and culturally ‘situated’ – then a template for a good life would seem to 
allow. What people desire or demand varies between cultures and has changed over 
time. In the face of this variability, a template for human fulfilment seems artificial 
and subjective preferences much more central.
Related to, but distinct from, this division between objective and subjective is 
the philosophical division between the ‘intrinsically good’ and the ‘instrumentally 
good’. This distinction is subtle but important. Colloquially, we are more likely to 
talk of ‘good’ in instrumental terms (e.g. that ‘vegetables are good for health’, or 
a particular job is ‘good for realising professional fulfilment’). In these terms veg-
etables and jobs are instrumentally good, but they are related to intrinsic goods: 
health and fulfilment. For something to be intrinsically good means that no further 
justification is needed in terms of what they are good for: they are desirable states
that are to be valued regardless of any further consequences that flow from them. 
The distinction is not always easy to draw. For instance, ‘unassailably good things 
for humans to have’, for example friends or knowledge, could be valuable in instru-
mental terms (they allow humans to be fulfilled or happy), or something good in 
themselves (their desirability requires no further justification).
Along with the intrinsically and instrumentally good, philosophy has long been 
concerned with ‘a good life’. Philosophical discussion of a good life often begins 
with Aristotle’s view of the human, and the conditions of human flourishing. For 
that reason it should be understood in a ‘holistic’ sense of ‘a life worth living’ or 
‘successfully lived’; it is less directly a matter of living a morally good life, although 
this is important for Aristotle, Plato and others (below). A good life is the meeting 
point of a number of ethical, political and legal discussions, and to make sense of 
this idea would clarify a range of difference debates in law and beyond. Both of the 
previous distinctions should be applied to this idea. Of those philosophers who 
think the idea of ‘a good life’ meaningful, it is taken to be a life that is intrinsically

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
88
desirable by an objective standard. On this account, while there are sound reasons to 
associate the evaluation of a life as a whole with the fulfilment of one’s subjective 
ideas and perceptions, it is maintained that ‘a good life’ is a holistic assessment of 
human flourishing based on objective standards. Our fleeting experiences of happi-
ness or pleasure are inadequate to evaluate whether living a particular kind of life 
is intrinsically good.
A ‘good life’ is the most obvious example of an intrinsic good: we do not hope for 
a flourishing life because it brings other benefits, it is the realisation of everything we 
might want to pursue. Thus, together ‘a good life’ and the ‘intrinsically good’ pro-
vide a bridge between fact and value. The claim that ‘all humans desire a good life’ 
does not require further justification for it to justify our seeking a good life: the goal 
is intrinsically valuable. Put in more abstract terms, discovering what is intrinsically 
good would be to discover what is obligatory. If anything provides humans with their 
values, it is their need and desire to live a good life, and this can be held to be ‘self-
evident’ or ‘axiomatic’ when we discuss values. It would be senseless to state that 
we know what is intrinsically good and, simultaneously, say that there is no reason 
to act upon it, that there is still some further justification needed to bring about or 
maintain this good state of affairs. Put strongly, to identify something as ‘intrinsi-
cally good’ is to identify it as ‘obligatory’ if ‘obligation’ is to mean anything at all.
We will encounter a number of claims with this kind of form. Kant (Chapter 4) 
treats having a ‘good will’ as intrinsically good, and a person has a good will if, and 
only if, they act on their obligations rather than their interests. John Finnis treats our 
rational and practical pursuit of a good life – one reconciling a network of intrinsic 
goods – as an irreducible, axiomatic, fact of human existence and sees this as 
an incontestable component of any possible discussion of obligations. This is, 
nonetheless, a network of intrinsic goods, not a single idea of ‘the good’: ‘no deter-
minate meaning can be found for the term “good” that would allow any commen-
surating and calculus of good to be made in order to settle those basic questions of 
practical reason which we call “moral” questions’ (2011: 115).
However, we will also encounter as many theorists defending the crucial impor-
tance of instrumental goods. Instrumental, subjective or ‘context dependent’ con-
ceptions of what is good are much more flexible ways to determine our obligations. 
Personal safety is good, and payment of a ransom to a kidnapper is a means to 
that end. Paying ransoms is neither good in itself nor obligatory, but there are good
reasons for paying ransoms, because they are means or instruments for maintaining 
personal safety. Thus, those philosophies that equate ‘good’ and ‘obligatory’ are 
challenged by utilitarian philosophies that prioritise ‘good’ in terms of the pursuit 
of human happiness. They would wish to say that obligations arise from discerning 
what is useful for bringing about happiness. This position has been attractive to law-
makers and judges because of its consequentialism (its interest in bringing about 
good ends) and its equal reluctance to commit to ideas of the intrinsically good.
www.ebook3000.com

1 THE GOOD
89
 Consequentialism is a useful tool for legal reasoning. While law is not, in any di-
rect way, engineered to manufacture happiness, it seeks the best possible outcomes 
without committing to a single conception of what ‘best possible’ would mean in 
all and every circumstance. Substituting ‘happiness’ with ‘welfare’, we are closer to 
the kinds of outcomes law aspires to. We want law to contribute towards people’s 
general welfare, not against it; we want law to contribute to people’s flourishing not 
crush it. Furthermore, by substituting ‘best possible’ with ‘least oppressive’ we are 
closer to the kind of instrument law seeks to be. Law, as an instrument, compares well 
with other styles of ‘social management’ and ‘social control’. Forms of militarism or 
tyranny are routes to social order, but legally regulated states are the least oppres-
sive means to this end given law’s balancing of individual and collective interests. 
For utilitarians, and consequentialists more generally, lives lived under law are not 
just stable, predictable and ordered. They are lives where welfare is maintained and 
oppression is minimised. 
 This chapter is an introduction to some philosophies using goodness in compet-
ing ways. We should note however that these approaches will be confronted, or 
indeed undermined, by those philosophies discussed in  Chapter   4 , which aim to 
make ‘right’ more important than ‘good’ in discussion of law.  
1  The good 
 
 Introduction 
 Different uses of ‘good’ are in evidence in ordinary language. For instance, it makes 
a significant difference whether we are seeking to understand the word that is op-
posite to bad or opposite to  evil . ‘Good  versus bad’ is our basic evaluative opposition; 
it allows us to express evaluations in a limitless range of different contexts. ‘Good 
versus evil’ has theological origins, and while it can be used as part of moral evalu-
ations (especially moral condemnation), its most common philosophical use is in 
contexts where the will of God is at issue (‘evil’ is where the will of God is contra-
vened in a radical way). Moreover, ordinary English language provides us with good 
as a predicate (a property) and as a predicate modifier (an evaluation of a property). 
I can say that a particular person is a good person (they have the property of moral 
goodness) and that they are a good swimmer (they not only have the property of 
being able to swim, but swim in a good way). Some of these complexities are cut 
away by the philosophical idea of ‘ the good’. 
 ‘The good’ can be described as that end-point or objective of human actions 
which is intrinsically desirable and can be gauged objectively. This end-point is the 
summation of what all humans seek in their activities, so in that sense it has  some
subjective elements (we seek it individually when we act), but is ultimately objec-
tive. The good is an external standard of what I should need, desire or strive to 
1  The good 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
90
achieve in my actions. This proposition finds its most important articulation at the 
beginning of Aristotle’s main work on ethics, the Nicomachean Ethics: ‘Every art and 
every inquiry, and similarly every action and choice, is thought to aim at some good; 
and for this reason the good has rightly been declared to be that at which all things 
aim’ (1987: 363). This proposition recurs in various forms in different philosophies, 
and is given various foundations. It takes the form of all humans seeking success in 
their actions or, ultimately, all humans seeking happiness in their actions. It can be 
said to be founded on our ‘rational nature’, on God’s plan for the universe or on the 
distillation of all of our political and moral ideas. For Aristotle, the proposition ‘all 
things aiming for the good’ represents the basic, logical, point that everything we 
do aims at success or completion, and this is true of every activity from the simplest 
tasks to living a human life (Barnes (ed.), 1995).
To begin to unravel the potential contained in this idea of ‘the good’, we can con-
sider it in the light of previous discussions of the intrinsic versus the instrumental 
and the objective versus the subjective. Use of the good suggests that all uses of the 
word ‘good’ point to a single common denominator of goodness. For example, that 
everything we call ‘good’ contributes in some way to human happiness; all instru-
mental goods are said to contribute to a single intrinsic good. Or, more contentiously, 
the fact that we attribute ‘goodness’ to people, things and activities could be used 
to suggest that every thing, and not just every person, has an ideal which they can 
fulfil or fail to fulfil, a standard by which they can be judged. This way, all subjective
ideas of what is good are subservient to a single objective good. In both cases, a single 
goal – human happiness or a universal standard of fulfilment – is posited.
If it makes sense to talk about the good as a single goal or standard it is undoubt-
edly a value. We use good in an instrumental sense to make factual claims about 
what will be best to achieve certain ends. However, when we judge an act as intrinsi-
cally, or objectively or morally good we give it an unequivocally positive evaluation. 
This kind of unequivocal evaluation is a powerful contribution to moral and legal 
debate. Identifying the unequivocally desirable is to identify what all social institu-
tions and activities – ‘every art and every inquiry’ in Aristotle’s terms – should aspire 
to. If we were assured that something was intrinsically good, we would have every 
reason to believe it desirable and obligatory at all times.
At the same time ‘the good’ is a concept which can be described as ‘thin’. It is thin 
because it is applicable to all and any moral debate and in a range of situations, but 
is also extremely general. This could be distinguished from ‘thicker’ moral concepts 
such as courage or courtesy which, while clearly terms of approval, have a much closer 
relationship with the environment in which they are used. One culture’s courage is 
another’s aggression; one culture’s courtesy is another’s repression. No such variabil-
ity should attach to ‘the good’. It remains good whoever and wherever it is discovered.
On this basis, a further philosophical distinction can be added: whether our use 
of good is ‘context dependent’. The instrumentally good may be context dependent: 
www.ebook3000.com

1 THE GOOD
91
theft is a good way to gain money quickly, but in many contexts it is a dangerous 
and uncertain route to gain money. The intrinsically good should not be context 
dependent. For example, it has always and everywhere been good to have health 
and friends. Those theories which reject context dependency can be described as 
‘monistic’: the good is indivisible, timeless and unchanging. As a philosophical 
manoeuvre, monism is closely associated with Plato and his argument that there is 
a single ideal for all things, including humans. The merit of this appeal to a single 
good is that there is no problem whatsoever overcoming division between fact and 
value; value will always predominate in so far as there is always, on this view, a 
(good or ideal) form that things should take. This can be contrasted with pluralistic 
positions wherein the good is context-dependent (dependent upon who and where 
we are) and divisible (there is a hierarchy of goods). John Stuart Mill (see below) 
might be considered a defender of the ‘divisibility’ position, arguing that there 
are qualitatively ‘higher goods’ versus ‘lower goods’, roughly divided such that the 
higher goods are those that are distinctive to humans and the lower goods those 
that we share with animals.
1a The human good
Appealing to the good allows legal philosophers to put humans at the centre of legal 
theorising. Consideration of rules or rights certainly concerns legal persons and 
their legal status, but appealing to the good ties the functioning of law closely to the 
needs, interests and capacities of humans. Appealing to the good also bridges the 
fact/value distinction suggesting that because humans always need or desire certain 
things law should, therefore, provide them. Whether this argument truly overcomes 
the division (or whether law is better characterised as a rule-based practice) is a 
question at the heart of debate between natural lawyers (defending the good) and 
positivists (defending strict observation of the fact/value distinction).
The assumption that there is a single good for humans is realised in its most 
undiluted form by theocratic states where a picture of a good life, for the individual 
as part of the state, is given religiously sanctioned reality. Conversely, Aristotle, who 
had a settled view of flourishing as the good of every individual, also at times had re-
course to context-dependent ideas of goodness (the possibilities open to us depend 
upon the state and culture we inhabit) and more specifically role-dependent ideas of 
goodness (being a good citizen and being a good person are different things (1987: 
521)). Indeed, Aristotle’s idea of the good is informed by a whole range of things 
that are instrumentally and intrinsically good and which together form part and 
parcel of the good. Friendship, a stable state, family life and civic life are all essential 
components in a general assessment of the individual’s good. Following Aristotle, 
philosophers therefore talk of ‘goods’ in the sense of intrinsically or objectively good 
properties, states or possessions that form part of an overall assessment of the good.

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
92
‘Basic goods’ are those possessions and states which are universally (or at least 
generally) desirable. Basic goods are various and contested, but would certainly be 
thought to include life itself, certain social activities (e.g. expression or religion), 
or claims to self-realisation as an individual (Finnis, 2011). Depending upon our 
cultural background, these goods will seem self-evident human goods, or at the very 
least recurrent features of human civilisation. They are basic goods for individuals 
because they are the foundation of the good (a flourishing life) or, and this may 
amount to the same thing, because they fulfil distinctively human needs (social ac-
tivities, expression or religion). They have a strong claim to be at the origin of legal 
systems, or to justify legal institutions, because these goods depend upon a well 
ordered social milieu. Put in opposite, but also plausible, terms it could be claimed 
that a ‘well ordered state’ is well ordered only to the extent that it allows individuals 
to pursue or achieve these goods.
In considering the human good we should recall the tension between objective 
accounts of goodness and those positions rejecting objective accounts. A purely 
subjective determination of the good would acknowledge our own individual 
perceptions of what is valuable, and argue against anyone (philosophers or law-
makers) seeking to set up a standard of success or failure for others. John Rawls 
and others inhabit this position (Chapter 4). This emphasises an individual’s right 
to determine their own ‘conception of the good’ and is closely linked to political 
liberalism with its emphasis on freedom and the limits of the state, but it is not a 
complete rejection of the idea of the human good. A ‘conception’ is our own con-
sidered view on an ‘essentially contested concept’, in this case ‘the good’. ‘[T]here is 
nothing necessarily right, or morally correct, about the point of view from which 
things are to be judged good or bad. One may say of a man that he is a good spy, 
or a good assassin, without approving of his skills’ (Rawls, 1999: 354). In acknowl-
edging different conceptions Rawls is not rejecting the good as unintelligible or 
illegitimate. He is suggesting that there will always be reasonable disagreement 
about it, and as a consequence of this, the conception of the good that each indi-
vidual reaches should be respected to the extent that it is reasonable.
EXAMPLE
European Social Charter 1961 (revised 1996), Article 13
A later supplement to the European Convention on Human Rights, the European Social 
Charter codifies fundamental goods that have a social dimension. Aspiration towards 
these goods is a broad commitment on the part of the signatory state, though not one 
enforceable in Court. Health is among our fundamental goods and the provision of health 
services is a fundamental, though not unqualified, responsibility of the state.
➨
www.ebook3000.com

1 THE GOOD
93
1b A good life and justice
Are we entitled to all basic goods? If basic goods are ‘axiomatic’ – they require no 
further argument to be treated as intrinsically desirable – then each of us has a 
reasonable claim upon them. This does not necessarily entail that we are entitled to 
them, if we treat entitlement as a more complex notion of desert within a particular 
social and political context. All states, even the most egalitarian, must make difficult 
decisions about how opportunities, and resources, can be distributed fairly.
The opportunity to pursue or realise basic goods is implicit or explicit in the con-
stitution of any well regulated democratic state. A constitution provides order, and 
order is necessary for any purposive human activity, but this does not mean that 
all inequality in a state is illegitimate, only that opportunities such as educational 
self-development or economic investment be open to all. The resources necessary to 
pursue or realise these goods may be either minimal (friendship does not necessar-
ily require financial investment) or substantial (knowledge requires access to infor-
mation, and health may require some claim to medical resources). All states have 
finite resources, and in conditions of scarcity the state has to treat some basic goods 
as more basic than others. States therefore require an implicit hierarchy of goods. 
In philosophical terms, this means that states rarely have monistic or indivisible 
accounts of the good. States are not committed to a single idea of the good or to 
realising all those basic goods that we have a claim to. Even if a state were to assert 
the moral authority to decide on a conception of the good for its citizens, existing 
conditions of inequality and scarcity would make this impossible to realise. This 
still leaves open the possibility that law has a close relationship with basic goods 
even where the state as a whole is subject to conditions of scarcity and inequality.
Whether we take our theory of justice from Rawls, Dworkin or Nozick, justice 
requires that the interests of individuals not be sacrificed to the interests of the state. 
Good law-making and good legal decision-making are the primary means by which 
a society maintains this protection. A well regulated society is not one that simply 
provides order, but it provides the individuals with the possibility of pursuing other 
goods of their choosing. Among the Ancient philosophers, ideas of law, justice and 
the good were much more closely linked. Law was a means of making people good, 
$UWLFOH~7KH5LJKWWR6RFLDODQG0HGLFDO$VVLVWDQFH
With a view to ensuring the effective exercise of the right to social and medical assis-
tance, the Parties undertake: 1/ to ensure that any person who is without adequate 
resources and who is unable to secure such resources either by his own efforts or from 
other sources, in particular by benefits under a social security scheme, be granted ad-
equate assistance, and, in the case of sickness, the care necessitated by his condition; 
2/ to ensure that persons receiving such assistance shall not, for that reason, suffer from 
a diminution of their political or social rights.

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
94
and justice was an individual virtue central to living a good human life (Morrison, 
1997). Few would now accept this close relationship between justice, the state and 
the good. Humans are more diverse in their interests and much more concerned 
with freedom; the modern democratic state is more impersonal, and more heav-
ily regulated, than the states of the Ancient world. Nonetheless, the natural law 
school continues to place basic goods at the heart of what law should provide, and 
a number of natural law theorists propound ideals of what a legal system should be
in the light of the basic good of individuals (Finnis, 2011). In sum, while modern 
thought eschews excessive monism in its discussion of the good, and there is no 
longer an explicit commitment to ‘making people good’, any discussion of justice 
tends to invoke two things: the distinctive contribution of legal institutions to our 
state and our lives, and law’s protection of individuals’ basic goods in the face of 
the pragmatism of politics.
EXAMPLE
Preamble of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation 
(1919)
The only institution related to the League of Nations that remains in existence, the 
International Labour Organisation, works for social justice and raising the general living 
standard. Its focus is primarily upon work and working conditions. Work is a crucial ‘instru-
mental’ good: it creates personal and public wealth. However, good working conditions are ar-
guably more than an instrumental good for maximising wealth, they are intrinsically desirable.
Whereas universal and lasting peace can be established only if it is based upon social 
justice; and whereas conditions of labour exist involving such injustice hardship and priva-
tion to large numbers of people as to produce unrest so great that the peace and harmony 
of the world are imperilled; and an improvement of those conditions is urgently required; 
as, for example, by the regulation of the hours of work including the establishment of a 
maximum working day and week, the regulation of the labour supply, the prevention of un-
employment, the provision of an adequate living wage, the protection of the worker against 
sickness, disease and injury arising out of his employment, the protection of children, 
young persons and women, provision for old age and injury, protection of the interests of 
workers when employed in countries other than their own, recognition of the principle of 
equal remuneration for work of equal value, recognition of the principle of freedom of asso-
ciation, the organization of vocational and technical education and other measures [. . .].
1c Happiness and harmony
Two terms are closely related to the idea of the good. The first is that a good life 
can be thought of as one where individuals possess happiness. It is a commonplace 
that a life with material goods but without some kind of fundamental happiness 
www.ebook3000.com

1 THE GOOD
95
would not be desirable. It is also true that many types of candidates for good(s) 
could perhaps be ultimately analysed as things which produce happiness in their 
possessor.
The other recurrent term, one with a more Ancient philosophical pedigree, is 
harmony, suggesting agreement or complementarity. This can be made compatible 
with happiness if we take happiness to be a kind of harmony within ourselves (e.g. 
between what we need and what we desire) or between our will, our social needs 
and our context. Harmony also indicates a more fundamental, sustainable, harmo-
nisation between individuals and social reality. This captures the idea that humans 
are naturally social creatures who need good social relationships, and it may pre-
suppose that there is a single true, authentic way for humans to live together. This 
can be a hard-headed defence of the idea that humans are co-dependent and have 
to work with others in order to achieve individual goods; it can also be a utopian 
concern with an ideal state where individuals live a sustainable, authentic and fruit-
ful life together. In the work of Plato it is both.
Put in political terms, the notion of harmony proposes a single good for individ-
uals, a single good for society, and the harmonious reconciliation of both individual 
and society. This lends itself to ‘collective’ positions: e.g. environmentalism or the-
ocracies which make claims about social goods, individual goods and the necessary 
overlap between the two. Furthermore, such collective positions generally lead to 
substantial demands made upon law to structure – or ‘engineer’ – society in order 
to realise the good in individual and social terms. An appeal to happiness does not 
have to involve a single good for individuals or a single good for society, but rather 
suggests that there is benefit in seeing certain minimal principles at the heart of law 
and politics, principles that can be partially reduced to the notion of happiness. 
This lends itself to ‘liberal’ positions, e.g. libertarianism and utilitarianism, which 
do not dictate the content of a good life or state, but do insist upon analysing lives 
and states on the basis of their contributing to individual happiness. Such liberal 
positions deflate claims about ‘the good’, rendering it a limit to what law can do on 
the basis that every individual has the right to choose what will allow them to realise 
happiness (West, 1998).
EXAMPLE
Federalist Paper No. 78 [1788] (Hamilton, 2012)
In this passage, which has some claim to constitutional status in the United States, 
Alexander Hamilton insists on the importance of judicial review on the grounds of its abil-
ity to limit the action of those in power. In other terms, law and politics may sometimes 
conflict, but this does not preclude their having a complementary, harmonious, relation-
ship in the governance of a state.
➨

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
96
2  Plato 
 
 Introduction 
 The influence of Plato within the Western philosophical tradition is inescapable, 
and there is some sense in Whitehead’s claim that ‘all Western philosophy is a foot-
note to Plato’ (1997: 39), but Plato is not as central to the philosophy of law as his 
pupil, Aristotle. Plato’s view of law is ‘of its time’ with an emphasis on strong rule, 
limited freedom and Spartan austerity. Nonetheless, echoes of Platonic thought can 
be found in any philosophy which asserts any one of the following propositions: 
doing good is synonymous with abiding by the law; there is a natural harmony of 
interests among individuals; the happiness of individuals depends upon their doing 
good and not evil; or, the commands of tyrants are not law because law ‘proper’ 
must bring about the good of all individuals in the state. 
 Crucial to Plato’s mature philosophy, of which  The Republic is the most important 
work, is monism. Plato insists that everything is the same in at least one respect. 
Everything is, represents or is an instance of, an  ideal . Everything has an ideal form 
that it should take, and the ideal form of all ideal forms is the good (1997: 1128–9). 
As such, both knowledge and morality are aspirations to discern or achieve what 
is good, the best way for things or people to be. This can also be expressed in the 
language of ‘teleology’ meaning the pursuit of ends or goals. Everything has an end 
or goal, a proper way to be, namely its good. Teleology does not treat ‘ends’ as the 
fleeting outcomes of individual preferences or passing judgments: there is a single 
form that everything strives to and should take. 
 Plato’s monism creates a complete philosophical system which is able to reduce 
explanation to a single term and idea. We must discover what the good is – for 
everything – and seek its realisation. It is also an invitation to mysticism. Translated 
into terms of ‘one truth’ hidden behind the multiplicity of appearances, Plato’s sys-
tem is not just a way to explain the world, but the creation of another world behind 
our own of which we see only pale and illusory imitations. It is this element of his 
system that had a profound influence on Islamic and Christian thought ( Blackburn, 
2006 ). Both were influenced by Neoplatonism (at its height in the third century, 
CE), a fully mystical version of Plato’s thought, stressing the underlying unity of the 
world and the ability of thought (rather than the senses) to penetrate the underlying 
2  Plato 
 By a limited Constitution, I understand one which contains certain specified exceptions 
to the legislative authority; such, for instance, as that it shall pass no bills of attainder, 
no ex-post-facto laws, and the like. Limitations of this kind can be preserved in practice 
no other way than through the medium of the courts of justice, whose duty it must be to 
declare all acts contrary to the manifest tenor of the Constitution void. Without this, all 
the reservations of particular rights or privileges would amount to nothing.  
www.ebook3000.com

2 PLATO
97
reality of the universe. However, Plato’s significance for law lies in his view of psy-
chology, and the relationship between psychology and justice.
2a The good and the individual
It has been suggested that Platonic thought can be discovered in contemporary 
thinking when we assert that unjust individuals cannot be happy. The idea seems 
both appealing and untrue because people who do wrong should not be happy, 
but nonetheless are. One of the main goals of Plato’s work was to demonstrate the 
truth of the idea that the evil cannot be happy. The essence of Plato’s argument is 
that harmony is the precondition of happiness. We must be harmonious within 
ourselves in order to avoid internal strife and tension; evil-doing is caused by, and 
causes further, internal conflict.
[In a person’s soul] there is a better part and a worse one and [. . .] whenever the naturally 
better part is in control of the worse, this is expressed as saying that the person is self-
controlled or master of himself. [. . .] [When] the smaller and better part is overwhelmed 
by the larger, because of bad upbringing or bad company, this is called being self-defeated 
or licentious and is a reproach. (1997: 1063)
Where there is, conversely, good order within us there is both happiness and no 
inclination to wrong-doing. This conclusion requires a particular view of the self, 
divided and potentially in conflict, but also a necessary correlation between harmo-
nious selves and happy selves.
Plato’s tripartite (three-part) division of the self subdivides all humans into 
rational, spirited, and appetitive parts. Each is distinct, each is necessary, and each 
must be harnessed together to ensure that none is in overall control. The rational 
must make decisions for the whole, the appetitive part keeps the body alive and 
functioning, and the spirited part ensures that neither the basic animal appetites nor 
the rational mind are left to fight for supremacy (it provides both a strong will and 
a sense of self-worth). This view of the self is too simple; the categories are too neat, 
and the body made more or less irrelevant to selfhood. In many respects, however, it 
is a powerful descriptive account of the competing tensions within the individual. It 
is a persuasive insistence that individuals must struggle to harmonise, not eradicate, 
competing internal impulses.
Why is the harmony of the self decisive for Platonic ethics? If one part of the self 
gains control then familiar human failings arise. A criminal is a person who has al-
lowed their appetites to gain control over their whole being. The overly ambitious 
are those for whom the courageous part has excessive influence. Those who think, 
but who fail to act or have too little self-respect, have not given sufficient rein to 
the spirited parts of the self. In each case there is a lack of internal equilibrium, and 
for Plato such a person simply cannot be happy because their self is not harmoni-
ous. Plato’s conclusion, therefore, is that ‘virtue is its own reward’. When we act 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
98
virtuously we are maintaining a healthy soul; when we fail to act virtuously we are 
in a position where our soul has been hijacked (1997: 1074). We cannot be happy 
in these circumstances.
It is doubtful whether with these arguments alone Plato proved what he set out 
to prove – that only the just person is happy – but his argument is supplemented by 
two further arguments. First, Plato states that philosophers, who have special insight 
into truth and goodness, know that this is the case even if we, non-philosophers, 
cannot see it (1997: 1108–11). Such an argument based on the special, privileged, 
insight of philosophers is unpersuasive unless supported by further rational argu-
ments. Second, he undertakes a substantial discussion of the state – as a kind of 
human writ large – and its contribution to human harmony.
EXAMPLE
Prosecutor v Erdemovic (ICTY) IT-96–22-T bis, para. 21
Holding individuals to account for their actions through punishment is important as a 
way of allowing that individual to repay a debt to society and reform their personalities. 
Where they plead guilty to a charge, such an admission is seen as evidence of willingness 
to change and can lead to a lesser punishment. Here such a reduction in punishment 
seems to be in tension with the need for wider social harmony and reconciliation pursued 
through harsh sentencing.
Discovering the truth is a cornerstone of the rule of law and a fundamental step on the 
way to reconciliation: for it is the truth that cleanses the ethnic and religious hatreds 
and begins the healing process. The International Tribunal must demonstrate that those 
who have the honesty to confess are treated fairly as part of a process underpinned by 
principles of justice, fair trial and protection of the fundamental rights of the individual. 
On the other hand, the International Tribunal is a vehicle through which the international 
community expresses its outrage at the atrocities committed in the former Yugoslavia. 
Upholding values of international human rights means that while protecting the rights of 
the accused, the International Tribunal must not lose sight of the tragedy of the victims 
and the sufferings of their families.
2b The good and the state
Plato initially argues that the state should be treated as analogous to the soul in 
order that the state should serve as a means of exploring the soul (1997: 1008). In 
other words, Plato makes no claim (at first) that the state, let alone all states, should 
themselves have a tripartite division mirroring the self. Rather, the roots of harmony 
and disharmony in the state are a good illustration of similar phenomena in the 
soul. Nonetheless, there is little doubt that Plato intended his model state, The 
Republic, to become a reality. The Republic would have rational rulers, a courageous 
www.ebook3000.com

2 PLATO
99
military class and a labouring class. With this strict unchangeable division (enforced 
through eugenics, censorship and ‘noble’ lies about the divine necessity of the caste 
system) Plato insists that a harmonious, and therefore just, state would be realised. 
The labouring class maintains the basic biological needs of the state; the courageous 
military class protects it from external threat; the rational rulers maintain the order of 
the whole. Justice, it is argued, is precisely that order, or harmony, between the parts.
[Justice] is concerned with what is inside him, with what is truly his own. One who is just 
does not allow any part of himself to do the work of another part or allow the various 
classes within him to meddle with each other. [. . .] He puts himself in order, is his own 
friend, and harmonises the three parts of himself [. . .]. [This is true of] the just man, the 
just city, and [what] justice is. (1997: 1075)
The rulers, ‘Philosopher Kings’ with complete knowledge of the good, would 
make any decisions necessary for the running and overall administration of the 
state. This technocracy (rule by philosophical experts), along with the censorship 
and generally illiberal nature of Plato’s system, mean there is much that cannot 
be salvaged from Plato’s thought. However, these considerable flaws aside, there is 
some enduring appeal in the idea that there could be a best, good, way for the state 
to be, that this ideal is in some way reducible to ‘harmony’, and that behind the state 
and ‘harmony’ are ultimately the good, i.e. the full realisation of human potential.
Plato’s later political and legal thought takes a more authoritarian turn, and ap-
peal to the good is superseded by a more pragmatic defence of strong government. 
The idea of a utopia was, of course, pursued in many different directions, and still 
has some appeal (not least because, when we criticise a state and its laws, we always 
implicitly make reference to some not-yet achieved ideal). Conversely, the dystopian 
aspects of Plato’s thought also remain important, cautionary, points of reference in 
legal theory. A state without rights, with censorship, and with lies about how things 
‘should be’, is more hell rather than heaven. Plato offers a cautionary tale of how 
over-emphasis on the good can lead to a dangerous under-emphasis on law.
EXAMPLE
~6LFKXDQ$FWLYLVW6HQWHQFHGWR)LYH<HDUVIRU~,QFLWLQJ6XEYHUVLRQRI
6WDWH3RZHU~)HEUXDU\+XPDQ5LJKWVLQ&KLQD
A strong state requires harmony but should also be able to tolerate some dissent. Here 
a Chinese activist falls foul of a state where harmony is understood in non-democratic 
terms.
In a brief hearing on February 9, 2010, in the Chengdu Municipal Intermediate People’s 
Court, Sichuan-based writer and environmental activist Tan Zuoren was found guilty of 
‘inciting subversion of state power’ and sentenced to a five-year prison term and three 
➨

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
100
2c Contemporary Platonism
Platonism continues to exercise an influence in legal philosophy, and not only in 
the natural law tradition. The suggestion that law not only changes and adapts but 
aspires towards an ultimate ideal has Platonic overtones, but does not necessarily 
have to involve utopianism. Nigel Simmonds argues that laws and lawyers do have 
or invoke some kind of ideal, namely ‘the rule of law’ (Simmonds, 2007). The rule 
of law provides that ideal by which actual legal systems can be judged, both in its 
instrumental role (as contributing to the good of individuals) and as something in-
trinsically good. The rule of law may never be fully realised – after all, many things 
that are neither legal nor necessarily good feature in legal decisions, such as politics 
and self-interest – but nonetheless the ideal allows us to say ‘these are not really part 
of law, law proper’. It is the ideal that allows us to distinguish what is truly part of 
law and what is contingently associated with it. Because many things are associated 
with law,
the most coherent solution to this problem is provided by an abstract archetype, [and] no 
problematic metaphysical commitments are involved: our practices themselves create the 
archetype in so far as they are structured by ideas that are best understood as pointing to 
the archetype. The thought that our concept of law may be structured by an archetype re-
quires no commitment to a strange or luxuriant ontology [i.e. theory of what exists]. Yet it 
would nevertheless be a mistake to underestimate the substantial connections that obtain 
between this thought and the Platonic [. . .] tradition of idealism. (2007: 58)
Has Simmonds, or any other contemporary theorist, an answer to the questions 
that Plato sets himself, namely that individuals ought to do what is good, and that 
it is good to abide by law? There is some sense in which contemporary theory has 
moved to the opposite end of the spectrum from Plato in placing ‘the good’ outside 
the scope of legal philosophy, and centralising what is right – what is necessary or 
universal – rather than an ultimate good. Nonetheless, it seems that Platonism is 
years’ deprivation of political rights. According to an informed source, when police led him 
away after the court hearing, Tan shouted, ‘It is my honor to go to prison for the people 
of my hometown’. [. . .] Tan was first detained on March 28, 2009, just three days after 
online publication of the findings of an investigation that he conducted with a colleague, 
Xie Yihue, into the causes of the widespread collapse of school buildings during the May 
2008 earthquake. The indictment, however, did not mention Tan’s earthquake investiga-
tion or its findings as constituting ‘incitement to subvert state power.’ Instead, it listed 
as evidence a 2007 article that Tan wrote about the 1989 Democracy Movement [. . .] 
and interviews that Tan gave to foreign media about the 2008 earthquake. During the 
trial, the judge repeatedly interrupted the defense lawyer, Pu Zhiqiang, and Tan was not 
allowed to make his final statement.
www.ebook3000.com

3 NATURAL LAW
101
at work in those contexts where an ideal is posited and where law, while imper-
fect, represents an ideal denoting something with intrinsic value and not simply 
 instrumental value.  
EXAMPLE 
Dred Scott v  Sandford , 60 U.S. 393 (1856) (at 426) United States 
Supreme Court 
There is an intuition, reflected by Plato, that ‘real law’ should be construed as unchanging; 
that changing law is closer to politics than law proper. Dred Scott  concerned the status of a 
slave both as a citizen of the United States and as, conversely, property. The majority of the 
Supreme Court found that Dred Scott was a slave and therefore property for the purposes 
of the constitution. The decision indicates why discussion of rights should be distinguished 
from discussion of goods; rights are here equated with property rights, certainly not the 
good of the individual slave. In a Platonic vein, the decision insisted that the law of the con-
stitution was unchanging and should be without reference to common opinion or feeling.
 The Government of the United States had no right to interfere for any other purpose but 
that of protecting the rights of the owner, leaving it altogether with the several States to 
deal with this race, whether emancipated or not, as each State may think justice, humanity, 
and the interests and safety of society, require. The States evidently intended to reserve 
this power exclusively to themselves. [. . .] No one, we presume, supposes that any change 
in public opinion or feeling, in relation to this unfortunate race, in the civilized nations of 
Europe or in this country, should induce the court to give to the words of the Constitution 
a more liberal construction in their favor than they were intended to bear when the instru-
ment was framed and adopted. Such an argument would be altogether inadmissible in 
any tribunal called on to interpret it. If any of its provisions are deemed unjust, there is a 
mode prescribed in the instrument itself by which it may be amended; but while it remains 
unaltered, it must be construed now as it was understood at the time of its adoption.  
3  Natural law 
 
 Introduction 
 The term ‘natural law’ has already been mentioned and identified as a philosophi-
cal school insisting on a necessary relationship between law and the good. This 
position, with origins in Ancient thought, has endured and continues to be a major 
contributor to philosophical debate. However, there are a number of natural law 
traditions, so no single position could be said to be ‘the’ natural law position. 
 In Ancient discussions of law and justice, metaphysics is important, i.e. the struc-
tures behind the natural and social worlds. Law – ‘true’, ‘real’ law – is found written 
3  Natural law 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
102
into the fabric of the physical and social worlds. This explains the invocation of 
‘natural’. Law is discovered among more general laws of nature; law is as unchanging 
and dispassionate as the natural world. However, in order to prevent such a posi-
tion simply demanding a return to nature – i.e. the ‘survival of the fittest’, or ‘might 
makes right’ – a narrower conception of nature is employed in natural law theorising. 
Natural law concerns the obligations that arise naturally. Those ‘naturally arising obli-
gations’ stem from the social situation that we find ourselves in – the social hierarchy, 
or the legal and political system – not directly from nature itself. Nonetheless, in pre-
modern contexts, where strict social hierarchy seemed natural, it was immediately in-
telligible to say that such social organisations possessed unchanging, pre-determined, 
forms and foundations and thereby generated ‘natural’ obligations (Cicero, 2000).
Modern natural law does not subscribe to a fundamental, metaphysical, identi-
fication of the natural and the obligatory. It argues, on one account, that there is a 
duty to govern human affairs through law. Such a duty is not simply an assertion 
of law’s usefulness but of an essentially moral obligation to employ law and legal 
means in social affairs (Fuller, 1969). On another account, law necessarily has moral 
content (Chloros, 1958). These are two points that need to be kept apart. The first 
point is recognisable in the foregoing discussions of the good and of Plato, i.e. that 
law aspires to realise social or individual goods or legality is justified by supporting 
us in realising these goods. The second point is that law must have moral content
or its content must overlap substantially with morality. If social mores dictate that 
certain behaviours are prohibited, or that certain actions are morally praiseworthy, 
then law should, respectively, prohibit or enforce them. Law has justification only in 
so far as its content reflects these goods. The two positions are separable (although it 
would be rare to support the second proposition but not the first) because one con-
cerns the initial justification of law (law’s inherent value) and the other the grounds 
of the continuing justification of law and laws (law’s contribution to morality).
The origins of both positions can be traced to Ancient Greece, and it is tempt-
ing to suggest that they arise from a more primitive form of thought that had not 
yet discovered a conceptually clear way of distinguishing law and morality. In fact, 
from the earliest Greek thought, law was analysed within a complex and shifting 
analytical framework, setting nomos (human laws and conventions) in contrast to 
phusis (nature). The value of this opposition between convention and nature is its 
potential to throw easily blurred oppositions into a profitable conflict with one an-
other (Barnes, 1987). For instance, do human conventions (nomos) have a natural 
(phusis) basis? Or, do human conventions (nomos) free us from nature (phusis)? We 
could answer no to the first question but yes to the second, suggesting that nature 
is something that we must be emancipated from through law. We could also answer 
no to both questions and thereby conclude that human conventions are repressive 
and that nature somehow encourages us to reject them. The opposition of ‘nature’ 
versus ‘human laws’ underlies debates in the philosophy of law still alive today.
www.ebook3000.com

3 NATURAL LAW
103
3a Early natural law
While Plato formulated many of the questions that the natural law tradition seeks 
to answer, it is Sophism that laid the groundwork for a philosophy of natural law. 
Sophism – a movement active around 400BCE – did this on the basis of an under-
lying opposition to human institutions (Dillon and Gergel, 2003). As a ‘movement’ 
Sophism did not aim to create a philosophical school but to provide practical 
guidance to the rich, teaching them how to maintain status and self-respect as 
aristocrats and resist social and personal threats (particularly legal action in the 
Courts where individuals were required to represent themselves). Sophists saw in 
the development of institutions such as marriage, civic responsibility and general 
social expectations the growth of repressive strictures that unnecessarily constrained 
the individual. These institutions were criticised as unnatural: they are not found 
in, located in or created by nature. This leads to the assumption that we should be 
doing what is natural and that nature is a source of values and grounds of activity 
(Plato, 1997: 235f).
This is arguably so. Nature insists that humans eat, reproduce and have their basic 
needs met in order to survive as a species. To oppose such needs is not only unnatu-
ral but repressive. With this as their premise, the Sophists famously propounded 
the idea that ‘might is right’: those best equipped by nature to fulfil their needs and 
interests should do so. The Greek Sophist Antiphon is characteristic in this respect:
[a person should] regard the laws as important when witnesses are present, but, when on 
his own without witnesses, the demands of nature. [. . .] [I]f a man transgresses the de-
mands of law and is not found out by those who are parties to the agreement, he escapes 
without either shame or penalty; but if he is found out, he does not. (quoted in Dillon 
and Gergel, 2003: 150–1)
It is this kind of argument that Plato sets out to criticise in his works. His argu-
ment for the psychological and moral importance of internal harmony is a direct 
assault on the Sophist’s endorsement of pure self-interest (1997: 992f); and it is 
these arguments in praise of the strong that have given ‘sophistry’ its pejorative sense 
of dressing up poor arguments as good ones simply in order to win at all costs. 
Philosophically, the Sophist position can be summarised as the idea that nomos
should be challenged by phusis. Human conventions are socially convenient but 
repressive; phusis, nature, gives grounds to oppose them.
Plato and Aristotle used this opposition between human law and nature, but ex-
plored their potential harmonisation rather than their antagonism. In both philoso-
phers there is a teleological conception of nature. If the natural world (the ‘natural 
order’) is characterised by progress towards an end (telos), then phusis itself is the 
guide to real or true law, and human conventions can be judged by the extent to 
which they harmonise with those natural ends. Those natural ends will be construed 
in terms of the good: the objective standard by which human lives are judged, and 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
104
by which the value of a political system is gauged. It is good that human affairs are 
regulated by law; laws are, ideally, attuned to the real nature of things and should 
therefore be accepted as binding. Plato’s criticism of the Sophists, and Aristotle’s re-
action to Plato, represents one of the most interesting strands of Ancient ethics (see 
Nussbaum, 1986). Suffice it to say, Plato and Aristotle’s political and legal thinking 
offered much more than the Sophists’ critique of law, but retained the Sophists’ 
preoccupation with nature as a guide to necessity in the human world.
Stoicism had Greek origins but became the predominant philosophy of the 
Romans. The Stoics – of which Seneca and Marcus Aurelius are the most charac-
teristic and Cicero the most famous (although his relationship with Stoicism is 
complex) – argued that the universe itself had a nomos, its own structuring laws, and 
accordingly there was no opposition, indeed a harmony, between nomos and phusis
(Cicero 1998; 2000). The Roman Stoics, unlike the Sophists, valued human institu-
tions, not least the Roman Empire. In this context, Stoicism became an individual 
ethic of self-control which demanded virtuous action, law-abiding activity and our 
detachment from the body (as a distraction from virtue and law). Stoicism was an 
all-encompassing ethic that demanded a harmony between humans, human law and 
the universal laws of the universe. This ‘cosmic reason’ is the summation of the view 
that law is written into the fabric of reality, not something created but discovered. In 
these conditions natural law became more than the unification of human laws and 
nature’s laws, but a complete metaphysics. The Cosmos has law at its centre.
EXAMPLE
The Art of War, Sun Tzu (1994) (c. sixth century BCE)
The idea of a natural or moral law features in Western and Eastern philosophical tradi-
tions. Whether such law arises from the natural world or something beyond the natural 
world, it serves as guide for human conduct. Here it is said to form part of the necessary 
preconditions of military success.
The art of war, then, is governed by five constant factors, to be taken into account in 
one’s deliberations, when seeking to determine the conditions obtaining in the field. 
These are: (1) The Moral Law; (2) Heaven; (3) Earth; (4) The Commander; (5) Method and 
discipline. / The Moral Law causes the people to be in complete accord with their ruler, 
so that they will follow him regardless of their lives, undismayed by any danger. [. . .] 
Heaven signifies night and day, cold and heat, times and seasons. [. . .] Earth comprises 
distances, great and small; danger and security; open ground and narrow passes; the 
chances of life and death. / The Commander stands for the virtues of wisdom, sincerity, 
benevolence, courage and strictness. [. . .] By method and discipline are to be understood 
the marshalling of the army in its proper subdivisions, the graduations of rank among the 
officers, the maintenance of roads by which supplies may reach the army, and the control 
of military expenditure.
www.ebook3000.com

3 NATURAL LAW
105
3b Natural law and religion
The first millennium of the Common Era did not change humanity’s preoccupation 
with the good, either the pursuit of a good life or a good state. However, the spread 
of monotheism demanded a reconsideration of Ancient ideas on two grounds. First, 
and generally, religious scholars sought a synthesis of Greek and Roman thought 
with revealed religion (scripture and religious practices). Second, and specifically, 
Christianity demanded a clear demarcation between the powers of the Church and 
the state. Both required a clarification of where and how a hierarchy of law and 
authority was possible.
The Ancient philosophers’ reflections on natural law were appealing to medi-
eval scholars as ideas through which philosophy and religion could be mutually 
reinforced. Religion insists on certain and unequivocal moral precepts; philosophy 
seeks to explain how divine rules are written into the fabric of reality. ‘Law’ use-
fully serves to encompass ideas of morality and regularities in the natural world. 
God created a world exhibiting order and regularity, thus good order must be sought 
in the human world too.
Augustine (345–430CE) synthesised the Platonic notion of the good with 
Christian revelation concerning God. The good is our ultimate goal, and, echoing 
Plato’s understanding of justice, the well ordered state and self-regulated individual 
are both necessary for harmonious existence.
The peace of the body is the orderly proportion of its members. The peace of the animal 
soul is the orderly repose of its appetites. The peace of the reasonable soul is the orderly 
concord of thought and action. The peace of body and soul together is the orderly life and 
security of the living person. The peace of man and God is the orderly obedience in faith 
to the eternal law. The peace of men is orderly harmony. (Augustine, 1963: 343)
At the same time Augustine combined elements of Sophism and Stoicism. 
Human institutions and laws are rational, but a prelude to divine justice:
[For Augustine] the secular commonwealth (civitas terrena) was a reflection of the divine 
common-wealth (civitas Dei) to the extent that human law and conduct were in unison 
with God’s will. It was antithetical to the civitas Dei insofar as human law and conduct 
were not in consonance with the lex aeterna (eternal law). (Wieacker, 1990: 12, n. 14)
The Christian ‘Golden Rule’ of treating others as we would wish to be treated is 
an adequate basis for pursuing virtue. Human laws are a supplement to, but cannot 
replace, this rule. Nonetheless, human knowledge and the laws of the universe can 
be brought into a rational harmonious whole.
The peace of the city is the orderly harmony of command and obedience on the part 
of the citizens. The peace of the heavenly city is orderly and harmonious fellowship 
in the enjoyment of God and of each other in God. The peace of the universe is the 
serenity of order. Order is the adjustment of like and unlike each to its own place. 
(Augustine, 1963: 343)

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
106
In the perfect state – The City of God – individuals follow the laws of God, and 
their own wills become harmonious with God’s will. In these terms, the legacy of 
Plato’s thought remains clear, albeit with a strong Christian flavour.
Averroës (1126–1198CE) also saw the possibility of a synthesis of philosophical 
and religious thought, in his case Aristotelianism and Islam. The most important 
elements of his thought are, first, that there is a harmony between religion and phi-
losophy and that a synthesis of the two is always possible (Averroës, 1998). Second, 
that there is a teleology shared by humans and the natural world, a harmonious 
movement towards God:
The heavenly bodies are endowed with life and reason, and their motions are a result of 
conception and desire. They conceive the good, which is their perfection, and desire to 
become like unto it. Inasmuch as motion is better than rest, since motion is life, they are 
constantly in motion. The movers not only move the heavenly bodies, but they give them 
their forms in virtue of which they are what they are, and hence they are thus agents, in a 
sense. (Husik, 1909: 425–6)
This is a development of Aristotle’s biological approach and his teleology, arguing 
for an underlying unity among humans and the natural world in desire for a good 
established by God.
St Thomas Aquinas’ work (1225–1274CE) is, in European thought, the most 
influential attempt to both combine philosophy and revealed religion. It seeks to 
make sense of the relationship between ‘law’ as a property of God’s will, the Created 
order, and of human governance. His ideas synthesise aspects of Aristotelianism (its 
teleology and conception of the individual), with the Old and New Testaments, 
and encompasses the work of Augustine and Cicero. From Aristotle, Aquinas takes 
ideas of the universe working towards some end, and the individual pursuing the 
good; both the individual and the created world have an end or telos established 
by God. From revealed religion he takes the rules, established by God, for human 
governance and a conception of humans as rational creatures able to discern God’s 
will in the world. From these roots Aquinas is able to draw out different, but com-
plementary ideas of law.
Aquinas needs to show that there are different, but nonetheless complementary, 
ideas of law in order to establish the proper relationship between God, religious 
authority and secular authority. He produces a four-fold account of law. Eternal 
law, established by God, provides a telos for the universe as a whole (2002: 30). The 
eternal law directs the unfolding of the universe and is only known in its entirety 
by God. Divine law is the law revealed directly to humanity through scripture and 
prophets (2002: 20–2). This law provides a clear distinction between the good and 
the evil (i.e. what is, or is not, God’s will). Natural law is that portion of the eter-
nal law that humans can know through the exercise of reason (2002: 40). Reason 
provides us with knowledge of the good, what it is intrinsically good to pursue and 
what our duties are as social beings; and human law is the application of natural 
www.ebook3000.com

3 NATURAL LAW
107
law to the general governance of human affairs (2002: 51). Human law is always for 
the good of a community, but flows from those with political or law-making power.
And so every human law has much of the nature of the nature of law as it is derived from 
the natural law. And a human law diverging in any way from natural law will be a perver-
sion of law and no longer a law. (Aquinas, 2002: 54)
Within this four-fold division, natural law and human law share the same 
rational foundations: in ‘human affairs [. . .] things are just because they are right 
according to the rule of reason. But the primary rule of reason is the natural law’ 
(2002: 54). Reason rather than nature becomes, through the work of Aquinas, the 
central motif of natural law thinking. This in turn provides resources for solving the 
problem of reconciling the demands made by religious and secular sources of law. 
While the importance of reason is evident in Augustine’s discussions of human gov-
ernance, and the importance of the will of God is given a richer analysis in Averroës, 
it is Aquinas who synthesises these strands of theorising into an idea of law which is 
recognisably human, and an idea of reason which is both practical and ideal.
EXAMPLE
Bruker v Marcovitz [2007] 3 S.C.R. 607, 2007 Canadian Supreme Court
The close relationship between religion and the natural law school is complex. Natural 
law is used to justify the rule of law and the pursuit of the common good. It can also, as 
discussed here, be used as a means to justify actions contrary to the state and its tradi-
tions. Should a Jewish divorce process ( get) be recognised in the Canadian Courts? Here, 
in the final appeal, there is a twin discussion of the basis of obedience to the law, and 
whether the Courts should hear ‘religious’ disputes. The Court decided such matters did 
fall within its remit (though not a related question of damages).
The underlying problem in any open and democratic society based on human dignity, 
equality and freedom in which conscientious and religious freedom has to be regarded with 
appropriate seriousness, is how far such democracy can and must go in allowing members 
of religious communities to define for themselves which laws they will obey and which 
not. Such a society can cohere only if all its participants accept that certain basic norms 
and standards are binding. Accordingly, believers cannot claim an automatic right to be 
exempted by their beliefs from the laws of the land. At the same time, the state should, 
wherever reasonably possible, seek to avoid putting believers to extremely painful and in-
tensely burdensome choices of either being true to their faith or else respectful of the law.
3c Modern natural law
The problem of reconciling revealed, divine, laws governing the cosmos on the one 
hand, and the demands made on the individual by secular, mundane, authorities on 
the other awaited a solution concerning the sources of law and the limits of power. 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
108
Aquinas’ taxonomy of laws presented law in a hierarchy determined by source, but did 
not provide a guide for governing the multitude of tensions generated by new forms of 
power. In the pre-modern era both the state and the Church exercised significant poli-
tical and economic power. The emergence of the modern era (i.e. from the sixteenth 
and seventeenth centuries onwards) amplified that problem. The co-existence between 
Catholic Church and state was disrupted by the establishment of strong Protestant 
powers in Europe (Tuck, 1999). This had significant political and legal consequences. 
Protestantism, which was more congenial to a division of Church and state than 
Catholicism, hastened the development of a ‘private sphere’ where individual religion 
and morality could be different from public religion and morality, and hastened a more 
general decline of religious influence on political thought (Kelley, 1990). Wars between 
Catholic and Protestant Europe also gave rise to the international legal system with the 
secular state as the prime legal entity (Steinberg, 1966). For these reasons Aquinas’ hi-
erarchy of sources of law was, to an extent, inverted with human law claiming predomi-
nance in human affairs and divine law relegated to personal ethics in the private sphere.
In addition to this, Western Europe was increasingly assuming power over ter-
ritories, and therefore indigenous peoples, in the New World. This colonial ‘en-
counter’ encouraged rethinking the basis of legal rule and the nature of sovereignty. 
The sovereignty of indigenous peoples was called into question in order to justify 
European domination (Tuck, 1999: 89–108), but this begged the question of what 
quality – beyond effective control over a territory through custom and force – was 
absent in the political and legal ordering of non-European people. European sover-
eignty (i.e. ‘true’ political and legal sovereignty) had to be construed as something 
more than control, custom and the threat of force. Two distinctively modern ideas 
emerge from such reflection. The first is the emergence of positivism as an attempt 
to identify law with one source only – the secular sovereign – and deny the status of 
law to more opaque moral or religious principles (see Chapter 5). The second is a 
reformed conception of natural law which placed a moral duty on the sovereign to 
provide particular kinds of social ordering.
Combining a concern with the burgeoning commercial activity of Europe with 
the colonial encounters that were part of that commercial activity, Hugo Grotius 
(1583–1645) sought to put natural law on a footing that did not depend upon ap-
peal to the Divine. Grotius did not entirely sever the relationship between law and 
God, but did assert that there was a normative and natural order independent of 
God’s (eternal or divine) laws. It is in the exploration of these independent orders 
that modern natural law takes shape. Grotius’ approach is to picture a global state of 
nature where all states contract with one another – i.e. create international law – in 
order avoid mutual destruction, enmity and warfare. This ties legal order to a rational 
self-interest which is both religiously sanctioned and ‘natural’:
. . . the law which adjudicates between different peoples, or between the rulers of dif-
ferent peoples, whether proceeding from nature itself, or established by divine laws, . . . 
www.ebook3000.com

3 NATURAL LAW
109
[is ‘natural law’ and] it stems by necessity from internal principles of man [and] God. 
(Grotius, quoted in Tuck, 1999: 100–1)
Although different states and peoples have competing views of the divine law, 
they can agree on basic rational principles that bring good ordering to human af-
fairs. A social ordering within which respect for property rights is primary. Emphasis 
on basic, shared, principles like self-preservation and property rights is characteristic 
of modern legal and political thought, in particular the ‘social contract’ model of 
authority (Chapter 4). And while such basic principles are held to be natural, note a 
changing relationship with the notion of the good. The nature or legitimacy of law is 
no longer premised upon a fulsome account of human need, a good life, or a good 
state. Rather there is a minimal conception of human needs; the state is legitimised 
by the provision of minimal goods (e.g. survival, freedom from fear) rather than any 
substantial (Aristotelean or religious) vision of the good.
Two important theorists of the twentieth century have revitalised the natural law 
tradition in contemporary philosophy. Both Lon Fuller (see Chapter 6) and John Finnis 
identify law with moral commitments and a purpose or function for law related to the 
human good. Fuller’s work reflects Grotius’ minimal reading of natural law with an 
emphasis on the basic principles needed for human sociability. Finnis, conversely, repre-
sents a revival of Aquinas’ position. Finnis insists that law, and only law, can provide cer-
tain basic goods for the individual (Finnis, 2011). These basic goods have their origins 
in human rationality, they are intrinsically good and require no further justification; 
they are not deduced from an assessment of what is (instrumentally) good for people 
to have, but are presumed in any assessment of practical reasoning, i.e. judgments con-
cerned how to act. These self-evident goods – life, knowledge, play, aesthetic experience, 
friendship, practical reasonableness and religion – are axiomatic, intrinsically good, 
characteristics or capacities that it is reasonable (rational) for all individuals to pursue.
A theory of natural law [. . .] may be undertaken, as this book is, primarily to assist the 
practical reflections of those concerned to act, whether as judges, or as statesmen, or as 
citizens. [This] undertaking cannot proceed securely without a knowledge of the whole 
range of human possibilities and opportunities, inclinations and capacities. (2011: 18)
Law must work with an idea of the individual seeking these goods – they are pre-
cisely what the ‘reasonable person’ would pursue – and make demands on law-
makers and judges to have this conception of the rational individual at the heart 
of law and legal decisions. (Authority and the imposition of order is a necessary 
dimension of social life, but by centralising basic goods law makes an indispensible 
contribution to the ‘common good’.)
Accordingly, Finnis’ position is practical, deontological and perfectionist. It is 
practical because it aims to assist us in deciding how to act rationally. It is ‘deon-
tological’ being concerned with duties on the part of law-makers and legal institu-
tions; such duties are not law’s own particular morality (as they would be in the 
case of Fuller) but rather intersect with moral duties more generally. It could also be 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
110
described as ‘perfectionist’: the state cannot remain agnostic about different concep-
tions of the good, rather it has the duty to encourage the maintenance or cultivation 
of the basic goods. (At the same time it is not teleological, it does not presuppose 
an end-point or goal for the state or the individual.)
Given that Finnis sees the pursuit and protection of these goods as premised ul-
timately on rational principles, he subsumes this ‘moral’ dimension of his account 
into one basic good, practical reasonableness:
the term ‘moral’ is of somewhat uncertain connotation. So it is preferable to frame our 
conclusion in terms of practical reasonableness [. . .]. [Practical reasonableness] is the view 
point which should be used as the standard of reference by the theorist describing the 
features of legal order. (2011: 15)
Self-evident goods offer good reasons for action; as such they can form the basis of 
practical reasoning about the world and what we should do in the world. Only 
by acknowledging the pursuit of basic goods as the foundation of sound reason-
ing about how to act in the world can we expect to judge our own and others’ 
actions. Put another way, the idea of ‘good reasons’ intersects with the idea of rea-
sonableness more generally. Reasonableness – the characteristic of being rational or 
justified – is not simply a principle that is, from time to time, imported into legal 
discussion. It is a moral principle associated with everyone’s interest in pursuing or 
maintaining basic goods. Such a principle provides a standard by which individual 
actions, including the actions of individuals within legal institutions, can be judged.
EXAMPLE
Rylands v Fletcher [1866] LR 1 Exch 265
Still a decisive case in common law jurisdictions concerning the torts of nuisance and 
negligence, Rylands hinges upon natural and unnatural use of land and our liability 
when ‘unnatural’ uses of land have an impact on our neighbours. That we should take 
reasonable care or due diligence where there is a risk of causing harm to our neigh-
bours remains a pillar of legal approaches to wrongs. The appeal to the reasonable here 
might be thought to intersect with Finnis’ basic goods of life, friendship and perhaps 
aesthetic experience.
The person whose grass or corn is eaten down by the escaping cattle of his neighbour, 
or whose mine is flooded by the water from his neighbour’s reservoir, or whose cellar is 
invaded by the filth of his neighbour’s privy, or whose habitation is made unhealthy by 
the fumes and noisome vapours of his neighbour’s alkali works, is damnified without any 
fault of his own; and it seems reasonable and just that the neighbour, who has brought 
something on his own property which was not naturally there, harmless to others so long 
as it is confined to his own property, but which he knows to be mischievous if it gets on 
his neighbour’s, should be obliged to make good the damage which ensues if he does 
not succeed in confining it to his own property.
www.ebook3000.com

4 UTILITARIANISM
111
4  Utilitarianism 
 
 Introduction 
 There is an appealing simplicity in the conclusion that everything ‘good’ is good by 
virtue of its giving us pleasure or happiness. From the simplest instrumental claim 
that ‘ x is a good tool for the job’ to the basic good of life itself, the reason why 
something is good is that it will bring benefit – pleasure, happiness, well-being or 
welfare – to people. More fully, a useful tool gets a job done to a person’s  satisfac-
tion ; that is, where an individual’s  preference is satisfied, or where their  interests are 
realised. In the ideas of satisfaction, preferences or interests a common standard 
can be posited: their contribution to the pleasure or the happiness of an individual 
or individuals. Positing a common standard is ‘reductive’ because it unifies at 
the  expense of variations in what we mean by preference, satisfaction or interest. 
Nonetheless, this reductive move does have two immediate advantages. First, it may 
chime with a view of human psychology as pleasure or happiness seeking. Second, 
it has the advantage of simplicity. Why complicate our view of life with compet-
ing ideas of motivation, obligation, duties and values? ‘Pleasure seeking’ captures 
both what humans do and, within reason, what we should do. That qualification – 
‘within  reason’ – intimates moral constraints on our actions to be further discussed. 
We need to decide to what extent this argument holds water, particularly whether 
‘pleasure’ does do the work we want it to, including whether it is always synony-
mous with happiness, and whether we can make sense of limitations on pleasure, 
i.e. seeking pleasure ‘within reason’.  
 
4a  Hedonism 
 A neat reduction of ‘good’ to ‘pleasure giving’ can be both plausible and conceptu-
ally tidy. Why call something good unless it gives someone pleasure? Why act in a 
way that fails to bring you, or others, happiness? There is also a negative justifica-
tion for identifying good with pleasure. The alternative is to argue that our actions 
should be guided by rules and duties, and rules and duties often make us, and 
others, unhappy. Duty-based systems of ethics might prohibit us from lying even 
though our lie will never be found out ( and such lying might make many people 
much happier). To forbid it in this context seems to lose any justification. Again, if 
we demand that every criminal be punished, even if there is no victim to demand 
that punishment ( and the criminal would themselves be made to suffer) this pun-
ishment seems to lose any sense or justice. 
 In the foregoing reduction of good to ‘pleasurable’ or ‘pleasure giving’ we have 
had recourse to the word  happiness . The commingling of ideas of pleasure and hap-
piness is in line with ordinary language, but it is conceptually untidy. In the English 
language, pleasure and happiness carry different connotations: the former a physical 
4  Utilitarianism

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
112
state, the latter an enduring state. Sharper differences can be drawn between purely 
physical pleasure and a state of happiness. Pleasure may be more intense, and we 
can never really doubt an experience of pleasure; happiness may be more fleeting 
or insubstantial, and it seems possible to doubt one’s own, and others’, happiness. 
We can be sceptical concerning a time in the past where we thought we were happy 
and we can be suspicious of others’ claims to being happy in circumstances where 
we ourselves would not be. Nonetheless, cultural and philosophical traditions have 
tended to denigrate pleasure in favour of happiness (recall Plato’s association of 
happiness and inner harmony). ‘Merely’ physical pleasure is seen as a transient and 
purely subjective experience, while happiness is treated a more desirable holistic 
state that can be objectively gauged. Pleasure may be a necessary condition for hap-
piness (it is a precondition), but it is not the sufficient condition of happiness (the 
only, or complete, cause).
Indeed, simple thought experiments try to make that point. Would we choose 
a life of physical pleasure induced by artificial means, e.g. by being attached to a 
computer program? If we would, we are consistent, pure, hedonists treating pleasure 
as a sufficient condition of happiness. If, on the other hand, we argue that this life 
would be lacking something essential (something ‘real’) we may still be hedonists of 
sorts, but happiness pursuing, not pleasure pursuing, hedonists (Flew (ed.), 1979). 
This latter position, while possibly more appealing, creates a further philosophical 
problem. To say that happiness must be real, and not dependent on (potentially 
deceptive) mental states, requires an objective standard: what a happy life really de-
mands or what, from an objective perspective, a good life should possess. Aristotle 
and Plato are able to claim justification for such positions. Those with a more sub-
jective conception of a good life will not.
The relationship between happiness and law could be stated as a simple instru-
mental one. That all legal systems are a means of making as many people as possible 
happy. With some clarification of happy this could be made plausible. Legal systems 
do not produce unalloyed pleasure at every moment, but they do satisfy the interests 
and needs of many people. A more subtle description of the relationship could be 
framed in terms of expectations: what do we expect of people, and what should we 
expect of them? We expect people to want to do what will make them happy and 
a legal system that systematically frustrated that pursuit of happiness would be not 
only unpopular but perverse; but in law this is tempered by what should be expected 
of people. This might be the simple claim that the pursuit of happiness must be cur-
tailed for the safety of other individuals (Mill, 1991). It might be a more substantial 
claim that the pursuit of happiness must be curtailed by the safety of other individu-
als and the interests of the state (Finnis, 2011). Even more substantially, some states 
might expect their citizens to identify their own happiness with the success of the 
state as a whole, in which case the systematic frustration of individual desires might 
be justified (Cicero, 1998). In each of these narrowings of the relationship between 
www.ebook3000.com

4 UTILITARIANISM
113
law and unadulterated human happiness there is, nonetheless, an acceptance that 
everything that is allowed or constrained by the state is allowed or constrained in 
the expectation that everyone pursues happiness. Accordingly, to posit a relationship 
between law and happiness requires expressing it in a way that is richer than a bare 
proposition stating ‘law aims to make people happy’. Legal systems always involve 
a complicated relationship between happiness and coexistence: we expect people to 
seek the pursuit of happiness with constraints on that pursuit.
If legal systems involve expectations about constraints on the pursuit of hap-
piness, they do not expect everyone to be saints. No legal system demands that 
we entirely sacrifice what gives us happiness for the interests of others, and even 
highly ‘collectivist’ states are seeking to construe individual happiness in a par-
ticular way as a better or fuller conception of human happiness. More generally, any 
view of human life or ethics that demanded total self-abnegation or total pursuit 
of happiness without constraint would be unattractive. The first is inhuman (even 
self-sacrifice has to bring some benefits), the second unreasonable (even happi-
ness has limits placed on it by our physical needs and by our living in the world 
with others). So, a philosophy, a politics or a personal ethics of happiness, while 
having a common sense foundation (‘the good is happiness or pleasure’), has 
constraints placed upon it on the basis of reasonable expectations. The demands of 
such reasonableness are central to Finnis’ critique of utilitarianism (Finnis, 2011: 
116). Demanding that we be saints would be perverse if we all pursue happiness; 
conversely, demanding that we be allowed to be happy does not mean that we are 
all pure pleasure seekers.
EXAMPLE
Regina Respondent v Brown (Anthony) Appellant [1994] 1 A.C. 212, at 273
The notorious case of consensual sado-masochistic sex among a group of men required 
the Court to consider the extent to which criminal legislation prohibiting harm could be 
used where the harm is self-inflicted and invited. This required consideration of the vari-
ation in individuals’ preferences (‘special interests’), and the responsibilities of a state 
committed to maximising freedom.
The [. . .] state should interfere with the rights of an individual to live his or her life as 
he or she may choose no more than is necessary to ensure a proper balance between 
the special interests of the individual and the general interests of the individuals who to-
gether comprise the populace at large. Thus, while acknowledging that very many people, 
if asked whether the appellants’ conduct was wrong, would reply ‘Yes, repulsively wrong,’ 
I would at the same time assert that this does not in itself mean that the prosecution of 
the appellants under sections 20 and 47 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861 
is well founded.

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
114
4b Utilitarianism
Utilitarianism is the most philosophically resilient form of hedonism. It involves 
three commitments: consequentialism (outcomes, exclusively, are subject to moral 
evaluation), a hedonistic reduction of the good to pleasure (or happiness, or wel-
fare) and a democratic commitment to equality. If we take the ‘utility’ aspect of utili-
tarianism as primary we can analyse utilitarianism as a philosophy where intrinsic 
and instrumental ideas of goodness are combined. Anything useful can be described 
as good (i.e. ‘good for achieving x’); any state of affairs where the sum of happiness 
outweighs the sum of unhappiness (disutility) is good intrinsically (i.e. without ref-
erence to any further goal). Thus J.S. Mill (see below) collapses the intrinsic and in-
strumental together: ‘Whatever can be proved to be good, must be so by being shown 
to be a means to something admitted to be good without proof’ (Mill, 1991: 4).
Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832), who coined the term ‘utilitarianism’, combined 
the instrumental good with other intrinsic and objective uses of good on the basis 
that everything useful and everything we approve of has one of two consequences: 
an increase of pleasure or an increase of pain.
By utility is meant that property in any object, whereby it tends to produce benefit, advan-
tage, pleasure, good or happiness, (all this in the present case comes to the same thing) 
[. . .] to the party whose interest is considered: if that party be the community in general, 
then the happiness of the community: if a particular individual, then the happiness of that 
individual. (Bentham, 2007: 2)
A good can-opener opens cans more quickly, leading to a marginal increase in 
pleasure; a good moral action may save lives leading to a substantial increase in 
pleasure. Conversely, bad can-openers and the loss of life are on a spectrum of things 
increasing pain in the world. A lot of work has to be done here by the terms pleasure 
and pain to encompass everything from life-defining activities to trivial inconven-
iences. Nonetheless, the reduction to this single standard – identifying what is good 
with what is useful for bringing about pleasure rather than pain – is held to provide 
a complete system governing individual action and collective legislation.
Bentham’s utilitarianism is intended to be both scientific and democratic. His 
reduction of all decision-making to an evaluation of outcomes, and the reduction of 
everything we might plausibly hold as beneficial (pleasure, happiness or well-being) 
to the value of utility, produces an empirical view of action and value. Everything rel-
evant to ethics – value and evaluation – is located in the empirical world of actions
and probable consequences:
. . . sum up all the values of all the pleasures on the one side, and those of all the pains on 
the other. The balance, if it be on the side of pleasure, will give the good tendency of the 
act [. . .]; if on the side of pain, the bad tendency of the act. (2007: 31, emphasis removed)
Interior mental processes or mysterious moral properties have no place in this sys-
tem. To be sure, Bentham asks us to evaluate what may happen; he offers a number 
www.ebook3000.com

4 UTILITARIANISM
115
of rules for assisting in calculation of what is likely to produce the greatest quantity of 
happiness (2007: 30), but the place of ethical action and evaluation is the world and 
the consequences of our actions. What we should do, and what we should value, are on 
a single unitary scale of utility, and that scale is purely empirical and calculable. We can 
calculate how much pleasure or pain our actions may cause and thereby evaluate em-
pirically what the best course of action is. With a monistic account of what is good, and 
with that good being something entirely empirical (rather than spiritual or mental), 
morality can be reconciled with science. We do not decide what is good, we calculate it.
The theory is not only scientific but also democratic on two grounds. First, in 
utilitarian calculations each person is to count as one, and only one. Individuals are 
not to be given greater weighting in calculation over one another. Second, Bentham 
makes no distinction between different kinds of pleasures. He famously argued 
that pub games and poetry should be judged on an equal footing; devoting time to 
either can be pleasurable (see Smart and Williams, 1973: 15). Admittedly, Bentham 
went to some pains to consider how the quantity of pleasure could be gauged sci-
entifically (the ‘hedonistic calculus’) and in such a calculation poetry might come 
out better as producing enduring, and not just intense, pleasure. Nonetheless, our 
choice of activities and interests should not be dictated by a hierarchy of desirable 
goals, only by their capacity to produce pleasure.
A critical question to ask of Bentham’s position is whether it is suitable to talk 
predominantly about pleasure where happiness is a better term for the type of re-
duction he wants to achieve. Bentham allows ‘utility’ to stand for the ultimate value 
of any activity. Nonetheless, if utility stands for both pleasure and happiness we 
could be presented with difficult problems when trying to choose between the maxi-
misation of physical pleasures and the overall happiness of human lives. Without a 
hierarchy of goals there can be no distinction drawn between the pleasure of indi-
vidual, self-seeking, individuals and the happiness of the whole. As Finnis puts it, 
the utilitarian’s position ‘affords them no principle by reference to which they could 
criticise as unreasonable or immoral any persons who set out to maximise their own 
happiness regardless of the welfare of others’ (2011: 116).
Mill sought to enrich utilitarianism with a more sophisticated analysis of this 
unitary value. Mill agrees with Bentham that pleasure is a necessary condition of 
goodness: we do not treat things as useful or valuable if they lack the capacity to give 
pleasure. Nonetheless, pleasure is not always the sufficient condition of happiness. 
In some cases we will know that our happiness is incomplete, despite our lives con-
taining much pleasure. We will know this, says Mill, if we have experienced ‘higher 
pleasures’ such as the pleasures of intellectual activity which leave us dissatisfied with 
‘lower pleasures’, i.e. pure physical pleasure. (In this respect Mill’s argument is not un-
like Plato’s, where his analysis of justice and knowledge is supported by the ‘special 
insight’ of philosophers. To the extent that such an argument is reasonable it depends 
upon the idea that, without having another point of comparison, we cannot make a 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
116
definitive decision on the truth or value of something.) Accordingly, Mill is able to say 
that it is better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool, or a pig, satisfied (1991: 140). 
Here Mill has not sought to introduce two entirely different kinds of pleasure – if he 
did, his argument would cease to be monistic, would have failed in its reduction of 
value to a single term – he has simply observed that in some circumstances we have 
a greater awareness of what will give us fuller, rich or more sustainable pleasure. At 
the same time it seems that Mill is not only suggesting that we can become aware of 
‘higher’ pleasure but that these are essentially superior to ‘lower’ pleasures, hinting at 
a pluralistic conception of the good that sits uneasily with Bentham’s strict monism. 
Either way, we have no choice, as utilitarian decision-makers, but to seek to maximise 
those pleasures that have the most ‘felicity’ (endurance, intensity, potency etc.).
EXAMPLE
Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza [2004] UKHL 30
This case concerned the status of same-sex partners in matters of succession to rented 
homes, i.e. whether they can retain the tenancy under legislation referring to ‘his or her 
wife or husband’. Not surprisingly, the UK House of Lords ruled that this was a matter of 
equality, of happiness, and of rationality, and the right should therefore be granted. Note, 
however, that the justification for individual rights is linked to democracy, but not neces-
sarily the desires of the majority. Neither the common good, nor democracy, are equiva-
lent to majoritarianism (i.e. pursuing whatever happens to be the will of the majority). Can 
utilitarianism reconcile ‘equal weighting’ with the complexity of democracy in practice?
Treating some as automatically having less value than others not only causes pain and 
distress to that person but also violates his or her dignity as a human being. The es-
sence of the [European Convention on Human Rights], as has often been said, is respect 
for human dignity and human freedom [. . .]. [S]uch treatment is damaging to society as 
a whole. Wrongly to assume that some people have talent and others do not is a huge 
waste of human resources. It also damages social cohesion, creating not only an under-
class, but an under-class with a rational grievance. Third, it is the reverse of the rational 
behaviour we now expect of government and the state. Power must not be exercised ar-
bitrarily. If distinctions are to be drawn, particularly upon a group basis, it is an important 
discipline to look for a rational basis for those distinctions. Finally, it is a purpose of all 
human rights instruments to secure the protection of the essential rights of members 
of minority groups, even when they are unpopular with the majority. Democracy values 
everyone equally even if the majority does not.
4c Variants of utilitarianism
For utilitarian decision-makers (including ourselves as individuals and our law-
makers) the most challenging responsibility is to identify that course of action 
which maximises utility for the greatest number of people. This has three specific 
www.ebook3000.com

4 UTILITARIANISM
117
dimensions. First, equality: each and every person, including ourselves, is to count 
as one, i.e. of equal importance. Second, a consequentialist dimension: we are 
only interested in the predicted outcomes, not the motives, of actions. Third, an 
evaluative dimension: we are acting in a way that is likely to bring pleasure on the 
basis of a calculation of the quality and quantity of that pleasure. Together these 
form the basis of deciding how to act, and expressed in this form constitute ‘act 
utilitarianism’. Act utilitarianism asks us ‘what are the possible outcomes in these 
circumstances’ and ‘which, among the possible actions in circumstances, will pro-
duce most pleasure or happiness? (Raz (ed.), 1978: 46f)’. The probabilistic dimen-
sion of this process is challenging We cannot control the outcomes of our actions; 
we as individuals may be poor at predicting outcomes; and we may be concerned 
about the long-term, and not just immediate, consequences of our actions. In short, 
people are often bad predictors of what will make themselves and others happy 
and no-one can foresee the wider consequences of their actions. To a point, the 
act utilitarian simply has to work within the normal limits of human agency and 
imagination: guessing that being nice to certain people will make them happier, 
or assuming that money given to a group of poor people will create more pleasure 
than its being spent by someone already extremely rich. But these examples do not 
capture the complex possibilities that any action, let alone a ‘moral quandary’ or 
legislative act, would have to envisage. The act utilitarian is asked to be both imagi-
native and pragmatic: consider all of the consequences of the act but not those too 
remote from it causally or temporally.
These problems have generated a variation of utilitarianism, rule utilitarianism, 
which is less reliant on multiple probabilistic calculations. The initial assumptions
are the same: the reduction of morality to utility, consequentialism and equality 
among persons. Nonetheless, this asks us to formulate rules which will serve as a 
generalisation to simplify decision-making and as a more formalised or regularised 
approach to morality and legislation. ‘Rule-utilitarianism is the view that the right-
ness or wrongness of an action is to be judged by the goodness or badness of the 
consequences of a rule that everyone should perform the action in like circum-
stances’ (Smart and Williams, 1973: 9). This is a generalised or legislative approach 
because we are put in the situation of a legislator rather than an individual actor and 
asked to consider what rules would be best to maximise utility. This resembles more 
familiar approaches to morality formulated as universal principles of ‘do not steal’, 
‘do pay your bills’ etc. However, it is still underpinned by, first, the equivalence of 
good, happiness and utility, and second, by a consequentialism which looks to out-
comes and does not accept that there are absolute duties which stand in the way of 
calculating the best outcome.
Rule utilitarianism is structured but not inflexible. Given that rules are justified by 
their maximising utility, all utilitarian rules can admit exceptions: a utilitarian could 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
118
happily construct a rule saying ‘do not steal unless it would bring a great benefit 
such as saving a life’. Arguably this therefore collapses back into act utilitarianism: 
i.e. ‘follow rules unless actions contrary to the rule would bring greater utility’. At the 
very least, the two positions are consistent with one another, with act utilitarianism 
guiding our actions as individuals, and rule utilitarianism able to guide a society 
needing general rules and expectations.
In this context it is also worth noting political and economic ‘neoliberalism’ as a 
distinctive variant on utilitarianism. This is the idea that the free market maximises 
the common and good and the state must support the market. Monistic (centred 
on wealth creation) and consequentialist, this is perhaps the most common form 
utilitarianism takes today. As such, the lasting legacy of utilitarianism might be 
said to be a defence of liberties (namely economic liberties) combined with a 
desire for quantifiable and calculable outcomes (namely increase of wealth). This 
does not look like an unquestionably good guide to legal and political action for 
everyone (see discussion of Sen below), but following the basic tenets of utilitari-
anism it does prevent the pursuit of wealth being viewed simply as a crude form 
of hedonism.
EXAMPLE
~$JUHHPHQWRQ7UDGH5HODWHG$VSHFWVRI,QWHOOHFWXDO3URSHUW\5LJKWV
(TRIPS) World Trade Organisation, 1994
Flowing from the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, this international agreement 
deals with intellectual property and international trade. The function of such an interna-
tional agreement is ‘recognition’ of a number of basic principles. This is an attempt to 
preserve both international trade and the protection of creativity (intellectual property) in 
the belief that both are necessary for wealth and happiness.
Desiring to reduce distortions and impediments to international trade, and taking 
into account the need to promote effective and adequate protection of intellectual 
property rights, and to ensure that measures and procedures to enforce intellectual 
property rights do not themselves become barriers to legitimate trade; / Recognizing 
the need for a multilateral framework of principles, rules and disciplines dealing 
with international trade in counterfeit goods; / Recognizing that intellectual property 
rights are private rights; / Recognizing the underlying public policy objectives of 
national systems for the protection of intellectual property, including developmental 
and technological objectives;  / Recognizing also the special needs of the least-
developed country Members in respect of maximum flexibility in the domestic imple-
mentation of laws and regulations in order to enable them to create a sound and 
viable technological base; [. . .].
www.ebook3000.com

5 PLACE AND PROPERTY
119
5  Place and property 
 
 Introduction 
 Discussion of basic goods often revolves around relationships with others and cer-
tain kinds of personal fulfilment. Law protects relationships and, by taking reasona-
bleness as its standard, allows personal fulfilment to take place without prescribing 
what form a fulfilled life should take. However, this seems to neglect the fact that, 
famously, ‘property is nine-tenths of the law’. The fabric of law seems to consist, in 
large measure, of the relationships and problems generated by property. This is partly 
for historical reasons concerning the identity of law-makers and those with access to 
the Courts; law was made by, and for, a ‘propertied’ class ( Thompson, 1975 ). 
 It also reflects the fact that ownership and property rights are not just one, among 
many, classes of rights, but among our most fundamental. The right to own or exchange 
property is rarely articulated as a human right because it is so frequently taken for granted 
as part of the constitutional rights of any citizen of a state ( Locke, 1960 : 327f;  Hobbes, 
1996 : 164). This too is for historical reasons. The emergence of the modern state coin-
cides with common land being parcelled or ‘enclosed’ into private property. It also coin-
cides with sovereignty over new lands where indigenous claims to sovereignty and prop-
erty were rejected as falling short of European understandings of ownership ( Tuck, 1999 ). 
 If the modern state has such a close relationship with private property, we take for 
granted that constitutions, if nothing else, must protect ownership and property  rights . 
But such rights can only be understood as fundamental because they meet basic human 
needs for place and property: to live somewhere, and to be recognised as having a claim 
to their belongings. Our legal relationship with property – its constitutional importance 
and its giving rise to rights – must relate to our valuing of it, rather than historical ac-
cident. Some basic ideas of property and ownership are discussed in relation to John 
Locke; some contemporary ideas concerning economic development are also considered. 
 The idea of ‘place’ also falls outside many discussions of the good. Those philoso-
phies taking their lead from Aristotle will certainly be sensitised to the needs of the 
situated individual who depends upon their social milieu for structures of material 
support (and indeed depends upon it for their identities and responsibilities as 
individuals and citizens) ( Taylor, 1992 ), but this picture is incomplete. Our relation-
ship with the world as a whole – our environment and the material resources of 
the world – has complex legal manifestations. The environment has been treated by 
law as property from which property rights flow. Property rights are, again, crucial 
to personhood, but they are insufficient to understand our reliance on, and obliga-
tions concerning, the natural world. Given that the environment, and the resources 
that it generates, are central to our physical well-being, these must be considered 
in their own terms, and we must, arguably, resist the temptation to treat the world 
purely as territory, i.e. property in the hands of an individual or state.  
5  Place and property 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
120
5a Property
John Locke (1632–1704) is a key contributor to early modern conceptions of law 
and his work on government remains influential in common law traditions. It is 
his approach to property that is our central concern here and it can be summa-
rised in a single assumption: because the natural can become property, property 
is natural. Locke sought to site the origins of legal and political legitimacy in the 
movement from a situation where there is no property and no legal rights, to one 
where individuals, and their property, are afforded legal protections. From a situa-
tion where the world was ‘common’ – open to anyone for appropriation and culti-
vation – individuals gained ownership by using our labour and work and thereby 
adding value to common natural resources. By gaining ownership through ‘mixing 
labour’ with the raw materials of the world, individuals could be rightly considered 
‘property owners’ and therefore deserving of protection through law (Locke, 1960: 
328). Individual labour, mixed with the resources of nature, is the essential basis of 
ownership. Ownership, therefore, is the most fundamental ‘natural right’, predating 
civil and political rights.
This assumes a fundamental equality between persons in so far as we are, from a 
‘natural perspective’, equally free to take possession of nature and establish owner-
ship, but there are also natural limits to individual ownership. Labour alone cannot 
provide us with much more than is necessary for survival and comfort:
The measure of property, nature has well set, by the extent of men’s labour, and conven-
iency of life: No man’s labour could subdue, or appropriate all: nor could his enjoyment 
consume more than a small part; so that it was impossible for any man, this way, to in-
trench upon the right of another, or acquire, to himself, a property, to the prejudice of his 
neighbour. (1960: 334, capitalisation removed)
Locke’s position is an appealing one to the extent that we do now take property 
rights as so fundamental that they are implicit, but rarely mentioned, in philosophi-
cal discussion of the good. Furthermore from this treatment of property rights as fun-
damental, a more substantial philosophy of state and government is possible: one 
dedicated to, but also limited by, the preservation of private property legitimately 
gained through work and labour. However, this view of rights arising from property 
has been justifiably criticised as ignoring inequalities of ownership stemming, in 
part, from the seizure of common land by already powerful landowners (Cole, 2001). 
Indeed, on a larger scale, it is the Lockean account of the origins of property and rights 
that was most frequently used to justify the seizure of colonial territory. The indig-
enous peoples of the New World did not cultivate land in a way that was recognised 
(or recognisable) to Europeans. Accordingly this ‘failure’ to use natural resources 
profitably meant the New World had the status of terra nullis – unowned, lawless, 
space – which was being civilised, rather than conquered (Coyle and Morrow, 2004). 
Moreover, treating the natural world purely as a basis of property has also (directly 
www.ebook3000.com

5 PLACE AND PROPERTY
121
and indirectly) led to a view of the natural world as ‘potentially-owned-material’, a 
view which has been challenged by environmentalists.
EXAMPLE
Status of Aliens Act 1914, s. 17
We can lose sight of the fact that whatever good the law may do for people, such benefits 
conferred by law are determined by jurisdiction: the power to make law within a particular, 
geographically confined, territory. For those who move to another state but do not adopt 
a new nationality, their rights are limited to a greater or lesser extent by specific laws 
governing their legal status and legal relationships. Section 17 of the Status of Aliens Act 
1914 (still in force) demonstrates that property may well be a basic good, but it is one 
closely related to place.
6HFWLRQ~&DSDFLW\RIDOLHQDVWRSURSHUW\
Real and personal property of every description may be taken, acquired, held and dis-
posed of by an alien in the same manner in all respects as by a [. . .] British subject; and 
a title to real and personal property of every description may be derived through, from or 
in succession to an alien in the same manner in all respects as through, from or in suc-
cession to a [. . .] British subject: Provided that this section shall not operate so as to – 
(1) confer any right on an alien to hold real property situate out of the United Kingdom; or 
(2) qualify an alien for any office or for any municipal, parliamentary, or other franchise; 
or (3) qualify an alien to be the owner of a British ship; or (4) entitle an alien to any right 
or privilege as a British subject, except such rights and privileges in respect of property 
as are hereby expressly given to him [. . .].
5b Environment
Environmental law is a challenging area of law because it seems to contradict two 
basic tenets of domestic and international law: that the natural world can be treated 
as a property and that the scope of legal regulation is always confined within juris-
dictions. The idea of the environment as property has its origins in a conception of 
humanity as having dominion over nature. Derived in part from Judaeo-Christian 
ideas, ‘dominion’ is the power, delegated from a sovereign, that a feudal lord has over 
a territory. A sovereign has unlimited power, but cedes some power to lords and bar-
ons over a sphere in which they hold power, power limited by the sovereign himself:
The origin of this notion is to be found in the feudal system of the middle ages, when 
lands were granted to vassals to ‘hold’ of the lord on condition of performing certain ser-
vices or paying sums of money. The theory implies, of course, that the King is in a sense 
the landlord as well as the ruler of the country, and is simply a survival from the times 
when a conquering chieftain did actually have the right to dispose of all the land as well 
as govern his dominions. (Hogg, 1908: 65)

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
122
Dominion of the Earth shares the same assumptions. We, like lords, have absolute 
power within our jurisdiction (the Earth) to rule as we see fit (conditional only on 
the will of God). On the Earth no authority higher than mankind exists, so domin-
ion authorises a rule that is unconditional.
On a dominion model of nature, nature was a common set of resources that 
could be made the possession of any individual who used their own labour to har-
vest or take ownership. Locke makes this point directly:
As much Land as a Man Tills, Plants, Improves, Cultivates and can use the product of, so 
much is his Property [. . .] God, when he gave the World in common to all Mankind, com-
manded Man also to labour, and the penury of his Condition required it of him. God and 
his Reason commanded him to subdue the Earth, i.e. improve it for the benefit of Life, and 
therein lay out something that was his own, his labour. (Locke, 1960: 332–3, italics removed)
This relationship between subjection, property and dominion means that shared en-
vironmental problems and concerns are difficult to manage. Individual ownership 
does not lead to a concern with the value of the whole (Coyle and Morrow, 2004). 
The objective of environmental law is therefore to reassert a harmony of interests 
in the maintenance of natural resources, which may, or may not, be articulated 
through the language of rights. More simply, it asks us to exchange the idea of do-
minion for that of stewardship: the duty to maintain a resource over which we have 
temporary control.
If environmental law involves rejecting a view of the Earth as property, it also has 
to be multi-jurisdictional. The environment cannot be easily conceptualised within 
law’s territorial understanding of space (see Chapter 7). Much contemporary think-
ing on the philosophy of environmentalism is informed by Hannah Arendt’s work 
in The Human Condition (1998). The negative implication of Arendt’s work is that 
we, as a consequence of the pervasive influence of science, still inhabit a mind-set 
informed by notions of dominion and domination, and we have not yet fully ac-
cepted a stewardship view of the environment. The positive implication is that we 
share a human condition – i.e. we share the Earth, and the Earth limits our pos-
sibilities as humans – and this is the foundation of a whole philosophy of life and 
politics premised not on domination but on a shared relationship with the Earth.
Written in 1950, when use of nuclear power was in its infancy, Arendt saw in nu-
clear experimentation a novel relationship with the Earth (Arendt, 1998). Because 
nuclear experiments and their consequences cannot be contained within a laboratory, 
the entire Earth has become the site of an open-ended experiment. This dangerous state 
of affairs is the consequence of giving science untrammelled power and authority in 
our societies. Science, the instrument of human endeavour, has become an end in itself.
If it should turn out to be true that knowledge (in the modern sense of know-how) and 
thought have parted company for good, then we would indeed become the helpless slaves, 
not so much of our machines as of our know-how, thoughtless creatures at the mercy of 
every gadget which is technically possible. (1998: 3)
www.ebook3000.com

5 PLACE AND PROPERTY
123
Science has come to dictate our goals, namely greater and greater ‘efficiency’, 
rather than an instrument of our goals. When we treat the Earth as something that 
can be experimented upon without limits, it is symptomatic of the fact that the 
human condition itself has changed: science now dominates humanity’s purposive 
activity, not the human good.
More positively, we as humans are all co-dependent upon the Earth and process-
ing its materials. This co-dependence, and the temporal and material conditions 
that this places upon us – i.e. the fact that we cannot change the past nor can we 
draw upon materials beyond the Earth – entails that we all share a condition: com-
mon boundaries, and common limits to what is possible. In terms of the environ-
ment and society more generally, this condition is our common dependence upon 
labour (gaining control of natural materials), work (processing of natural materials) 
and action (social and political decisions concerning labour and work). This does 
not translate directly into a political and legal position in the sense of an environ-
mental politics. Rather, this is a more fundamental call to see politics as based in a 
shared condition, and a rethinking of politics as more than the pursuit of efficiency 
in the management of human affairs. Politics should be a process of looking for new 
beginnings and new possibilities on a global scale. In short, the world is materially 
inter-related not in a metaphysical or physical sense, but because we have the power 
to damage the environment outside our own state, perhaps irreversibly.
EXAMPLE
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (1992) 
Article 3
The UN defends a principle of sustainable development in environmental law, namely that 
law should seek to integrate economic growth and minimal impact on the environment. It 
also defends the ‘precautionary principle’ which encourages caution and constraint, even 
in the absence of strong scientific evidence of harm or risk. Science can never make us 
certain – we can never know what we will know in the future – accordingly, precaution 
and international cooperation are the best policies.
The Parties should take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent or minimize the 
causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse effects. Where there are threats of seri-
ous or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason 
for postponing such measures, taking into account that policies and measures to deal 
with climate change should be cost-effective so as to ensure global benefits at the low-
est possible cost. To achieve this, such policies and measures should take into account 
different socio-economic contexts, be comprehensive, cover all relevant sources, sinks 
and reservoirs of greenhouse gases and adaptation, and comprise all economic sectors. 
Efforts to address climate change may be carried out cooperatively by interested Parties.

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
124
5c Capability
Development theory, at the intersection of politics, economics and law, has become 
an important feature of inter-governmental activity. The underlying assumption is 
that it is good for the international community to aid economic and social develop-
ment in less developed parts of the world and that there should be legal structures 
supporting this. Whether this is instrumental (the economic enhancement of less 
developed states as a means to regional stability), or an intrinsic good (obligatory 
given its relationship with human flourishing), international development has 
powerful ideological force in international relations and is driven by both states and 
non-governmental organisations.
Organisations such as the World Bank and International Monetary Fund have 
powers, granted to them by the international community, to administer grants and 
loans to states in order to support economic growth conditional on internal eco-
nomic and political restructuring. They work on the – economic and philosophical – 
assumptions that global economic development is both a question of increasing 
wealth and increasing capabilities (Twining, 2009: 219–24). Increasing material 
wealth is one way of increasing the good within a state and ultimately the good of 
its citizens. However, material wealth is not a sufficient condition of sustaining good 
lives for people. It is necessary to ensure that ‘capability’ is built within countries to 
ensure that wealth creation is sustainable. It is also important that individuals are 
given the resources – the education, the opportunities and the freedom – to deter-
mine their own lives and pursue their own conceptions of what a good life consists 
of. Accordingly, a ‘capabilities approach’ is now considered to be the guiding prin-
ciple of UN organs, arguing that individual capacities and capabilities are at least as 
important as general wealth creation within a state (Twining, 2009: 221–2).
This capabilities approach is based on the work of Amartya Sen, who developed a 
theory of international economics built on Rawls’ theory of justice (Sen, 1999). The 
capabilities approach argues that material wealth is an incomplete goal, and that 
giving people the capability – through education and infrastructure – to pursue their 
own goals and individual development should be the underpinning of international 
economics. ‘Instead of asking about people’s satisfactions, or how much in the way of 
resources they are able to command, we ask, instead, about what they are actually able 
to do or to be’ (Nussbaum, 2000: 12). This approach can be characterised as ‘liberal’ 
in so far as the goods of self-realisation and empowerment are treated as limits on the 
power of the state. The capabilities approach is also more fulsome in its conception 
of the good than often found in liberalism, in that it includes an (Aristotelian) view 
of the importance of flourishing, and not simply preference fulfilment and equality 
of opportunity. Ultimately, liberal positions tend to be concerned with what is right 
rather than what is good (see Chapter 4), but in capabilities approaches we see some 
attempt to use both of these ideas to drive the direction of the global ‘community’.
www.ebook3000.com

125
QUESTIONS
EXAMPLE
~'HFODUDWLRQ RQ WKH 5LJKW WR 'HYHORSPHQW 8QLWHG 1DWLRQV *HQHUDO
Assembly Resolution 41/28 (1986)
Consolidating ideas already found in international treaties, the UN’s Declaration on the 
Right to Development grounds a set of state of responsibilities in both individual needs 
and capabilities (Art. 1(1)) and the needs and rights of peoples (Art. 1(2)).
$UWLFOH
States have the duty to co-operate with each other in ensuring development and eliminat-
ing obstacles to development. States should realize their rights and fulfil their obligations 
in such a manner as to promote a new international economic order based on sovereign 
equality, interdependence, mutual interest and co-operation among all States, as well as 
to encourage the observance and realization of human rights.
Section 1
●Is goodness a characteristic of natural processes? Could something be evaluated as 
good without any reference to humans?
●Can a person lead a desirable life without wealth, or friendship or knowledge? On what 
basis – subjective or objective – could this be decided?
●Can legal rights and duties be decided on the basis of a ‘thin’ – i.e. flexible – concept 
such as the good? Can moral rights and duties be decided on the basis of a thin notion 
such as the good? Why might the answer to the two be different?
Section 2
●Is what is ‘valuable’ ultimately monistic, i.e. reducible to a single value? Or are values 
pluralistic, i.e. there are many values?
●Does Plato give a plausible account of human psychology? Is a good psychological state 
the precondition of acting morally?
●Does there have to be a harmony between the individual and their state – a harmony of 
interests, values and expectations – for that individual to be happy?
Section 3
●Is nature something that is a source of law, or antagonistic to law?
●Why does the natural law school associate values with some facts (e.g. rationality in 
humans) but not others (e.g. the survival of the fittest in nature)?
●Is human reasoning a good guide to what is treated as reasonable in law?
Questions

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
Section 4
●Classical utilitarianism suggests that morality can become a science on the model of 
the ‘hard sciences’. Is this desirable? Does utilitarianism offer a plausible account of 
how we decide how to act?
●Should law-makers always to achieve the greatest happiness for the greatest number? 
Should judges?
●Does utilitarianism provide justification for granting human rights? Would act and rule 
utilitarianism differ in their relationship with rights?
Section 5
●What kind of relationship do we have with the Earth? Does this depend upon whether 
or not it was created? Does this depend upon current scientific knowledge? How might 
such knowledge be limited?
●Environmentalism suggests that science sometimes offers an impoverished view of the world 
and of our responsibilities: we are more concerned with power and rights than with harmony 
and duties. Is this a fair account of the impact of science on our thinking about values?
●Can we reconcile property rights and duties to future generations?
●Does a ‘capabilities approach’ provide a useful combination of intrinsic and instrumen-
tal ideas of the good?
&RQFHSWVDQGPHWKRGV9DOXHV
Value and values
The language of ‘values’, ‘what we value’ and ‘value judgments’ are common to dis-
cussion in law, philosophy and beyond. Philosophy has a long tradition of analys-
ing and clarifying our discussion of values in the form of political, ethical and legal 
philosophy. General study of values is termed ‘axiology’:
Axiology can be thought of as primarily concerned with classifying what things are good, 
and how good they are. For instance, a traditional question of axiology concerns whether 
the objects of value are subjective psychological states, or objective states of the world. 
(Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, 2011)
Entertaining the possibility that value can be found, ‘objective states of the world’ 
axiology does not presume a division between facts and values but explores the na-
ture of value and the preconditions of intelligible discussion of value.
The language of value is one where, characteristically, philosophical discussion can 
appear to stray far from common language and discussion. Nonetheless, our intuitions 
126
www.ebook3000.com

127
CONCEPTS AND METHODS: VALUES
concerning value remain good starting-points. It should be immediately intelligible 
that there are things that we value: health, friendship, wealth etc. This sometimes does, 
and sometimes does not, equate with what we consider to be values. Values are more 
often articulated as positive generalisations (everyone is entitled to wealth), and some-
times negative generalisations (no-one should be forced into intolerable situations).
In making such generalisations it is important to distinguish exchange value (i.e. 
the market price of something) from the intrinsic worth of something (see Moore, 
1959: 173). We can also distinguish exchange value from labour value, namely the 
value of the work that goes into a commodity or service (see Marx, Chapter 5). We 
should also distinguish needs from preferences (see Twining, 2009). A sub-division 
of ‘interests’ and ‘preferences’ is useful for this purpose. Humans’ basic interests (e.g. 
survival) are relatively stable and predictable; human preferences vary considerably 
between and within cultures. ‘Value as preference’ could be reducible to evaluation
(we, individually or socially, decide on the value of everything). ‘Value as preference’ 
can be described as a ‘cognitivist’ position: value is nothing more, or less, than the 
evaluation that takes place in our minds. Conversely, needs and interests are more 
likely to be mind-independent: valuable regardless of our subjective evaluations and 
therefore ‘non-cognitivist’ (see Baggini and Fosl, 2007: 112–13).
 
Analysing values
The most important approach to questions concerning what humans are, and what they 
should do, is to observe the division between facts and values. While ‘what humans are’ 
is related to ‘what humans should do’, they are nonetheless distinguishable. Be aware, 
and draw distinctions, where facts are easily blurred with values. For example, where 
something is said to be a ‘natural’ human instinct, behaviour or tendency this does 
not necessarily entail anything about what humans should do. Equally, exercise caution 
where values are said to be ‘natural’. Many things have been said to have been natural 
(e.g. slavery) which are clearly not. Other things look quite natural (e.g. taking care of 
children), but may well vary radically from culture to culture. Also, exercise caution 
when presented with arguments concerning ‘human nature’. Human nature can be used 
to generate opposing, even contradictory characterisations: greedy and benign, selfish 
and selfless, perfect and imperfect. Appeal to human nature should generally be avoided; 
common human traits, behaviours, dispositions and instincts are generally clearer.
There are powerful currents of thought, generally categorised as ‘virtue ethics’, 
where fact, value and human nature meet. This position, associated with Aristotle, 
suggests that ethics and morality are largely reducible to the cultivation of virtue 
(the disposition to do good or healthy actions) and avoidance of vices (the disposi-
tion to engage in bad or unhealthy actions). This does, of course, generate important 
questions about what virtues, in general, people should cultivate; it also demands 
clarity on what kind of social relationships are conducive to virtue (Moore, 1959: 
172–3). Virtue ethics can therefore be associated with more familiar discussions of 

CHAPTER 3 GOOD
128
rights and duties, but it can also be allied with certain forms of scepticism about 
moral universality. While this does not seem to encompass all that we mean by eth-
ics and morality, it certainly gets to the heart of the combination at the heart of the 
concept ‘human’: facts (what we are) and values (what we should be).
 
Practical reasoning
The subjective processes of thinking and judging, while ‘private’, can be evaluated by 
the standard of whether they are reasonable. Rational thinking may be characterised 
as relating ends and means in a sensible way (e.g. staying in bed is not a rational 
means to achieving success), or it may involve having a ‘rational’ view on what is 
good for yourself or for others (it is not rational to eat mud or encourage others 
to do so). Where there is a failure to match ends to means, or see one’s own basic 
interests clearly, this can be characterised as unreasonable.
This has wider significance for law and morality. The ends of a legal system (social sta-
bility, order, fairness) are different from the means to those ends (laws and procedures). 
It is generally accepted – in international law and beyond – that it is unreasonable to use 
others purely as a means to one’s own ends (i.e. slaves of one kind or another). This is 
one of the main ends of human rights law: this asserts that everyone is entitled to certain 
levels of freedom and respect. There are, however, some grey areas here, from the person 
who works hard but is taxed heavily (through taxation they become a means to general 
social ends) to those working in the sex industry whose bodies become commodities.
The work of Finnis encourages us to think carefully about the relationship between 
practical reasoning and law in such contexts. Practical reasoning is deliberation about 
action (as opposed to theoretical, speculative or pure reason). Deciding how to act is 
different from purely theoretical reasoning. We are not speculating about the world 
or deducing propositions from first principles, but deciding what we should do as 
rational individuals with a set of complex interests. When we deliberate about what to 
do we draw together a mixture of beliefs – about the world, about what is possible for 
us, what is desirable for us, how we can justify our actions to ourselves and others – 
and derive from these beliefs judgments about what we should do. This generates 
hypothetical imperatives or descriptive norms: ‘having to do x to achieve y’. It also 
encompasses some categorical imperatives and prescriptive norms: ‘I have obligations 
regardless of my preferences.’ Reasons for action may not have a strict ‘logic’ but beliefs 
can be assessed as justified or unjustified, and some means can be judged better than 
other means as reasonable for the chosen ends (Raz (ed.), 1978: 33–45).
However, good practical reasoning must involve more than justifying our beliefs 
and fitting our means to our ends. It has to involve choices between ends: our objec-
tives or designs for life. Accordingly, those engaged in practical reasoning – whether 
private individuals or judges – may have, ultimately, to make an assessment of basic 
goods in Finnis’ terms (2011: 100–26). That is, determine what it is that is self-
evidently or unassailably good to achieve.
www.ebook3000.com

129
FURTHER READING
Categorical and hypothetical imperatives
This is an old philosophical categorisation investigated most fully by Kant (see 
Chapter 4). Imperatives are things that should be done. Hypothetical imperatives 
are those things that should be done as a means to ends. Categorical imperatives 
are those things that must be done, regardless of the consequences they produce or 
the cost for the person doing them. Kant sought to demonstrate that truly moral 
actions are those pursuing categorical, not hypothetical, imperatives (Kant, 1948). 
His position makes sense of at least some of our intuitions about morality, not least 
the idea that we have duties and that these make demands upon us which do not 
always lead to pleasurable outcomes.
Identifying categorical imperatives is not easy for the same reasons it is difficult 
to identify necessary truths. To make a certain class of acts obligatory or necessary 
in all possible circumstances is likely to run up against the complexity of the world 
and yield demands for exceptions. Note that governments and legal systems rarely 
function on the basis of categorical imperatives, rather hypothetical ones about the 
welfare of the majority of people. Categorical statements of value more generally are 
rarely found within legal reasoning, however, this is sometimes a feature of human 
rights discussions (see Chapter 5).
Further reading
For broad philosophical accounts of the good, Nussbaum’s (1986) work combines analy-
sis of both Plato and Aristotle. G.E. Moore’s Principia Ethica (1959) is central to modern, 
analytical, approaches to the use (and misuse) of the good in philosophy. Iris Murdoch’s 
Sovereignty of the Good (1970) is rather more complicated, and presumes knowledge of 
Kant on the part of the reader, but is still a powerful defence of the good as ‘axiomatic’ in 
our thinking. Among the voluminous literature on natural law Finnis (2011) and Fuller (1969) 
are both crucial. Simmonds’ (2007) work has a more Platonic slant; D’Entreves (1957) is 
more Thomist (i.e. informed by Aquinas). Smart and Williams (1973) is not only a good intro-
duction to utilitarianism but also a good example of philosophical debate in practice. Coyle 
and Morrow provide a valuable philosophical introduction to environmental law. Nussbaum 
(2000) and Sen (1999) provide different renderings of the capabilities approach.
Visit www.mylawchamber.co.uk/riley to access tools 
to help you develop and test your knowledge of legal 
philosophy including Podcasts on leading thinkers and 
theories, discussion questions, diagrams showing 
interrelations between concepts, and weblinks

130
Right
4
The good provides an appealing interpretive perspective on law. Law has a number 
of ends – those ends associated with justice such as the common good, judgment, 
desert and others – and it aims to achieve these ends by the best means that it can: 
through the use of general and public rules, and through maintaining the basic 
goods of the individual. Through this interpretive lens we see law as making a dis-
tinctive contribution to social life and as something valuable in itself. However, this 
picture of law is a partial one. While it offers us a way to understand how law, as part 
of the governance of social affairs, can be assessed or justified, it does not capture two 
distinctive aspects of what we see at work within legal systems and legal institutions.
First, while legislators may see their law-making actions in terms of aspiring to 
the common good, legal officials (judges and lawyers) have a much closer relation-
ship with the means that are distinctive to law: adjudication, impartiality and the 
enforcement of rules. These means are, in legal practice, separable from any ends 
they may serve; lawyers and judges construe their professional responsibilities in 
terms of upholding those means (i.e. ‘professional integrity’) rather than explicitly 
serving more substantial social or moral ends. Put simply, legal officials seek the 
right answer to legal questions.
Second, to the extent that the functioning of law serves the basic goods of in-
dividuals, this is more often discovered in the granting and protecting of rights. 
While basic goods may make unassailable moral claims on us as individuals and 
as a society, law generates and preserves a complex system of rights which grant 
both more, and less, than basic goods demand. They grant more because law gives 
rise to a complex system of rights: civil, political, social, contractual, constitutional, 
economic, familial, welfare and other rights. They grant less because such rights are 
conditional on the political and economic conditions within which law is created 
and are not, conversely, unassailable moral demands which hold unquestionably 
and unconditionally.
Introduction
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION
131
This does not lead to the conclusion that goodness and rightness are wholly 
incompatible ways of approaching law. If it is good for humans to live in groups, it 
is therefore right that social institutions should be preserved through the rule of law. 
Nonetheless, ‘good’ is used widely to denote social and personal ideals, while ‘right’ 
seems far closer to the privileges and protections at work within law.
These two features of the ‘internal perspective’ on law (i.e. the perspective of 
those working within and for a legal system) point towards two important aspects 
of law that are contained within the language of ‘right’. Legal practitioners strive 
to find the right answer to legal problems, and that is the right legal answer, not 
necessarily a right answer in the sense of morally or socially right. Second, law is 
characterised by rights. The language of rights (rather than goods) seems appropriate 
for discussing the kinds of claims that legal practitioners routinely deal with. These 
two ideas – the right legal answer and law’s relationship with rights – are the focus 
of this chapter. The remainder of this introduction outlines these two ideas.
What is it to find the right answer to a legal question? If we consider a Court case 
in a common law jurisdiction, finding an answer to a legal question is the respon-
sibility of a judge (or in the case of criminal responsibility, a jury) and the right 
answer is a match between general rules (usually legislation) and a specific case at 
hand. This is not always simple. A Court may be aware of a number of rules which 
seem to apply with equal force, and a jury may have to make a judgment beyond 
reasonable doubt in circumstances where the boundaries between doubt and cer-
tainty have been blurred. Nonetheless, the right answer can emerge in these cases: 
we would say ‘the evidence is strong and no other decision is possible’ or ‘over time 
it has become clear that this particular decision was the right one for the parties and 
for society as a whole’.
These are slightly different kinds of ‘rightness’. On the one hand, we are saying 
that the decision follows logically from the rules and the evidence. On the other 
hand, we are saying that this was the right decision from a wider social, policy or 
historical perspective. It might be tempting to say that the second of these kinds 
of rightness is actually closer to the realisation of the good, that is, that the law is 
here making a better contribution to the common good. However, decisions that 
are good ‘from a wider social or policy perspective’ still have to be right answers for 
the parties whose case is being decided; and they have to be the right answer in the 
sense of emerging from the legal principles contained within a legal system. Legal 
decisions, even when serving the good, must first pass the threshold of being right 
in the specific circumstances of a dispute.
Drawing these species of ‘right answer’ together – the logically right and the 
circumstantially right – we can begin to treat ‘legally right answers’ as possessing a 
distinctive coherence or correspondence. To make the right logical decision is to draw a 
conclusion that coheres with (is drawn or derived from) its premises; in parallel, the 
right legal decision is the one that moves coherently from general rules, to specific 

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
132
facts, to a judgment. To be circumstantially right is to make a judgment on the 
basis of all relevant factors: the decision must  correspond to relevant facts and legal 
categories. In sum, coherence associates ‘the right answer to a legal question’ with 
logical rigour, correspondence denotes the idea that the right legal answer must be 
one which corresponds to a pre-existing set of facts. 
 The language of  rights is one of the most important contributions that law makes 
to our lives. When we claim that we have the right to something – from the trivial 
(the right to park here) to the profound (to be free from inhuman treatment) – we 
are making claims that have power and potency because they are supported by, and 
enforceable with, laws. Rights are immediately intelligible from a perspective exter-
nal to legal institutions. Everyone should feel empowered to claim their rights, i.e. 
what is rightfully theirs or their right to certain basic forms of treatment. 
 In fact, while widespread, such claims are context-dependent and can be legally 
incorrect. We may not, for example, inhabit a legal system that protects our right 
to self-expression, or we may articulate our aspirations for social and economic 
justice in terms of rights, but find that no enforceable legal rules correlate with 
our aspirations. We often articulate (social, political and moral) claims in the lan-
guage of rights, but this can mismatch the legal rights that are enforceable in law. 
Therefore, one of the most important responsibilities for analytical legal philosophy 
(see below and  Chapter  5 ) is to distinguish between different kinds of legal rights, 
in order to prevent the language of rights becoming an undifferentiated mass of 
radically different rules and powers including those ‘rights claims’ which have no 
enforceable legal basis. It is also a responsibility of ‘normative’ legal philosophy (see 
 Chapter   6 ) to consider what rights law should grant to people. This is a much more 
wide-ranging task drawing upon moral and political philosophy. 
 This chapter looks first at ‘rightness’ in law, moving from general analytical 
distinctions to more substantial questions of how philosophy, particularly politi-
cal philosophy, underpins our ideas of what it is for there to be rightness in law. 
It then turns to rights, looking at ways to differentiate rights and looking at the 
 philosophical challenges presented by ‘human rights’.  
1  Right 
 
 Introduction 
 The idea that the right is merely a variation on the theme of the good is partly per-
suasive. If a decision is the right one it must be good for someone. If something is 
right for us it must be good for us. However, the converse does not hold. What is 
good for us may not be right. A good outcome might be achieved at someone else’s 
expense. An increase in overall happiness could be at the expense of  wronging a mi-
nority. In sum, a good decision may be good in an instrumental sense (i.e. useful) 
1  Right
www.ebook3000.com

1 RIGHT
133
but not right in a more fundamental sense that it is justifiable. Thus the good and 
the right are closely related notions, but sufficiently different to generate different 
conclusions about values and obligations.
There is an argument, common to a range of theorists, that both the right and 
the good are united in the justification of freedom or liberty. This emphasis on the 
defence and expansion of liberty is found in Hegel (below) and is also defended 
by Hobbes:
It is not against reason that a man doth all he can to preserve his own body and limbs, 
both from death and pain. And that which is not against reason, men call RIGHT, or 
jus, or blameless liberty of using our own natural power and ability. (quoted in Tuck, 
1999: 132)
This ‘natural right’ to not have our natural liberties curtailed without justification 
will recur within discussion of the right, and is, for those theorists who prioritise the 
right, the most important good defended by law (Sadurski, 1988). Law can be said 
to provide and defend a number of good things, but the right legal answer is always 
one which corresponds with fundamental liberties and freedoms.
It may also be the case that appeal to the right can overcome some of the prac-
tical and philosophical problems related to philosophies of the good. If the goal 
of human activity, including law, is the pursuit of the good, this still requires us 
to identify a social structure or legislative programme which prioritises goods and 
allows individuals to pursue their own good. In order for this not to become a 
prescriptive and potentially oppressive project, this must be limited in its applica-
tion. One way to do this is to argue that the state must allow individuals to pursue 
their own conception of the good and ensure that the conditions of individual basic 
goods and the common good are protected. Prioritising the right – right legal an-
swers, and rights – ensures that individual freedom is protected and collective goals 
can be pursued. Different accounts of this reconciliation of the good and the right 
are offered by Hegel and Mill (below).
1a Right and truth
The word ‘right’ in English is both a noun (‘a right’) and an adjective (‘to be right’). 
One way of keeping these ideas separate is to concentrate on their antonym. Right 
as an adjective has its opposite in wrong. Right as a noun has various opposites 
among the most important of which is duty. The Oxford English Dictionary has the 
noun right denoting ‘that which is consonant with justice, goodness, or reason; that 
which is morally or socially correct’. More simply, it describes right as a synonym of 
‘justice’. The adjectival form has ‘right’ denoting the property of ‘agreeing with some 
standard or principle; correct, proper’ or ‘rightful, legitimate, lawful’. This connec-
tion between right, law and justice is even clearer in Latin where ius is translatable 
as either law or right, and in other European languages where the equivalent of the 

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
134
English ‘right’ – Recht in German, droit in French – encompasses everything that we 
mean by ‘right’ and by ‘law’. Putting these definitions together, it can be said that the 
English word ‘right’, like its European synonyms, is intimately related to justice, and 
to law, and that there is some overlap between noun and adjective.
The noun and the adjective overlap around the ideas of ‘agreement’ and ‘correct-
ness’. Together these words point towards the importance of correspondence and 
coherence in our understanding of ‘right’: to be in agreement with something is to 
cohere with it; to be correct is to correspond with a standard. Why are ‘correspond-
ence’ and ‘coherence’ related to law? The ‘rightness of law’ lies in its capacity to give 
us certainty, and in the authority with which law and legal decisions are invested. 
Rightness – understood as certainty, authority or coherence – has a relationship 
with logic and necessity in a way that goodness does not. A ‘right answer’ is one that 
is not only desirable, but one that has the force of a truth. At this point the nature 
of ‘rightness’ draws us into ideas of certainty and truth.
There are two ways of construing ‘truth’, both of which have a relationship with 
rightness and with law. First, a right answer in law may share something with a right 
answer in mathematics: it has a force that rational persons cannot reject. Admittedly, 
any analogy between mathematics and law will be strained. Mathematics deals with 
ideal objects, law deals with the – less than ideal – social world. However, it may be 
that the conception of truth which we find in mathematics has at least one impor-
tant similarity with that we find in law. Not all mathematics exhibits correspond-
ence with the world as we perceive it; mathematics does not need correspondence
with anything in the perceptible world to be true, it requires coherence. Mathematical 
proof is internal agreement between different mathematical assumptions; it does 
not need to be verified by our senses. On this basis we can analyse the idea of ‘right-
ness’ in law at a fundamental epistemological level (i.e. concerning the foundations 
of knowledge). The idea of the right is not about corresponding to a truth or set 
of facts outside law, it is about finding what is coherent within the system itself. As 
such ‘legal rightness’ is specific to law; a correct legal decision has its own distinctive 
claim to truth.
In distinction to this coherence account of truth, we could construe truth on the 
model of the empirical sciences, saying any claim that is made, and has the possibil-
ity of being true or false, must have a correspondence with a state of affairs in the 
world. The inner coherence of a system is irrelevant unless it has some link with a 
factual state of affairs in the world. On that basis, legal reasoning must correspond 
with a set of facts – rules, evidence, precedent – to be correct, and rightness is in that 
sense correspondence. Precisely what law is required to correspond to is contested: it 
may be previous legal decisions, rational principles, the underlying commitments 
of a community or a correspondence between law and human need. In each case, 
however, a right legal answer has force and necessity because it is in harmony with 
an external standard of truth.
www.ebook3000.com

1 RIGHT
135
1b Right answers
When we use ‘right’ to describe a correct answer or moral obligation, we are describ-
ing the special force of the answer or obligation. Understanding how use of ‘right’ is a 
distinctive way of describing something, particularly in the context of law, requires us 
to consider force and the related idea of necessity. For something to be right requires 
more than it benefit someone, it must have a force that is derived from something other 
than fleeting goals and needs. Put in sharper terms, the right, unlike the good, deals in 
what is necessary, rather than what is instrumentally useful or desirable. The nature of 
this necessity is difficult to capture. Partly it is logical necessity: some conclusions are in-
escapable if you accept a line of argumentation. Partly it is factual necessity: decisions and 
judgments must conform to the facts of reality. Unlike good things that we aspire to or 
desire, rightness is conformity with a pre-existing legal or factual standard of correctness.
Logical necessity concerns being compelled to accept the conclusion of a line 
of argumentation. Logic itself concerns the structure of argument and specifically 
the structure of deduction: the derivation of conclusions from premises (parts of 
or steps in an argument) in a structurally acceptable way. A common syllogism (a 
short logical argument), and a structurally defensible one, runs: ‘Socrates is human, 
all humans are mortal, therefore Socrates is mortal.’ The conclusion – the part after 
‘therefore’ – is validly derived from the premises, indeed it is already contained in the 
premises. A rational person accepting the premises must – is forced to – accept the 
conclusion. Note that logic concerns structure, and an argument can be structurally 
valid without necessarily being sound (i.e. true). The following argument, having the 
EXAMPLE
Šilth v Slovenia ECHR (Application number 71463/01) 2009
The applicant brought a case to the ECHR claiming that they had been denied a fair 
trial. The Court here (as it has elsewhere) refuses to decide on the merits of particular 
cases (i.e. who should have won given the facts) and stresses instead its commitment 
to find general principles for fair trials. It thereby ensures certainty for the Parties to the 
Convention, and ensures coherence in its jurisprudence.
The Court will be forced to carry out complex and questionable assessments on a case-
by-case basis that will be difficult to dissociate from the merits of the case. The impact 
this is likely to have on ‘legal certainty’ (which the Court has rightly referred to) is, I would 
venture, both obvious and harmful. [. . .] For these reasons, we are in favour of following 
the case-law set by the decision in the Moldovan case, which appears to us to be more 
faithful to the principles governing the liability of States for acts or omissions occurring 
before the entry into force of the Convention, to ensure greater coherence in the Court’s 
case-law and to be more compatible with the important principle of legal certainty.

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
136
same form as the Socrates argument, is valid but not sound: ‘The Queen is human, 
all humans are invertebrates, therefore the Queen is an invertebrate.’ That argument 
is valid – it is a structurally valid deduction of a conclusion from its premises – but 
the conclusion is false. A sound argument is both structurally defensible and has 
true premises. Ultimately, we should accept the logical force of an argument if we 
accept the premises, and the conclusion is validly derived from those premises.
Legal arguments are not always this simple. We have first to ask whether we are sure 
the premises are true. In a legal context this encompasses questions about whether evi-
dence is reliable, and whether the right rules are being applied to the case. Moreover, 
we have to be sure that a conclusion really does follow from its premises. Has a sound 
legal judgment been deduced from a combination of general rules, evidence and facts?
Consider the following description of a legal process. A witness sees a crime and picks 
the defendant out of a line-up; on questioning, the defendant has no alibi; the jury 
concludes the defendant is guilty. Even this simple legal question has contested prem-
ises and a potentially contested conclusion. Was the witness reliable? Are there other 
reasons why the defendant has no alibi? Can guilt follow from the testimony of a single 
witness? Such questions about facts and conclusions make legal reasoning much more 
complex than the use of simple logical syllogisms. Nonetheless, the goal of legal judg-
ment remains a sound conclusion: i.e. a factually and structurally correct conclusion.
The alternative idea, that rightness is conformity with facts rather than logically 
binding, represents a different understanding of truth. If to be right requires that our 
statements and our actions conform to reality, to how things really are, we are not 
saying ‘right equals logical’ we are saying ‘right equals true’. This is related to the ‘cor-
respondence theory’ of truth, i.e. that theory of knowledge where, for our statements 
to be true, they must correspond to a state of affairs in the world. As a theory of truth 
this is problematic. For example, consider statements about long dead or historical 
figures; are they necessarily false because they do not correspond with reality as it 
is now? But as a way of specifying the function of ‘right’ – i.e. has a correspondence 
with, or is grounded in, reality – this seems like a strong approach capturing, along 
with logical necessity, where rightness diverges from goodness.
EXAMPLE
Chester v Afshar [2004] UKHL 41
We demand clear answers from law, but it also has to confront uncertainty and unpredict-
ability. Here a doctor is held responsible for not mentioning a small (one to two per cent) risk 
routine back surgery (a procedure of which he was an expert) could have serious and debilitat-
ing side effects, side effects that Miss Chester suffered after the surgery. If legal judgment de-
pends on probability and ‘counter-factual’ arguments about what might have happened, can 
it ever be said to correspond to reality, or is a right legal answer – at best – a coherent one?
➨
www.ebook3000.com

1 RIGHT
137
1c Right as justice
The noun ‘right’ (as in ‘human rights’) is in some languages associated with law and 
justice as a whole.
The usual definition of a legal right […] more or less consciously presupposes that law 
and right are two different phenomena which are not to be subsumed under a common 
general term. The English language countenances this dualism by the very fact that it has 
two entirely different words: ‘law’ and ‘right’ […]. (Kelsen, 2006: 78)
A strict separation between the meanings of ‘law’, ‘right’ and ‘justice’ is denied by 
Kelsen and others. But the idea that ‘right’ is somehow related to justice seems too 
grand a claim. While the good seems to lend itself to substantial notions of social and 
individual well-being, rights, while important, are a contribution to justice but not 
in any obvious way the ‘essence’ of justice. However, some theorists have made rights 
central to their understanding of law and the state. Among others, Hegel claims the 
development of a notion of ‘right’ and its diffusion into law and politics represents 
a considerable development in the structure of human thinking. The basis for such a 
claim will be considered below, but we can partially distil this into the notion of uni-
versality. If something is logically necessary or logically binding it is not just right here 
and now, but potentially everywhere at all times. The good may be local and contin-
gent, but basic (constitutional or human) rights have to be universal and necessary.
Thus, one way in which universality, necessity and justice meet is in defence of 
basic liberties for individuals. The reason being that, as already considered, appeal 
to the good may prove oppressive when we claim knowledge of the objectively good 
for others. Conversely, if we make minimal but binding claims about what is owed 
to every individual (universally) then we are claiming something is right in the 
sense of coherent with, or corresponding to, our other commitments. Consequently, 
basic liberties, either on their own, or treated as the entire basis of a political and 
legal project (see Dworkin, 1998), have been defended in terms of what is right, i.e. 
what is logically consistent with our other commitments.
It is now, I think, generally accepted that the ‘but for’ test does not provide a compre-
hensive or exclusive test of causation in the law of tort. Sometimes, if rarely, it yields 
too restrictive an answer [. . .]. More often, applied simply and mechanically, it gives too 
expansive an answer: ‘But for your negligent misdelivery of my luggage, I should not have 
had to defer my passage to New York and embark on SS Titanic.’ But, in the ordinary 
run of cases, satisfying the ‘but for’ test is a necessary if not a sufficient condition of 
establishing causation. Here, in my opinion, it is not satisfied. Miss Chester has not 
established that but for the failure to warn she would not have undergone surgery. She 
has shown that but for the failure to warn she would not have consented to surgery on 
Monday 21 November 1994. But the timing of the operation is irrelevant to the injury she 
suffered, for which she claims to be compensated. That injury would have been as liable 
to occur whenever the surgery was performed and whoever performed it.

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
138
2  Right as correspondence 
 
 Introduction 
 The idea of truth was first considered in  Chapter  1 , where it was suggested that both 
law and philosophy had crucial, but complicated, relationships with truth. Here we 
consider the possibility – highlighted by the concept of right – that law has its own 
relationship with truth. First through the idea of correspondence, then through the 
idea of coherence. 
 The relationship between truth and correspondence is this: that any claim we 
make, or anything we claim to know as true, must correspond to reality. Sometimes 
put in terms of ‘justified true belief’, for our ideas to count as knowledge they must 
be justified by corresponding to a real state of affairs ( Dawson, 1981 ). This is an ap-
pealing account of truth because it makes sense of the basic intuition that only by 
making our (internal) ideas correspond with (external) reality can we say anything 
true, meaningful or justified. This basic commitment to truth-as-correspondence is 
found throughout philosophical thought ( Sartwell, 1992 ). Here we consider three 
different, but related, philosophers who not only have diverging views on how we 
should construe this idea of correspondence, but also have diverging ideas about 
the social world, ideas that have consequences for how we should understand law. 
 This trio of philosophers – Kant, Hegel and Marx – are only paralleled by 
Socrates, Plato and Aristotle in their importance for the history of ideas. While not 
2  Right as correspondence 
EXAMPLE 
Snyder v  Phelps , 131 S. Ct. 1207 (2011) United States Supreme Court 
Rights sometimes produce unsatisfactory outcomes. Here the right to freedom of speech in 
the United States allows the public picketing of funerals by homophobic radicals. Nonetheless, 
legal defence of their speech flows from a right which has unassailable  importance within 
that culture. Defending the universality of free speech is held to be more important than the 
good – the desires and welfare – of the individuals involved.
 Westboro [Church] believes that America is morally flawed; many Americans might feel the 
same about Westboro. Westboro’s funeral picketing is certainly hurtful and its contribution 
to public discourse may be negligible. But Westboro addressed matters of public import on 
public property, in a peaceful manner, in full compliance with the guidance of local officials. 
[. . .] Speech is powerful. It can stir people to action, move them to tears of both joy and 
sorrow, and – as it did here – inflict great pain. On the facts before us, we cannot react 
to that pain by punishing the speaker. As a Nation we have chosen a different course – to 
protect even hurtful speech on public issues to ensure that we do not stifle public debate. 
That choice requires that we shield Westboro from tort liability for its picketing in this case.  
www.ebook3000.com

2 RIGHT AS CORRESPONDENCE
139
influential on one another through personal contact as were the Ancient thinkers, 
they each took ideas from the previous philosopher and radically reworked them. 
Each has complete, or at least extensive, accounts of how ideas and reality can be 
said to correspond. Of equal importance, each has ideas about the basis of right and 
its relationship with law. Note that, as German speakers and philosophers, ‘right’ for 
them is (for the most part) synonymous with ‘law’, and their work is characterised 
by a rich analysis of how rightness is also the most important dimension of law as a 
whole. The territory on which the debate was conducted is sketched here.
Immanuel Kant’s (1724–1804) notion of right is closely tied to the idea of ration-
ality. Human rationality shows us what is necessary, and not just desirable in our 
actions and choices. It is also correspondence with the rational that constitutes the 
basis of law. As universal and necessary, rational decisions by one individual should 
coincide with the rational decisions of other individuals, and rational decisions can 
be said to, together, form a ‘kingdom of ends’ where everyone’s decisions can be said 
to be rational and therefore compatible (Kant, 1948). In short, good laws should 
allow the exercise of rationality; and right (as an adjective, i.e. rightness in action) is 
conformity – correspondence – between laws and human rationality.
G.W.F. Hegel (1770–1831) in his Philosophy of Right accepts the form of right that 
Kant identified – the meeting of law and rationality – but insisted this correspond-
ence had to be contextualised within concrete social situations. Rather than treating 
the foundation of law as the individual’s pursuit of their self-generated choices, Hegel 
insisted on beginning his analysis of law with the structures of social life and state insti-
tutions that are the necessary condition of freedom to choose. The state has to provide 
the conditions for individual freedoms, and the rightness of an action does not begin 
with the autonomous individual but with the state, understood as the embodiment 
of freedom and rationality. Social institutions have come, through long historical 
evolution, to embody rationality – evolved human thinking has been made concrete 
in modern social and legal practices – and right actions are those where institutions 
and rational actions correspond. Hegel’s philosophy of right is a philosophy seeking 
an ultimate synthesis of the right action of the individual, our right to exercise our 
liberties and the state as the provider of freedom through law and governance.
Karl Marx (1818–83) took Hegel’s criticisms of Kant much further. Rightness is not 
only related to rational actions within a just social context. That social context has to 
be one where law and legal rights – fictions used to diffuse social conflicts – are re-
placed with a social system that corresponds with the needs of individuals. In making 
‘rightness’ concrete in the state, Hegel treated the state as a necessary condition of right. 
Marx, conversely, sees the modern state, and the inequalities on which it is founded, as 
a barrier to right and the dissolution of the state the necessary condition of right. Making 
a social system without antagonism or contradictory class interests would dissolve a 
temporary and incomplete correspondence between interests and laws and replace it 
with a true correspondence between the material conditions of existence and social life.

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
140
This, then, is the trajectory of ‘rightness’ through the three theorists. From law’s 
correspondence with reason, to correspondence between the state and rationality, 
to correspondence between material and social reality.
2a Kant: right as duty
The essence of Kant’s philosophy is opposition to ‘dogmatism’, that is, the unre-
flective and uncritical acceptance of received ideas and opinions. His philosophy 
denies authority to anything external to the individual and makes our faculty 
of reason the final determinant of what is true and right (Kant, 1929). Ideas of 
individual freedom and rationality suffuse his writings on law, and Kant’s ac-
count of law, his ‘doctrine of right’ (Kant, 1996), is closely related to his general 
moral theory.
Kant’s moral theory begins with the premise that the only unconditionally good 
thing is a good will. While the consequences of our actions can be judged good or 
bad, the will to do good can be separated from the outcomes of our actions and is 
an unconditionally good thing. Second, a good will seeks to perform duties, rather 
than pursue good ends or outcomes. Good outcomes or states of affairs can become 
bad outcomes or states of affairs; to will or pursue our duty is always a good thing. 
Finally, our duties are identified as those actions that everyone should, and can, 
perform. We should think of ourselves as legislators who have to make rules for eve-
ryone, universally. If we can make such a rule it is a duty, a ‘categorical imperative’. 
If we cannot make such a rule it is merely a hypothetical imperative, something that 
may, hypothetically, bring about a good state of affairs (Kant, 1948: 56–7). When 
we identify our duty we are identifying a categorical imperative: something that 
must be done regardless of possible states of affairs.
This rational basis for determining the basic principles of ethical action has 
echoes of a religious principle, the ‘golden rule’, of doing to others only what we 
want them to do to us. The value of Kant’s articulation of this as the categorical im-
perative is two-fold. It is logical because it demands that we avoid contradiction in 
our actions. Second, it is focussed on individual freedom. We are not free when we 
have our actions dictated by people and things external to us (including the moral 
dictates of God or the physical dictates of nature). By choosing action on the basis 
of duty alone we are acting from a pure will uninfluenced by authority, dogmatism 
and the forces found in the natural world. This also allows Kant in his mature work 
on morality, The Metaphysics of Morals, to divide his concerns into doctrines of right 
(concerning law) and doctrine of virtue (concerning action), but insist that both 
ultimately concern freedom (Kant 1996: 165). Doctrines of virtue concern ‘inner’ 
freedom, the conditions by which we freely determine our duties. Doctrines of right
concern our ‘outer’ freedom; they concern the legal and political conditions that 
allow us to act rationally and pursue our duties.
www.ebook3000.com

2 RIGHT AS CORRESPONDENCE
141
Kant’s doctrine of right is, accordingly, an explanation of how laws should corre-
spond to individual freedom and rationality. The kinds of laws that Kant favours do 
not diverge from the kinds of civil and criminal laws that are common to European 
legal systems. His concept of constitutional law favours a constitutional monarchy 
where public codes provide for freedom and well-ordered social coexistence (Kant, 
1996). While his legislative programme is not radical, Kant’s philosophical rethink-
ing of legal systems looks to achieve correspondence between reason and external 
law. Without such correspondence individuals cannot be free, and law becomes an 
external, oppressive, imposition on the individual.
While criticism of Kant’s position will be taken up by Hegel and Marx it is worth 
considering the merits of this position. First, in a fundamentally uncertain world 
where we can never have control over the consequences of our actions, we can un-
derstand why Kant applauds those who identify and pursue their duties and do not 
allow circumstances to dictate their actions. This could be expressed in terms of the 
virtue of integrity: pursuing the right course of action despite pressures to the con-
trary. Second, his work stresses the intrinsic or inalienable value of the individual. 
The reason we have categorical duties is because without such duties we would treat 
others, and ourselves, as merely having a ‘market value’ to be calculated. On the 
contrary, we have a ‘dignity’, an irreducible status. Third, while not radical from our 
own contemporary perspective, Kant argued for a limited government and limited 
state intervention into the lives of individuals, associating his ideas with democracy.
EXAMPLE
~3HHS6KRZ&DVH*HUPDQ&RQVWLWXWLRQDO&RXUW%9HUZ*(
In this case the German Constitutional Court had to consider whether a live ‘peep show’ 
(an enclosed space containing naked dancers who could be viewed at a price) was de-
grading and caused a loss of dignity to the performer. In an eminently Kantian decision 
stressing the importance of valuing individuals’ dignity through upholding their status 
as free and rational individuals, the Court decided that certain forms of sex work were 
incompatible with constitutional protection of the individual.
[In contrast to other instances of nudity] in the peep-show the woman appearing is as-
signed to a degraded, objectified role, to which end several circumstances of the event 
cooperate: those owing to the kind of payment which establishes an atmosphere of 
a mechanical and automatized event, by which the spectacle of the naked woman is 
bought and sold like a commodity through the slot of a machine. [. . .] This justifies 
the decision that the woman displayed in the show is degraded through this manner of 
performance – the peep-show – characterized (in its own peculiar way) as ‘professional 
public performance’ [. . .] and thereby received a dignitarian injury.

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
142
2b Hegel: right made social
If Kant’s philosophy is an attack on submission to dogmatism and an insistence 
on the authority of reason, Hegel’s position is, among other things, an assault on 
certain kinds of natural law ideas. Far from rationality being discovered in a world 
beyond the human, Hegel relocated necessity in the human being: we ourselves are 
the determinants of what is rational and what is necessary. Moreover, the natural 
law tradition’s interest in the good is held by Hegel to be symptomatic of an earlier, 
less evolved, conception of rationality (Hegel, 2008: 47). Humanity is on a path of 
mental and cultural evolution from the ‘priority of the good’ to the ‘priority of the 
right’ (Sadurski, 1988). This is more than a terminological shift: it is humanity’s 
reorientation towards something more rational and universal.
Hegel is in agreement with Kant that freedom must be central to any philosophy of 
human life and action and that this must include an account both of the individual and 
of the laws that govern them. Hegel’s philosophical system, however, aims to demonstrate 
that the evolution of human ideas and human civilisation are much more important 
than Kant’s (much less historically sensitive) theories would concede. The unfolding of 
human history has been driven by the expansion of self-consciousness, both of the indi-
vidual and of humanity itself. This ‘coming to self-consciousness’ is a complex process of 
overcoming inadequate understandings of reality, but can be summarised in Hegel’s as-
sertion that ‘what is rational is actual and what is actual is rational’ (2008: 14): the world 
mirrors the structure of our mind and vice versa. Within this view of the world, ‘right’ has 
a central role because it is a notion that has emerged as a consequence of humanity gain-
ing a fuller conception of itself and its rational responsibilities. As we move to a greater 
understanding of our place in the world, we also come to possess a more sophisticated 
understanding of social and individual responsibilities, namely the centrality of the right 
as a combination of what is true and what is obligatory (2008: 70–1).
Note that Hegel is not entirely removed from natural law. The identification of 
rational and real resembles the underlying motif of natural law thinking, but Hegel 
is not arguing for a correspondence between the facts of nature and values. He is 
arguing for a correspondence between evolved human thinking and evolved human 
structures: a full understanding of our rationality and the modern, rational, state.
Hegel therefore seeks to offer us a ‘science of right’. This is not only a description 
of the uses of ‘right’ as they have emerged over time, but a more ambitious account of 
how the concepts of right and legal rights have developed together. At the heart of 
this abstract philosophical account of the right is the nature, function and evolution 
of the state. It is the state that has driven our awareness of right; the existence of the 
modern state has shown us that certain goods can be delivered universally or fairly 
without intruding on the freedom of the individual, and without establishing a pre-
scriptive account of what it is to be human. Also, it is the state that has made right 
concrete; the state not only maintains legal rights and legal relationships but also 
www.ebook3000.com

2 RIGHT AS CORRESPONDENCE
143
sustains the conditions of fuller, more substantial, ethical bonds. As such, right is the 
correspondence between the state and the freedom and rationality of the individual. 
Without the state we would not see what is rational let alone be able to pursue what 
is rational, and without the state we cannot have laws that correspond with our 
emerging and evolving idea of the – universally and necessarily – right.
Modern institutions, particularly the state, mean that when we now think of ‘right’ we 
are thinking not of isolated individuals making self-interested claims, but of the indi-
vidual and collective joined in a mutually supporting bond. Put in different terms, right 
is not just ‘my rights’ but the essence of individual and social existence. Note that Hegel’s 
account of right does not seem to be an accurate historical account of the evolution of 
a word, rather he is trying to chart the evolution of a concept. This provides an explana-
tion of how certain ideas seem to ‘make sense’ at certain times and not at others. We 
now cannot talk of ‘right’ without thinking of ourselves as members of a state that makes 
demands on us and upon which we make claims. With this firmly in mind we can un-
derstand why it is that the language of right is so potent and says much more in political 
and legal terms than claims about what is good for any single individual. It is a modern 
way of thinking which arises from a complex relationship with others and with the state.
EXAMPLE
Korematsu v United States, 323 U. S. 214 (1944) United States 
Supreme Court
Hegel grants considerable power to the state to maintain the concrete bases of right, 
including criminal justice powers and other administrative powers. Emergency powers are 
not always easy to square with the rule of law: they can be discriminatory and arbitrary. 
Korematsu, an ‘American citizen of Japanese descent’ challenged war-time constraints 
placed on him for national security reasons. The US Supreme Court held that these were 
acceptable measures (though a later Court held the decision to have been illegitimate as 
it was based on fabricated evidence.) For Hegel, such excessive use of sovereign powers 
would be unacceptable; our rights cannot be suspended by sovereign will.
[. . .] We are unable to conclude that it was beyond the war power of Congress and the 
Executive to exclude those of Japanese ancestry from the West Coast war area at the time 
they did. True, exclusion from the area in which one’s home is located is a far greater 
deprivation than constant confinement to the home from 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. Nothing short 
of apprehension by the proper military authorities of the gravest imminent danger to the 
public safety can constitutionally justify either. But exclusion from a threatened area, no 
less than curfew, has a definite and close relationship to the prevention of espionage and 
sabotage. The military authorities, charged with the primary responsibility of defending 
our shores, concluded that curfew provided inadequate protection and ordered exclusion. 
They did so [. . .] in accordance with Congressional authority to the military to say who 
should, and who should not, remain in the threatened areas.

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
144
2c Marx: right made material
Marx’s relationship with law can be understood as rejection of a form of legal posi-
tivism. In opposition to Hegel and others, he opposes the idea that the laws com-
manded by the state are the basis of ‘rightness’. Justice does concern the protection 
of the rights, interests, freedom and rationality of the individual, but these have to 
be understood at a more basic level of correspondence between social organisation 
and the material world.
Marx criticises Hegel for his Idealism, i.e. his assumption that ideas are the driv-
ing force of history. The real is not rational but, according to Marx, material. This 
turning Hegel ‘on his head’, making the material dominant, has consequences for 
how we understand rightness. First, it means criticism of the idea of rights as fun-
damentally positive and progressive contributions to legal and political thought. 
Rights arise from social structures characterised by inequality; rights reflect, but can-
not remedy, this inequality. Second, Marx criticises Hegel’s defence of the modern 
state. In Marx’s view, the state generates antagonisms which a conservative rule of 
law helps to support. In contrast, Marx sought a more fundamental, less ‘statist’, 
correspondence between social life and human needs.
First, abstract rights cannot give universal respect and protection to individuals. 
To reduce all of our moral and political interests, demands and needs to rights is 
a harmful approach to ourselves and others. When we assert our rights we are as-
suming that the state can fulfil these demands universally and fairly and that our 
particular interests as individuals and as members of groups will be met by the state. 
In fact, the things that unite us, the people we know, the culture we share and the 
commitments we have made are either poorly protected or not protected at all by 
rights. Even where rights are protected by law, this is predominantly in the domain 
of private property where the law is concerned to maintain the rights of existing 
property owners rather than ensure that there is a just distribution of property 
(Hunt, 1986). There is, in other words, a close relationship between legal right and 
property which clearly and systematically disadvantages the class with less property 
and less influence. Furthermore, we have the strongest bonds with people around 
us with whom we do not have rights relationships, but rather stronger bonds of 
mutual need (as in our commercial and working relationships) and affection (our 
personal relationships). These are relationships that cannot be understood in terms 
of rights, but are stronger material relationships established through shared human 
experiences. As such, they would exist in the absence of legal rights and should not 
be understood as maintained by rights (Easton, 1961).
This suspicion concerning the basis and function of rights is part of a wider cri-
tique by Marx of our relationship with the state. Recall that for Hegel the ultimate 
trajectory of talk of ‘right’ is the state. The state is the ultimate defender of fair treat-
ment, objectivity and fairness. While he agrees that the priority of the right is im-
portant, Marx rejects Hegel’s belief that right has found its fullest realisation in the 
www.ebook3000.com

2 RIGHT AS CORRESPONDENCE
145
modern state. ‘Right can never be higher than the economic structure of society and 
its cultural development’ (Marx, 2000: 615). The state is not the ultimate defender 
of right, it is not the logical realisation of the state as defender of the interests of 
both individual and collective, but is, rather, a reflection of existing inequality and 
exploitation. We are afforded a number of rights, but these are ultimately defend-
ing private property and, by extension, property owners. The state is the scene of 
‘alienation’: our relationships with others are not construed in terms of our needs 
but in terms of efficient production and wealth creation (Easton, 1961). ‘Right’ is 
an ideology, a structure of thought imposed upon us, that gives the impression that 
the state and legal rights are the only true bonds between individuals; right and the 
state are, in actual fact, ways of justifying exploitation.
In the light of this we can make sense of Marx’s claim that the state will ‘wither 
away’ and be replaced with material relations of production which are non-exploitive 
and not premised on possession of private property (Easton, 1961: 196). Hegel (and 
Kant’s) optimistic views about the rationality and universality of the right are too 
ideal; they miss the correspondence between individual status and our collective reli-
ance on the material world of production and consumption. In sum, Marx’s view of 
‘the law of the state’ is clearly critical and radical, but the idea of making the social and 
material correspond – fairly, and without exploitation or antagonism – is a way of ar-
guing for just social architecture without establishing a prescriptive vision of the good.
EXAMPLE
&RPPLWWHH 2Q (FRQRPLF 6RFLDO DQG &XOWXUDO 5LJKWV ~*HQHUDO
&RPPHQW1R>RQ,&(6&5$UWLFOHVDQG@
Marxism has an ambivalent relationship with rights, and the ‘right to water’ is a good exam-
ple of why. Clearly no-one would question the need, value or importance of access to water. 
However, is the correct orientation towards this fundamental human need the creation of 
a right? Here a United Nations body overseeing economic and social rights outlines where 
such a right would find its legal and moral basis.
The legal bases of the right to water:
[. . .] The human right to water entitles everyone to sufficient, safe, acceptable, physically 
accessible and affordable water for personal and domestic uses. An adequate amount of 
safe water is necessary to prevent death from dehydration, to reduce the risk of water-
related disease and to provide for consumption, cooking, personal and domestic hygienic 
requirements. [The Covenant on Economic and Social Rights] specifies a number of rights 
emanating from, and indispensable for, the realization of the right to an adequate standard 
of living ‘including adequate food, clothing and housing’. The use of the word ‘including’ 
indicates that this catalogue of rights was not intended to be exhaustive. The right to water 
clearly falls within the category of guarantees essential for securing an adequate standard 
of living, particularly since it is one of the most fundamental conditions for survival.

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
146
3  Right as coherence 
 
 Introduction 
 We do not have to work within a legal institution to know that law has its own way 
of doing things. We know that law can be used if we have a conflict with our neigh-
bours and we know that the law will deal with that conflict by its own rules. Those 
inside the legal profession have been trained to work with a set of rules and pro-
cedures that are not found anywhere else in the social world. Law has its ‘own rules’ 
not only in the sense of being constituted or characterised by rules but because it 
has its own way of doing things and dealing with the world; distinctively  legal deci-
sions can be made and legal answers can be found. Law produces right answers in its 
own distinctive way on the basis of its rules and its unique means of adjudication. 
 The idea that law has its own internal way of generating right answers is related 
to the coherence view of truth: systems can produce right and wrong answers on the 
basis of their own internal assumptions without having to show correspondence with 
reality. Of course, we could treat rules as part of that reality and the division between 
coherence and correspondence would thereby become blurred. Nonetheless, the idea 
that law can generate its own standard of correctness, without appeal to anything 
beyond law itself, is a distinctive and widespread conception of what law is and does. 
 One famous way that this ‘internal coherence’ has been expressed is through law 
being seen as a ‘seamless web’ (the phrase is attributed to Frederic Maitland, see 
 Berman, 1977 ;  Bix, 2004 ). This suggests that understanding law is not about learn-
ing a number of discrete topics; rather to ‘know law’ we have to have synoptic view 
of an entire legal system. This is because law is a web of interconnected rules, princi-
ples, precedents and practices that do not respect neat boundaries. We have to know 
how use principles from one field (e.g. contract) to make sense of another field (e.g. 
tort). The reason this is the case will be historical (legal systems emerge over time 
in haphazard ways that do not respect boundaries), but also because legal systems 
have their ‘own way of doing things’ that are valid whatever the subject-matter. If 
this picture is correct, the web is ‘seamless’ because law can always draw upon its 
own resources to come to a decision in a particular case, and this may explain the 
fact that a ‘right legal decision’ is always possible. When a dispute is accepted by a 
legal institution (where a court accepts jurisdiction over it) it will always find some 
kind of answer. Laws can always be found to respond to a dispute, and law is always 
capable of generating a decision: a legal decision not just an  ad hoc decision. 
 The following theories from Hobbes, Mill and Rawls represent different ways of 
making sense of how law’s inner coherence – its self-generated rightness – can be 
explained. The common denominator among them is that legal rules and legal insti-
tutions are given a basis of justification in a particular political arrangement or by a 
political principle (contract, liberty and fairness respectively). These are not theories 
3  Right as coherence 
www.ebook3000.com

3 RIGHT AS COHERENCE
147
suggesting that law should be subservient to political goals; they each defend the 
independence of law and legal institutions. Nonetheless, for each there is a core 
principle of political legitimacy with which legal institutions and legal decisions 
must cohere in order to be valid. It is coherence with an underlying or justificatory 
principle (contract, liberty or fairness) which means right legal decisions can be 
made within a legal system even when the rules run out.
Put another way, these theorists can be understood as trying to cohere contradic-
tions and tensions at work in any theory of law and state. Hobbes is attempting 
to reconcile or cohere political power with consent. Mill is reconciling utilitarian 
governance with the belief that the state should not dictate what is good for the in-
dividual. Rawls is reconciling the liberties of the individual with fair social practices. 
The ‘rightness’ of law and legal decisions, in each case, depends upon supporting the 
reconciliation of these competing principles.
3a Hobbes: right as contract
The importance of Hobbes’ work for legal scholarship lies in his treatment of the 
origins of law as something legal – a contract – meaning that law never has to be 
justified by anything other than itself. Legal institutions possess rightness or cor-
rectness because they are already authorised as, or acknowledged to be, legal. Law 
is inherently justified, and does not have to correspond to any external standard.
In the middle of the seventeenth century, Hobbes found himself between two war-
ring factions in the English civil war, Crown and Parliament, both claiming legal legiti-
macy for their cause. In this situation Hobbes sought (for both scholarly and personal 
reasons) a new theory of legal legitimacy (Tuck, 1999). He avoided appeal to divine 
support for the status quo (the predominant medieval approach to politics which had 
been adopted by the Monarchist cause); nor did he grant automatic authority to those 
with the de facto power, wealth and money (i.e. the wealthy gentry of the Parliamentary 
cause). The theory arising from this tension traces authority to the origins of human 
social life. Hobbes’ story concerning the origin of social life does not paint a picture of 
either haphazard emergence of political power nor divine ordinance. Real legal author-
ity arose from neither divine nor political sources: it arose from a purely legal event.
To imagine the origins of human social activity, Hobbes posited ‘a state of nature’. 
This is a situation without the structures and boundaries of human society wherein 
individuals live in constant fear of each other because of natural predatory impulses 
and the absence of a legal authority to remedy or prevent predatory action between 
humans. In this situation human life is fragile and human endeavour is fruitless 
because human effort can never be supported nor human life respected. Without 
social protections and boundaries life is, famously, ‘solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, 
and short’ (1996: 84). In such a situation an ultimate power, a sovereign, would be 
like a God, able to ensure order and justice.

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
148
Contracting with one another to grant legal and political power to a sovereign 
means rescuing humans both from nature itself and from each other. Without this 
single, powerful, sovereign any kind of social ordering will founder on human weak-
ness and fear:
somewhat else must be done, that those who have once consented for the common good, 
to peace and mutual help, may by fear be restrained, lest afterwards they again dissent, 
when their private interest shall appear discrepant from the common good. (1996: xxxiv, 
emphasis removed)
The sovereign, as the conglomerate of many individual wills, is the ultimate power 
and authority, able to make decisions, support complex social ventures and mete 
out punishments. However, the sovereign is also, crucially, a legitimate power in so 
far as its power derives from the decision of the individual to cede their own power. 
Hobbes gives one of the first secularised accounts of how legality is legitimately 
founded and justified. It is founded in a contractual decision, and all subsequent 
legal commands are justified by virtue of flowing from this legal origin. Hobbes also 
supplies a plausible account of why we should, pragmatically, accept the authority 
of law: in essence, because any law is better than no law.
However, there are a number of questions that can be asked of Hobbes. If this 
truly is a contract, what responsibilities lie with the sovereign? Hobbes seems to 
demand unconditional obedience to all and any sovereign powers: ‘[anyone], if they 
do tolerate not their king, whatsoever law he maketh [. . .] do violate their faith, con-
trary to the divine law, both natural and positive’ (1996: 387, emphasis removed). 
We as citizens have the clear responsibility to obey the law (we have made a contract 
to create laws enforced by the sovereign). Conversely, the sovereign is placed under 
no such strictures (although may be subject to divine vengeance) (1996: 422). 
The fabric of a legal system – its rules and traditions – seems, at best, secondary to 
the pure power of a sovereign to impose order on an otherwise warring populace. 
Hobbes may have given social order an inner coherence, but has he provided a good 
description of the particular coherence of law?
More specifically, consider the ‘solitary’ aspect of ‘solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, 
and short’. To the extent that there has been any real state of nature (a ‘pre-legal’ state 
of instability) that environment would surely not have been solitary. For there to be 
people at all there have to be two parents; the survival of humans, as uniquely vul-
nerable animals, depends upon some kind of cooperation or nurturing. From this 
we could draw different conclusions about the natural. That the family is natural, as 
are groupings of families (as per Aristotle’s account of the origins of the state). Or 
that some kind of law will always be natural in the form of kinship bonds (the rules 
within and between families) or patronage (rule by strong, paid, individuals). For 
these reasons, Hobbes’ work is less useful as an account of how law ‘came to exist’ 
than as a model of law in a modern state where there is an identifiable sovereign 
consistently enforcing the law and little difficulty distinguishing de facto and de jure
www.ebook3000.com

3 RIGHT AS COHERENCE
149
power. The degree to which Hobbes can also be used to demonstrate that law is 
justified from its inception (that it has an inner coherence based on contractual ori-
gins) should be similarly curtailed: he has not provided fundamental justification 
for all legal practices, but rather explained the coherence of talking about legality as 
something distinct from religion and class.
3b Mill: right as liberty
We have encountered the utilitarian dimension of J.S. Mill’s thought (Chapter 3). 
The liberal aspect of his philosophy is considered here. The bridge between these 
two theoretical positions is Mill’s acceptance that, while happiness is the good 
towards which individuals’ actions work, the political and legal realisation of this 
utilitarianism demands a (politically liberal) acceptance that people should be able 
to – within limits – pursue their own ideas of the good and their own ‘experiments 
in living’. He is, in other words, seeking to allow the right, understood as liberty, and 
the good, happiness, to coexist.
EXAMPLE
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons (International 
Court of Justice Advisory Opinion, Dissenting Opinion of Judge 
Weeramantry) 1996 I.C.J. 226
Grotius, whose ideas are similar to Hobbes’, remains an influential source (‘publicist’) 
of international law. In this opinion by the International Court of Justice, Grotius’ work is 
used to consider the origins and pedigree of jus in bello, the law which applies in warfare. 
Warfare remains a constant reminder of the possibility of a ‘state of nature’ returning and 
the Court here suggests that, to a degree, there is historical value in Hobbes’ state of 
nature narrative.
Grotius’ concern with the cruelties of war is reflected in his lament that: ‘when arms were 
once taken up, all reverence for divine and human law was thrown away, just as if men 
were thenceforth authorized to commit all crimes without restraint’ [. . .]. The foundations 
laid by Grotius were broad-based and emphasized the absolute binding nature of the re-
strictions on conduct in war. In building that foundation, Grotius drew upon the collective 
experience of humanity in a vast range of civilizations and cultures. [. . .] Humanitarian 
principles have long been part of the basic stock of concepts embedded in the corpus of 
international law. Modern international law is the inheritor of a more than hundred-year 
heritage of active humanitarian concern with the sufferings of war. This concern has 
aimed at placing checks upon the tendency, so often prevalent in war, to break every 
precept of human compassion. It has succeeded in doing so in several specific areas, but 
animating and underlying all those specific instances are general principles of prevention 
of human suffering that goes beyond the purposes and needs of war.

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
150
Mill’s position possesses some similarity to Hegel’s. Hegel argues that we have 
moved beyond the good as our prevailing social value to the right as the most de-
veloped, universalisable, basis of social life. Unlike Hegel, however, Mill has much 
more interest in deciding on the limits of law – and therefore right and rights – 
rather than showing how law and reason exhibit a necessary, logical, correspond-
ence. With the freedom that law provides, repressive social mores can be exchanged 
for rights which give the individual the possibility of pursuing fully realised lives. 
For Mill this involves important limits to the state, namely respecting the private 
sphere and resisting undue influence on private choices (Mill, 1991).
This gives rise to Mill’s ‘harm principle’ whereby the power of the state is limited 
to the prevention of harm, as opposed to cultivating the good: ‘the only purpose 
for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized commu-
nity, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or 
moral, is not a sufficient warrant’ (Mill, 1991: 14). The state should certainly seek 
to prevent individuals physically harming one another, but has a more fundamental 
responsibility to allow the fullest possible range of liberties. These liberties extend to 
a free press, wide voting rights and representative legislatures (Gray, 1996).
Mill’s emphasis on the liberties of the individual does not point to a simple di-
vide between public and private ‘spheres’. Rather, Mill separates ‘self-regarding’ ac-
tions, that only concern our own actions and welfare, and ‘other-regarding’ actions, 
where the actions and welfare of others are affected. The state has no right to dictate 
self-regarding actions, but is authorised to regulate other-regarding actions where 
our actions have an impact on those who may not have consented, or be able to 
consent, to our influence on them.
In the conduct of human beings towards one another, it is necessary that general rules 
should for the most part be observed, in order that people may know what they have to 
expect; but in each person’s own concerns, his individual spontaneity is entitled to free 
exercise. (1991: 85)
Mill’s position is therefore less a neat drawing of lines between the public and pri-
vate spheres, more an attempt to cohere an act utilitarianism governing our actions 
in relation to others, and defence of (a necessarily more opaque) liberty of thought 
and action for us as individuals.
Problems arise with Mill’s harm principle. Certain forms of self-inflicted harm in 
the private sphere (e.g. drug-taking) would seem to be protected from state inter-
vention (and would seem to be compatible with ‘experiments in living’) but also 
entail ‘social harms’. As soon as we concern ourselves with social harm, however, we 
subscribe to a more substantial ‘social programme’ than Mill’s position is intended 
to support. Accordingly, the minimal definition of harm that Mill gives us generates 
a (perhaps undesirably) minimalistic political philosophy. Conversely, as a work-
ing assumption for legal systems this seems to have merit: it demands that the law 
and judges refrain from making substantial judgments about the good and serve a 
www.ebook3000.com

3 RIGHT AS COHERENCE
151
minimal ‘watchdog’ role. Mill’s harm principle, and his more general commitment 
to allowing a plurality of conceptions of the good accords well with the impartiality 
and equality that legal institutions should support. Law is not intended to corre-
spond to a pre-established political or rational order, but is intended to help cohere 
the different ideas of life that people can reasonably pursue.
3c Rawls: right as fairness
Social contract theories depend upon a conjectural situation where the protections 
of society have been stripped away and humans are shown to lack liberties – rights, 
duties, securities and freedoms – despite possessing natural freedoms. Two elements 
of this were revived in John Rawls’ work. An attempt to find on what rational basis 
consent to law would be given; and a thought experiment involving individuals 
outside their normal social situation. The essence of both of these steps is Rawls’ 
idea of ‘justice as fairness’ (see Chapter 1). Here we consider the policies that flow 
from this principle: social structures which create as many opportunities as possible 
without being radically redistributive, and the creation of laws which ensure equal-
ity without imposing a radical egalitarianism.
Rawls does not imagine a brutal state of nature but rather an ‘original position’. 
This is a situation where individuals are required to make a decision about what 
would be the best social system in which to live (1999: 102f). They are to make 
EXAMPLE
Charter of the United Nations (1945)
The Preamble to the Charter of the United Nations contains a rousing assertion of the basic 
obligation of states to be ‘good neighbours’ in order to pursue ‘better standards of life’. A 
harm principle (of sorts) is given prominence: force can only be used for the common interest.
We The Peoples Of The United Nations Determined to save succeeding generations from 
the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind, 
and to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human 
person, in the equal rights of men and women and of nations large and small, and to es-
tablish conditions under which justice and respect for the obligations arising from treaties 
and other sources of international law can be maintained, and to promote social progress 
and better standards of life in larger freedom.
And For These Ends to practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as 
good neighbours, and to unite our strength to maintain international peace and secu-
rity, and to ensure, by the acceptance of principles and the institution of methods, that 
armed force shall not be used, save in the common interest, and to employ international 
machinery for the promotion of the economic and social advancement of all peoples [. . .].

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
152
their decision behind a ‘veil of ignorance’: they are stripped of any knowledge 
of where they will be located in the social system they are devising (1999: 119). 
They are, because of this, rational (not purely self-interested) decision-makers who 
are being asked to decide on the best overall shape of a social system for rational 
decision-makers such as themselves. Moreover, they know that the situation cannot 
be perfect, that there will be inequalities, scarcities, benefits to distribute and bur-
dens to share. Consequently, they should, on these methodological assumptions, be 
inclined to choose a system that offers the best range of rights and opportunities for 
the widest range of individuals: ‘each person is to have an equal right to the most 
extensive scheme of equal basic liberties compatible with a similar scheme of liber-
ties for others’ (1999: 53). After rejecting systems that allow substantial inequalities 
in benefits and burdens, these decision-makers would, says Rawls, choose an eco-
nomic system avoiding excessive gaps between rich and poor: ‘social and economic 
inequalities are to be arranged so that they are [. . .] to the greatest benefit of the least 
advantaged’ (1999: 266). They would also choose a social structure suited to increas-
ing the welfare of the widest group of people possible: ‘an inequality of opportunity 
must enhance the opportunities of those with the lesser opportunity’ (1999: 266).
What Rawls provides us with is a defence of many existing political practices and 
institutions, specifically the rule of law, being a ‘basis of legitimate expectations. 
They constitute the grounds upon which persons can rely on one another and 
rightly object when their expectations are not fulfilled’ (1999: 207). A wide, basic, 
set of liberties would be chosen by anyone who could not guarantee that they were 
part of a privileged caste for whom the basic protections of law were unimportant. 
It is also a criticism of social systems where civil rights are limited and where there 
are considerable disparities of wealth between richest and poorest.
These conclusions are defended on the basis that Rawls’ liberal political system 
would provide individuals with the greatest possible range of opportunities and 
protections. To that extent it possesses elements of utilitarianism; welfare and over-
all happiness are important, though these will be the by-products of a fair system, 
not its goal. It also has elements of Kantianism to the extent that it is premised on 
what would be consented to by rational individuals. While Hobbes and Mill have 
their own views on the psychological underpinnings of legality and politics, Rawls is 
happy to assume that legality should be justified on the basis of the individual with 
rational self-interest. Whether this philosophical move is justified remains a topic 
of philosophical debate (Taylor, 1992).
This social contract argument generates demand for a fair social system, not just 
one that ‘saves’ us from nature, and that this fairness is the essence of good social 
institutions such as law. Justice and fairness can be equated because it is fairness that 
allows us to reconcile respect for individuals (as rational and autonomous) with the 
difficult choices concerning benefits and burdens which always accompany political 
activity. In other words, it is right and just that we should live under a rule of law, 
www.ebook3000.com

4 RIGHTS
153
4  Rights 
 
 Introduction 
 In Hegel’s concern with rights as the defining mark of the modern state, and in Rawls’ 
concern with the distribution of basic liberties, we have seen claims made about the 
power and importance of rights. Rights undoubtedly inhabit an important place in 
4  Rights
in a state which does not compromise basic liberties, and one that does not entail 
redistribution of wealth other than to benefit the poorest in society. Such values are 
fundamental, and can be written into the structure of the state, they do not have to 
be generated by utilitarian conjectures about good outcomes. This offers a thin view 
of what is good for us, namely to be treated fairly. However, it does offer us a substan-
tial view of what is right: fairness, just social institutions and the rule of law. A rule 
of law that embodies this fairness has justification and legitimacy; law does not need 
to correspond to any more substantial programme of social and political reform.  
EXAMPLE 
Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v  Wednesbury Corporation
>@$OO(5
Rawls’ assumptions about the choices of a reasonable person are among his most contentious. 
This is a vitally important common law case where the notion of ‘reasonableness’ received its 
general formulation. ‘Rightness’ in the actions of public officials can be considered through 
the lens of the reasonable: what is rational or justified in that context. It is therefore a variable 
standard. In this case the idea of unreasonableness looks similar to the idea of unfairness.
 [Which actions by public authorities should concern the Courts?] Bad faith, dishonesty – 
those, of course, stand by themselves – unreasonableness, attention given to extraneous 
circumstances, disregard of public policy, and things like that have all been referred to as 
being matters which are relevant for consideration. In the present case we have heard a 
great deal about the meaning of the word ‘unreasonable.’ It is true the discretion must be ex-
ercised reasonably. What does that mean? Lawyers familiar with the phraseology commonly 
used in relation to the exercise of statutory discretions often use the word ‘unreasonable’ 
in a rather comprehensive sense. It is frequently used as a general description of the things 
that must not be done. For instance, a person entrusted with a discretion must direct himself 
properly in law. He must call his own attention to the matters which he is bound to consider. 
[. . .] He must exclude from his consideration matters which are irrelevant to the matter that 
he has to consider. If he does not obey those rules, he may truly be said, and often is said, 
to be acting ‘unreasonably.’ Similarly, you may have something so absurd that no sensible 
person could ever dream that it lay within the powers of the authority. Warrington LJ, I think it 
was, gave the example of the red-haired teacher, dismissed because she had red hair. [. . .] 

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
154
our general conception of what law is. Even when rights claims are not supported 
by clear law or legal remedies, claims about our rights still seem to have a powerful 
impact upon the user and the listener. When someone claims their right to do x they 
are asserting, in a forceful way, that they have the power or the justification to do some-
thing. The language of rights is ubiquitous, rhetorically powerful and inescapable.
Such ubiquity and potency requires philosophical caution. The fact that the word 
‘right’ could be attached to a range of interests and preferences means that the lawyer 
will wish, at the very least, to distinguish what is legally enforceable from what is 
the expression of desire and aspirations. The philosopher of law will also want, over 
and above this, to clarify how it is that rights claims are meaningful at all. What are 
the conditions under which rights claims have acquired legal force, and do all rights 
claims possess equal force? For instance, how is it that our claim to our own private 
property can be construed as a right (is this based on other, contractual or constitu-
tional, rights?) and does this right have a legal force equal to, say, the right to privacy 
in one’s home? The latter right does not look like a species of contract, rather a more 
fundamental human right. Moreover, there is a need to consider whether rights claims 
always function in the same way. Whether they always act as an assertion of an individ-
ual’s power to act, or whether some rights act in more sophisticated ways concerning 
the relationship between the rights claimant and those they make claims against whom.
For that reason we have to distinguish carefully the forms that rights take from 
their functions in law. Hohfeld offers a systematic analysis of the forms of rights in 
law. Dworkin and Nozick analyse rights’ functions as peremptory ‘trumps’ which 
override certain kinds of argument in legal discussion (Dworkin) or as ways of map-
ping the proper limits of law and the state (Nozick).
4a Hohfeld: distinguishing rights
The American scholar Wesley Hohfeld’s (1879–1918) most celebrated work was 
an attempt to analyse the nature of rights claims (Hohfeld, 1913). He notes that 
‘rights talk’ is ambiguous: ‘the word ‘right’ is used generically and indiscriminately 
to denote any sort of legal advantage, whether claim, privilege, power, or immunity’ 
(1913: 17). A ‘right’ can refer to any number of kinds of legal assertion or legal 
relationship. Hohfeld’s first move is to distinguish four different kinds of legal right. 
The first is a claim-right which denotes what we would normally consider to be a 
‘legal right’, i.e. the product of legal relationship where x has a particular claim on 
others (to act or forbear from acting). Second are liberties (or privileges), assertions 
of the right to do something, either the general right to do anything that the law 
permits or something more specific related to a particular status (e.g. to alter one’s 
own will). Third are powers, concerning what a person is authorised to do within 
a particular role, for example the powers that can be exercised by a government 
official; they also encompass the creation of legal roles and relationships (e.g. in a 
www.ebook3000.com

4 RIGHTS
155
marriage or a will). Finally there are immunities, rights against others to insulate an 
individual against violations of their person and status, including having their legal 
status changed (e.g. to annul a marriage or change a will).
Put in such abstract terms, these subdivisions make right claims seem complex, 
and indeed they are, but each of these four basic terms cannot, in Hohfeld’s view, 
be further reduced or analysed. They are ‘what may be called “the lowest common 
denominators of the law”‘ (Hohfeld, 1913: 58). For example, an immunity such 
as the ‘right to privacy’ can be understood in different ways from the perspective 
of law, politics and public policy, but an immunity itself represents a kind of legal 
relationship – an ability to stop the actions of others – which is legally fundamental.
Indeed, each of these basic terms indicates some kind of relationship. Each of them 
(even when they resemble an assertion about one’s own legal powers, capacities and 
capabilities) entails something about one’s relationship with others. It is this way of 
conceptualising the four basic components of rights claims that leads to Hohfeld’s 
next step, analysing the ‘correlatives’ of these kinds of rights for others. Each simple 
form of a right (claim, power etc.) imposes a correlative duty on another. The basic 
form of right, a claim-right, entails some kind of duty on another. A liberty (a gen-
eral right claim) does not seem to imply any correlate relationship with another, 
however it could be also be expressed in terms of the denial of another’s right, or in 
Hohfeld’s terms that another party has no-right, no claim over me when I exercise 
the liberty. A power entails a liability on the part of another, i.e. they are liable to be 
subject to my actions when I exercise a power. Finally, my immunity entails a dis-
ability for another, another party is rendered unable to alter my legal position, and 
they are rendered unable to exercise particular kinds of power over me.
Given the breadth of rights-talk in law and culture, it could be said that Hohfeld’s 
technical analysis of these terms diverges from ordinary usage. We neither colloqui-
ally nor legally recognise a consistent and authoritative set of terms and correlatives 
associated with our assertion of rights. Indeed, it might be argued that we simply 
know from the context what is being asserted (and demanded) when someone 
expresses ‘their rights’. Nonetheless, Hohfeld does offer clear means of dissecting 
otherwise confused and even contradictory legal rights claims, and does so in a way 
which makes sense of the fact that my rights assertions rarely only concern my own 
powers and capacities, but also make explicit and implicit demands of others.
It is interesting to note that while it originated in the context of the US legal sys-
tem, Hohfeld’s analysis offers a powerful way of explaining the relationship between 
rights and the unusual structure of the UK constitution. The underlying assumption 
of this unwritten constitution is that every act is to be presumed legal and justified 
unless there is a legal rule indicating otherwise (Lester, 1976). There are certainly 
constitutional principles, institutions and conventions that give fuller shape to the 
state, but this principle of ‘freedom except in the absence of positive prohibition’ 
can be understood as premised on liberties in Hohfeld’s sense. These liberties can 

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
156
4b Dworkin: rights as trumps
Dworkin’s work in the philosophy of law is among the most influential of the 
twentieth century and further consideration of his work will be found in Chapter 7. 
At present we are concerned with how Dworkin understands rights as functioning 
in law. For Dworkin, law is always more than a system of rules, it has to include 
decision-making tools – policies and principles – that allow decisions in difficult 
cases. Policies (the political objectives of the state) and principles (axioms or values 
which determine permissible ways to resolve conflicts) are used to determine how 
legal rules should be interpreted.
Pre-eminent among these tools are rights. Rights for Dworkin function as ‘trumps’: 
they ‘trump’ claims made by the state (Dworkin, 1977). This functioning can be de-
scribed as a peremptory function, automatically preventing the use of certain kinds 
of legal argument (see Simmonds, 2008: 291–3). Specifically, they prevent utilitarian 
claims, i.e. claims asserting the primacy of the general good and of good outcomes, 
be expressed in the language of rights, and indeed the constitution does provide 
specific rights (claims, immunities and powers). At its heart, however, is the liberty 
to act with the correlate responsibility for the state to refrain from interfering in our 
liberty. From our liberties, other claims, powers and immunities are secured.
EXAMPLE
Re KD (A Minor) (Ward: Termination of Access)+RXVHRI/RUGV>@
$&
The case involved the question, within adoption proceedings, of the relative priorities of 
the ‘welfare of the child’ and the ‘rights of the parents’. Here the Court is seeking to argue 
that there is no significant difference between these two principles and they can both be 
considered ‘rights’. Echoes of Hohfeld’s analysis are clear.
Such conflict as exists, is, I think, semantic only and lies only in differing ways of giving 
expression to the single common concept that the natural bond and relationship between 
parent and child gives rise to universally recognised norms which ought not to be gratui-
tously interfered with and which, if interfered with at all, ought to be so only if the welfare 
of the child dictates it. The word ‘right’ is used in a variety of different senses, both 
popular and jurisprudential. It may be used as importing a positive duty in some other 
individual for the non-performance of which the law will provide an appropriate remedy, as 
in the case of a right to the performance of a contract. It may signify merely a privilege 
conferring no corresponding duty on any one save that of non-interference, such as the 
right to walk on the public highway. It may signify no more than the hope of or aspiration 
to a social order which will permit the exercise of that which is perceived as an essential 
liberty, such as, for instance, the so-called ‘right to work’ or a ‘right’ of personal privacy.
www.ebook3000.com

4 RIGHTS
157
in favour of the interests and will of the individual. The fact that we have rights, and 
that they have this powerful capacity to be deployed or relied upon at any time, is the 
most significant dimension of any liberal political and legal system. They prevent the 
individual and their interests being sacrificed for general gains or collective goods, 
and they help to ensure that a right decision can be made in difficult cases: a right de-
cision coheres with the underlying commitments of a liberal state (Dworkin, 1975).
Dworkin’s later work treats rights as part of law’s distinctive integrity. If we are to 
make decisions which are fair, impartial and reflect the general moral commitments 
of our society, then we must demand of judges and law-makers that they prioritise 
and protect rights; only this can be said to represent the pursuit of integrity. For a 
decision to exhibit integrity in a social system with a history of protecting the rights 
of the individual, such a decision must demonstrate concern for rights or fail to 
integrate legal decision-making with the collective values of the society.
Law as integrity denies that statements of law are either the backward-looking factual 
reports of conventionalism or the forward-looking instrumental programs of legal prag-
matism. It insists that legal claims are interpretive judgments and therefore combine 
backward- and forward-looking elements; they interpret contemporary legal practice seen 
as an unfolding legal narrative. (1998: 225)
Dworkin’s functional analysis does not seek to explore the forms of rights. For the 
most part, Dworkin seems to identify rights with immunities. Nonetheless, he suggests 
that legal systems in liberal states will use two, broad, kinds of rights that protect in-
dividuals from being ignored or negated by utilitarian decision-makers (1975: 1063f). 
The first are background political rights which seek to protect the individual against the 
state as a whole. The second are institutional political rights protecting the individual 
within the context of a specific institution such as a Court. Consequently, Dworkin takes 
a different tack from Hohfeld, offering an account of how rights are presupposed by a 
particular (liberal) political milieu where they function predominantly as immunities. 
This allows a combination of positions: Hegel’s and Mill’s expansive view of the impor-
tance of rights combined with a nuanced account of how Courts actually apply and use 
rights. The subtleties of his position require sustained analysis, but even in broad sweep 
demonstrate how and why rights-talk is particularly important in liberal legal contexts.
EXAMPLE
Soobramoney v Minister of Health (Kwazulu-Natal) (CCT32/97) [1997] 
South African Constitutional Court
Basic rights, concerning life or health, seem to provide unassailable grounds for claims 
against the state. However, even prosperous states have to place limits upon what they 
grant in terms of social and economic rights. This is all the more acute where the state 
➨

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
158
4c Nozick: rights as constraints
As a balance or corrective to the expansive functional claims made by Dworkin, 
Robert Nozick argues for a far more curtailed conception of rights within legal and 
political systems. Like Dworkin, Nozick identifies rights with a broadly liberal con-
ception of law and politics. They are important because they act as a counter-weight 
to strictly utilitarian decision-making. But rather than being the key, direct, realisa-
tion of liberal commitments, rights for Nozick are constraints on action, prohibiting 
certain forms of action. Rights are a way of articulating the limits of the state and the 
most minimal protections for an individual in a liberal state. While there are echoes 
of Dworkin here, Nozick is not echoing the fulsome claims made by Dworkin. For 
Nozick, rights are part of a fundamental moral and political obligation on the part 
of the state to constrain itself from intrusion into our lives.
With rights claims we prohibit, absolutely, all forms of instrumentality in human 
affairs, i.e. slavery. Slavery, for Nozick, includes redistributive taxation under which 
we can be said to be working purely for others. The problem with both slavery and 
redistributive taxation is not that they have simply become (historically) undesir-
able. Rather, they are contrary to the very essence of a liberal, freedom-preserving, 
legal system. In contradistinction, rights function to constrain the actions of the 
state. Following Locke, Nozick believes that the essence of politics and law is the 
just creation of private property through free labour and the social protection of 
that justly held private property (1974: 26–7). Therefore, contra Rawls, Nozick does 
not support any redistributive measures whatsoever in politics, even to the point of 
decrying most forms of taxation.
(here South Africa) is poor and recovering from systemic social inequality. In such a con-
text rights, even constitutional rights to health, do not ‘trump’ the decision to limit access 
to resources. In the case, it was concluded that the denial of dialysis to a terminally ill 
patient was not unconstitutional; the Court confined itself to ensuring that procedures for 
deciding upon allocation of resources were respected.
[A]ccess to housing, health care, food, water and social security are dependent upon the 
resources available for such purposes, and [. . .] the corresponding rights themselves are 
limited by reason of the lack of resources. Given this lack of resources and the significant 
demands on them that have already been referred to, an unqualified obligation to meet 
these needs would not presently be capable of being fulfilled. This is the context within 
which section 27(3) must be construed. [. . .] In this case life is indeed potentially at 
stake and this Court is enjoined therefore not only to find a humane and morally justified 
solution to the problem at hand, but also to examine assiduously the process by which 
the solution is reached and the legal foundation on which it rests. The state undoubtedly 
has a strong interest in protecting and preserving the life and health of its citizens and to 
that end must do all in its power to protect and preserve life.
www.ebook3000.com

5 HUMAN RIGHTS
159
 More generally he defends a minimal state which does not interfere with our 
pursuit of entitlements. Without such a minimal state we have poor protection of 
the entitlements of individuals or indeed of groups (1974: 119). As such, rights are 
part and parcel of a general protection of minimal entitlements, entitlements that 
are minimal or negative – they prohibit state action against the individual – but 
which are not positive in demanding substantial commitments on the part of the 
state (for example healthcare or education). In short, Nozick’s position is liberal to 
the extent that it values the freedom of the individual (and the market) to pursue 
their goals on the basis of their entitlements, but without their necessarily making 
‘excessive’ rights-claims against the state.  
5  Human rights 
 
 Introduction 
 The idea of legal rights has now become dominated by one group of rights which 
have become uniquely important elements, not only of law, but of our politics and 
our society. Human rights are that group of rights that can be seen as truly funda-
mental rights. Fundamental in the sense that they are legally, often constitutionally, 
5  Human rights 
EXAMPLE 
Alvarez-Machain v  US (2003) 331 F.3d 604, C.A.9 (Cal.) 
A case concerning the US ‘Alien Torts Claim Act’; this Act allows prosecution of torts and 
crimes committed by non-nationals, in other jurisdictions, in the US domestic Courts. Use 
of the Act requires engagement with the notion of universality as a basis for claiming 
 jurisdiction. Here the rejection of the norm in part of the United States is treated, logically, 
as a lack of universality. In Nozick’s view should any norms be treated as universal if they 
demand action from the state rather than limits its powers?
 Such analysis fits with our case law’s incorporation of the requirement that an actionable 
norm of international law be ‘universal.’ The case at hand does not require us to deline-
ate the bare minimum level of acceptance that would constitute ‘universality’; instead, it 
invokes the simple proposition, stated explicitly in Martinez and implicitly in other cases, 
that in determining whether a norm is ‘universal,’ the United States is to be counted as 
a part of the universe. A norm to which the political branches of our government have 
refused to assent is not a universal norm. It is not the judiciary’s place to enforce such a 
norm contrary to their will. [. . .] The final requirement under our law is that an actionable 
norm be ‘obligatory.’ Our cases have used this term to mean ‘binding’ [. . . ]. Binding 
norms ‘confer [ . . . ] fundamental rights upon all people vis-à-vis their own governments.’ 
[And] the class of obligatory norms is further restricted to those that are obligatory in the 
literal sense, i.e., those that nation-states must obey.  

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
160
fundamental to legal systems, and fundamental in the sense that they protect basic 
values and basic human interests. In essence, they are fundamental to recognising 
humans as persons, that is, recognising each individual as deserving of recognition 
and protection. Paradigm examples are the right to life, to be free from torture, to 
vote and participate in elections, and to have a fair trial. They reflect some of the 
basic protections that have been the target of historical struggles and popular de-
mands for several centuries. They are rights which have been demanded by people 
of the state over many centuries, if not (in one form or another) since the earliest 
stirrings of democracy. They are also fundamental to what we are as humans – hence 
human rights – because they reflect the basic needs and demands of humans: to be 
free from arbitrary treatment, fear and oppression and to have our status as humans 
recognised by others.
All of the claims to fundamentality appealed to above are not without contro-
versy. These rights are arguably dimensions of Western, liberal, history and by no 
means found uniformly across the world. Moreover, even the idea of the human and 
their needs (an apparently incontrovertible basis for rights claims) is not without 
its critics in the sense that many cultures may value order over individual rights, or, 
more philosophically, that the good (as determined by certain states and cultures) 
overrides claims to human rights on the part of individuals. These criticisms deserve 
answers, and this demands explanation of whether human rights can be severed 
from their cultural origins without losing their meaning.
5a From natural rights to human rights
There are different accounts of the origins or foundations of human rights. There is 
no doubt that there is an important resemblance (in form and function) between 
human rights and the ideas of natural rights that long predate modernity. Ancient 
cultures distinguished the free-born and the slave. So, while Ancient cultures were 
therefore democratic only in a limited sense, these cultures had a sense of equality – 
equal treatment and equal status – within the class of free-born individuals. Also, 
while many Ancient cultures endorsed slavery, they also demanded equal status 
within their groups: citizens should not be treated as instruments, as means to an 
end. ‘Since, then, law is the bond which holds together a community of citizens, 
and the justice embodied in the law is the same for everyone, by what right can 
a community of citizens be held together when their status is unequal?’ (Cicero, 
1998: 22). These ways of articulating the status, value and basic demands of in-
dividuals, while far from today’s representative democracy, are still a recognisable 
approach to the basic rights of humans.
Between the Ancient discussions of natural rights, and the human rights move-
ment of the twentieth century, lie the revolutionary and Enlightenment move-
ments. The Enlightenment pursued the notion of equality between humans, albeit 
www.ebook3000.com

5 HUMAN RIGHTS
161
a philosophical equality among persons. As we saw in Kant’s defence of the bare 
characteristics of rationality and autonomy in our understanding of the human, 
this entails that all humans have the capacity to be rights-bearers but also, equally, 
to be held responsible for their acts. The individual is understood in terms of their 
autonomy: as able to govern themselves and, therefore, as creators of responsi-
bilities as much as bearers of rights. However, it took the revolutionary period to 
turn this philosophical equality into political equality among humans. Among the 
French and American revolutionaries there was consciousness that nominal philo-
sophical equality has to be translated into concrete civil and political recognition 
(Paine, 1969). The language of ‘natural rights’ here evolves from theoretical as-
sumptions about what nature has provided humans with, to a radicalised demand 
for concrete civil and political safeguards for each and every individual. Anti-
instrumentality remains important here – rights articulate that individuals have to 
be recognised as autonomous and not treated as means to an end – but philosophi-
cal assumptions about autonomy become less important than constitutionalised 
civil and political rights.
The twentieth century is the point at which the language of human rights be-
comes widespread. In the first half of the century, human rights became a way of ar-
ticulating the blind-spots in the revolutionary conception of natural rights, namely 
a narrow understanding of the civil rights of men, and the retention, by the state, of 
the power to visit misery on their own populations through poor governance, and 
on other populations through war. Two deadly World Wars demanded a radical re-
consideration of the adequacy of the state, alone, to protect individuals’ welfare. The 
promulgation in 1948 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights represented 
the International Community’s agreement that mass murder and systematic dehu-
manisation should never again be shielded behind the sovereignty – the territorial 
integrity and legal superiority – of the state. The twentieth century also gave rise to a 
far more sophisticated understanding of economic and social inequality among hu-
mans, as well as the specific needs of women, the ‘colonies’ and the poor. In short, 
a more egalitarian understanding of society, and a more global outlook, demanded 
expansion of the scope of possible rights claims.
Most importantly, after the end of the Second World War there was a drive 
towards international constitutional values. Given impetus by the Holocaust and 
the inhumanities of World War, there was an acute awareness that the basic rights 
of the individual are not always protected by the state alone, and human rights 
must have international purchase (Glover, 2001). Out of these origins we now 
have 60 years’ worth of international human rights law and jurisprudence seeking 
to protect the individual in the most basic ways, often from their own state. This 
century has inherited a substantial body of law, but also the fundamental tension 
that human rights often seek to protect the individual from the state that should be, 
legally and morally, their principal protector and provider of rights.

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
162
5b Particularity versus universality
While human rights are distinguishable from other rights by being in some way 
fundamental, they share with the general notion of right an aspiration towards uni-
versality and necessity. That is to say, they are not good as instruments for certain 
ends, but they can be treated as the right thing for us to be afforded at all times. 
These kinds of claims are much less likely to be made with respect to legal rights 
or Hohfeld’s ‘claim-rights’ which seem to be embedded within, and arise from, 
particular legal and political systems. Rather, they are special because they are uni-
versal, transcending the state and the particularities of time, circumstance and other 
contingent elements in politics and society.
That human rights can be said to be ‘universal’ requires further analysis because on 
the face of it this is plainly false. It is not the case that everyone everywhere enjoys the 
exercise of these rights. In response to this, it can be argued that human rights discussion 
has always involved aspiration towards universality. The aspiration towards universality 
can be read in two ways. As a claim of normative universality, insisting that everyone 
should be afforded certain standards of treatment, contrasted with factual universality 
claiming that everyone actually possesses human rights. The first, normative, claim is fa-
miliar from natural rights discourse and from Enlightenment ideals: the abstract equal-
ity of persons. Human rights are in accord with the liberal principle of political equality, 
EXAMPLE
~5HVHUYDWLRQVWRWKH&RQYHQWLRQRQWKH3UHYHQWLRQDQG3XQLVKPHQWRI
WKH &ULPH RI *HQRFLGH z ,QWHUQDWLRQDO &RXUW RI -XVWLFH z
$GYLVRU\2SLQLRQRI0D\>@,&-
It is difficult to be optimistic about the emergence of ‘international values’, but there is 
strong support for certain, minimal, legal principles. The Genocide Convention comes as 
close as any treaty comes to universal assent, but even this has its detractors. Here the 
universality of the Convention is considered: whether it is better to gain state signature 
with reservations than to have fewer overall parties to the treaty.
It is an undeniable fact that the tendency of all international activities in recent times has 
been towards the promotion of the common welfare of the international community with a 
corresponding restriction of the sovereign power of individual States. So, when a common 
effort is made to promote a great humanitarian object, as in the case of the Genocide 
Convention, every interested State naturally expects every other interested State not to 
seek any individual advantage or convenience, but to carry out the measures resolved 
upon by common accord. Hence, each party must be given the right to judge the accept-
ability of a reservation and to decide whether or not to exclude the reserving State from 
the Convention, and we are not aware of any case in which this right has been abused. It 
is therefore not universality at any price that forms the first consideration.
www.ebook3000.com

5 HUMAN RIGHTS
163
where people are treated with equal minimal respect and never as mere means to ends; 
no state is authorised to arbitrarily discriminate between rational and autonomous 
persons. The second, factual, claim is articulated by different theorists in different ways. 
They require grounding human rights in the ‘human person’. Liberal theorists such as 
Kant and Rawls appeal to universal, factual claims concerning the equivalence of ‘legal 
person’ and ‘rational person’ in order to form a basis for normative claims (see Rawls, 
1999: 221–2). Non-liberal theorists will appeal to thicker characteristics – i.e. needs and 
interests – in order to find factual bases for universality claims. In either sense, univer-
sality is central to what human rights are trying to do and articulate.
These defences of universality have met with a number of fierce attacks. What 
unites them is the value of particularity, the value of preserving and protecting what 
is particular in individuals and in cultures. This is the thrust of the ‘cultural relativist’ 
critique of universalism (see Ohlin, 2002). That is, human rights depend upon a lib-
eral political milieu in order to have legal and moral significance. Liberalism is not 
factually universal, it depends upon universalising assumptions. In sum, other cul-
tures have chosen other systems or accept other systems. Liberal politics and human 
rights have no meaning in these contexts; they are projects and agendas originating 
from, and limited to, specific historical and political circumstances.
This position can be augmented with other points of critique, not least the fact 
that humans are not factually equal: people vary radically in their capabilities and 
capacities, and equality is at best a convenient – but parochial – political assump-
tion shared only by particular states with particular histories (Kelley, 1990). Another 
line of critique is that Enlightenment assumptions are too thin; they have too ab-
stract a conception of the individual to identify universal qualities (Taylor, 1992).
These kinds of criticisms are made by critics of human rights from across the 
political spectrum but they are united by a sense that particularity – individuality, 
idiosyncrasy, difference or otherness – is something to be celebrated and not swept 
away in easy assertions about universality. Factual universality is a difficult claim to 
sustain when people and cultures are so different; normative universality is difficult 
to defend because it depends upon identifying what should be case everywhere, not 
itself an obviously liberal position to inhabit.
EXAMPLE
Gabcikovo-Nagymaros Project, (1994) 197 International Court of Justice 7
The International Court of Justice here considers which materials international law can 
draw upon, i.e. which disciplines and ideas. International law must draw upon more than 
rules: it must consider all civilisations and cultures. This might be thought of as a plea for 
‘epistemic plurality’: that we should see all forms of knowledge as valuable, not only those 
originating in Western cultures.
➨

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
164
5c Human rights and liberalism
Perhaps the most acute criticisms of human rights have come from those critics of lib-
eralism, communitarians, who criticise the whole sweep of liberal philosophical com-
mitments while offering their own defence of the gains made by modernity (Price, 
1989). Communitarians attack both the philosophical foundations of human rights 
and liberalism itself by arguing that liberalism’s conception of the individual is too 
abstract, and that liberalism says too little about the fact that individuals need to be 
embedded within a community. This is augmented with criticisms of the social reali-
ties of liberal states which are said to suffer from a breakdown in community and so-
cial bonds. This deterioration is held to be a consequence of liberalism, specifically the 
excessive individualism fostered by human rights claims in society (Tushnet, 1991).
If these criticisms are correct, would it still be possible to defend human rights? 
There are three ways in which it is possible to sever human rights from liberalism and 
salvage them from potentially fatal attacks from communitarians and from those de-
fending cultural particularity. The first is to jettison liberal politics in large measure and 
defend human rights on another political basis. Ernst Bloch’s (1885–1977) Marxist 
defence of human rights provides one possible picture of what this would look like. 
Bloch returns to the earlier natural law traditional and identifies – in its appeals to 
both natural rights and human rights – a shared, and perennial, opposition to degra-
dation (Bloch, 1986). Bloch insists that opposition to degradation cannot be parochial 
and does not depend upon liberal (or any other political) assumptions, only individu-
als’ realisation that they are not animals and should not be treated as such. Bloch 
encourages us to return to the core of human rights claims. The basic, and universal, 
assertion that humans can be distinguished from animals and should be protected 
from degradation to the status of animals (see also Douzinas and Gearey, 2005).
The second approach could be called an ideological approach, insisting that 
the force and value of human rights exists because of the language of the ideology 
that they generate. This approach can be used to account for the greater success of 
[I]nternational law, [. . .] needs to be multi-disciplinary, drawing from other disciplines 
such as history, sociology, anthropology, and psychology such wisdom as may be relevant 
for its purpose. On the need for the international law of the future to be interdisciplinary, 
I refer to another recent extra-judicial observation of that distinguished former President 
of the Court that: ‘there should be a much greater, and a practical, recognition by in-
ternational lawyers that the rule of law in international affairs, and the establishment 
of international justice, are inter-disciplinary subjects’ [. . . ]. Article 9 of the Statute of 
the International Court of Justice [. . .] requires the ‘representation of the main forms of 
civilization and of the principal legal systems of the world’ [. . . ]. I see the Court as being 
charged with a duty to draw upon the wisdom of the world’s several civilizations, where 
such a course can enrich its insights into the matter before it. The Court cannot afford to 
be monocultural, especially where it is entering newly developing areas of law.
www.ebook3000.com

5 HUMAN RIGHTS
165
‘human rights talk’ in some cultures. In Lynn Hunt’s work, the origin of human 
rights is explained ideologically, but not politically. While human rights are clearly 
associated with Western liberal states, this is not because they are the corollary of a 
political programme, but because such states were in the process – driven by popu-
lar culture – of a growing consciousness of the suffering of others. ‘Ultimately at 
stake in this conflict of views about the novel was nothing less than the valorization 
[increased value] of ordinary secular life as the foundation of morality’ (2007: 57). 
The idea that ‘human rights’ provide a means of expressing our perceptions about 
the suffering and need of others does, admittedly, have liberal supporters such as 
Rawls and Habermas who both, in different ways, seek to show that human rights 
are principles that would be demanded by people if they were allowed to decide 
upon their political system and their commitments unencumbered by their social 
and cultural past (Sadurski, 1988). However, this is not confined to liberals, and 
the communitarian Charles Taylor makes a similar point, arguing that differences 
between cultures cannot be ignored but that certain values, and laws, can be agreed 
upon as common points of reference (Taylor, 1992). These positions often begin 
with the concession that human rights lack strong, unassailable, ethical founda-
tions, but they do share the view that human rights claims are meaningful outside 
the constitutions of liberal states.
Third, an ‘ordinary language’ defence of human rights takes this one stage further 
and shows that human rights are meaningful in any number of contexts. Human 
rights language, like the Revolutionary language of natural rights, is a way of stirring 
others and empowering others to engage in social and political activity and to assert 
claims about what is rightfully theirs. These claims may change over time and have 
degrees of success over time, but there is no possible denial that this language has 
allowed people to see themselves differently and articulate strong claims about what 
they want and need. This may well also be another way of expressing what Bloch is 
saying about human and natural rights: the language may change and mutate, but 
the core of empowerment remains constant.
EXAMPLE
~$IULFDQ >%DQMXO@ &KDUWHU RQ +XPDQ DQG 3HRSOHV 5LJKWV DGRSWHG
-XQH2$8'RF&$%/(*UHY,/0
The creation of an ‘African Charter’ of rights was an opportunity to create new rights 
reflecting the values of non-Western states. In fact, there is substantial overlap with the 
dominant international (Western) instruments, and some clear ideological links with the 
Lockean/social contract approach to rights found in Western states. Whether this is 
grounds for applauding or criticising the Charter is another question.
➨

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
166
Article 21:
1. All peoples shall freely dispose of their wealth and natural resources. This right shall 
be exercised in the exclusive interest of the people. In no case shall a people be deprived 
of it. / 2. In case of spoliation the dispossessed people shall have the right to the lawful 
recovery of its property as well as to an adequate compensation. / 3. The free disposal of 
wealth and natural resources shall be exercised without prejudice to the obligation of pro-
moting international economic cooperation based on mutual respect, equitable exchange 
and the principles of international law. / 4. States parties to the present Charter shall 
individually and collectively exercise the right to free disposal of their wealth and natural 
resources with a view to strengthening African unity and solidarity. / 5. States parties to 
the present Charter shall undertake to eliminate all forms of foreign economic exploitation 
particularly that practiced by international monopolies so as to enable their peoples to 
fully benefit from the advantages derived from their national resources.
Section 1
●The right answer to a question is not always a good (useful/beneficial) answer: what 
then is the nature of ‘rightness’? Could there be a right answer to a legal question that 
benefitted no-one?
●If some languages make no distinction between ‘right’ and ‘law’, does this suggest that 
‘right’ is a more important concept for understanding legal systems and institutions 
than ‘good’?
●For a legal decision to be ‘the right legal decision’, does that decision have to have 
some kind of necessity to it? What if the right legal decision is one based on reasons of 
public policy (or stability, or administrative convenience)? Could that be ‘right under the 
circumstances’, but not necessarily the only answer?
Section 2
●For something to be right or wrong does it have to correspond to a state of affairs in the 
world? Is the proposition ‘the present King of France is bald’ false, nonsense or neither?
●Is being in the right the same as having a right? Is the former a moral status and the lat-
ter a legal one, and could they overlap?
●Does law have to correspond with rational ideas, rational social structures or the eco-
nomic basis of our social structures? Would a legal system survive if it were constantly 
at odds with prevailing social and economic conditions?
Section 3
●Does law have to cohere with political principles underlying our social systems? If so, 
what are the political commitments underlying our own social system and how does this 
have legal consequences?
Questions
www.ebook3000.com

CONCEPTS AND METHODS: LOGIC
●Is, or was, there a single point at which legality commenced, a contractual moment? 
Would this contractual relationship need renewing with every generation?
●Which is more important: liberty or fairness? How might the prioritisation of one or the 
other have legal consequences?
Section 4
●Could a legal system have legitimacy if it did not offer a wide range of rights?
●Is it useful to distinguish rights, duties, claims, powers and immunities? Are these all 
reducible to legal rules?
●Do rights always provide an answer to legal questions? Do all instances of rights have 
the property of being ‘trumps’ which counteract utilitarian arguments?
Section 5
●Why do human rights have particular force in legal contexts? What, if anything, is ‘univer-
sal’ about human rights?
●What is culturally specific about human rights? Could we imagine a culture where people 
did not appeal to their rights, but only what is good for them? Is it for the same or differ-
ent reasons that some have challenged the cultural universality of human rights?
●If we did not have the language of human rights would it be more difficult to oppose 
immoral laws?
Concepts and methods: Logic
 
The universal
One distinguishing feature of appeal to ‘a right answer’ is that it implies that the 
right answer is true everywhere, not just useful or correct here and now. Universality 
is a concern of logicians, and ‘universals’ are abstract sets of things or properties that 
hold good everywhere at all times. These have a problematic ontological status (how 
could we know that such things exist?), and complex epistemological features (how 
can we distinguish things that were universal from their instantiation in actual, 
particular, objects?) The uses of universality in legal and moral theory are clearer, 
but there is still an important requirement in debate to distinguish descriptive and 
prescriptive universality. Descriptive universality (what is universal) might be thought 
to include certain properties, inclinations or capacities on the part of humans; pre-
scriptive universality (what should be universal) would include familiar moral claims 
about things we should all do, e.g. observe the prohibition of murder.
167

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
168
The Kantian test of duty – whether something could be a universal law – has long 
been a useful guide for identifying overarching moral and legal principles. Note 
that Kant intended this as a means of generating general moral principles, not as 
a guide to all human action. It is a powerful way of identifying those kinds of ac-
tions, duties, which can be demanded universally and yet should be acceptable to 
any rational individual. However, it is often worth bearing in mind Hegel’s criticism 
of this principle: it can be become an ‘empty formalism’ (Hegel, 2008: 46–7). ‘Do 
unto others’ provides a rule of thumb for avoiding contradiction and hypocrisy but 
does not yield a complete account of what we, as individuals or as a society, should 
do. For Hegel and Marx, discovering our basic, concrete, social and economic objec-
tives as a society requires a far more complex understanding of how individual and 
society must, of necessity, interrelate.
Care needs to be taken to avoid conflating the prescriptively and descriptively 
universal. Concerning cultural assumptions, it is best not to point to the ‘universal’ 
too readily; it is generally possible to find contradictory evidence concerning any 
social practice. Equally, use of prescriptive universality requires caution: identifying 
what should be done in all circumstances is more difficult than it appears.
 
The necessary
Logical necessity concerns the correct derivation of conclusions from premises 
(steps in an argument). Logic is concerned with valid arguments that are structurally 
defensible, i.e. where the conclusion follows from the premises because it is con-
tained within, or adds nothing to, the premises. Unlike the search for sound argu-
ments (where the premises have to be true) logical validity should hold good in all 
possible worlds. A valid argument produces a necessarily, and not just temporarily, 
true conclusion.
‘Necessity’ is much more problematic if we move outside logic to facts. While 
the idea of necessity in the physical world appears to be a natural extension of our 
understandings of cause and effect, it is susceptible to scepticism (Hume, 1975). 
‘Causal necessity’ (that something will be or must be, necessarily, the effect of a 
particular cause) should be distinguished from normative necessity (that something 
must, necessarily, be done). These are on two different sides of the fact/value dis-
tinction, and although sometimes linked (e.g. ‘torture necessarily causes suffering 
therefore must necessarily be wrong’) run the risk of blurring fact and value.
We can distinguish the necessary from the contingent: i.e. what will always be the 
case (necessarily) and what may only be temporarily the case (contingently). It is 
also common in philosophy to distinguish ‘necessary conditions’ from ‘sufficient 
conditions’. This is a way of analysing both causes and properties. Some states of 
affairs (i.e. some conditions, causes and facts) will always, necessarily, bring about 
a particular effect. Where there are a number of conditions, causes and facts needed 
www.ebook3000.com

169
CONCEPTS AND METHODS: LOGIC
to bring about a particular effect, these are individual necessary conditions. When 
a single cause is enough to bring about a particular effect, this cause is a sufficient
condition.
Unpacking and distinguishing causal and normative necessity is a good analyti-
cal approach to those claims about law which seem to equivocate on the fact/value 
division. The fact that something is necessary for certain ends does not make it 
morally necessary; equally, moral necessity does not mean that something will be 
useful or efficacious. Necessity frequently has rhetorical function, e.g. ‘we/they must 
necessarily do x’.
 
The a priori
The logical thrust of claims about what is right, though partially captured in neces-
sity and universality, can be distilled into the notion of the a priori, namely those 
things that are true necessarily and without reference to the empirical world. The term 
is a medieval one (with earlier philosophical roots) and is used in contradistinction 
to the a posteriori. What can be considered true without using our senses (a priori) is 
contrasted with what requires us to consult our senses (a posteriori). Claims about 
the right, unlike those about the good, can generally be classified on the a priori
side of this distinction, that is, claims about the right aim to be true come what may.
Consider how something would be verified: it will either be by thinking, or by 
using your senses. Knowledge provided by the senses can be thought to include the 
whole panoply of possible evidence provided to us by other people’s testimony. 
Knowledge gained through thinking is all the possible judgments that can be made 
about evidence from the senses. As such, these categories encompass anything we 
can possible know. However, there is much less that fits into the a priori category 
beyond simple truths of logic (and arguably mathematics). Thus, claims to be neces-
sarily true should be treated with suspicion. The opposite of any empirical proposi-
tion is always possible (see Hume, 1975), so logical truths are preferable if we seek 
absolute certainty. However, logical truths do not tell us anything beyond what 
formal characteristics an argument should have: it should not be contradictory and 
should not entail conclusions that are not contained in the previous steps.
Conceptual parsimony
‘Ockham’s Razor’ can be summarised as the idea that ‘the simplest explanation is 
the best explanation’. This idea has had a long philosophical life (see Baggini and 
Fosl, 2010: 209–11) and features in the work of the realists and positivists. For exam-
ple, one of the main attractions of legal realism (see Chapter 6) is its commitment 
to conceptual and explanative parsimony. Complex theoretical explanations are 
exchanged for description and prediction of the actions of judges and the virtues 

CHAPTER 4 RIGHT
170
that they need to exhibit. Any discussion of the force of law is thereafter tied to the 
rhetorical strategies, national and interpersonal politics, and the tendencies exhibited 
by judges. As such, no complex value structure is needed and no further explana-
tion of the obligatory force of the law. Such conceptual parsimony is attractive in its 
empiricism and its anti-metaphysical worldview.
Searching for the simplest explanation is not the same as denying the value of 
theoretical reflection altogether. It is, however, advisable to explain phenomena 
such as law with as little metaphysical scaffolding as possible. While we could 
discuss law’s relationship with the ‘laws of nature’, other explanations using rules, 
practices and institutions are preferable on the basis that we are more likely to make 
sense of our initial institutions about what the word ‘law’ means. Ockham’s razor 
also applies to values and obligations. Although we receive powerful explanations 
of the origins, structure and nature of our values from Kant, Hegel and Marx, a more 
minimal, but nonetheless powerful, account of values is offered by Hobbes and his 
focus on our fear of anarchy.
Further reading
The relationship between law, right and theories of truth is set out well by Fernandez (2009). 
Fine (2001) provides a careful introduction to the relationship between Hegel and Marx 
and the political dimension of ‘right’ more generally. Neither Kant’s Metaphysics of Morals
nor Hegel’s Philosophy of Right are straightforward texts, but most modern editions contain 
useful and extensive introductions. Marx is perhaps the most difficult to read of the three 
philosophers (his texts were written for specific audiences rather than for philosophical 
exposition); his ‘Economic and philosophical manuscripts’, ‘On the Jewish question’ and 
‘Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right’ encompass his criticisms of Hegel and wider philo-
sophical position (all available in Marx, 2000). As ever, Solomon’s text (1988) is an excellent 
introduction to the philosophical figures and movements of the last four centuries. Douzinas 
and Gearey’s Critical Jurisprudence (2005) puts many of their arguments into the context of 
Western philosophy and law. Rawls’ Theory of Justice (1999) remains a touchstone of later 
twentieth-century thought on law and politics.
Visit www.mylawchamber.co.uk/riley to access tools 
to help you develop and test your knowledge of legal 
philosophy including Podcasts on leading thinkers and 
theories, discussion questions, diagrams showing 
interrelations between concepts, and weblinks
www.ebook3000.com

171
171
Rules are a crucial dimension of law. If we were asked to identify where law was to 
be found it would be above all in rules. Why is law intimately related to rules? Laws 
are promulgated – they are made, and are made publically – in the form of general 
rules. Law’s rules are generalisations about actors, activities, practices, institutions 
and indeed the whole spectrum of human life and conduct.
If rules take the form of generalisations, their function is to guide our behaviour 
and tell us what should, and should not, be done. Surely one of the most basic tasks 
of a system of laws is to tell us, through rules, what to do and what will happen if 
we fail to act. The practice of law consists of the analysis of our conduct through the 
lens of these rules.
Both of these aspects of legal rules will be our concern in this chapter. Their form: 
what characteristics legal rules possess that other things (such as the rules of phys-
ics) do not possess, and their function: what legal rules do that other things (such 
as requests and threats) do not. The form and functioning of rules is related to our 
previous concerns with the right and the good. Rules function to support basic goods
such as certainty in human affairs and predictable action by the powerful. Moreover, 
if we treat a ‘rule’ as any kind of generalisation that justifies a course of action, we 
are using rules whenever we act in a way that is rational or reasonable; in contrast, to 
act without reference to rules is to open ourselves to the arbitrary and unreasonable. 
The general form of rules, their being generalisations, recalls the necessity and univer-
sality which are associated with the priority of the right. By making expectations and 
standards public, clear and impartial, legal rules become a standard of rightness to 
which our actions should conform.
It is important from the outset to consider three characteristic properties of 
rules that not only help to distinguish them from other phenomena, but also 
draw out their relationship with the good and the right: generality, justification
and guidance of behaviour.
Rule
5
Introduction

CHAPTER 5 RULE
172
First, we have noted (Chapter 1) that judgment is a relationship between general
rules and particular cases. Legal rules (and indeed any rules) are generalisations, 
assertions about what should happen whenever actions or events fall within the 
scope of the rule. Because they assert what ought to happen, many rules (including 
legal rules) can be classed as prescriptive generalisations; they do not describe a 
generalisation, but demand or counsel a particular course of action. A legal case is 
the comparison between such prescriptive generalisations and a particular situation. 
If the facts of the case fall within the rules, the rules determine what should have 
happened and what should happen in the future.
Second, we have seen that law’s relationship with justice involves ends (judg-
ment) and means (adjudication) which seek to regulate human behaviour. Legal 
rules either regulate the actions of legal professionals or provide guidance to the 
public on what is expected of them. Explicit expectations provide the basis for judg-
ing our actions or determining what we deserve. Accordingly, rules justify certain 
kinds of behaviour and justify certain responses to behaviour. The rule ‘walking 
faster gets you to your destination quicker’ can be used to justify my walking fast. 
The rules of property law justify my taking and using these particular belongings 
(and justify a penalty if they are not my belongings).
Third is the capacity of rules to guide our action. Rules are instructions determin-
ing what actions should or should not be done. Our actions should conform to 
rules either in order to achieve a certain end (‘for better coffee always add some cold 
water’), or because they are binding without reference to any further end (‘always 
refrain from theft’). How it is that rules can ‘bind’ or obligate us will receive further 
attention. It is enough at present to note that while some rules offer us choices de-
pending upon our preferences, and some take the form of an unconditional ‘thou 
shalt’, all rules provide a guide to action and therefore provide a degree of certainty
in action that impulsive or arbitrary behaviour does not possess.
Despite these common functions, it is clear that rules can take many forms. From 
rules that we may wish to follow if we want better coffee, to moral rules that are 
universal in scope and without exception. Within the class of legal rules, rules can 
be written, unwritten, clear, unclear, implied, statutory, customary and so on. Are all 
of these equally rules? In the sense that they all share the function of rules – general 
prescriptions that serve to guide action and provide justifications – they are certainly 
rules despite their difference in form. It is certainly tempting to say that some are 
more rule-like than others, for example a statutory rule is ‘more’ of a rule than the 
rules governing etiquette in Court. (Perhaps because statutes are written down or 
are more likely to be associated with a specific penalty for their violation.) However, 
while one rule may well be more important than another, rules are no less rules for 
lacking a written form or not being supported by explicit threats.
The form and the function of legal rules will be our concern, but analysis of 
legal rules often turns on their foundation, that is, how they come into existence. 
www.ebook3000.com

1 RULES
173
The foundation of rules must be either something real (in the world) or something 
ideal (among our ideas). Both of these possible sources have attractions. On the one 
hand, rules require having a  mental understanding of why and how we should act: 
 . . . a dog’s acquisition of a habit does not involve it in any understanding of what is meant 
by ‘doing the same thing on the same kind of occasion’, this is precisely what a human 
being has to understand before he can be said to have acquired a rule.   ( Winch, 1958 : 61)  
 On the other hand, whether written or unwritten, rules must be  publically ‘know-
able’. For a rule to guide our actions it must be in some way public; we cannot follow 
a rule without knowing what the rule is. For this reason there are some problematic 
questions concerning whether the forceful or compulsory dimension of rules is some-
thing objective or subjective. A rule has to be publically known or knowable, but with-
out subjective agreement over the meaning and significance of a rule, the rule cannot 
be said to guide action. This question is considered in the light of the work of Ludwig 
Wittgenstein (1889–1951), who stressed the public dimension of rules, and H.L.A. 
Hart (1907–92), who analysed both the ‘internal’ and ‘external’ aspects of legal rules. 
 This chapter considers the basic structure of rules and rule-following, but note that 
consideration of rules will take place, as far as possible, in isolation from discussion 
of ‘norms’. ‘Norms’ and ‘normativity’ pinpoint the force or obligation separating rules 
from other facets of the world. While this is an important aspect of analysing rules (par-
ticularly legal rules) and is a useful way of considering the binding force of rules, it mer-
its distinct concern. Normativity takes over much of the work that we attribute to rules 
in law as well as, additionally, making sense of why legal rules do not always have to 
be associated with a threat (or even a legal institution) to be legal rules. In short, while 
it is artificial to treat normativity in isolation from rules it is analytically defensible: the 
distinctive  form that legal rules take can become lost in generalisations about norms.  
1  Rules 
 
 Introduction 
 What is meant by the phrase ‘rules are rules’? This tautology (a seemingly uninformative 
repetition) says a great deal about the role that rules play in our lives. Rules encompass 
the many things that we are obliged to do and ‘rules are rules’ is another way of saying 
‘this is obligatory’. Rules also concern what people are justified in doing, as opposed to 
what they desire to do. So, rules bind us, but often without them agreeing with our imme-
diate interests or impulses. We accept that the rules of a game, or of a building site or of a 
club have justification even if we cannot see their justification; rules have control over our 
actions even if they do not agree with our immediate interests or have immediately intel-
ligible functions. The evasive tautology ‘rules are rules’ is another way of saying that rules 
can retain their power over us even when their justification is unclear or unappealing. 
1  Rules

CHAPTER 5 RULE
174
For this reason, rules have a complex relationship with the good and the right. 
Rules can be said to ensure goods. They provide certainty and reliability in human 
affairs. This does not mean that a rule is always right, that it coheres with our other 
commitments or corresponds to our fundamental social principles. We might argue 
that in general it is good to use rules to govern human affairs but, in a particular 
case, it would be right to find an exception to the rule. Conversely, use of a rule 
could be said to be right but not good. Rules provide clarity and logic in decision-
making. That is, they lend themselves to decision-making because rules are always 
public (the parties know on what basis a decision will be made) and logically de-
ducible from other rules. At the same time, this may provide answers or outcomes 
that makes no party any happier. Rules yield clear answers, but there is no guarantee 
that they are desirable answers for all concerned.
It might be objected at this point that legal rules are different. There is always a 
distinctive justification of legal rules, namely that they are legal rules, and legal rules 
are binding on us regardless of any relationship with the good or the right. Legal 
positivism (see below) encourages us to see legal rules as a distinctive category of 
rules possessing the same characteristics as other rules (guiding, binding, generalisa-
tions) but which, taken as a whole, have special – obligation generating – properties. 
Before such analysis can take place, however, we have to be clear which rules are
legal rules, and in the first instance ‘legal rules’ identifies a class of rules (and not 
an entirely clear one at that) rather than a qualitatively distinct form of rules. The 
class of legal rules could be said to be subsumed under all those categorical rules 
that compel us to act, rather than being those prudential or hypothetical rules that 
we follow out of convenience (see below). That legal rules are binding does not 
distinguish them from moral rules, and, moreover, does not distinguish them from 
the coercive commands of a criminal or tyrant. We do not follow such commands 
out of convenience, but because they leave us with no choice.
The phrase ‘legal rules’ does not even pick out a set of rules with a single origin.
Legal rules are not always from a single source, i.e. a Parliament, or sovereign, or 
single law-maker. We inherit legal rules from previous generations through prec-
edent; rules with the ‘force of law’ can be created by government ministers, local 
government and trading blocs; the rules of international law are created by the 
various, sometimes competing, practices of states. The task of understanding law’s 
relationship with rules is initially, therefore, the task of understanding whether there 
is a distinctive class of ‘legal rules’ at all.
1a Rules as commands
Rules instruct us as to what we should do, and do not always need further justifica-
tion in order to do that ‘telling’. The ‘thou shalt’ rules of religion – that no-one is 
ever permitted to steal, lie or kill – are not supplemented with justifications. They 
www.ebook3000.com

1 RULES
175
are categorical commands: unqualified and unequivocal. To the extent that such cat-
egorical commands are justified, it is on the implicit understanding that the origin 
of the rule, God, can command without further justification. The question of whether 
this provides a good analogy for the functioning of legal rules is an important 
point of contention in legal philosophy. The ‘command theory’ of law (see below 
and Weinreb, 1978: 926f) is an explanation of why we should see the rules of law 
as much closer to religious injunctions than to the rules of cookery. Legal rules are 
categorical instructions, not a menu of options serving our preferences.
Not all rules have this quality of commanding. Prudential or hypothetical rules 
are ‘rules of thumb’ that guide us to a particular end should we want to achieve that 
end. However, the rules associated with morality, and often with law, have a com-
manding quality that gives them a different complexion to prudential rules. Laws 
assert that it is an ‘offence’, or ‘illegal’ or ‘forbidden’ to engage in a particular act. 
Laws assert that a particular act is ‘required’, ‘necessary’ or ‘should’ happen. They 
command or proscribe behaviour on the part of the actor(s) that they are directed 
towards. For this reason, there is a long, and persuasive, tradition of associating 
law not only with rules, but with rules as commands to act in particular ways. Such 
theories focus on the form of rules (commands), the source of rules (a commanding 
sovereign power) and on the function of rules (to compel us to act).
As suggested, law shares with morality a capacity to command, and many legal 
rules look like the kind of categorical commandments that are found in religious 
and non-religious moral systems. To the extent that rules are commands, not hy-
potheses about what a course of action will bring about, they are deontological 
(duty-based) rather than consequential (outcome-based). But two important dif-
ferences between law, and deontological morality, have to be observed for analytical 
clarity. The first is that law’s commands often have a distinctive source, namely the 
state or sovereign. Morality’s commands are not seen as conditional on the will, 
actions or decisions of a single law-making power-holder. A central task of legal phi-
losophy is to determine who is permitted to command, thereby securing a particular 
set of commands as distinctively or authoritatively ‘legal’ commands.
Second, law’s rules, while often seemingly unequivocal, are supplemented by 
an array of exceptions. Moral theories can be supplemented with exceptions (e.g. 
Nozick’s ‘side constraints’(1974: 28–33)), but exceptions are peripheral to the main 
‘compulsory thrust’ of a moral theory. Exceptions are far more central to understand-
ing the function of legal rules. Legal rules are rarely intended to bind all persons;
they are more often intended to apply universally and unequivocally to a carefully 
specified class of persons and actions. (The fact that the laws we encounter most com-
monly in the media, criminal laws, do apply to a very wide class of persons should 
not distract us from the fact that the majority of laws apply to a specific class of 
persons with specific duties.) Laws apply when we adopt legal duties through form-
ing particular relationships. Furthermore, any set of rules will be accompanied by 

CHAPTER 5 RULE
176
exceptions that specify, much more carefully than the general rule, where the rule 
is not to apply and where alternative courses of action – by individuals and by law-
enforcers – should be made available. Exceptions themselves come in the form of 
rules, but they are rules that narrow the scope of the most general legal rules.
EXAMPLE
R v Immigration Officer at Prague Airport and another ex parte European 
Roma Rights Centre and others [2004] UKHL 55
The basic characteristic of a sovereign is their power to make rules for a territory; the 
rights of the persons on that territory are, in some respects, secondary to such com-
mands. This case considers the origins and fundamental principles concerning the treat-
ment of ‘aliens’ in England. It suggests that sovereign commands have been replaced by 
statutory rules.
The power to admit, exclude and expel aliens was among the earliest and most widely 
recognised powers of the sovereign state. In England, it was a prerogative power of the 
crown. Sir William Holdsworth [rightly stated]: ‘I conceive the King had an absolute power 
to forbid foreigners, whether merchants or others, from coming within his dominions, 
both in times of war and in times of peace, according to his royal will and pleasure; and 
therefore gave safe-conducts to merchants strangers, to come in, at all ages, and at his 
pleasure commanded them out again.’ But the crown’s prerogative power over aliens was 
increasingly questioned, and since 1793 the power to exclude aliens has in this country 
been authorised by statute, whether temporary in effect [. . .] or permanent [. . . ].
1b Forms and functions of rules
It should be clear from the range of legal materials encountered by anyone studying 
law that legal rules come in a variety of forms. Contemporary law is dominated by 
statutes where a carefully drafted set of rules regulate specific areas of activity. Some 
jurisdictions also possess a range of rules derived from the common law (rules that 
arise from particular legal decisions, decisions which then bind lower Courts). The 
contrast between the two is instructive. Legislation provides a sparse set of classifi-
cations, procedures, definitions and commands governing a specific field of activ-
ity. Common law rules are much less specific and can be much more difficult to 
articulate in a simple formula. The merit of legislation is the creation of rules with 
systematic attention to a single field of activity. The merit of common law is the gen-
eration of rules through a longer process of application, contest and trial and error.
Whether of statutory or common law origin, rules provide classifications as well 
as commands. They are not purely rules of the form ‘x is prohibited / required’, 
but a complex web of classifications distinguishing actions, relationship, rights and 
www.ebook3000.com

1 RULES
177
duties. Moreover, the commands and classifications of statutory and common law 
are also supplemented with the rules governing legal institutions and legal practi-
tioners: procedural rules in court, rules governing who is qualified to make legal 
decisions and rules governing the conflict of rules. With such variety in form of 
rules, the command theory, with its strong emphasis on the source of the rules, is not 
helpful in making sense of the many forms of legal rules. It is therefore necessary to 
distinguish, on grounds other than source, legal from non-legal rules, and, second, 
different types of legal rules.
One way to (provisionally) divide legal from non-legal rules is to recall the 
Kantian division between hypothetical and categorical imperatives. The distinc-
tion is intended to determine whether actions can be turned into moral duties, 
but the distinction has wider application to rules. If hypothetical imperatives are 
those courses of action which we pursue because they might or could lead to good 
outcomes, this can be found in many of our day-to-day activities. We might think it 
generally useful to be polite to people because this is likely (hypothetically) to make 
others happier than if we are not polite. This is certainly a generalisation that guides 
our behaviour and which can be used to justify our actions. As such it is rule-like, but 
such a rule is based on hypothetical outcomes. It can be contrasted with a categori-
cal imperative which insists that ‘no-one, under any circumstances, should tell a 
lie’. This too is a generalisation that guides our behaviour and which can be used to 
justify our actions. But this rule is intended to hold good regardless of any particular 
outcomes: it identifies a category of actions that should always be done. Legal rules 
are much closer to categorical than hypothetical imperatives. They are not rules that 
we follow just in case they have a good outcome. They are a category of rules that 
demand action (or omission) unconditionally. Legal philosophy is concerned with 
distinguishing the two, although this is not always easy. Those ‘inside’ law (i.e. legal 
practitioners) may see the rules they use as categorical (until they are changed by a 
higher legal authority). Those ‘outside’ law – for example Oliver Wendel Holmes’ 
bad man – may see legal rules as a species of hypothetical rules: they do not bind 
our action unconditionally, but rather ask us to make an assessment of whether or 
not we are likely to meet with a penalty if we disobey them.
Another distinction, also attributable to Kant but taken up by John Searle 
(b.1932) and other philosophers, separates constitutive and regulative rules. This is 
especially useful in classifying legal rules and it centres on the functions of the rules. 
Regulative rules regulate conduct. They are what we would most commonly associ-
ate with legal rules: they tell us as individuals what to do, tell judges how to classify 
actions and provide society with an array of rules with which to conduct its affairs. 
Constitutive rules are those which create or constitute our social institutions and 
practices. They are the precondition of other rules being applicable. A constitution 
is predominantly a set of constitutive rules concerning how a state and its organs 
should function and interact. The institutions created by a constitution themselves

CHAPTER 5 RULE
178
make rules, regulative rules, which cannot be fully understood without recourse 
to the underlying constitutive rules. For example, we cannot make sense of how it 
is that criminal laws are binding on us without reference to the constitutive rules 
that empower the criminal justice system and the police in the first place. Without 
them, when a police officer enforces a rule, this would not be distinguishable from 
instructions from a member of the public who (for reasons of their own) wants us 
to act in a particular way. The regulative rule is justified by the existence of another, 
constitutive, rule.
Both constitutive and regulative rules are generalisations; they refer to ‘any’, ‘all’ 
or ‘every’. However, legal rules are drafted such that they, despite being generalisa-
tions, include and exclude as carefully as possible. Whatever source a legal rule origi-
nates from, and whatever it is intended to do, the rule will encompass some actors 
and circumstances and exclude others. Even the most general (or ‘global’) rule of 
international law is directed at the actions of states rather than individuals; it is im-
plicit in the rule that it is not enforceable between private persons. Rules governing 
contracts for services are intended to include every party who has entered into such 
a contract; they exclude everyone else who has not entered into precisely this kind 
of contract.
However, this is not to say that all rules look like rules in statute books with a 
carefully drafted set of criteria for inclusion or exclusion. Rules can be customary 
activities, general principles to be applied in particular cases, or a set of unspoken 
assumptions in a particular context. What a statutory law, a common law principle 
and many rules outside legal contexts have in common is something of the form: if 
conditions A and B are fulfilled, then C is relevant but everything else is irrelevant. 
For example: ‘if you are in a Court, and you are a suspect in a criminal case, then 
your behaviour during the events at issue is relevant, but your conduct prior to 
those events is irrelevant’. A further rule could be added to make an exception to 
this, namely ‘the foregoing rule is relevant except in those circumstances where your 
previous conduct may be relevant to evidencing a propensity to act in a particular 
way’. This common characteristic of legal rules is termed ‘defeasibility’; legal rules 
have the capacity to be ‘defeated’ (Bix, 2004: 50). The characteristic of defeasibility 
indicates that, while generalisations, legal rules are always components of larger 
systems of inclusion and exclusion (or ‘applicability’ and ‘non-applicability’).
In other words, law’s generalisations are conditional on certain explicit (and 
often implicit) assumptions about what is to be included within the scope of the 
rule; this sometimes has to be settled by other rules of interpretation that either 
draw attention to the context of the rule or look to the purpose for which it has 
been created. Such rules of interpretation are needed because laws have a tendency 
to both over-inclusive and over-exclusive generalisations. Frederick Schauer gives 
the example of the simple rule ‘no dogs allowed’ (1991: 32). In terms of the ends 
it is intended to serve (a quiet and safe place), it is over-inclusive (not all dogs 
www.ebook3000.com

1 RULES
179
are noisy or dangerous) and under-inclusive (it is not only dogs that are noisy or 
dangerous). Law generalises through rules, but even careful generalisations remain 
generalisations.
EXAMPLE
McTear v Imperial Tobacco Ltd No 1 [2005] CSOH 69
A range of rule-related issues are raised in this case about the liability of a tobacco com-
pany for the death by lung cancer of a smoker. The rule on the claimant’s part was the 
rule set out in Donoghue v Stevenson (1932): that a duty of care goes beyond parties to a 
contract. The defendants pleaded volenti non fit injuria, a rule concerning the illegitimacy 
of a claim when the claimant has brought injury upon themselves. The Court also consid-
ers it necessary to consider policy as a supplement to these rules.
[T]he maxim volenti non fit injuria [applies when] the pursuer had taken a chance. [O]nce 
an individual was aware that there was a risk in what they were doing, then the conse-
quences of the risk fell on him, because he could choose whether or not to take the risk. 
The cases on volenti non fit injuria, where the acceptance was of a future risk, where there 
had not yet been negligence, such as driving carelessly, could be contrasted with the type 
of circumstance found in Titchener, where the alleged fault had already taken place, in 
that case the state of the fence. These circumstances were important in determining as a 
matter of fact whether the pursuer had accepted a risk, waived a claim and so on. It was 
sometimes very difficult to get to volenti non fit injuria, because by the time one was look-
ing at that one had already decided that there was no breach of a duty of care. Counsel 
submitted that Titchener afforded an insight into the general policy of the common law, 
which was founded on the notion of individual freedom, and the notion that the individual 
took responsibility for his own actions. The common law recognised that individuals were 
entitled to do things which involved risk to their health or well-being, but if they did so they 
must accept responsibility for the consequences of their actions.
1c Formalism and anti-formalism
If the common form of a legal rule is a generalisation, and the function of legal 
rules is to regulate and constitute, legal rules might be thought to be rigid rules not 
unlike those found in religion. However, the complex processes of inclusion and 
exclusion associated with law means that this picture of generalisation and rigidity 
is incomplete. Through inclusion and exclusion, legal rules determine, with a high
degree of specificity, what must happen when an action or event falls within the scope 
of the rule. Whether we are concerned with statutory rules, common law princi-
ples or professional standards, we find generalisations concerning commitments 
or obligations. The way that rules determine obligations through generalisations 
reflects the analysis of law provided by the idea of ‘right’. A coherence in law that 
allows the generation of right answers. Such ‘inner coherence’ of law comes from 

CHAPTER 5 RULE
180
its relationship with logic (right answers can be logically deduced, they are not just 
good answers to a problem) and with universality (duties, on a Kantian model, can 
be discerned when an obligation can be made general or universal).
It is these kinds of assumptions that gave rise to a loose grouping of early 
twentieth-century legal scholars labelled ‘formalists’ (Bix, 2004: 69–70; Tamanaha, 
2010). To the extent that they share a common position, it is that rules are the most 
important dimension of law because rules have the capacity to generate right legal 
answers. A right legal answer can be established because of the formal qualities of 
rules (they are generalisations) and by their functional qualities (they function in a 
‘binary’ way to determine, unequivocally, whether something is right or wrong – i.e. 
coherent – within a legal system).
Formalism, a movement associated with analysing the common law system of the 
United States, insisted on rules creating right legal answers out of the ‘completeness’ 
of law. The combination of statutory and common law rules allowed the correct 
legal answer to any legal question to be determined through the logical application 
of existing legal rules. This echoes the ‘seamless web’ conception of law as a com-
plete, inter-related set of rules (see Berman, 1977). The characteristic of legal rules – 
their categorisation of facts through inclusion and exclusion – has the capacity to 
encompass any possible state of affairs and any possible conflict.
This entails a strictly limited role for judges: enforcing and applying rules. Judges 
do not make legal rules. Rule creation is found in the evolution of the common law 
through judicial interpretation and in legislative activity; legal judgment is exclu-
sively the application of those rules. The merit of formalism is that it accords with 
many of our ideas about what legal activity is concerned with (rules) and what legal 
activity rejects (‘making up the rules as we go along’). It also supports a potentially 
radical view of legal judgment. If all human activity can be brought within the 
ambit of a rule or an exception, then there is infinite potential for the application of 
rules. Law therefore contains the possibility for replacing decision-making by judges 
with a wholly automated process. After all, if everything can be designated as falling 
within a rule or an exception to a rule, there is nothing logical to prevent every event 
being processed by a computer, i.e. a machine ultimately processing facts in a binary 
fashion as 0 or 1: included or excluded, applicable or inapplicable. This is arguably 
the ‘coherence’ conception of the right taken to its final conclusion.
There are strong currents of anti-formalism associated with ‘legal realist’ move-
ment (Chapter 6; Tamanaha, 2010). This rejects the rigid straightjacket that formalism 
places on law and legality. The first ground of anti-formalism rests on a distinction 
between rules, principles and standards. There is an argument to suggest that while 
most elements of a legal system seem to take the form of rules, the functioning of stand-
ards and principles is different. Standards establish criteria by which actions can be 
judged; they substitute generalisations for a narrower set of expectations. Principles, 
as broad moral commitments, guide the ways in which judgments can be reached 
www.ebook3000.com

1 RULES
181
without including or excluding anything in advance: they are there to prevent the use 
rules in certain circumstances. This kind of distinction is useful for analysis of judicial 
decision-making and is crucial to Dworkin’s analysis of law (1998) (although, given 
the generalisation, guidance and justification that they allow, the classification of 
principles and standards as something other than rules is problematic).
A second objection to formalism concerns logic and judgment. It is argued that a 
formal system cannot replace human judgment. While it may or may not be the case 
that every event can be captured by a rule, the application of a rule always requires 
classification of facts. It is only when we have classified something as a member of 
a class of facts that we can decide which rule is applicable to it. This classification 
is not a logical process but a process of human judgment, i.e. comparison, evalua-
tion and also intuition. Without these subtle evaluative processes and the subjec-
tive judgments they require, the whole system of rules and rule application cannot 
commence. Put strongly, the ‘autonomy of rules’ is a mythology: some would like 
to think that objective rules can replace subjective judgment, but this is impossible 
because classification always contains something more than the application of a 
rule (Wilkins, 1990).
Finally, formalism does not reflect the dynamism required by law (see Chapter 7). 
To the extent that both individuals and social life are dynamic phenomena that 
change or emerge, the governance of rules is likely to become repressive if it does 
not follow or map those changes. This could be argued for in the language of the 
good in so far as the good of the individual and of the state change, and rules are 
there to reflect that good, not determine it. It might also be articulated in the lan-
guage of the right to the extent that even our basic rights and duties are liable to 
change over time and depend upon the social situation we inhabit: i.e. the right 
is established through correspondence to our underlying political commitments. 
Existing legal rules are only temporary and contingent manifestations of those prin-
ciples perceived to be basic or fundamental.
EXAMPLE
25HLOO\ DQG 2WKHUV $SSHOODQWV Y 0DFNPDQ DQG 2WKHUV 5HVSRQGHQWV
[1982] 3 W.L.R. 1096
Are prison rules (here the UK Prison Rules of 1964) subject to judicial review? In other 
words, are rules governing the running of prisons (prison boards) part of the powers 
exercised by a member of the Executive or are they simply a set of regulations with an 
informal status? Even if they are informal, should basic rules of ‘natural justice’ apply? On 
the one hand, the legal formalist has no answer to these questions because they concern 
the applicability of rules, not the use of rules; on the other this could be settled by the 
constitutive rules of the constitution (as the formalist model would suggest).
➨

CHAPTER 5 RULE
182
2  Positivism 
 
 Introduction 
 The theory of law most closely associated with rules is legal positivism. We will 
consider some of the reasons rules are important to positivists and only then con-
sider at length the most important rule-centred theory of law, Hart’s  The Concept of 
Law . What is significant about Hart’s work for present purposes is that he reflects 
aspects of the ‘scientific positivism’ that was in the background of most academic 
and philosophical thinking in Anglophone countries during the twentieth century. 
While the relationship between legal positivism and scientific positivism is not a 
simple one, understanding the latter is a good basis for understanding the former 
(see  Hutchinson, 1995 ). 
 What is ‘positivism’ in general terms? The ‘posited’ part of ‘positivism’ concerns 
what is posited or immediately found in reality by the senses, as opposed to what 
is ‘hidden’ and needing further explanation. Positivism is one of the least scepti-
cal philosophical positions: the world, as we find it, provides certain and reliable 
knowledge. Positivism, in more specific terms, denotes the belief that science (sys-
tematic, observation-based enquiry) offers the best model of knowledge or the most 
authoritative account of reality. While positivists vary in their commitment to sci-
ence as the only justified style of thinking or analysis, they are unified in what they 
reject. They reject metaphysics, that is, the founding of knowledge on assumptions 
insulated from empirical enquiry. This encompasses scepticism about the mental 
realm, and philosophical ‘idealism’: appeals to our minds, or our inner worlds, are 
not justifiable as explanations. This approach had considerable impact on how law 
was understood in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, with legal positivists 
pursuing this agenda through emphasis on how law is posited (made or created) 
rather than looking for any single kind of  content ,  justification or  essence of legality.  
2  Positivism
 Many of the men complained about the conduct of the board of visitors. They said that 
the board had failed to comply with the rules of natural justice. [. . .] [The appellant] has 
issued a writ against three gentlemen who were the board of visitors and heard his case 
[. . .] and has said: ‘. . . the board failed to give the plaintiff an opportunity to call alibi 
witnesses in his defence notwithstanding that he requested them to do so and that the 
evidence thereof was relevant and material to his said defence.’ [. . . ]. Rules of court 
can only affect procedure: whereas an Act of Parliament comes in like a lion. It can affect 
both procedure and substance alike. [. . .] In the absence of express provision to the 
contrary Parliament, whenever it provides for the creation of a statutory tribunal, must be 
presumed not to have intended that the tribunal should be authorised to act in contraven-
tion of one of the fundamental rules of natural justice or fairness: audi alteram partem
[no-one should be condemned unheard].  
www.ebook3000.com

2 POSITIVISM
183
2a Origins of positivism
Scientific positivism owes much to empiricism, the view that all knowledge must 
ultimately come from the senses. Positivism’s departure from (and arguably radi-
calisation of) empiricism arises from, first, its insistence that knowledge begins and 
ends with scientific enquiry and no further discussion of metaphysics or ideas is 
necessary or desirable (Skorupski, 1993: 119–20). This is a radical epistemology: 
all knowledge must come from, or be sought through the methods of, scientific 
research. A second departure from empiricism is the application of these principles 
directly to moral and ethical thought. Ethics is required to reconstitute itself on 
scientific lines or risk being branded metaphysics. ‘Value’ itself must become some-
thing intelligible in scientific terms (Ayer, 1970). We have, therefore, an assertion 
that the sole route to truth is through science, that all metaphysical speculation is 
misguided and that values should be reduced to facts.
The historical evolution of positivism in the nineteenth century – at which point 
what we now label ‘legal positivism’ had already begun to take on its own distinctive 
characteristics – betrayed difficulties and internal conflicts in this aspiration. Auguste 
Comte (1798–1857), one of the founders of the discipline of sociology, exhibited 
the merits and excesses of positivism. On the one hand, he applied scientific methods 
to the study of society (which at that point had changed little from the observations of 
Aristotle) and pursued an encyclopaedic, and historical, view of what it is to be human 
within human society. On the other hand, this was combined with a quasi-religious 
view of the progress of humanity through the pursuit and use of scientific rationality 
(Skrorupski, 1993: 119). By embracing ideas of humanity’s progress Comte did not 
escape from or reject metaphysics, nor did he satisfactorily reduce value to fact. The 
facts of science have no such simple correlation with the values of society.
We have inherited some of these tensions to the extent that we as a society are 
prone to assume that science is authoritative in all domains, that positing the exist-
ence of anything outside the world constructed by scientific investigation is mere 
speculation, and that therefore scientific methods and analysis provide the only au-
thoritative guide to the organisation of human affairs. The premises and conclusion 
of this argument are false and the deduction itself is invalid. Science is a source of de-
bate, not certainty, and science’s assumptions are not a direct guide to social values.
The positivist worldview is also generally interested in and well disposed towards 
rules. As with empiricism there is an assumption that all nature exhibits regularity, 
that nature is law-like (Hampson, 1968). This means explanations and predictions 
about nature are possible, and such explanations will take the form of rules. These 
could be general rules up to and including the rule that ‘nature exhibits law-like 
regularity’ (an important, though often implicit, assumption in scientific research). 
It also means that all scientific observation, and therefore all reality, is amenable 
to expression in the form of rules. This is distinguishable from other empiricist 

CHAPTER 5 RULE
184
philosophies which concede that we cannot treat ‘nature’s law-like regularity’ as a 
universal rule. (David Hume, despite being central to empiricism, was sceptical of 
such claims (Hume, 1975)). It is also distinguishable from those positions that seek 
to preserve a distinctive realm of value where public rules are not appropriate or are 
misguided (see Wittgenstein, below). Positivism is, in short, the philosophy that has 
(albeit indirectly in some instances) formed the basis of our modern understanding 
of the world and particularly of law as a set of public rules.
EXAMPLE
Regina v Turner (Terence) [1975] 2 W.L.R. 56
Powerful claims made in defence of science and scientific expertise are still a feature of 
our Courts. Expert testimony provides clarity for jurors in complex trials. But Courts are 
becoming suspicious of the quantity and quality of expert witnesses in Courts.
We all know that both men and women who are deeply in love can, and sometimes do, 
have outbursts of blind rage when discovering unexpected wantonness on the part of their 
loved ones; the wife taken in adultery is the classical example of the application of the 
defence of ‘provocation’; and when death or serious injury results, profound grief usually 
follows. Jurors do not need psychiatrists to tell them how ordinary folk who are not suffer-
ing from any mental illness are likely to react to the stresses and strains of life. It follows 
that the proposed evidence was not admissible to establish that the defendant was likely 
to have been provoked. The same reasoning applies to its suggested admissibility on the 
issue of credibility. The jury had to decide what reliance they could put upon the defend-
ant’s evidence. He had to be judged as someone who was not mentally disordered. This is 
what juries are empanelled to do. The law assumes they can perform their duties properly. 
The jury in this case did not need, and should not have been offered, the evidence of a 
psychiatrist to help them decide whether the defendant’s evidence was truthful.
2b Logical positivism
The already radical agenda of positivism became intensified in the early twentieth 
century with the foundation of the ‘Vienna Circle’ of philosophers and physicists 
(Skorupski, 1993). This group, influenced by the early Wittgenstein and his work on 
sense and logic, sought to purify positivism of metaphysics and re-found enquiry on 
the basis of ‘verificationism’ (Ayer, 1970). In this form of positivism, propositions 
(i.e. statements about the world in the form of sentences) only have sense if they 
are true by definition (tautologies or mathematical statements) or empirically verifi-
able. Verification requires a set of statements or conditions whereby a proposition 
could be checked empirically by the senses; propositions that cannot be so verified 
are metaphysical, and therefore nonsense. For example, statements about objects in 
the universe are meaningful because there is, in theory, a set of processes by which 
www.ebook3000.com

2 POSITIVISM
185
they can be verified. Conversely, ‘murder is always morally wrong’ yields no means 
of verification – by what means could we verify the existence of ‘wrongness’? – and 
is therefore nonsense.
Verificationism clearly leads to a problematic relationship with psychological and 
moral ideas, and indeed with any assertion based on cognitive rather than empiri-
cal judgment. It led to the ‘behaviourist’ movement in psychology where all talk 
of mental states is replaced with testable and verifiable behaviour (Winch, 1958). 
Furthermore, in the context of moral theory it gave rise to ‘emotivism’, the idea that 
all values claims are intended to persuade but are, strictly, nonsense (Baggini and 
Fosl, 2007). When someone insists that ‘murder is wrong’ this may well have some 
impact on how we think about life and how we should act, but this is not because 
the proposition is ‘true’. In fact, the proposition is wholly meaningless but exerts a 
powerful, emotional, effect on people who hear it.
Importantly we can, however, distinguish the proposition ‘murder is wrong’ 
from the proposition ‘murder is illegal’. This, on the contrary, indicates some-
thing that can be verified using laws in statute books or the practices of courts. 
Law fairs much better in the logical positivist’s world as a set of empirically veri-
fiable assertions about what law-makers have commanded and what generally 
happens when law is implemented in the Courts. Nonetheless, any necessary 
relationship with morality has to be rejected (see Skorupski, 1993: 28–9). If all 
moral propositions lack sense, this nonsense is likely to infect our understanding 
of law and legal systems. The challenge presented by the logical positivists would 
be to wholly expunge any appeal to unverifiable value claims from legal discus-
sion. But such a position is not adopted by most legal positivists because while 
there may not be any necessary overlap between the content of law and content 
of morality, the language of morality still has some role to play in analysing law 
(see Hart, 1994: 172–3).
EXAMPLE
Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum v Union of India (1996) 5 SCC 647 
Supreme Court of India
This judgment, the consequence of a claim brought against tanneries whose industry was 
poisoning drinking water in the State of Tamil Nadu, invokes two key principles of environ-
mental law. First, the precautionary principle that demands action even in the absence of 
clear scientific evidence, and second the polluter pays principle which puts liability, after 
an event of environmental harm, on the polluter to serve as a deterrent to others. Is there 
a contradiction between normal scientific research into cause and effect and the legal 
assumption that risk exists without scientific evidence?
➨

CHAPTER 5 RULE
186
2c Legal positivism
The fact that a form of positivism has come to dominate debate about law should 
not surprise us. Both the general objectives of positivism (attention to posited real-
ity and a rejection of metaphysical explanation) and its implicit agenda (to rid en-
quiry of unverifiable dogmatic assumptions) offer to demystify law and at the same 
time to give it its proper – social, not metaphysical – place within the evolution of a 
culture and state. Legal positivism is, then, a bid to clarify and demystify an area of 
activity where there is a tendency towards categorical anarchy. All life is contained 
within law, and all means (political, psychological and emotive) seem to be at its 
disposal to reach judgments; adding to this mixture the contested idea of morality 
is a recipe for confused (or certainly ‘unscientific’) thinking.
In fact, legal positivists share the assumption that there are distinctive means 
available to legal systems that allow us to distinguish law from other social phe-
nomenon, namely its source and its form. Law does not reach decisions by just any 
means, but by using legitimate means authorised by legitimate sources of authority. 
Moreover, positivism seeks to give law its ‘proper place’ in our lives and our thinking 
by distinguishing our social and political culture from our legal system. Our society 
gives rise to and requires a legal system, but that system must be, in many respects, 
independent of that society. Positivism allows us to separate out these closely re-
lated ideas by showing that law does have a specific and distinctive origin and that 
it is distinguishable from the ‘mores’, the morality, of a society. Two core ideas are 
at work here. First, the positivist ‘social thesis’ that law is a social phenomenon; the 
source of law is social practices (see Bix, 2004: 203–4). Second, the ‘separation the-
sis’ that law can be analytically separated from morality (Raz, 2009). We turn first 
to one form of ‘social thesis’: Austin’s command theory.
In its ‘classic’ form as promulgated by John Austin (1790–1859), legal positiv-
ism seeks to demonstrate that law is the ‘command of a sovereign’ supported by 
force. While this picture of the nature of law is much criticised (e.g. Tur, 1978) it 
has one clear merit: identifying exactly what should be labelled ‘law’ and exclud-
ing that which is potentially law-like but only a social trend, ethical commitment 
The authority so constituted by the Central Government shall implement the ‘precaution-
ary principle’ and the ‘polluter pays’ principle. The authority shall, with the help of expert 
opinion and after giving opportunity to the concerned polluters [to present evidence,] 
assess the loss to the ecology/environment in the affected areas and shall also identify 
the individuals/families who have suffered because of the pollution and shall assess 
the compensation to be paid to the said individuals/families. The authority shall further 
determine the compensation to be recovered from the polluters as cost of reversing the 
damaged environment. The authority shall lay down just and fair procedure for completing 
the exercise.
www.ebook3000.com

2 POSITIVISM
187
or religious injunction. There is some intuitive appeal in seeing law as amounting 
to a set of obligations taking the form ‘do this or suffer the consequences’. After 
all, we may debate and discuss other areas of life – politics, morality and personal 
commitments – but we obey the law.
By specifying exactly what the origin of law is, Austin gives us the means to 
distinguish laws from all other rule-governed activities. That origin is the sover-
eign understood as that entity that commands within a given territory and is not 
commanded by any higher authority: ‘If a determinate human superior, not in a 
habit of obedience to a like superior, receive habitual obedience from the bulk 
of a given society, that determinate superior is sovereign in that society’ (Austin 
quoted in Freeman, 2001: 251). The sovereign is that body or person whose com-
mands we habitually obey and who, conversely, is not in the habit of obeying any 
other source of commands. At the root of any and all legal rules is a single person 
or body who has the power to promulgate rules and whose rules are habitually 
obeyed (see Bix, 2004: 10–14).
While we might find this command account of law too centred on power (law is 
surely more than a variation of ‘might is right’), legally inadequate (in marginalis-
ing customary and common law) or even morally suspect (there are, ostensibly, no 
limits to what a sovereign can command), it has clear value in separating out the 
territory of legal enquiry. It respects the distinction between facts and values, and 
delineates what should be left to political or moral decision-making. A well defined 
‘province’ is created for lawyers and legal philosophers – the commands of the sov-
ereign – leaving moral and political philosophers to concern themselves with the 
shape that action and society might, ideally, take. Moreover, the command theory 
treats law as (exclusively) a set of facts with verifiable social origins. Whatever legal 
rules we encounter are, either explicitly or implicitly, endorsed or commanded by the 
sovereign; anything purporting to be a legal rule without such origins is mislabelled.
Due to some of the difficulties already indicated in Austin’s account – the limit-
less power of the sovereign, and those legal rules that have not come directly from a 
Parliament but from custom and practice – modern (twentieth-century) legal posi-
tivism has sought to find a way to maintain the distinctively ‘posited’ dimensions 
of law without recourse to commands or to morality. One way of doing this is by 
paying closer attention to how law is effective in society. In contrast to simple ideas 
of obedience, appeal to social efficacy requires isolating those sources that give rise 
to law and law-abiding behaviour including, but not exclusively, the sovereign. For 
example, this could be the fact that legal rules are understood and accepted as creat-
ing obligations, and therefore legal rules do not have be associated with a threat. 
Treating the rules of law as garnering or generating obedience does not thereby 
commit us to the idea that law is another form of social more (an unconscious, 
customary, pattern of behaviour) or, worse, as a variation of the threat of the armed 
criminal. Law generates a sense of obligation (see discussion of Hart, below).

CHAPTER 5 RULE
188
Another version of the social thesis is found in the work of Joseph Raz (b.1939). 
In his account – a stronger form of social thesis named the ‘sources thesis’ – legal 
rules give us a special and distinctive set of reasons for acting, reasons different from 
those found in morality or in prudential, instrumental, thinking. Those reasons lie 
in the proven authority of legal systems, as social institutions, to give decisions that 
are fair and justified (Raz, 2009: 12–16). This, for Raz, means that we only to need 
to look at legal institutions, their practices and our attitudes towards them in order 
to understand law. There is no need to turn to external or higher sources of authority 
and justification to treat law as an authorised and justified set of rules and practices. 
A certain set of rules are authoritative – they have a socially accredited sources – and 
this authority does not rely on any justification outside society. In Hart and Raz 
the emphasis is on facts: what is verifiably associated with law, but its rules, or the 
acceptance of rules by a society.
The more specific ‘separation thesis’ takes as its guiding principle that legal 
rules can be wholly separated from moral rules. This position accords with one 
key part of the positivist agenda, namely the rejection of the idea that law is in 
any way dependent on ‘external’ justification by morality. While it is clear that 
there is a contingent relationship between law and morality – the rules of one are 
often the rules the other – laws do not need justification on the basis of moral 
rules or principles (see Bix, 2004: 198–199). While this has been construed as a 
‘project’ of insisting that judicial decision-making be free from moral content and 
moral judgments (Kelsen’s work could be seen as an instance of such a project, 
see Chapter 6) few positivists would want to suggest that law-making should be 
isolated from wider moral concerns, nor would they deny that there is a recur-
rent overlap between law and morality. Rather – and this is where the separation 
thesis can be subsumed under the social thesis – legal rules of all kinds arise 
from social sources that do not need validation by anything ‘outside’ society, its 
practices and its institutions.
EXAMPLE
Parliament Act 1911
With a bicameral legislature (e.g. the two Houses of Parliament or the two Houses of the 
US Congress) are one or both Houses sovereign? In the 1911 Parliament Act, the UK 
House of Commons specifies circumstances when – with popular support and in anticipa-
tion of wider reform – it would excise power without the Lords’ consent. Does this make 
the Commons the ultimate source of law? A command theory would say, in these circum-
stances, make the Commons alone the source of law; a wider view of law’s sources could 
encompass the Lords, Commons and common law.
➨
www.ebook3000.com

3 HART
189
3  Hart 
 
 Introduction 
 The work of H.L.A. Hart (1907–92) is, in Anglo-American philosophy, the most 
influential work of the twentieth century and in many quarters remains the start-
ing point for discussion in analytical jurisprudence, i.e. philosophy concerned with 
analysing legal concepts and the distinctive characteristics of law. This means that 
his work is a shared reference point for engaging in contemporary debate on the 
philosophy of law. It is also significant for the centrality of rules within its vision of 
law. Hart’s analysis of rules is powerful and nuanced. It provides the analytical clar-
ity sought by legal positivism, but also contains an element of conceptual scepticism 
that runs counter to aspects of scientific, logical and earlier legal positivism. 
 The debt owed to the earlier legal positivist tradition is explicit in Hart’s work. 
He is a legal positivist taking as his starting-point law as a set of facts. Facts  partially
characterised by being rules promulgated by a sovereign  sometimes backed with the 
threat of force and possessing what resembles habitual obedience. The fact that this 
is a hesitant characterisation of law is central to Hart’s project. Command theories 
fail to capture,  inter alia : the functioning of legal institutions and legal practices lack-
ing any obvious coercive element; the fact that law is not created and administered 
by a single body but by complex institutional arrangements; and the fact that our 
‘habitual obedience’ is actually conscious acceptance of a system of governance, not 
unthinking obedience to any single sovereign. 
 In constructing his criticism of command theories, Hart commences with 
Wittgenstein’s sceptical analysis of concepts (see below). Concepts such as just, 
good, state, rule and so on, are not neatly defined things with single, univocal, 
meanings or functions. They are used in different ways in different contexts, with no 
single common thread running through their uses. That ‘common thread’ is what 
3  Hart
 Whereas it is expedient that provision should be made for regulating the relations between 
the two Houses of Parliament / And whereas it is intended to substitute for the House of 
Lords as it at present exists a Second Chamber constituted on a popular instead of he-
reditary basis, but such substitution cannot be immediately brought into operation / And 
whereas provision will require hereafter to be made by Parliament in a measure effecting 
such substitution for limiting and defining the powers of the new Second Chamber, but 
it is expedient to make such provision as in this Act appears for restricting the existing 
powers of the House of Lords: [. . .] (1) If a Money Bill, having been passed by the House 
of Commons, and sent up to the House of Lords at least one month before the end of the 
session, is not passed by the House of Lords without amendment within one month after it 
is so sent up to that House, the Bill shall, unless the House of Commons direct to the con-
trary, be presented to His Majesty and become an Act of Parliament on the Royal Assent 
being signified, notwithstanding that the House of Lords have not consented to the Bill. 

CHAPTER 5 RULE
190
we are searching for if we are determined to find the meaning of a word, but no such 
thread can be found (Hart, 1994: 280). Accordingly, legal philosophers should not 
seek to find hidden uniformity in the uses of ‘law’ or ‘rule’; rather we should accept 
that important terms have a ‘core’ meaning and a ‘penumbra’ (a halo) of other uses. 
The central challenge of Hart’s work is to do this with the concept of ‘law’.
3a The concept of law
Hart’s pursuit of a concept of law is not, therefore, an empirical enquiry concerned 
with precisely isolating what should, and should not, be called law. Rather he is 
concerned with what is meant by law among those most versed in, or qualified in, 
the use of law. The intention behind this is not to find out, empirically, what in-
formed people say ‘law’ means, it is to isolate one particular set of practices within 
which the word ‘law’ is used – namely practices within legal systems – and analyse 
what is being meant by law in that context. Put in negative terms, Hart is resisting 
the temptation to stipulate a single authoritative meaning for ‘law’. After all, ‘law’ 
connotes rules (from the rules of courtrooms, to the generalisations of the natural 
sciences), but it would be a distortion of language to say that only one class of uses 
is the legitimate or correct use: ‘this book is offered as an elucidation of the concept
of law, rather than a definition of ‘law’ which might naturally be expected to provide 
a rule or rules for the use of these expressions’ (1994: 213).
From this foundation, Hart outlines the deficiencies in Austin’s command theory. 
This is the ‘classic’ positivist argument that law is a set of facts characterised by use 
of rules, promulgated by a sovereign, which are then reinforced with the threat of 
coercion. Hart shows that this theory cannot make a distinction between the com-
mand of a sovereign and that of a gangster making demands with menaces: both 
are commands supported with the threat of force. We would surely want to say that 
there is something rather more consensual (if also potentially coercive) about the 
laws of the land. Nor does this make sense of the function of common law and 
customary law, forms of law accreted over time and separable from the will of any 
particular sovereign. Further, a command theory cannot make sense of the transi-
tions between sovereigns. In the absence of sovereign (during an ‘interregnum’ or 
dissolved Parliament) law would presumably cease to exist.
From this set of criticisms, Hart moves to enrich our understanding of legal rules 
and our obedience to them. Rules, for Hart, are not merely things external to us 
but have an internal force. We can see rules objectively (‘in the world’) when we see 
people engaged in behaviour that is law-like: when everyone stops at a red light, or 
everyone pays their taxes. However, to see this habitual obedience as law-like behav-
iour, in the same way that a scientist sees law-like regularity in the orbit of the moon, 
is missing something crucial: that the people exhibiting this behaviour see and 
perceive themselves as being obliged to follow a rule. If we want to understand why 
www.ebook3000.com

3 HART
191
it is that law exists in the absence of single sovereign individual, why common and 
customary laws are laws ‘proper’, and most importantly why it is that we distinguish 
the sovereign’s rules from the gangster’s rules, we look to our ‘internal’ relationship 
with those rules. This is not to say we constantly and persistently give our conscious 
consent to the rules that we abide by. Nor does it mean that everyone, without 
exception, is law-abiding. Rather, legal rules are rules that we appear to ‘habitually 
obey’ because we have consciously acknowledged the force of a rule, not because we are 
automatons who have learnt to fear the consequences of not obeying. ‘[I]f a social 
rule is to exist some at least must look upon the behaviour in question as a general 
standard to be followed by the group as a whole. A social rule has an ‘internal’ 
aspect [. . .]’ (Hart, 1994: 56).
This internal aspect allows us to make an important distinction with respect to 
obedience. It was suggested that moral rules, legal rules and the commands of a crim-
inal all have some claim to objectivity; these rules have an objective, public, element 
because they come from ‘outside’ ourselves and are reinforced by the practices – and 
sometimes the threats – of those around us. However, some of these are rules that 
we assent to (e.g. moral obligations to others), some are simply obligations that are 
placed upon us (coercive threats). Hart wants to, in a similar vein, distinguish ‘being 
obliged to’ and ‘having an obligation’. We can be obliged, compelled, to do many 
kinds of things. But ‘having an obligation’ means being bound by something that has 
justification and that we know has some kind of justification. We recognise and 
acknowledge certain things as binding rules (we ‘have an obligation’) and are simply 
coerced in other contexts (we are ‘obliged’). To confuse the two is to confuse the 
internal and external aspect of rules. Externally, a criminal’s instructions and a legis-
lative rule may both look like coercive commands. Obedience to those commands 
shows that the subjects of the commands were obliged. Only in the case of following 
the legislative rule does the actor see themselves as having an obligation, and there is 
good reason to see this as the mark of – all and any – legal rule.
Hart’s account separates a legal rule from a categorical imperative. A categori-
cal imperative binds us in the absence of hypothetical judgments about the likely 
outcome of acting. Legal rules certainly share some kind of similarity in their cre-
ating obligations, but this is not, unlike a categorical imperative, independent of 
all internal perceptions, decisions and judgments. On the contrary, the imperative 
force of law is somewhere between the categorical (it represents obligation) and the 
hypothetical (it is a decision to abide by a legal rule, even if such rule-following is 
contrary to our immediate interests). Our relationship with legal rules is, in other 
words, distinguishable from moral rules that hold good independently of our deci-
sions, and distinguishable from the merely prudent decision to act in such a way as 
the risk of bad consequences is avoided.
Hart thereby offers us the foundations of a more robust positivist view of law, 
although the picture is not yet complete because Hart has more to say about the 

CHAPTER 5 RULE
192
relationship between rules and the concept of law. Note at this point, however, that 
Hart’s conception of rules is both objective and internal. Rules are part of the world, 
because they are found in the practices and behaviour of persons. At the same time 
they are ‘internal’ because rule following cannot be understood without the sense
of obligation. This is a persuasive combination of two quite different dimensions 
of legal rules, their public nature and their dependence on ‘internal’ rule-following.
3b Primary and secondary rules
Legal rules are, then, that group of rules which we habitually obey and which guide 
our actions. However, we do not immediately associate them with the threat of vio-
lent coercion by the sovereign, rather we obey them because they give rise to a sense 
of obligation. Within a stable democracy, people obey legal rules because they are the 
law and not because they fear for their safety, but these rules are not a single homog-
enous set of rules, and this is especially clear to those working within a legal system 
and administering its rules. Those who work within legal institutions also work 
with, and under, rules of a more complex nature. That is, rules about creating legal 
rules and using legal rules. In other words, legal systems possess another system of 
EXAMPLE
French Civil Code (As Amended 2004), Title 3, Chapter 1
The law of contract naturally varies between countries, and the rules governing the crea-
tion of valid contracts show some difference between jurisdictions. The French Civil Code 
provides a set of rules for identifying where a contract exists and whether it is valid. 
Conscious adoption of an obligation is central, as it is in other jurisdictions. Do such rules 
make sense as the ‘command’ of a sovereign?
Art. 1101:
A contract is an agreement by which one or several persons bind themselves, towards 
one or several others, to transfer, to do or not to do something. / Art. 1102: A contract 
is synallagmatic [imposes mutual obligations] or bilateral where the contracting parties 
bind themselves mutually towards each other./ Art. 1103: It is unilateral where one or 
more persons are bound towards one or several others, without there being any obligation 
on the part of the latter. / Art. 1104: It is commutative where each party binds himself 
to transfer or do a thing which is considered as the equivalent of what is transferred to 
him or of what is done for him. [. . .] Where the equivalent consists in a chance of gain 
or of loss for each party, depending upon an uncertain event, a contract is aleatory. / 
Art. 1105: A contract of benevolence is one by which one of the parties procures a purely 
gratuitous advantage to the other. Art. 1106: A contract for value is one which obliges 
each party to transfer or do something.
www.ebook3000.com

3 HART
193
rules which underpin the action-governing generalisations we generally think of as 
legal rules: legal systems involve constitutive and not just regulatory rules.
Hart calls the main body of regulative rules ‘primary rules’. These are the ‘laws of 
the land’ which guide our action whether we are closely involved in legal matters or 
just dimly aware that there are laws that constrain what we can do. The governing 
that takes place under primary rules is not coercion by force but the outcome of the 
creation and acceptance of obligations. Primary rules give us standards of behaviour 
not unlike, but nonetheless distinct from, the standards of behaviour offered by 
morality. The difference is that law always takes the form of rules, always arises from 
social decisions and social institutions, and moreover, contains rules which change 
and vary over time through the exercise of other rules.
Under rules of one type, which may well be considered the basic or primary type, human 
beings are required to do or abstain from certain actions, whether they wish or not. Rules 
of the other type are in a sense parasitic upon or secondary to the first; for they provide 
that human beings may by doing or saying certain things introduce new rules of the pri-
mary type, extinguish or modify old ones, or in various ways determine their incidence or 
control their operations. (1994: 81)
These other rules are secondary rules. These are rules which allow for the legiti-
mate change of, and adjudication between, primary legal rules. Without such rules 
of change and adjudication we would have to see all rules as sovereign commands: 
binding us unconditionally until such time as the sovereign chose to modify them. 
Law possesses rules for adjudication, i.e. rules for determining how conflicts be-
tween rules are decided. Also rules of modification: rules determining how and 
in what circumstances rules can be changed (1994: 92–4). This is what we would 
expect to find within a mature legal system: a complex web of rules wherein major 
decisions are rule-governed decisions not diktats from a sovereign or executive.
Perhaps most importantly, this group of rules contains the ultimate rule by which 
any rule, primary or secondary, is to be recognised as a legal rule: the rule of recogni-
tion. The rule is the means by which any rule can be judged to be a part of the legal 
system; it is the standard by which any other rules can be said to be included within 
the legal system: ‘[t]his will specify some feature or features possession of which 
by a suggested rule is taken as conclusive affirmative indication that it is a rule of 
the group to be supported by the social pressure it exerts’ (1994: 94). Adjudication 
and modification cannot take place without a clear indication of whether a rule is 
truly a legal rule. However, the precise nature of the rule of recognition is difficult 
to pin-point. In the UK legal system it would be the fact that legitimate legislation 
is created by Parliament in accordance with the UK’s constitutional arrangements. 
In the international legal system, Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court 
of Justice (which states the legitimate sources of international law) takes its author-
ity, ultimately, from the Charter of the United Nations, which in turn takes its force 
from the ability of sovereign states to agree to the existence of international legal 

CHAPTER 5 RULE
194
organisations. However, there is also a sense in which recognition relates to that 
dimension of legal rules – we see them as creating obligations – which means that 
they generate more than slavish obedience. In this sense the rule of recognition is less 
the fact of a constitutional origin for legal rules and more a state of mind whereby 
those administering primary and secondary rules see and accept certain kinds of rules 
as legal ones using ‘criteria of validity which [. . .] refer not to the content of the law 
but to the manner and form in which the laws are created or adopted’ (1994: 258).
The concept of law is, then, most adequately captured by this combination of 
primary and secondary rules. This is not only for the negative reason that command 
theories fail to capture the nuances of rules and of obedience. It is for the important 
conceptual reason that the use of the word ‘law’ by those most closely associated 
with legal systems always designates two sets of rules and denotes a definite group of 
rules that fall within the scope of the rule of recognition. This is not to say that ‘law’ 
only or authoritatively means the union of primary and secondary rules under a rule 
of recognition. It does entail that if we want to understand ‘law’ in a way meaningful 
to those within legal institutions then we must attend to the internal aspect of rules 
and the regulation of rules by rules.
3c Hart and his critics
The influence of Hart’s work has been considerable and much contemporary ana-
lytical jurisprudence takes Hart’s work as its starting-point. Three areas where his 
work has been extended or criticised are considered: the role of legal institutions, 
responses by natural lawyers and direct attacks on Hart’s picture of rules.
EXAMPLE
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969) Articles 31 and 32
This Convention contains the basic rules of interpretation in international law. Command 
theories of law could not grant international law full legal status because it lacks a single, 
commanding, sovereign. Nonetheless, international law clearly possesses secondary rules 
that govern its primary rules.
Article 31 General rule of interpretation:
1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance with the ordinary meaning to be 
given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose. / 
2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a treaty shall comprise, in addition 
to the text, including its preamble and annexes: (a) any agreement relating to the treaty 
which was made between all the parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty; 
(b) any instrument which was made by one or more parties in connection with the conclu-
sion of the treaty and accepted by the other parties as an instrument related to the treaty.
www.ebook3000.com

3 HART
195
Neil MacCormick’s (1941–2009) work places greater emphasis on the state and 
the institutions within which legal rules function. As suggested above, Hart’s con-
cept of law concerns the behaviour and perceptions of those within legal institutions. 
MacCormick stresses the centrality of this context and this point of view. Without 
legal institutions providing and administering secondary rules, the union of primary 
and secondary rules makes little sense. Thus MacCormick’s account maintains the 
importance of primary and secondary rules but, significantly, shifts focus away from 
rules to institutional norms:
Normative systems are systems that guide the judgements and actions of rational agents. A 
rational agent concerned to observe the norms of a particular system needs to have means 
of discovering which norms belong within it at any given time, hence needs to know what 
purport to be its norms, and which of the purported norms are genuinely valid and have 
not (yet) been terminated. (1988: 342)
The crucial importance of this shift of vocabulary to the language of norms is the 
subject of Chapter 6.
As we might expect, Hart elicited response from those that might be broadly 
categorised as natural lawyers. Patrick Devlin (1905–92) made the argument 
that rules alone could not explain the particular content that we demand from 
law (see Dworkin (ed.), 1977). Engaging with Devlin on the specific issue of 
content, Hart, amplifying the aspects of his work that accord with the separa-
tion thesis, denies that there is a necessary relationship between the content of 
morality and the content of law. This does not deny that there may be a close 
relationship between law and morality. On the contrary, morality is always 
a critical perspective on legal rules, and Hart himself insists that law should 
have a ‘minimum content of natural law’, i.e. certain commitments, reflecting 
humans’ interest in survival, that are among the most important primary rules: 
‘without such a content laws and morals could not forward the minimum pur-
pose of survival which men have in associating with one another’ (1994: 193). 
This ‘minimum content’ seems to concede considerable ground to the natural 
law position. But note that these are primary rules that we would expect to see in 
a sustainable legal system given the problems perennially generated by human 
coexistence and the (pragmatic not moral) requirement of a legal system to 
acknowledge them. However, if they were essential to the concept of law they 
would have to have the status of secondary rules, i.e. they would have to be 
among those rules necessary for primary to rules to be administered, adjudi-
cated or recognised. They are not a moral gauge or threshold by which a legal 
system and its primary rules are judged. They are elements of any normally 
functioning legal system.
Finally, while Hart divides primary and secondary rules, his account seems reduc-
tive in portraying all aspects of legal procedure as rules. This reduction is attacked by 
critics of ‘formalism’ where rules are seen as complete and exhaustive answers to 

CHAPTER 5 RULE
196
any legal question (see Chapter 6). More specifically, for Dworkin, hard cases, where 
rules cannot provide a simple answer to a legal question, are the key to understand-
ing a legal system (1975; 1998). In hard cases, where a judge has to use a combina-
tion of rules, principles and policies, we see the full potential of legal adjudication;
adjudication is not a mechanistic response to a problem, it is the point where law, 
politics and morality meet in a harmonious way. This is not to say that rules are not 
important or that law is not conceptually distinct from politics and morality, but the 
combination of primary and secondary rules is not a guarantee that an answer can 
be found to a legal problem. The range of tools available to judges are wider than 
rules, and particularly in hard cases – where what is owed to the parties is unclear, or 
where the interests of public policy are clearly at odds with the strict application of 
rules – principles can be deployed that do not formally or mechanistically determine 
an outcome but allow judges to integrate the wider, political, commitments of a 
society with its legal activities. In essence, Dworkin, and other critics of formalism, 
point to the fact that Hart’s account appears to describe any well regulated system 
of rules. A club or organisation may well have primary and secondary rules. The 
decisive characteristic of a legal system is that it can, and must, generate just answers 
where rules are incomplete, inconsistent or unfair.
EXAMPLE
Shaw v DPP, House of Lords [1961] 2 W.L.R. 897
In an obscenity trial concerning the distribution of material with the capacity to ‘deprave 
and corrupt’, this Court found itself considering the moral welfare of the state as a whole. 
Clearly something more than primary rules is at work in such considerations. Issues of 
public policy are often mentioned which, while generalisation, are not obviously rules. 
Nonetheless, Hart was perfectly aware that law ‘follows’ public policy and ‘public morals’; 
he simply denied that law was conceptually dependent upon them.
In the sphere of criminal law I entertain no doubt that there remains in the courts of law a 
residual power to enforce the supreme and fundamental purpose of the law, to conserve 
not only the safety and order but also the moral welfare of the State, and that it is their 
duty to guard it against attacks which may be the more insidious because they are novel 
and unprepared for. That is the broad head (call it public policy if you wish) within which 
the present indictment falls. It matters little what label is given to the offending act. To 
one of your Lordships it may appear an affront to public decency, to another considering 
that it may succeed in its obvious intention of provoking libidinous desires it will seem 
a corruption of public morals. Yet others may deem it aptly described as the creation of 
a public mischief or the undermining of moral conduct. The same act will not in all ages 
be regarded in the same way. The law must be related to the changing standards of life, 
not yielding to every shifting impulse of the popular will but having regard to fundamental 
assessments of human values and the purposes of society.
www.ebook3000.com

4 WITTGENSTEIN
197
4  Wittgenstein 
 
 Introduction 
 Ludwig Wittgenstein’s (1889–1951) work is given close attention as a powerful 
analysis of rules, and because his work had a great impact on both logical positivism 
and on Hart’s work. While his significance for legal theory as a whole is contested, 
understanding his work sheds light on positivism and on the analysis of rules more 
specifically. 
 Wittgenstein’s work on rules and rule-following clarifies what it is we understand 
by rules and what we should expect from rules. Put bluntly, we expect certitude 
and guidance from rules. However, for Wittgenstein, that guidance comes from the 
whole world of our experiences and our social practices not from  rules themselves . 
If we want to know how to follow a rule, or whether we have followed a rule cor-
rectly, we have to look to the actions of those around us and their judgments about 
successful and unsuccessful rule following ( Wittgenstein, 2001 : 68–77). Following 
a rule is a social activity, not a mental activity. 
 The early Wittgenstein shared with other philosophers of the early twentieth 
century an interest in the use and foundations of logic. He sought to show that the 
entirety of our world – to the extent that it is intelligible – is reducible to simple 
facts which can be placed in logical relationship with one another. Whenever lan-
guage is used to assert facts, or assert relations between facts, it is able to perfectly 
‘picture’ the facts: ‘A picture presents a situation in logical space, the existence and 
non-existence of states of affairs. / A picture is a model of reality’ (1974: 9). Every 
fact can be described in a proposition (a complete idea or sentence) designated true 
or false; every combination of facts can also be pictured as true or false in this way. 
‘What any picture, of whatever form, must have in common with reality, in order to 
be able to depict it – correctly or incorrectly – in any way at all, is logical form, i.e. 
the form of reality’ (1974: 11). Thus, with the aid of logic, our world in its entirety 
can be pictured through language. ‘It is a beautiful idea that logic expresses the es-
sential structure of fact – the logical structure of the world – that is, of everything 
that is the case’ ( Skorupski, 1993 : 174). The negative consequence of this ‘picture 
theory’ of language is that where assertions cannot form a picture of the world (i.e. 
where our assertions attempt to say something ‘metaphysical’ about the structure 
of the universe or make judgments concerning the value of a state of affairs), then 
they are strictly meaningless. This does not mean that other experiences of the world 
should be ignored (like experiences associated with religion, art, morality). But 
these cannot be expressed in language – they do not admit or truth or falsity – and 
they cannot, therefore, make sense: ‘they are indeed, things that cannot be put into 
words. They  make themselves manifest . They are what is mystical.’ ( Wittgenstein, 1974 : 
89, emphasis in original.) 
4  Wittgenstein

CHAPTER 5 RULE
198
The merit of this picture view of language is that it explains how language, logic 
and the world are inter-related: a perfect correspondence, through adherence to logical 
structures, between the world and the picturing of the world by language. Furthermore, 
it sets the standard of meaning high (logical correspondence with reality and verifiabil-
ity) in a way that is attractive to the scientifically or empirically minded. However, un-
ravelling of this philosophical position came with consideration of the very first move: 
that language is able to perfectly reflect logical standards. This presumption – that the 
logic we aspire to in our arguments is able to give rise to perfect pictures of reality – is 
far from obviously true. Language is far more complicated, and less logical, than this. In 
successful communication we depend upon localised practices (‘forms of life’) which 
give rise to public, shared, language practices (Wittgenstein, 2001: 75). These ‘language-
games’ – ‘games’ only in the sense that the word ‘language’, like the word ‘game’, 
denotes a set of localised practices without a single common denominator – are the 
main characteristic of language (2001: 4). This means, in sum, that ‘logic’ and ‘facts’ are 
secondary. Human activities, human practices and the human ‘form of life’ are primary.
While this rejection of his earlier view leads to sceptical conclusions about the 
role of logic and the limits of language, there is some continuity between the two 
positions, not least the idea that much of what we attempt to express about our 
judgments (including in ethics, law and art) are not matters of logic and fact, but 
attempts to say what ultimately has to be shown. After all, it is perhaps impossible to 
say to someone, to persuade them, they should see the world differently (perhaps to 
‘act in a more responsible manner’) unless and until they themselves see the world 
differently. In a similar way, understanding language through use and practices 
shifts our attention away from conceptual analysis towards what people actually 
do with language: we have to see how language works before we can picture it in 
language. Nonetheless, crucial to the shift in Wittgenstein’s position is the idea that 
rules, including the rules governing how we should act, are not straightforwardly 
logical things which our language can describe, but rather a set of social and behav-
ioural practices that our language helps us to perform.
4a Rules and sense
The early Wittgenstein, then, is preoccupied with language and language’s capacity 
to make sense or to be nonsense. This distinction is more important than it seems, 
because once the limits between these two capacities of language are drawn, there 
is nothing further that can be said about ‘truth’. If language makes sense, it success-
fully says something logical or empirical about the world. If it fails to say something 
logical or empirical it is nonsense. This covers all and every possible relationship be-
tween language and reality and as such nothing more needs to be said about truth.
Our knowledge of the world remains, of course, important, but this can either 
be expressed with logical clarity or cannot be expressed at all. What we perceive 
www.ebook3000.com

4 WITTGENSTEIN
199
about the world around us involves facts and logic and can therefore be expressed. 
Conversely, if our experiences are so unique, subjective, or so fundamental to our 
knowledge of the world that they cannot be expressed (as in certain moral or re-
ligious experiences) then we must ‘pass over it in silence’. They simply cannot be 
expressed and we should not try. The irony at the heart of this view of language and 
logic is that the basic relationship between language and reality that Wittgenstein is 
trying to explain cannot be expressed in language. It does not picture the world: it is 
trying to discuss how we picture the world. It is neither fact nor logic. Therefore the 
theory is, strictly, nonsense.
Those things and experiences that we have to ‘pass over in silence’ (1974: 89) 
are important for understanding both Wittgenstein’s relationship with rules and 
the relationship between his early and his later work. Wittgenstein is not saying 
that the whole of human experience is reducible to the logical or the empirical 
(as the logical positivist tried to argue). Rather he is delineating in what ways 
language can be used and be said to possess sense. This approach – delineating 
what language is used for – is pursued to its logical, and perhaps absurd, conclu-
sions in Wittgenstein’s later work where a ‘use theory’ of meaning is developed. 
Here the meaning of a proposition is not a relationship between language, real-
ity and logic but whatever constitutes successful use of words in practice. ‘The 
King of France’ says nothing about reality or logic (there is presently no king 
of France and no necessary relationship between ‘king’ and ‘France’) but this 
phrase makes sense when it is used in some contexts (e.g. in history books, or as 
an example in a book).
The idea of rules is an important aspect of this later work and requires atten-
tion to both sense and to use. We could describe a rule (be it a law or the rule of 
game) and this would make sense as a description of something in the world, but 
to understand why someone should obey that rule, we are identifying a compulsion 
that is neither logical nor empirical. As such, the force of the rule is something that 
has to be shown and cannot be said. We can make a similar but slightly different 
point in the language of the later Wittgenstein. ‘Rule’ means many different things 
when used in different circumstances. Some uses may or may not be successful: if 
I instruct someone to obey the rules of chess during a Court case or golf tourna-
ment my use of ‘rule’ fails to convey any meaning in that context. The rules belong 
to different contexts but both are rules. Again, using French rules of evidence in an 
English Court means no longer playing that game: both are rules but the context is 
crucial. The question then becomes not whether some aspect of rules ‘cannot be 
said but only shown’, but rather ‘what social conditions make rules meaningful?’ 
The answer to this is not a matter of degrees: it constitutes the meaning of the word 
‘rule’. ‘The word ‘agreement’ and the word ‘rule’ are related to one another, they are 
cousins. If I teach anyone the use of one word, he learns the use of the other with 
it’ (Wittgenstein, 2001: 73).

CHAPTER 5 RULE
200
4b Rule scepticism
The significance of this radical contextualisation of meaning that we find in the 
later Wittgenstein can be understood as a form of scepticism. Meaning is not a 
stable relationship between language and reality but something wholly context-
specific. This analysis includes rules. Rules only have meaning in the course of 
human lives. Were this the extent of Wittgenstein’s analysis, it would be limited 
to making the simple but important point that what is meant by ‘rule’ depends 
on who is saying it and where they are saying it. What is important and challeng-
ing about Wittgenstein’s position is that he wants to discourage us from asking 
further questions such as ‘what mental processes are involved in following a rule?’ 
and ‘what is meant by a rule?’ Wittgenstein’s project is to free us not only from 
the assumption that every word must pick out a group of ‘things’ with a common 
denominator, but from the more general temptation to talk about rule-following 
as an ‘event’, a ‘process’ or any other way using categories from the empirical 
world. Rather, as Landers puts it, the questions that we should be asking are: 
‘“What rule did I purport to be using?” and “What result does the use of that rule 
yield?”‘ (1990: 203). This has an impact on our understanding of rules because 
of the temptation to perceive rules as having a force or meaning that we see or 
EXAMPLE
R v Ann Harris (1836) 173 E.R. 198
In the 1830s, the rules concerning ‘wounding’ and ‘assault’ looked similar. But they can 
be separated out by looking at the intention of the statute that created the rules, as in the 
present case. Looking at the intention behind the rules is not always a simple task. It may 
concern other parts of the same legislation; it may demand consideration of the debates 
that took place prior to passing the legislation. These yield very different results. In either 
case, the additional job of ‘gauging intention’ makes the functioning of rules look a lot less 
automatic, and a lot more interpretative, than they often appear to be.
The prisoner was indicted under the statute [. . .], for wounding a female by biting off the 
end of her nose. Patteson, J., told the jury that in Rex v. Stevens, which had occurred a 
short time ago, the prisoner had been indicted under the same section of the same stat-
ute for biting off the joint of a policeman’s finger, and the case having been reserved for 
the opinion of the fifteen judges, they had determined that the offence of biting off [. . .] 
the joint of a finger did not come within the words ‘stabbing, cutting, or wounding’; and 
the decision proceeded on the ground that it was evidently the intention of the legislature, 
according to the words of the statute, that the wounding should be inflicted with some 
instrument, and not by the hands or teeth; and therefore, in the present case, they must 
acquit the prisoner, who, however, would not escape punishment if she was guilty, as she 
would be indicted for an aggravated assault. Verdict: Not guilty.
www.ebook3000.com

4 WITTGENSTEIN
201
follow or grasp ‘in our minds’. For Wittgenstein, rules and rule-following are not 
‘internal events’ and we should not picture them as things ‘followed in our heads’ 
and then ‘followed, in fact, in the world’. There is no sense in talking about the 
‘internal’ meaning or internal force of rules: following rules is something we do, 
not something we think.
This can be thought to lead to sceptical conclusions about rules and, in particu-
lar, to hit home at Hart’s ‘internal perspective’ on rules. Social practices make rules, 
not something internal to rules, and those practices have nothing to do with things 
‘going on in people’s heads’, but everything to do with successfully doing things in 
the world. Hart’s analysis of obligation is misleading if it means translating the force 
of rules into interior assent or interior recognition. Rather the force, form and function 
of rules are always objective and public. Whatever force or authority underlies rules, 
they are ultimately to be located in social practices that show us when a rule has 
been fulfilled. The explanation of someone following a rule might be that they feel 
obliged by it, but we cannot know of what that obligation consists until we join 
others in following that rule in practice.
Wittgenstein is seeking to demystify rules, and avoid appeal to ‘forces’ by showing 
that we see rule-following behaviour, rather than‘interiorise the force of rules’ . However, 
this does not invalidate Hart’s analysis. Hart, like Wittgenstein, is not interested 
in the ‘internal perspective’ on rules because he is claiming access to our interior 
mental processes. Rather he is saying that there is a group of social practices that 
we, quite legitimately, call ‘following a legal rule out of a sense of obligation’. This 
does not require him to give account of mental processes. It only asserts that we are 
drawing an important distinction when we say that ‘x is following a legal rule’ rather 
than ‘x has been compelled to act in a certain way’. ‘What is necessary is that there 
should be a critical reflective attitude to certain patterns of behaviour as a common 
standard [. . .]’ (Hart, 1994: 57).
A sceptical conclusion might be suggested by one further aspect of Wittgenstein’s 
analysis: if rules are public practices and public behaviour then you cannot follow a 
rule on your own. Because the gauge of following or observing a rule is social prac-
tice and not the conjunction of an interior ‘mental event’ and an action, without 
social practices demonstrating that you have followed the rule, you could never be 
certain that you had followed it:
‘obeying’ a rule is a practice. And to think one is obeying a rule is not to obey a rule. Hence 
it is not possible to obey a rule ‘privately’: otherwise thinking one was obeying a rule 
would be the same thing as obeying it. (2001: 69)
If we set ourselves a rule (or a law), and attempt to abide by it we have no-one with 
whom to agree on what counts as ‘the rules’ and ‘successfully following the rules’. 
Were the rule a public one there would be parameters set by the practices of indi-
viduals; without such practices the ‘rules’ become strictly meaningless because there 
is no ‘agreement in judgment’ underlying the rule.

CHAPTER 5 RULE
202
4c Anti-scepticism
If we are to understand how rules work we cannot appeal to a mysterious prescrip-
tive force that takes hold of our thinking. We are describing successful or unsuccess-
ful behaviour, success being a gauge or standard found in social practice not in the 
‘rules themselves’. The sceptical conclusion to be drawn from this is that rules do not 
seem to have the ‘force’ we assume they possess, because they do not entail special 
mental events called ‘following a rule’.
We do not have to treat this conclusion as a sceptical one, however. We need to 
recall the view of truth, knowledge and language that Wittgenstein applies in his 
work. In the first instance, Wittgenstein is concerned with showing, rather than say-
ing. Certain things do not belong to the realm of facts and logic, but they are no less 
significant for that. Rule-following could be included here: the relationship between a 
rule and an act is not a logical one, nor is it one concerning mental and real facts. It is 
an agreement in judgment between humans. Applying the rules of evidence in Court is 
meaningful; applying the rules of evidence in a party game is meaningless. Thus, while 
rules might well be tied to social behaviours and practices, they are also intimately 
related to what we understand by meaningful or meaningless. Wittgenstein insists that 
we should not strive for a more substantial link between language, truth and reality.
As we return to ideas and positions more directly concerned with legal rules, we can 
consider the potential significance of Wittgenstein’s work for understanding law. One 
EXAMPLE
~,GHQWLI\LQJSKRWRFRS\PDFKLQHSRVHVSUREOHPIRU&X\DKRJD&RXQW\
RIILFLDO&OHYHODQG0HWUR, 2011)
The newspaper report provides 10 pages of a Court transcript. The Court case, concern-
ing office expenses, stalled on the word ‘photocopier’. The witness had only ever used the 
word ‘Xerox’ and his counsel demands clarity concerning Xerox machines and photocopi-
ers. In part this illustrates the fact that meaning has to be connected to use. In part it 
represents the strategic use of rules that is sometimes a feature of Court cases.
Marburger: During your tenure in the computer department at the Recorder’s office, has 
the Recorder’s office had photocopying machines? / Cavanagh: Objection. / Marburger: 
Any photocopying machine? / Patterson: When you say ‘photocopying machine,’ what do 
you mean? / Marburger: Let me be . . . let me make sure I understand your question. 
You don’t have an understanding of what a photocopying machine is? / Patterson: No. 
I want to make sure that I answer your question correctly. / [. . .] Patterson: When you 
say ‘photocopying machine,’ what do you mean? / Marburger: Let me be clear. The term 
‘photocopying machine’ is so ambiguous that you can’t picture in your mind what a pho-
tocopying machine is in an office setting? / Patterson: I just want to make sure I answer 
your question correctly.
www.ebook3000.com

4 WITTGENSTEIN
203
important thing to note about the form of rules is that, for Wittgenstein, rules appear in 
many different contexts and rules do not always have something in common with one 
another. Rather, they have ‘family resemblances’ – overlapping characteristics – with one 
another. Rules of games are not just rules by analogy with ‘proper’ rules: all sorts of rules 
can be considered rules. This means we should not look for a single form or function for 
legal rules. This can make sense of why in some contexts, particularly international law, 
we talk about both ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ rules, with the latter closer to guidance or recom-
mendations, but still in some respects rules (see Twining, 2009). There is no reason to deny 
the latter the status of rules: the important thing is the practices that surround them. 
Moreover, there is nothing fundamentally incompatible with Wittgenstein’s analysis 
and our intuitive understanding of rules. We generally consider that legal rules are bind-
ing both because of from whom they come (Courts or the sovereign) and because they 
are socially considered binding. Such conclusions are entirely compatible with the idea 
that rules are dependent on human action and at the same time lack a ‘mental com-
ponent’. We only face conceptual trouble if we see ourselves as following a legal rule by 
‘having it in our mind’. We are on far safer ground if we assume from the outset a close 
relationship between rules and social practices, behaviour and expectations.
EXAMPLE
%DEELWW6HFUHWDU\RI,QWHULRU et al. v Sweet Home Chapter of Communities 
for Great Oregon et al. 515 U.S. 687 (1995) United States Supreme Court
From the headnote of the case, this is an application of the noscitur a sociis rule to 
clarify responsibilities with respect to endangered species. Discussing the word ‘take’, the 
Court narrows its meaning to active intervention with a protected species, not change 
to its environment. However, even this seems to stretch the ordinary (and legal) use of 
‘take’ beyond its normal use. This is intelligible as the application of one rule ( noscitur 
a sociis) but not another (‘the provisions of statutes should be interpreted as literally 
as possible’).
As relevant here, the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA or Act) makes it unlawful for 
any person to ‘take’ endangered or threatened species [. . .], and defines ‘take’ to mean 
to ‘harass, harm, pursue,’ ‘wound,’ or ‘kill,’ [. . . ]. [The] Secretary of the Interior further 
defines ‘harm’ to include ‘significant habitat modification or degradation where it actually 
kills or injures wildlife.’ Respondents, persons and entities dependent on the forest prod-
ucts industries and others, challenged this regulation on its face, claiming that Congress 
did not intend the word ‘take’ to include habitat modification. The District Court granted 
petitioners summary judgment, but the Court of Appeals ultimately reversed. Invoking the 
noscitur a sociis canon of statutory construction, which holds that a word is known by the 
company it keeps, the court concluded that ‘harm,’ like the other words in the definition 
of ‘take,’ should be read as applying only to the perpetrator’s direct application of force 
against the animal taken.

CHAPTER 5 RULE
204
5  Disobedience 
 
 Introduction 
 Positivism is a powerful means of isolating law from other kinds of obligations and 
other social institutions. It is, however, more difficult to use positivism to analyse 
the justification or authority of law. While positivism isolates, by virtue of its source, 
what can be correctly identified as law, positivism distinguishes this from the ques-
tion of whether particular laws are justified. Justification, as Austin would have 
argued, is the province of morality not jurisprudence ( Austin, 1995 ). 
 Nonetheless, even without external justification – i.e. moral validation – legal 
rules, and legal systems, can be said to have authority. This is highlighted in the disa-
greements between ‘exclusive’ and ‘inclusive’ legal positivists (see  Bix, 2004 : 123–4). 
Exclusive positivists adopt a strong version of the separation thesis, insisting that the 
authority of a legal rule can never depend upon morality. Law’s origin and author-
ity always flows, exclusively, from its social sources (see  Chapter   7 ). Inclusive legal 
positivists concede that while there is no necessary relationship between law and 
morality, a legal system  may accept or encompass moral criteria within its positive law. 
Such criteria are criteria for judgment authorised by a legal system. 
 Civil disobedience is a challenge to both. Acts of civil disobedience express the 
belief that something wholly external to law can negate the authority of a law (in 
opposition to exclusive positivism), or that law’s own inner, moral, resources justify 
the rejection of some laws (pushing inclusive positivism to the point of absurdity). 
Our present concern, then, is the extent to which analysis of the  content , but also the 
sources , of law can make sense of ‘a right to disobey the law’. 
 ‘Civil disobedience’ – breaking the law as a deliberate gesture of defiance – is 
an expressive act of protest. Civil disobedience involves refusal to obey a rule, or 
disruption of society, in order to communicate a principled point of view. It may or 
may not involve violence, and it may or may not involve a protester freely submit-
ting to punishment, accepting that this is a necessary consequence of their actions. 
Whatever form it takes, and whatever consequences are expected to flow from it, 
civil disobedience expresses a belief that, while laws in general have authority, a 
particular rule or rules should be changed. 
 Civil disobedience is not a matter of challenging the legality of a law or of ascertaining the 
meaning of a law. It is a matter of a man rejecting a moral demand of his society at the same 
time that he admits the legal right of his society over him. Men do require society, and society 
requires government. Government requires an ultimate sovereign power, a final legal authority 
such that once it has spoken there is no appeal beyond it except to heaven.   ( Rucker, 1966 : 143)  
 This should be distinguished from a number of other positions. 
 First, civil disobedience should be distinguished from  lawful protest; a lawful 
protest is a democratic right justified by legal rules. Civil disobedience involves 
5  Disobedience
www.ebook3000.com

5 DISOBEDIENCE
205
deliberately illegal acts from the outset. Second, civil disobedience does not entail 
seeing all laws illegitimate as might, for example, criminals or anarchists. A crimi-
nal may treat all legal rules as hypothetical imperatives concerning the likelihood 
of being punished (legal rules present risks but not obligations). Some anarchists 
consider all legal rules to be illegitimate because they originate in the state, and the 
state has no moral authority, only de facto force at its disposal (Gerry, 2011). This is 
closer to civil disobedience – it claims a moral justification – but denies that any 
legal rules can possess moral authority because of their relationship with the state.
Distinct from lawful protesters, anarchists and criminals, there have always been 
individuals who feel compelled to break the law on grounds of principle but who 
otherwise accept the binding force of law. Principled disobedience or civil disobedi-
ence involves expressing opposition to rules through breaking rules – the specific 
rule being challenged – on one or many occasions. That is, directly violating a law 
that is disagreed with, for example refusing to pay a tax held to be unfair. This break-
ing of specific rules reflects commitment to certain over-riding duties, i.e. moral du-
ties that are thought to supersede the obligation to follow a specific legal rule. Such 
positions compel us to look more closely at law’s sources as validating or justifying a 
legal system, and at the possible ways of understanding law’s own claim to authority.
5a The Socratic paradox
The most important philosophical engagement with disobedience is to be found in 
Plato’s accounts of Socrates’ trial and execution in the Crito and the Apology. Socrates 
argued – and died defending the idea – that we should respect the rules of the state, 
even unjust rules. This is paradoxical on a number of levels, not least because the 
most forceful expression of this position in the Crito seems at odds with his criticism 
of Athens and its laws in the Apology. First, in the Apology, Socrates places the author-
ity of reason and conscience above the authority of the state: he refused to accept 
any law preventing him from engaging in philosophy (Plato, 1997: 27). Second, 
to argue, as he did in the Crito, that even unjust rules require obedience appears to 
put greater value on rules than on justice. On these assumptions, tyrants deserve 
obedience and their rules are held to supersede justice (Plato, 1997: 46). The fact 
that Socrates decried rule by tyrants, and identified justice as the primary virtue, 
gives rise then to one of Socrates’ famous paradoxes. Such paradoxes are not just 
contradictions: they are challenges to the intelligibility of ideas such as rule, justice 
and obligation.
Socrates did not consider himself as a destroyer of the laws when he said that he would 
not obey any order to desist from his philosophic activities. He openly stated that there 
were certain things that, as a man, he would not do; yet, as a citizen, he stood prepared 
to undergo execution if so ordered. Had he tried to evade his punishment once he was 
sentenced, he would have been a destroyer of the laws. (Rucker, 1966: 142)

CHAPTER 5 RULE
206
Socrates’ explanation of this paradox (or Plato’s answer on behalf of Socrates) is 
complicated. Socrates felt that the Gods had ordained his death and that it would be 
impiety to disobey the Gods. Flowing from Plato’s argument concerning equilibrium 
within the soul, Socrates is said to be demonstrating that action in accordance with law 
is analogous to justice ruling our souls; without justice in ascendency (and analogously, 
good order in the state) we can be neither good nor happy (1997: 1075). Socrates also 
defends a form of social contract argument. Legal rules secure collective goods and 
avoid the trauma of civil war. Moreover, on recognisably natural law grounds, Socrates 
intimates that there is something binding about law – its contribution to the common 
good – even if the governing regime is morally objectionable (1997: 28).
The most consistent, but nonetheless paradoxical, way to interpret Socrates’ ac-
tions is that, in allowing himself to be executed, he demonstrates both that we can-
not pick and choose which laws to obey and that we should follow our conscience. 
Obedience to the law is a good, both collectively and individually. At the same time 
we should not have to live in a way contrary to our conscience. It was Socrates’ ‘luck’ 
that obedience and conscience coincided: he obeyed the law and believed in the 
fundamental value of lawfulness.
While this offers some grounds for dissolving the paradox – we have a general 
commitment to law but may wish to reject individual laws on moral grounds – 
Socrates’ identification of ‘law-abiding action’ and ‘moral action’ leaves him in a 
paradoxical position. Without such a contentious commitment (and positivism is 
surely correct in seeking some division between law and morality) we can ask two 
further questions. If it is not purely moral authority, what, if any, legitimate authority 
does a legal system as a whole possess? And what legitimate authority do individual 
laws within a system possess and on what grounds can such authority be questioned?
EXAMPLE
0DUWLQ/XWKHU.LQJ-U~/HWWHUIURPD%LUPLQJKDP-DLO$SULO
Not strictly a legal text but one that contributed to upheavals in the law. Martin Luther 
King’s philosophy is a Christian one, but his message resonates throughout our culture.
There comes a time when the cup of endurance runs over, and men are no longer willing 
to be plunged into the abyss of despair. I hope, sirs, you can understand our legitimate 
and unavoidable impatience. You express a great deal of anxiety over our willingness to 
break laws. This is certainly a legitimate concern. Since we so diligently urge people to 
obey the Supreme Court’s decision of 1954 outlawing segregation in the public schools, 
at first glance it may seem rather paradoxical for us consciously to break laws. One may 
well ask: ‘How can you advocate breaking some laws and obeying others?’ The answer 
lies in the fact that there are two types of laws: just and unjust. I would be the first to 
advocate obeying just laws. One has not only a legal but a moral responsibility to obey 
➨
www.ebook3000.com

5 DISOBEDIENCE
207
5b The authority of legal systems
The idea of ‘authority’ will be distinguished below from other ideas (like validity 
and efficacy) with which it is easily conflated. For present purposes two approaches, 
associated with the main schools of jurisprudence, can be used to explain the 
relevance of authority to disobedience. The first will be a moral idea of authority, 
discussed in relation to Fuller’s natural law theory. The second will be a rational or 
reason-giving idea of authority associated with positivism.
Natural law theorists are concerned with both the moral content of law and the 
overall authority of a legal system, but this need not mean that morality is some-
thing wholly external to law. Lon Fuller (1902–78) sees certain structures of law-
making, and characteristics of legality, as necessary for law to be truly considered 
law. He identifies eight characteristics or ‘desiderata’ of law which, together, are the 
minimum characteristics necessary for law to be rational, fair, and a contribution 
to good human governance. He demands that laws be publicised, non-retroactive, 
stable, capable of being fulfilled, general, clear, compatible with one another and 
congruent between the letter of the law and its realisation in practice. These char-
acteristics are what any legal system should aspire to (even if few or no systems 
perfectly fulfil them all) and are needed if law is to fulfil its purpose:
The demands of the inner morality of the law [. . .] demand more than forbearances; they 
are, as we loosely say, affirmative in nature: make the law known, make it coherent and 
clear, see that your decisions as an official are guided by it, etc. (1969: 42)
This ‘inner morality of the law’ makes basic demands on law-makers: to make law 
using rules that are reasonable and capable of being followed. This is distinguished 
from a ‘morality of aspiration’ (our own individual pursuit of the good), and the 
‘external morality of law’ (principles such as equality or justice which are used to 
evaluate law but are not part of law). As such, Fuller’s position can be characterised 
as a form of ‘procedural naturalism’. While law has its own morality concerning 
reasonableness in the use of rules, there is no relationship with the good such that 
we find in canonical natural law theories. It is procedural because law’s status as a 
morally justified social practice is dependent upon the form in which law is created 
and which it takes, rather than particular substantive content.
just laws. Conversely, one has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws. I would agree 
with St. Augustine that ‘an unjust law is no law at all.’ [. . .] Now, what is the difference 
between the two? How does one determine whether a law is just or unjust? A just law is a 
man made code that squares with the moral law or the law of God. An unjust law is a code 
that is out of harmony with the moral law. To put it in the terms of St. Thomas Aquinas: 
an unjust law is a human law that is not rooted in eternal law and natural law. Any law 
that uplifts human personality is just. Any law that degrades human personality is unjust.

CHAPTER 5 RULE
208
To embark on the enterprise of subjecting human conduct to the governance of rules in-
volves of necessity a commitment to the view that man is, or can become, a responsible 
agent, capable of understanding, following rules and answerable for his defaults. [. . .] Every 
departure from the law’s inner morality is an affront to man’s dignity as a responsible agent. 
To judge his actions by unpublished and retrospective laws, or to order him to do the impos-
sible is to convey to him your indifference to his powers of self-determination. (1969: 162)
For Fuller, a legal system with moral authority observes certain formal require-
ments in its law-making, and where there is a multiple or repeated violation of these 
formal requirements then our own ‘morality of aspiration’ would trump or super-
sede the legal system’s claim to authority (1969: 41). However, the idea of ‘authority’ 
can be further disassociated from what Fuller would recognise as ‘morality’. Claims 
about the rationality of law (reaching their peak in Hegel’s system) also point to 
another idea of authority: that law is, or should be, rational. In some ways this is 
making a similar point to that of Fuller – irrational laws are law’s own form of im-
morality – but it can also be a much wider idea that law provides a certain kind of 
rational authority, that it can give rational reasons for action that are different from 
the reasons that individuals alone have to act.
For the same reason Joseph Raz (b. 1939), a positivist, grants law an authority – 
authority to give reasons and to justify action – that morality does not have. A legal sys-
tem observing liberal principles deserves obedience because of the freedoms it affords 
us (Raz, 2009). (As considered below, this still provides some grounds for opposing 
individual laws on the assumption that not all states provide equally compelling rea-
sons for action given their constitutions and constitutive rules.) Raz warns us against 
the apparent ‘paradoxes of authority’ (2009: 3f). Such apparent paradoxes arise from 
the fact that law is treated as externally validated by its contribution to maintaining 
freedom. Ostensibly, freedom (in the Kantian sense of making our own, autonomous, 
decisions) is in tension with the authority (in the sense of anything, external to 
us, that has power over us). However, for Raz, law is authority, social authority. Asking 
whether it is an ‘authorised authority’ only makes sense if we are committed to the 
view that law is validated by something outside itself, an assumption that Raz rejects.
EXAMPLE
Director of Public Prosecutions Respondent v Jones (Margaret) and 
Another Appellants, House of Lords, 4 March 1999, [1999] 2 W.L.R. 625
Is there a right to protest? This is a paradoxical question if it is understood as asking 
whether there is a right to break the law: there could be no law justifying violation of law. 
Conversely, law-makers and Courts (as here) seek to legitimise peaceful protest within 
reasonable boundaries. Such legitimation is reasonable on the basis that the state must 
constrain itself from trying to prevent and police all and every instance of disorder.
www.ebook3000.com

5 DISOBEDIENCE
209
5c The authority of individual laws
In the main, we cannot pick and choose which laws to obey. Law’s contribution to 
the common good lies in the generality (and therefore impartiality) that flows from 
governance by rules. This argument, on the face of it, denies any possibility that 
any particular law can be rejected for moral or principled reasons. The interests of 
individual and collective have already been reconciled by the use and maintenance 
of law, albeit not necessarily to everyone’s satisfaction. Can any clear point be identi-
fied when individuals and groups are so disadvantaged by laws that breaking them 
becomes legitimate despite this overarching defence of the value of law?
Natural law provides a quick, albeit opaque, response to the legitimacy of individ-
ual laws: an unjust law is not a law. This can be derived easily from Sophist and Stoic 
currents in Ancient natural law. Law exists beyond human conventions, and some 
human conventions can or should be rejected. Aquinas’ position provided some jus-
tification for resistance to tyrannical laws and wrongly constituted authorities (2002: 
65, 101). In Finnis’ modern natural law, pursuit of the common good provides law 
(as a whole) with an external justification while allowing that obedience to law 
should not be treated as an absolute duty: ‘rulers have, very strictly speaking, no right 
to be obeyed [. . .]; but they have the authority to give directions and make laws that 
are morally obligatory and that they have the responsibility of enforcing’ (2011: 359).
In the context of positivism, analysis of disobedience requires disentangling 
three, easily conflated, ideas. The first is a law’s efficacy, the second is a law’s validity 
and the third is a law’s authority. These can become blurred because all three point 
to ideas of justification of a particular law. The command theory does not give easy 
grounds to assess the justification of laws: the efficacy or effectiveness of a law, as-
sociated with a sanction, is enough for it to be classified as law proper. Hart’s posi-
tivism (along with Kelsen’s positivism, see Chapter 6) are able to distinguish those 
rules that have validity from those rules that do not (they are recognised as valid 
legal rules). Again, however, this identifies what is truly or properly a legal rule – it 
is accepted as obligatory – but does not provide any additional criteria for deciding 
where a valid rule can lose validity on the basis of moral repugnancy.
Positivism, to the extent that it provides the means of justifying disobedience, 
points towards the importance of constitutive rules: rules that fail to govern the state 
I am of opinion that the holding of a public assembly on a highway can constitute a rea-
sonable use of the highway and accordingly will not constitute a trespass and I would 
allow the appeal. But I desire to emphasise that my opinion that this appeal should be 
allowed is based on the finding of the Crown Court that the assembly in which the defend-
ants took part on this particular highway, the A344, at this particular time, constituted 
a reasonable use of the highway. I would not hold that a peaceful and non-obstructive 
public assembly on a highway is always a reasonable use and is therefore not a trespass.

CHAPTER 5 RULE
210
and its legal system in a defensible way can have their authority called into question. 
An argument to this effect can be found in Raz’s work (2009: 272f). Raz distin-
guishes states constituted on liberal principles which have the authority to limit our 
freedoms because of other, wider, constitutional commitments to freedom; illiberal 
states lack the constitutive rules necessary to make certain of their regulative rules 
on protest, expression and other obligations binding.
The events of the twentieth century, in Fascist Europe in particular, sharpened positiv-
ists’ concern with disobedience and the authority of law. Gustav Radbruch (1878–1949) 
who, before the war, could be described as an orthodox positivist (and with this as-
serted the unequivocal duty to obey the law) came to the conclusion that individuals 
have the right to reject laws if they are contrary to conscience. For Radbruch a law may 
well be perfectly legitimate in its origin and characteristics as law (i.e. fulfilling all of 
Fuller’s desiderata) and yet still be such that reasonable people simply cannot abide by 
it. Under such circumstances we must concede that the law loses its status as law:
One thing [. . .] must be indelibly impressed on the consciousness of the people as well as 
of jurists: There can be laws that are so unjust and so socially harmful that validity, indeed 
legal character itself, must be denied them. (Radbruch, 2006: 14)
EXAMPLE
~5HVROXWLRQ RI WKH &RXQFLO RI WKH ,QWHUQDWLRQDO %DU $VVRFLDWLRQ RI
2FWREHU   RQ WKH &RPPHQWDU\ RQ 5XOH RI /DZ 5HVROXWLRQ
(2005)
The International Bar Association (IBA) represents lawyers across the international com-
munity. Because the first decade of the twenty-first century seemed to involve a great deal 
of compromise of the rule of law, the IBA both issued a resolution of the rule of law and 
reiterated in 2009. Particular attention is paid to the significance of states of emergency 
where rules are often suspended and where it is more likely that legally and morally 
objectionable rules might flow from a limitless sovereign power.
States of Emergency: The Rule of Law is most likely to come under threat, even in coun-
tries which claim to abide by it, in times of war or other emergency, when the Executive 
is most likely to seek and the people most likely to be willing to grant it exceptional 
powers. This is a time when the utmost care and calm, rational consideration is required 
and when it is least likely to be provided. In such cases, the absolute necessity for a 
rigorous separation of powers becomes all the more important, because it will be the 
Executive which calls for the exceptions and it will be for the Legislature to create and 
for the Judiciary to interpret and oversee them. A proper balance must be struck. Even in 
such cases, exceptions to the fundamental requirements of the Rule of Law should not 
be admitted, otherwise the society in question will risk self-destruction. In many countries, 
the threat of war, counterrevolution or other emergency is frequently used as an excuse 
for not introducing the Rule of Law in the first place.
www.ebook3000.com

211
QUESTIONS
Section 1
●What is it about rules that makes them relevant to legality? Could there be a system of 
public rules that were not a legal system? Could there be a legal system that did not 
use rules widely?
●Is there any foolproof way of distinguishing the rules of law from the rules of a game? Is 
the difference in their outcome or their form?
●Are some legal rules less binding than others? Compare criminal laws and civil proce-
dure rules.
Section 2
●Does science provide a good model for understanding law? What, if anything, would be 
lost if we could only describe law using factual claims, not value claims?
●Is moral language best explained by emotivism (that all moral claims are an at-
tempt to persuade)? Could emotivism be used to explain the role of morality in legal 
decision-making?
●Is the ‘sources thesis’ an improvement on Austin’s ‘command theory’? Could (social or 
political) coercion explain the reason why the social sources of law are important?
Section 3
●How do we recognise a rule as a legal rule? Is a legal rule ‘legal’ because of its pedi-
gree or its context?
●Why is the concept of law different from the history of law? Does Hart’s account of the 
concept of law mean that only legal systems with developed secondary rules are legal 
systems?
●Give examples of secondary rules. Are these easy to distinguish from primary rules? Are 
secondary rules closer to procedural practices than rules?
Section 4
●How do you know whether you have followed a signpost correctly? How could you be 
sure that you had not misread it but found your destination by accident?
●How do we know that a judge has followed the rules? For example, is there any neces-
sary relationship between a prison sentence delivered in a decision and the rules of 
sentencing? Is this to be decided on a logical relationship between argument and con-
clusion, or by whether other judges would agree with the decision?
●Do lawyers follow rules, or follow practices established by rules?
Section 5
●Does ‘the rule of law’ have any moral significance? Is it good (justified by its outcomes) 
or right (justified by its coherence with, or correspondence to, our other commitments)?
Questions

CHAPTER 5 RULE
●If law justifies the use of violence by the state, does this negate any moral obligation to 
obey the law?
●Is there a moral duty to disobey the law when it is morally wrong, dangerous or contradic-
tory? Are there any other circumstances in which there is a moral duty to disobey the law?
Concepts and methods: Rules and exceptions
Finding and following legal rules
There is a tension between the idea of legal rules as commands (emphatic injunc-
tions to do, or not do something) and the fact that legal rules frequently generate 
the question ‘is this rule applicable?’ We can find any number of contemporary 
and historical legal rules, but we are only required to follow those rules that are 
(amongst other things): the rules of our jurisdiction, in force, applicable to us as 
individuals with particular characteristics, applicable to us as individuals with par-
ticular roles and applicable provided that other rules do not have a greater claim 
to authority. Finding legal rules is one thing, deciding which to follow is another.
We cannot follow two contradictory rules, but developed legal systems frequently 
make demands on us that appear contradictory. Surgeons are obliged to do things 
to people that, in other circumstances, constitute criminal harm. Public bodies 
are required to protect personal data and release personal data if it is in the public 
interest. We can draw two conclusions from this. Either, there are never real con-
tradictions in law (one rule will always supersede another, and what looks like a 
contradiction is merely an exception). Or, that law creates real contradictions that 
it is the responsibility of Courts to mediate or overcome. Which of these solutions 
we choose depends very much on whether we see rules as a ‘seamless web’ of self-
governing, harmonious, rules (the formalist approach), a mass of commands which 
judges have to reconcile on the basis of principles found outside legal rules (the 
realist approach) or a combination of the two (Dworkin’s interpretive approach, 
see Chapter 7).
Finding and using legal rules is a skill, one requiring training and patience. It 
requires training because legal materials (both legislation and case law) contain 
much that is very general and also much that is very specific. It requires patience 
because of the quantity of potentially relevant legal rules in any given circum-
stance. At the same time, the principle that ‘ignorance of the law is no defence’ 
either suggests that legal systems do not care about the complexity of finding 
legal rules or, more defensibly, that for the most part ‘law-abiding’ behaviour 
is behaviour that is unexceptional, common, intuitive or normal. The idea that 
212
www.ebook3000.com

213
CONCEPTS AND METHODS: RULES AND EXCEPTIONS
our ‘normal’ behaviour maps onto legal rules (and vice versa) is considered in 
Chapter 6. At present we can conclude that law assumes that its rules are largely 
harmonious with our intuitive or common sense assumptions except where we 
have assumed special responsibilities (duties of care or explicit contractual rela-
tionships). In these instances there is a greater requirement for the public, and 
lawyers, to find out their specific legal responsibilities.
 
Exceptions
Legal rules are always accompanied by exceptions. Here are three examples. General 
rules are always supplemented by more specific (but nonetheless also general) rules 
about when the main rule is not to be applied. Second, general rules of law always 
implicitly exclude a great number of things (e.g. the rules of this offence do not apply 
to other offences, or that the rules of this country do not apply in another). Third, 
the implementation or enforcement of rules in legal institutions includes discretion
by which some rules can be set aside in favour of a decision about the most just 
remedy (e.g. ‘equitable remedies’).
There is a saying that ‘there is an exception to every rule’. Putting to one side the 
problem of that saying itself taking the form of a rule and therefore requiring its 
own exception, it is the case that every legal rule could have some exception either 
to its applicability (‘this rule does not apply, another rule applies’) or to its scope 
(‘this rule does not apply here or to these parties’). In the latter sense, exceptions 
help to define a rule, clarifying where it does and does not apply; exceptions form 
part of rules, the negative part identifying where they are to be disapplied. We also 
say that exceptions ‘prove’ a rule – which makes no sense in the normal sense of 
‘prove’, i.e. ‘demonstrate the truth of’ – but indicates that exceptions refine a rule. 
An exception refines a rule by narrowing it down and limiting its application. 
These maxims point to two distinct ways of approaching legal rules. Exceptions 
refining legal rules, but also every legal rule being accompanied by an exception to 
its applicability or scope.
A legal rule that had no exception would be too general to be just. It would be 
over- or under-inclusive: regulating the behaviour of too many, or too few, people; 
it would justify too little, or too much. Of course, all legal rules could be thought to 
have implicit caveats attached to them insisting that ‘the present rule holds good un-
less it is changed or suspended in accordance with the law’ and that ‘this rule holds 
good only within the jurisdiction within which it is promulgated’. Thus there are 
always exceptions to a rule’s applicability, but there are also always exceptions to its 
scope. No legal rule is so fundamental that it does not have exceptions or qualifica-
tions. For example, the ‘right to life’ is qualified by only applying to the actions of 
states; it also admits of exception in times of war, or where resources are rationed. 
It is this close association between rules and their exceptions that is captured in the 
idea of defeasibility: we always expect, and find, exceptions that ‘defeat’ the rule.

CHAPTER 5 RULE
214
Rules and ruling
To rule is to be in command of a given territory. There are de facto and de jure ele-
ments to this. To rule is, de facto, to have ‘effective control’ over a territory: to be 
able to command and have one’s commands generally followed. To rule is, de jure,
to have some legal claim to exercise that effective control. It certainly falls within 
the scope of legal philosophy to explain the meaning of de jure ruling: what is it to 
have a legal claim to exercise power (see Marmor, 2004; Kelsen, 2006). This can be 
answered, partly, by identifying the constitutional rules governing assumption of 
power (especially, but not exclusively, democratic procedures). However, it is also 
a question of in what ways de facto ruling can become de jure ruling. Fuller’s work 
(1969) is a good example of this. It does not matter how a sovereign gained their 
capacity to rule; for their rules to be de jure they have to conform to the inner moral-
ity of law, the shape that any law worthy of the name must take.
Accordingly, the idea of ruling can be analysed through attention to those con-
stitutional rules that grant the power to make law. But the direction of enquiry 
can also be reversed such that promulgated rules become the gauge by which their 
origin is judged (Fuller, 1969). Rules are not solely the by-product of power: they 
are the principal means by which we gauge the legitimacy of power. Legitimate 
rulers not only command but command consistently. They avoid uncertainty and 
confusion concerning how our actions are to be judged. They should certainly avoid 
promulgating laws that are either impossible to adhere to or are morally repugnant 
to the majority of people to whom they apply. This is partially, though not always 
clearly, captured in the language of the rule of law. The rule of law indicates that all 
are bound equally by the public rules of the state; it means that social disputes will 
be settled by general rules, not the will of the powerful. In these terms, a defensible 
state is one governed by a system of public rules without unjustified exceptions.
Nonetheless, a rule of law will contain exceptions. The language of the rule of 
law can obscure the fact that laws always involve exceptions; the rules of law are not 
categorical imperatives but systems of generalisation, inclusion and exclusion. Note 
also that sovereigns will often make themselves, through law, an exception to the 
rules. In the United Kingdom, freedom of information rules apply to public bod-
ies, but not Parliament; defamation rules apply to all speakers, except those within 
Parliament. We have to approach the idea of the rule of law as a broad commitment 
to rules and to equality, but we should not see it as denoting the social and political 
dominance of categorical rules.
 
Liberalism and utilitarianism
The political commitments of a state can inform how rules are used and evaluated. 
In those authoritarian political systems where order is given priority over freedom, 
rules will certainly be used, but they will be considered less important than the 
www.ebook3000.com

215
FURTHER READING
capacity of the state to control the actions of its citizens, with or without rules. In 
liberal states, rules are used to ensure equality and maximise liberty. Rules will not 
be seen in instrumental terms (their contribution to good order) but as having in-
trinsic value: they provide a coherent system of expectations and justifications that 
have a rational foundation, or they, through their generality and impartiality, cor-
respond with the underlying value of liberty.
Utilitarianism has a more ambiguous relationship with rules. Like liberal posi-
tions, utilitarianism is concerned with equality. Each person is given equal weight in 
utilitarian calculations, and this is realised in part through the generalisations that 
we find in laws. However, like more authoritarian political positions, it evaluates 
rules by their contribution to utility: a rule should provide the greatest happiness 
for the greatest number. This could be seen as an asset of utilitarianism; it provides 
a principle of equality for adjudication, and an idea of goodness to determine leg-
islation. Thus it could also be seen as a weakness. Only rule utilitarianism gives suf-
ficient weight to the fact that we have to make generalisations about what is needed 
and what is owed to people, and even this would appear to allow the sacrifice of 
minorities and their interests to the pursuit of the collective benefit.
Further reading
Twining and Miers’ ‘primer’ How to do Things with Rules (2010) is a classic introduction 
to the nature of rules and the use of rules in legal contexts; Schauer’s work (1991) is 
of a more technical nature but covers similar ground. Teichmann’s ‘Explaining the Rules’ 
(2002) is an analysis of rules as ‘reason-giving’ with a Wittgensteinean slant. The origins 
and scope of positivism, along with analysis of different aspects of legal positivism, can be 
found in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy http://plato.stanford.edu/. For a better 
sense of the functions of legal positivism and the heated debate it can generate, compare 
Kramer (1999) with Simmonds (2008). Hart’s The Concept of Law (1994) is both indis-
pensable and accessible reading. Raz (1994) offers a refinement (or alternative) to Hart’s 
position, as does MacCormick (2007). Hacker (1997) provides a short, clear introduction 
to Wittgenstein.
Visit www.mylawchamber.co.uk/riley to access tools 
to help you develop and test your knowledge of legal 
philosophy including Podcasts on leading thinkers and 
theories, discussion questions, diagrams showing 
interrelations between concepts, and weblinks

216
Norm
6
It is common to those inside and outside legal institutions to picture law as a 
collection of rules. This picture is both familiar and accurate, but a view of legal 
rules as sovereign commands is inadequate. Something else is needed, something 
both subjective (our assent to rules) and objective (the practices associated with 
legal rules).
The language of norms and normativity is rather more specialised than that of 
rules, but it enables us to isolate precisely that component of legal rules which is as-
sociated with both practices and assent. Normativity enables us to understand why 
law is more than a set of commands, and it enables us to understand the relation-
ship between social expectations and legal rules.
‘Norm’ echoes the word ‘normal’. The normal expectations found in society have 
a relationship with the obligations that are enforced by law; the fact that ‘ignorance 
of the law is no defence’ relies on that fact that in many instances law reflects what 
is considered to be normal in a society. Thus ‘norms’ are expectations or regularities 
in behaviour, and ‘normative’ is the quality of being, or creating, an expectation. 
‘Legal norms’ and ‘legal rules’ are occasionally treated as synonymous but, more 
accurately, calling attention to a rule’s normativity picks out the obligatory element 
of the rule. Legal rules are binding, not as coercive threats, but as expectations of 
behaviour, expectations that are perceived to be, or are accepted as having, a binding 
‘normative force’. Nonetheless, the precise relationship between rules, norms and 
law is not easy to identify:
Unsurprisingly, no agreement exists about what the normativity of law comes to, let alone 
about what ‘normativity’ is. We can point to certain phenomena that law regulates; that 
legal claims, as H.L.A. Hart famously observed, standardly incorporate normative lan-
guage, the language of rights, duties, obligations, and powers; that law is viewed, at least by 
those who accept the system, as providing a standard of criticism and reasons for action; 
that law claims authority and purports to give us obligations and reasons for action that 
we might not otherwise have. (Rosati, 2004: 297, footnotes removed)
Introduction
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION
217
We can say that for something to be normal it is generalisable: ‘in normal situ-
ations a person is likely to do this’ or ‘it is normal here to do x, so you should do 
x’. Because of their relationship with normal expectations, rules and norms share 
the characteristic of being generalisations; generalisations about what is likely to 
happen (hypothetically) or what should happen (categorically). However, the gen-
eralisations found in legal rules are qualified: they include and exclude, and they 
are defeasible generalisations which hold good until another rule defeats them. We 
can understand norms without necessarily having to consider those formal charac-
teristics associated with rules. ‘Norms’ – in the widest sense of both social and legal 
expectations – entail no such careful qualification. They are generalisations about 
what is likely to happen within social and legal practices and the obligations that 
these practices give rise to.
The fact that we can talk about what is ‘normal’ in terms of what is likely to hap-
pen and what should happen indicates that the language of norms and normativ-
ity can be both descriptive and prescriptive. Social and legal norms can take both 
forms. For instance, they can take the form ‘in this culture you greet a person in this 
way’ thereby describing what is normal – what behaviour is regularly found – in that 
culture. That norm can also be expressed in prescriptive terms: ‘you should greet a 
person in this way – this is an obligation – and you will cause offence if you fail 
to observe this norm’. Similarly, a legal rule can be expressed as a descriptive norm: 
what we would expect a judge or lawyer to do under these circumstances. We could 
also express it in terms of a prescription: a legal rule provides us with the standard 
by which actions, including judicial decisions, can be judged right or wrong.
So, on the one hand, the language of normativity contains an ambiguity: it en-
compasses describing and prescribing, risking a blurring of the fact/value divide. 
Legal rules clearly prescribe, and we could argue, therefore, that analysis of rules 
is more important for understanding law than using the problematic language of 
norms. On the other hand, as Hart shows, the important element of legal rules is 
not their being pure prescriptions or commands, it is that they are rules which we 
have accepted as obligations and through which our own, and others’, actions can 
be judged. This exhibits the same combination of elements we find in norms. In 
other words, Hart’s ‘internal point of view’ centres on the normative aspect of rules, 
both in their capacity to say what is expected (legal rules involve insisting on a 
course of action and criticising deviation from it), and their internal, mental, aspect 
(we understand a course of action as the norm). The language of norms picks out 
precisely what is important and distinctive in Hart’s account of legal rules: to will 
that something should happen (prescribe it) and to know that a rule (an observable, 
general, practice that can be described) is being followed.
The bivalence (the double meaning) of ‘norm’ as descriptive and prescriptive 
means that this is a useful, if broad, way of isolating generalities in behaviour and 
generalities in obligation. When we consider social norms we are largely concerned 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
218
with norms in the descriptive sense, what regularities there are in society concern-
ing expectations and obligations. Moral norms are prescriptive generalisations: what 
should happen in all or most instances. Legal norms can, importantly, be both. We 
have seen that normativity – as a prescriptive or obligatory power – is one of the 
most important dimension of legal rules, but it is also the case that we can describe 
a legal system in terms of what we would expect its officials to do. For instance, one 
way to describe the work of a lawyer is to say that they are skilled in anticipating 
what a judge is likely to say and on this basis either prepare a case or do their best 
to avoid a problem being taken to the Courts. Judges themselves will make decisions 
on the basis of what a higher Court would or might be expected to decide given the 
present case. Thus, even within a legal system, there is an important role played by 
descriptive norms: what behaviour we would expect from the judiciary.
Is there any distinction between the normativity of legal and moral prescriptions? 
Because of their shared normative language – the imperatives ‘should’, ‘ought’ and 
‘must’ – it is not obvious that there is a clear dividing line. We can distinguish legal 
obligations from categorical imperatives on the basis that legal rules are far more 
specific as to whom they apply; they often involve the prior assumption of legal 
relationships and responsibilities; and legal obligations are defeasible involving 
exceptions and over-ruling. However, to the extent that they are both, nonetheless, 
obligatory means that they share the same ‘normative force’. That force, that binding 
or obligatory quality, is presumably the same whether the rules are moral or legal: 
an obligation is an obligation.
However, the breadth and variety of norms allows us to make a more careful 
analysis at this point. Legal rules justify action. Social norms also justify actions, but 
in a different way: the fact that everyone does something does not mean that we au-
tomatically have an obligation to do it. This difference becomes sharper if we look 
closely at the point where descriptive social norms (for example, the fact that people 
often give up a seat on the bus to someone who is infirm) become prescriptive norms 
(there is a social obligation to give up a set on the bus to someone infirm). The point 
at which the regularity becomes an obligation on society at large is unclear, but it is 
certainly related to generality in practice (most people do this) and censure or social 
disapproval for not doing the act (most people disapprove of not doing this).
Under these circumstances a norm has emerged, but legal norms do not always 
have such a gestation period. They can be ‘created out of nothing’, and they bind 
and justify regardless of widespread social practice. Moreover, the morally prescrip-
tive (everyone has an obligation to do this) can, but does not necessarily, become 
legally prescriptive (giving up one’s seat could, theoretically, become a law). The 
fact that not all social norms do become legal norms could be for any number of 
reasons: a state’s general political commitments, or the cost of enforcing the rule. 
Nonetheless, the existence of a social norm can give rise to the idea that it is a 
moral (prescriptive) norm and thereafter, potentially a legal norm. This process is 
www.ebook3000.com

1 NORMS AND NORMATIVITY
219
discussed below with reference to social norms and realism. We have not shown that 
there are ‘degrees’ of obligation or ‘binding force’, but we have seen ways in which 
various prescriptive and descriptive norms can be mutually supportive and give rise 
to the likelihood of something becoming a legal obligation. 
 In essence, norms have the capacity to be both behavioural regularities and pre-
scriptive rules because they are both  real and  ideal . That is to say, norms are real, ob-
servable practices among people, and they are also ideas, perceptions or intuitions in 
our mental realm. Either of these points of view yields interesting perspectives on law. 
Real, concrete, patterns of human behaviour have varied over time, and have, in turn 
given rise to different views of morality and legality. Posner defines social norms as: 
 mere behavioural regularities with little independent explanatory power and exogenous 
[external and compulsory] power to influence behaviour. They are the labels that we attach 
to behavioural regularities that emerge and persist in the absence of organized, conscious 
direction by individuals.   (2000: 8)  
 This real, behavioural, aspect of norms encourages us to consider the historical con-
text (the situations and social practices) wherein social norms are generated, and con-
sider whether this explains why law has the particular form it does at particular times. 
 Nevertheless, norms are also ideal. That is, they are mental, idea-based phenom-
ena. We perceive certain things as ‘the done thing’ in certain contexts; we perceive 
certain rules in our society as legal rules and therefore as binding or as authoritative. 
In Korsgaard’s definition, norms are ideal; they are those things ‘that outstrip the 
world we experience and seem to call it into question, to render judgement on it, 
to say that it does not measure up, that it is not what it ought to be’ (quoted in  Del 
Mar, 2007 : 355). Ultimately, the great merit of the concept of a ‘norm’ is to make us 
squarely engage with the fact that law – its rules, institutions and practices – have 
both a real and an ideal dimension, a dual characteristic that is sometimes lost in 
the empiricism of legal positivism. 
 The objectives of this chapter are as follows. First, to see how normativity can be 
used within a positivist framework. Second, to explain the relevance of social customs, 
practices and obligations to legal rules. Third, to consider the ‘realist’ conception 
of norms and normativity. Finally, to consider the extent to which law’s normative 
‘force’, despite its historical and institutional complexity, is ultimately a coercive force.  
1  Norms and normativity 
 
 Introduction 
 The language of norms and normativity is a useful language, but also one apt to 
lead to confusion. It is useful because ‘normative’ picks out the common denomi-
nator hinted at in the words ‘obligatory’, ‘binding’, ‘compelling’ and ‘mandatory’. 
1  Norms and normativity 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
220
Different kinds of norms are found in different social practices. Some practices 
generate especially generalised, authoritative, norms, law being the obvious exam-
ple. But other social situations seem to have their own norms – manners in society, 
rules in sport, ways of eating – that are the normal ways of acting or behaving but 
are much closer to ‘expectations’ or ‘the done thing’ than unequivocal obligations. 
One question that we have to ask is whether, given there are different normative 
‘spheres’, there are also degrees of normativity. Or, on the contrary, whether there 
is a strict division between our general expectations concerning behaviour and the 
binding – ‘true’ – normativity of legal and moral rules.
It is, in the first instance, important to distinguish the classes of prescriptive 
and descriptive norms. Prescriptions are encountered in law and in ethics. Certain 
things are obligatory for us and, whether or not they take the form of rules, bind 
how we act. In this sense ‘normative’ can be treated as synonymous with ‘obliga-
tory’. The fact that legal norms are more narrow generalisations than moral norms 
does not detract from the fact that if applicable, a legal rule is unquestionably a 
species of prescription. In fact, by virtue of being much more focussed prescrip-
tions, legal norms appear more prescriptive than the broad generalisations found 
in some moral discussion.
A descriptive norm is of a different order: it describes what happens with regu-
larity, what we would expect to happen. It is a norm that, for example, people 
speak quietly in libraries and drink warm beer in English pubs. What is asserted 
here is what is generally expected, what is normal. It is not an unequivocal obliga-
tion to do these things, but note that doing the opposite of these things may be 
‘frowned upon’. There may be no obvious penalty for deviation from such norms, 
although it is significant that deviation from such norms is likely to involve penal-
ties in terms of the extent to which people are trusted (see discussion of ‘law and 
economics’, below). Suffice it to say, although we are principally concerned with 
prescriptive norms (legal imperatives) we also have to consider descriptive norms 
because of the ways in which they can be translated (both socially and legally) 
into prescriptive norms.
1a Law as binding
The ‘bindingness’ of law has emerged as a common thread among our critical con-
cepts. Law concerns obligations, and the word ‘obligation’ is derived from ‘ligare’
meaning ‘to bind’. We can analyse the binding nature of law in terms of its contribu-
tion to human needs (particularly good social order), its being intrinsically good, 
its being right or as a dimension of rules (good order arises out of clear public 
generalisations about conduct). However, we can approach this question rather 
more directly if we ask, not whether it contributes to certain ends that are binding, 
but whether law itself is binding, has normative justification or normative force. 
www.ebook3000.com

1 NORMS AND NORMATIVITY
221
The question of whether law does have a fundamental normative force – if law as a 
whole binds us – is different from the question of whether individual laws and rules 
can be justified by reference to their source or their moral defensibility. It is to ask 
whether a system has internal or external justification.
The idea of internal justification can be explained by appealing to the distinct 
‘rightness’ of law, i.e. that it has an inner coherence which does not need any fur-
ther justification outside the system itself. Conversely, the normative justification of 
law can be said to arise outside a legal system, either in its moral justification (its 
realisation of the good) or from a particular source (the sovereign, as in a command 
theory). Such questions demand consideration of the range of concepts discussed so 
far, but they benefit from conceptualisation in the language of normativity because 
this allows us to consider the prescriptive power of law without committing ourselves 
to an idea of prescription which is tied to the idea of a commanding sovereign. 
Normativity, something simultaneously real and ideal, allows us a more subtle 
picture of ‘binding’.
The search for a normative foundation of law – a complete explanation of the 
bindingness or any rule within a legal system – would be to answer questions both 
about how we can distinguish law from other legal practices and how it is law can 
coerce us. We could argue that law has a basic justification in its having a certain au-
thority (God, the state or the sovereign) or a certain utility (it contributes to the good 
or the right); any norm that we find embodied in legal rules can be said to find their 
ultimate normative force in that authority or utility. However, Kelsen (below) insists 
that there is a normativity behind law which arises from neither authority nor utility 
but which is wholly unique. The legal ‘scientist’ should be concerned with finding 
the patterns of obligation within legal practices themselves, not with any practice, 
justification or force external to a legal system. This, as we will we see, is difficult to 
defend. Law certainly seems to generate its own distinct system of obligations that 
are distinguishable from compulsions and from moral rules. But even legal norms 
have to have some correlate in our practices: a norm that was not recognised, ob-
served or potentially enforced through sanctions, would have a questionable claim 
to be a legal norm. Put differently, Kelsen’s distinctively ideal conception of norms 
has to be supplemented with a description of the real functioning of norms.
Normativity can also be used to analyse ‘anti-foundationalism’ in law. There is 
much to commend the argument that not only is there no need for external valida-
tion of legal rules, there is no ultimate justification of law per se. Starting with the 
pragmatic assumption that things are true only to the extent that they are useful, 
we could argue that there is no use, no function served, in appealing to the ‘norma-
tive foundations of law’ (see Ross, 2004). Law functions without having continual 
recourse to self-justification. If primary rules stand in need of justification there are 
secondary rules to do this. If we ask for justification of secondary rules we end up 
with the brute fact that law is perceived to be law: explanation must end somewhere. 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
222
More strongly, there is no need to explain the obligatory force of legal rules and legal 
systems at all, because this is missing the fact that we are governed by legal institu-
tions and legal practices that exhibit norms – regularities in behaviour and conduct – 
which do not need explaining in prescriptive terms. This approach is shared by legal 
realists who would wish to see ‘legal normativity’ reduced as far as possible to descrip-
tive norms about what people (the public and judges) generally do, what people ex-
pect to happen (Frank, 2009). Explanation of law and the nature of law need not, and 
should not, stray beyond these descriptive norms because they are sufficient to answer 
questions about why people do, and should, obey the law. The public follow the rules 
because they know there is a system of legal remedies in place to challenge deviation 
from the rules. Judges are likely to respond to disputes in a particular kind of way, but 
this predictability lies in the identity and training of judges (and therefore psychologi-
cal propensities), not because legal rules have a special force. This kind of pragmatic 
anti-foundationlism discourages us from looking for dramatic, all-encompassing, 
ideas of justification and foundation when we consider law and normativity.
EXAMPLE
The Sunday Times v The United Kingdom ECHR (Application no. 
6538/74) 1979
This case before the European Court of Human Rights concerns the right of a news-
paper to publish stories concerning the company Distillers who manufactured the drug 
Thalidomide. The company had not tested the drug thoroughly before marketing it and it 
caused birth defects in hundreds of children in the 1960s. The UK government sought to 
suppress press comment on a Court case against the company. At issue then is a tension 
between Article 10 of the ECHR allowing freedom of expression, and Article 10(2) which 
qualifies this right ‘The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and re-
sponsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as 
are prescribed by law.’ Does ‘prescribed’ demand a single, clear, rule?
In the Court’s opinion, the following are two of the requirements that flow from the expres-
sion ‘prescribed by law’. Firstly, the law must be adequately accessible: the citizen must 
be able to have an indication that is adequate in the circumstances of the legal rules 
applicable to a given case. Secondly, a norm cannot be regarded as a ‘law’ unless it is 
formulated with sufficient precision to enable the citizen to regulate his conduct: he must 
be able – if need be with appropriate advice – to foresee, to a degree that is reasonable 
in the circumstances, the consequences which a given action may entail. Those conse-
quences need not be foreseeable with absolute certainty: experience shows this to be 
unattainable. Again, while certainty is highly desirable, it may bring in its train excessive 
rigidity and the law must be able to keep pace with changing circumstances. Accordingly, 
many laws are inevitably couched in terms which, to a greater or lesser extent, are vague 
and whose interpretation and application are questions of practice.
www.ebook3000.com

1 NORMS AND NORMATIVITY
223
1b Normativity and the jurisprudential schools
The differences between the different schools of legal thought encountered through-
out this book are clearly highlighted when we consider their relationship with the 
idea of normativity. It demands that they pin-point ‘where’ law is, ultimately, to be 
found: in certain practices (such as the use of rules or social practices) or in certain 
ideas (such as rationality or moral principles).
Positivism strives to find the most defensible distinction between legal and other 
norms: for Austin it is their source, for Hart it is their source and their structure, and 
for Kelsen (below) it is the logical relationship between legal norms. Earlier empiri-
cist positivists were less likely to use the language of norms given that it denotes 
both the ideal as well as the real (e.g. Austin, 1995). In contrast, the legal positivists 
of the twentieth century were much more amenable to locating legal obligation in 
social sources (Hart, 1994; Raz, 2009). Nonetheless, positivists claim a much clearer 
account of how the normative language of morality differs from the normative lan-
guage of law: their source. Accordingly, while Hart admits the importance of a sense 
of obligation in order to avoid law becoming a variation on the threat of a gangster, 
he is eager to associate the concept of law with rules. While our sense of obligation 
is important it is the concrete, public, rules we are consenting to that are central to 
a legal system being a system.
Natural law theorists, conversely, do not require that the normativity take a real, 
concrete form. Reasonableness or the common good are the drivers of law, and 
these do not need to be empirical rules, enforced by sanctions, to be binding. Nor 
do natural lawyers draw a clear division between moral and legal norms. Natural 
law’s deontology – its account of morality as a system of duties – and its valida-
tion of legal systems by moral standards, means that there is a mutually supportive 
relationship between legal and moral norms. While Finnis and others concede that 
positivism is useful in identifying different classes of legal and moral norms, to the 
extent that they are prescriptive norms they have equal and indistinguishable status 
(Finnis, 2011: 297f). Distinguishing the sources of prescriptive norms does not entail 
that they have a different status as a norm.
It may be that there is no clear way to distinguish legal norms moral norms, 
or the social expectations and ‘normal’ behaviour that we find in a social life as 
a whole. This position, close to that of the Scandinavian realists (below), can be 
construed as a denial that there are prescriptive norms in the sense that positivists 
or natural lawyers would want to assert. On the contrary, legal and moral prescrip-
tions resemble the descriptive norms of manners, sports and polite social behav-
iour (Posner, 2000). We expect people to act in certain ways, and we can, by virtue 
of those norms, seek to persuade people to act in a particular way, but there is no 
special force to norms beyond what people do and what people can be persuaded 
to do. This is a diametrically opposed position to Kelsen’s positivism, where law 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
224
is nothing but a set of prescriptive norms having no relationship with the world 
of facts. A middle-ground is provided by American realism. Here ‘law’ is nothing 
more or less than the prescriptive norms generated by the Courts (Frank, 2009). 
For American realists, if we accurately describe the norms found in Courts then we 
have sufficiently explained law’s prescriptions.
Clearly there is much at stake for the jurisprudential schools in the meaning 
and function of norms, more than in analysis of the formal properties of rules. 
Certain rules possess an authoritative pedigree; some rules are not commands 
but instructions to officials concerning the adjudication, modification or recogni-
tion of rules. This, however, leaves unanswered the question of why these rules 
can be said to have a binding force – and what this binding force consists of – in 
the absence of a threat or when there is disagreement over the nature and exist-
ence of a rule of recognition. The question of normativity pushes each school of 
thought to give a clear answer to why anything should be considered compulsory 
other than on the basis of the hypothetical imperative ‘do this or risk a penalty’. 
For this reason the schools of jurisprudence, where they are concerned with the 
binding nature of law, often reveal their fundamental commitments when consid-
ering international law. Clearly the command theory cannot be reconciled with 
the plurality of sovereigns found in the international arena. However, Kelsen’s 
more nuanced account of normativity, while broadly speaking a positivist one, 
has to presume continuity between national and international norms (normative 
‘monism’). Ross, a Scandinavian realist, lies at the other extreme, tying law’s nor-
mativity to the marriage between national practices and a national legal system 
(normative ‘pluralism’).
➨
EXAMPLE
R (on the application of Corner House Research) v Director of the Serious 
Fraud Office [2008] UKHL 60
Is a state prosecutor entitled to drop criminal investigations after having received a threat 
from a foreign government that the investigation ‘jeopardises cooperation in national 
security issues’? It is suggested that the obligation to protect lives may be more binding 
than the rule of law. What is the most basic normative force at work in the decision: legal 
rules or the threat of force by terrorists?
[T]he right of a state to protect its security in the sense of protecting the lives of its citi-
zens against terrorism is fundamental. As the Permanent Court of International Justice 
put it in the Case of the SS Wimbledon (1923) [. . . ]: ‘The right of a state to adopt the 
course which it considers best suited to the exigencies of its security and to the mainte-
nance of its integrity, is so essential a right that in case of doubt, treaty stipulations can-
not be interpreted as limiting it, even though those stipulations do not conflict with such 
www.ebook3000.com

1 NORMS AND NORMATIVITY
225
1c Classifying norms
We have encountered the difference between prescriptive and descriptive norms. 
Norms can also be categorised in other ways. Some draw a distinction between 
social, legal and moral norms, some do not. First, norms can be described as valid
or invalid. While rules are generally treated as applicable or inapplicable, and (deon-
tological) moral norms face a test of universality, legal norms alone share with logic 
the test of validity. Validity depends on whether norms are structurally defensible, 
or whether they have the correct source, rather than whether they apply here or do 
not apply here. Thus, legal norms can be tested by the validity of their source (legal 
obligations are valid norms because they arise from a sovereign not a gangster), or 
their validity on the basis of their relationship with other norms (a legal decision is 
valid because it is derived from other valid norms within the system).
Another way of classifying norms in law is as ‘peremptory’ or as ‘defeasible’ (see 
Simmonds, 2008). Peremptory means ‘admitting no debate’; an action, decision or 
statement is peremptory if it is intended to end debate without any further discussion. 
Many elements of law could be considered to be peremptory, for instance the decision 
of a highest Court of appeal, and Austin’s sovereign commands are peremptory norms 
(commands that admit of no counter-argument). But peremptory norms – that can-
not be contracted out of and cannot be temporarily suspended – are rare in law. Law 
is more often characterised by defeasible norms: norms that draw a limit to the use of 
other norms, without claiming any kind of universality or lack of exceptions. The notion 
of the peremptory norm captures the idea of certainty and rigidity we expect from law; 
but defeasible norms are more commonly found among a legal system’s primary rules.
an interpretation.’ [. . .] Associated with the right of a state to take those measures which 
it considers necessary to protect its citizens, is the importance of those international 
norms which protect human rights and, in particular, the right to life. Some norms have a 
special or privileged status because of their content [. . .]. The obligation of a government 
in a democratic society to protect and safeguard the lives of its citizens was, as we have 
already recalled, described [. . .] as essential to the preservation of democracy.
EXAMPLE
Committee of U.S. Citizens Living in Nicaragua v Reagan (1988) 859 F.2d 
929 United States
Jus cogens norms (literally ‘compelling laws’) are peremptory norms that cannot be dero-
gated from, even by sovereign states. Following an International Court of Justice (ICJ) deci-
sion that the US was in contravention of international law in funding Contras in Nicaragua, 
➨

CHAPTER 6 NORM
226
2  Kelsen 
 
 Introduction 
 For positivists the question of ‘normativity’ is both crucial and problematic. It is 
crucial because positivists seek to find and isolate the normativity unique to law. 
It is problematic because normativity is sought in a particular set of facts, only sec-
ondarily in the perceptions and ideas that make certain things normative  for us as 
individuals. The  sense of obligation that is generated by particular sources – rules or 
society – is analytically separable from those sources. Rules are posited – promul-
gated and publicised – but obligatory ‘force’ is something that we see or feel. 
 An important exception to this empiricist positivism is found in the work of Hans 
Kelsen (1881–1973). His focus is on the normativity of law as the  ideal , rather than 
the real, character of legal norms. He is a positivist to the extent that he accepts the 
sources thesis, and accepts the separation thesis, and therefore treats analysis as a 
form of scientific enquiry. However, he is poles apart from logical positivism and 
its reduction of knowledge to the verifiable and observable. Rather, a legal science 
is possible because the study of law can be freed from other areas of enquiry. In 
addition, once its subject matter has been isolated, law can be found, analysed and 
logically validated on entirely independent grounds. This project is a purification of 
legal enquiry, and its subject matter is law as a set of norms.  

D .HOVHQVFULWLFDOSURMHFW
 Kelsen’s idiosyncratic position should be contextualised within the German 
philosophical environment in which he worked. First, German philosophy can 
2  Kelsen 
a group of US citizens brought claims within US Courts asserting that the US had failed 
to abide by the ICJ decision and (unsuccessfully) arguing that such a legal decision by the 
ICJ was itself a jus cogens norm binding the US administration.
 [T]he United States may have violated peremptory norms of international law. Such norms, 
often referred to as jus cogens (or ‘compelling law’), enjoy the highest status in inter-
national law and prevail over both customary international law and treaties. Appellants’ 
contention that the United States has violated jus cogens [norms] forms their primary 
argument before this court. They contend that the obligation of parties to an ICJ judgment 
to obey that judgment is not merely a customary rule but actually a peremptory norm of 
international law. [From the decision:] The Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which 
reflects the common understanding of the term, defines jus cogens only in relation to in-
ternational law: ‘A treaty is void if, at the time of its conclusion, it conflicts with a peremp-
tory norm of general international law . . . [which] is a norm accepted by the international 
community of States as a whole as a norm from which no derogation is permitted’ [. . .].  
www.ebook3000.com

2 KELSEN
227
be characterised as pursuing Wissenschaft. This is often translated as ‘science’, but 
should be thought to indicate any unified body of knowledge, be it in the hard and 
natural sciences or the arts and humanities. In the background of Kelsen’s work is, 
therefore, the philosophical assumption that law is not characterised by discon-
nected facts but by its being a unified system. This means, amongst other things, that 
he wholly endorses the separation thesis which treats law and morality as different 
domains of enquiry. Second, like other scholars working in the German philosophi-
cal tradition, Kelsen is interested in ‘axioms’, unassailable first principles. Axiomatic 
for Kelsen is the division between facts and values. Kelsen is unusually consistent 
in this, making his work consonant with other forms of positivism and giving his 
account of law a claim to a certain kind of ‘purity’.
Third, in Kelsen’s intellectual environment Kant’s philosophy was central, and 
Kelsen considered himself a continuator of Kant’s ‘critical project’. This is the project 
of rejecting dogmatic assumptions in philosophy, and discovering the a priori con-
ditions of any knowledge, i.e. the truths presupposed or necessary for any kind of 
truth, knowledge or certainty. Kant’s project led him to identify the structures of con-
sciousness that shape our knowledge of the world; the approach is ‘critical’ because 
it looks for the most fundamental structures of reality, accepting neither rationalism 
nor empiricism but looking at the basis of both (Kant, 1929). Kelsen transfers this 
to law by asking, ‘What must be assumed for a legal system to be possible?’ Kelsen’s 
answer is that there must be a system of normative claims and normative deductions 
which do not depend upon any other social facts. We can find rules in any walk of 
life; legal norms are, conversely, a completely distinctive set of obligations.
Kelsen’s argument that the very possibility of law presupposes wholly distinctive 
legal norms is based on two related moves. First, law concerns a body of ‘ought’ 
propositions, norms that are prescriptive in the absence of any threat of coercion 
by the sovereign. Agreeing with Hart, these prescriptions are distinguishable from 
moral prescriptions because of the system within which they are contained – a 
legal system constituted by norms that themselves are the gauge of validity and 
invalidity (as opposed to a legal system constituted by norms validated by a mo-
rality external to the system).
The validity of a legal norm cannot be questioned on the ground that its contents are incom-
patible with some moral or political value. A norm is a valid legal norm by virtue of the fact 
that it has been created according to a definite rule and by virtue thereof only. (2005: 113)
Second, the isolation of a system of distinctively legal norms relies upon treat-
ing the division of facts and norms as complete and unbridgeable. If there is a 
complete chasm between the two, then legality must be among prescriptions 
rather than social facts: ‘Whereas an “is” statement is true because it agrees with 
the reality of sensuous experience, an “ought” statement is a valid norm only if it 
belongs to [. . .] a valid system of norms’ (2005: 111). Accordingly, legality proper 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
228
2b A pure theory of law
Kelsen was concerned with separating the domain of law from other disciplines 
and social practices, but this does not mean that he was looking to create a ‘pure 
law’. Kelsen knew that law and laws have a complex relationship with the reality 
from which they arise and help to create. What he was seeking to assert is that legal 
norms – i.e. truly legal obligations and not just political, social or other contingent 
obligations – are identifiable and can be isolated. Law is a system of ‘oughts’, of 
normative obligations. Purified of contingent social facts and moral claims, law is 
a self-contained system of normative obligations that are binding because they are 
legal norms, not because they are associated with social or political coercion.
One consequence of this is that identifying legal obligations is a question of iso-
lating those norms and the relationships between those norms. Legal science is not 
an empirical science that looks only for those rules flowing from a particular source. 
Rather it looks for the relationships behind and between legal rules. ‘Law is an order 
is characterised – crucially – by a normativity that is not dependent on any facts, be 
they facts about consequences or about legal institutions. Legal norms are unique, 
self-contained and also distinct from other kinds of norms. In this way, following 
Kant, Kelsen offers us an account of law that is purified of any empirical ‘intrusions’ 
from morality, politics or society.
EXAMPLE
~7KH 5HLFK &RQVWLWXWLRQ RI $XJXVW WK :HLPDU &RQVWLWXWLRQ
Germany 1919)
Kelsen was at the heart of the Weimar Republic period of German history (1919–1933). 
The ill-fated Weimar Constitution is principally remembered as a democratic constitution 
which allowed (through Article 48 concerning emergency powers) anti-democratic forces 
to take control of Germany. More widely, its blurring of general constitutional principles 
and social norms seems to render a ‘science of legal norms’ difficult, if not impossible.
[Preamble:] The German people, united in its tribes and inspirited with the will to renew 
and strengthen its Reich in liberty and justice, to serve peace inward and outward and to 
promote social progress, has adapted this constitution. [. . .] [‘Second Chapter: Life within 
a Community’] Article 119: Marriage, as the foundation of the family and the preservation 
and expansion of the nation, enjoys the special protection of the constitution. It is based 
on the equality of both genders. / It is the task of both the state and the communities 
to strengthen and socially promote the family. Large families may claim social welfare. 
Motherhood is placed under state protection and welfare. / Article 120: It is the supreme 
obligation and natural right of the parents to raise their offspring to bodily, spiritual and 
social fitness [. . .].
www.ebook3000.com

2 KELSEN
229
of human behaviour. An ‘order’ is a system of rules. Law is not, as it is sometimes said, 
a rule. It is a set of rules having the kind of unity we understand by a system’ (2005: 3). 
Lawyers are those trained in looking past the materials generated by legal systems to 
the ways in which obligations flow from higher or more general obligations: i.e. find-
ing valid legal norms deduced from other, valid legal norms. This validation of legal 
norms through their deduction from other legal norms is labelled ‘imputation’ by 
Kelsen. A legal rule always gains its validity (is imputed) from a higher norm, which 
in turn is imputed from another norm. If we want to know the obligations that are 
generated by contract law we need to find a valid norm which governs that area; find-
ing that valid legal norm is not a question of its source, it is a question of imputing 
its validity from higher, more general, norms of contract law. These norms may have 
been imputed from even more general constitutional norms, and as such any legal 
system has to be seen as a network of norms and imputations (2005: 113f).
The merit of portraying law in this way is clear. It isolates and describes law in 
terms of distinctive obligations, obligations that are in no way dependent upon the 
contingencies of different sovereigns and their will, nor changing social practices, nor 
legal institutions and their functioning. We have no need at all to appeal to empirical 
sources. Rather, we are solely focussed on obligation, thereby making sense of why law 
resembles morality more than it resembles the threats of gangsters, but also showing 
how it is different from the categorical prescriptions found in morality. In short, the 
distinctively binding nature of law is derived from a unique web of normative claims.
EXAMPLE
R (on the application of Al-Saadoon) v Secretary of State for Defence
>@(:&$&LY
International law depends upon an unusual kind of positivism – like Kelsen’s – because 
it has no single sovereign. This case turned on the extent to which the jurisdiction of the 
English Courts encompassed the activities of English nationals in Iraq. The UK and other 
states had effective control over parts of Iraq following invasion in 2003; problems arose 
concerning prosecution and punishment of war crimes committed during and immediately 
after the invasion. Here the Court grapples with a complex question. There can be no 
simple imputation of norms in Kelsen’s terms. Nonetheless, certain principles, such as 
‘sovereign legal authority’, are treated as axiomatic.
Conclusion on the Jurisdiction Question: It is not easy to identify precisely the scope of 
[. . .] jurisdiction where it is said to be exercised outside the territory of the impugned 
State Party, because [. . .] its scope has no sharp edge; it has to be ascertained from a 
combination of key ideas which are strategic rather than lexical. Drawing on the Bankovic
judgment and their Lordships’ opinions in Al-Skeini, I suggest that there are four core 
propositions, though each needs some explanation. (1) It is an exceptional jurisdiction. 
➨

CHAPTER 6 NORM
230
2c The Grundnorm
One question which this purified picture of law gives rise to is where the system 
of norms has its beginning and ultimate normative force. We might agree that all 
legal obligations stem from other, more general, obligations, but this line of justi-
fication has to end. To avoid an infinite regress of norms – a ceaseless referring to 
higher and higher norms – Kelsen posits a Grundnorm (basic norm) from which all 
other norms gain their validity. ‘The basic norm [Grundnorm] of a legal order is the 
postulated ultimate rule according to which the norms of this order are established 
and annulled, receive or lose their validity (2005: 113).’ The nature of this norm is 
unclear within Kelsen’s writing; nonetheless, it must logically have certain qualities. 
It must be a norm not a state of affairs. It is a norm that those within a legal system 
implicitly assume (officials see their system as ultimately valid and not just effec-
tive). And it must exist in order for law to be a normative system (as opposed to a 
set of facts about behaviour).
The nature of the Grundnorm is clear to the extent that all norms within Kelsen’s 
view of law must be norms, so the Grundnorm is not, and cannot be, a fact or set of 
facts. This distinguishes it from Hart’s rule of recognition, which is based on what-
ever is perceived to be the basic factual, institutional, foundations of a constitution. 
The nature of the Grundnorm must be something like an ‘ought’ proposition that is 
free from empirical content and gives rise to all other legal obligations.
The basic norm is not created in a legal procedure by a law-creating organ. It is not – as a 
positive legal norm is – valid because it is created in a certain way by a legal act, but it is 
valid because it is presupposed to be valid. (2005: 116)
One way of giving expression to this norm might be to say ‘the norms of this sys-
tem should be seen as obligation generating’. The Grundnorm must be a simple 
normative proposition, and this proposition does indeed insist (it is a prescriptive 
norm) that the norms found within the legal system are binding or have authority. 
Conversely, it is misleading to see such a norm as anything like a regulative rule. It 
is closer to a constitutive principle that makes other norms possible:
(2) It is to be ascertained in harmony with other applicable norms of international law. 
(3) It reflects the regional nature of the Convention rights. (4) It reflects the indivisible 
nature of the Convention rights. The first and second of these propositions imply (as per-
haps does the term jurisdiction itself) an exercise of sovereign legal authority, not merely 
de facto power, by one State on the territory of another. That is of itself an exceptional 
state of affairs, though well recognized in some instances such as that of an embassy. 
The power must be given by law, since if it were given only by chance or strength its 
exercise would by no means be harmonious with material norms of international law, but 
offensive to them; and there would be no principled basis on which the power could be 
said to be limited, and thus exceptional.
www.ebook3000.com

2 KELSEN
231
I would say [. . .] that the Grundnorm in Kelsen is a sort of ‘logical’ closure of his system[,] 
so to speak, a closure of convenience. It is a little like the idea of the absolute sovereignty 
of the nation-state. The idea of sovereignty as ‘power of powers’ is a closure of convenience, 
no different from the Grundnorm conceived of as a ‘norm of norms’. Nothing verifiable cor-
responds, nor can correspond, to these notions. (Bobbio and Zolo, 1998: 358)
The scope of the Grundnorm is a different question concerning the extent to which 
different legal systems possess different Grundnorms validating the norms within 
their system, or rather (and this is more in keeping with Kelsen’s Kantian assump-
tions) that there can only be one Grundnorm which serves to validate any and all 
legal norms. Much of Kelsen’s writing does point to the conclusion that we should 
perceive domestic and international law in a monistic relationship where there is no 
boundary between the two or, indeed, any fundamental division between any legal 
systems. This monistic position is contrary to the assumptions within the majority 
of legal systems which consider themselves in a dualistic relationship with interna-
tional law and would assume that they had to make conscious step to include inter-
national law within their jurisdiction. At the same time, Kelsen’s position sits better 
with much international legal scholarship and the assumption that the customary 
norms of international law are binding unconditionally on all states. To presume 
there is a plurality of such realms would seem to be a suspiciously empirical asser-
tion flowing from the fact that there is a plurality of legal systems. For Kelsen those 
obligatory norms that we call legal norms are not tied to contingent social or politi-
cal facts, nor are they tied to effective control over a territory: they are a species of 
pure obligation.
Since a norm is no statement of reality, no statement of a real fact can be in contradiction to 
a norm. Hence, there can be no exceptions to a norm. The norm is by its very nature invio-
lable. To say a norm is ‘violated’ by certain behaviour is a figurative expression (2005: 46)
EXAMPLE
~+XPDQ 'LJQLW\ DQG /LEHUW\ >%DVLF /DZ 1XPEHU @ 3DVVHG E\ WKH
.QHVVHWRQWKHWK$GDU%HW0DUFK
The Israeli constitution has a number of Basic Laws – fundamental instruments with a 
constitutional status – which set out the legal principles by which the state and its organs 
should function. Like similar constitutional structures, some provision is made for suspen-
sion of basic principles in the event of emergency. Does this support or negate the idea 
of a Grundnorm validating law universally and at all times?
1. The purpose of this Basic Law is to protect human dignity and liberty, in order to 
establish in a Basic Law the values of the State of Israel as a Jewish and democratic 
state. / 2. There shall be no violation of the life, body or dignity of any person as such. /
3. There shall be no violation of the property of the person. / 4. All persons are entitled 
➨

CHAPTER 6 NORM
232
 3  Law and social norms 
 
 Introduction 
 Positing a distinction between legal norms and social norms is difficult, and poten-
tially misleading. It is difficult because we cannot treat social norms – from the rules 
of courtship and manners, to the implicit or unconscious expectations involved in 
waiting for a bus – as pure descriptions of regularities in human behaviour. They are 
seen by their participants as obligations ( MacCormick, 1988 ), certainly not obliga-
tions that are routinely accompanied by state coercion, but obligations nonetheless. 
Some social norms fall between legal and social obligations. Marriage rituals are 
both legally recognised contracts and socially significant events. The two aspects of 
the ritual are distinct, but we cannot understand the legal dimension of the ritual 
without reference to the social dimension. Marriage is contract formation in a very 
specific sense; it can only be understood in the context of long historical patterns of 
human relationships, familial relationships and social expectations. In other words, 
the social world and social expectations both pre-date, and are essential to under-
standing, the legal dimension of marriage. 
 This does not present an immediate challenge to formalists or Kelsenian positiv-
ists. While the social practices are one thing, the legal norms that arise out of them 
are another. These can be isolated and validated without reference to historical ritu-
als and social norms. If, however, we want to account for why law has concerned 
itself with some social norms and not others, then we have to consider the less 
formal, and more ‘impure’, world of individual interests and social practices. 
 It is also the case that the formalist or Kelsenian accounts of law can be turned 
on their heads and recast as accounts of the rituals, the social expectations and the 
relationships that we find in a legal system. While lawyers concern themselves with 
rules and norms, their behaviour can be described through a set of objective, be-
havioural, norms. Like a marriage ritual, a legal process is also a social event with 
distinct historical origins, predictable ritual behaviour and any number of ‘expecta-
tions’ from the etiquette of Courts to the use of certain rules in certain ways. If this 
account of legal practices is sufficiently rich, the ‘internal point of view’ on rules, 
 3  Law and social norms 
to protection of their life, body and dignity. / 5. There shall be no deprivation or restric-
tion of the liberty of a person by imprisonment, arrest, extradition or otherwise. [. . .] 12. 
This Basic Law cannot be varied, suspended or made subject to conditions by emergency 
regulations; notwithstanding, when a state of emergency exists [. . .] emergency regula-
tions may be enacted by virtue of said section to deny or restrict rights under this Basic 
Law, provided the denial or restriction shall be for a proper purpose and for a period and 
extent no greater than is required. 
www.ebook3000.com

3 LAW AND SOCIAL NORMS
233
‘pure legal norms’ and ‘distinct legal obligations’ could drop out of the picture to be 
replaced with a description of the norms that we see in legal institutions. If we want 
to isolate what is real, rather than ideal, in law we should look exclusively at what 
happens and what is likely to happen in legal institutions.
We can articulate this possibility in the language of formalism and anti-formal-
ism. The formalist sees law as a system of rule-following wherein decisions are 
(using Kelsen’s term) imputations from wholly distinctive – non-social and non-
moral – legal norms. The anti-formalist denies this picture, drawing attention to 
both the regularities and idiosyncrasies of applying rules in Courts. They exhibit 
regularity: there is no doubt that we have a system of laws and not arbitrary com-
mands. However, they are also idiosyncratic: because law involves the selection of 
facts and the selection of rules, and judges themselves are not wholly predictable. 
Law is best understood through prediction of the decision-making of judges. Legal 
norms and social norms therefore not only have the status, but require the same 
methodology: attention to what people do.
There are a number of ways in which this denial of the division between descrip-
tive social norms and prescriptive legal norms can be articulated. Here we will look at 
historical, sociological and economic accounts of how social norms give rise to law.
3a Law and history
The example of a marriage ritual illustrates one of the many formalised social practices 
which pre-date state-based legal institutions. Indeed, many legal practices could be 
thought to build upon established historical antecedents. The modern state has taken 
social, cultural and commercial practices and formalised them to apply uniformly. 
The fields of modern law, from crime to family law, are undoubtedly foreshadowed 
by practices with social, not bureaucratic, origins. Freud offers an explanation of how 
certain legal norms can be said to have psychological and anthropological roots. We 
will also briefly consider Maine and Marx’s wider historical reflections on law.
Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) applied a model of human psychological develop-
ment in children to the formation of societies in ‘humanity’s infancy’. His model of 
infancy – where the human personality is formed through a conflict between bio-
logical drives and socialisation – remains provocative. Rejecting the prevailing view 
of childhood as a period where the ‘blank slate’ of the mind is filled with experience, 
early infancy is where strong fundamental drives for survival, for growth and pleas-
ure do battle with the environment that they encounter; namely, their parents and 
the ways in which their parents interact with, allow, or frustrate those basic primi-
tive drives. The negotiation between primitive drives and the authority exercised by 
parents is the central way in which the personality is formed.
Freud later sought to expand the scope of his analysis to look at the primitive 
drives that have served to shape social life and social being. Prohibitions (the frus-
tration and control of drives) have been a perennial feature of social life, and from 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
234
these ideas Freud attempts to reconstruct the earliest beginnings of human society. 
He suggests that natural drives posed a threat to early human social groups; in par-
ticular the drive for pleasure and for control lead to instances of incest and patricide 
(the killing of fathers). ‘One day the expelled brothers joined forces, slew and ate the 
father [. . .]. This violent primal father had surely been the envied and feared model 
for each of the brothers’ (Freud, 1938: 218). These crimes led to the earliest laws: 
the prohibition of incest and the prohibition of murder within one’s own familial 
and social group. While there is more to Freud’s account of the intertwined devel-
opment of the human psyche and human society, this emphasis on the centrality 
of crime in the formation of human societies does give support to both positivist 
command theories and natural law theories that see the prohibition of certain acts 
as foundational to law.
Freud’s analysis is controversial, but does offer a tempting account of how legal 
norms can be traced not only to social practices but to psychological processes. A 
rather less psychological, but no less sweeping, account of the evolution of legal sys-
tems is found in Henry Maine’s (1822–88) historical jurisprudence. Maine’s work 
Ancient Law not only attempts to chart the origin and evolution of all of the main 
species of legal system, but derives from this an account of the ‘natural’ evolutionary 
trajectory of legal systems (Maine, 1931). This natural evolutionary process is best 
exemplified by the changes found in Roman law and its movement from status to 
contract. ‘Primitive’ legal systems attribute powers, immunities and claims of right, 
on the basis of an individual’s status within a social order; such social orders are 
hierarchical and patriarchal. The association of law with status undergoes a positive 
evolutionary shift when status is progressively replaced bycontract as the foundation 
of legality. Under contracts, individuals enter into legal relations with one another 
as equal contracting parties and have their own rights and obligations as individuals 
recognised; such rights are independent of family, caste or group:
The notion that persons under a contractual engagement are connected together by a 
strong bond or chain, continued till the last to influence the Roman jurisprudence of 
Contract; and flowing thence it has mixed itself with modern ideas. (1931: 261)
This movement is not driven by deliberate social engineering but is, for Maine, part 
of the organic development of any healthy society. While the evolutionary dimen-
sion of this should give us grounds for suspicion (by what objective standard is 
social evolution to be judged natural or progressive?), the descriptive aspects of 
Maine’s account are powerful to the extent that they draw a distinction between 
types of law in context. That is, different ways in which social contexts can give rise 
to distinctive patterns of legal relations and legal rights.
Maine offers a suggestive description of how legal systems have changed their 
character over time, but Marx, following Hegel, provided explanation of the sources
of historical change. Marx’s materialist position represents a rejection of idealism 
(that ideas are the only reliable source of knowledge) in favour of the diametrically 
www.ebook3000.com

3 LAW AND SOCIAL NORMS
235
opposed position: that the material of the world, and the processes which emerge 
from our relationship with the material world, are the origins of our ideas. 
Combining the historical analysis of ideas undertaken by Hegel with the fact that 
human life depends upon the resources of the material world, Marx proposed an 
opposing historical materialism (see also Chapter 7). Sometimes labelled dialecti-
cal materialism, this is a dynamic materialism which encompasses ideas of conflict, 
change and, ultimately, progress.
Marx accepted the basic materialist assumption that material conditions are the 
basis of our ideas. He added to this a belief that our relationship with the material 
world and our ideas will evolve as we grapple with and overcome the contradictions 
found in our social lives (Marx, 2000: 419). Such contradictions arise from the fact 
that those most closely related to the appropriation of the material world, and its 
processing into something with exchange value, are those who profit least from it. 
Workers – those harnessing and refining the resources of the material world – are 
the least politically powerful class, and (through the translation of raw material into 
exchangeable commodities) alienated from the very thing they work with (Easton, 
1961). The barrier to a more efficient and just harmony between the material and 
human is this irrational and exploitative relationship between the large class of pro-
ductive individuals and those who employ them for profit.
Within historical materialism, historical change is not the consequence of ar-
bitrary power or the evolution of forms of governance, it is driven by class strug-
gle: the tension between those creating wealth and those holding wealth. This 
entails, on the one hand, that the role of law in society is secondary to changes 
in the relations of production (law is, in Marxist terms, only ‘super-structural’, 
a by-product of more fundamental economic structures). On the other hand, 
this offers a critical diagnosis of law and legal relationships. Law contributes to 
legitimising an unjust system; material inequalities are maintained through the 
conservative equality of constitutional and contractual legal relationships protect-
ing property and wealth (Hunt, 1986). To an extent this also offers a project for 
reform. To see the basis of any wealth creation in a state as the product of working 
people not wealth holders, and to seek the eradication of inequalities between 
classes to ensure that working people are granted sufficient rights to immunise 
them against exploitation.
EXAMPLE
&RQVWLWXWLRQRIWKH5HSXEOLFRI&XEDDPHQGHG3UHDPEOH
The Cuban constitution is one of the few remaining constitutions committed to Marxist 
principles. It has a stirring preamble setting out the positive basis of the constitution (life 
without degradation) and its negative foundations (freedom from slavery and imperialism).
➨

CHAPTER 6 NORM
236
3b Law and sociology
Historical accounts of the origins of law provide a sense of the social practices which 
antedate but inform state-based legal institutions; they reveal historical patterns that 
legal systems share; and they can reveal the forces which drive historical change, in-
cluding legal systems. Sociology is much more closely focussed on the structure of 
modern society and culture. This can be said to include Marx’s work, and other work 
like it, which concerns the social groupings that we find in modern society and the 
patterns of governance under which they live.
The classic sociological works of Weber and Durkheim, as well as the more 
controversial work of Foucault, each contain insights into the function of law in 
modern society. What unites each of them is ambivalent view of modern society as 
characterised by both rationality in social processes and oppressive norms enforced 
or strengthened by law. In Max Weber’s (1864–1920) work, the birth of modernity 
is characterised by a ‘disenchantment’ of the world: the substituting of magic or 
superstitious conceptions of the natural and social world for scientific forms of 
thought (Weber, 1978: 226f). Law is crucial in this process:
For Weber, formal legal rationality symbolized the height of this disenchantment 
process, as it manifests a detachment from substantive value judgments; is based on 
general rules rather than on ad hoc assessments; and strips the adjudication process (as 
well as lawmaking) from any remains of sacredness, magic, and charismatic authority. 
(Blank, 2011: 640)
At the same time, the ‘rationalisation’ – the efficiency and professionalisation – of the 
management of social affairs forms part of the ‘iron cage of modernity’, a technoc-
racy (rule by experts) that has stifled or destroyed more organic forms of community 
(Weber, 1978: 138–73).
We, Cuban Citizens, heirs and continuators of the creative work and the traditions of 
combativity, firmness, heroism and sacrifice fostered by our ancestors; by the Indians 
who preferred extermination to submission; by the slaves who rebelled against their mas-
ters; by the patriots who in 1868 launched the wars of independence against Spanish 
colonialism and those who in the last drive of 1895 brought them to victory in 1898, a 
victory usurped by the military intervention and occupation of Yankee imperialism; by the 
workers, peasants, student and intellectuals who struggled for over fifty years against 
imperialist domination, political corruption, the absence of people’s rights and liberties, 
unemployment and exploitation by capitalists and landowners; by those who promoted, 
joined and developed the first organizations of workers and peasants, spread socialist 
ideas and founded the first Marxist and Marxist-Leninist movements; [. . .] / Aware that 
all the regimes based on the exploitation of man by man cause the humiliation of the ex-
ploited and the degradation of the human nature of the exploiters; that only under social-
ism and communism, when man has been freed from all forms of exploitation – slavery, 
servitude and capitalism – can full dignity of the human being be attained [. . .].
www.ebook3000.com

3 LAW AND SOCIAL NORMS
237
This is a theme echoed by Emile Durkheim (1858–1917), for whom modernity is 
characterised by an experience of ‘anomie’ – literally ‘being without law’ – wherein a 
sense of meaning in people’s lives has been lost (Clarke, 1976). In both Durkheim 
and Weber we see the deterioration of ‘community’ wherein people have a role and 
a sense of meaning and purpose, and a movement towards ‘society’ in its modern 
incarnation which is characterised by bureaucratic management. In other words, the 
movement from community to society, while allowing greater rationality in public 
affairs, severs social norms that are essential for a sense of meaning and purpose. 
The more regulated or rationalised structure of contemporary society manages us, 
but does not give us meaning.
Michel Foucault’s (1926–84) work accentuates the negative dimension of mo-
dernity’s drive to rationalise, emphasising the reduction of politics to ‘manage-
ment’ of a populace and complicity between knowledge, technology and power 
(Foucault, 1977). This complicity has particular importance in his understanding 
of law, norms and punishment. Criminal law and normativity have a close, but not 
straightforward, relationship. Criminals are people who have deviated from ‘nor-
mal’ or at least ‘generally approved’ behaviour. To be law-abiding is to demonstrate 
adherence to prevailing norms; to act criminally is to deviate from those norms. 
This picture is, however, misleadingly simple. We can talk of deviating from the 
prescriptive norms of the law, but it is not always the case that those norms match 
social norms. It might be quite normal for people to want to engage in criminality, 
or at least engage in it and not get caught. Furthermore, there is always the potential 
for norms to become tools of oppression, particularly in criminal and penal law. If 
criminality is treated as an abnormality, this authorises us to use forms of punish-
ment or therapy ensuring that law-breakers have such abnormalities subdued or 
reformed. But at what point does simple deviation from social norms become ab-
normality; and who is authorised to decide this? Such a use of norms and normal-
ity is, argues Foucault, the modern world’s most widespread and insidious form of 
power and violence (1977).
It was Weber who first drew attention to the importance of the modern state’s 
claim to a monopoly over legitimate use of violence (1978: 349) and nowhere is 
this more in evidence than in the use of punishment. From the seventeenth century 
onwards, through the diffusion of military forms of discipline to social action and 
education, the prison took on a more ‘regulatory’ role in disciplining the offender 
to act in particular ways that were ‘normal’. The characteristics Foucault attributes 
to the ‘technologies’ of punishment have spread to other aspects of contemporary 
Western society (Luker, 1998; Oldfield, 2003). The norms that are appealed to when 
prisoners are rehabilitated in prison, and the processes by which a model of nor-
mality is prescribed through technologies of regimentation and social uniformity, 
are the basis of a more general movement towards ‘normalisation’. Normalisation 
suggests that sovereign force and sovereign power no longer aim at brute control 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
238
3c Law and economics
The central concern of the law and economics movement is the application of 
economic principles and models to law itself and to relationships with a legal 
dimension. Relationships, not only business relationships but also many social 
relationships, generate costs. Maintaining friendships demands sacrifices, main-
taining business relationships often involves hospitality, and maintaining the 
respect and trust of those around us can depend upon a whole series of socially 
approved actions from the way we speak to what we wear. The introduction of 
law to those relationships is itself a cost – it is expensive to make a contract, and 
over citizens. A model of ‘normal behaviour’ and ‘normal identities’ has become 
the principal means by which we are controlled. Through our ‘internalising’ these 
expectations (see below) and through scientific disciplines such as penology, psy-
chology and psychiatry, a standard of normality is enforced. Lest we think that 
these disciplines only reflect social reality or therapeutic practices meant to liberate 
us, Foucault cautions us to look closely at the assumptions about what is normal. 
Without exception they enforce ideas of self-control, and self-repression that are 
both convenient for society and bear similarities to the self-discipline demanded 
by prisons (Foucault, 1977). Whether or not this is a fair diagnosis of the manage-
rial style of the contemporary state, it accords with the pessimistic tenor of much 
sociological thought.
EXAMPLE
&ULPHDQG'LVRUGHU$FW3DUW,3UHYHQWLRQRIFULPHDQGGLVRUGHU
Is there a point at which criminal justice blurs into social ordering or social engineering? 
Anti-Social Behaviour Orders and Parenting Orders are means by which civil powers can 
be used over ‘problematic’ individuals such that their actions are constrained and they 
are placed in a position just short of criminal remedies. Should a non-convicted individual 
be ‘normalised’?
Parenting orders. (4) A parenting order is an order which requires the parent – (a) to com-
ply, for a period not exceeding twelve months, with such requirements as are specified 
in the order, and (b) [. . .] to attend, for a concurrent period not exceeding three months, 
such counselling or guidance programme as may be specified in directions given by the 
responsible officer. [. . .] (7) The requirements that may be specified under subsection 
(4)(a) above are those which the court considers desirable in the interests of preventing 
any such repetition or, as the case may be, the commission of any such further offence. / 
(7A) A counselling or guidance programme which a parent is required to attend [. . .] may 
be or include a residential course [. . .].
www.ebook3000.com

3 LAW AND SOCIAL NORMS
239
even more expensive to litigate a dispute – but may also be an alternative to more 
costly ways of maintaining relationships, certainly in business contexts, where 
non-legal solutions to a problem are uncertain.
Moreover, legal processes and policies themselves can be explained or generated 
with economic models. With enough data about preferences and interests, individu-
als’ actions can be made statistically predictable. Their economic behaviour dem-
onstrates how much they are likely to pay to sustain legal relationships or prevent 
liability for losses; these ‘revealed preferences’ can be used to predict risk-taking, and 
used to tailor law to incentivise non-risky behaviour (Katz, 2011). For these reasons, 
the law and economics movement is concerned with descriptive norms: how we 
are likely to act, given that our preferences are statistically predictable. It also gener-
ates prescriptions about the forms and practices of law: how law should be used to 
distribute risk and apportion burdens through legislation (Posner, 2000). In both 
ways, it takes the pursuit of efficiency to be an explanation of our behaviour and an 
ideal for our legal institutions.
The analysis of social and legal practices can benefit from the models and assump-
tions used by economists. The assumption of most economic theories is that we are 
self-interested rational actors, who will seek to achieve our preferences by the most 
efficient means possible. We can, then, predict patterns of behaviour through model-
ling how it is that individuals are able to maximise their preference-satisfaction. This, 
alone, would not be a rich analytical framework for social science or legal scholar-
ship. However, Eric Posner (b. 1965) and others have presented a deeper analysis 
of how law’s functioning depends on social norms, norms that themselves can be 
captured by economic models. Thus, patterns of social etiquette reflect predictable 
patterns of cost and exchange. We behave in certain ways in public, potentially at 
some cost to ourselves, because of our need for social exchanges. ‘Costly’ social prac-
tices, such as showing ‘good manners’, can maximise the likelihood of our fulfilling 
a greater range of preferences. Clearly not all rules of social etiquette become legal 
norms. But it is the case that behind many effective legal rules, social norms are at 
work. ‘[M]any legal rules are best understood as efforts to harness the independent 
regulatory power of social norms’ (Posner, 2000: 8). Thus, criminal law does not 
have to be explained in terms of neutralising or normalising dangerous individuals; 
criminalisation is also related to the deterrence of ‘anti-social behaviour’. Many social 
norms centre on demonstrating that we are trustworthy, practices that individuals 
(consciously or unconsciously) adopt and which the anti-social criminal flouts. 
Effective criminal law is built upon reinforcing these existing social expectations.
In prescriptive terms, economic analyses can translate into policy recommendations, 
policies to ensure that efficiency is maximised in legal rules. Policy should distribute 
costs and benefits in such a way that rational decision-makers are not penalised, and 
so that people have incentives to act legally. This is often applied to the rules of tort, 
where the threat of punishment is absent but where recklessness and negligence can 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
240
be costly to both individuals and for society as a whole ( Katz, 2011 : 203f). Through 
well structured legal regulation, laws can become social norms which minimise risks 
and costs. For example, penalties for risk taking (e.g. not wearing seatbelts in cars), 
can become social norms at relatively little cost. Taking risks with property can be de-
terred when, through systematic use of legal penalties, the cost of prevention becomes 
less than the cost of accidents. Economic analysis can also be used to prescribe more 
general public policies. This is true of environmental law where ‘externalities’ – costs, 
such as pollution, which do not immediately fall on private actors but on society more 
generally – can be shifted by law to those who generate the externalities.  
EXAMPLE 
Regina v  Ghosh>@:/5
A case concerning the law of theft and the role of dishonesty in theft. The case provides 
a test for dishonesty requiring a decision on the part of the jury as to whether something 
was dishonest by the ‘ordinary standards’ of ‘reasonable honest people’. Such a standard 
is necessary but variable. What may look unreasonable in normal social settings may look 
ordinary in certain business or commercial environments. The fact that the test is initially 
‘objective’ suggests that dishonesty is a socially recognised phenomenon being harnessed 
directly for legal purposes.
 In determining whether the prosecution has proved that the defendant was acting dishonestly, 
a jury must first of all decide whether according to the ordinary standards of reasonable and 
honest people what was done was dishonest. If it was not dishonest by those standards, that 
is the end of the matter and the prosecution fails. [. . .] If it was dishonest by those standards, 
then the jury must consider whether the defendant himself must have realised that what he 
was doing was by those standards dishonest. In most cases, where the actions are obviously 
dishonest by ordinary standards, there will be no doubt about it. It will be obvious that the 
defendant himself knew that he was acting dishonestly. It is dishonest for a defendant to act 
in a way which he knows ordinary people consider to be dishonest, even if he asserts or genu-
inely believes that he is morally justified in acting as he did. For example, Robin Hood or those 
ardent anti-vivisectionists who remove animals from vivisection laboratories are acting dishon-
estly, even though they may consider themselves to be morally justified in doing what they 
do, because they know that ordinary people would consider these actions to be dishonest.  
4  Realism 
 
 Introduction 
 ‘Realism’ has a range of competing meanings in philosophy, including legal 
philosophy. To generalise, legal realists are often empiricists, concerned with 
verifiable facts, and therefore focus on  behavioural responses to legal language 
4  Realism
www.ebook3000.com

4 REALISM
241
and on the decisions of judges. Judicial decisions are shown to reflect the ‘logic 
of experience’ – what in practice is just, fair, equitable or justifiable – rather 
than logical ‘imputations’ derived from rules. Legal realists are also often philo-
sophical pragmatists. They exhibit a degree of scepticism, not only about knowl-
edge and truth claims, but about the reality of ‘law’ as it is conceived by other 
theories of law. The other schools of legal thought are seen as deploying ques-
tionable assumptions about the reality of law as a kind of social or normative 
‘substance’ that can be distinguished from other substances in the world. The 
more sceptical conclusion favoured by certain realists (and shared with logical 
positivists) is that there is no such substance, that law can only be known by its 
effects on our action.
Despite convergence around these kinds of ideas, the American and Scandinavian 
schools of realism have distinct origins and perspectives. American realism origi-
nated in law schools and in the need to prepare law students for legal practice. 
Their perspective on law can be summarised as, first, a suspicion of abstraction, and 
second, treatment of legal adjudication as no different to other, non-institutional-
ised, forms of problem-solving. When any social or practical problem arises, some 
people – with more experience or more interest – have instincts about the right 
outcome. Whether we are dealing with a domestic disagreement or a Supreme Court 
case, decision-makers have a ‘hunch’ about what the right outcome should be. Facts 
and rules are secondary to that moment of insight.
Scandinavian realism arose from scholarly research on Freud’s psychology and 
the work of the logical positivists. Their perspective on law can be summarised as 
treating legal and social norms as emotive statements which have a psychological 
impact on the recipient. Cast in the language of ‘emotivism’, this gives legal norms 
the same status as any other normative expressions: they are intended to persuade 
and exercise rhetorical force.
These are, therefore, two different ‘realisms’ perhaps best distinguished by what 
they are opposed to. American realism takes a realistic perspective on legal pro-
cesses, opposing theunrealistic claims about legal processes made by other legal the-
orists. Scandinavian realism is a philosophical realism opposed to the idealism – the 
ideals, and certain kinds of rationality-focussed perspectives on law – often relied 
upon by other schools.
4a Realism and normativity
Realism is both practical and sceptical. Realists encourage us to refocus our atten-
tion on the functioning of legal language in Courts and in society. When we focus 
on what is normal in these contexts we discover that, while the language of law and 
legal rules has great ‘potency’, the reality of law is much less impressive than the 
ideal. Legal actors see themselves as problem-solvers rather than scientists discover-
ing norms. Legal rules sometimes govern behaviour, and sometimes do not.

CHAPTER 6 NORM
242
The normal functioning of law has its own logic, particularly in common law sys-
tems where rules and practices have been honed through the trial and error of case-
work. This view of the evolutionary ‘wisdom’ of the common law could be grounds 
for supporting formalism: the clarity and logic of rule application. However, when 
conjoined with philosophical pragmatism, it can also support the view that law is 
not a web of rules but the – culturally and historically contingent – practices of legal 
institutions. In reorientation towards legal practice and the everyday decision-making 
processes of law, we discover the real source of legal normativity: the traditions and 
expectations of the legal profession. Normativity does not have coherence, correspond-
ence, logic or any other such stable foundation. In the words of Oliver Wendel Holmes, 
‘The life of the law has not been logic: it has been experience’ (quoted in Bix, 2004: 92).
This is not to say that all realists reject theorising in favour of the description of 
legal judgment. Many realists would see themselves as part of a ‘science of predic-
tion’, looking to combine accurate descriptive of the normal functioning of law with 
a prescriptive analysis of where and how ‘good’ or ‘right’ decisions are achieved. 
The practice of law does create normative standards of good decision and right 
judgment, and it is the distinctive contribution of realism to try to expose how 
such standards arise within general legal activity. Namely, through the insight and 
wisdom of individual judges, rather than the scientific application of rule to fact.
What this also entails, more sceptically, is an exposure and puncturing of the my-
thology of ‘autonomous’ rules. There is a tendency within positivism to treat rules 
‘governing’ legal decisions. Realism associates that normative force with expectations; 
expectations legal actors are expected to fulfil. This anti-formalism insists that law is 
not reducible to mechanical application of rules, and it denies that law can be treated 
as a deductive system allowing the imputation of rules from a set of first principles. 
The real normativity of law lies in practices and expectations that surround legal 
decision-making. This means that norms vary frequently and illogically. Legal prac-
tices, and the societies that give rise to legal practices, will naturally vary over time 
and legal normativity will vary accordingly. Any more uncompromising view of legal 
norms is guilty of being un realistic: ‘law must be more or less impermanent, experi-
mental and therefore not nicely calculable. Much of the uncertainty of law is not an un-
fortunate accident; it is of immense social value’ (Frank, 2009: 7, emphasis in original).
EXAMPLE
United States v Kirby 74 U.S. 482 (1868) United States Supreme Court
An Act of Congress prohibited ‘wilfully and knowingly’ obstructing the movement of post 
within the United States. Kirby and a number of others did precisely this by stopping a 
steamboat in Kentucky; they were, however, law enforcement officers apprehending a 
➨
www.ebook3000.com

4 REALISM
243
4b Scandinavian realism
Scandinavian realism represents a radical anti-metaphysical move in legal theory; a 
rejection of law as a unique normative system as well as a rejection of foundations 
in accounting for the normativity of law. Its view of law can be best summarised 
in its reductive view of legal language. Legal language is one, among others, type of 
persuasive social discourse. The ‘oughts’ and ‘shoulds’ of legal discussion have real-
ity only to the extent that they have that persuasive psychological effect.
The school has its origins in psychological and psychiatric research in the early 
twentieth century, research exploring individuals’ relationship with authority and 
the ‘internalisation’ of social norms (Ross, 2004: 70–4). We can be compelled to act 
through threats and coercion, but the authority of law (like other sources of such 
authority such as parents, politicians and officials) relies on the rhetorical force of 
their instructions and, to be fully effective, on our acceptance of those arguments 
and authorities as part of our own will and identity (‘internalisation’). This psycho-
logical research, drawn upon by the founding figure of Scandinavian realism, Axel 
Hagerstrom (1868–1939), treated legal language as nothing more than a language 
able to empower the speaker and elicit feelings of compulsion on the part of the 
hearer. The potency of legal language, its ‘magical’ capacity to both compel us to act 
and to accept its compulsion, is completely explicable in psychological terms.
Consequently, the Scandinavian realists encourage us to reject any normative ex-
planation of law other than the description of behavioural patterns. Our behavioural 
known criminal. Their actions fell clearly within the Act: should they be convicted? A realist 
and realistic answer is that we must rely on the ‘common sense’ of judges, not the rules 
of the law which were clearly contravened.
There can be but one answer, in our judgment, to the questions certified to us. The stat-
ute of Congress by its terms applies only to persons who ‘knowing and wilfully’ obstruct 
or retard the passage of the mail, or of its carrier; that is, to those who know that the 
acts performed will have that effect, and perform them with the intention that such shall 
be their operation. When the acts which create the obstruction are in themselves unlaw-
ful, the intention to obstruct will be imputed to their author, although the attainment of 
other ends may have been his primary object. The statute has no reference to acts lawful 
in themselves, from the execution of which a temporary delay to the mails unavoidably 
follows. [. . .] All laws should receive a sensible construction. General terms should be 
so limited in their application as not to lead to injustice, oppression, or an absurd conse-
quence. It will always, therefore, be presumed that the legislature intended exceptions to 
its language, which would avoid results of this character. The reason of the law in such 
cases should prevail over its letter. [. . .] The common sense of man approves the judg-
ment mentioned by Puffendorf, that the Bolognian law which enacted, ‘that whoever drew 
blood in the streets should be punished with the utmost severity,’ did not extend to the 
surgeon who opened the vein of a person that fell down in the street in a fit.

CHAPTER 6 NORM
244
patterns demonstrate the extent to which we have accepted and internalised certain 
forms of behaviour as authorised. All the prescriptive normative claims that we at-
tribute to law should be reduced to descriptive claims about what we do.
The word ‘ought’ and the like are imperative expressions which are used in order to im-
press a certain behaviour on people. It is sheer nonsense to say that they signify a reality. 
Their sole function is to work on the minds of people, directing them to do this or to 
refrain from something else – not to communicate knowledge about the state of things. 
(Olivecrona, quoted in Spaak, 2011: 172)
Through these minimal explanatory commitments, the analysis of law can be made 
consistent with the verificationist demands of logical positivism: meaning should 
only be afforded to behaviour not normative claims per se (Ayer, 1970).
Some variations within the school are significant and rest on what kinds of 
non-psychological factors could also be considered significant. For Karl Olivecrona 
(1897–1980), the cause of obedience to law is a combination of internal factors 
(will, fear and compulsion) combined with external factors, particularly the respect 
afforded to law-makers and law’s symbols of authority. The documented psycho-
logical capacity to internalise authority – to treat laws as arising from within us – is 
reinforced by being associated with the special rituals, displays and symbolism of 
law. For example, in English culture the police are sometimes referred to as ‘The Law’ 
reflecting our association of law not with abstract rules but with the physical pres-
ence of law enforcement agents on our streets (see Stolleis, 2009). Alf Ross links this 
with the wider, ideological and psychological, foundations of law:
The force exercised by the police and executive authorities is not based solely on physical 
factors, such as the number of men at their disposal, their training and weapons, but on 
ideological factors as well. Were all citizens to conspire together, they would undoubtedly 
be stronger than the police. But this does not happen. The law-abiding citizen respects the 
police. The power of the police is based for the most part on this respect in conjunction 
with the feeling the police themselves have as exercising their authority ‘in the name of 
the law’. To generalise, one may say that the physical means of compulsion must always be 
operated by human beings. (Ross, 2004: 56)
While the ultimate ‘reality’ of norms must be seen as psychological, legal norms 
are distinguishable from moral norms because they are seen to be more effective than 
moral norms. Legal ideas give rise to social practices and social phenomena which 
show us that law is predictably associated with force. This predictability marks out a spe-
cial class of (legal) norms, those most likely to be considered binding or authoritative.
In sum, Scandinavian realism stresses the centrality of descriptive norms and argues 
that explaining ‘law’ is explaining what is likely to happen in predictive psychological 
terms. Thus the school seeks to be ‘scientific’ in the sense that law must be explained 
through behavioural observations, but not ‘pure’ in Kelsenian terms. Kelsen separates 
legal norms from the rest of the world; Scandinavian realism embeds them in our lives. 
While this overcomes the abstraction that is characteristic of Kelsen’s position, the 
Scandinavian realists are less able to explain the subtleties of legal decision-making. 
www.ebook3000.com

4 REALISM
245
After all, judicial decisions are not fully explained as the result of internalised concep-
tions of authority but aspire to a particular kind of consistency (see Ross, 2004: 128f).
EXAMPLE
~7KH3URWHFWLRQRI&LYLO5LJKWV$FW>,QGLD@6HFWLRQ$
Scandinavian realism encourages us to look at the whole range of social norms and the 
means by which they are enforced. Religious norms (which often involve various types of 
‘inclusion’ of religious believers and ‘exclusion’ of non-believers) can become social and 
legal norms sanctioning social and economic marginalisation. This was especially pro-
nounced in India’s caste system. Here we see a legislative effort to remove the general 
discriminatory assumptions and the economic practices associated with discrimination.
[A] person shall be deemed to incite or encourage the practice of ‘untouchability’ if he, 
directly or indirectly, preaches ‘untouchability’ or its practice in any form; or if he justifies, 
whether on historical philosophical or religious grounds or on the ground of any tradition 
of the caste system or on any other ground, the practice of ‘untouchability’ in any form. 
/ [7A. Unlawful compulsory labour to be deemed to be a practice of ‘untouchability’:] 
Whoever compels any person, on the ground of ‘untouchability’, to do any scavenging or 
sweeping or to remove any carcass or to flay any animal or to remove the umbilical cord 
or to do any other job of a similar nature, shall be deemed to have enforced a disability 
arising out of ‘untouchability’.
4c American realism
American realism shares with Scandinavian realism a distrust of metaphysics and an 
interest in descriptive norms. Originating in US law schools, it combines aspects of 
rule scepticism, of positivism, and above all a parsimonious (the minimum neces-
sary) approach to explaining law and legality. The latter point is significant. American 
realism attempts to explain law and legality by the least complex, least metaphysi-
cally extravagant, means possible. Eschewing appeal to anything other than the 
hard materials of case law, the constitution and day-to-day legal decision-making, 
American realism suggests that we can have a philosophy of law that is also recognis-
able and attractive to practitioners of law. That does not, of course, ensure that it is a 
good theory of law, but it is one that avoids exaggerated philosophical claims.
American realists would agree with positivism in its account of how law is distin-
guishable from other social institutions, namely through its being a set of obliga-
tions generated by rules that have a particular kind of pedigree. However, positivism 
can become formalism: the assumption that the answers to all legal questions can 
be discovered through the use and application of rules. For the American realists, 
rules are much less important than what legal officials do with them. There are a 
multitude of legal rules, rules can always generate contradictory answers, and there 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
246
is always need for judicial discretion in deciding on what basis, and in which way, 
rules should be used. The most important dimension of the ‘life of the law’ is not 
the rules themselves, but the practices whereby judges make selection among rules 
(and among the facts to be brought under rules) in order to reach a conclusion.
The work of Karl Llewellyn (1893–1962), concentrated on law as the arbitration 
of disputes in Court and is associated with ‘rule scepticism’. Judges make decisions 
about which facts to include and exclude in order to construct, not discover, a 
decision. With different exclusions and inclusions cases could have been decided 
otherwise (Ingersoll, 1966). For these reasons we should pay close attention to the 
style of reasoning found in judicial decisions and the rhetorical moves by which 
they harness the facts and rules to a solution. Such studies show us that the facts 
and rules are not the basis of a logical deduction: judges are professional decision-
makers who make intuitive choices supported by the materials at hand.
Jerome Frank (1889–1957) also emphasised the choices that judges make among 
rules, and particularly their choice of facts; his work is associated with ‘fact scepti-
cism’. Each and every legal decision is ‘under-determined’ by legal rules, leaving the 
choice of relevant facts to the judge. This construction of legal answers through selec-
tion of facts and rules means that a legal decision is always a decision for a particular 
case, not the discovery of ‘the’ right answer. A legal decision is a ‘hunch’ to which 
rules are fitted, after the hunch, as justification. Facts themselves are always filtered, 
arranged and interpreted by a (fallible) judge:
If his final decision is based upon a hunch and that hunch is a function of the ‘facts’, then 
of course what, as a fallible witness of what went on in his courtroom, he believes to be 
the ‘facts’, will often be of controlling importance. (Frank, 2009: 119)
It is this kind of analysis that allows the realists to insist that law is exclusively ‘the 
decisions of the Courts’: law is only law when a Court has made a decision about 
the application of a rule:
For any particular lay person, the law, with respect to any particular set of facts, is a deci-
sion of a court with respect to those facts so far as that decision affects that particular 
person. Until a court has passed on those facts no law on that subject is yet in existence. 
(Frank, 2009: 50)
Undoubtedly, there are strong forces working on judicial decision-making, both 
rational and irrational, and it is the distinctive merit of the American realist school 
to concentrate on the institutional demands made on judges (for example the desire 
not to have a decision overturned) as opposed to the emphasis on behavioural cause 
and effect in social life (as per the Scandinavian realists). There are, nonetheless, 
limits to this style of analysis (see Gilmour, 1961). First, there is a danger of paro-
chialism. While it works well to analyse a legal system (the United States) which has 
an influential and long-lived constitution, this foundation this does not necessarily 
exist elsewhere. Second is a more general failure to account for the importance of 
www.ebook3000.com

4 REALISM
247
justice in our view of law. Judges are trained problem-solvers, and the attractiveness 
of legal processes is expert, and consistent, solutions to problems. However, the 
ends of law, including the common good and the rule of law, are more than the sum 
of law’s parts. They are the ideals with an unclear, but nonetheless irreducible, role 
in our understanding of law. Emphasis on the judicial arm of government places too 
little stress on the wider relationship between law, politics and the common good.
Finally, a defence of rule indeterminacy is not without its problems. Certainly, 
hard cases seem to demonstrate that legal rules are under-determined. The scope 
of a rule may not be able to encompass every situation and it may be ambiguous. 
This does not entail that all rules are undetermined, i.e. capable of any interpretation 
(Solum, 2011). In simple cases, where law and facts are not disputed, the rules may 
give rise to the right answer. Moreover, the social norms underlying legal norms have 
a degree of stability which allows for the right understanding and right interpretation 
of rules. Such criticisms notwithstanding, the American realists’ orientation of legal 
theory towards the norms of judicial practice can explain why law is used as a route to 
problem-solving: because the judiciary itself exhibits predictable behaviour and rep-
resents a class of problem-solvers with training and experience in complex problems.
EXAMPLE
Roth v United States 354 U.S. 476 (1957) United States Supreme Court
Obscenity is an area where considerable judicial latitude is granted and Roth is an in-
fluential US case. It created a test of obscene material: ‘whether to the average person, 
applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken, 
as a whole, appeals to prurient interest.’ There are important questions to ask about the 
normativity (indeed the reality) of ‘contemporary community standards’. We should also 
ask realist questions about whether judges are equipped to make estimations of such 
attitudes or whether we are happy to for them to use their judgment in these matters.
[I]f ‘obscenity’ is to be suppressed, the question whether a particular work is of that 
character involves not really an issue of fact, but a question of constitutional judgment 
of the most sensitive and delicate kind. Many juries might find that Joyce’s ‘Ulysses’ or 
Bocaccio’s ‘Decameron’ was obscene, and yet the conviction of a defendant for selling 
either book would raise, for me, the gravest constitutional problems, for no such verdict 
could convince me, without more, that these books are ‘utterly without redeeming social 
importance.’ In short, I do not understand how the Court can resolve the constitutional 
problems now before it without making its own independent judgment upon the character 
of the material upon which these convictions were based. I am very much afraid that the 
broad manner in which the Court has decided these cases will tend to obscure the pecu-
liar responsibilities resting on state and federal courts in this field, and encourage them to 
rely on easy labelling and jury verdicts as a substitute for facing up to the tough individual 
problems of constitutional judgment involved in every obscenity case.

CHAPTER 6 NORM
248
5  Force and power 
 
 Introduction 
 We have talked throughout our analysis of ‘the force’ of rules and norms. At times 
this sounds merely metaphorical. A rule or obligation does not force us in the same 
way that a strong wind or a gunman forces us into acting. However, while normative 
accounts of the ‘force of law’ seek to dissuade us from thinking of law as command 
or violence, it may be that even by appealing to a ‘sense of obligation’ or the ‘com-
pulsory nature of law’ or law ‘binding us’ we are obscuring a very real relationship 
between law and power. This relationship need not take the form suggested by com-
mand theories – such theories clearly over-simplify the nature of legal obligations – 
but power takes many other forms than commands and threats. 
 There is certainly something appealing in Hart’s belief that a theory of law is not 
defensible if it cannot distinguish the demands of the sovereign and the demands 
of a gangster. Also, following Alexy, we might say that there is something necessary, 
but innocuous, in linking law and force: 
 It seems to be quite natural to argue that a system of rules or norms which in no case au-
thorizes the use of coercion or sanction – not even in case of self-defence – is not a legal 
system, and this is the case owing to conceptual reasons based on the use of language. 
Who would apply the expression ‘law’ to such a system of rules?   (2004: 163) 
 Conversely, Scandinavian realists in particular, emphasise the compulsory force 
that legal discourse exerts upon us through its relationship with the symbols of 
authority, and our own psychological capacity to ‘internalise’ law: ‘In law, fear of 
sanctions and a feeling of being bound by what is valid work together as integral 
motive components of the same action’ ( Ross, 2004 : 61). In this sense, law forces 
us to act in certain ways through its ‘conspiring’ with our psychology to compel us. 
This is more than having an ‘internal point of view on legal rules’ whereby we ‘ac-
cept’ or ‘acknowledge’ the binding force of rules. With its hint of ‘indoctrination’, 
the internalisation of law points towards the conclusion that the social activities 
and institutions we see as making compulsory demands are ultimately activities and 
institutions capable of exercising force and violence. In other words, the command 
theory does not give us a complete account of legal rules and their functioning, but 
it is correct to assume that in the background of what we gently describe as law’s ‘ef-
ficacy’ or its ‘obligatory force’ are coercive social institutions and threats. Even when 
we understand law as ‘reason-giving’ or ‘action-justifying’, this is against a backdrop 
of a sovereign state’s force, power and violence. 
 Before moving any further it is important to distinguish force, violence and 
power. These terms have different meanings in different contexts; force and power 
in particular are often synonymous, but we can certainly draw distinctions between 
the predominantly real and the predominantly  ideal . The use of violence, namely 
5  Force and power 
www.ebook3000.com

5 FORCE AND POWER
249
physical threat or physical harm, is undoubtedly real. This can be distinguished 
from ‘force’ which is often something ideal; the ‘force of law’, like the ‘force of an 
argument’, is more frequently related to ideas rather than real violence (Fish, 1988). 
Power can be both real and ideal: the use of violence, or rhetorical and argumenta-
tive force. While these categorisations may be contestable – Hannah Arendt’s On
Violence (1970) proposes a slightly different categorisation – they should sensitise 
us to the range of physical and mental events that can be associated with the ‘force 
of law’. All three – force, power and violence – will be our concern.
5a Norms and repression
Is there something repressive about law and what does repression mean? Nietzsche’s 
Genealogy of Morals is an account of the emergence of morality (Nietzsche, 1998). 
At its heart is an inversion of Hobbes’ account of our emergence from a state of na-
ture. It rejects benign notions of freedom from fear and the consent of the people, 
in favour of the emergence of forms of repression associated with law. Nietzsche 
centralises legal ideas of responsibility, contract and punishment in our expulsion 
from the state of nature. Its significance for our purpose is that many of the ideas 
found in Scandinavian realism are given an anthropological basis, it explains why 
the ‘force of law’ has such potency, and suggests why law should be seen as inti-
mately tied to power.
Nietzsche’s account of the genealogy (origins) of morality is intended to be 
provocative. Morality is treated throughout the text as a biological response to our 
environment, not a set of eternal truths. Nietzsche adopts a ‘state of nature’ nar-
rative to show how it is that morality, as a form of human self-repression, could 
have emerged. This narrative does not chart our liberation from nature, but treats 
the emergence of morality as a point of decline in the vitality and happiness of 
humans. While Hobbes treats our emergence from nature as a positive step – that 
any law provided by a sovereign is better than a situation without law – Nietzsche 
treats the change from a natural state to one governed by laws as disastrous for the 
human as an animal. We could rely on our instincts in a natural environment. In 
a world governed by social expectations and norms the natural instincts have to 
be suppressed: ‘One burns something in so that it remains in one’s memory [. . .] 
only what does not cease to give pain remains in one’s memory’ (1998: 37). The 
suppression of instincts is not a simple product of societies deliberately repress-
ing certain behaviours, but a millennia-long process of the emergence of social 
ideas (right and wrong) and social institutions (law and religion) which seek to 
justify and celebrate the suppression and taming of the human animal. On this 
account, our subjection to norms is not a process of those more powerful than us 
threatening us with violence lest we fall short of those norms. It is a long process 
of our learning to see suppression, self-denial and self-subjugation as natural and 
valuable. Such is the basis of real power.

CHAPTER 6 NORM
250
This account depends upon Nietzsche’s ‘biologism’: a tendency to judge human 
practices against standards more usually applied to the natural world. This is unsatis-
factory on a number of levels given the multiplicity of ways in which we assess both 
human actions and human institutions (see Chapter 2). However, it does provoke us 
to understand power in a more complex way than many other models of social exist-
ence. Violence is one small part of how norms are created and enforced. As feminist 
scholarship shows (Chapter 2), the ‘natural’ has ideological force and can be used to 
justify injustice. Nietzsche is more radical than this. The suppression of our instincts 
is a central element of social norms and laws, and law helped to make this unnatural 
suppression natural. Moreover, the idea of ‘power’ is thereby given a much more nu-
anced meaning because we can be subject to both real violence and the force of ideas,
both of which shape our social world and shape our self-perception.
Finally, Nietzsche places ideas of contract and responsibility close to the heart of 
all social practices, from law itself to wider moral ideas. This inversion of natural 
law’s account of the origin of law (i.e. that morality precedes law) is also provoca-
tive and depends on a ‘state of nature’ model. The natural human animal, like other 
animals, would react to the world. The socialised human animal is compelled to 
remember, i.e. develop a complex relationship with its own past actions and those of 
others. The capacity to remember is essential to humans’ social being because it is 
the basis of making other, repressive, norms effective. Without memory of what we 
have done we cannot be made to feel guilty about it, and without the capacity for 
guilt there is no effective way for people to repress themselves.
Precisely here there are promises made; precisely here it is a matter of making a memory for the 
one who promises [. . .]. In this sphere, in contract law that is, the moral conceptual world of 
‘guilt’, ‘conscience’, ‘duty’, ‘sacredness of duty’ has its genesis. (1998: 40–1, emphases removed)
Put another way, while an animal that is punished will refrain from doing that action 
again, a human that is punished is encouraged to see themselves, their past actions, and 
their identity in a new light: to devalue themselves and their past actions. Thus, memory 
is essential for this process of self-devaluation, a process that we now take for granted 
in the context of punishment. Society hopes that the punished individual will disown 
their own past selves and past actions. And such devaluation is, for Nietzsche, at the 
heart of law, society and power (1998: 35f). To remember that we are responsible for 
our actions, to remember that we owe a debt to others or to society, and to remember 
our own past errors, is the psychological structure that makes other social practices and 
social norms possible: ‘for this, man himself must first of all have become calculable,
regular, necessary, [. . .] in order to be able to vouch for himself as future, as one who 
promises does!’ (1998: 36, emphasis in original). Accordingly, the social practices and 
social institutions, such as law, that we take to be the index of a positive progress in hu-
manity, depend upon the unnatural demand that we remember, and hold ourselves re-
sponsible for, the entirety of our past actions. The force of law arises from the capacity to 
remember, and the capacity to remember is essential for power to be exercised over us.
www.ebook3000.com

5 FORCE AND POWER
251
EXAMPLE
Bowman and Others Appellants v Secular Society, Limited Respondents
[1917] A.C. 406
This blasphemy case represents a conflict between the rules of ‘public policy’ and the 
rules of a ‘secular society’. It required consideration of whether ‘secular’ also means ‘im-
moral’, and whether one could enter into a contract with such an ‘irrational’ organisation. 
The willingness of the judiciary to treat Christianity and public policy as synonymous is 
questionable and would certainly be challenged by Nietzsche, who identifies Christianity 
with powerful forms of repression.
[I]f the judges of former times have always regarded attempts to undermine Christianity 
as contrary to public policy, what ground is there for changing that policy? It is said that 
public policy is a dangerous principle, but every consideration against introducing new 
rules of public policy applies equally to abrogating old rules. [. . .] I have perused the rules 
of the society for the purpose of considering the force of this objection, and although I 
am of opinion that the society is based upon irrational principles, and seeks to realise a 
visionary and unattainable object, it is not, I think, to be considered as founded for the 
purpose of propagating irreligious and immoral doctrines in the ordinary and proper sense 
of those words. It is not such a society as that a person dealing with it could not acquire 
the right to enforce a contract entered into with him by the society. [. . .] This implies that 
if the result of the examination of the rules had been to show that the society was formed 
for irreligious purposes the decision might have been the other way.
5b The force of law
Hannah Arendt characterises violence as instrumental: it is a means to good or bad 
ends (1970: 46). This position has intuitive appeal because while violence is often 
a dreadful occurrence it cannot be denied that it sometimes aims at, and achieves, 
good ends. Just wars, liberation struggles and self-defence are all ends to which 
violence can be deployed and all forms of violence that law authorises. However, 
in his essay Critique of Violence, Walter Benjamin (1892–1940) attempts to analyse 
violence purely as a means and not in the light of its possible ends (1979). In an un-
conventional analytical move, he separates this entirely from the question of what 
ends violence might serve. He asks what structure violence possesses regardless of 
the ends it serves. His answer is that violence – if it is used functionally at all, and 
is not purely pathological behaviour – is always a means of generating or preserv-
ing law. The state uses violence to maintain law and order; the individual, through 
violence, is capable of establishing themselves as ‘law-maker’ or sovereign within a 
particular context. In the latter sense, ‘law’ appears to become merely metaphorical, 
but whosoever uses violence is claiming the power to decide what should happen in 
a particular context. This is only metaphorical sovereignty if we presume a positivist 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
252
understanding of law as emanating exclusively from the state. In opposition to this, 
the Critique is avowedly an attack on positivist readings of law (and, by extension, 
legitimate violence) as arising only from the state. He is, ultimately, seeking to make 
sense of how a violent revolution could be law-creating.
Most violence, whatever its source, is ‘law-preserving’. Violence is not a rupture 
in the fabric of law which needs to be remedied. It can always be understood 
within a legal framework with violence serving to trigger legal responses. Some 
violence may be ‘law-creating’, i.e. when through invasion or revolution a new 
legal order is initiated. In either case, however, violence entails the beginning or 
the maintenance of law:
For the function of violence in law-making is twofold, in the sense that law-making pur-
sues as its end, with violence as its means, what is to be established as law, but at the mo-
ment of instatement does not dismiss violence; rather, at this very moment of law-making, 
it specifically establishes as law not an end unalloyed by violence, but one intimately and 
necessarily bound to it, under the title of power. (Benjamin, 1979: 149)
Note that this is not a way of saying that states are necessarily violent, or necessarily 
respond to violence, but rather that law is never threatened by violence because law 
is the one thing that always accompanies violence. Furthermore, this does not serve 
as a justification or a celebration of either law or violence. On the contrary, it should 
lead us to a pessimistic conclusion that the relationship between the state and the 
use of violence is not a contingent one, but a very intimate and inescapable one.
In his essay ‘The force of law,’ Jacques Derrida (1930–2004) draws upon 
Benjamin’s critique of violence in an attempt to unpack two questions arising from 
Benjamin’s position (Derrida, 1990). The first is how we should understand the 
‘force of law’ and, second, where this leaves the relationship between law and justice.
Derrida uses the work of Montaigne to articulate law’s force as something more than 
violence: ‘And so laws keep up their good standing, not because they are just, but 
because they are laws: that is the mystical foundation of their authority, they have 
no other’ (1990: 942). The force of law can be seen as something ‘mystical’ in the 
sense that it has to be assumed but can be neither discovered nor proved. To that 
extent, the Scandinavian realists are correct in seeking to work on the assumption 
that there is an ideal, purely mental, normative force for law, but this can be used 
to lead away from Benjamin’s conclusion that violence always accompanies law to 
an assumption about the importance of justice. The fact that the force of laws is that
they are laws implies we are dealing with something more than a system of coercive 
threats; law, despite its relationship with violence, is an ideal. Put differently, the 
raw violence of law is not a sufficient explanation of why law can be treated as an 
ideal. Rather, law’s compulsory force has precisely that property we have attributed 
to norms more generally: they are always ideal and real. The reality of law’s norma-
tivity is its relationship with violence; the ideal aspect of law’s normativity is that the 
imposition of law always brings with it a sense of the need for justice.
www.ebook3000.com

5 FORCE AND POWER
253
EXAMPLE
~'UDIW $UWLFOHV RQ WKH 5HVSRQVLELOLW\ RI 6WDWHV IRU ,QWHUQDWLRQDOO\
:URQJIXO $FWV ,QWHUQDWLRQDO /DZ &RPPLVVLRQ 81 'RF $
$UWLFOH
Both Benjamin and Derrida were concerned with the significance of strikes as forms 
of force that may be instances of exceptional ‘law-destroying’ violence: where one legal 
system is destroyed but not replaced with another. The International Law Commission 
presented draft articles concerning state responsibilities, including situations force ma-
jeure: literally a ‘greater force’, like a natural event or massive upheaval which makes the 
normal functioning of life and law impossible. Law-destroying violence would have to be 
something like force majeure, an act of God.
$UWLFOH
Force majeure: 1. The wrongfulness of an act of a State not in conformity with an interna-
tional obligation of that State is precluded if the act is due to force majeure, that is the 
occurrence of an irresistible force or of an unforeseen event, beyond the control of the 
State, making it materially impossible in the circumstances to perform the obligation. / 2. 
Paragraph 1 does not apply if: (a) the situation of force majeure is due, either alone or in 
combination with other factors, to the conduct of the State invoking it; or (b) the State has 
assumed the risk of that situation occurring. [From the International Law Commission’s 
Commentary on the Article] Material impossibility of performance giving rise to force ma-
jeure may be due to a natural or physical event (e.g. stress of weather which may divert 
State aircraft into the territory of another State, earthquakes, floods or drought) or to 
human intervention (e.g. loss of control over a portion of the State’s territory as a result 
of an insurrection or devastation of an area by military operations carried out by a third 
State), or some combination of the two.
5c Critical legal studies
Critical legal studies (CLS) is that school of legal philosophy most sensitive to the 
varieties of force and power at work in law. Whether it takes an ‘external’ critical 
perspective, looking at law’s role in its wider social context, or an ‘internal’ criti-
cal perspective, analysing how legal processes and institutions betray ideological 
patterns of reasoning, the complicity between law and power-holding groups is 
central. In essence, law is said to reinforce social norms that are either unjust (law 
is discriminatory) or have the potential to be unjust (law can be used to challenge 
certain forms of discrimination, but at the expense of reinforcing other problematic 
social norms). This school, more than any other, is willing to identify precisely those 
social norms law should be challenging or maintaining.
The historical origins of the CLS group lie in the United States, the political up-
heavals of the 1960s, and in particular opposition to the Vietnam War (Tushnet, 
1991). However, the philosophical origins of the movement lie in both American 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
254
realism and in continental ‘critical theory’. CLS scholars take from American real-
ism opposition to formalism, but they offer an ideological diagnosis (rather than 
in Jerome Frank’s work, psychological diagnosis) of formalism. The very existence 
of formalism reflects something more than the professional pride of judges claim-
ing to be able to impute legal norms logically and without extra-legal intrusions. It 
reflects widespread patterns of thinking whereby social injustice can be ignored on 
the basis that ‘rules are rules’ and that law is always ‘impartial’. Rules are the creation 
of a particular class and their interests, and law is not impartial in its basic assump-
tions (Hunt, 1986). Law assumes that property is more important than other basic 
goods, and it assumes that it should ignore the private sphere, the most important 
dimension of human life, in favour of the formalised contractual relationships 
found in the public sphere.
The influence of critical theory (of which Walter Benjamin is an example) is 
found in CLS’ understanding of how social norms, and thereby legal norms, are 
created and maintained. Critical theory has Marxist origins, but rather than see-
ing culture and law as ‘super-structural’ by-products of economic relationships, 
law and culture are held to have a crucial impact on how economic systems are 
maintained. While culture and society certainly exhibit the influence of ideology, 
it has to be assumed that this is something more insidious than the poor being 
‘persuaded’ to accept a subservient social and economic status. Rather, social sys-
tems exhibit complex patterns of indoctrination: what might be called ‘internalisa-
tion’ in the language of the Scandinavian realists or ‘normalisation’ in Foucault’s 
terms (Hunt, 1987). Inequalities are not only legitimised, but treated as cause 
for pride (e.g. America is a ‘land of opportunity’ despite its deep inequalities; ‘an 
Englishman’s home is his castle’ despite England being under the ownership of the 
Crown and land-owners).
Law has a close relationship with the maintenance of these fictions. It provides 
authoritative justification for the existing unequal distribution of wealth; it centra-
lises the economic actor in the public sphere while ignoring the labour that takes 
place in the private sphere; it treats certain (scientific or economic) experts as au-
thorities in order to reach legal conclusions that reflect dominant conceptions of 
‘normality’. In short, CLS draws together many of the negative ways in which law is 
based on or reflects social norms (Unger, 1986; Hunt, 1987). The basic responsibil-
ity for CLS scholars, therefore, is to work on exposing ideology and demonstrating 
the inseparable relationship between law and politics. This involves conventional 
political analysis and campaigning; it can also involve ‘deconstruction’ of legal 
decisions to show their internal tensions and faults (Douzinas and Gearey, 2005; 
see below). This is a noteworthy conclusion. Our early reflections on the justice 
sought to separate legal and political ideas of justice, a task that could not easily be 
achieved. CLS gives us the clearest answer to why this might be the case: law and 
politics are not related, law is politics.
www.ebook3000.com

255
QUESTIONS
EXAMPLE
A Tale of Two Cities&KDUOHV'LFNHQV>@'LFNHQVz
CLS has encouraged a multi-disciplinary approach to law, including analysis of literature. 
In A Tale of Two Cities, Dickens provides one of the earliest ‘courtroom dramas’. Two criti-
cal points are at work: Courts are not necessarily the route to justice, and legal language 
can mask political motives.
Silence in the court! Charles Darnay had yesterday pleaded Not Guilty to an indictment 
denouncing him (with infinite jingle and jangle) for that he was a false traitor to our serene, 
illustrious, excellent, and so forth, prince, our Lord the King, by reason of his having, on 
divers occasions, and by divers means and ways, assisted Lewis, the French King, in his 
wars against our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth; that was to say, by coming 
and going, between the dominions of our said serene, illustrious, excellent, and so forth, 
and those of the said French Lewis, and wickedly, falsely, traitorously, and otherwise evil-
adverbiously, revealing to the said French Lewis what forces our said serene, illustrious, 
excellent, and so forth, had in preparation to send to Canada and North America. This much, 
Jerry, with his head becoming more and more spiky as the law terms bristled it, made out 
with huge satisfaction, and so arrived circuitously at the understanding that the aforesaid, 
and over and over again aforesaid, Charles Darnay, stood there before him upon his trial; 
that the jury were swearing in; and that Mr. Attorney-General was making ready to speak.
Questions
Section 1
●What kinds of normative claims do we commonly encounter?
●Is everything that is ‘normal’ an obligation? Does ‘obligatory’ admit of degrees?
●Is law binding in a way that is different from the obligations found in morality? If they 
are binding in the same way is this because they serve the same ends (regulation of 
conduct) or have the same form (generalisation)?
Section 2
●What is the relationship between prescriptive and descriptive norms? Does the fact/value 
distinction require that there is no possible relationship between the two, or rather that 
for descriptive norms to become prescriptive norms additional justification, or additional 
force, is needed?
●Is analysis of law through the imputation of norms applicable in common law systems 
with their emphasis on judges’ identification and application of rules?
●Could a Grundnorm have content? That is, rather than being a purely formal 
constitutive norms, could the Grundnorm assert, for example, that ‘law should 
realise the good’?

CHAPTER 6 NORM
Section 3
●Are descriptive norms reducible to prescriptive norms (and vice versa)? Note that 
description of normality or regularity in human conduct could be seen as testifying to 
underlying laws (prescriptive norms) governing that normality or regularity.
●Should law reflect social norms; would it be effective if it did not? Should law change or 
shape social norms; would it be – morally or socially – justified if it did not?
●Should economic models inform the creation of policy and legislation? Does economic 
theory provide the right assumptions about the rationality of persons?
Section 4
●Are realists right to neglect discussion of foundations in favour of description of the 
functioning of the law?
●If we could accurately predict the outcome of legal processes to a high degree of 
certainty, would this give credence to a formalist defence of the priority of legal rules, or 
a realist emphasis on the importance of legal practitioners and their virtues?
●Is ‘lawyering’ ultimately about prediction? Are lawyers those who are best able to predict 
whether someone will do something (in court or in the course of a legal relationship)? 
If this is the case, does it mean that a good lawyer could predict the outcome of a case 
but fail to explain how a field of law is structured?
Section 5
●Is self-control always unnatural and is law, therefore, always non-natural? If so does this 
effectively refute all natural law philosophy?
●If we conceded that the force of law is somewhere between the threat of violence 
and the ‘force’ of rhetoric, would the best account of law be a realist one, or would 
positivism and natural law also have an explanative role?
●Does ‘justice’ mean ‘criticism of law’?
&RQFHSWVDQGPHWKRGV&ULWLTXH

&ULWLTXH
Evaluation and criticism of law and laws has been a recurrent theme throughout our 
conceptual survey. Concepts such as good, right, justice etc. are critical not only in 
the sense that they serve important roles in jurisprudence, but also because they offer 
means to criticise law, and criticise claims about law. Criticism of law can be specific 
(‘this is a poor law’) or, more commonly in jurisprudence, general: that a legal system 
as a whole lacks certain essential qualities or fails to meet a fundamental goal.
256
www.ebook3000.com

257
CONCEPTS AND METHODS: CRITIQUE
Specific criticism of laws, by lawyers, is a kind of ‘internal critique’: it uses means 
internal to the system – rules or principles – to criticise other parts of the system. 
General criticism of laws and legal systems can be understood as ‘external critique’: it 
stands outside the system using tools of analysis that are non-legal. American realism 
– to the extent that it is critical – offers a kind of internal critique of legal theory and 
legal training showing that legal processes fall short of the formalist model. Critical 
legal studies represents a form of external critique using tools from the social sciences 
and political philosophy to challenge illegitimate assumptions in legal thinking.
In philosophical terms, there are three main strands of critique used in contempo-
rary philosophy, and each is present in legal philosophy. The first is Kantian or ‘tran-
scendental’ critique. This seeks to find certainty at the most fundamental level pos-
sible, i.e. the basic certainties possible in epistemology (knowledge) and metaphysics 
(reality). This is critique in the sense that all claims to knowledge from the senses (and 
certainly the received truths of tradition) are treated with suspicion unless they are 
founded upon basic truths about the conditions under which knowledge is possible.
The second strand of philosophical critique is ‘genealogical’ critique associated 
with Nietzsche. This is a critical approach concerned primarily with values. It shows 
that values are at work in even ostensibly objective enquiries into knowledge and re-
ality. It seeks to show the presence of these values within all of our activities, implic-
itly and unconsciously supporting our claims to science, knowledge and certainty. 
These are often bad or unsupportable values that arise from human need, or human 
self-delusion, rather than insight into truth.
A third might be termed ‘therapeutic’ critique. This is associated with philosophers 
as diverse as Socrates and Wittgenstein. It suggests that the essence of philosophical 
enquiry is criticism of philosophy’s own traditions and assumptions. That the basic 
philosophical responsibility is to show either that we are all ignorant of the truth 
(Socrates) or that philosophical problems are the result of confusions in thought and 
language (Wittgenstein). In either case, philosophy is a kind of ‘therapy’ for curing 
misapprehensions in our thought.
*HQHDORJLHVJHQHDORJLFDOIDOODFLHVDQGad hominem arguments
The origin of ideas is rarely crucial to understanding how they are used in debate. 
For instance, we can discuss the function of legal sovereignty without caring about 
its origin in religious thought. Nonetheless, sensitivity to the origins of an idea or 
argument can alert us to ambiguities in its use. The idea of a ‘genealogy’ suggests 
that the ideas we use today may not have the kinds of origins that we assume, and 
that they may have mutated or evolved from very different kinds of ideas and in-
stitutions. A genealogy of ‘good’ is provided by Nietzsche, who charts the change 
between good as antonym of ‘bad’ and then of ‘evil’; he suggests the opposition 
between good and evil has questionable psychological origins (1998). Genealogical 
analysis entails that we should not assume that ideas, concepts and principles used 

CHAPTER 6 NORM
258
in discussion have had a simple origin or beginning. Ideas such as the ‘good’ may 
have mutated over time, and it may be of particular significance if the idea’s anto-
nym has changed.
A common move in debate, but a debased kind of genealogy, is an ‘ad hominem
argument’ asserting that a claim should be judged on the basis of the person 
who makes the argument or their character. Avoid ad hominem arguments: ideas 
need judging by their content, not the character of the person who makes them. 
This is an instance of a genealogical fallacy. The fallacy is judging the value of 
something by its origins. Because certain things began life as repressive practices 
(punishment, or arguably law itself) does not mean that they are now repressive 
or illegitimate.

'HFRQVWUXFWLRQ
Deconstruction is one of the most radical philosophical approaches. While the 
name is often associated with the general thrust of ‘critique’ (i.e. analysing why 
things are possible at all), deconstruction is a specific term of art. It concerns the 
analysis of texts (including philosophical writing and legal decisions) with the 
intention of exposing implicit oppositions within the text: mutually constituting 
oppositions which are unstable and which undermine the coherence of the text as 
a whole (see Hunt, 1987; Douzinas and Gearey, 2005). The opposition at the heart 
of Western philosophy is said to be between presence and absence (we generally 
prioritise what is here and now, though that cannot be understood without refer-
ence to what is absent). The opposition between speech and writing is often crucial 
in philosophy (we prioritise speech as an immediate and present thing, but speech 
presumes distinctions that are only possible through writing).
This approach has been applied to legal texts (e.g. Goodrich, 1990). Legal deci-
sions draw upon a range of different classifications, but many of these are ultimately 
reducible to the ‘universal versus the particular’ and the ‘necessary versus the contin-
gent’. A deconstructive approach would see these as reducible to more fundamental, 
and problematic, ideas: both the universal and particular are contained in the idea 
of ‘classification’, and both the necessary and contingent contained in the idea of 
‘possibility’.
Do not treat oppositions as absolute unbridgeable poles of debate. Very often, 
oppositions share hidden assumptions, or are so reliant upon one another as to 
make them inseparable. This is true of ‘foundationalism versus constructivism’: 
foundations can be constructed; constructions serve as foundations. Both could be 
captured in the idea of an ‘origin’. Note that deconstruction emphasises ‘texts’ rather 
than truth. The importance of this is that, unlike critical theory, there is no assump-
tion that we can get to the truth. Rather we are reliant upon language as a means of 
conceptualising the world, but language is always susceptible to attack in its use of 
classifications and oppositions.
www.ebook3000.com

259
CONCEPTS AND METHODS: CRITIQUE
Interdisciplinarity and the interstitial
This chapter, in using social, historical and sociological theory, has strayed far from 
the legal materials commonly used in learning about law. However, legal institu-
tions and legal practitioners draw upon the whole fabric of human life, and with 
it a panoply of ideas and texts. It has been said that ‘law is a scavenger, feeding 
off the leftovers of other disciplines’ (Elliott, quoted in Hoeflich, 1986: 96); legal 
scholarship is wide-ranging, and indeed has to be. Put more generally, G.E.R. Lloyd 
expresses why we should be critical about drawing neat disciplinary boundaries, 
including boundaries between law and other disciplines:
Current academic boundaries evidently serve a dual role, both liberating and constrain-
ing. They liberate in that they enable the student potentially to reach the frontiers of 
knowledge in the field. But they constrain in that specialisation inevitably entails a 
narrowing in the focus of interest. Narrower and narrower specialisations are a phenom-
enon of twenty-first-century science especially, where interdisciplinary or cross-discipli-
nary interests are frowned upon as diluting the concentration on the specific problems 
at the cutting edge of research, when they are not condemned as evidence of hopeless 
superficiality. (Lloyd, 2009: 181)
Classification demands drawing clear and distinct boundaries. Such boundaries 
may be finely drawn, but any kind of classification is likely to be, to some degree, a 
falsification of reality. Reality itself does not exhibit difference and opposition: these 
are classifications we impose on reality, and this is especially applicable to law. Law 
demands the creation of classifications, and while these classifications are always 
challenged and refined by the demands of legal disputes, they can never hope to be 
perfect ‘mirrors of nature’. Classification is useful, but it is a human practice, not an 
insight into reality.
Respecting difference, and avoiding over-hasty classification, are traits of a legal 
system founded on liberal principles. We cannot impose our assumptions on oth-
ers, and nor should we seek to impose our classifications upon them. We respect 
difference first of all by acknowledging it: differences of class, race, gender or ability. 
Acknowledging such difference should not be a means of marginalising or criticis-
ing difference. It is the means by which difference is recognised and through which 
measures can be put in place to ensure equality. Nonetheless, however refined 
such categories become, they do not reflect human reality. There are degrees of 
membership of a class, race and gender. There are degrees of physically or mentally 
‘normal’. The classifications used by law may not fit the self-perception or lives 
who those who are classified. Moreover, individuals fall into multiple categories: 
race and gender, or disability and class. Accordingly, the movement in social theory 
emphasising the ‘interstitial’ seeks to draw attention to those lives and experience 
at the meeting-point of classifications (e.g. Roach Anleu, 1992). Law has trouble 
recognising such complex social experiences – it needs clear classification – but 
without recognition of them it cannot claim to classify in a way that will do justice.

CHAPTER 6 NORM
260
Law and art
The relationship between law and art, like art itself, varies considerably between 
times and cultures. Different cultures not only have different legal systems, but 
engage in different representations of legal practices. In any context, such represen-
tations are influential in the wider cultural understanding of law. This has two con-
sequences. It contributes to our awareness of law and, as the Scandinavian realists 
argue, it is our awareness and imaginings about law that are its salient characteristic, 
not its rules or its institutional practices (see Spaak, 2011), and much of that repre-
sentation involves criticism and parody. This may be for a number of reasons, but 
its consequence is to reinforce the view that law is a distinct part of the social world, 
not part of its normal or every-day proceedings. This gives more support to those 
positions associated with the right and the good: law has as special moral respon-
sibility that separates it out from other social practices (the good) or it has its own 
rules and standards of correctness (the right).
The merit of considering law’s relationships with the arts – in film, literature 
or the visual arts – is not simply representation. Art does more than represent, in-
deed not all art is representative of social or natural reality. Art has a relationship 
with knowledge, albeit a complicated and perhaps destructive relationship. Art can 
cultivate our ‘emotional intelligence’ (as Aristotle would argue), it shows the lim-
its of the knowledge provided by our senses (as Kant argued), and it can even be 
seen as disruptive of knowledge (as in Plato’s defence of censorship). Accordingly, 
when we consider the relationship between art and law we are certainly consider-
ing the cultural and psychological impact of representation, and this is crucial to 
the Scandinavian realists and some CLS scholars (e.g. Stolleis, 2009). We are, how-
ever, also considering the limits of our knowledge and the potential for reality to 
be greater, or at least more complicated, than our cognitive capacities allow us to 
perceive.
Law itself can be treated as a field of literature. An approach explored most fre-
quently by the CLS school but arguably a dimension of any legal education, legal 
materials demonstrate specific styles of writing and trends in what is acceptable, 
good or legitimate legal writing. In short, legal writing is a genre. It involves narra-
tives: stories about chains of events expressed through the ideas and vocabulary of 
a distinctive tradition. Furthermore, it is not surprising to note that writing – com-
mon law judgments in particular – are characterised by rhetoric: styles of writing 
intended to persuade. Appeal to authority is, of course, important legally, and this 
has stylistic consequences in the centrality and deference afforded to authorities.
Stylistically, it is undoubtedly true that legal language is also ‘dry’, i.e. systematic, 
lacking in excessive ornamentation, and lacking in warmth. This too is a conse-
quence of law’s rhetorical dimensions and its need to return frequently to author-
ity. However, it also means, more particularly, that there is a distinctive absence of 
interiority. The interior lives of the people involved in legal disputes (excepting the 
www.ebook3000.com

261
FURTHER READING
views and perceptions of some judges) are absent or conceptualised in such a way 
as to become unfamiliar. Criminal cases, for instance, are rarely interested in moti-
vation, that is, a rounded and full narrative of how someone came to decide to do 
something and the personal experiences that informed that decision. Rather, crimi-
nal law is concerned with intent – intention to bring about consequences – and this 
is gauged through objective behavioural patterns, not personal testimony. In short, 
legal texts, and the genre of the legal decision, are in some respects unappealing, but 
attention to these aspects of law can alert us to where critical concepts such as the 
good, the right and the person are being used, and perhaps abused.
Further reading
MacCormick (1998) provides a complex combination of approaches to norms, one that is in 
keeping with Hart’s Concept of Law but that is much more attuned to law’s institutional prac-
tices. Important work on norms has been undertaken by Korsgaard (1996); an introduction 
to her work can be found in Del Mar’s review of (2007). Sylvia Delacroix’s has written gener-
ally on norms (2006) and has also written on Kelsen (2005). There is no simple introduction 
or approach to Kelsen’s work, but Bobbio and Zolo’s is among the most accessible (1998). 
Posner (2000) makes a range of interesting and challenging points about law and social 
norms. Tapp and Levine (1974) explore the idea of norms within legal institutions from an 
American realist perspective, while Ross (2004) offers the fullest account of Scandinavian 
realism. Stanley Fish (1988) gives sustained attention to the ‘force’ of law. The best recent 
work on critical legal studies is Douzinas and Gearey’s (2005).
Visit www.mylawchamber.co.uk/riley to access tools 
to help you develop and test your knowledge of legal 
philosophy including Podcasts on leading thinkers and 
theories, discussion questions, diagrams showing 
interrelations between concepts, and weblinks

262
Law
7
There are two reasons why discussion of this clearly crucial concept has been de-
layed. The first concerns the complexity of the idea of ‘law’. It is only by having first 
analysed concepts intimately related to law that the multiplicity of perspectives 
on law becomes apparent. Through these concepts we have encountered law as an 
institution, as a goal and as a means. These concepts show law to be, variously, a 
source of truth, a set of rules and a by-product of social forces. From the perspective 
of these concepts law is something both ideal and all-too-human.
The second reason for deferral of direct analysis of law is a consequence of adopt-
ing justice as our starting-point. The idea of justice encourages us to pursue intui-
tive questions about law, namely its goals and its means. The complexity of law’s 
goals and its means gives rise to philosophical questions which are both analytical 
(conceptual and linguistic) and normative (related to values and ideals). The idea 
of justice led us towards a range of questions concerning language, truth, morality, 
politics and social philosophy.
As a consequence of commencing with justice, we have resisted engaging in a 
purely analytical exploration of the concept ‘law’ and have, instead, engaged with 
both analytical and normative philosophies. More specifically, we have considered 
the formal characteristics of legal systems (rules); what law aspires to or should be 
judged by (justice, the good); the internal logic of law (right); and what might be 
said to give rise to, or sustain, legal practices (persons and norms). The contribution 
that these core concepts make to our understanding of law is enormous. However, 
deducing neat generalisations about law from them is difficult. The conflicting 
claims made about these critical concepts, along with the variety of legal practices 
putting them to use, illustrate the difficulty of giving law a simple characterisation.
This difficulty making generalisations is true even if we concentrate on analyti-
cal questions rather than normative questions. Conceptual and linguistic analysis 
requires, in the first instance, clarity about what is being analysed. However, at a 
Introduction
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION
263
conceptual level, it is not clear whether we should be concentrating on law’s sources, 
its structure or its goals; at a material level, it is not clear whether we should priori-
tise law’s rules, its institutions or its procedures; and at a linguistic level, it is not 
clear whether ‘law’, ‘laws’ or ‘legal’ should be the primary focus of our analysis. For 
these reasons, it is unclear whether we should be analysing the concept ‘law’ at all. 
Like the concepts ‘society’ or ‘justice’, ‘law’ can be said to serve as a useful, if general, 
term under which more specific ideas can sit. Worse, insistence on finding a cor-
respondence between the word ‘law’ and a clearly delineated group of things would 
be to misunderstand meaning in Wittgensteinian terms: i.e. meaning as the various, 
and potentially contradictory, uses of a word.
Related to this tendency to demand a correspondence between word and thing, 
analytical approaches to law can fall prey to the hasty, and conceptually danger-
ous, assumption that Dworkin labels the ‘semantic sting’ (1998: 42–4). That is, 
to assume that despite various philosophical disagreements, those inside the legal 
profession must have a shared idea of law, or else their disagreements over matters 
of law become nonsense. That is, they must already implicitly agree on everything 
that could be considered law, or else use of the word ‘law’ by legal officials would 
represent an anarchic linguistic battle to make any claim about law fit their conclu-
sions. On the contrary, says Dworkin, lawyers do not simply sort through an agreed 
category of facts labelled ‘the law’. Legal professionals are required to be creative; 
judgment in difficult cases requires ‘interpretative debate among rival conceptions 
of law’ (1998: 99). In short, we should not assume that philosophical uncertainty 
over the meaning of ‘law’ obscures universal legal consensus over what should be 
considered ‘legal’. Hard cases involve resolving legal uncertainty over the meaning 
of ‘law’ and ‘legal’.
Assuming that, despite these pitfalls, unfolding or explicating the concept of 
law is nonetheless desirable, philosophy offers several examples of ‘ideal types’. 
The label ‘ideal type’ is Max Weber’s (1978: 23–5) and denotes the employment 
of an exaggerated and simplified version of reality for the purpose of analysis and 
comparison. In different ways, the philosophies of Hart and Finnis are powerful 
attempts to do just this. Hart’s Concept of Law presents us with the ideal structural 
characteristics of a legal system. The merit of Hart’s ideal type is its distinction be-
tween the obligatory, as opposed to compulsory, dimension of legal rules, and the 
governance of rules by other rules. One problem with this ideal type is that Hart 
seems to have isolated the characteristics of a ‘mature system of governance’ rather 
than law per se: the union of primary and secondary rules could be said to be an 
aspect of any carefully regulated social organisation.
Finnis presents us with an ideal type related to law’s purposive character, and the 
need for individuals and societies to exercise practical reasonableness through the 
governance of rules. The ideal type of a legal system is a system that harmonises 
with, and uses, practical reasonableness in the governance of human affairs to 

CHAPTER 7 LAW
264
achieve the common good. This picture captures many of the ideas that are most 
closely associated with what humans are, what humans need and how law should 
be tailored to human interests. It also constructs an ‘ideal type’ that downplays the 
autonomy we think important in legal systems: law generates  right legal answers to 
legal problems and, to that extent, law is distinguishable from other means of find-
ing good answers to problems. 
 Nonetheless, Finnis and Hart’s ideal types provide illuminating conceptions of 
law. They do not intend to encompass all aspects of legal reality, only the core func-
tions or forms. Moreover, they are not intended to be normative models by which a 
legal system can be gauged to have failed or succeeded. All real systems fall short of 
ideal systems. Rather they are intended to draw out basic, formal, characteristics to 
which systems approximate to a greater or lesser extent. 
 Rather than assert and defend an ideal type, the present chapter seeks to provide a 
general classificatory scheme. It discusses law’s  formal properties, law’s  functions and 
its foundations . This classificatory scheme reflects some fundamental philosophical 
questions and methods. To discuss the foundations of law we are employing the 
idea of ontology, analysis of how things can be said to exist. To capture the formal 
properties of law we turn to phenomenology, the science of appearances. To analyse 
the functions of law we have to return to ideas of value, reason and justice. 
 This philosophical framework shows all of the competing schools of legal phi-
losophy – normative and analytical – to be useful. It also highlights a number of 
ways in which we have to augment, or go beyond, the traditional jurisprudential 
schools in order to make sense of the many forms that law takes and functions 
that law serves. This remains an analytical task: providing the basic classifications 
required for conceptual understanding of law. However, it also has a critical element 
in showing that the main schools of jurisprudence are not, alone, complete explana-
tions of law. As such, this chapter is intended to be both a summary of the previous 
chapters and an argument concerning the usefulness, and limitations, of each of the 
schools of legal philosophy.  
1  Foundations 
 
 Introduction 
 Philosophy is concerned with the foundations of knowledge. But ‘foundation’, as 
much as ‘knowledge’ itself, represents a philosophical  problem . Can we find things – 
facts, human capabilities or basic mental intuitions – that are certain and reliable, 
on which we can build a body of knowledge? Furthermore, can we find those foun-
dations without assuming the very things we wish to prove? In the context of law 
this requires us to show what law  is , without already assuming that certain laws, or 
sources of law, or legal institutions, provide the best starting point for our enquiries. 
1  Foundations
www.ebook3000.com

1 FOUNDATIONS
265
Such a seemingly simple requirement – to provide an account of what law is with-
out making a presumption about the priority of certain sources or ideals – leads us 
into fundamental questions about knowledge.
Knowledge can only be gained through the capacities with which the human 
being is equipped. Through either ideas or the senses. In either case, a foundation 
for knowledge is identified, a foundation from which other forms of knowledge can 
be securely derived. Sound use of the mind leads to well-founded understanding; the 
evidence of the senses is the bedrock of reliable enquiry. The sceptical philosopher 
is one who either denies that such foundations are reliable, or that the foundations 
can produce the other kinds of knowledge that were hoped for. Having a defensible 
starting-point is one thing. It is quite another to prove that reliable or incontrovert-
ible knowledge is possible.
The foundations of knowledge about law are somewhat clearer but also con-
tested. Public institutions and public practices are the source of legal rules, but the 
justification or authority of those rules and institutions can be questioned. This repre-
sents a shift between philosophical points of view. Not only between factual sources 
and normative justifications, but between ontologies: how law can be said to exist 
at all. By arguing that even acknowledged sources of legal rules (e.g. a government) 
lack authority (as in cases of civil disobedience) law is being identified as something 
separable from social sources and existing only on the basis of its possessing moral 
or other authority. The existence of law can, therefore, be said to depend upon real 
sources or ideal justifications.
However, we cannot assume that either is the best starting-point; we have yet to 
prove that one is more important than the other. We have to ‘put the question marks 
deeper’ (Wittgenstein, in Hacker, 1997: 7) and ask whether real sources, or ideal 
justifications, can be said to be better foundations for legal knowledge. Immediately 
prioritising real sources or ideal justifications would be over-hasty in the same way 
that choosing our minds or our senses as the foundation of knowledge would be 
over-hasty. Both certainly lead to knowledge, but there are wider frames of analy-
sis within which the two starting-points can, themselves, be assessed. We can ask 
in philosophy what it is for knowledge to exist at all (Kant’s critical project), and, 
by extension, ask what is necessary for law to exist at all? This question is critical: it 
demands putting aside the knowledge we already have in order to explore the pre-
conditions of knowledge. It is also ontological: it asks for the necessary conditions 
for something to be said to exist.
Three basic ontologies of law are possible: law is transcendent, it is immanent or 
it is self-subsisting. These treat the existence of law as (respectively) wholly outside 
human life, wholly inside human life or depending only upon itself for existence. 
These will be explored more fully below, but the importance of considering ontol-
ogy and not just sources can be illustrated by returning to, and problematising, the 
positivist’s ‘social thesis’ and in particular Raz’s variation on this, the ‘sources thesis’.

CHAPTER 7 LAW
266
The sources thesis is not only concerned with insisting that particular social 
institutions are the sources of laws, but with emphasising ‘that the existence and 
content of every law is fully determined by social sources’ (Raz, 2009: 46). Laws exist 
because of societies and social practices. Nothing else is necessary for a law’s exist-
ence, no external validation or justification. This can be contrasted with a weaker 
separation thesis claiming ‘that the identification of the existence and content of 
law does not require resort to any moral argument’ (Raz, 2009: 296). That is, law 
is always found in social practices and socially created laws, although it may be the 
case that certain spheres of law contingently contain (but do not necessarily contain) 
ideas found in morality. To this can be added a third, even weaker, claim about 
social sources and the meaning of ‘law’: ordinary language dictates that the word 
‘law’ denotes something arising from human affairs unless we choose to stipulate 
otherwise. That is, ‘law’ generally denotes something with a social source, though it 
is also used in other ways (Raz, 2009: 316).
On these three accounts, the sources of law are certainly social. However, the suf-
ficient conditions for the existence of law shift: social rules, social institutions or 
socio-linguistic practices. The common-denominator is something social, but what 
is meant by ‘social’? Rules, practices and institutions themselves depend upon dif-
ferent kinds of things: generalisations, behaviour and language. These dimensions 
of the social themselves change over time; they depend upon norms which have no 
single, sustained, presence in the social world. On this basis we could conclude that 
law is a set of norms possessing no stable content and no stable continuity through time.
This conclusion would be congenial to Scandinavian realists, but it is not the analyt-
ical conclusion, dividing law from non-law, intended by the positivist social thesis.
Nonetheless, we can describe the common-denominator in these positions as 
their having an understanding of law’s foundations as immanent: found exclusively 
in the social world around us. This might be thought to encompass those meta-
theories of justice offered by Rawls and Nozick (see Chapter 1). These theories of 
justice rely on extra-legal accounts of justice, but that extra-legal justice is an aspect 
of the human world, not another ‘normative realm’. Indeed, many contemporary 
natural lawyers could be said to be interested in the values immanent in human life 
and human needs rather than treat values as having origins beyond the social world 
(see Chapter 3). The sources thesis is, of course, directly challenged by classic natural 
law. Early natural lawyers relied upon the claim that law originates in something 
that transcends human activity. Equally, however, some positivists, such as Kelsen 
and Simmonds, are also concerned with transcendent, Platonic or Kantian, claims 
about law’s ultimate origin or source.
Both transcendent and immanent accounts of law’s existence depend upon 
substantial philosophical underpinnings. They have to account for how law has 
stability and continuity through time (in the immanent account) and how it is that 
we could know law at all (in the transcendent account). A realist and pragmatist 
www.ebook3000.com

1 FOUNDATIONS
267
response might be that such philosophical underpinnings are neither discover-
able nor useful. They are not discoverable in practice because the ‘life of the law’ is 
decision-making not ‘foundation-finding’. They are not useful because they make no 
difference whatsoever to how law is conducted. The only conclusion compatible 
with this attack on foundations is to adopt the sources thesis in a different form. 
To treat law as arising from society, but now independent of society and sustaining 
itself: it is self-subsisting.
1a Transcendent
The idea of transcendence indicates that which is beyond our senses and beyond 
our social world. This is often associated with religious ideas of the world as created 
or understood by God. It also has philosophical use designating the point at which 
knowledge and metaphysics meet. Transcendent truths are the basic truths – about 
the world or our nature – which must hold good for us to know anything with cer-
tainty. This kind of argument is in evidence whenever we ask whether there is ‘more 
to law’ than our society’s creation and use of law, and ‘more to law’ than the proce-
dures and decisions of legal institutions. There is an ideal law which we recognise, 
partially and imperfectly, in the law of the land. Without this ideal we would have 
no understanding of the true nature of law and have no grounds for criticising exist-
ing laws. Plato’s radical idealism is one example of this; Kant’s appeal to the ‘moral 
law’ is another. Each can be understood as offering ideal types: law as an ideal, im-
mutable, structure of which reality is an approximation.
Plato’s position is that law has a transcendent foundation, namely justice. Such 
idealism, wherein law has an ideal template towards which the real aspires, contin-
ues to feature within legal philosophy long after the metaphysics associated with 
Platonic ‘forms’ has been abandoned. It is found in the assumption that there is a 
correct form that law should take and which legal systems approximate in ‘the here 
and now’. Law ‘proper’ is a form towards which legal systems should move, and 
an unchanging standard with which to combat complacency about existing legal 
institutions (Simmonds, 2007). In many respects, the language of justice alone 
sustains this Platonic ideal (as in Derrida’s work, see Chapter 6). Through justice, 
we criticise law for being imperfect, or as yet incomplete, without necessarily being 
able to articulate what justice would be in each and every case. Real law continues 
to generate ideas of ideal justice, and it is the language of justice that is the underly-
ing ‘force of law’.
A transcendent source of law is also associated with religious traditions. Revealed 
religion promulgates laws originating in a non-human realm. Not only does law 
have its existence secured by something beyond the social world, but also the proper 
shape and conduct of human lives. Religious views of law share with Ancient phi-
losophy the assumption that law should make people good, ensuring that humans 

CHAPTER 7 LAW
268
fulfil their function or destiny. If modern states (i.e. those centralising freedom) do 
not subscribe to this teleology, we nonetheless still think of law as something that 
speaks of the best in human endeavour and that reflects our potential as a species.
This teleology is partly secularised in Kant’s idea of the ‘moral law’, the universalis-
able duties binding the rational subject (1948: 67f). While insight into the moral law 
is achieved through human reason, reason itself transcends the individual: ‘a purely 
rational belief is the signpost or compass by means of which the speculative thinking 
can orientate himself on his rational wanderings in the field of supra-sensory objects’ 
(Kant, 1991: 245). Reason is the structure required for any intelligible perspective on 
the world, and obedience to duty is nothing more or less than conformity to rational 
laws as binding as those governing the universe. The moral law gives rise to ethical 
and legal obligations that are universal, basic commandments providing the foun-
dation of all other laws. While the complexity of social life prevents this from being 
easily translated into a legislative programme (hence Kant’s need to provide both a 
‘doctrine of virtue’ and a ‘doctrine of right’, see Chapter 4) the underlying assump-
tion remains attractive. There are not only local laws but also universal laws, and 
these are universal on the basis of their necessity, not their contingent social value.
EXAMPLE
Sophocles, Antigone (from The Three Theban Plays) (1984), pp. 81–2
This work of Ancient Greek drama remains a touchstone for theorists defending trans-
cendent foundations for law. Antigone transgresses the law laid down by her monarch, 
Creon, which forbade burying a traitor. She appeals to a higher law that demanded re-
spect for a relative: a transcendent justice that always supersedes or takes precedence 
over human laws.
Creon: And still you had the gall to break this law? / Antigone: Of course I did. It wasn’t 
Zeus, not in the least, who made this proclamation – not to me. Nor did that Justice, 
dwelling with the Gods beneath the earth, ordain such laws for men. Nor did I think your 
edict had such force, could override the Gods, the great unwritten, unshakable traditions. 
They are alive, not just today or yesterday: they live forever, from the first of time, and no 
one knows when they first saw the light.
1b Immanent
The opposite of transcendence is immanence. This limits knowledge to what is im-
mediately known of the world around us. On these grounds, the existence of law 
is located exclusively in the social and psychological existence of humans. While 
prohibiting appeal to anything transcendent, immanence encourages us to explore 
www.ebook3000.com

1 FOUNDATIONS
269
the fact that law permeates every aspect of the world around us. Law is not a distinct 
social institution: it is part of the fabric of our lives. We equate law with rules, but 
law is, more importantly, the ‘glue’ which binds society together. Our social lives 
could not take the form that they do without being regulated by law.
One way in which this can be articulated is that ‘the people’ are the foundation of 
law. That ‘we’ are the origin and justification of law finds expression in Rousseau’s 
social contract theory. Another route, pursued by the Scandinavian realists and oth-
ers, is to identify law with language, explaining law’s existence through the ubiquity 
of the language of law.
The idea that ‘we, the people’ are in some sense the origin or foundation of law 
has its origins in the Revolutionary era, but this does not have to be narrowly con-
strued as meaning that law functions to serve the interests and welfare of the many. 
It can be a more fundamental claim that law exists in or through the ‘will of the 
people’. This echoes social contract theory, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s (1712–78) 
work is part of that tradition. Rousseau wrote for a particular context, pre-Revolu-
tionary France, and two elements of this context shape his thinking about law (see 
Solomon, 1988). First, the ‘divine right’ of monarchs, as a transcendent source of 
legal authority, is questioned. Second, there is a search for a replacement for the 
authority of the monarch. Finding a replacement is hampered by both the attractive-
ness of placing legal authority in the hands of one individual, and the diversity of 
interests among the populace.
In the background of Rousseau’s social contract narrative is a view closer to the 
Biblical, rather than the Hobbesean, picture of the pre-legal world. The natural ease 
and plenty of the natural world was disrupted by the divisive intrusion of private 
property (Rousseau, 1968: 192–4). With the creation of society, along with law to 
protect property, humans were compelled to engage in commerce and competition, 
and conflict naturally arose from this. Thus the principal characteristic of the mod-
ern the state is loss of freedom, captured in Rousseau’s famous maxim ‘man is born 
free; and everywhere he is in chains’ (1968: 3; see also Morrison, 1997: 153–6). 
However, amidst this conflict and competition, the sovereign represents the total, 
collective, will of a populace and is able to pursue the underlying demands of so-
cial existence: the ‘general will’. Rousseau’s social contract is the recognition of, and 
bringing to life through law, of the general will. The basic, natural, desire for peace-
ful co-existence. Law is the ‘register of the general will’ (Rousseau, 1968). Law is the 
underlying spirit, and underlying rationality, of a populace when the conflict of ac-
quisitive competition is put aside in favour of the natural unity of human interests.
Law, as the register of the general will, supersedes individual freedoms. The loss 
of freedom necessary for social existence is replaced by the freedom associated with 
government by the people and for the people. Potentially repressive consequences 
flow from this: ‘whoever refuses to obey the general will shall be compelled to do 
so by the whole body. This means nothing less than he will be forced to be free’ 

CHAPTER 7 LAW
270
(1968: 15). Nonetheless, the movement towards legality is in accordance with the 
spirit shared by humans, even if individual humans are self-serving: ‘equality of 
rights and the idea of justice which such equality creates originate in the preference 
each man gives to himself, and accordingly in the very nature of man’ (1968: 25). 
Also, legality is perpetually justified – is necessarily just – in spite of the fallibility 
of humans and institutions: ‘the general will is always right and tends to the public 
advantage [. . .]’ (1968: 23).
Rousseau, with his idea of law existing in and through the people, gives an im-
manent foundation to law. He identifies law with our fundamental (though superfi-
cially diverging) interests. However, the idea of immanence also discourages us from 
identifying law’s existence in the ideal, and from seeking foundations in terms of es-
sences. Rousseau is encouraged to talk of a general will because this serves to replace 
the unity of law and legality provided by a monarch; the general will replaces this 
with a no less powerful ‘body politic’. Such essentialism is problematic. As we found 
in discussion of ‘humanity’ (Chapter 2), attributing agency or interests to humans as 
a whole is difficult to defend. A return to Scandinavian realism and Wittgenstein’s 
idea of a ‘form of life’ are useful at this point to show that immanence does not have 
to involve essentialism, i.e. attribution of an underlying unity to humanity.
Our language pushes us into essentialist assumptions; we assume that a word 
must correspond to a ‘thing’. Is it possible to understand law as a purely immanent, 
social, phenomenon without falling into such essentialism? Certainly the presence 
of law in our lives can be gauged by our relationship with the word ‘law’. Any com-
petent English language user can use the word. Competent language users share a 
great deal of agreement over what this word is intended to mean, even if they had 
little or no direct knowledge of particular laws. We use the word ‘law’, and it is rarely 
confused with the homonym ‘lore’; we engage in a meaningful, successful, conver-
sation about ‘the law’ without having to read any legal instrument. This does not 
show that use of the word ‘law’ has an essential meaning; it demonstrates that law 
has a ‘presence’ in our lives. This rejection of meaning as correspondence in favour of 
meaning as use (see Chapter 5) serves useful analytical purposes.
It is significant that, for the most part, English language users cannot use the 
words ‘law’ and ‘morality’ interchangeably. Compare ‘there is a law against speed-
ing’ and ‘you have a moral obligation not to drive at speed’. The first has an immedi-
ate sense and force, while the second is an invitation for further discussion. These 
words have different meanings, which is to say they are used for different purposes. 
As such, the two things are, in one respect at least, not the same thing. There is a sta-
bility and predictability in our use of ‘law’, and its use marks a distinction (however 
opaque) with other words. Furthermore, this stability and predictability arises from 
our shared practices, our ‘form of life’ in Wittgenstein’s terms (2001: 75). Thus, to 
the extent that ‘law’ has a stable and constant presence in our lives, it is because of 
our practices and our language, not because of its essence or ideal form:
www.ebook3000.com

1 FOUNDATIONS
271
1c Self-subsisting
Whatever our understanding of the word ‘law’, its use denotes ‘order’. Be it the 
ordered structures of the natural world, or the order found in any structured, 
‘law-governed’, human practice. A legal order is a social and institutional arrange-
ment exhibiting, and providing, predictability or regularity. More than that, law 
can be said to be an institution characterised by self-ordering: an autonomous 
process of developing its own basic assumptions, putting these into practice and 
then revising its assumptions. Law can also be said to be society’s self-ordering: 
it is not through the decision-making of politics, but through subjecting itself to 
law that a society creates, and not just manages, itself. Law is the ongoing effort 
of society to create good order for itself. We have seen how, through rules and 
through the enforcement or amendment of social norms, law orders our society. 
Here we consider law’s self-ordering and, with it, the idea that law depends only 
on itself for its existence.
both the idea of the state’s divine omnipotence and the idea of a will of the people prevail-
ing evaporate in a sober-minded consideration of the real state of things. It is because of 
the respect for an established system of rules that the always relative authority of the state 
exists. (Olivecrona, quoted in Spaak, 2011: 182)
EXAMPLE
~'HFLVLRQRIWKH6WDWH&RXQFLO5HJDUGLQJWKH4XHVWLRQRI5HKDELOLWDWLRQ
WKURXJK/DERXU&KLQHVH1DWLRQDO3HRSOHV&RQJUHVVRQ$XJXVW
Chinese law encompasses legislation, ‘people’s courts’ where administrative decisions 
can be challenged, and various guifanxing wenjian (normative documents) issued by gov-
ernment departments and officials. Here, criminal legislation is tied to the general will; the 
measures allow rehabilitation, and therefore reintegration into the whole.
The following decision regarding the question of rehabilitation through labour is made 
[. . .] with a view to reforming those persons who are able to work but insist on leading 
an idle life, violating law and discipline, or will not engage in honest pursuits, into persons 
who are able to support themselves through their own labour, and to further maintaining 
public order, thus facilitating socialist construction: (A) Persons of the following categories 
shall be interned for rehabilitation through labour: (1) Those who will not engage in honest 
pursuits, involve themselves in hooliganism, commit larceny, fraud or other acts for which 
they are not criminally liable or violate public security rules and refuse to mend their ways 
despite repeated admonition; (2) Counterrevolutionaries and anti-socialist reactionaries 
who commit minor offences and are not criminally liable and who have been given sanc-
tions of expulsion by government organs, people’s organizations, enterprises or schools, 
and as a result have difficulty in making a living [. . .].

CHAPTER 7 LAW
272
Law’s self-ordering can be understood as a circle:
There is thus a characteristically legal ‘circle’, a sense in which the system (as the inter-
related rules and institutions are significantly but loosely called) ‘lifts itself by its own 
bootstraps’ – a sense captured by the more scientific but still literally paradoxical axiom 
that ‘the law regulates its own creation’. (Finnis, 2011: 268)
This explains the preoccupation of many theorists with ‘hard cases’ (Freeman, 
2001: 1391–2), i.e. where law does not have the resources to answer a question or 
seems to generate contradictory answers about a question. In these instances, law it-
self allows judges to make an intuitive decision about justice (Hart) or requires judges 
to make a decision about what would be most coherent given the underlying political 
commitments of a community (Dworkin). For Hart, legal systems are self-regulating 
because certain officials are authorised to ‘fill the gaps’ in the rules (1994: 134–5). 
For Dworkin, legal systems are self-regulating because those officials are required to 
show law in its ‘best light’ as possessing coherence, continuity and integrity (1998: 
225f). This goes some way towards explaining the ‘paradox’ (in Finnis’ terms) of law’s 
self-regulation: it is not only constituted by malleable rules, but has the structure and 
resources necessary to develop or augment those rules in a non-arbitrary way.
Both Dworkin and Hart’s positions can be expressed differently in terms provided 
by Niklas Luhmann’s (1927–88) theory of ‘autopoiesis’. For Luhmann, law is a sys-
tem, but the idea of a system often involves ‘reification’: taking something abstract and 
treating it as a real or concrete thing. This is to obscure the fact that systems depend 
upon relationships, not tangible objects. Drawing upon research in biology, Luhmann 
approached law as a kind of organic system characterised not by its institutions but 
by the communication between its parts. Biological entities such as animals have 
physical elements, but their claim to be a system lies in the fact that the parts work 
together, reacting to one another and contributing to the functioning of the whole. 
Biological entities are thereby said to be ‘autopoietic’, meaning that while they func-
tion in a wider environmental context – a context on which they depend and to which 
they react – they interact with the environment through their own, distinct, systemic 
processes. By extension, a legal system is part of a wider society – it depends upon and 
reacts to social needs and individuals’ activities – but it is distinct and self-contained.
This is what Luhmann calls the legal system’s normative (or operative) closure. Normative 
closure denotes that norms do not change merely on the basis of factual conditions. 
Normative change occurs on the basis of autopoietic reproduction: the superimposition of 
norms onto norms. (Philippopolous-Mihalopoulos, 2010: 71, emphasis removed)
Social conflicts are drawn into a legal system and processed – analysed, classified 
and adjudicated – by the distinctive practices of that system. In this sense, a social 
conflict does not ‘enter’ the legal system; rather a conflict is ‘processed’ within a 
system and a distinctively legal answer is produced: ‘legal’ or ‘not legal’, ‘legal win-
ner’ or ‘legal loser’. Law’s unique ability to distinguish lawful and unlawful is more 
www.ebook3000.com

1 FOUNDATIONS
273
than a function: it is the defining characteristic of law as a system. It ‘determines the 
systemic boundary in relation to other social systems: law’s monopoly on deciding 
between lawfulness/unlawfulness is at the same time the law’s limit’ (2010: 73). In 
this way we can respect the distinctive practices and meanings that are character-
istic of a legal system (law has its own language, institutions and processes) and 
acknowledge law’s relationship with other social forces (law reacts to its environ-
ment and reorganises itself in response to that environment), but still see law as an 
independent and dynamic system of communication.
There are a number of merits to this model. First, it is both dynamic and organic; 
legal systems are closely related to the ‘soil’ in which they grow and the problems 
they encounter, but their growth and change is the product of law’s own internal 
resources. Second, it specifies the systemic aspect of law – a system of communi-
cation – without reducing the ‘system’ to particular institutions which are prone 
to change through time. It also means that we can refuse commitment to either 
transcendent or immanent accounts of law’s existence. Law is not beyond the social 
world; nor is it reducible to the social world. It is a distinctive, dynamic, communi-
cative practice within the social world.
Law, as a communicative system, contributes to the self-ordering of a commu-
nity or society. The Greeks had a word for this phenomenon, eunomia, meaning 
‘good self-ordering through law’. The idea of eunomia encompasses both the basic 
assumption that law contributes to the ordering of the state, and the ontological 
assumption that law is a self-contained and self-regulating system. Societies can 
manage their own creation through law. They do not have to be created through the 
force of command or violence.
Philip Allott developed a contemporary theory of eunomia after the end of the 
Cold War (Allott, 1990). For Allott, like Hegel, law represents society’s coming to 
consciousness, in this instance the coming to consciousness of the international 
community as an international community and not a collection of mutually 
antagonistic sovereign states. The driver of such a consciousness is not deliberate 
commitment to co-existence under law (it is not utopian), but rather the ongoing 
development of the existing rule of law in the international arena. Through pro-
cesses of self-subjection to law – under international treaties and in the European 
Union – it is becoming clear that legality can now exist without the will of a single, 
dominant, sovereign power and can exist without coercion and force (1990: 264f). 
Law has emerged out of the self-regulating of a community, not of states. As this 
process continues, we will be become more aware of our social bonds and less com-
mitted to the fiction of the sovereign state, the dangerous fiction that sovereigns are
the law and therefore cannot be governed by law.
Accordingly, Allott’s eunomia is a theory of change on the basis of existing social 
and legal processes and one which represents a shift in our consciousness towards 
an international constitution.

CHAPTER 7 LAW
274
2  Forms 
 
 Introduction 
 The form that law takes is not singular. It is not solely the decisions of courts, or 
the commands of sovereigns, or rules, or norms. It takes the form of classifications, 
rights, relationships and expectations. To reduce law to any one of these forms is 
not only culturally and historically narrow but also conceptually inadequate. The 
set ‘classifications, rights, relationships and expectations’ contains both the real 
2  Forms
 The ideal constitution is the constitution as it presents to society an idea of what society 
might be. In the ideal constitution, society organises desire and obligation with a view to 
its own becoming. [. . .] The ideal constitution is not a fixed star towards which a society 
steers a fixed course. It is constantly being remade as society’s words and ideas and theories 
and values alter society’s idea of its potential self through all the intensive activity of the 
total social process.   (1990: 136–7, emphasis removed)  
 Admittedly, such a shift in consciousness is difficult. It is often difficult to accept the 
idea that abandonment of the sovereign state is not a desire for anarchy but a desire 
for legality; it is difficult to see the ‘international community’ as more than an anal-
ogy with ‘real, organic, communities’. But this shift in consciousness allows us to 
see that law is more than the will of sovereigns; law is a self-subsisting system which 
governs globally. Law is society’s self-ordering through the self-ordering of law.  
EXAMPLE 
7KH&KDUWHURIWKH$UDE/HDJXH0DUFK
Is eunomia  an ideal of universality, particularity, or both? Good self-ordering within and 
among societies is applauded by Allott. Would this include groupings of states founded 
upon racial or ethnic particularity? Established to ensure harmonisation on legal matters 
within Arab states, the Arab league identified core goods in its constituting charter. It also 
adds that the prevention of the use of force is high among its priorities.
Article II: The League has as its purpose the strengthening of the relations between the 
member-states, the coordination of their policies in order to achieve co-operation between 
them and to safeguard their independence and sovereignty; and a general concern with 
the affairs and interests of the Arab countries. It has also as its purpose the close co-
operation of the member-states, with due regard to the Organisation and circumstances 
of each state [. . .]. Article V: Any resort to force in order to resolve disputes between 
two or more member-states of the League is prohibited. If there should arise among them 
a difference which does not concern a state’s independence, sovereignty, or territorial 
integrity, and if the parties to the dispute have recourse to the Council for the settlement 
of this difference, the decision of the Council shall then be enforceable and obligatory.  
www.ebook3000.com

2 FORMS
275
and ideal; both descriptions of, and perspectives on, reality. The question, then, is 
whether we can analyse ‘the formal characteristics of law’ without theoretical pre-
suppositions about the properties law must have.
Of course, to adopt a perspective without presuppositions is not only difficult but 
contradictory. We always make a judgment from a perspective. We bring presupposi-
tions to bear in determining what ‘law’ is, namely our foundational assumptions 
about the sources and nature of law. Even turning this line of enquiry around, and 
insisting that certain formal arrangements are the defining mark of law (e.g. Hart’s 
union of primary and secondary rules), is no less problematic. It begs a question as 
to whether this is enough for law to exist, beyond the presence of certain formalised 
activities within our society.
For this reason the starting assumption made here is that there are ways of cat-
egorising law’s appearances which neither demand that ‘law must take a particular 
form’ or ‘there is an essence of law underlying our different perceptions of law’. The 
present approach is therefore phenomenological, i.e. it seeks to chart different kinds 
of appearances without proposing an underlying essence behind those appearances. 
The phenomenological school of philosophy accepts sceptical conclusions about 
the limitations of ‘truly’ knowing the nature of reality, and exchanges this for a 
‘science’ of appearances, of how reality appears to us. The methods used by phe-
nomenologists have differed (see Moran, 2000). However, the basic insights – the 
importance of our perceptions and scepticism about finding essences – provide a 
fruitful approach to social practices such as law which take a variety forms and take 
on different appearances from different perspectives.
The most general set of categories within which to encompass law’s appearances 
concern law’s relationship with time, space and change. Regardless of the origins of 
law, where there is law it is ordered in a way that is intelligible to human beings. 
Law is structured by time and space, and it is susceptible to change.
2a Historical and territorial
Along with law, our social world is made up of countless complex systems, behav-
iours and perceptions, but our lives appear to us to have structure or stability. How 
do we find order in our complex social worlds? Any aspect of human life must be 
structured according to time and space. These are the basic preconditions of any 
activity or thought. It is these basic structuring principles that mean our perceptions 
have unity and meaning (Kant, 1929).
Law has its own distinctive relationships with time and space. It is territorial: tied 
to a particular geographical location, and it is historical: law changes through time, 
but it preserves its past through archives and through the use, and re-use, of legal 
rules and norms. These points, while seemingly trivial, draw out the fact that law is 
dependent on the raw facts of space and recording the past. This encourages us to 
look again at the insights of historical jurisprudence and its charting of the growth 

CHAPTER 7 LAW
276
of different kinds of legal system. It also calls into question the nature of ‘territory’ 
and how space can take on legal qualities.
There are a number of lines of historical enquiry which see law as having an 
‘organic’ relationship with the culture within which it functions. Be they schools of 
historical jurisprudence, or sociological theories such as Luhmann’s, such histori-
cal and sociological narratives describe the ways in which law arises from, and is 
inexorably associated with, a particular cultural context. The originator of this kind 
of approach could be said to be Edmund Burke (1730–97) whose defence of the 
English constitution against revolutionary ideologies stressed the organic relation-
ship between the British constitution and British culture. In opposition to calls for 
‘rationalisation’ of legal systems (the project of Enlightenment philosophers and 
reformers such as Bentham), such organic relations are said to have a superior ‘fit’ 
with the spirit of the people.
In some instances we find this kind of assumption leading to speculation, as in 
the work of Maine, about the primitive origins of legal systems (Chapter 6). It can 
also lead to the ‘spiritual’, and perhaps nationalistic, understanding law found in 
Friedrich Von Savigny (1779–1861). As an ‘expression’ of culture, law is tied to the 
people and practices from which it emerges. For Von Savigny, law cannot be codified 
or rationalised without violence to the culture from which it emerged and the spirit 
of the nation transmitted through law.
Savigny viewed the development of law as a part of the historical development of the 
common consciousness of a society. Law, he wrote, is developed first by custom and by 
popular belief, and only then by juristic activity. As a people becomes more mature and its 
social and economic life becomes more complex, its law becomes less symbolic and more 
abstract [. . .]. The professional or technical element should not, however, Savigny wrote, 
become divorced from the symbolic element or from the community ideas and ideals that 
underlie both the early and later stages of legal development (Berman, 1977: 1711, n. 161).
More rigorous historical research does not necessarily evidence an organic or 
systematic relationship between a state and its legal system (e.g. Foucault, 1977; 
Stolleis, 2009), but historical research does offer a strong counter-weight to the 
temptation to posit ideal types or ‘grand narratives’ about progress and change in 
legal systems. For instance, there has been a tendency in Marxist theories of law to 
assume that law is the by-product of more fundamental economic processes. Closer 
historical research paints a more complex picture of law’s relationship with social 
life beyond its economic determinants and, indeed, beyond repressive ideology (see 
Thompson, 1975; Cole, 2001).
The idea of territory parcels the world into spaces where sovereigns exercise effec-
tive control over the lives and actions of a population. The discrete parcelling of the 
world into territory could not take place without law. Territory not only concerns 
land boundaries, but authority and the limits of authority. As such, territory has real 
and ideal components. Territory is real in so far as states literally mark and control 
www.ebook3000.com

2 FORMS
277
space: they plant flags, manage public spaces through policing and exercise violence 
to repel invaders. It is also ideal: it concerns the recognition of certain authorities 
(governments or states) as having legitimate claim to that territory.
The idea of cosmopolitanism challenges this understanding of the necessary 
relationship between territory and authority. Cosmopolitanism is the pursuit of a 
single law or legal system that holds universally. The cosmopolis is an ideal, global, 
state of which all humanity is a citizen. The cosmopolitan ideal has roots in Roman 
legal thought and a body of Roman laws, the jus gentium, applicable to the whole 
Roman Empire (Berger, 1953). This body of laws partly codified, and partly created, 
legal uniformity across disparate lands. This was premised on the philosophically 
appealing idea (related to Stoicism) that common laws could be found in existence 
across different societies and nations, and good governance is a matter of enforcing 
these consistently and rigorously (Nussbaum, 1997). Conversely, this was a rather 
more oppressive ideology insisting that uniformity could be and should be enforced 
on nations whether they were willing or not.
The origins of modern cosmopolitan theory lie in Kant’s work. As we have seen, 
Kant is one the pre-eminent theorists of the right as a moral and legal notion, and 
his position is one that pushes frequently towards identifying the necessary and 
universal in politics. For Kant, the cosmopolitan ideal is a universal rule of law that 
binds states and sovereigns regardless of territorial boundaries (Kant, 1991). This 
does not mean the destruction of the sovereign state, only universal values being re-
spected by states. Kant’s idea, which he talks of in terms of ‘perpetual peace’, a peace 
among nations without recourse to warfare, is in part narrow. It is an international 
rule of law, premised on the equality of sovereign states, which leaves the integrity 
of existing states as they are. Conversely, it is a potentially radical idea to the extent 
that, unlike Hegel, Kant does not accept the absolute primacy of the state, but rather 
the existence of a law higher than the state itself: ‘The rights of man must be held 
sacred, however great a sacrifice the ruling power may have to make. [. . .] For all 
politics must bend the knee before right’ (1991: 125).
Kant provokes us, as he provoked his contemporaries, into thinking about the 
basis and the goals of law, particularly international law. Our present international 
legal system is ‘Westphalian’, it flows from the Peace of Westphalia that ended the 
Thirty Years’ War in 1648 and maintains there is no legal authority higher than the 
sovereign state, and that the sovereignty stems from the successful use of violence 
(‘effective control’) over a territory (Steinberg, 1966). Kant’s ideas, conversely, point 
to a ‘global’ legal consciousness, because all territories on our planet, our globe, 
are ultimately interconnected. The moral bonds between states may be unclear, but 
there is no denying that territories have some de facto connection in sharing bounda-
ries and ultimately sharing the earth. Kant was the first philosopher of law to fully 
grasp the fact of (actual and potential) globalisation, and his perpetual peace is the 
first analysis of the phenomenon of political and legal globalisation.

CHAPTER 7 LAW
278
2b Atemporal and atopic
We see law tied to a particular time and space. It is closely related to societies and 
cultures; it changes as societies and cultures change, but law also appears to us as 
one of the most conservative dimensions of social life. Not only are its institutions 
characterised by preservation of the past, by tradition and repetition, but its use of 
rules (with their apparent categorical inflexibility) give the impression that law is a 
strongly conservative force in society. Law can be perceived to be a barrier to change, 
and dependent upon the maintenance of traditional ideas, principle and institutions.
Moreover, while law’s formal characteristics reflect particular places and historical 
epochs, if we look at how legal rules are structured it becomes clear that law often 
aspires to be neither territorial nor historically conditioned. Statutes do not claim 
temporary validity, validity until such time as they are repealed. They claim indefinite 
authority into the future. And, while their application can be limited to parts of a ter-
ritory (e.g. ‘England and Wales, but not Scotland’) they do not claim any origin in a 
particular place (e.g. Westminster) but claim to hold good everywhere that they apply.
Thus, the formal characteristics of law are paradoxical. We know that they have 
specifiable historical origins (their point of creation, where they were first recorded, 
EXAMPLE
~'UDIW$PHQGPHQWVWRWKH5RPH6WDWXWHRIWKH,QWHUQDWLRQDO&ULPLQDO
&RXUW1RYHPEHU
The Parties to the International Criminal Court statute are working on a new statutory defi-
nition of the ‘Crime of [state] Aggression’. At present there is a working text (based on a UN 
General Assembly Resolution from 1974). This would make the seizure of territory illegal, 
but it would also leave in place the recognition of sovereignty on the basis of ‘effective con-
trol’, i.e. defensive force and the right of the Security Council to authorise the use of force.
Article 8 bis:
Crime of Aggression: 1. For the purpose of this Statute, ‘crime of aggression’ means the 
planning, preparation, initiation or execution, by a person in a position effectively to exercise 
control over or to direct the political or military action of a State, of an act of aggression 
which, by its character, gravity and scale, constitutes a manifest violation of the Charter of 
the United Nations [. . .]. Any of the following acts [. . .] qualify as an act of aggression: (a) 
The invasion or attack by the armed forces of a State of the territory of another State, or any 
military occupation, however temporary, resulting from such invasion or attack, or any annex-
ation by the use of force of the territory of another State or part thereof; (b) Bombardment by 
the armed forces of a State against the territory of another State or the use of any weapons 
by a State against the territory of another State; (c) The blockade of the ports or coasts of a 
State by the armed forces of another State; (d) An attack by the armed forces of a State on 
the land, sea or air forces, or marine and air fleets of another State [. . .].
www.ebook3000.com

2 FORMS
279
and how they have changed over time). But the main material form in which we 
find laws – cases and statutes – deny these historical and geographical characteris-
tics. Statutes express the law in such a way as to suggest that they only state the law; 
they are ‘enacted’ from a particular time and source, but thereafter their force applies 
at all times everywhere with no concern for their point of origin. Equally, legal deci-
sions do not claim to speak from the point of view of the judges themselves: they are 
expressions, not of opinions here and now, but of the law. They claim a final, ‘per-
spective free’, statement of law in that case. In this way, the form of law may be said 
to be denial of its own historical and geographical roots. This is an important aspect 
of the phenomenology of law, its ability to give the impression of timelessness. We 
will also explore the possibility that law is no longer dependent upon territory.
The ahistorical character of law is a consequence of legal language. Law is a linguis-
tic phenomenon found in written rules and the language of those qualified to profess 
the law. This language is perceived to be dry, dull and pedantically precise, a stereo-
type with a degree of truth: governance through law requires careful generalisation. 
Such is the distinctive ‘aesthetics’ of legality. This spare, generalising, language of the 
law is a reflection of law’s functions, its need to classify and to justify (see below). 
But legal language can also be construed as a ‘genre’. Legal language is characterised 
not only by generality, but by its being deliberately ahistorical and atemporal. Put 
another way, for laws to generalise about obligations they must appear to be categori-
cal imperatives binding everywhere at all times, even if, as we have seen, legal rules 
are better characterised as defeasible rules, not categorical commands.
The CLS movement, with its interest in law as literature, draws upon the work of 
the novelist Franz Kafka (1883–1924) to understand how law is experienced in mo-
dernity (Luban, 1986; Douzinas and Gearey, 2005). For Kafka, the existence of law 
is immanent, rather than transcendent. It is omnipresent and all-pervasive, and as 
such oppressive. Law is experienced as the limitless potential to be judged and held 
guilty. But law’s immanent nature gives rise to the formal character of law as count-
less categorical imperatives: limitless, potentially contradictory, obligations. That is, 
the manifestation of law in Kafka’s writing is as something omnipresent but neverthe-
less timeless and therefore inaccessible. It is always unclear when a law is made, when 
a law is applicable, when a legal process begins or ends, or when a law ceases to be 
in force. This perception that laws have an inaccessible quality is captured in Kafka’s 
parable ‘Before the law’ (Kafka, 1994: 59):
‘Everyone strives to reach the Law,’ says the man, ‘so how does it happen that for all these 
many years no one but myself has ever begged for admittance?’ The doorkeeper recognizes 
that the man has reached his end, and, to let his failing senses catch the words, roars in 
his ear: ‘No one else could ever be admitted here, since this gate was made only for you. 
I am now going to shut it.’
This intimates, among other things, that the law is always there, and always there for 
us to use, but without knowing when the law exists – when all of its contradictory 

CHAPTER 7 LAW
280
promises are in force or not in force – it remains inaccessible. This is an important, 
though rarely emphasised, characteristic of law: legal language denies its own his-
torical contingency, even when we know that law is historical in nature and subject 
to change (see Goodrich, 1990).
Law’s appearance with respect to space is complex, and globalisation has clearly 
disrupted the relationship between law and place. A characterisation of law as ‘at-
opic’ – without a place – runs contrary to the positivist demand that law be tied to 
territory. That is, as requiring either a single sovereign governing a territory, or as 
a system of rules requiring a definable set of institutions governing the rules and 
their recognition. Such links between legality and place are potentially undermined 
by transnational legal networks. Transnational law is distinguishable from public 
international law. The latter represents the contractual relationships between states. 
Transnational law is the network of legal relationships created by economic globali-
sation, networks which do not depend upon states.
Transnational commercial law consists of that set of rules, from whatever source, which 
governs international commercial transactions and is common to a number of legal 
systems. Such commonality is derived from international instruments of various kinds, 
such as conventions and model laws, and from codification of international trade usage 
adopted by contract [. . .]. [Harmonisation is also driven by] ‘soft law’ restatements [. . .] 
which though not binding are regularly resorted to [. . .]. Underpinning these is the lex
mercatoria, consisting of the unwritten customs and usages of merchants and general prin-
ciple of commercial law. (Goode et al, 2007: lix)
These are networks of relationships, characteristic of contemporary global eco-
nomic practices, which aim to by-pass many of constraints imposed by the ter-
ritorial state. This is driven by a distinctive class of actors and their relationships. 
‘Transnational actors’ are any actors whose activities involve investment, commerce 
or trade in two or more states. This can include multi-national firms, corporations, 
non-governmental groups or wealth fund managers, all of whom can be charac-
terised as ‘strategic actors’ looking to build economic relationships which have the 
stability that we would expect from state-governed legal relationships, but without 
having recourse to the legal systems of particular states (Likosky (ed.), 2002).
Such strategic actors can be said to form legal ‘networks’ – as opposed to a dis-
tinctive system – and they depend upon norms rather than rules. These norms can 
be existing norms: ‘best practice’ in commercial and scientific conduct, or norms of 
adjudication found in alternative dispute resolution. They can be emerging com-
mercial norms, including expectations about how litigation can be avoided, or 
expectations about minimising labour and other costs. These emerging norms are 
referred to as lex mercatoria, a law of merchants, suggesting continuity with ancient 
practices of localised dispute settlement using commercial norms (Teubner, 1997). 
Such networks can be supplemented by state law. For instance, in agreements over 
which jurisdictions contractual disputes will be heard in, usually the jurisdiction 
www.ebook3000.com

2 FORMS
281

F 'LDFKURQLF
The idea of the diachronic stresses that law is perceived as something dynamic char-
acterised by change through time. There is a danger in seeking an ‘ideal type’ behind 
the many manifestations of law because, among other things, this neglects the fact 
that law is always characterised by change. Law’s encounters with social reality, and 
its reaction to dynamic social processes and trends, might suggest that law exists 
primarily as a reaction to social processes, thereby accounting for law’s conservative 
and reactive appearance. It may also be, more controversially, that law ‘progresses’, 
teleologically, on a path towards an ideal state. We will consider the possibility that 
law changes because it is subject to forces – logical and material – outside law. First, 
we return to Niklas Luhmann’s autopoiesis theory, which provides an account of law’s 
dynamic formal properties.
most attractive to the stronger bargaining party whether or not this is their ‘native’ 
state. Their essence, however, is the generation of regulatory networks that do not 
depend on, and deliberately by-pass, the territorial state in order to ensure eco-
nomic efficiency and profit.
Even if we were to deny (on positivist or natural law grounds) that these networks 
have the status of law, they nonetheless constitute the most prevalent manifestation 
of ‘global governance’: the regulation of economic activity at a global level. They are 
also the best explanation of why activities that, from a legal perspective, have no 
single territorial focus – from contracting with a multinational corporation to using 
the internet – are nonetheless governed by predictable, rule-governed, practices of 
arbitration and regulation. Globalisation entails the disruption of the relationship 
between law and place. However, this does not entail the absence of law, only the 
increased importance of norms rather than rules.
EXAMPLE
&KDUOHV'LFNHQVBleak House>@'LFNHQV
Reflecting the perception of law as ‘outside time’, this novel has a never-ending legal 
dispute at its heart. Dickens attacks both the unobtainable nature of legal justice and the 
legal profession which sustains it.
Equity sends questions to law, Law sends questions back to Equity; Law finds it can’t do 
this, Equity finds it can’t do that; neither can so much as say it can’t do anything, without 
this solicitor instructing and this counsel appearing for A, and that solicitor instructing and 
that counsel appearing for B [. . .]. And thus, through years and years, and lives and lives, 
everything goes on, constantly beginning over and over again, and nothing ever ends.

CHAPTER 7 LAW
282
Law creates itself through communication, but this does not fully account for 
patterns of change within a legal system. To understand the stable processes and pat-
terns of change found in a legal system Luhmann appeals to the idea of ‘feedback’ 
(Luhmann, 1988). A legal system ‘absorbs’ a conflict or dispute by categorising and 
analysing the conflict by its own, internal, concepts; it then generates a decision 
about the compatibility of the parties’ claims with its own assumptions. Where 
complex or seemingly irresolvable problems arise, solutions are not simply ‘chosen’ 
by those within a system (through judicial intuition or creative interpretation). Law, 
as a system, is restructuring its own, internal, assumptions to make sense of the 
problem. Change is not achieved through the importation of something external to 
the system: a decision is the rearrangement of existing components of that system. 
This helpfully accounts for law’s paradoxical appearance as simultaneously dynamic 
and ordered. Its rules change, but change is governed from within the system.
In contradistinction to Luhmann, we can attribute change to something external 
to law. Understanding the bases of social change – cultural, historical and technolog-
ical changes in human societies – might well offer a way of understanding changes 
in law and legal institutions. However, social change is an area of extensive debate 
and uncertainty (Winch, 1958). It has to presume, first of all, that social change has 
a pattern and is not simply anarchical mutation of social practices. It also presumes 
that societies themselves – as entities or stable practices – have a distinct reality of 
their own explaining their endurance through time. The existence of an author-
ity in a territory may be enough to attribute some basic unity to a society, but the 
existence of ‘an authority in a territory’ is surely distinguishable from wider social 
practices – moral, technological or cultural – which have their own logic of change 
and progress.
There are two ways of understanding the forces behind social change which, 
while related, have very different characters and offer different kinds of explanation 
of social and legal change. The idea of ‘dialectics’ arises from Greek philosophy 
and refers to a quality found in discussions, namely that they are characterised by a 
relentless process of argument and counter-argument (see Morrison, 1997: 26–33). 
Nineteenth-century German philosophy developed this idea of dialectics, with com-
peting accounts offered by Hegel and Marx.
Hegel (using ideas taken from Johann Gottlieb Fichte, 1762–1814) used dia-
lectical processes to analyse the evolution of human thinking (Hegel, 2008). The 
importance of this for law lies in the expansion of rationality, not as a project (as 
in the ‘Enlightenment project’), but as the unfolding of legal ideas as they inter-
act with reality. Our ideas may well sit uneasily with reality: legal rules often fail 
to find a fit with what is possible or desirable for a certain society. Nonetheless, 
the tensions between social practices and legal regulation will produce something 
new: new laws and new social practices. Those new laws and social practices will 
in turn produce new tensions and problems which themselves will be superseded 
www.ebook3000.com

2 FORMS
283
by newer practices. In sum, when reality and law clash tensions and problems will 
arise. Nonetheless, in the sense of dialectics propounded by Hegel, such clashes and 
changes will, progressively, lead to more rational law and a more rational society 
(see Fine, 2001: 24f). The clash of the real and ideal leads towards something more 
logical, necessary, and universal.
Marxist accounts of the dialectical structure of change have, as can be anticipated 
(Chapter 4), the material world as their basis rather than the evolution of the ideal 
and rational. It is the material world, and the use of the material world for our 
survival and our profit, that drives social change and legal change. Technological 
changes in the way that we control and manufacture the material world have been 
changes in terms of speed, efficiency and ownership. With this has come change 
in the management of social affairs, including greater levels of management, and 
greater levels of profit for single individuals. It has also meant changes in our 
experience of work and of each other. We are no longer in a close relationship 
with the material of the world; we work in more specialised and mechanical ways, 
and the specialisation of work, along with the flow of profit to a few people own-
ing the means of production, has the consequence that we are ‘alienated’ both from 
the fruits of our labour and from the profits that we generate (Easton, 1961). In 
this Marxist account, law can be portrayed as a peripheral phenomenon, significant 
only because it helps to maintain the status quo and bolster the power of the capital-
holding class. However, it also sharpens our understanding of law as irreducibly tied 
to the processes of manufacture, exchange and nature itself. Law can be seen as a 
way of justifying inequality and the division of society into different (profit-creating 
and profit-holding) classes, or it can be seen as part of the process whereby we are 
alienated from the world and from each other. Either way, changes in law are not 
the product of internal processes of logic (formalism) or judicial wisdom (realism). 
Changes in law are symptomatic of inescapable forces outside law: the material 
world and our relationship with the material world.
EXAMPLE
~7XUNH\ 5HVWULFWLRQV RQ ,PSRUWV RI 7H[WLOH DQG &ORWKLQJ 3URGXFWV
:RUOG7UDGH2UJDQLVDWLRQ$%z
Trade disputes, particularly international disputes, are not easy to settle through the ap-
plication of legal rules. In the face of power, wealth and vested interests, a combination 
of law and pragmatism is usually called for. Here protectionist practices are considered in 
the light of the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) and the rules of the World 
Trade Organisation (WTO). An intimate, perhaps dialectical, relationship between rules, 
profit and pragmatism is at work.
➨

CHAPTER 7 LAW
284
 )XQFWLRQV
 
 Introduction 
 The identification of a single function, many functions, or even changing functions 
for law, is to provoke a number of vexatious debates. First of all, law no doubt 
serves many functions, but does this mean it has  a function? To isolate a single 
function – i.e. a single goal or purpose – would be to lose sight of the reality of 
law in an over-arching ideal. Conversely, attempting to describe its many functions 
might be (conceptually or historically) incomplete: given the many formal changes 
in law and laws, to prioritise certain functions would be to neglect others. It would 
also threaten conceptual parsimony, finding the simplest possible explanation. So, 
it is not easy to decide in advance what the scope of an enquiry into law’s functions 
would be. Raz describes three possible ways approaches: 
 [First,] the functions that all legal systems necessarily fulfil [because of] certain universal 
facts of human nature. [Second, those functions] fulfilled by some or most [legal systems]. 
[. . .] Finally, theorists are interested in claims that legal systems in general or under certain 
circumstances ought to fulfil certain functions in certain ways.   ( Raz, 2009 : 165) 
 Each of these approaches will have a role to play in what follows. 
 Brian Tamanaha’s description of law as a ‘multifunctional tool’ (2008: 15) serves 
to emphasise that law does have a functional character, that it has many functions 
rather than one function, and it encourages us to think about a great many things 
which are routinely, but wrongly, excluded in discussion of law. Paradigm cases of 
law in action – mediation between two parties in contractual dispute for example, 
or governing the actions of a number of people through criminal law – distil law’s 
functions into mediation and  governance . Both of these are important functions 
served by law, but consider law’s role in keeping us safe from our own actions, for 
example wearing a seatbelt in cars. Or law’s function to change the way we  think , and 
not only the way we act, through race relations or discrimination legislation. These 
are related to, but not reducible to, ideas of mediation (in an adversarial sense) and 
 )XQFWLRQV
 This appeal relates to certain quantitative restrictions imposed by Turkey on 19 categories 
of textile and clothing products imported from India. Turkey adopted these quantitative 
restrictions upon the formation of a customs union with the European Communities. The 
Panel found these quantitative restrictions to be inconsistent with [the GATT agreement]. 
The issue raised by Turkey in this appeal is whether these quantitative restrictions are 
nevertheless justified [. . .]. [The WTO holds that] the purpose of a customs union is ‘to 
facilitate trade’ between the constituent members and ‘not to raise barriers to the trade’ 
with third countries. This objective demands that a balance be struck by the constituent 
members of a customs union. A customs union should facilitate trade within the customs 
union, but it should not do so in a way that raises barriers to trade with third countries.  
www.ebook3000.com

3 FUNCTIONS
285
governance (in a policing sense). Law is a multi-functional tool for changing our 
thinking as well as our acting.
Law does not have unlimited functions. On the one hand, ‘law does not concern 
itself with trivialities’ meaning, among other things, that law is not a tool for ful-
filling our fleeting preferences. On the other hand, there are certain functions that 
law could not serve and still maintain a relationship with what we commonly take 
to be justice. Using law as a tool to destroy a state and its population would look 
like a political act achieved through quasi-legal means. Law is intended to fulfil 
certain ends, captured by the idea of justice, which cannot be squared with wholly 
destructive, or wholly inhumane, objectives. This is not to say that law cannot serve 
undesirable ends. It suggests that such actions will always generate opposition and 
resistance pointing to the misuse of law (Derrida, 1990).
While law functions in various ways, it is generally associated with positive so-
cial functions rather than destructive functions. The challenge of analysing law’s 
function is, therefore, to consider some basic descriptive characterisations of how law 
functions, and some normative limits to how law should function. This should clarify 
some of the questions concerning justice raised in the first chapter. Those debates – 
whether and how justice is a standard external to law, what it is for law to serve to 
the common good and whether justice is meaningful at all – challenged us to think 
about law’s functions in the sense of the ends it serves and the means that it deploys. 
Here, then, we must take account of the values, and not only the facts, of law. We 
need to find what positive role law plays in our lives.
We consider three functions here: constituting, regulating and justifying. By find-
ing where law fails to fulfil these positive functions, we are in a better position to 
understand justice and injustice. To regulate poorly and allow disparities of power, 
or irrational principles, to become acceptable in social life, is the most common way 
for law to fail to fulfil its functions. To constitute an unstable state, or fail to con-
stitute defensible conceptions of personhood, is to make poor use of law’s creative 
powers. To justify actions that are irrational or unreasonable is an attempt to make 
normal what cannot be made normal. While these three functions are different, 
and therefore do not necessarily point to a single function or objective for law, they 
represent widespread uses law, and widespread uses of law where ideas of justice, 
good, right, person, norms and rules commonly intersect.

D &RQVWLWXWH
Analysis of legal rules demanded that we divide those rules which directly regulate 
our conduct from those prior rules that constitute legal institutions and processes, 
but the constitutive function of law is more potent than its ability to create legal 
practices and institutions through constitutive rules. It is the creative power of ideas, 
practices and expectations. In short, law is constructive and creative. It constructs 
principles to aid problem-solving, it constitutes the legal person, it constitutes the 

CHAPTER 7 LAW
286
state and it creates ideals that we would not otherwise have. We would not have the 
idea of citizenship, or of the equality of individuals, or of just retribution, without 
law. As a society, we could not engage in complex endeavours such as progressive 
taxation, party politics or social welfare, without law. At the most basic level, the 
constitution of the state, and the constitution of the person, are among law’s most 
important functions.
The power to constitute the state was evident in discussion of justice. The (cor-
rective) justice of law and the (distributive) justice of politics are difficult to divide 
completely; law also distributes, and politics also corrects. However, a shared re-
sponsibility lies in creating and maintaining the conditions of social coexistence: 
i.e. law and politics always work together to create the state. Law and politics create 
the social and economic world that we inhabit; both law and politics are precondi-
tions of the common good and individual rights. Fundamentally, there is a creative 
relationship between law and politics which allows us to distinguish them, but also 
adds to the complexity of their relationship. Constitutional law constitutes the state. 
But the state also constitutes law. The executive, judiciary and legislature are each 
drivers of law, and each organs of the state. It is this creative, constitutive, relation-
ship between law and politics that allows human coexistence.
The relationship between law and politics is not only the shared responsibility of 
allowing human coexistence, but also a relationship of mutual constitution. We can 
understand politics by showing where it differs from law; we can understand law by 
distinguishing it from politics. Politics without law is brutal; law without politics is 
socially blind. Without this contrast we would have no sense of what is distinctive 
about legality. This mutually constitutive relationship is perhaps best understood in 
the CLS school. While this position is caricatured as reducing all law to politics, in 
fact it pushes us to understand how what we think of as normal and natural – the 
norms of social world – are the product of the interplay of law and politics. They 
shape our very understanding of what it is to coexist, and with this they shape the 
(ideologically malleable) idea of what is ‘natural’:
Most people in the legal academy agree, albeit often with some reluctance, that law is 
politics in the superficial sense that we can talk about identifiably liberal and conservative 
positions on various issues in the law [. . .]. The indeterminacy argument and the critique 
of social theory led CLS to a different understanding of the proposition that law is politics. 
We saw law as a form of human activity in which political conflicts were worked out in ways 
that contributed to the stability of the social order (‘legitimation’) in part by constituting 
personality and social institutions in ways that came to seem natural. (Tushnet, 1991: 1526)
However, Finnis’ centralisation of the common good also captures well the con-
stitutive function of law. The idea of the common good is useful precisely because it 
is the creative project shared by law and the state: to purposely create a social world 
where the good can be realised. Extending this, there are ideas of the human, and 
of human relationships, that could not exist without law. Law not only serves to 
www.ebook3000.com

3 FUNCTIONS
287

E 5HJXODWH
Many things drive social change – economics, politics, science – and law governs 
these drivers of change. In fact, law appears more as a regulator of social change than 
a driver of social change.
[Law] enables past, present, and predictable future to be related in a stable though devel-
oping order; it enables this order to be effected in complex interpersonal patterns; and 
it brings all this within reach of individual initiative and arrangement, thus enhancing 
individual autonomy in the very process of increasing individuals’ obligations. (Finnis, 
2011: 303)
support a certain kind of good social life, but creates and promotes forms of human 
life. The ‘person’ is precisely that understanding of the individual human that most 
closely reflects our relationship with, and need for, law. That individual humans are 
recognised as having value, are to be immunised against being treated like animals, 
and are to be treated equally. This is the implicit normative content of law denoted 
by the idea of a person. This does not prevent laws being used to abuse individu-
als, nor does it prevent controversy concerning where personhood begins and ends 
and what interests personhood can be said to protect (Dayan, 2011; Ohlin, 2002). 
There is, however, a common-denominator among ideas of justice, human rights, 
the ‘minimum content of natural law’, the right, and the good, which limits the 
functioning of law. Law creates and protects personhood. Where it has been used to 
diminish or deny personhood it is met with claims concerning justice: something 
transcendent, immanent or self-contained, in the foundations of law which de-
mands that it be constructive, not destructive, or personhood.
EXAMPLE
SalomonYSalomon & Co Ltd+RXVHRI/RUGV1RYHPEHU>@
A.C. 22
Here the ‘personality’ of companies in English law is confirmed. The ability of law to give a 
single personality to groups of persons in a common endeavour is treated as ‘self-evident’ 
provided the criteria established by statute are fulfilled.
My Lords, the important question in this case [. . .] is whether the respondent company 
was a company at all – whether in truth that artificial creation of the Legislature had been 
validly constituted in this instance [. . .]. My Lords, the learned judges appear to me not 
to have been absolutely certain in their own minds whether to treat the company as a real 
thing or not. If it was a real thing, if it had a legal existence, and if consequently the law 
attributed to it certain rights and liabilities in its constitution as a company, it appears to 
me to follow as a consequence that it is impossible to deny the validity of the transactions 
into which it has entered.

CHAPTER 7 LAW
288
Social and economic developments take place within a legal system, under the 
governance of rules, and their impact on society can be altered or managed through 
law. Accordingly, law ‘regulates’ not only in the sense of imposing obligations, but 
law mediates between society and the forces that act on society. Understanding this 
role requires considering the historical context in which legal systems were distin-
guished from other forms of authority as an independent and authoritative means 
of social mediation. We will consider how and why regulation is best understood 
as a normative, rather than specifically rule-governed, phenomenon. We will also 
consider how, in a related vein, law regulates the relationship between different 
spheres of human life.
It is telling that ‘mediation between parties’ can be distinguished from ‘legal 
litigation of a dispute’. The former is a semi-formal ‘umpiring’, the latter a formal 
process of decision-making, but this is a difference in degree but not kind. The 
fact that a legal decision can be enforced is (as we have seen with reference to the 
command theory) not a sufficient condition for something to be legal. The rules by 
which the decision was reached have to be recognised as legal rules. It is the norma-
tive background of a mediation process that ensures it is legal: the public practices 
and mental attitudes that mark off certain rules and decisions as distinctive.
Legal decision-making offers to ‘close’ disputes more decisively than any other 
means. This is for various social, economic and psychological reasons, i.e. for rea-
sons related to social norms not simply the pedigree of legal rules. Law has a dis-
tinctive and respected social status as a means of dispute resolution. Law provides 
reasons not found elsewhere (Raz, 1994); and because of the force of law – in the 
sense of force shared by the Scandinavian realists, Derrida, and others – we see law 
exercising a decision-making power that is distinctive and authoritative. Law neither 
merely commands, nor merely mediates: it regulates in that it makes regular, it pro-
vides the underlying stability for social norms. While law is less frequently a direct 
creator of social norms, it is the strongest social force for stabilising social forces. 
In sum, law’s regulative function is best understood as a normative phenomenon, 
rather than as a coercive process.
‘Regulation’ should also be understood on a much larger, social and historical, 
canvas. The distinction between de facto and de jure authority is not simply a concep-
tual division but one with specific roots in European culture. The Medieval period, 
a high-water mark of natural law thought, grappled with the separation of the legal 
spheres of Church (sacrum) and state (saeculum) (Berger, 1953). This was of practical 
and philosophical significance. Practically, it concerned division of authority be-
tween kings and Church in a period where a state system was not in force and many 
kinds of authority could be claimed over territory. Philosophically, it weighed the 
authority of the conscience against the authority of the law. Freedom of conscience 
was by no means as valued or as protected as it is in the modern world, yet the stir-
rings of a sense of its importance and value was emerging. In short, the autonomy of 
www.ebook3000.com

3 FUNCTIONS
289
secular law gave impetus to a view of the individual as autonomous; an independ-
ent secular sphere allowed a free-thinking individual to emerge.
The separation of secular and sacred hastened the more general ‘separation of 
powers’ that we expect to see in a modern state. The separation of courts and politics 
allows law to mediate between the individual and the political structure that they 
inhabit. Thus, put in a wider historical context, the function of law is mediation 
between spheres of authority. This can be illustrated through law’s regulation of the 
public and private spheres. Law’s governance of space, particularly its governance of 
public and private spaces, might be said to be among law’s formal properties. Law 
certainty takes the form of ‘territories’. However, it can be argued that this division 
depends upon values: law’s responsibility to draw a dividing-line between the public 
and the private. The public–private division is something regulated by law rather than 
something dependent on space.
The division between public and private has long been articulated in the language 
of ‘spheres’. There are a number of variations of this metaphor, but in essence they 
point to the existence of a space of choice, self-realisation and preference for the 
individual (the private), which is excluded from political (public) processes and 
decision-making. The public sphere is associated with the actions of the state and 
the governance of state and economy. The private sphere – associated with family, 
choice, preference and recreation – is (especially in liberal states) insulated from the 
intrusion of the public (Alldridge and Brants (eds), 2001). This negative prohibition 
against intrusion is essential to the priority of the right. The good – associated with 
the fulfilment and flourishing of the individual – is relegated to the private sphere 
of activity where (while held as valuable) it is not allowed to determine social and 
political decisions. To allow the good to dominate public life would be to endorse 
a project of social engineering.
Thus, a division between public and private allows autonomy and consistency. 
Autonomy is maximised in the private sphere, while the public sphere is charac-
terised by the consistency provided by rights and legislation. In other words, it is 
essential to the priority of the right. In this sense, the two spheres are mutually 
regulating: encouraging private autonomy demands limiting the power of the public 
(i.e. the state and other public bodies); prioritising consistency in the public sphere 
demands the exclusion of private interest.
This classic, liberal, statement of the public–private divide (often associated with 
Mill’s harm principle) has come under sustained attack from a number of quarters. 
Feminist criticisms in particular chart how this divide has been used to shield or 
hide domestic abuse and labour found in the private sphere in order to protect the 
interests of men (Kruks, 2005). There is also a question of how a ‘division’ can be 
said to exist at all. Because of the regulation of our private conduct, and because 
private bodies can discharge public duties, it is clear that the division is more than 
the difference between two geographical places (homes and public spaces); it is 

CHAPTER 7 LAW
290

F -XVWLI\
It is through the ideas of reason, giving reasons and the reasonable that law func-
tions to justify individual and collective actions. Reasons – in the general form of 
explanations, or in the specific form of rules – are important because they justify 
actions. We can only justify our actions if we have reasons for them: action without 
reason is action that is irrational, criminal or simply animal impulse. Law’s ability 
to justify is crucial to understanding the functioning of law. However, we will also be 
value-laden, and concerns the duties of both the state and the individual. This can 
expressed in Lon Fuller’s terms as a division between the ‘morality of aspiration’ 
(personal excellence) which is the responsibility of the private individual, and a 
‘morality of duty’ (minimum public virtues) which are certainly the concern of the 
state and legal system. ‘There is no way by which the law can compel a man to live 
up to the excellences of which he is capable. For workable standards of judgment 
the law must turn to its blood cousin, the morality of duty’ (Fuller, 1969: 9). The 
division between public and private can, in these terms, be understood as a divi-
sion between different kinds of morality, not spaces. There is an important division 
between (more or less) ‘purely’ private places such as the home, where aspiration 
and even personal excellence are appropriate, and the public places, where the basic 
rules of public order are applied. Law’s dual role is regulating activity in public and 
private, but also regulating the ‘division’ itself.
EXAMPLE
In the Matter of A Petition of Right &RXUW RI $SSHDO .LQJV %HQFK
'LYLVLRQ>@.%
Private rights can sometimes become the victim of ‘public necessity’. Such necessities 
can include general concerns for social welfare, but also include pressing considerations 
of national safety in a time of warfare. The present case concerns prerogative powers and 
the possession of land during the First World War.
It cannot, I think, be disputed, and the suppliants do not in fact dispute, that the King, as 
the supreme executive authority, was and is now by virtue of the prerogative entitled in 
certain circumstances of national emergency to take and use the property of a subject or 
otherwise interfere with private rights in order to provide for the safety of the public and 
the defence of the realm. [. . .] But it is said that the right is confined to the doing of what 
is necessary for the conduct of actual military operations against an enemy on the soil of 
this country. I cannot think that this can be so. So to limit the prerogative would in these 
days be to render it practically useless for the purpose for which it is entrusted to the 
King. The circumstances under which the power may be exercised and the particular acts 
which may be done in the exercise thereof must of necessity vary with the times [. . .].
www.ebook3000.com

3 FUNCTIONS
291
concerned with the ways in which justification requires classification, and requires 
identifying the rational and reasonable, and the fact that this entails a problematic 
relationship with truth, knowledge and power. In sum, the relationship between 
law, justification and classification hinges crucially on what can be considered ra-
tional or considered reasonable, and the tension between the two.
Law, as reason-giving, allows us to justify our actions, but law’s reason-giving pro-
cesses also justify law itself. The ‘self-justification’ of law is not a simple assertion of 
its authority. Law justifies itself through its use of generalisations, classifications and 
rules. These lend order and stability to its decision-making. Judgments must involve 
stable points of reference and cannot be justified if they are the fleeting instincts of 
a judge. Law cannot justify the actions of individuals, or its own institutional prac-
tices, without such stability.
Stability is not the same as predictability of outcomes. Perfect predictability is nei-
ther discoverable nor desirable in law. Rather, the means law uses are stable. It is the 
stability that comes from law’s imposition of reasonable rules and categories on life 
in order to reach a decision. The importance of law as a rule-based system is less the 
judgments that this allows it to reach, more the fact that classification of the world, 
and thereby the justification of action, has taken place in a rigorous, public and sys-
tematic way. We have encountered the relationship between rules and categorisation, 
and with it the problems of ‘indeterminacy’ and over- or under-inclusiveness. While 
this can be explained in terms of the nature of rules themselves, we should consider 
some deeper problems generated by law’s need to classify and justify.
Classifications allow legal judgment – most fundamentally, as lawful or unlawful – 
but classifications are also creative. By creating new categories of relationships and 
responsibilities law is not only constituting new aspects of social reality but also justi-
fying new forms of action and justifying new remedies and penalties related to those 
categories (Dayan, 2011). The creation of new categories of harm (e.g. environmental 
damage) has justified new forms of action and new remedies. The creation of new 
categories of perpetrator (e.g. the ‘unpriviledged belligerent’ of international humani-
tarian law) has justified new forms of criminal responsibility. The creation of new 
legal entities (e.g. the European Union) has justified the exercise of freedoms across 
territorial borders. In sum, the relationship between law, justification and classifica-
tion hinges crucially on what can be considered rational or considered reasonable, and 
the tension between the two. Law encompasses and uses the reasonable as a test of 
what is normal or legitimate. It also provides reasons for action that are not found in 
any other sphere: it is a distinct source of justification.
This is not to say that there is a simple, binary, relationship between classifica-
tions and justifications. Law is justified in coming to decisions that emerge from the 
entirety of a legal system and culture. Our ‘civil liberties’ are a broad group of legal 
and cultural assumptions justifying many actions without explicit legal categorisa-
tion. Law is justified in coming to decisions in hard cases where a simple application 

CHAPTER 7 LAW
292
of rules is impossible. In this sense justification encompasses both the norms that a 
legal system is intended to uphold and the authority we invest in our legal institu-
tions. Law’s justification is always more than the application of rules. It is the justifi-
cation associated with law’s overall institutional authority (see Raz, 2009).
The classifications found in our legal system therefore have a dual quality: we can 
expect them to be reasonable, and because of this, they give us a reason to act where 
other norms may be unclear.
People often know what is morally the right thing to do, but just cannot bring themselves 
to do it, for one reason or another. That explains why there might be some practical point 
in superimposing a legal requirement over and above the moral one. Far from merely 
telling people to do something they would have done anyway, backing morality with the 
force of law gives people extra incentives (legal rewards and punishments) to do what is 
morally prescribed. Legalizing morality is, alas, far from redundant. (Goodin, 2010: 625)
Thus, saying that our actions are ‘lawful’ gives justification to our actions in a way 
that saying our actions are ‘moral’ does not. The lawful is clearly more difficult to 
contest, not only because it involves public rules associated with penalties, but be-
cause public rules are careful classifications clearly intended to justify in as specific 
a way as possible. Classification is one of the most powerful and distinctive human 
capacities and essential for giving reasons. But on what basis can we treat our clas-
sifications as reliable, meaningful or rational? The structures that we ‘find’ in the 
world, particularly those identified by the sciences which seem both reliable and 
powerful, are nonetheless of human origin.
Poststructuralism is a radical attempt to call such classifications into question 
(see Solomon, 1988; Morrison, 1997). Poststructuralism is characterised by sus-
picion about the promises made by modernism, i.e. many of the ideas that can 
be traced to the Renaissance and the Enlightenment. ‘Enlightenment’ suggests we 
should have the courage to use our own rational capacities to judge, accept and re-
ject ideas received from the past and our cultures. Poststructuralism argues that this 
Enlightenment goal is more problematic than it appears because our classifications, 
and with it what we hold to be rational or reasonable, are always temporary, artifi-
cial or culturally determined. We cannot treat rationality as the route to a timeless 
and universal realm of truths, but have to see our identities and cultures, including 
what we see as justified, as culturally and historically determined.
This gives rise to two trains of thought encompassed by, but not exclusive to, 
poststructuralism. The first is a suspicion of claims about the timelessness of ration-
ality and truth in our scientific and legal categories. Claims about rationality and 
truth need to be seen in their historical context as temporary, and problematic, as-
sumptions. Our classifications of the world and of action always betray underlying 
assumptions about what our classifications should look like or achieve. There is no 
‘theory-free observation’: we always bring assumptions to bear in our scientific or 
legal enquiries (Winch, 1958).
www.ebook3000.com

3 FUNCTIONS
293
A second, more radical, conclusion can be drawn about the human sciences and 
law. Not only are these practices misleading as to what is objective, but they repre-
sent a drive to control human actions by determining certain things as ‘normal’ and 
others ‘abnormal’. The human sciences are fundamentally a means, an instrument, 
of ordering and controlling, laying down standards for being human that are not 
necessary in any metaphysical or moral way but because they fit efficient, orderly, 
convenient scientific categories (Foucault, 2002).
One of the clearest examples of this can be found in the complicity between science, 
law and ‘social values’ with respect to sex, gender and sexuality. An ideology of ‘natural’, 
‘essential’ human qualities posits changeless, natural, divisions between the sexes and 
also insists upon a universal, binary division between the biological sexes. This binary 
division, itself falsified by countless physiological variations among people, was used 
to obscure variations in gender and identity (because our physiological classification 
and our gender self-perception may not ‘match’) and in sexuality (because sexual at-
traction is not always for the opposite (‘hetero’) sex) (Roach Anleu, 1992). The social 
sciences remained under the spell of the biological sciences and thereby blind to real 
differences between persons. Treating as deviant those who do not fit biological catego-
ries is no longer a part of legitimate social scientific enquiry. Nonetheless, its historical 
presence in the ‘purely descriptive’ endeavour of social science is grounds for suspicion 
concerning its isolation from prevailing social attitudes and power.
Reason in the fullest philosophical sense, what is universally or timelessly ra-
tional, if it exists at all is something that we have neither definitively found (as a 
culture or civilisation) nor that law has an authoritative claim over. Whether we are 
suspicious concerning all claims to truth and reason, or merely accept the present 
limitations on human knowledge, law has not and cannot claim definitive insight 
into the rational. Law’s deployment of the reasonable, and law’s contribution to the 
creation of what is rational, serves the purpose of justification, justifying the actions 
of the state and the individual. But humans, and perhaps the state, may well be 
fundamentally irrational entities, pursuing goals, actions and experiences that can-
not be understood as either reasonable or rational. Law is in constant tension with 
the irrational in human life. Not only the unreasonableness of the criminal. The 
unreasonableness that may well be a constant component of the human condition.
EXAMPLE
FM (FGM) Sudan CG >@ 8.$,7  8. $V\OXP DQG
Immigration Tribunal)
Female genital mutilation (FGM) or female circumcision is a cultural practice explicable 
either as a rite of passage or institutionalised cruelty. Those differences in description can 
be cast as a debate between ‘cultural relativists’ (often social scientists seeking to record 
➨

CHAPTER 7 LAW
294
but not judge cultural practices) and ‘universalists’ (often politicians and lawyers seeking 
to change practices). The following passage was submitted as evidence in the trial; the 
author is a Dr Gruenbaum writing in an anthropology journal. The issue of methodology in 
the human sciences is as much at issue here as the practice of FGM itself.
Such responses [criticising FGM] strike many African women scholars as arrogant, espe-
cially because western culture has its own aesthetically motivated medical disasters such 
as silicone breast implants and useless cosmetic surgeries. The ethnocentric views of 
outsiders fail to recognise the dynamic nature of cultural patterns, imagining ‘the other’ 
perhaps as frozen in time, bound by ‘traditional’ ways of doing things, and as ‘prisoners 
of ritual’ who are not rational makers of their own history. But as Edgerton makes clear in 
his discussion of customs such as Sati in India as well as female circumcision in Africa, 
insiders to such cultures often have widely differing opinions and disagreements about 
them [. . .]. Culture, in fact, is far from static, as the cultural debates now raging in Sudan 
over the issue of female circumcision illustrate.
Section 1
●Is it possible to offer a definition of law which is neither local nor temporary? Is our use 
of the word ‘law’ always dependent upon the context in which it is used?
●Do we have to presume that law has foundations beyond our social and cultural history? 
If we were to deny law any foundation beyond our social and cultural history would this 
challenge the authority of law as independent of politics?
●Is it possible to combine the ideas that ‘law is a system characterised by communication’ and 
‘legal systems are always changing’? Does ‘system’ always presuppose static institutions?
Section 2
●Do trends in the formal characteristics of law evidence progress? For example, does the 
increased quantity of statutory law created in the last century mean that society is bet-
ter – more rationally or more fairly – governed?
●Can a regulatory framework be classed as law? For example, do professional standards 
create legal relationships? Compare realist and positivist responses.
●Is the practice and study of law ahistorical? Does law demand that we ignore the past, 
or does law demand that we treat the past as present?
6HFWLRQ
●Is law a multi-functional tool or do the functions of law, together, serve a single function?
●Does the idea of ‘law’s function’ refer to its institutions or its ideals? Are these separable?
●Is using law in a just way reducible to law being reasonable? Does reasonable always 
mean rational?
4XHVWLRQV
www.ebook3000.com

CONCEPTS AND METHODS: KNOWLEDGE
Concepts and methods: Knowledge
Knowledge and belief
What we know and what we believe can be demonstrated to be different things. We 
know that we exist (we have to exist in order to know anything). But we can only be-
lieve that, for example, the last train leaves at midnight. Our memory might be faulty 
or the last train may get cancelled. Much philosophical effort has been expended 
considering the relationship between knowledge and belief. Some of it considering 
the reliability of the senses and the human mind, much of it turning on the words 
‘knowledge’ and ‘belief’ themselves.
The relationship between knowledge, belief and law has its own, complex, his-
tory. Law rarely aspires to absolutely certain knowledge. Rather, different levels of 
certainty (‘proof’) are appropriate in different contexts. In most jurisdictions we find 
a different standard of proof for different areas of law. Certainty in criminal cases is 
much more important – because liberty is at stake – but nonetheless, this is not cer-
tainty in terms of infallible knowledge, but to a level as high as is humanly possible.
Law is concerned with what beliefs people hold where this is important to deter-
mine their responsibilities (e.g. whether they understood the terms of a contract) or 
their desert (e.g. whether their intention to harm was premeditated). ‘Belief’ generally 
has a narrow meaning in law, isolating a narrow range of expectations within a narrow 
field of activity, e.g. ‘did someone hold belief x during activity y’? Given that beliefs 
are subjective (and therefore defy direct examination), this will often be ascertained 
through their objective actions, or through a ‘reasonable person’ test determining 
what a person would be justified in believing in that context. Unlike philosophy, law 
much more rarely seeks to take a stand on people’s ‘personal beliefs’, i.e. those ideas 
that are personally important to them, but which may not be held by everyone.
 
Appearance and reality
The difference between appearance and reality is the staple division at the heart of 
Western philosophy. By positing a difference between how the world appears to us 
and how it is in reality, we are articulating suspicion (the world is not as it seems) and 
a difference between epistemology and ontology (what we know and what actually 
exists). Simple suspicion is a useful philosophical tool. We should be suspicious of the 
evidence of our senses; there is no guarantee that they are suitable for apprehending 
reality. We should also be suspicious in the sense that we should not settle for simple 
answers to difficult questions. Suspicion about the relationship between epistemol-
ogy and ontology fueled criticisms of transcendent accounts of law’s existence: why 
295

CHAPTER 7 LAW
296
should we believe anything exists beyond our social world? Equally, immanent ac-
counts of law give rise to suspicions about the law’s claim to authority: why should we 
invest authority in something that is only the product of human practices?
Scepticism about ontology itself – enquiry into the underlying structures of real-
ity – does not entail scepticism about knowledge. Appearances themselves can be the 
route to predictable knowledge about the world. As phenomenologists and others 
have argued, appearances can always be mapped, and appearances can be manipu-
lated with the use of our imagination. Imagination is the capacity whereby our intel-
lect can be used to come to judgments (Kant, 1929). Without imagination we could 
not decide which of our appearances should be brought under general rules, and it is 
imagination that allows us to turn appearances into reasons for action and the bases 
of decision-making. In sum, appearances and imagination are – as realists might 
argue – not peripheral to law but central to its need to constitute, justify and regulate.
 
Epistemology and ontology
We have been concerned with knowledge – truth, certainty, justified belief – 
throughout our engagement with critical concepts in law. Knowledge and certainty, 
while crucial, are contested in philosophy and in law. We can seek the absolute and 
unchanging (Plato) or make more modest claims about law being made real in the 
practices of the courts (American realism). The former is a tempting but extravagant 
view of knowledge; the latter is a limited but parsimonious approach to what we 
should aim for when we seek ‘the truth about law’.
This chapter has demanded a better sense of the relationship between episte-
mology and ontology. Ontology – the study of what exists and how it exists – is 
an eminently metaphysical branch of philosophy: it asks what structures underlie 
reality in order to allow things to exist and make them intelligible to us as humans. 
But ontology does not have to be understood as a metaphysical form of enquiry. 
We engage in ontology whenever we ask where something – particularly something 
non-physical – has come from or how it is that something can be said to exist. For 
example, how an institution exists (despite being characterised by people, processes 
and physical spaces), how a nation exists (despite being a conglomerate of disparate 
persons) or an ideology exists (despite being a non-physical system of ideas). These 
things exist in different ways but, nonetheless, exist (see Winch, 1958).
Discussing the ‘ontology of law’ sounds like abstract philosophical enquiry, but it can 
be understood in terms of what needs to be the case for law to exist at all. We can pin-
point where much law comes from, i.e. law-making sovereign bodies, but this is not the 
same asking ‘what must be the case for there to be law at all’? For legal institutions to exist 
there must be both real practices (shared ways of doing things) and ideal standards (agree-
ment on what should or should not be done). For law as a practice to exist there must 
be something that distinguishes legal rules from other rules (namely the conjunction of 
primary and secondary rules). For law as an ideal to exist there must be certain kinds of 
www.ebook3000.com

297
CONCEPTS AND METHODS: KNOWLEDGE
ideas that we share and which retain their meaning through time: that there should be 
good order, that there should be justice in human conduct and human affairs, or simply 
the idea that we have obligations rather than simply having preferences and interests. In 
sum, there must be both real activities and shared ideas for law to exist at all. Therefore, 
how we know law is also a question of what we are trying to know and how it exists.
Foundationalism
The use of the term ‘normativity’, which is relatively uncommon in general legal 
discourse, reflects an effort to consider the fundamental basis of obligations and 
rules. Sometimes appealing to a party’s obligations is not enough: we have to turn 
the origins or justifications of those obligations in order to assess the ‘force’ of the 
obligation. Not only that, normativity can be used to explore the origins of justifica-
tion of legality per se, giving us a language to articulate the fact that law is perceived 
as binding aside from the fact that individual laws are binding. As such, the language 
of normativity allows discussion of ‘foundationalism’.
The term foundationalism has a number of different philosophical meanings, and 
while it is most closely associated with epistemology and the foundations of knowl-
edge (Sartwell, 1992), it is applicable in legal contexts. Rules need a particular founda-
tion or origin in order to be legal rules. Such a foundation might lie in the nature of, or 
relationship between, rules. However, to avoid an infinite regress in this analysis – there 
must be a point at which appeal to other rules ceases – rules must have a foundation 
that is extrinsic to rules, even if this is the authority of a legal constitution.
Note that the foundation of laws or legality may well be something different to a 
constitution or constitutional settlement. The modern preoccupation with constitu-
tions can distract us from the fact that systems of law and law-making long pre-date 
the modern constitutional state. To argue that ‘law’ proper only begins with the con-
stitutional state ignores the historical relationship between social and legal norms 
which pre-date the emergence of the sovereign state in the seventeenth century.
The meaning of foundationalism turns on the philosophical opposition between 
‘foundationalism’ and various forms of ‘constructivism’ (Alexy, 1989). The latter sug-
gests that institutions, processes and ideas that seem to demand foundations are, in 
fact, constructed through human agency and activity. This position is not necessarily 
a sceptical one, it simply denies that foundations are always as necessary – timeless or 
unchanging – as we assume. Note that this opposition is susceptible to deconstruc-
tive challenge (see Chapter 6).
Grammar
Law is a structured phenomenon. It has rules governed by institutions, and 
has institutions structured by constitutive rules of recognition, modification 
and adjudication. Even those systems dismissed as ‘primitive’ have structuring 

CHAPTER 7 LAW
298
principles: expectations about how disputes should be mediated and what kinds 
of remedies are appropriate. Norms and rules give structure to legal institutions 
and legal rules.
One way to stress the ideal – rather than real or concrete – dimensions of the 
structure of law is to say that law has a grammar. That is, law has structuring prin-
ciples that determine what can and cannot be said, or be meaningful, within the 
system. This captures part of what is being expressed in Luhmann’s systems theory. 
It is part of the CLS criticism of law’s ideological dimension (Unger, 1986). It is also 
related to Wittgenstein’s understanding of rules as public practices; our social lives 
have a grammar, a structure, which determines what should and should not be done 
(Wittgenstein, 2001). Like grammar in linguistics, there are systematic rules for deter-
mining what is right or wrong in all of our social systems. However, these rules are 
not written into the fabric of reality, nor are they necessarily explicable in rational, 
formal, terms. The grammar of social life, including legal practices, depends upon 
our witnessing public practices and testing our own actions against public practices.
The term ‘grammar’ is useful to avoid the reification (artificial concretisation) of 
a legal system. A legal system has real, physical, components: people, buildings, rules 
written in books, but these are unified by a structure that is not part of our physical 
world. The structure unifies by providing public rules for rightness and wrongness – 
a grammar – which is not real but nonetheless has real effects.
Many, if not all, of the classic texts in the jurisprudential canon give an account of what law 
is or how questions concerning its definition should be approached. For works more focussed 
on how the definition of law should be approached, Tamanaha (2008) gives a broad func-
tional approach, while Twining (2009) and Walker (2003) contrasting foundational accounts. 
Goodrich (1990) offers a powerful CLS analysis of the formal characteristics of the common 
law; a philosophical overview of other kinds of legal systems can be found Twining (2009). 
The emergence of new networks of governance at a global level is discussed in Likosky (ed.) 
(2002); a more general introduction to law, regulation and networks can be found in Morgan 
and Yeung (2007). The relationship between law and space is analysed by Delaney (2001).
Further reading
Visit www.mylawchamber.co.uk/riley to access tools 
to help you develop and test your knowledge of legal 
philosophy including Podcasts on leading thinkers and 
theories, discussion questions, diagrams showing 
interrelations between concepts, and weblinks
www.ebook3000.com

299
299
Analytical jurisprudence The study of those concepts crucial to understanding law as an 
institution and law as a social practice. The aim of analytical jurisprudence is to achieve con-
ceptual clarity: to distinguish the concept, and the practice, of law from other social practices 
and ideals. Contrasted with normative jurisprudence (see below).
Antonym The opposite of a term. Understanding a concept demands understanding both the 
meanings attributed to the word and how it can be held to be the opposite of something else.
Autonomy To be a ‘law unto oneself’. Autonomy designates the human capacity for rational 
action and decision-making. It can be contrasted with ‘freedom’ which is a more general 
absence of barriers to action and decision-making.
A priori Truths or principles existing prior to knowledge gained through the senses; of par-
ticular concern to rationalists. If there is any knowledge a priori – prior to the information 
received by our senses – it is either of a formal nature (logical or mathematical truths, or the 
existence of a perceving subject) or of a metaphysical nature (the existence of God).
A posteriori Knowledge gained through the senses; the principal concern of empiricists. A
posteriori knowledge is any ‘raw data’ about the world received by a human subject.
Causation A relationship of cause leading to effect. Causation and causality apply at both 
a micro level (e.g. particles) and a macro level (e.g. ‘social forces’). Hume insisted (1975) 
that there is no ‘thing’ or ‘power’ that is ‘causation’ per se. When we label something as the 
cause of an effect, any kind of process or power could be at work. This presents problems 
for any scientific attempt to give a meaning to causation – science presumes, so cannot prove, 
causation – although it remains a useful term of analysis.
Conditions (necessary and sufficient) A condition is that which has to be fulfilled or in place 
for an outcome. Necessary conditions are multiple conditions. A number of causal forces 
may have to be in place in order to bring about an effect; each of these individual causes may 
be needed (necessary) but not sufficient. Sufficient conditions are those causes which are, in 
themselves, enough to bring about an effect.
Consequentialism Any moral theory (including, but not exclusively, utilitarianism) is con-
sequentialist if moral worth or value is determined purely on the outcome of the actions. 
Compare deontology.
De facto / de jure De facto refers to the fact that power has been exercised (often the power to 
make a decision); de jure identifies the fact that power has been exercised lawfully. The dif-
ference between the two depends upon one’s philosophical starting-point: positivists point 
to sources, natural lawyers to external validation, and critical legal studies would deny that 
there is any stable division at all.
Glossary of philosophical terms

GLOSSARY OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS
300
Deontology Claims concerning duties. Deontological theories of morality are concerned with 
identifying obligatory or prohibited actions without reference to the consequences of actions, 
often on the basis of what can be made universal.
Determinism The belief that everything is the product of causation, including human action.
Empirical Generally meaning discovered or verified by the senses, empirical is often used to 
mean anything discovered by scientific investigation.
Empiricism The claim that everything that can be considered knowledge can be traced to the 
immediate evidence of our senses.
Epistemology Theorising about knowledge. Epistemology is generally concerned with 
distinguishing ‘mere belief’ from knowledge. Knowledge is often understood as belief that 
is – additionally – both justified and true.
Foundationalism Claims about the sources, or basic cause, of a phenomenon. Foundationalism 
is needed to show that any set of beliefs, norms, or rules must have a source outside them-
selves (in order to avoid infinite regress in explanation).
Ideology Strictly, any system of ideas. More commonly, a system of ideas that seeks to gain 
power, or maintain inequality, through misrepresentation of reality or misrepresentation of 
human interests.
Immanent Arising from the immediate human and social world; not depending upon any 
explanation beyond the human and social world.
Imperatives Claims – taking the form ‘ought’ or ‘should’ – which either demand or encour-
age a course of action. In Kant’s terms, hypothetical imperatives encourage adoption of speci-
fied means to ends; categorical imperatives bind unconditionally.
Indeterminacy The characteristic of rules to be either under- and over-inclusive, or fail to 
guide judgment at all. Indeterminacy can be attributed to the nature of legal judgment, the 
structuring of facts in legal contexts, or uncertainty in language itself.
Infinite regress The endless expansion of justifications or explanations. A consequence of 
trying to explain something by positing a prior explanation that itself needs explanation.
Metaphysics Literally ‘after nature’, this is the field of philosophical enquiry that looks for 
the first causes, the structure or the fundamental laws of the universe. It can be used more 
broadly to label (and often criticise) claims about the world that are not verifiable through 
scientific means.
Monism Explanation based on a single property, process or substance. In metaphysics it can 
be contrasted with dualism (i.e. there is more than one substance in the world, namely bod-
ies and minds). In ethics it can be contrasted with pluralism (i.e. there are many sources of 
moral obligations rather than one).
Morality A system of norms or ‘mores’ governing individual conduct. Morality is partly dis-
tinguishable from ethics, which centralises character and virtue. However, in modern thought, 
www.ebook3000.com

GLOSSARY OF PHILOSOPHICAL TERMS
301
ethics is associated less with character and virtue and more with universal obligations and 
therefore morality. Arguably distinguishable from law via the positivists’ separation thesis.
Naturalistic fallacy The error of assuming that facts (i.e. what is ‘natural’) directly or auto-
matically give rise to values; a violation of the fact/value distinction.
Normative jurisprudence Analysis of the content laws and legal systems should have, or the 
functions a legal system should serve. Often involving the denial of a distinction between 
legal, political and moral philosophy.
Ontology Discussion of being. That is, how things can be said to exist; what conditions make 
it possible for something to exist.
Phenomenology The science of appearances. Taking its inspiration from the work of Descartes 
and Kant, phenomenology grants that certain kinds of knowledge are unobtainable (namely 
pure, objective, insight into the workings of nature). Nonetheless, the presentation of reality 
to human subjects can be carefully analysed and yield truths about how reality is structured 
for that perceiving subject.
Proposition An assertion, in language, of a fact or relationship between facts. Propositions 
are similar to, but distinguishable from, a sentence. A sentence is an utterance or assertion 
whose meaning can be context-specific. The statement of fact, or relation of ideas, expressed 
by a proposition should not be context-specific.
Rationalism The claim that for anything to be considered knowledge it must have arisen from 
or be validated by the mind.
Reason Used as a noun, reason is an idealisation and generalisation of the human capac-
ity for thought. As a generalisation, reason denotes the rational capacities possessed by all 
humans. As an idealisation, it suggests that human reasoning – wherever it is found, and if 
stripped of error – allows insight into the functioning of the world and the functioning of 
reasoning itself. 
Reification Illegitimately treating something ideal (mental) as real (empirical or concrete).
Scepticism Denial of the reliability of human knowledge; denial of the capacity for human 
thinking to gain insight beyond what is immediately known to the senses.
Teleology Discussion of ends or goals. In a general sense it denotes the pursuit of goals. In 
a metaphysical sense it denotes the claim that entities, including humans, have a predeter-
mined form of completion or fulfilment.
Transcendent Beyond the knowledge of the senses but potentially accessible through reason.
Verificationism An epistemology associated with logical positivism. Broadly, it suggests that 
the title ‘knowledge’ can only be attributed to facts gained through verified, or verifiable, ob-
servation. Strictly, it is the claim that propositions only have meaning if they can be associated 
with a method of verification or falsification.

302
Bibliography
Alexy, R. (1989) A Theory of Legal 
Argumentation, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Alexy, R. (2004) ‘The Nature of Legal 
Philosophy’ Ratio Juris 17 (2) pp. 156–67.
Alldridge, P. and Brants, C. (eds) (2001) 
Personal Autonomy, the Private Sphere and the 
Criminal Law: A comparative study, Oxford: 
Hart Publishing.
Allott, P. (1990) Eunomia, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Aquinas (2002) On Law, Morality, and Politics,
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing.
Arendt, H. (1970) On Violence, Orlando, FL: 
Harcourt Books.
Arendt, H. (1998) The Human Condition,
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Aristotle (1987) A New Aristotle Reader,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arrigo, B.A. (2003) ‘Justice and the deconstruc-
tion of psychological jurisprudence: The 
case of competency to stand trial’ Theoretical 
Criminology 7 (1) pp. 55–88.
Augustine (1963) St. Augustine’s City of God,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Austin, J. (1995) The Province of Jurisprudence 
Determined, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Averroës (1998) ‘On the harmony of religions 
and philosophy’. Available at: www.muslim-
philosophy.com/ir/art/ir100.htm. Accessed 30 
January 2012.
Ayer, A.J. (1970) Language, Truth and Logic,
London: Victor Gollancz.
Baggini, J. and Fosl, P.S. (2007) The Ethics Toolkit: 
A compendium of ethical concepts and methods,
Chichester: John, Wiley and Sons, Ltd.
Baggini, J. and Fosl, P.S. (2010) The
Philosopher’s Toolkit: A compendium of 
philosophical concepts and methods (2nd edn), 
London: Wiley-Blackwell.
Barnes, J. (1987) Early Greek Philosophy,
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Barnes, J. (ed.) (1995) The Cambridge 
Companion to Aristotle, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Bayles, M. (1986) ‘Principles for legal proce-
dure’ Law and Philosophy 5 (1) pp. 33–57.
Benjamin, W. (1979) One Way Street, London: 
Verso.
Bentham, J. (2007) An Introduction to the 
Principles of Morals and Legislation, Mineola, 
NY: Dover Publications.
Berger, A. (1953) ‘Encyclopaedic Dictionary 
of Roman Law’ Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society 43 (2) pp. 333–809.
Berman, H.J. (1977) ‘The origins of Western 
legal science’ Harvard Law Review 90 (5) 
pp. 894–943.
Bix, B.H. (2004) A Dictionary of Legal 
Philosophy, New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Blackburn, S. (2006) Plato’s Republic: A 
Biography, London: Atlantic Books.
Blank, Y. (2011) ‘The reenchantment of law’ 
Cornell Law Review 96 (4) pp. 633–670.
Bloch, E. (1986) Natural Law and Human 
Dignity, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bobbio, N. and Zolo, D. (1998) ‘Hans Kelsen, 
the theory of law and the international 
legal system: A talk’ European Journal of 
International Law 9 (2) pp. 355–67.
Bridgeman, J. and Millns, S. (1998) Feminist 
Perspectives on Law: Law’s engagement with the 
female body, London: Sweet & Maxwell.
Cain, P. (2010) The Hart-Fuller Debate in 
the Twenty-First Century, Oxford: Hart 
Publishing.
www.ebook3000.com

BIBLIOGRAPHY
303
Campbell, T. (1999) Legal Positivism, Aldershot: 
Ashgate.
Campbell, T. (2001) Justice, Basingstoke: 
Macmillan.
Carey, C. (2012) Trials from Ancient Athens
(2nd edn), Devon: Routledge.
Caudill, D.S. and Gold, S.J. (1995) Radical 
Philosophy of Law: Contemporary challenges to 
mainstream legal theory and practice, Atlantic 
Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press.
Chloros, A.G. (1958) ‘What is natural law?’ 
The Modern Law Review 21 (6) pp. 609–22.
Cicero (1998) The Republic and The Laws,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cicero (2008) On Obligations, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Clarke, M. (1976) ‘Durkheim’s sociology of 
law’ British Journal of Law and Society 3 (2) 
pp. 246–55.
Cleveland Metro (2011) ‘Identifying photo-
copy machine poses, problem for Cuyahoga 
County Official’, http://blog.cleveland.com/
metro/2011/03/identifying–photocopy–
machine.html (accessed 8 July 2012).
Cole, D.H. (2001) ‘An unqualified human 
good: E.P. Thompson and the rule of 
law’ Journal of Law and Society 28 (2) 
pp. 177–203.
Copleston, F. (2003) A History of Philosophy 
Volume 3: Late Medieval and Renaissance 
Philosophy, Cornwall: Continuum Books.
Coval, S.C. and Smith, J.C. (1982) ‘Rights, 
goals, and hard cases’ Law and Philosophy
1 (3) pp. 451–80.
Coyle, S. and Morrow, K. (2004) The
Philosophical Foundations of Environmental 
Law: Property, Rights and Nature, Oxford: Hart 
Publishing.
Davies, T. (1997) Humanism, London: 
Routledge.
Dawson, G. (1981) ‘Justified true belief is 
knowledge’ The Philosophical Quarterly 31
(125) pp. 315–29.
Dayan, C. (2011) The Law is a White Dog: 
How legal rituals make and unmake persons,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
De Beauvoir, S. (1963) Nature of the Second 
Sex, Surrey: New English Library.
De Beauvoir, S. (1988) The Second Sex, London: 
Picador.
Delacroix, S. (2005) ‘Schmitt’s critique of 
Kelsenian normativism’ Ratio Juris 18 (1) 
pp. 30–45.
Delacroix, S. (2006) Legal Norms and 
Normativity: An essay in genealogy, Oxford: 
Hart Publishing.
Delaney, D. (2001) ‘Making nature/marking 
humans: Law as a site of (cultural) produc-
tion’ Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers 91 (3) pp. 487–503.
Del Mar, M. (2007) ‘Legal norms and norma-
tivity’ Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 27 (2) 
pp. 355–72.
Del Mar, M. (ed.) (2011) New Waves in 
Philosophy of Law, Croydon: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
D’Entreves, A.P. (1957) Natural Law: An 
introduction to legal philosophy, London: 
Hutchinson University Library.
Derrida, J. (1990) ‘Force of law: The mystical 
foundation of authority’ Cardozo Law Review
11 pp. 919–1045.
Descartes, R. (1968) Discourse on Method 
and the Meditations, Harmondsworth: 
Penguin Books.
Dickens, C. (1971) Bleak House,
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Dickens, C. (2003) A Tale of Two Cities,
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Dillon, J. and Gergel, T. (2003) The Greek 
Sophists, London: Penguin Books.
Douzinas, C. and Gearey, A. (2005) Critical
Jurisprudence: The political philosophy of justice,
Oxford: Hart Publishing.
Dworkin, R. (1975) ‘Hard cases’ Harvard Law 
Review 88 (6) pp. 1057–109.
Dworkin, R. (1977) Taking Rights Seriously,
London: Duckworth.
Dworkin, R. (ed.) (1977) The Philosophy of 
Law, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dworkin, R. (1998) Law’s Empire, Oxford: Hart 
Publishing.
Easton, L.D. (1961) ‘Alienation and history 
in the early Marx’ Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 22 (2) 
pp. 193–205.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
304
Eberle, E.J. (2002) Dignity and Liberty: 
Constitutional visions in Germany and the 
United States, Westport, CT: Praeger Press.
Fernandez, J. (2009) ‘An exploration of the 
meaning of truth in philosophy and law’ 
The University of Notre Dame Australia Law 
Review 11 pp. 53–83.
Fine, R. (2001) Political Investigations: Hegel, 
Marx, Arendt, London: Routledge.
Finnis, J. (2011) Natural Law and Natural Rights
(2nd edn), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fish, S. (1988) ‘Force’ Washington and Lee Law 
Review 45 (3) pp. 883–954.
Flew, A. (ed.) (1979) A Dictionary of Philosophy,
London: Pan Books.
Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish: The 
birth of the prison, Harmondsworth: Penguin 
Books.
Foucault, M. (2002) The Order of Things,
London: Routledge.
Frank, J. (2009) Law and the Modern Mind,
New Jersey: Transaction Press.
Freeman, M.D.A. (2001) Lloyd’s Introduction 
to Jurisprudence (7th edn), London: Sweet & 
Maxwell.
Freud, S. (1938) Totem and Taboo,
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Fuller, L.L. (1969) The Morality of Law, New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Gerry, K. (2011) ‘On the nature of law: 
Philosophical anarchism and the function 
of law’. Available at: http://ssrn.com/ab-
stract=1937437. Accessed 23 February 2012.
Gilmore, G. (1961) ‘Legal realism: Its cause 
and cure’ Yale Law Journal 70 (7) 
pp. 1037–48.
Glover, J. (2001) Humanity: A moral history of 
the twentieth century, London: Pimlico.
Goode, R., Kronke, H., McKendrick, E. (2007) 
Transnational Commercial Law: Text, cases and 
materials, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goodin, R.E. (2010) ‘An epistemic case for 
legal moralism’ Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
30 (4) pp. 615–33.
Goodrich, P. (1990) Languages of Law: From 
logics of memory to nomadic masks, London, 
Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Gray, J. (1996) Mill on Liberty: A defence,
London: Routledge.
Hacker, P.M.S. (1997) The Great Philosophers: 
Wittgenstein, London: Weidenfeld & Nicholson.
Hamilton, A. (2012) ‘The Federalist No. 78: 
Saturday, June 14, 1788’. Available at: http://
www.constitution.org/fed/federa78.htm. 
Accessed 27 February 2012.
Hampson, N. (1968) The Enlightenment,
Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Hart, H.L.A. (1994) The Concept of Law (2nd 
edn), Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hegel, G.W.F (2008) Outlines of the Philosophy 
of Right, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hendrickson, N. (2008) The Rowman and 
Littlefield Handbook for Critical Thinking,
Plymouth: Rowman & Littlefield.
Hobbes, T. (1996) Leviathan, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Hoeflich, M.H. (1986) ‘Law & geometry: 
Legal science from Leibniz to Langdell’ The
American Journal of Legal History 30 (2) 
pp. 95–121.
Hogg, J.E. (1908) ‘French and English land 
law’ Journal of the Society of Comparative 
Legislation 9 (1) pp. 64–8.
Hohfeld, W.N. (1913) ‘Some fundamental 
legal conceptions as applied in judicial 
reasoning’ The Yale Law Journal 23 (16) 
pp. 16–59.
Holmes, O.W. (1897) ‘The path of the law’ 
Harvard Law Review 10 pp. 457–78.
Honneth, A. (1995) The Struggle for 
Recognition: The Moral Grammar of Social 
Conflicts, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Human Rights in China (2010) ‘Sichuan 
activist sentenced to five years for ‘Inciting 
subversion of state power’‘. Available at: 
http://www.hrichina.org/content/377. 
Accessed 26 February 2012.
Hume, D. (1975) Enquiries Concerning Human 
Understanding and Concerning the Principles of 
Morals, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Humm, M. (1992) Feminisms: A Reader,
London: Longmans.
Hunt, A. (1986) ‘The theory of critical legal 
studies’ Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 6 (1) 
pp. 1–45.
www.ebook3000.com

BIBLIOGRAPHY
305
Hunt, A. (1987) ‘The critique of law: What is 
‘critical’ about critical legal theory?’ Journal of 
Law and Society 14 (1) pp. 5–19.
Hunt, L. (2007) Inventing Human Rights: A his-
tory, New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Husik, I. (1909) ‘Averroës on the metaphysics 
of Aristotle’ Philosophical Review 18 (4) 
pp. 416–28.
Husserl, G. (1937) ‘Justice’ International Journal 
of Ethics 47 (3) pp. 271–307.
Hutchinson, A.C. (1995) ‘A postmodern’s 
Hart: Taking rules sceptically’ The Modern Law 
Review 58 (6) pp. 788–819.
Ingersoll, D.E. (1966) ‘Karl Llewellyn, 
American legal realism, and contemporary 
legal behavioralism’ Ethics 76 (4) pp. 253–66.
Kafka, F. (1994) The Trial, Harmondsworth: 
Penguin Books.
Kant, I. (1929) The Critique of Pure Reason,
London: Macmillan Press.
Kant, I. (1948) The Moral Law, London: 
Hutchinson University Library.
Kant, I. (1991) Political Writings, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Kant, I. (1996) The Metaphysics of Morals,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Katz, L. (2011) Why the Law is so Perverse,
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kelley, D.R. (1990) The Human Measure: 
Social thought in the Western legal tradition,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kelsen, H. (2005) General Theory of Law and 
State, London / New Jersey: Transaction Press.
Korsgaard, C. (1996) The Sources of Normativity,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kramer, M.H. (1999) In Defense of Legal 
Positivism: Law without trimmings, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Kruks, S. (2005) ‘Beauvoir’s time/our time: The 
renaissance in Simone De Beauvoir studies’ 
Feminist Studies 31 (2) pp. 286–309.
Landers, S. (1990) ‘Wittgenstein, realism, and 
CLS: Undermining rule scepticism’ Law and 
Philosophy 9 (2) pp. 177–203.
Laughland, J. (2008) A History of Political Trials: 
From Charles I to Saddam Hussein, Oxford: 
Peter Lang.
Lee, R.W. (2007) The Elements of Roman Law
(4th edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell.
Lester, A. (1976) ‘Fundamental rights in the 
United Kingdom: The law and the British 
constitution’ University of Pennsylvania Law 
Review 125 (2) pp. 337–63.
Likosky, M. (ed.) (2002) Transnational Legal 
Processes, London: Butterworths.
Lloyd, G.E.R. (2009) Disciplines in the Making: 
Cross-cultural perspectives on elites, learning, 
and innovation, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Locke, J. (1960) Two Treatises of Government,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Locke, J. (1975) An Essay Concerning Human 
Understanding, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Luban, D. (1986) ‘Legal modernism’ Michigan
Law Review 84 (8) pp. 1656–95.
Luban, D. (1989) ‘Difference made legal: The 
Court and Dr. King’ Michigan Law Review 87
(8) pp. 2152–224.
Lucy, W. (2009) ‘Abstraction and the rule of 
law’ Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 29 (3) 
pp. 481–509.
Luhmann, N. (1998) ‘The third question: The 
creative use of paradoxes in law and legal 
history’ Journal of Law and Society 15 (2) 
pp. 153–65.
Luker, K. (1998) ‘Sex, social hygiene, and 
the state: The double-edged sword of 
social reform’ Theory and Society 27 (5) 
pp. 601–34.
MacCormick, N. (1988) ‘Norms, institutions, 
and institutional facts’ Law and Philosophy
17 (3) pp. 301–45.
MacCormick, N. (2007) Institutions of Law: 
An essay in legal theory, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Maine, H. (1931) Ancient Law: Its connection 
with the early history of society and its relation to 
modern ideas, London: Murray.
Marmor, A. (2004) ‘The rule of law and its 
limits’ Law and Philosophy 23 (1) pp. 1–43.
Marx, K. (2000) Karl Marx: Selected writings
(ed. McLellan), Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Mill, J.S. (1991) On Liberty and Other Essays:
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
306
Monroe, K., Martin, A. and Ghosh, P. (2009) 
‘Politics and an innate moral sense: Scientific 
evidence for an old theory?’ Political Research 
Quarterly 62 (3) pp. 614–34.
Moore, G.E. (1959) Principia Ethica,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moran, D. (2000) Introduction to 
Phenomenology, London: Routledge.
Morgan, B. and Yeung K. (2007) An
Introduction to Law and Regulation: Texts and 
materials, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Morrison, W. (1997) Jurisprudence: From the 
Greeks to postmodernism, London: Cavendish 
Publishing.
Murdoch, I. (1970) The Sovereignty of the Good,
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Nietzsche, F. (1998) On the Genealogy of 
Morality, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishing 
Company.
Nozick, R. (1974) Anarchy, State, and Utopia,
London: Blackwell.
Nussbaum, M. (1986) The Fragility of 
Goodness: Luck and ethics in Greek tragedy and 
philosophy, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Nussbaum, M. (1997) ‘Kant and stoic cosmo-
politanism’ Journal of Political Philosophy 5 (1) 
pp. 1–25.
Nussbaum, M. (2000) Women and Human 
Development: The capabilities approach,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ohlin, J.D. (2002) ‘Is the concept of the per-
son necessary for human rights?’ Columbia
Law Review 105 (1) pp. 209–49.
Oldfield, K. (2003) ‘Social class and public 
administration: A closed question opens’ 
Administration & Society 35 (4) pp. 438–61.
Paine, T. (1969) Rights of Man, London: 
Pelican Books.
Patterson, D. (ed.) (1996) A Companion to 
Philosophy of Law and Legal Theory, Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing.
Philippopoulos-Mihalopoulos, A. (2010) 
Niklas Luhmann: Law, Justice, Society, London: 
Routledge.
Plato (1997) Complete Works, Indianapolis, IN: 
Hackett Publishing Company.
Posner, E.A. (2002) Law and Social Norms,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Price, D.A. (1989) ‘Taking rights cynically: A 
review of critical legal studies’ Cambridge Law 
Journal 48 (2) pp. 271–301.
Quinton, A. (ed.) (1967) Political Philosophy,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Radbruch, G. (2006) ‘Five minutes of legal 
philosophy’ Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
26 (1) pp. 13–15.
Rawls, J. (1999) A Theory of Justice (Rev. edn), 
Cambridge, MA: Belknap.
Raz, J. (ed.) (1978) Practical Reasoning, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Raz, J. (1994) Ethics in the Public Domain: 
Essays in the morality of law and politics,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Raz, J. (2009) The Authority of Law (2nd edn), 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Roach Anleu, S.L. (1992) ‘Critiquing the law: 
Themes and dilemmas in Anglo-American 
feminist legal theory’ Journal of Law and 
Society 19 (4) pp. 423–40.
Rosati, C.S. (2004) ‘Some puzzles about the 
objectivity of law’ Law and Philosophy 23 (3) 
pp. 273–323.
Ross, A. (2004) On Law and Justice, Clark, NJ: 
Lawbook Exchange.
Rousseau, J.-J. (1968) The Social Contract (trans. 
Cranston), Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.
Rucker, D. (1966) ‘The moral grounds of civil 
disobedience’ Ethics 76 (2) pp. 142–5.
Sadurski, W. (1988) ‘The right, the good and 
the jurisprude’ Law and Philosophy 7 (1) 
pp. 35–66.
Said, E.W. (1978) Orientalism, London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Sanders, T.C. (1962) The Institutes of Justinian
(7th edn), London: Longmans.
Sartre, J.-P. (2007) Existentialism is a Humanism,
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Sartwell, C. (1992) ‘Why knowledge is merely 
true belief’ The Journal of Philosophy 89 (4) 
pp. 167–80.
Schauer, F. (1991) Playing by the Rules: A philo-
sophical examination of rule-based decision-
making in law and in life, Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
www.ebook3000.com

BIBLIOGRAPHY
307
Schmitt, C. (2006) Political Theology, Chicago, 
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Sen, A. (1999) Development as Freedom, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Shklar, J. (1986) Legalism: Law, morals and polit-
ical trials, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Simmonds, N. (2007) Law as a Moral Idea,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Simmonds, N. (2008) Central Issues in 
Jurisprudence: Justice, law and rights, London: 
Sweet & Maxwell.
Skorupski, J. (1993) English-Language Philosophy 
1750–1945, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smart, J.J.C. and Williams, B. (1973) 
Utilitarianism: For and Against, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Solomon, R.C. (1988) Continental Philosophy 
Since 1750: The rise and fall of the self, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Solum, L. (2011) ‘Legal theory blog’. Available 
at http://lsolum.typepad.com/legaltheory/. 
Accessed 26 February 2012.
Sophocles (1984) The Three Theban Plays: 
Antigone, Oedipus the King, Oedipus as Colonus,
Harmondswort: Penguin Books.
Spaak, T. (2011) ‘Karl Olivecrona’s legal phi-
losophy: A critical appraisal’ Ratio Juris 24 (2) 
pp. 156–93.
Spragens, T.A. (1993) ‘The antinomies of 
social justice’ The Review of Politics 55 (2) 
pp. 193–216.
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (2011) 
Available at: http://plato.stanford.edu/. 
Accessed 26 February 2012.
Steinberg, S.H. (1966) The ‘Thirty Years War’ 
and the Conflict for European Hegemony 1600–
1660, London: Edward Arnold.
Stolleis, M. (2009) The Eye of the Law: Two essays 
on legal history, London: Birkbeck Law Press.
Sun Tzu (1994) The Art of War (trans. Giles), 
Project Gutenberg. Available at: http://www.
gutenberg.org/files/132/132.txt. Accessed 13 
February 2012.
Tamanaha, B. (2008) ‘Law’ (St. John’s Legal 
Studies Research Paper No. 08–0095). 
Available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1082436. 
Accessed 10 January 2012.
Tamanaha, B. (2010) Beyond the Formalist-
Realist Divide: The role of politics in judging,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Tapp, J. and Levine F. (1974) ‘Legal socializa-
tion: Strategies for an ethical legality’ Stanford 
Law Review 27 (1) pp. 1–72.
Taylor, C. (1992) Sources of the Self: The making 
of the modern identity, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Teichmann, R. (2002) ‘Explaining the rules’ 
Philosophy 77 (302) pp. 597–613.
Teubner, G. (1997) ‘The king’s many bodies: 
The self-deconstruction of law’s hierarchy’ 
Law and Society Review 31 (4) pp. 763–88.
Thompson, E.P. (1975) Whigs and Hunters: The 
origins of the black act, London: Allen Lane.
Tuck, R. (1999) The Rights of War and Peace: 
Political thought and the international order 
from Grotius to Kant, Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Tur, R.H.S. (1978) ‘What is jurisprudence?’ 
Philosophical Quarterly 28 (111) pp. 149–61.
Tushnet, M. (1991) ‘Critical legal studies: A 
political history’ Yale Law Journal 100 (5) 
pp. 1515–44.
Twining, W. (2009) General Jurisprudence: 
Understanding law from a global perspective,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Twining, W. and Miers, D. (2010) How to do 
Things with Rules: A primer of interpretation,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Unger, R. (1986) The Critical Legal Studies 
Movement, Cambridge, MA / London: 
Harvard University Press.
Walker, N. (ed.) (2003) Sovereignty in 
Transition, Oxford: Hart Publishing.
Weber, M. (1978) Max Weber: Selections in 
Translation, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press.
Weinreb, L.L. (1978) ‘Law as Order’ Harvard 
Law Review 91 (5) pp. 909–59.
West, R. (1998) ‘Toward humanistic theories 
of legal justice’ Cardozo Studies in Law and 
Literature 10 (2) pp. 147–50.
Whitehead, A.N. (1979) Process and Reality,
Doncaster: Free Press.
Wieacker, F. (1990) ‘Foundations of European 
Legal Culture’ American Journal of Comparative 
Law 38 (1) pp. 1–29.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
308
Wilkins, D.B. (1990) ‘Legal realism for lawyers’ 
Harvard Law Review 104 (2) pp. 468–524.
Winch, P. (1958) The Idea of a Social Science 
and its Relation to Philosophy, London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Winthrop, D. (1978) ‘Aristotle and theories of 
justice’ American Political Science Review
72 (4) pp. 1201–16.
Wittgenstein, L. (1974) Tractatus Logico-
Philosophicus, London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Wittgenstein, L. (2001) Philosophical 
Investigations, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Wollstonecraft, M. (1997) Vindication of 
the Rights of Women, Ontario: Broadview 
Press.
www.ebook3000.com

309
309
Note: page numbers in bold refer to glossary 
entries.
a posteriori 169, 299
a priori 169, 227, 299
ad hominem arguments 20–1, 258
adjudication 9, 224, 280
American realism 241
Dworkin 196
Hart 193, 195
means 17–19, 172
see also courts; judgment
adoption proceedings 156
Afghanistan 28
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights 
165–6
Alexy, Robert 34, 248, 297
aliens
rules as commands 176
UK Status of Aliens Act 1914 121
US Alien Torts Claim Act 159
Allott, Philip 273–4
alternative dispute resolution 280
American realism 241, 245–7, 253–4, 257, 296
analytical jurisprudence 132, 189, 262–3, 264, 299
anarchism 75, 205
animals 48, 58, 91, 164, 250, 272
anti-formalism see formalism
anti-foundationalism 221–2
anti-social behaviour 238, 239
Antigone (Sophocles) 60, 268
Antiphon 103
antonyms 48, 133, 257–8, 299
Aquinas, Thomas 33, 106–7, 108, 109
authority of individual laws 207, 209
common good 29
Arab League 274
Arendt, Hannah 53, 122, 249, 251
Aristotle 35–6, 55–6, 66, 86, 96, 148
Aquinas 106
art 260
Averroës 106
equality 37, 65
freedom 73, 74
goal (telos) 57
good 56, 87, 90, 91, 112
human species 56–7, 148
justice 20, 35–6
political animals 57–9
setting down the appearances 44, 81
situated person 59–61, 119
Sophism 103–4
view of virtue 58
virtue ethics 127
women 68, 69
art 197, 198
law and 260–1
The Art of War (Sun Tzu) 104
asylum seekers 28, 33
audi alteram partem (no-one should be condemned 
unheard) 182
Augustine 105–6, 107, 207
Austin, John 83, 186–7, 204, 223
Australia 59
authoritarian government/rule 27, 55, 214–15
authority 109, 260, 276–7, 288
collectives 33–4
disobedience 204–10, 265
of individual laws 209–10
of legal systems 30, 207–9, 243, 244, 265
mediation between spheres of 289
power without 36
rightness of law 134
autonomy 63–5, 161, 264, 288–9, 299
freedom as 77–9, 87
reproductive 70–1
of rules 181
autopoiesis 272–3, 281–2
Averroës 106, 107
axiology 126
Ayer, A.J. 183, 184, 244
balance of probabilities 16
bargaining power 19–20
behaviour/behaviourists 82, 185
Scandinavian realism 243–4, 246
belief and knowledge 295
Index

INDEX
310
Benjamin, Walter 251–2, 253, 254
Bentham, Jeremy 30, 114–15, 276
Bible 68
biologism 250
Bix, B.H. 24, 40, 178, 180, 186, 187, 188, 
204, 242
blasphemy 251
Bloch, Ernst 164, 165
burial rituals 31
Burke, Edmund 276
Canada 54–5, 107
capabilities approach 124–5
caste system 245
categorical imperatives 128, 129, 140, 141, 177, 
191, 214, 218
appearance 279
Catholicism 108
causal necessity 168, 169
causation 73, 136–7, 299
certainty 172, 174, 267, 296
rightness of law 134, 135
subjective state of mind 82
see also uncertainty
Charles I 63
China 99–100, 271
Chloros, A.G. 102
Christianity 68, 96, 251
Golden Rule 105, 140
just and unjust laws 206–7
natural law 105–7, 207
Cicero 10, 28, 33, 68, 102, 104, 106, 112, 160
Civil Code: France 192
civil disobedience see disobedience
claim-rights 154, 156, 162
class 58, 144, 235, 254, 259, 283
classification 259, 264, 274, 291–2
deconstruction 258
of facts 181
of norms 225–6
objective and subjective see separate entry
climate change 123
collectives 8, 24–5, 28–9
authority 33–4
common good 29–31, 39, 41
rule of law 31–3, 39
colonialism 108, 120
command theory of law 175, 177, 209, 221, 234, 
248, 288
Austin 186–7
Hart: criticism of 189–90, 194
international law 224
common good 9, 25, 29–31, 107, 109, 116, 
209, 223
good governance 36
law and politics 286
pragmatism 41
realism 247
scepticism 39
Socrates 206
common law 176–7, 179, 180, 187, 190, 191
judgments 12, 260
realism 242
reasonableness 153
communitarianism 29–30, 164, 165
community 28–9, 58, 59, 237, 273–4
see also collectives
Comte, Auguste 183
concepts and methods
concepts distinguished from ideas 81
critique 256–61
ideas and ideology 81–4
knowledge 295–8
logic 167–70
rules and exceptions 212–15
theorising 44–6
values 126–9
conceptual parsimony 169–70, 284
conceptual scepticism 40, 189
conditions (necessary and sufficient) 137, 
168–9, 299
consent: rule of law 32
consequentialism 88–9, 114, 117, 118, 299
see also utilitarianism
constitution 34, 36, 74, 93, 137, 161, 286, 
297
constitutive rules 177, 210
Cuba 235–6
cultural context 276
freedom of speech 138
Hart: rule of recognition 193–4
historical materialism 235
Hohfeld 155–6
human dignity 141
international 273–4
Israel 231–2
judicial review 95–6
Kant 141
limits: social and economic rights 157–8
meta-theory for law 39
national security 143
property rights 119
scepticism 42
unchanging 101
www.ebook3000.com

INDEX
311
unwritten 155
Weimar Republic 228
constitutive rules 285, 297
regulative and 177–8, 209–10
constructivism 258, 297
contingent
deconstruction 258
distinguish necessary from 168
legal positivism: relationship between law and 
morality 188, 266
link between law and justice 9
practices of legal institutions 242
contract 109, 165, 206
Hobbes 146–9
Nietzsche 249, 250
Rawls 38, 151–3
Rousseau 269–70
contract law 47, 82, 146, 229, 284, 295
contracts for services 178
French Civil Code 192
from status to 234
historical materialism 235
imbalances of bargaining power 19–20
contract of marriage 232
corporations 79, 280, 281
cosmopolitanism 62, 67, 277
courts 3, 9, 10, 11, 176, 212, 222, 232, 233
conflicting scientific evidence 53
critical legal studies (CLS) 255
descriptive norms 218
expert evidence 53, 184
hard cases 196, 247, 263, 272, 291–2
impartiality 19–21
judicial review 95–6, 153, 181–2
legal writing 260–1
means: adjudication 17–19, 172
realism 241–3, 244–7, 296
rhetoric 3, 260
right answers 131
see also adjudication; judgment
crime(s)
against humanity 54–5
formation of human societies 234
of state aggression 278
war 229–30
criminal law 58, 82, 141, 284
anti-social behaviour 238, 239
China 271
consensual sado-masochistic sex 113
constitutive rules 178
criminals 205, 237, 293
dishonesty 240
expense 24, 27
fair trial: Art 6 ECHR 26–7, 135
freedom as rationality 76–7
impartiality 20, 21
legal writing 261
legalism 32
moral welfare of state 196
normativity and 237
prison/prisoners 64–5, 181–2, 237
recognition to convicted 27
right answers 136
standard of proof 16, 131, 295
status and rights of suspects 27
theft 240
critical concepts 1–2
critical legal studies (CLS) 4, 40, 253–5, 257, 
260, 298
Kafka 279–80
law and politics 286
critical theory 254, 258
critique 256–7
ad hominem arguments 20–1, 258
deconstruction 258, 297
genealogical analysis 257–8
interdisciplinarity and interstitial 259
Cuba 235–6
cultural relativism 163, 293–4
customary law 187, 190, 191
international 231
De Beauvoir, Simone 67–8, 71
de facto/de jure power 288, 299–300
Hobbes 147, 148–9
rules and ruling 214
death: burial rituals 31
deconstruction 258, 297
defamation 214
defeasibility 178, 213, 217, 218, 279
norms 225
democracy 94, 116, 141, 192, 225
Ancient cultures 160
deontology 109, 175, 223, 225, 300
Derrida, Jacques 252, 253, 267, 285, 288
Descartes, René 45
descriptive universality 167, 168
desert 13–15, 65, 295
development
capabilities approach 124–5
Devlin, Patrick 195
dialectics 282–3
Dickens, Charles 255, 281
dignity 66, 141

INDEX
312
discrimination 66, 72, 163, 253, 284
caste system 245
emergency powers 143
see also equality
disobedience 204–5
authority of individual laws 209–10
authority of legal systems 207–9, 265
Socratic paradox 205–7
divine authority 33
drug-taking 150
dualism 231
Durkheim, Emile 236, 237
Dworkin, Ronald 4, 9, 24, 26, 29, 93, 137, 158, 
181, 195
equality 37, 66
hard cases 196, 263, 272
interpretive approach 212
rights as trumps 156–8
‘semantic sting’ 263
dystopia 99
economics and law 238–40, 276
education 159
emergency powers 143, 210, 231–2
emotional intelligence 260
emotivism 185, 241
empiricism 183–4, 227, 300
rationalism and 45
ends of law 8, 11, 39, 40, 128, 262, 285
desert 13–15
judgment 12–13, 172
political context 35
realism 247
truth 15–17
England 63, 176, 244, 254
Enlightenment 62, 63, 71, 86, 160–1, 163, 
276, 292
environmental law 121–3, 185–6, 240, 291
environmentalism 81, 95, 122
epistemology 295–7, 300
epistemic pluralism 81, 163–4
equality 9, 67, 151, 160–1, 259, 286
Ancient cultures 160
critical legal studies (CLS) 254
Enlightenment 160–1
external morality of law 207
historical materialism 235
human rights 162–3
humanism: fraternity and 65–6
liberal states and rules 215
means 21–3
meta-theory 37, 39
Rawls 38, 152
Renaissance humanism 62
rule of law 214, 277
utilitarianism 114, 116, 117, 215
see also discrimination; feminism
equitable remedies 213
essentialism 270
eunomia 273
European Convention on Human Rights 116
Art 6: fair trial 26–7, 135
Art 8: private and family life 57
Art 10: freedom of expression 222
Art 12: right to marry 65
European Court of Human Rights 64–5, 135, 222 
European Social Charter 92–3
European Union 30, 39, 75, 273, 291
European Court of Justice 66
evil 89, 96, 97, 106, 257
exceptions to legal rules 213
exchange value 127
Existentialism 64, 68, 74
expert evidence 53, 184, 185–6, 254
fact scepticism 45, 246
facts
classification of 181
picture theory of language 197–9
realism 241, 246
selection of 233
facts and values 5, 49–51, 59, 78–9, 91, 127–8, 285
humanity and human nature 54–5
humans and persons 48–9, 51–2
necessity 168, 169
norms 217
positivism 183, 187
science and facts 52–3
failed states 36
fairness 10
adjudication 18–19, 196
common good 29, 31
ECHR: Art 6 26–7
legal positivism 188
meta-theory 37–8, 39
Rawls 38, 146–7, 151–3
rule of law 31
state 142, 144
family law 47
female genital mutilation (FGM) 293–4
feminism 66–7, 74, 79, 250, 289
identity politics 71–2
nature as ideology 69–71
second sex 67–9
www.ebook3000.com

INDEX
313
Finnis, John 57, 83, 88, 92, 94, 109–10, 112
authority of individual laws 209
common good 25, 30, 263–4, 286
critique of utilitarianism 113, 115
ideal type 263–4
law’s self-ordering 272
positivism 223
practical reasoning 128, 263–4
social change 287
floodgate problem 24
force majeure 253
force and power 55, 248–9
critical legal studies see separate entry
force of law 251–3
norms and repression 249–51
use of violence 237, 248–9, 251–3, 277
formalism and anti-formalism 233, 283
critical legal studies (CLS) 254
realism 242, 245
rules 179–82, 195–6
forms of law 264, 274–5
atemporal and atopic 278–81
diachronic 281–4
historical and territorial 275–8
Foucault, Michel 236, 237, 238, 276, 293
foundationalism 258, 297, 300
anti- 221–2
foundations of law 264–7
immanent 265, 266–7, 268–71, 273, 
279, 300
self-subsisting 265, 267, 271–4
transcendent 265, 266–8, 269, 273, 301
France 63, 64, 161, 192, 269
France, Anatole 22
Frank, Jerome 222, 224, 242, 246, 254
fraternity 67
humanism: equality and 65–6
free market 118, 159
freedom 55, 72–3, 92, 94
as autonomy 77–9, 87
Hegel: right made social 142–3
of information 214
Kant: right as duty 140–1
as liberty 73–5, 87
meta-theory 38–9
Nozick: rights as constraints 38, 158, 159
obedience 208, 210
as rationality 75–7
right and good 133
Rousseau: loss of 269
of speech/expression 138, 222
state as provider of 139
Freud, Sigmund 68, 233–4, 241
Fuller, L.L. 29, 40, 102, 109, 290
procedural naturalism 207–8, 214
functions of law 264, 279, 284–5
constitute 285–7
justify 279, 290–4
regulate 287–90
funeral picketing 138
GATT (General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs) 
283–4
gender 28, 259, 293
legal profession 41
sex and 70, 71, 72
genealogical analysis 257–8
genealogical critique 257
genealogical fallacy 258
Genocide Convention 162
Germany 141, 228
globalisation 277, 280–1
Golden Rule 105, 140
good 4, 5, 55, 56, 86–9, 287
common see separate entry
dynamism 181
the good 89–96
Hart 189–90
hierarchy of goods 91, 93
human 91–3
human rights 160
instrumentally 87, 88–9, 90–1, 94, 114, 124
intrinsically 87–8, 90, 91, 94, 109, 114, 124
Kant 88, 140
life and justice 93–4
Marx 145
Mill 91, 112, 114, 115–16, 150–1
morality of aspiration 207
natural law see separate entry
Nietzsche: genealogy of 257
place and property 119–25
Plato 96–101, 102
Rawls 92, 93, 153
realism 242
right and 131, 132–3, 137, 242
rules and the 173–4
Socrates 206
utilitarianism see separate entry
will to do 140
Goodrich, P. 258, 280
governance, global 281
grammar of law 297–8
Grotius, Hugo 108, 109, 149
Grundnorm 230–2

INDEX
314
Habermas, J. 165
Hagerstrom, Axel 243
Hamilton, Alexander 95–6
happiness 55, 96, 152
harmony and 94–6, 97, 112
hedonism 111–13, 118
see also utilitarianism
hard cases 196, 247, 263, 272, 291–2
hard and soft rules 203
harm principle 150–1, 289
harmony
Averroës 106
happiness and 94–6, 97, 112
of interests: environmental law 122
Marx 235
Plato 95, 97–100, 112
Stoicism 104
Hart, H.L.A. 3, 65, 173, 182, 185, 187, 189–90
concept of law 190–2, 223
conceptual scepticism 189
critics 194–6
disobedience 209
emphasis on facts 188, 189
habitual obedience 189, 191
hard cases 272
ideal type 263, 264
morality 191, 195, 196
natural law 195
norms and normativity 216, 217, 223, 227, 248
objective and internal rules 192, 201
primary and secondary rules 192–4, 195–6, 
263, 275
rule of recognition 193–4, 230
Wittgenstein 189, 197, 201
health 69–79
right to 157–8
services 92–3, 159
hedonism 111–13, 118
see also utilitarianism
Hegel, G.W.F. 133, 137, 138–9, 168, 170, 208, 
273, 277
dialectics 282–3
Marx 144–5, 234, 235
right made social 142–3, 150
history and law 79, 233–6
historical form of law 275–6, 278–80
historical jurisprudence 30, 234, 275–6
Hobbes, Thomas 55, 119, 133, 170, 249
right as contract 146–9
Hohfeld, Wesley 154–6, 162
Holmes, Oliver Wendel 9, 177, 242
human dignity 66, 141
human good 91–3
human nature 54, 127
human rights 128, 129, 137, 159–60, 225, 287
freedom of speech 138, 222
from natural rights to 160–2
liberalism and 163, 164–6
life, right to 157–8, 213, 225
particularity vs universality 162–4
water, right to 145
humanism 30, 61–2, 74, 78–9
fraternity and equality 65–6
humanity and persons 62–4
liberty 63–5
humanitarian law 48, 149, 291
humanity and human nature 54–5
humans and persons 48–9, 51–2
Hume, David 168, 169, 184
Hunt, Lynn 165
Husserl, G. 37
hypothetical imperatives 128, 129, 140, 177, 
205, 224
ICSID (International Centre for Settlement of 
Investment Disputes) 19
ideal types 263–4, 267, 276, 281
idealists/idealism 82, 144, 182, 234–5, 241, 267
ideas 81–2, 173, 183, 296–7
ideology see separate entry
norm: real and ideal 219, 221, 223, 226, 233, 
248–9, 252
origin of 257–8
reflection and self-reflection 83–4
uses of ‘nature’ 82–3
identity politics 71–2
ideology 81–2, 145, 276, 296, 300
critical legal studies (CLS) 254, 298
nature as 69–71, 250
ignorance of the law is no defence 212, 216
immigration 28
immunities: rights 155, 157, 167
impartiality 19–21, 31, 151, 209
imperatives 300
categorical 128, 129, 140, 141, 177, 191, 214, 
218, 279
hypothetical 128, 129, 140, 177, 205, 224
India 185–6, 245
indigenous peoples 59, 108, 119, 120
individualism 59, 164
individuals 8, 23–4, 141, 259
individual’s good 24–5
rights 25–7
status 27–8
www.ebook3000.com

INDEX
315
integrity 141, 157
intellectual property 118
interdisciplinarity 259
International Bar Association 210
International Court of Justice 162, 163–4, 
193, 225
International Covenant on Economic, Social and 
Cultural Rights 23, 145
International Criminal Court 55, 278
International Criminal Tribunal for the former 
Yugoslavia (ICTY) 98
International Labour Organisation 94
international law 108, 121, 128, 174, 273–4, 
277
common good 30
crimes against humanity 54–5
customary norms of 231
force majeure 253
hard and soft rules 203
Hart: rule of recognition 193–4
individual’s good 25
intellectual property 118
Iraq 229–30
jus in bello 149
jus cogens 225–6
monistic relationship with domestic 
law 231
normativity 224–5
public 280
state responsibilities 253
states 178
treaties: general rule of interpretation 194
International Law Commission 253
International Monetary Fund 124
internet 281
interpretation
noscitur a sociis rule 203
statutory 200, 203, 242–3
treaties: general rule of 194
interstitial 259
Iraq 229–30
Islam 96, 106, 107
Israel 231–2
judgment 291
ends 12–13, 172
see also adjudication; courts
judicial review 95–6
prison rules 181–2
Wednesbury reasonableness 153
jus in bello 149
jus cogens 225–6
justice 4, 5, 7–11, 35, 252, 262, 281, 297
Ancient conception of 9, 10, 14–15, 20, 35–6, 
37, 38, 40, 42, 93–4, 99
collectives 8, 24–5, 28–34
critical legal studies (CLS) 254, 255
ends 8, 11–17, 35, 39, 40, 172, 262, 285
external morality of law 207
functions of law and 285, 287
good life and 93–4
individuals 8, 23–8
means 8, 17–23, 35, 39, 40, 172, 262, 285
natural 20, 35, 36, 181–2
philosophy and 35–42
Plato 14–15, 99, 267
Rawls 38, 152–3, 266
realism 247
right, law and 133–4, 137–8
Socratic paradox 205–7
unjust law is not a law 40, 207, 209
Kafka, Franz 279–80
Kant, Immanuel 49, 50, 78, 88, 138–9, 170
art 260
basic structuring principles 275
categorical and hypothetical imperatives 129, 
140, 141, 177
constitutive and regulative rules 177
cosmopolitan theory 277
imagination 296
Kelsen 227
moral law 267, 268
objects and subjects 82
perpetual peace 277
Rawls: right as fairness 152
right as duty 88, 140–1, 145, 161
universality 139, 145, 163, 168, 180, 268, 277
Kantian or transcendental critique 257
Kelsen, H. 137, 214, 221, 223–4, 226, 244, 266
axioms 227
critical project 226–8
disobedience 209
Grundnorm 230–2
imputation 229
pure theory of law 228–30
separation thesis 188, 226, 227
kidnap ransom 88
King, Martin Luther, Jr 206–7
knowledge 265
appearance and reality 295–6
belief and 295
epistemology and ontology 295–7
grammar of law 297–8

INDEX
316
labour value 127
language 257, 260, 270, 273, 279, 280
critical legal studies (CLS): legal 255
deconstruction 258
justice: linguistic scepticism 39–40
meaning as use 199, 263, 270
picture theory of 197–9
Scandinavian realism: legal 241, 243, 269
law 2–3, 4, 5–6, 262–4
dynamism 181, 273, 281–4
forms 264, 274–84
foundations 264–74
functions 264, 284–94
law and social norms 217–19, 228, 232–3, 245, 
247, 288, 297
law and economics 238–40
law and history 233–6
law and sociology 236–8
leadership, political 30
legal positivism 3, 174, 182, 183, 186–9, 219
Benjamin 251–2
disobedience 209–10
exclusive and inclusive 204
Freud 234
Hart see separate entry
Marx 144
morality see legal positivism and morality
norms and normativity 223
separation thesis 186, 188, 195, 204, 226, 
227, 266
social thesis 186–8, 265–6
sources thesis 188, 265–6
see also Austin; Kelsen; Raz
legal positivism and morality 206, 223
debate morality 187
Hart 191, 195, 196
Kelsen 188, 227, 229
language of morality 185
Raz 186, 188
separation thesis 186, 188, 195, 204, 226, 
227, 266
social thesis 188
legal profession 3, 229, 263, 281
International Bar Association 210
realism 242
scepticism 40–1
legal realism 222, 223, 224, 240–1, 266–7, 283
American realism 241, 245–7, 253–4, 257, 296
anti-formalism 180
conceptual parsimony 169–70
normativity and 241–3
Scandinavian realism see separate entry
legalism 32
lex inusta non est lex 40, 207, 209, 210
lex mercatoria 280
liberalism 30, 92, 124, 215
human rights and 163, 164–6
libertarianism 95
liberties
basic 137–8, 152, 153
economic 118
Hohfeld 154, 155–6
negative 39
liberty 63–5, 67, 78, 133
freedom as 73–5, 87
liberal states and rules 215
Mill: right as 146–7, 149–51
life, right to 157–8, 213, 225
linguistic scepticism 39–40
see also language
Llewellyn, Karl 246
Locke, John 51–2, 119, 120, 122, 158
logic 134, 135–6, 180, 225
a posteriori 169, 299
a priori 169, 227, 299
anti-formalism: judgment and 181
conceptual parsimony 169–70, 284
necessity 135, 137, 168–9
realism 241, 242
universality 167–8
Wittgenstein 197, 198, 199
logical necessity 135, 137, 168
logical positivism 184–6, 189, 197, 199, 226
realism and 241, 244
Luhmann, Niklas 272–3, 276, 281–2, 298
Mabo case 59
MacCormick, Neil 195, 232
mafia clan 36
Maine, Henry 234, 276
Maitland, Frederic 146
majoritarianism 58, 116
Marcus Aurelius 104
marriage rituals 232
Marx, Karl 25, 127, 138–40, 168, 170, 236
dialectics 282, 283
historical materialism 234–5
law ‘super-structural’ 235
right made material 144–5
‘Matrix’ claim 45–6
meaning as use 199, 263, 270
means of law 8, 17, 39, 40, 128, 262, 285
adjudication 17–19, 172
equality 21–3
www.ebook3000.com

INDEX
317
impartiality 19–21
political context 35
mediation 284, 288, 289
meta-theory 36–9, 40, 42
metaphysics 101–2, 170, 197, 267, 296, 300
Kantian critique 257
positivism 182, 183, 184, 186
realism 243, 245
Mill, John Stuart 91, 112, 114, 115–16, 289
right as liberty 146–7, 149–51
monism 91, 93, 94, 96, 115, 118, 300
domestic and international law 231
normative 224
morality 87, 102, 105, 108, 109, 115, 117, 270, 
300–1
of aspiration 207, 208, 290
categorical and hypothetical imperatives 129
commanding quality of rules 175
disobedience 205, 206–8
external morality of law 207
function of law: justify 292
hard cases 196
human rights 164
inner morality of law 207–8, 214
natural law 223
Nietzsche 249–50
picture theory of language 197, 199
positivism see legal positivism and morality
verificationism 185, 301
virtue ethics 127–8
mortgages 50
multinational corporations 280, 281
nation 28–9, 296
see also collectives
national security 29, 143, 224–5, 290
native practices 59
natural beings 49
natural justice 20, 35, 36, 181–2
natural law 3, 25, 28, 60, 82, 83, 91, 94, 101–2
common good 29–30, 223
critics of Hart 195
early 103–4, 266
Freud 234
Hegel 142
human rights: opposition to degradation 164
minimum content of 195, 287
modern 30, 102, 107–10, 266
norms and normativity 223
procedural 207–8, 214
religion and 83, 105–7, 108, 207
rule of law and 31–2
Socrates 206
unjust law is not a law 207, 209
see also Finnis
natural rights 160–1, 164, 165
natural sociability 55–6, 58
natural values 127
nature
human 54, 127
as ideology 69–71, 250
law-like regularity 183–4
Nietzsche 249–50
uses of 82–3
necessity 101, 104, 134, 135–7, 168–9, 266
Aristotle: natural justice 35, 36
deconstruction 258
dialectics 283
Hegel 142, 143
human rights 162
Kant 139, 268, 277
link between law and justice 9
logical 135, 137, 168
private rights and public 290
needs and preferences 127
neoliberalism 118
Neoplatonism 96–7
networks 280–1
Nietzsche, F. 249–50, 251, 257
non-discrimination see discrimination
normative jurisprudence 132, 262, 264, 301
normative necessity 168, 169
norms 4, 5, 173, 216–19, 298
bivalence 217
classifying 225–6
defeasible 225
force and power 248–55
globalisation 280–1
jurisprudential schools and normativity 223–5
Kelsen 188, 209, 221, 223–4, 226–32
law as binding 220–2
MacCormick: institutional 195
moral 218, 220, 223, 225, 244
normativity and 216, 217, 219–26
peremptory 225–6
real and ideal 219, 221, 223, 226, 233, 248–9, 
252
realism see legal realism
social see law and social norms
valid or invalid 225, 227
noscitur a sociis rule 203
Nozick, Robert 93, 266
rights as constraints 38, 158–9, 175
Nussbaum, M. 60, 104, 124, 277

INDEX
318
objective and subjective 82, 87, 89–90, 92, 112, 
173, 216
beliefs 295
objectives of philosophy of law 5
obscenity 196, 247
Ockham’s razor 169–70
Olivecrona, Karl 244, 271
ontology 264, 265, 295–7, 301
order 109, 160, 228–9, 297
Kelsen 228–9
law’s self-ordering 271–4
Plato 99
rule of law 32
orthodoxies 81
other/otherness 68, 163, 294
Paine, T. 33, 161
parenting orders 238
Parliament Act 1911 188–9
paternalism 55
penology 238
person 2, 4, 5, 47–50, 286, 287
ad hominem arguments 20–1, 258
Aristotle 55–61
equality 22, 37
facts and values 49–55
feminism 66–72, 74, 79, 250, 289
freedom 72–9
humanism 61–6, 74
impartiality 20–1
phenomenology 264, 275, 279, 296, 301
philosophy and justice 35–6
meta-theory 36–9, 40, 42
pragmatism 41–2
scepticism 39–41
piracy 55
place and property 119
capability 124–5
environment 121–3
property 120–1
Plato 47, 49, 87, 91, 95, 96–7, 102, 115
art 260
contemporary Platonism 100–1
desert 14–15
the good and the individual 97–8
the good and the state 98–100
harmony 95, 97–100, 112
knowledge 296
Socrates 60–1, 205–7
Sophism 103–4
transcendent foundation of law 267
pleasure 111–12, 115–16
pluralism, epistemic 81, 163–4
police 26–7, 244
politics and law 8, 10–11, 35–42, 286
see also democracy; disobedience; equality; 
fairness; force and power; freedom; 
pragmatism; state
pollution 240
polluter pays principle 185–6
positivism 83, 91, 108, 182, 197, 280
conceptual parsimony 169
disobedience 209–10
legal see separate entry
logical 184–6, 189, 197, 199, 226, 241, 244
norms and normativity 223, 226, 242
origins of 183–4
realism and 241, 244, 245
scientific 182, 183, 189
Posner, E.A. 219, 223, 239
poststructuralism 292
power 3, 40, 285
force and 248–55
imbalances of bargaining 19–20
without authority 36
powers
distinguishing rights 154–5, 156
practical reasoning 128, 263–4
pragmatism 41–2, 57, 94, 266–7
legal realism 241, 242
theorising and 46
precautionary principle 123, 185–6
preferences and needs 127
prescriptive universality 167, 168
primary and secondary rules 221, 296
Hart 192–4, 195–6, 263, 275
principles 180–1, 196, 212, 285
genealogical analysis 257–8
prison/prisoners 64–5, 237
rules 181–2
privacy 57, 155
private–public divide 289–90
promiscuity 70
property rights 109, 119, 120–1, 144, 145, 269
see also place and property
prostitution 70
Protagoras 47
Protestantism 108
psychiatry 184, 238, 243
psychology 51, 111, 152, 185, 233–4, 238
Nietzsche 250, 257
Scandinavian realists 241, 243, 244, 248
public health see health
public policy 196, 240, 251
www.ebook3000.com

INDEX
319
public–private divide 289–90
punishment 60, 237, 249, 250, 258
Radbruch, Gustav 210
ransom to kidnapper 88
rationalism 227, 301
empiricism and 45
rationality 78–9, 109, 110, 139, 208, 282, 293
freedom as 75–7
Hegel: right made social 142–3, 145
Kant: right as duty 140–1, 145, 161
modern society 236, 237
poststructuralism 292
Rawls, John 38, 92, 93, 124, 163, 266
human rights 165
reflective equilibrium 84
right as fairness 146–7, 151–3
Raz, Joseph 64, 117, 128, 186, 188, 284, 
288, 292
disobedience 208, 210
norms and normativity 223
sources thesis 188, 265–6
realism see legal realism
reasonableness 20, 21, 27, 119, 291, 292, 293–4
common good 25, 30, 31
dishonesty 240
modern natural law 25, 30, 109, 110, 223
practical reasoning 128, 263–4
Rawls 38, 153
reasonable person 82, 109, 153, 240, 295
utilitarianism 113
Wednesbury case 153
redistribution 153, 158
reflection 83–4
reflective equilibrium 84
regulative and constitutive rules 177–8, 209–10
relativism, cultural 163, 293–4
religion 68, 89, 92, 109, 197, 199, 267–8
authority 33
Christianity see separate entry
dominion over nature 121
Islam 96, 106, 107
Medieval period 288
natural law and 83, 105–7, 108, 207
norms of exclusion 245
Renaissance 61, 62, 63, 292
repression 269
norms and 249–51
reproductive autonomy 70–1
right 4, 5, 130–3, 287
adjective 4, 133–4
answers 131, 134, 135–7
as coherence 131–2, 134, 135, 146–53, 179–80
as correspondence 132, 134, 136, 138–45, 146
dynamism 181
as justice 137–8
noun 4, 133–4
realism 242
rules and the 173–4
truth and 133–5
rights 4, 5, 130, 131, 132, 153–4
Dworkin: rights as trumps 156–8
Hohfeld: distinguishing 154–6
human see separate entry
individuals 25–7
Nozick: rights as constraints 38, 158–9, 175
Roman law 234, 277
person 52, 62, 79
Ross, Alf 3, 221, 224, 243, 244, 245, 248
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 269–70
rule of law 31–3, 107, 131, 214, 224
contemporary Platonism 100
emergency powers 210
international arena 273, 277
Rawls 38, 152, 153
realism 247
scepticism 39
rule scepticism 45, 200–2, 245, 246
rules 4, 5, 171–4, 297–8
autonomy of 181
classification of facts 181
as commands 174–6
constitutive 177–8, 209–10, 285, 297
defeasibility 178, 213, 217, 218, 279
disobedience 204–10, 265
exceptions to legal 213
finding and following legal 212–13
formalism and anti-formalism 179–82, 
195–6
forms and functions of 176–9
Hart see separate entry
impartiality 20, 209
liberalism and 215
positivism see separate entry
principles, standards and 180–1, 196
prudential or hypothetical 174, 175, 177
realism 241, 242, 245–6, 247
regulative 177–8, 209–10
ruling and 214
utilitarianism and 215
Wittgenstein see separate entry
same-sex partners 116
Sartre, Jean-Paul 64

INDEX
320
Scandinavian realism 223, 224, 241, 243–5, 260, 
266, 270
behaviour 243–4, 246
force of law 248, 252, 288
language of law 241, 243, 269
Nietzsche 249
scepticism 9, 39–41, 128, 168, 265, 295–6, 301
legal realism 241, 245, 246
phenomenology 275
positivism 182, 189, 201
theorising 45–6
Wittgenstein: rule 200–2
science 51, 115, 293
environment 122–3, 185–6
facts and 52–3
positivism 182, 183–4
reproductive autonomy 70–1
Searle, John 177
self-determination 30
self-reflection 83–4
Sen, Amartya 124
Seneca 104
separation of powers 32, 210, 289
sex 293
consensual sado-masochistic 113
gender and 70, 71, 72
industry 128, 141
sexuality 293
Simmonds, N. 100, 225, 266, 267
situated person 59–61, 87, 119
slavery 127, 128, 158, 160
social contract 109, 165, 206
Hobbes 146–9
Rawls 38, 151–3
Rousseau 269–70
social norms see law and social norms
society 28–9, 55–6, 237
see also collectives
sociology and law 236–8
Socrates 60–1, 257
Socratic paradox 205–7
soft and hard rules 203
Sophism 103–4, 105, 209
Sophocles 60, 268
South Africa 157–8
standard of proof 16, 131, 295
standards 180, 181
state 28–9, 38, 78, 93–4, 193–4, 273–4, 276–7, 
286
anarchism 205
Aristotle 56, 66, 148
collective needs 24, 27, 28
crime of state aggression 278
force majeure 253
force and power 55, 248–9
happiness and interests of 112–13
harm principle 150–1, 289
Hart 189–90
Hegel: freedom and rationality 139, 142–3, 144
human rights 161
international law 178
law as tool to destroy 285
Marx 144–5
minimal 158, 159
moral welfare of 196
national security 29, 143, 224–5, 290
normalisation 237–8
public–private divide 289–90
Raz 210
regulatory networks by-passing 280–1
Rousseau: loss of freedom 269
rules and political commitments of 214–15
separation of powers 32, 210, 289
use of violence 237, 248–9, 251–3, 277
see also collectives; constitution; democracy
status: individuals 27–8
statutory interpretation 200, 203, 242–3
sterilisation 70–1
stewardship of environment 122
Stoicism 104, 105, 209, 277
subjective and objective 82, 87, 89–90, 92, 112, 
173, 216
beliefs 295
Suffrage movement 71
Sun Tzu 104
syllogism 135–6
Tamanaha, Brian 180, 284
taxation 128, 158, 286
Taylor, Charles 165
teleology 57, 96, 106, 110, 267–8, 281, 301
terrorism 75, 224–5
theocracies/theocratic states 91, 95
theology 68, 83, 89
theorising 44–5
pragmatism and 46
rationalism and empiricism 45
scepticism 45–6
therapeutic critique 257
tort 26, 58, 146
‘but for’ test 136–7
causation 73, 136–7
www.ebook3000.com

INDEX
321
delegated authority 34
duty of care 179
economics 239–40
freedom of speech 138
Rylands v Fletcher 110
US Alien Torts Claim Act 159
volenti non fit injuria 179
tragedy, Greek 60, 268
transnational law 280–1
TRIPS (Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights) Agreement 118
truth 11, 41–2, 257, 292, 293, 296
deconstruction 258
ends 15–17
logic and 135–6
positivism 183
right and 133–5
right as coherence 131–2, 134, 135, 146–53, 
179–80
right as correspondence 132, 134, 136, 138–45, 
146
Wittgenstein 198, 202
Turkey 283–4
uncertainty 53, 73, 141, 239, 263
legitimate rulers avoid 214
realism 242
social change 282
tort 136–7
see also certainty
United Kingdom 155–6, 290
cultural context and law 276
England 63, 176, 244, 254
exceptions to rules 214
Hart: rule of recognition 193
Iraq 229–30
parenting orders 238
Parliament Act 1911 188–9
prison rules 181–2
Status of Aliens Act 1914 121
United Nations
capabilities approach 124, 125
Charter of 151, 193
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination against Women 72
Framework Convention on Climate Change 123
rule of law indicators 32–3
United States 53, 63, 64, 77, 101, 161
Alien Torts Claim Act 159
American realism 241, 245–7, 253–4, 257, 296
corporations 79
critical theory 254
formalism 180
freedom of speech 138
judicial review 95–6
national security 143
peremptory norms 225–6
Universal Declaration of Human Rights 161
universality 79, 137, 167–8, 180, 225, 293–4
dialectics 283
Genocide Convention 162
happiness 84
Hegel 142, 143, 145
Kant 139, 145, 163, 168, 180, 268, 277
Marx 144, 145
particularity vs 162–4, 258
unjust law 60
is not a law 40, 207, 209, 210
utilitarianism 30, 84, 88, 89, 95, 111, 114–16
act 117, 118, 150
hedonism 111–13, 118
Rawls: right as fairness 152
right as liberty and 149
rule 117–18, 215
rules and 215
variants of 116–18
utopia 95, 99, 100
values 30, 170
analysing 127–8
categorical and hypothetical imperatives 129
emotivism 185
facts and see facts and values
genealogical critique 257
practical reasoning 128
value and 126–7
verificationism 184–5, 244, 301
Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 
194, 226
violence, use of 237, 248–9, 251–3, 277
virtue ethics 127–8
volenti non fit injuria 179
Von Savigny, Friedrich 276
vulnerable groups 33
war 206, 213, 251, 277
crimes 229–30
jus in bello 149
Sun Tzu 104
water, right to 145
Weber, Max 236, 237, 263
Wednesbury reasonableness 153

INDEX
322
Weimar Republic 228
witchcraft 68–9
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 173, 184, 189, 197–8, 257, 
265, 270, 298
anti-scepticism 202–3
family resemblances 203
rule scepticism 200–2
rules and sense 198–200
use theory of meaning 199, 263
Wollstonecraft, Mary 67
women 28
female genital mutilation (FGM) 
293–4
feminism 66–72, 74, 79, 250, 289
legal profession 41
work and working conditions 94
World Bank 124
World Trade Organisation (WTO) 283–4
www.ebook3000.com

