www.ebook3000.com

 LEGAL REASON 
 Legal Reason  describes and explains analogical reasoning, the distinc-
tive feature of legal argument. It challenges the prevailing view that 
analogical reasoning is a logically ﬂ awed, defective form of deductive 
reasoning. Drawing on work in epistemology and cognitive psychology, 
the book shows that analogical reasoning in the law is the same as that 
used by everyone routinely in ordinary life and that it is a valid form of 
reasoning, derived from the innate human capacity to recognize the gen-
eral in the particular. The use of analogical reasoning in law is dictated 
by the nature of law, which calls for the application of general rules to 
particular facts. Critiques of the ﬁ rst edition of the book are addressed 
directly and objections answered in a new chapter. Written for scholars, 
students, and persons interested in law,  Legal Reason  is written in acces-
sible prose, with examples drawn from the law and everyday experience. 
 Lloyd L. Weinreb is Dane Professor of Law, Emeritus at Harvard Law 
School. His other books include  Natural Law and Justice  (1987) and 
 Oedipus at Fenway Park: What Rights Are and Why There Are Any (1994).  

ii
www.ebook3000.com

 Legal Reason 
 THE USE OF ANALOGY IN 
LEGAL ARGUMENT 
 Second Edition 
 LLOYD L. WEINREB 
 Harvard Law School  

iv
One  Liberty  Plaza,  20th  Floor, New York NY 10006,  USA
 Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.  
 It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of 
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.  
 www.cambridge.org  
 Information on this title:  www.cambridge.org/ 9781107153462 
 © Lloyd L. Weinreb 2016  
 This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception 
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, 
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written 
permission of Cambridge University Press.  
 First edition published 2005  
 Second edition published 2016  
 Printed in the United States of America by Sheridan Books, Inc.  
 A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication data 
 Names: Weinreb, Lloyd L., 1936–
Title: Legal reason: the use of analogy in legal argument / Lloyd L. Weinreb.
Description: Second edition. | New York: Cambridge University Press, 2016. | 
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identiﬁ ers: LCCN 2016026393 | ISBN 9781107153462 (hardback) | 
ISBN 9781316607329 (paperback)
Subjects: LCSH: Law–Methodology.
Classiﬁ cation: LCC K213 .W45 2016 | DDC 340/.11–dc23
LC record available at  https://lccn.loc.gov/2016026393  
 ISBN 978- 1- 107- 15346- 2 Hardback  
 ISBN 978- 1- 316- 60732- 9 Paperback  
 Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of 
URLs for external or third- party internet websites referred to in this publication 
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, 
accurate or appropriate.  
www.ebook3000.com

[v]
 Contents  
 Preface to the Second Edition   
page   vii 
 Preface to the First Edition   
  ix 
 
Introduction  
  1 
 1  
  Steamboats, Broadcast Transmissions, and Electronic 
Eavesdropping   
  16 
 2  
  Analogical Legal Reasoning   
 37 
 3  
  Objections   
  75 
 4  
  Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and 
the Rule of Law   
  114 

Contents
[vi]
vi
 Appendix A Note on the Problem of Universals   
  149 
 Appendix B Biographical Notes   
  155 
 Notes 
  159 
 Index 
  185 
www.ebook3000.com

[vii]
 Preface to the Second Edition  
 Robert Dreesen, who succeeded to the role of my representative at 
Cambridge University Press, suggested that I prepare this new edition. 
He guided the proposal through the process of approval and then publi-
cation, for all of which I am grateful. 
 For this edition, I have thoroughly reviewed the text of the ﬁ rst edition. 
I have made some corrections and have revised and expanded arguments 
that now seem to me less clear than they should have been. The major 
addition is a discussion of objections that were raised in response to the 
ﬁ rst edition. Although the substance of those arguments was familiar and 
was addressed in the ﬁ rst edition, having them directed explicitly to what 
I said there has helped me to sharpen my own arguments and to present 
them more forcefully. The discussion of Scott Brewer’s account of ana-
logical legal reasoning, which was formerly set off by itself in  Chapter 1 , 
has been integrated with the discussion of other accounts that differ from 
mine, all of which are now included in a new chapter that follows the full 
exposition of analogical legal reasoning in  Chapter 2 . 
 Marilyn Uzuner helped to prepare the manuscript for publication. 
Melinda Eakin applied her uncanny ability to detect typographical 
errors to this edition as she did to the ﬁ rst.  

viii
www.ebook3000.com

[ix]
 Preface to the First Edition  
 Recent discussions of the use of analogy in legal argument, which 
measure its use against the standards of deductive and inductive rea-
soning and ﬁ nd it wanting, prompted me to write this book. Even those 
who have approved the use of analogical argument in the law, like 
Edward Levi in his classic study,  An Introduction to Legal Reasoning , 
have thought it is rationally “ﬂ awed,” although how in that case it 
could have the benign effects that Levi and others attribute to it is not 
explained. So also, efforts to reconstruct analogical legal argument as 
only a slightly disguised form of deductive or inductive argument, or 
some combination of the two, distort the arguments that lawyers and 
judges actually make and are evidently dictated only by the conviction 
that otherwise the arguments are invalid and entitled to no weight. 
 Views of this kind, which have dominated the discussion about ana-
logical legal reasoning, ﬂ y in the face of the indubitable fact that the 
use of analogy is at the very center of legal reasoning, so much so that 
it is regarded as an identifying characteristic not only of legal reason-
ing itself but also of legal education. It is not credible that arguments 
subjected routinely to the closest scrutiny would contain such funda-
mental error. Studying the matter, I conﬁ rmed my belief that the use 

Preface to the First Edition
[x]
x
of analogical argument in law stands up on its own terms and, indeed, 
is not different from the reasoning on which we all rely successfully in 
the affairs of everyday life. Its use in the law is distinct only in that it 
is not merely commonplace and useful but is essential to the preserva-
tion of values that we ascribe to “the rule of law.” The effort to displace 
analogical reasoning by deductive or inductive reasoning responds to 
a mistaken belief that the rule of law so requires. Analogical reasoning 
does not undermine the rule of law but rather sustains it. 
 I intend this book both for those who are interested in the scholarly 
debate and for those who are beginning their legal studies or just entering 
the practice of law, as well as for persons who have a general interest in 
law. Addressing myself to these audiences, I have not scanted discussion 
of the issues. I have, however, omitted most of the apparatus –  lengthy 
footnotes about marginally relevant points and extensive citation –  that 
is, excessively I think, common to legal scholarship. I have been gen-
erous with commonplace examples and with explanations of matters 
that will be familiar to legal scholars and experienced practitioners but 
perhaps not to beginning students, practitioners starting out, and others 
outside the legal profession. 
 I am grateful to many colleagues and friends who read some or all of 
the manuscript and made fruitful suggestions, among whom are Brian 
Bix, Michael Doyen, Richard Fallon, Robert Ferguson, Morton Horwitz, 
Daniel Meltzer, Anton Metlitsky, Daniel Weinreb, Mark Yohalem, and 
Benjamin Zipursky. 
 Andrew Waterhouse, George Borg, and Marcia Chapin helped me to 
understand the chemistry of wine stains and talcum powder. I presented 
some of the ideas in the book at workshops at Cornell Law School, 
Fordham Law School, and Harvard Law School and was encouraged 
and stimulated by comments of the participants. 
 The library of Harvard Law School provided ready access to books 
and articles about a wide variety of subjects, including many that did 
not make it into the ﬁ nal manuscript. The library of Fordham Law 
School was similarly helpful when I was a visiting professor there in 
2003. Melinda Eakin prepared and managed many drafts of the man-
uscript and assisted in the ﬁ nal copyediting. Her help was invaluable. 
Ed Parsons was a generous and helpful representative of Cambridge 
University Press.  
www.ebook3000.com

[1]
 Introduction  
 This is a book about the arguments that lawyers make in sup-
port of their clients and that judges make in the course of their 
opinions. That is not the whole of the law, which extends in 
every direction and takes many different forms. The pattern 
of reasoning of those who are engaged elsewhere in the law, 
in the legislative process or in the regulatory or administra-
tive process, is different. But   adjudication, in which lawyers’ 
arguments and judicial opinions hold sway, is typically the 
place where the law is brought to bear concretely and, to use 
a current expression, “the rubber hits the road.” No effort to 
understand and explain the law or the legal process can suc-
ceed unless the arguments of lawyers and judges are under-
stood. Those arguments, furthermore, are what people have 

Legal Reason
[2]
2
in mind when they speak about legal reasoning  . It is widely 
believed that legal reasoning is somehow special, not just in 
its subject matter but in its very form. In a law school class, a 
professor, intending high praise, may say to a student, “Now 
you are thinking like a lawyer,” as if a legal education equips 
a person to think in a way unknown to others. And, indeed, 
a great deal has been written about the nature of legal argu-
ments. 1 Yet it would be odd if legal reasoning were somehow 
different from reasoning about other subjects. Doctors and 
engineers also have their special expertise. One does not hear 
so much talk about thinking like a doctor or thinking like an 
engineer. 
 There is a large difference in one respect between the prac-
tice of law and other professions, which surely has something 
to do with the special attention given to legal reasoning. The 
reasoning of a doctor or an engineer is readily and in the nor-
mal course put to the test. The patient’s health improves, or it 
does not; the bridge stands, or it falls. There is no comparable 
test of legal reasoning. Although we talk about what the law 
is, as though it is a matter of fact like a medical diagnosis 
or the weight a bridge will support, the content of the law 
is normative: it prescribes what is –  that is to say, ought –  to 
be done. (Even to say that it declares what will be done is 
too much, for there are many instances when the law is not 
followed.) How to address that conjunction of what is and 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
[3]
what ought to be is one of the fundamental problems of juris-
prudence. Because the outcome of legal reasoning does not 
furnish an objective test of its merit, it is unsurprising that 
we attend more insistently to the process of reasoning itself. 
 The stakes are large. For   law provides an overarching struc-
ture within which most human affairs are conducted, and it 
reaches down to the smallest details. If its demands are not 
to be felt as arbitrary and oppressive, they must be, and must 
be perceived to be, reasonable.  Whatever may be the grounds 
for the authority of law in general or of a particular law or 
body of law on a speciﬁ c subject, when the law takes hold and 
determines speciﬁ c rights and obligations of speciﬁ c persons, 
its justiﬁ cation characteristically is found in the arguments of 
lawyers and judges. On the face of it, the analysis of legal rea-
soning, which is subjected to close, persistent, and thorough 
scrutiny, should be straightforward. Lawyers’ arguments are 
rebutted by arguments of lawyers for the other side. When 
a judge decides a case, he has an opportunity to explain his 
decision and may be required to do so. The decision ordinar-
ily can be appealed to a higher court, where it is reviewed by 
a panel of judges, whose decision also is generally explained 
on the record. Often that decision can be appealed to still 
another court and another panel. The pattern of such argu-
ment, its merits and defects, are, one would think, unusually 
open to view and, if necessary, correction. Yet the amount 

Legal Reason
[4]
4
that has been written about legal reasoning and the diversity 
of views suggest otherwise, as if it is not what it appears to 
be or is subject to some demand that direct examination does 
not satisfy. 
 There is something distinctive about legal reasoning, which 
is its reliance on   analogy. Leaving more precise deﬁ nition for 
later, an   analogical argument can be described as   reasoning 
by example: ﬁ nding the solution to a problem by reference to 
another similar problem and its solution. Reasoning of this 
kind is by no means unique to the law; on the contrary, it 
is the way all of us respond to countless ordinary problems 
in everyday life  . Nor do analogical arguments displace other 
forms of reasoning about law, when they are appropriate. 
Legislatures and administrative agencies may, for example, 
rely on extensive empirical studies to develop and defend pro-
posed legislation and regulatory measures.  Analogical argu-
ments are, however, especially prominent in legal reasoning, 
so much so that they are regarded as its hallmark  . And, as a 
hallmark, they are not reassuring. Although the value of an 
analogy as a ﬁ gure of speech is acknowledged, the value is 
commonly thought to belong to the art of persuasion and not 
to reason, part of the gilding that makes the result attractive 
but not otherwise of any signiﬁ cance. Analogical arguments 
are said to be slippery and likely to mislead or, at any rate, not 
to be ﬁ rm enough to support a seriously contested conclusion. 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
[5]
They are usually contrasted in this respect with deductive and 
inductive arguments. A   deductive argument is subject to the 
rules of formal logic. According to those rules, an argument is 
either valid or invalid, and no more need be said one way or 
the other. An   inductive argument is not formally bound in the 
same way, but the conclusion can be tested experimentally, 
and, again, either it is veriﬁ ed or it is not. The similarity at the 
heart of an analogical argument, on the other hand, does not 
display its signiﬁ cance, as a deductive argument displays its 
validity. Things are similar and dissimilar to one another in 
countless ways.  2 There simply are no rules that prescribe how 
much or what sort of similarity is enough to sustain analogies 
generally or to sustain a particular analogy. Nor can an anal-
ogy ordinarily be tested experimentally, for the similarity on 
which it depends may be unquestioned but have nothing to 
do with the conclusion that is said to follow from it, whether 
the conclusion be true or false  . 
 For all the prominence of analogical arguments in the 
actual reasoning of lawyers and judges, they are largely disre-
garded in the theoretical model of legal reasoning that, explic-
itly or implicitly, pervades legal analysis. According to that 
model, legal reasoning is built on determinate rules linked 
by logical inference, the correctness of which can, at least in 
principle, be ascertained. The model is familiarly represented 
as a pyramid, decisions in concrete cases at the base being 

Legal Reason
[6]
6
derived from a rule, which in turn is derived from a higher 
rule and so on, up to the highest of all, from which all the rest 
are derived, at the apex.  3 Alternatively, the most fundamental 
rule forms the base of the pyramid, each rule above resting 
on the one beneath, up to the decision in a case at the apex.  4 
 Few people suppose anymore, as was once maintained, 
that scrupulous adherence to this model is all that is required 
to reach the correct result; indeed, whether there is, in that 
sense, a correct result is contentious.  5 But our inability to 
demonstrate the truth of a judicial decision as if it were a 
mathematical proof is commonly perceived as a practical 
limitation attributable to the fractious subject matter, rather 
than a ﬂ aw in the model itself. The proper method of arriv-
ing at a decision is said to be to set forth the relevant rules, 
resolve any inconsistencies among them, and bring them col-
lectively to a coherent focus on the facts of the case.   Ronald 
Dworkin, for example, has forcefully defended the thesis that 
in order to reach the right answer, a judge has to bring his 
decision “within some comprehensive theory of general prin-
ciples and policies that is consistent with other decisions also 
thought right”; it must be “consistent with earlier decisions 
not recanted, and with decisions that the institution is pre-
pared to make in the hypothetical circumstances.”  6   Evoking 
the familiar image of a   pyramid, Dworkin says that this com-
prehensive theory must have “a vertical and a horizontal 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
[7]
ordering”: vertical, inasmuch as a justiﬁ catory principle must 
be “consistent with principles taken to provide the justiﬁ ca-
tion of higher levels,” and horizontal, inasmuch as it “must 
also be consistent with the justiﬁ cation offered for other deci-
sions at that level.”  7 Elsewhere, he has described the process 
of decision as a “justiﬁ catory ascent.”  8 Dworkin does not sup-
pose that a judge will often accomplish so arduous a task or 
even that he will often be tempted to try. Famously, he named 
his exemplary judge “Hercules  .” 9 Many scholars, furthermore, 
without denying that a judge is obligated to decide according 
to the law, have questioned whether the full scope of that obli-
gation can be contained in articulable principles. The resort 
to principle, however, so far as it goes, and the model of legal 
reasoning as a hierarchical order of rules subject to a require-
ment of vertical and horizontal consistency are not generally 
questioned, practically or theoretically.  10 It is evident that 
analogical arguments do not conform to this model. Rather 
than composing a pyramid  of rules held together by deduc-
tive inference, the arguments of lawyers and judges resemble 
a Tinkertoy construction, one case being linked to another by 
factual similarities that are deemed to warrant application of 
the same rule. 
 Confronted by this discrepancy between the theoreti-
cal model and the evident fact that analogical arguments 
abound,   legal scholars have drawn a variety of conclusions. 

Legal Reason
[8]
8
Some afﬁ rm a hierarchy of rules as the ofﬁ cially correct 
model but urge that room be made for analogical arguments 
as well. Despite their logical weakness, or, indeed, because 
of it, these scholars urge, analogical arguments serve a use-
ful function by promoting the settlement of difﬁ cult cases. 
In his classic study of legal reasoning,   Edward Levi observed 
that analogical argument is “imperfect” and contains a “logi-
cal fallacy.”  11 Nevertheless, he said, it is the “basic pattern of 
legal reasoning” and is “indispensable to peace in a commu-
nity,” because it is the means by which the law grows and 
changes in conformity with the community’s views, even as 
it is being applied.  12 Levi’s conﬁ dence that the adjudicative 
process helps to preserve “peace in a community” may seem 
misplaced today, when judicial decisions on issues like abor-
tion, gay rights, and afﬁ rmative action are as likely to divide 
the community as to unite it and judicial appointments are 
a potent political issue. But in any case, his concession that 
analogical reasoning is logically ﬂ awed leaves one to won-
der whether peace is not obtained at too high a price. Others 
are more skeptical of the virtues of analogical arguments and 
believe that they are used a great deal too much.  Richard 
Posner has commented that the reason lawyers ﬁ nd analogi-
cal arguments “irresistible” is that they enable lawyers “to 
reach conclusions without reading much beyond what is in 
law books,” and he suggests that judges’ reliance on them 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
[9]
similarly reﬂ ects an unwillingness to look outside their cham-
bers. 13 “It is no surprise,” he says, “that ‘real’ reasoning by 
analogy –  going from an old to a new case on the basis of 
some felt ‘similarity’ –  has been a source of many pernicious 
judicial doctrines  .” 14 
 The most common assessment of analogical arguments in 
the law goes beyond praise or blame and asserts bluntly that 
there is no such thing. There can be no   reasoning “by exam-
ple” from one concrete instance to another, it is said, except 
by way of a general principle that subsumes them both. So, 
if someone observes that Socrates is a man and is mortal and 
reasons that Alcibiades, being a man, is (by analogy with 
Socrates) also mortal, the correct way to frame her reason-
ing is:  All men are mortal. Alcibiades is a man. Therefore, 
Alcibiades is mortal. If not, she does not, properly speaking, 
 reason  at all; if her conclusion is correct, it is only by happen-
stance. Without some general statement that relevantly asso-
ciates Socrates and Alcibiades, there is no basis for ascribing 
the mortality of the former to the latter. So- called analogical 
argument as a distinct form of argument,   Larry Alexander 
concludes, is a “phantasm”; “it does not really exist.”  15 
 For all the differences among these views, there is broad 
agreement that, possibly benign political effects aside, the 
law could and would do better not to rely on analogical argu-
ments –  “logically ﬂ awed,” “pernicious,” a “phantasm” –  at all  . 

Legal Reason
[10]
10
This agreement is the more remarkable because, despite their 
own insistent attention to the grounds for a legal outcome, 
lawyers and judges seem entirely unaware of any such prob-
lem. If, as Posner says, lawyers ﬁ nd analogical arguments 
irresistible in their own work, it is hard to understand why 
they are unable to resist them in the briefs of opposing coun-
sel. Although particular analogies are often at the center of 
contention between lawyers on opposite sides and between 
majority and dissenting judges, there is scarcely a trace of 
criticism of analogical argument generally. On the contrary, 
the importance that is usually attached to the choice of anal-
ogy suggests quite the opposite. 
 Not only do analogical arguments ﬁ gure prominently in 
briefs and opinions, but they are also a standard feature, one 
might almost say deﬁ ning feature, of   legal education; the 
content of   Socratic dialogue, on which law school classes are 
typically built, is mostly an exercise in reasoning by analogy.  16 
Students are likely to be introduced to   analogical argument 
and to begin to reason analogically themselves in their ﬁ rst 
days at law school, as they are asked to consider whether the 
rule of some case applies or should apply to other cases that 
are more or less similar. Such questioning is not an invitation 
into an arcane professional ritual, as a bewildered student 
may sometimes suppose. It is, rather, a more cautious and 
deliberate version of a kind of problem- solving with which 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
[11]
students are already fully familiar, in practice if not by name. 
Explaining the analogical structure and rationale of legal rea-
soning is not an abstract exercise of interest mainly to legal 
theorists. It is a powerful aid to understanding not only the 
law itself but also its characteristic mode of instruction  . 
 The view of legal reasoning that excludes the use of anal-
ogy, except perhaps on sufferance as a kind of useful inepti-
tude, or that regards it as an elliptical deductive argument is 
mistaken.   Analogical legal arguments differ only in their sub-
ject matter from the analogical arguments that we make rou-
tinely in everyday life. In law as in life, analogical argument is 
a valid, albeit undemonstrable, form of reasoning that stands 
on its own and has its own credentials, which are not derived 
from abstract reason but are rooted in the experience and 
knowledge of the lawyers and judges who employ it. Some 
analogical arguments are good and some are bad. Ordinarily, 
we know how to tell one from the other and are able to reach 
a fair degree of agreement about which is which. The human 
capacity for reasoning by analogy presents complex and dif-
ﬁ cult epistemological issues, but its use is commonplace and, 
carefully used, its conclusions are generally reliable. 
 The prominence of analogical arguments in legal reason-
ing is not accidental. It is in the nature of law to be a matter 
of rules, the principled application of which to concrete cases 
is accomplished by analogical reasoning. That is contrary to 

Legal Reason
[12]
12
the model of legal reasoning as fully contained within a   hier-
archy of rules connected inferentially and to the rejection of 
analogical reasoning as arbitrary and subversive of the rule 
of law.  17 Without the intervention of analogical arguments, 
legal rules and the rule of law itself would be only theoretical 
constructs. These are large claims, which are explained and 
defended in the chapters that follow.  
 On its face, the contrast between the scholarly critique of 
analogical reasoning and its pervasive use and acceptance 
in practice is puzzling. It suggests that the impulse behind 
efforts to measure legal reasoning by the rules of formal 
logic and methods of empirical science is not prompted by 
a weakness in the arguments themselves. Rather, it springs 
more deeply from a conviction that it is not enough for law to 
be reasonable, as an accommodation of the interests of indi-
viduals living together in community, and that law must be 
independent of the contingencies of human experience and 
anchored wholly and absolutely in reason. Although those 
who criticize the use of analogical arguments do not gener-
ally make the connection, one can detect in their criticism the 
same concern for the validity of law that fuels the perennial 
jurisprudential debate between   natural law and   legal positiv-
ism, which the horrors of   Nazism made urgent after World 
War II  18 and which, more recently, has sparked debate about 
the canons of constitutionalism and legal interpretation.  19 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
[13]
( Cass Sunstein has observed that   Levi’s effort to tie the use 
of analogy in the law to democracy was a response to the 
 Legal Realists’ attack on legal reasoning as “political” and 
undemocratic.)  20 
 The immediate focus of the methodological issue and the 
substantive one are different, the former having to do speciﬁ -
cally with the process of adjudication and the latter with law 
at large. But both are responsive to the perception of a gap 
between the law’s great normative force, on one hand, and 
its supposed lack of rational force, on the other. From that 
perspective, the debate about analogical reasoning in the law 
concerns more than a logician’s nicety or a professional trope. 
It belongs within the long history of debate whether the law 
is a product of   reason or of will, whether in the end the law 
is the law because it is right or only because of the power of 
those who proclaim it. So understood, the use of analogy in 
legal reasoning is worth studying, not just as an important 
feature of the lawyer’s craft but because it is a critical aspect 
of the law’s normative claims. 
 I begin in  Chapter 1  with a discussion of three cases or 
sets of cases. The ﬁ rst,   Adams v. New Jersey Steamboat Co. , 21 
is drawn from the common law and has ﬁ gured in other dis-
cussions of the use of analogy in law.  22 The second is a set of 
four cases decided by the Supreme Court over a forty- four- 
year period, in which the Court construed provisions of the 

Legal Reason
[14]
14
federal Copyright Act having to do with radio and television 
broadcast transmissions. 23 Third are two cases,   Olmstead 
v. United States 24 and   Katz v. United States , 25 in which, with a 
thirty- nine- year gap in between, the Supreme Court consid-
ered a question of constitutional law arising under the Fourth 
 Amendment.  26 Together the cases display clearly the courts’ 
reliance on analogical reasoning. Far from being uncom-
fortable or uneasy about it, they rely on analogical reason-
ing conﬁ dently, not as a makeshift, best- we- can- do substitute 
for something else, but as a central part of the argument 
being made. 
 Chapter 2  is the heart of the book. It begins with a reminder 
of how pervasively analogical reasoning is used in everyday 
life. It then draws on the examples developed in  Chapter 1  to 
describe the place of analogical reasoning in the arguments 
of lawyers and judges. Discussing the process of adjudication 
generally, it explains why, in the nature of law, analogical rea-
soning is not merely useful but is indispensable.  Chapter 3 
discusses objections to the account of analogical legal rea-
soning given in  Chapter  2  and responds more generally to 
the argument that analogical reasoning, on its own terms, is 
defective and too weak to bear the weight placed on it. 
 In  Chapter 4 , I discuss brieﬂ y how it is that, assertions to 
the contrary notwithstanding, we are able to make arguments 
by analogy and to have conﬁ dence in the outcomes. That is 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction
[15]
followed by a discussion of the “ case method” of legal educa-
tion, in which analogical reasoning plays a central role. The 
chapter continues with a discussion of how analogical rea-
soning is related to the rule of law. In the concluding pages, 
I  make the connection between the search for certainty in 
legal reasoning and the search for objective validity in the 
law itself. In both cases, the search springs plausibly from 
the same source, a felt need to vindicate incontrovertibly the 
law’s normative claims. Such certitude is not to be found. 
Rather, the law is sustained by the conscientious application 
of human reason and good will.  

[16]
16
 CHAPTER 1 
 Steamboats, Broadcast Transmissions, 
and Electronic Eavesdropping  
 a.  Common Law:   Adams v. New Jersey Steamboat Co.  
 Adams was a passenger on the defendant’s steamboat, going 
from New York to Albany. During the night, having locked the 
door and fastened the windows of his stateroom, he left a sum 
of money in his clothing. The money was stolen by someone 
who apparently managed to reach through one of the win-
dows. Adams sued to recover the amount of his loss. The jury 
returned a verdict for Adams, and judgment was entered in his 
favor. On appeal, the judgment was afﬁ rmed, and the defen-
dant took a further appeal to the New York Court of Appeals.  1 
 The only question before the court was whether the 
trial court had properly instructed the jury that, in the 
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[17]
circumstances, the defendant was liable as an insurer, without 
proof that it had been negligent. In its opinion, having stated 
the issue, the court turned without further elaboration to the 
rule that innkeepers were liable as insurers for the losses of 
their guests. The rule, the court said, was based on public 
policy:  innkeepers should have a “high degree of responsi-
bility” because of the “extraordinary conﬁ dence … necessar-
ily reposed in them” and the “great temptation to fraud and 
danger of plunder” created by “the peculiar relations of the 
parties.”  2 The relations of a steamboat operator to its passen-
gers, the court went on, “differ in no essential respect”: “[t] he 
passenger procures and pays for his room for the same rea-
sons that a guest at an inn does,” and “[t]here are the same 
opportunities for fraud and plunder” that tempt an inn-
keeper. 3 Indeed, “[a] steamer carrying passengers upon the 
water, and furnishing them with rooms and entertainment, is, 
for all practical purposes, a ﬂ oating inn.”  4 “[S]ince the same 
considerations of public policy apply to both relations,” the 
rule in the two cases should be the same.  5 One might have 
thought that the stateroom of a steamboat resembles a berth 
in the sleeping car of a railroad, the operator of which did 
not have an insurer’s liability, more than it does a room at an 
inn, since both of the former involve travel from one place 
to another and the latter is stationary. But the court thought 
otherwise and added a lengthy passage that distinguished the 

Legal Reason
[18]
18
relations between a steamboat operator and its passengers 
from those between an operator of a railroad sleeping car and 
its passengers.  6 The court then returned to the main theme. 
A steamboat is one of those “modern ﬂ oating palaces,”  7 and 
a traveler on a steamboat “establishes legal relations with the 
carrier that cannot well be distinguished from those that exist 
between the hotelkeeper and his guests … The two relations, 
if not identical, bear such close analogy to each other that the 
same rule of responsibility should govern.”  8 
 The analogy between an inn and a steamboat that provides 
staterooms for passengers evidently plays a large role in the 
court’s reasoning. Arguments of public policy are deployed 
to explain the existing rule applicable to inns, which is then 
applied to steamboats on the basis of the analogy. Likewise, 
the court is at pains to explain why there is not a relevant 
analogy between a railroad sleeping car and an inn.  9 It adds 
a reason of policy: “[T] he passenger has no right to expect, 
and in fact does not expect, the same degree of security from 
thieves while in an open berth in a car on a railroad as in 
a stateroom of a steamboat, securely locked and otherwise 
guarded from intrusion.”  10 Even that, however, is supported 
by the analogy between the stateroom and a room at an inn.  11 
 So far as the court’s opinion goes, its ruling extends the 
liability as an insurer that applies to innkeepers only to 
steamboat operators. It is not difﬁ cult to enlarge the ruling 
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[19]
to encompass more. One might, for example, infer from the 
opinion that at least in some other circumstances, if conﬁ -
dence is reposed in an enterprise offering services to the pub-
lic, which creates an opportunity for plunder, the enterprise 
is liable as an insurer. But the opinion does not read that way, 
and insofar as the enlarged rule exceeds the bounds of the 
analogy between an inn and a steamboat, it is speculative and 
awaits another case in which other facts will or will not be 
found by analogy to be subject to the same rule. One might 
speculate, for example, about the liability of a stagecoach or a 
bus that carries passengers overnight; but, in view of the dif-
ferences between an inn and a steamboat, on one hand, and 
a stagecoach and a bus, on the other, such speculation might 
go either way and would be far from certain. The court’s rul-
ing, on its own terms, is limited to the content of the analogy 
from which it arises.  
 b.   Statute:  Buck v. Jewell- LaSalle Realty Co. ; Fortnightly 
Corp. v. United Artists Television, Inc. ; Teleprompter 
Corp. v. Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. ; 
Twentieth Century Music Corp. v. Aiken  
 Section 1 of the   Copyright Act of 1909 provided: “Any per-
son entitled thereto, upon complying with the provisions 

Legal Reason
[20]
20
of this title, shall have the exclusive right  …  [t] o perform 
the copyrighted work publicly for proﬁ t if it be a musical 
 composition.”  12   In  Buck v.  Jewell- LaSalle Realty Co. , 13 the 
defendant, Jewell- LaSalle, operated a hotel in Kansas City. 
The hotel had a master radio receiving set, which was wired 
to its public and private rooms. It received broadcasts of a 
local radio station that included copyrighted songs of com-
posers represented by the American Society of Composers, 
Authors, and Publishers (ASCAP) and transmitted the broad-
casts to the hotel’s rooms. The defendant was notiﬁ ed that 
it was infringing copyrights and, when the reception and 
transmission of the broadcasts continued, ASCAP sued for 
an injunction and damages. Relief was denied on the basis 
that the hotel’s acts in receiving and transmitting programs 
broadcast by the radio station did not constitute a “perfor-
mance” under the Act and were not, therefore, covered by 
the copyright. The plaintiffs appealed to the Circuit Court 
of Appeals, which certiﬁ ed to the Supreme Court the ques-
tion whether the hotel was performing the songs within the 
meaning of the Copyright Act. Among other arguments, the 
defendant contended that the reception and transmission of 
a program to its rooms was “no different from listening to a 
distant rendition of the same program.”  14 Since the energy 
that activated the receiver was part of the same energy that 
was set in motion by the performer, the receiver was merely 
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[21]
“a mechanical or electrical ear- trumpet for the better audi-
tion of a distant performance.” 15  
 The Supreme Court concluded otherwise. Sounds, it said, 
consist of waves that pass through the air and are locally 
audible. Music played at a broadcasting studio is not directly 
heard at a distant receiving set. The sound waves are trans-
mitted as inaudible electrical currents –  radio waves – that the 
receiver converts back into audible sound waves. The guests 
in the hotel did not, therefore, hear the original program as it 
was produced; they heard a reproduction of it. And the repro-
duction was a performance: “There is no difference in sub-
stance between the case where a hotel engages an orchestra 
to furnish the music and that where, by means of the radio 
set and loud- speakers here employed, it furnishes the same 
music for the same purpose. In each the music is produced 
by instrumentalities under its control.”  16 
 The Court’s opinion is brief. Its conclusion rests entirely 
on the analogy it drew between a live hotel orchestra, perfor-
mances of which were unquestionably covered by the copy-
right, and reception and transmission of a radio broadcast. 
The Court noted that there might be policy reasons why such 
activities should not be regarded as infringement of the copy-
right, but the   Copyright Act did not so provide.  17 It observed 
further that Congress was then undertaking revisions of the 
Act. 18 Considerations of policy, in short, were not apposite. 

Legal Reason
[22]
22
Having to decide whether the hotel’s activities were more like 
 playing  the music or  listening  to it, the radio itself more like a 
microphone or a hearing aid, the Court drew on the analogy 
to a live orchestra, and the case was decided.  
 Thirty- seven years later, in   Fortnightly Corp. v.  United 
Artists Television, Inc. , 19 the Supreme Court revisited its hold-
ing in  Jewell- LaSalle , in the context of television.   Fortnightly 
operated community antenna television (CATV) systems, by 
which television programs of ﬁ ve stations were transmitted to 
homes in communities that the stations’ own broadcasts did 
not reach. The programs included movies to which United 
Artists held the copyrights. The licenses that United Artists 
gave to the stations to show the movies did not authorize a 
further transmission. United Artists sued Fortnightly for cop-
yright infringement. As in  Jewell- LaSalle , the crucial question 
was whether Fortnightly had “performed” the movies. 
 Relying on the holding of the earlier case, the trial court 
and the court of appeals answered that it had. This time, how-
ever, the Supreme Court came out the other way. It said that 
although transmission of a television program was clearly not 
a performance in a conventional sense, the question could 
not be resolved by resort to ordinary meaning and legislative 
history, for television had been unknown when the Copyright 
Act was enacted.  20 Instead, the Court considered a number 
of examples of activities that were, or were not, regarded 
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[23]
as performances under the Act and reasoned by analogy. 
Contrasting the exhibitor of a movie or play, who unquestion-
ably performs it, and a member of a theater audience, who 
unquestionably does not, and extending those examples to a 
television broadcaster, on one hand, and a television viewer, 
on the other, the Court concluded that Fortnightly, like a tele-
vision viewer, was not an “active performer” but rather a “pas-
sive beneﬁ ciary” of the performance of another.  21 “Essentially,” 
the Court said, “a CATV system no more than enhances the 
viewer’s capacity to receive the broadcaster’s signals … CATV 
equipment is powerful and sophisticated, but the basic func-
tion the equipment serves is little different from that served 
by the equipment generally furnished by a television viewer.”  22 
A CATV system, that is to say, is more like a pair of binoculars 
than a movie projector. Reinforcing its conclusion, the Court 
noted a number of respects in which the function of a CATV 
system is unlike the function of a broadcaster.  23 Invited by the 
Solicitor General to reach a compromise decision that would 
accommodate considerations of copyright, communications, 
and antitrust policy, the Court declined the invitation; “[t] hat 
job,” it said, “is for Congress.”  24 As for the conﬂ icting opinion 
in  Jewell- LaSalle , it “must be understood as limited to its own 
facts.”  25 
 Six years later, the Court considered again whether a CATV 
system performs the television programs that it transmits, in 

Legal Reason
[24]
24
 Teleprompter Corp. v.  Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc . 26 
The plaintiffs argued that the case differed from  Fortnightly 
in a number of respects, which, they said, made the defen-
dants’ activities of reception and transmission enough like 
broadcasting to count as a performance. Some of the CATV 
systems in this case originated their own programs, the func-
tion of an ordinary broadcaster; they sold advertising time, 
a characteristic of broadcasters; and they licensed some 
of their original programs to other CATV systems, again 
behaving like broadcasters.  27 Some of the defendants, like 
Fortnightly, transmitted programs beyond the range of the 
original broadcast, which also, the plaintiffs argued, made it 
akin to a broadcaster.  28 
 None of that, the Court said, made any difference. Adhering 
to its reasoning in   Fortnightly , the Court said that while anal-
ogies to the performance and viewing of live or ﬁ lmed per-
formances “were necessarily imperfect, a simple line could 
be drawn: ‘Broadcasters perform. Viewers do not perform.’ ”  29 
Although the CATV systems in this case had some of the trap-
pings of a broadcaster, nevertheless they were more like view-
ers. As for the transmission of signals beyond the range of the 
original broadcast, that was still “essentially a viewer function, 
irrespective of the distance between the broadcasting station 
and the ultimate viewer.”  30 The Court speculated a little about 
likely consequences of its holding for the television industry, 
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[25]
but, it said, developing facts on which to base a sounder rule 
and framing such a rule were legislative, rather than judi-
cial, functions and “beyond the competence of this Court.”  31 
“[R] esolution of the many sensitive and important problems 
in this ﬁ eld … must be left to Congress.”  32 Dissenting in part, 
Justice Blackmun observed that the Court’s “simple” analysis, 
“Broadcasters perform. Viewers do not perform,” was “sim-
plistic.”  33 Justice Douglas, also dissenting, insisted that “[i]n 
any realistic practical sense” the activities of CATV systems 
were broadcasting, not viewing, and should be so regarded.  34 
 Fortnightly , he said, should be limited “to its precise facts,” as 
the Court had previously limited  Jewell- LaSalle . 35 
 The Supreme Court had one more opportunity to con-
sider the question a year later, in  Twentieth Century Music 
Corp. v.  Aiken . 36 Aiken operated a fast- food shop, in which 
he installed a radio with four speakers. Throughout the day, 
Aiken, his employees, and his customers heard whatever was 
broadcast on the stations to which the radio was tuned. As 
in  Jewell- LaSalle , the holders of copyrights to some of the 
songs that were broadcast sued for copyright infringement. 
Although this case involved radio, not television, and had 
nothing to do with cable transmission, the Court said that 
 Fortnightly and  Teleprompter , not  Jewell- LaSalle , were control-
ling: “If, by analogy to a live performance in a concert hall 
or cabaret, a radio station ‘performs’ a musical composition 

Legal Reason
[26]
26
when it broadcasts it, the same analogy would seem to require 
the conclusion that those who listen to the broadcast through 
the use of radio receivers do not perform the composition.”  37 
The Court noted some of the practical difﬁ culties of applying 
a contrary rule and left it at that. 
 In all of these opinions, there was reference to the policy 
considerations that might point one way or the other and 
the possibility of a legislative solution, incidentally in   Jewell- 
LaSalle  and with increasing emphasis, either by the major ity 
or by the dissent, in the later opinions. However, the Court 
regarded itself as bound not to resolve the problem on pol-
icy grounds. Its task was to apply the statute before it, even 
though, as the Court observed in  Fortnightly , the statute “was 
drafted long before the development of the electronic phe-
nomena” that were at issue.  38 Performing its task, the Court 
relied ﬁ rst and foremost on analogies between an ordinary 
performer and a broadcaster, on one hand, and between a 
member of an ordinary, on- site audience and a radio listener 
or television viewer on the other. Insofar as instrumental 
arguments appear in the opinion, they are peripheral, not 
central, and are made not to supplant the analogies but to 
support them. Nor is there evident any general rule from 
which the controlling analogies can be derived. The shift 
from  Jewell- LaSalle  to the latter three cases, which required 
that it be “limited to its own facts,” was little more than a 
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[27]
reconﬁ guration of those analogies, without further explana-
tion. 39 Were the analogies left aside, the opinions would have 
a gaping hole at their center.  
 c.   Constitution:   Olmstead v. United States ; 
 Katz v. United States  
 Olmstead was the leading ﬁ gure in a conspiracy to bootleg 
liquor. The conspirators used the telephone to receive orders 
for the liquor and to arrange for delivery. Federal prohibition 
ofﬁ cers tapped the telephone lines of the main ofﬁ ce of the 
conspiracy and the homes of four of the conspirators over 
a long period. The taps were made from outside the prem-
ises, without trespass on the conspirators’ property. Evidence 
from the taps was used at the trial of Olmstead and other 
conspirators, over their objection that it had been obtained in 
violation of the Fourth Amendment and was therefore inad-
missible. The defendants were convicted, and the convictions 
were afﬁ rmed on appeal.  40 
 The Supreme Court afﬁ rmed. The larger part of the 
Court’s opinion reviewed prior cases under the Fourth 
Amendment, all of which had involved the govern-
ment’s search for and seizure of a document or tangible 
thing, rather than overhearing a private conversation, by 

Legal Reason
[28]
28
telephone or otherwise. Having concluded its review, the 
Court said: “The Amendment itself shows that the search is 
to be of material things –  the person, the house, his papers 
or his effects. The description of the warrant necessary to 
make the proceeding lawful, is that it must specify the place 
to be searched and the person or  things to be seized.”  41 The 
defendants urged that the wiretapping was analogous to the 
government’s opening a sealed letter in the mail. Agreeing 
that opening a letter was a search and seizure, the Court 
rejected the analogy to wiretapping. A letter, it said, is “a 
paper, an effect.”  42 In this case, however:
 There was no searching. There was no seizure. The 
evidence was secured by the use of the sense of hearing 
and that only. There was no entry of the houses or ofﬁ ces 
of the defendants … The language of the Amendment can 
not be extended and expanded to include telephone wires 
reaching to the whole world from the defendant’s house 
or ofﬁ ce. The intervening wires are not part of his house 
or ofﬁ ce any more than are the highways along which 
they are stretched.  43  
 In the absence of “a seizure of [a defendant’s] papers or 
his tangible material effects” or “an actual physical inva-
sion of his house,” the tapping of telephone lines is not 
“a search or seizure within the meaning of the Fourth 
Amendment.”  44 Congress might protect the secrecy of 
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[29]
telephone conversations by appropriate legislation, if it 
chose to do so.  45  
 Dissenting, Justice   Brandeis argued that the reference 
to “searches” and “seizures” in the Fourth Amendment 
should not be applied literally. In view of the purpose of the 
Amendment, which is to protect the individual’s right to be 
let alone by the government, “every unjustiﬁ able intrusion by 
the Government upon the privacy of the individual, whatever 
the means employed, must be deemed a violation.”  46 From that 
point of view, it was irrelevant whether there was a physical 
entry or search; with respect to the crucial matter, the intru-
sion on privacy, the two situations were alike –  analogous –  
and the same rule should be applied to both. Brandeis pointed 
to other cases, none of them involving a telephone tap or oral 
communication of any kind, in which the notion of a search 
and seizure had been interpreted expansively to carry out the 
Amendment’s   purpose. 47 Justices  Butler and   Stone agreed. 
Justice Butler observed: “Tapping the wires and listening in by 
the ofﬁ cers literally constituted a search for evidence. As the 
communications passed, they were heard and   taken down.”  48 
 Almost forty years later, the Supreme Court revisited the 
issue of wiretapping in   Katz v. United States . 49 Katz, a book-
maker, was convicted of transmitting wagering information 
by telephone. At trial, the government introduced evidence of 
his end of conversations that he had made from a telephone 

Legal Reason
[30]
30
booth. Government agents had overheard and recorded what 
he said by a device attached to the outside of the booth. 
 The government contended that the Fourth Amendment 
was inapplicable, there having been no physical penetration 
of the telephone booth and no seizure of tangible property.  50 
The Court disagreed. Citing a case decided after  Olmstead , 51 
it said that the Amendment extended to the recording of oral 
statements and might apply even if there were no trespass. 
Adopting Brandeis’s view in  Olmstead , the Court said that the 
key was not property but privacy. “The Government’s activi-
ties in electronically listening to and recording the petitioner’s 
words violated the privacy upon which he justiﬁ ably relied 
while using the telephone booth and thus constituted a ‘search 
and seizure’ within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.”  52 
 Justice Black dissented. The   Fourth Amendment’s lan-
guage, he said, “connote[s]  the idea of tangible things with 
size, form, and weight, things capable of being searched, 
seized, or both  …  A conversation overheard by eavesdrop-
ping, whether by plain snooping or wiretapping is not tangi-
ble and, under the normally accepted meanings of the words, 
can neither be searched nor seized.”  53 Furthermore, eaves-
dropping was not unknown when the Fourth Amendment 
was drafted. Had the Framers intended that it be included 
within the Fourth Amendment, Black believed, “they would 
have used the appropriate language to do so.”  54 To apply 
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[31]
language directed at searches and seizures to eavesdropping 
was, he said, “clever word juggling.”  55 
 The word “analogy” is not used in  Katz , but it might well 
have been. The words of the Fourth Amendment do not apply 
literally to eavesdropping, because, just as Black said, one 
would not ordinarily refer to searching or seizing what is only 
spoken. The nub of the Court’s argument was that, in light 
of the purpose of the Fourth Amendment, eavesdropping is 
analogous to a search and seizure, and the analogy is close 
enough to call for the same result. Making the analogy more 
concrete by reference to prior cases, it said: “No less than an 
individual in a business ofﬁ ce, in a friend’s apartment, or in a 
taxicab, a person in a telephone booth may rely upon the pro-
tection of the Fourth Amendment.”  56 Neither the Court nor 
Justice   Black had much to say for or against the exclusion of 
evidence obtained by wiretapped conversations as a matter 
of policy, although some of the concurring opinions referred 
brieﬂ y to cases involving national security.  57 Insofar as instru-
mental considerations of that kind were taken into account, it 
was only to show that the analogy itself was sound. 
 One can ﬁ nd in the opinion in  Katz the statement of a gen-
eral principle from which the result is drawn. It is because 
the eavesdropping “violated the privacy upon which [Katz] 
justiﬁ ably relied while using the telephone booth” that it was 
a search and seizure.  58 That proposition has generally been 

Legal Reason
[32]
32
regarded as the crux of the case. It is not unqualiﬁ ed, how-
ever. Elsewhere, the Court said:
 [T] he Fourth Amendment cannot be translated into a general 
constitutional “right to privacy.” That Amendment protects 
individual privacy against certain kinds of governmental 
intrusion, but its protections go further, and often have 
nothing to do with privacy at all. Other provisions of the 
Constitution protect personal privacy from other forms of 
governmental invasion. But the protection of a person’s 
 general  right to privacy –  his right to be let alone by other 
people –  is, like the protection of his property and of his 
very life, left largely to the law of the individual States.  59 
 The reason why  this  invasion of Katz’s privacy constituted 
a search and seizure although other invasions might not 
is provided by the analogy that the Court drew between the 
telephone booth from which Katz spoke and “a business 
ofﬁ ce  …  a friend’s apartment  …  or  …  a taxicab.” It is easy 
to overlook the analogy, because the privacy at stake seems 
so obvious, in comparison with other aspects of privacy that 
the Court mentioned.  60 But, as Justice Black’s dissenting opin-
ion makes plain, without the analogy, the Court’s argument is 
 incomplete. 
 In none of the foregoing cases does the analogy on which 
the Court primarily relied disappear from view. Nor could it. 
For it is a crucial part of the argument. Were the comparison 
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[33]
with an innkeeper eliminated in  Adams , the comparisons 
with live performance and listening or viewing eliminated 
in  Jewell- LaSalle  and the other cases, the comparison with a 
physical search eliminated in  Olmstead and  Katz , the opin-
ions would collapse. In each of the cases, it is possible to 
reject the analogy without logical error, as the dissenting 
Justices in the latter two sets of cases showed. But it cannot 
simply be shelved or displaced; nor can it be reconstructed 
as a different kind of argument that omits the analogy, with-
out transforming it altogether. The opinions give no sign that 
the judges are uncomfortable with their reasoning, or that, 
as   Sunstein suggests,  61 they argued as they did because they 
were unable to agree on what would be a sound policy or 
instrumental arguments to achieve it. On the contrary, they 
studiously avoid embarking on that kind of inquiry, because 
it was not necessary to the argument being made and also, 
most explicitly in the broadcasting cases, because it was inap-
propriate to their task. 
 If one attends to scholarly writings about the use of ana-
logical arguments in legal reasoning, the opinions in all 
these cases are radically defective. Absent from all of them 
is a statement of a general, fully dispositive principle that 
the court is applying –  indeed, in the view of some critics of 
analogical argument, must be applying –  if the court is to be 
credited with having reasoned at all. The opinions themselves 

Legal Reason
[34]
34
offer little support for that view. Any principle that a court 
offers appears not to reach further than what is required 
by a comparison of the speciﬁ c facts before the court with 
other facts, equally speciﬁ c, for which the result is known. 
So, although in   Adams , the court evidently thought that the 
passengers’ reliance on the steamboat operator and the oper-
ator’s temptation to betray that conﬁ dence were signiﬁ cant, 
it went no further than to conclude that, in view of those 
facts, the relationship between operator and passengers was 
like the relationship between an innkeeper and his guests. It 
did not purport to say what the outcome would be if another 
form of transportation were involved or in any other kind of 
situation in which one person reposes conﬁ dence in another 
who is tempted to betray it. In the   broadcasting cases, the 
Court did not attempt to catalog every kind of technologi-
cal feat that would or would not constitute a “performance” 
under the provisions of the copyright law. It was able to dis-
tinguish the decision in  Jewell- LaSalle  from the three cases 
that followed it precisely because in the earlier case it had 
not laid down a rule for broadcasting generally. In the lat-
ter series of cases as well, there was need for two further 
opinions after  Fortnightly was decided because the Court had 
not in that case declared a general rule for every manner of 
broadcast transmission of radio and television or even for 
CATV systems alone.  
www.ebook3000.com

Steamboats … and Electronic Eavesdropping
[35]
 Olmstead and   Katz appear to come closest to the 
statement of a general rule. But the opinions in those 
cases as well are more narrowly focused. “The [Fourth] 
Amendment,” the Court said in  Olmstead , “does not forbid 
 what was done here .” 62 Overruling  Olmstead , the Court said 
in  Katz  that “what [a person] seeks to preserve as private, 
even in an area accessible to the public,  may be constitu-
tionally protected.”  63 Tailoring its conclusion to the facts 
of the case, it said: “[A]  person in a telephone booth may 
rely upon the protection of the Fourth Amendment. One 
who occupies it, shuts the door behind him, and pays the 
toll that permits him to place a call is surely entitled to 
assume that the words he utters into the mouthpiece will 
not be broadcast to the world.”  64 What the result would be 
if the person left the door to the booth open, or if he called 
from one of a row of unenclosed public telephones, or in 
any of the other circumstances to which the initial general 
proposition might apply, the Court did not say. If, in the 
course of comparing eavesdropping on Katz’s conversa-
tion in the telephone booth to other situations to which 
the Fourth Amendment applied, the Court referred to a 
“legitimate expectation of privacy,” that phrase was more 
a generalization from specific results than a principle lead-
ing to them; and even as such, it left abundant opportu-
nity for further distinctions, as later cases showed.  65 The 

Legal Reason
[36]
36
familiar practice of  distinguishing  a prior case from the 
one presently before a court, as in  Fortnightly , depends on 
such reticence. To be sure, one might speculate what the 
result would be were an analogous case to arise, but such 
speculation, like the court’s reasoning, would depend on 
the relevance of the analogy.  
www.ebook3000.com

[37]
 CHAPTER 2 
 Analogical Legal Reasoning  
 The use of analogies in the cases discussed in  Chapter 1  is 
strongly at odds with accounts of  analogical reasoning that 
treat it, one way or another, as ﬂ awed or inadequate. In all 
of the cases, the court relied on analogical reasoning as an 
integral part of its argument. Much of the discussion in the 
opinions is deployed to vindicate the court’s reliance on one 
analogy rather than another. Dissenting judges express their 
objection to the majority’s conclusion as disagreement with 
the analogy on which the majority relies, and they offer an 
alternative analogy that seems to them more persuasive. Far 
from analogies serving merely to illustrate or underscore 
an argument on another basis, arguments from prior cases 
are used to explain why the analogy is a good one, and the 

Legal Reason
[38]
38
analogy in turn supports reliance on those other arguments. 
If the court expresses a general principle that expands on an 
analogy (“Broadcasters perform; viewers do not perform,” 
“Privacy protects people, not places”), the principle by itself 
is too broad to express the court’s holding and requires refer-
ence to the analogy to determine its scope. The direction of 
thought is from the analogy to the principle, rather than the 
other way around. 
 The dismissive treatment of analogical arguments is not, 
then, based simply on a close reading of judicial opinions, 
which themselves betray no doubt or difﬁ dence about their use. 
Nor is it based on any special formal feature of legal reasoning 
in particular that makes the use of analogical arguments inap-
propriate; on the contrary, their use in legal reasoning is espe-
cially pronounced. Rather, it follows from a tacit or express 
assumption that only arguments with the credentials of induc-
tive or deductive logic count as true reasoning at all. Since an 
argument that depends on an analogy satisﬁ es neither of those 
forms, it is concluded that the analogy must serve some other 
cognitive or rhetorical function or that it is only a placeholder 
for a different argument in proper form. From that perspective, 
the pervasive use of analogies in legal reasoning is a curios-
ity of the law, interesting perhaps, useful perhaps, and invit-
ing explanation, but having little to do with fundamental legal 
concerns.   For those who promote the virtues of analogical 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[39]
reasoning, its virtues are not those of reasoned argument but 
rather the political beneﬁ ts of selling reason short. Others sug-
gest that the prevalence of analogical reasoning is due to slip-
shod judicial work habits and a failure to come to grips with 
the real issues. Or an analogy is regarded as something like a 
cognitive spark plug that is no longer needed once the engine 
of reason turns over. One way or another even the possibil-
ity of an analogical argument is dismissed as a ﬁ gment of our 
confused logical imaginations. What purports to be analogi-
cal reasoning is either an ordinary deductive inference or not 
properly regarded as reasoning at all.  
 Because the criticism of analogical reasoning in the law 
takes this form, its defense proceeds in stages. I begin in 
this chapter with examples of the use of analogical reason-
ing in our everyday lives, simply to show in the most direct 
way that it can be done: we do it all the time. Building on 
those examples as well as the cases presented in  Chapter 1 , 
I  discuss the use of analogical arguments in the law and 
the manner in which analogical legal argument intersects 
with the model of legal reasoning as a coherent, deductively 
ordered hierarchy of rules. In  Chapter  3 , I  consider the 
objections to this account of legal reasoning in more detail. 
In  Chapter 4 , drawing on work in epistemology and cogni-
tive psychology, I sketch how we reason analogically, not to 
instruct those who do not already know how, for instruction 

Legal Reason
[40]
40
is not needed – the critics of analogical arguments assur-
edly rely on them, along with the rest of us – but to meet the 
challenge that, despite all appearances to the contrary, it 
cannot be done. 
 a.  Practical Analogical Reasoning  
 Mary spills cranberry juice on a white tablecloth. “Try pouring 
salt on it,” Edna says. “It works with wine.” Charlie cannot 
start his lawn mower. It occurs to him that when his car does 
not start, it sometimes helps to turn off the motor and let it 
stand for a while. He goes inside to watch television.  
 Although they are not likely to notice it or to make much 
of it if they do, Edna and Charlie are reasoning by analogy. 
Observing the similarity between (red) wine and cranberry 
juice – both are red and liquid –  and knowing that salt helps 
to remove a wine stain, Edna speculates that cranberry juice 
shares that characteristic with wine as well. Knowing that his 
lawn mower and his car are both powered by internal com-
bustion engines (or perhaps even less, only that both engines 
use gasoline for fuel) and that sometimes when his car does 
not start, it is because he has ﬂ ooded the engine, Charlie spec-
ulates that that is why his lawn mower does not start, and he 
waits for the excess gasoline to evaporate. 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[41]
 In countless situations of everyday life, we engage in prac-
tical analogical reasoning of this kind. Most of the time, 
confronting a problem that is not just like one that we have 
encountered before, we neither embark on a program of 
experiments to discover what will work nor do research in the 
appropriate ﬁ eld to learn the applicable general rule. There is 
not time for that, and even if there were, ordinarily it would 
not be time well spent. Rather, we make an educated guess, 
based on our experience of situations that are more or less 
similar. Very likely, we could not offer any rule or principle 
that justiﬁ es the guess; it is the past experience itself on which 
we rely. Unless Edna happens to be a food chemist, she prob-
ably does not know why salt removes a wine stain. She knows 
only that it does and relies on the fact that cranberry juice 
also is a red liquid. If Mary asked her to explain why salt has 
that effect, Edna might respond, “I don’t know, it just does,” 
or she might say something conclusory like, “I suppose it 
absorbs the wine,” and let it go at that. If the stain were blood, 
she might not recommend salt – blood is a red liquid, but it 
seems less like wine in other respects –  and if it were choco-
late ice cream, she probably would not, although a stain is a 
stain and, absent any better idea, why not? Charlie need not 
know why ﬂ ooding the engine prevents a car or, as he specu-
lates, a lawn mower, from starting or even know, except in 
the most general terms, what “ﬂ ooding the engine” means; 

Legal Reason
[42]
42
nor need he know why letting the engine sit “unﬂ oods” it. If 
he were an auto mechanic or a small- engine repairman, he 
would know more. But for his purposes, it is enough to know 
that the engines of a car and a lawn mower are more or less 
similar. 
 The similarities that prompt Edna and Charlie to reason 
analogically are, of course, accompanied by many dissimilari-
ties. Without giving it a thought, Edna no doubt assumed that 
the absorbent capacity of salt would not be affected by the 
fact that wine is more expensive than cranberry juice, or that 
the wine that was spilled the other time was imported and 
cranberry juice is not. Were she asked why she made those 
assumptions, she would most likely be puzzled, because it all 
seems so obvious. What something costs or whether it is a 
domestic product or imported just does not seem like a qual-
ity that has anything to do with using salt to remove a stain. 
Charlie may know very little about cars or small engines. 
Nevertheless, almost certainly it will not occur to him that 
the lawn mower may not work the way his car does because 
it is red and the car is blue. How does he know that? Well, 
everyone knows that the color of a machine has nothing to 
do with how it works. If, when Charlie told his wife that the 
lawn mower would not start and he was going inside to watch 
television, she were to reply, “What’s the good of that? Try 
kicking it. That gets a donkey started,” Charlie would most 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[43]
likely go on inside, even though a lawn mower and a donkey 
are more similar in some respects than are a lawn mower and 
a car. They just don’t seem very much alike for  this  purpose. 
Kicking a lawn mower  might help to start it, but it does not 
seem likely. 
 In a sense, practical analogical reasoning is “incompletely 
theorized,” as   Sunstein describes the outcome of analogical 
legal reasoning.  1 Most of the time, however, it would be more 
accurate to say that it is not theorized at all. Edna and Charlie 
have practical problems, for which their  experience suggests 
practical solutions. Having gotten that far, a theory is beside 
the point. The observed similarity between past experience 
and present problem or, in the language of analogy, between 
the  source and the  target of the analogy is itself enough to 
prompt the connection between them, without mediation by 
a general rule.  2 If they were asked to frame a rule from which 
the solution followed, very likely they would not know how 
to proceed, unless they simply constructed a rule out of the 
source and target themselves: “Salt removes stains from wine 
and cranberry juice,” “If a car or a lawn mower won’t start, 
letting it stand a while may help.” A more general rule might 
occur to them –  “Salt removes red stains,” “Letting an engine 
stand for a while may help to start it” –  or a more informative 
rule –  “Salt absorbs liquids, which carry some of the stain-
ing pigment with them,” “Letting excess gasoline evaporate 

Legal Reason
[44]
44
helps to start an engine.” But it would make no difference. 
For they are interested for the moment in solving a particular 
problem, and speculation beyond that is not to the purpose. 
Were they obliged to conduct an empirical inquiry in order 
to frame a rule from which they could deduce a solution to 
the problem at hand, they would be stymied altogether. Of 
course, their ready solutions may turn out to be mistaken.  3 If 
the matter were of sufﬁ cient importance and there were time, 
they might try to conﬁ rm their solutions inductively before 
applying them. If, for example, Mary’s tablecloth were a fam-
ily heirloom, she might want to try Edna’s suggestion on a 
white rag before pouring salt on the tablecloth. In a matter 
of very great importance, one might insist on understanding 
how a solution works and formulating a rule (which might 
be a good deal broader than the particular problem requires) 
from which the solution follows. But for ordinary affairs, the 
analogy itself is enough. 
 Practical analogical reasoning allows a person to take 
considered action and to achieve his purposes over a vastly 
larger range than would otherwise be possible. Without the 
capacity to reason in this way and to base one’s actions on 
the outcome, a person would be effectively immobilized, 
except when the similarity between a present problem and 
past experience is so great that they are for practical purposes 
the same.  4 Without resort to analogical reasoning, how would 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[45]
Edna go about removing the stain from her tablecloth, unless 
she had a book that told how to remove stains, cranberry 
juice in particular? How would Charlie, using a lawn mower 
for the ﬁ rst time and ﬂ ooding the engine, get the job done, 
unless there were a neighbor who had used a lawn mower 
and could advise him? How would the neighbor have learned 
what to do, and how would he know that what works for his 
lawn mower will work for Charlie’s, which is not the same 
model? Far from being special to the law, analogical reason-
ing is used by all of us constantly, to conduct the most ordi-
nary affairs. Our lives depend on it. 
 To say that reasoning by analogy is used in the ordinary 
affairs of everyday life is not to say that it is used only in 
unimportant matters. If a doctor is visited by a patient who 
complains of symptoms that match closely ones that the doc-
tor has seen before, she will most likely prescribe the same 
remedy. If the symptoms are similar but not quite the same 
as those she has seen, we do not expect or want her to say, 
“Come back in six months, after I have studied the matter and 
done some experiments.” The patient wants her to prescribe a 
remedy now, which the doctor probably will do, reasoning by 
analogy and prescribing the remedy that worked on the past 
occasion most similar to the present one. 
 Whatever success Edna, Charlie, and the rest of us have in 
using analogical reasoning to solve the small and large crises 

Legal Reason
[46]
46
of everyday life, those who dismiss or decry its use in the law 
are not likely to be convinced that such success has anything 
to do with their concerns. The off- the- cuff, practical problem- 
solving in which we all engage will appear to them an odd 
model for the rulings of a court. In the ﬁ rst place, the nature 
of the tasks is different. Edna and Charlie require speciﬁ c 
information about what is the case, more particularly, how 
things work. A court, on the other hand, determines the rights 
and duties of the parties; it prescribes behavior. (The tasks are 
not always so unalike. We commonly use analogical reason-
ing to resolve a question about how one ought to behave or 
ought to have behaved in a speciﬁ c situation. Such a question 
is prescriptive, like the questions before a court.) 
 Likewise, the manner of going about the tasks is different. 
The lessons of ordinary experience, like those on which Edna 
and Charlie rely, are mostly acquired and applied in haphaz-
ard, episodic fashion, even if they are sometimes gathered 
into workaday practices that have some of the quality of rules. 
The law, on the other hand, is organized systematically into 
a body of rules set forth as “black letter law,” codes, restate-
ments,  5 and the like, which are available for examination and 
intended for use in future cases. A judicial   decision of any sig-
niﬁ cance is carefully considered and is not likely to be reached 
until the issue has been debated and alternative outcomes 
forcefully defended. Once rendered, it is subject to review and 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[47]
reconsideration by other judges as well as by lawyers and legal 
scholars.  6 Furthermore, adjudication is constrained by formal 
procedures that have no counterpart in daily life. A  proce-
dural irregularity may itself be the ground for invalidating an 
outcome, however persuasive it is on its own terms. (In con-
trast, even if one thought that Mary would be foolish not to try 
salt ﬁ rst on something less valuable than her best tablecloth, 
so long as the stain is removed, Edna will not be faulted.) So 
also, having to deal with a stained tablecloth or a balky lawn 
mower, we are not likely to think at all about how the action 
that we take then will affect what we do thereafter. No doubt, 
if the solution works, we shall use it again if the same problem 
recurs, or we may (reasoning analogically) apply it to a differ-
ent but similar problem (red jelly). But for the moment, our 
concern is conﬁ ned to the matter at hand; the problem and the 
solution are particular, not general. Although a judicial deci-
sion also is particular –  it decides that case and no other –  its 
implications are general; it bespeaks a rule grounded in the 
past and extending into the future. 
 All of these differences point to a further, overriding differ-
ence. If, on one hand, the solution to an   everyday  practical 
problem is likely to be reached without extensive study or 
formal procedure and without consideration beyond the 
concrete problem itself, on the other hand, it can generally 
be put to the test directly and deﬁ nitely. Mary’s tablecloth 

Legal Reason
[48]
48
comes clean, Charlie’s lawn mower starts, or it does not. 
And since nothing else is at stake, there is no more to be 
said  . In adjudication, the situation is reversed. The delib-
eration and procedural formality that precede the decision 
and the concern to reach a result that will be satisfactory 
for similar problems in the future are not reﬂ ected after 
the decision by any deﬁ nite criteria of its correctness.  7 The 
lack of such a test, no doubt, accounts in large measure 
for the attention to the process by which the decision is 
reached, as well as the scholarly insistence that analogical 
reasoning be replaced with more rigorous logical forms. 
Notwithstanding the many aspects of legal argument and 
decision that have no counterpart in daily life, however, the 
form of reasoning –  deriving the solution to a problem from 
the solution to another problem, on the basis of a similar-
ity between them – is the same in both. Furthermore, while 
the use of analogical reasoning in ordinary affairs is a likely 
and serviceable expedient, in adjudication it is more than 
that. It is indispensable.  
 b.   Legal Reasoning  
 It should be made explicit what has up to now been taken 
for granted. “  Legal reasoning,” as that term is usually used 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[49]
and as I have used it here, refers to the reasoning pattern of 
lawyers when they argue a case and judges when they decide 
one. It does not refer to the reasoning of legislators and their 
aides arguing in support of or in opposition to legislation, 
or of administrative ofﬁ cials when they take steps to enforce 
the law, although they all reason about the law and certainly 
make use of analogies when they do.   The adjudicative task 
of a court is to determine the outcome of a speciﬁ c, concrete 
controversy in all its particularity, typically reﬂ ected in the 
name of a case, which identiﬁ es the opposed parties: “ Smith 
v. Brown .” 8 In this respect, it is quite different from legisla-
tion, the objective of which, even if it is prompted by particu-
lar circumstances, is to fashion a rule of general application 
for all instances of a designated type. So also, it is different 
from executive action, which is invoked to implement a deter-
minate outcome in a particular instance.  9 The difference in 
function explains why analogical reasoning, although it is 
useful in legal matters generally as it is elsewhere, has a spe-
cial role in adjudication. 
 The starting point for an adjudicative decision is the actual 
 facts of a controversy between two (or sometimes more) par-
ties. This aspect of legal reasoning, implicit in the very mean-
ing of adjudication, is manifest in the common provision that 
limits a court’s jurisdiction to a “  case or controversy.”  10 As a 
matter of course, lawyers’ briefs and oral arguments begin 

Legal Reason
[50]
50
with a statement of the facts of the case. So also do judicial 
opinions.  11 Those facts, that case, are what bring the law-
yers and judge into court; that, for the moment, is their only 
business together. Only a small number of the details of the 
situation out of which the controversy arises will affect the 
outcome; but all the details are potentially available for con-
sideration, because it is that speciﬁ c situation and no other 
that needs to be resolved. The lawyers’ arguments and the 
judge’s opinion recite only those facts that they respectively 
believe are material to the outcome. Although there are likely 
to be facts the relevance of which is disputed, there are a great 
many others the relevance or, more likely, the irrelevance of 
which is not in doubt. In  Adams , neither of the lawyers (so 
far as we know) nor the Court of Appeals thought it neces-
sary to mention the purpose of the plaintiff’s trip, or what he 
had eaten for dinner, or whether it had rained on the night 
in question, although any of those facts might have been rel-
evant in other circumstances.  12 Those facts and myriad other 
details about that particular situation –  Adams’s trip upriver –  
were disregarded, but they were available to be considered, if 
the lawyer for one side or the other or the court had thought 
them relevant to the outcome.  
 A second distinctive feature of adjudication is that the 
court’s  decision is to be based entirely on the law. A great deal 
has been written about this requirement, both what it means 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[51]
and how it is carried out. In principle it is straightforward and, 
indeed, obvious. For the question that brings the parties into 
court is what  the law  obligates each of them to do with respect 
to one another in the circumstances, and not, except insofar 
as their legal obligations may implicate such questions, how 
they can best accomplish their individual or mutual goals or, 
the law aside, what goals they ought to pursue or what will 
advance the interests of society generally. (Mary would not 
seek a judicial decision about how to remove that stain, but 
if Edna had stained the tablecloth and done nothing about 
it, Mary might ask a court to declare Edna’s legal obligation 
to replace it. Charlie would not ask a judge how to start his 
lawn mower, but if he were convinced that it was defective, he 
might ask a court to declare that the store that sold it to him 
was legally obligated to repair or replace it.) What are appro-
priate sources of the law is a question about which there is 
much disagreement, but no one doubts that a court is to look 
to those sources and nowhere else.  13 Nor is it permissible to 
conclude that there is no law that disposes of the controversy 
before the court, which must therefore remain unresolved. 
A  judge who can ﬁ nd no statute or judicial precedent that 
deals directly with the matter before her does not throw up 
her hands and tell the litigants to ﬁ ght it out.  14 
 It is a commonplace among trial lawyers that most legal 
controversies arise because the parties have different views 

Legal Reason
[52]
52
about the facts and that once all the factual questions are 
settled, the case is easily decided.   Sometimes, indeed, once 
the facts are known, the applicable rule of law is so clear that 
the court has nothing to do but state the rule and announce 
its decision.  15 A great many cases are resolved in that way. 
Much the greater number of legal obligations, after all, are 
uncontroversial and are never brought into court, because 
the parties recognize their mutual obligations and perform 
them. Tenants pay the rent, employers pay their employees’ 
wages, borrowers return what they have borrowed, without 
resort to adjudication. Shared life in a community would be 
impossible otherwise. 
 If the facts as determined do not fall clearly under a dispos-
itive rule, each side will seek to present the facts and the law 
in a light consistent with the outcome it favors. Facts and law 
are closely intertwined; unless the applicable rules provide 
that certain facts make a difference to the outcome, there is 
no reason to dispute them. That is why no issue was made of 
what Adams ate for dinner on the night his money was stolen, 
even though, perhaps, he and the steward had different recol-
lections of what was served. So, having an eye to the law, a 
lawyer will not only emphasize facts that support his client’s 
position and minimize those that do not, but will also, so far 
as the facts permit, characterize them in a manner that calls 
for application of a rule that favors his client’s position. At 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[53]
the same time, having an eye to the facts, he will emphasize 
rules of law that favor his client’s position and, so far as the 
rules permit, will interpret them in a manner that supports 
that position. Adjusting the characterization of the facts and 
the interpretation of the law mutually to one another, the law-
yer’s objective is to weave the two together into a coherent 
account pointing to the conclusion that the law as applied to 
those facts dictates but one outcome. The opposing lawyer 
will make the same effort in the same manner, but she will, 
of course, direct her argument toward a different outcome. 
 In  Adams , for example, there was no rule that expressly 
deﬁ ned the liability of steamboat operators, and the general 
rule was that a person is not liable for another person’s loss 
unless it is due to the former’s negligence. Innkeepers were 
subject to a stricter rule, which made them liable without 
proof of negligence for their guests’ losses. It was, therefore, 
in the interest of the plaintiff to emphasize that the steam-
boat on which Adams took passage provided overnight lodg-
ing and meals, like an inn, and to disregard the fact that it 
was not a building at all but a means of transportation that 
went up and down the river. Bringing the facts to the rule was 
easier than bringing the rule to the facts and arguing directly 
that the rule about an innkeeper’s liability was intended and 
should be understood to refer not only to innkeepers but also 
to the operator of a steamboat carrying passengers upriver 

Legal Reason
[54]
54
overnight. Whichever the argument, the outcome that it 
supported, which the plaintiff favored, was the same. The 
defendant’s lawyer, on the other hand, would point out that 
a steamboat’s primary function is to get from one place to 
another, like a railroad, while an inn is stationary. 
 In its opinion, the court adopted the plaintiff’s characteri-
zation of the steamboat and called it “for all practical pur-
poses, a ﬂ oating inn,” “one of the modern ﬂ oating palaces 
that  …  navigate the interior waters of the country.”  16 With 
that analogy in place, the rule about an innkeeper’s liabil-
ity became applicable, and the rule about the liability of the 
operator of a railroad sleeping car, which might have been 
thought relevant, became inapt. At the same time, the court 
made a nod in the direction of the plaintiff’s alternative argu-
ment:  even if the innkeeper rule did not apply in terms to 
steamboat operators, “the same considerations of public pol-
icy apply.”  17 
 Similarly, in  Katz , considering the electronic eavesdrop-
ping of Katz’s telephone conversation and confronting the 
rule of  Olmstead  that a search and seizure under the Fourth 
Amendment involves a trespass, the Court might have taken 
either of two routes toward its holding that the eavesdrop-
ping was a violation of his constitutional right. It might have 
relied on a factual analogy and declared that the eavesdrop-
ping was a trespass (or was “constructively” a trespass or 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[55]
was a “quasi- trespass”  18 ), thus bringing the facts of the case 
within the rule of  Olmstead . Or it might have declared, as it 
did, that a search and seizure under the Fourth Amendment 
does not necessarily include a physical trespass, thereby 
expanding the rule to embrace the facts. Just six years earlier, 
 in another case not so unlike  Katz , the Court had adopted the 
former rationale.  19 Police ofﬁ cers gained access to a vacant 
row house adjoining premises that they believed were used 
as headquarters for an illegal gambling operation. By means 
of a “spike mike” inserted into the common wall between the 
houses, which came in contact with a heating duct of the 
suspect house, they were able to overhear conversations that 
took place there.   Distinguishing another case in which the 
Court had held that attaching a listening device to a com-
mon wall without penetrating it did  not constitute a search 
and seizure,  20 the Court emphasized that the spike mike had 
been stuck  into the wall and, reasoning analogically, con-
cluded that this “unauthorized physical penetration into the 
premises” occupied by the defendants satisﬁ ed the trespass 
requirement of a search and seizure “whether or not there 
was a technical trespass under the local property law.”  21 In a 
concurring opinion, Justice Douglas objected to the Court’s 
rationale, which, he argued, made such cases depend on a 
triviality  –  “the depth of the penetration of the electronic 
device” –  rather than the invasion of privacy, which was the 

Legal Reason
[56]
56
same whatever kind of electronic equipment was employed  . 22 
In  Katz , mindful of the result in the earlier case, the federal 
agents who put the eavesdropping device in place had not 
penetrated the wall of the telephone booth;  23 so if anything 
remained of the requirement of a trespass, the eavesdropping 
could not easily have been described as a search and seizure. 
Instead, following Justice Douglas’s line of reasoning, the 
Court modiﬁ ed the rule and enlarged the meaning of “search 
and seizure” to include eavesdropping without any physical 
intrusion in the circumstances of that case.  24 
 Having the facts of a case before him and looking within 
the body of the law for a ground of decision, the task of the 
lawyer or judge is ﬁ rst to locate the facts within a broad area 
of the law dealing with that kind of human conduct, and 
then, including more and more particular detail, progres-
sively to sharpen the focus until there emerges a rule that 
applies squarely to those facts. Ordinarily, the relevant area 
of the law is quickly and easily determined, because the cat-
egories of the law correspond, as they must, to the kinds of 
controversies that arise. Occasionally, the facts of a case do 
not lie neatly within one clearly deﬁ ned category or another 
but fall on the border between two well- deﬁ ned categories, so 
that rules of law from both may alike have some bearing on 
the outcome.  25 The familiar legal categories – torts, contract, 
criminal law, environmental law, securities regulation, and so 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[57]
forth –  are, in any event, not mutually exclusive but are rather 
conventional rubrics that refer to a grouping of rules related 
together by the kind of conduct with which they deal.  26 As 
the focus is sharpened, more and more facts are included –  
a person’s loss of property … while reposing conﬁ dence in 
another  …  without the other’s negligence or fault  …  on a 
steamboat  …  that provides overnight lodging  …  –  and the 
rule is drawn more and more narrowly, until there emerges a 
rule that uniquely applies to those facts. 
 At some point, the convergence of law and facts comes 
to an end. However comprehensively the wording of a rule 
speciﬁ es the circumstances in which it is to be applied, it can-
not specify  all the facts of a particular concrete case without 
losing the quality of a   rule. 27 Words that describe and do not 
merely point to something (“Not this, that!”) are necessarily 
general. No words fully exhaust the description of what they 
describe –  fully replicate, as it were, the thing itself –  and, 
therefore, they do not wholly eliminate the possibility of fur-
ther speciﬁ cation by the inclusion of some additional quali-
ﬁ cation –  “When I said that you could buy a book, I didn’t 
mean a comic book” –  or by the exclusion of some qualiﬁ ca-
tion that had been implicitly taken for granted –  “When I said 
that you could buy a book, I didn’t mean that it had to be an 
educational one.” The explicit use of comprehensive quan-
tiﬁ ers (“any,” “all,” “no”) makes the addition or elimination 

Legal Reason
[58]
58
of further qualiﬁ cations problematic and, no doubt, less con-
vincing; but so long as the qualiﬁ cation is rendered as part of 
the meaning of the words themselves and not as a departure 
from them, it cannot be barred altogether –  “When I said ‘any 
book,’ I certainly did not mean a  comic book !” Furthermore, 
although the words that we use to describe our experience are 
cast as discrete categories, the actual phenomena are mostly 
continuous; “nature” and, generally, human contrivances as 
well avoid sharp breaks. Some general categories leave little 
room for uncertainty (“all men at least eighteen years old”); 
but there is typically, for the most part unavoidably, a range 
of uncertainty at the boundaries, in which some phenomena 
will fall.  28 For both reasons – because words, as symbols with 
meaning, are general, and phenomena, as such, are particu-
lar, and because words, however precise, do not fully distin-
guish phenomena in all their variety – there remains a gap 
between a rule and its applications that no further statement 
of the rule or speciﬁ cation of the facts will close completely. 
Any rule that otherwise appears to apply to the facts of a 
case will be silent about some of its concrete details. One or 
another such detail –  the steamboat’s mobility or its provision 
of lodging, the absence of physical trespass, or the intrusion 
on a private conversation –  may appear to be of special signif-
icance or to be manifestly irrelevant, according to the content 
of the rule under consideration. But none can be disregarded 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[59]
or declared to be irrelevant out of hand, because it is that case 
and no other that is to be decided. 
 Having thus to bridge the gap between facts and rule, one 
may refer to some rule of decision, itself part of the law, that 
provides how much weight should be given to facts, or fac-
tors, of one kind or another or which of two conﬂ icting rules 
should prevail. Such a   rule also is general in form, and there 
will remain a gap between it and the particular occasions of 
its application.  29 In short, at some point in the argument, the 
content of the rules themselves runs out, and straightforward 
application of the law to the facts will falter. Having to take 
account of all the facts in their unique detail and having to 
lodge them under a rule of law, the lawyer or judge will have 
recourse to analogical reasoning to decide whether, all things 
considered, the facts more closely resemble facts subsumed 
under one rule or under another, actually or hypothetically.  
 Although no rule dictates a   decision, in the manner of a 
deductive argument, the choice of which analogy to prefer 
is not like a ﬂ ip of the coin. Just as her common sense, the 
accumulation of ordinary experience, tells Edna that it makes 
no difference how much cranberry juice costs or whether it 
is imported, a lawyer or judge relies on his knowledge and 
experience of the law. The greater his expertise in the par-
ticular area of the law, the more likely it is that the analogy 
he chooses will be convincing to others (just as Edna’s advice 

Legal Reason
[60]
60
to Mary would be more convincing if Edna had a degree 
in food chemistry). The choice is informed also by a broad 
understanding of what is relevant to the sort of decision being 
made –  a matter of liability ( Adams ) or regulation of busi-
ness ( Jewell- LaSalle ) or individual rights ( Katz ) –  and, broader 
still, what generally “counts” in the law  . Especially when the 
choice is a close one, as able opposing lawyers in a seriously 
contested case will make it appear to be, the lawyers’ grasp 
of the issues may be attributed to nothing more deﬁ nite than 
“intuition,” and the judge’s decision to a “hunch” or “whim.” 
But it is the law itself (as well, of course, as ordinary common 
sense) on which a decision properly rests and on the basis of 
which, carefully articulated, it commands assent. A decision 
is not a proof; it does not afford certainty, and reasonable per-
sons may disagree. But in law, as in human affairs generally, 
a proof is not to be had.  
 Surely, however, there are judicial opinions in which ana-
logical argument is absent or plays a subordinate role. The 
need for and the prominence of analogical argument is 
 directly related to the size of the gap between   facts and rule 
that such argument serves to ﬁ ll. If the facts of a case are, as 
it is said, “on all fours” with the facts of a prior case and fall 
squarely under the rule of that case, there is little need to 
engage explicitly in analogical reasoning, because the con-
vergence of facts and rule is accomplished without it. Had 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[61]
Adams spent the night at an inn instead of on a steamboat, 
the innkeeper’s liability would have been clear, and the case 
would probably not have been appealed on that ground to 
two higher courts. So also, had the government agents eaves-
dropped on Katz’s telephone call by means of a “spike mike,” 
as in the earlier case, it would not have required more than 
a citation to that case to vindicate his claim.  30 Sometimes, 
although there is not a prior case precisely on point, the court 
or another superior court has nevertheless indicated in an 
opinion how a case like that should be decided. Discussing 
the liability of an innkeeper in some prior case, for exam-
ple, the New York Court of Appeals might have observed that 
“innkeepers  and all others who provide private accommoda-
tions overnight on land or water are liable as insurers for their 
guest’s losses.” Had it done so, the court in  Adams could have 
relied directly on that and would not have needed to draw the 
analogy between innkeepers and operators of steamboats.  31 
 Sometimes also, in the absence of a rule that plainly covers 
the facts of a case, a court formulates a covering rule on the 
basis of instrumental arguments that do not as such depend 
on analogical reasoning. So, in  Adams , the court’s observation 
that passengers on a steamboat ought to be protected against 
the opportunities for theft might have rested directly on its 
disapproval of theft instead of on the rule about innkeepers. 
Likewise, in  Katz , the Court called attention to the reasonable 

Legal Reason
[62]
62
expectation of privacy of a person in a telephone booth. In 
both cases, the court evidently believed that the effects of its 
decision would be salutary. However weighty such an argu-
ment might have been as a straightforward matter of public 
policy, it would have been entitled to no weight in the case 
before the court, without the support of analogical reason-
ing. The case was to be decided according to the law, and 
whatever instrumental arguments the court brought to bear 
had to be found ﬁ nally within the law itself. The argument 
that it was sound policy to protect passengers on a steamboat 
from theft had a foothold in  Adams because a steamboat was 
a “ﬂ oating inn,” and that argument had been used to justify 
the rule about innkeepers. In  Katz , the expectation of privacy 
of a person in a telephone booth made a difference, because 
it was analogous to the expectation of a person “in a busi-
ness ofﬁ ce, in a friend’s apartment, or in a taxicab,” which 
the Fourth Amendment had previously been held to protect. 
The opinions in  Adams and  Katz would have been very differ-
ent and would have been subject to criticism had there been 
no such analogical connection to prior law and the court 
had relied simply on its conclusion that the outcome that it 
reached was desirable. At a more general level as well, when 
a judge relies on one type of argument –  authoritative text, 
public policy, or some more general consideration –  rather 
than another, he may draw an analogy to prior cases in quite 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[63]
different areas of the law, to show that such reliance is legally 
grounded and not ad hoc.  
 The judge is thus in a different situation from   that of Edna 
and Charlie, who are under no general constraint about how 
to solve the problems before them, except that the solution 
be effective. Although they are likely to reason by analogy, 
they need not. If they have plenty of time, they might experi-
ment with different solutions until they ﬁ nd one that works 
 (although they will almost certainly rely on analogical reason-
ing to narrow the range of their experiments). Or they might 
refer to a rule that covers the case, which might come from 
any source whatever. If Edna had not herself removed any 
stains in the past, she might ﬁ nd no basis in her own experi-
ence from which to draw an analogy. (She might, of course, 
lacking an alternative, draw an analogy, however dubious, 
from a more remote source:  washing clothes or washing 
dishes or washing the dog.) Instead, recalling that her Aunt 
Lizzie had once told her that salt removes lots of stains, she 
might rely simply on that. Or she might refer to a rule, again 
from any source –  “My Aunt Lizzie told me that salt removes 
wine stains” – and use analogical reasoning to extend it to 
Mary’s particular problem. Of course, the more reliable the 
source of such a rule, the more likely Mary is to take Edna’s 
advice. Similarly, if Charlie’s neighbor likes to work on small 
engines, Charlie might just ask him to start his lawn mower 

Legal Reason
[64]
64
for him, while he watches television.  A judge is not free to 
consider Aunt Lizzie’s view, no matter how sensible she usu-
ally is –  not, at least, unless she is an expert in that area of 
the law and has made her view public –  nor may he ask his 
neighbor how to decide a case. For him, having to bring the 
facts of a case within a rule, analogical reasoning is not a 
convenience but a   necessity. 
 There is no ﬁ xed order of precedence between analogical 
argument that supports the application of a rule and the rea-
sons for the rule that are then mustered in support of its appli-
cation. Which precedes and prompts the other is not a logical 
question but an epistemic one, the answer to which varies 
from one judge to another and from case to case; very likely, 
the analogy and the instrumental arguments that support it 
will be considered together. The reasons for a rule may sup-
port the analogy, because, as in  Adams and  Katz , they apply 
alike to the source and the target and thus help to establish 
that the similarity on which the analogy depends is relevant. 
At the same time, the analogy legitimates reference to the rea-
sons underlying the rule as within the purview of the court. 
One or the other may carry the greater weight. For if the 
reasons for a rule are not substantial, that may suggest that 
the analogy supporting its application is weak and that some 
other analogy pointing to a different rule is to be preferred. 
Or, if the analogy is weak, that may suggest that less weight 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[65]
should be given to the reasons for the rule to which the anal-
ogy points. As a general matter, the stronger the reasons for 
a rule, the less compelling the similarity between source and 
target needs to be to sustain the analogy, and the more com-
pelling the similarity, the weaker the reasons may be without 
making the analogy irrelevant. 
 In sum, however strong a judge’s personal convictions  –  
whatever their source –  about the matter, she is not at liberty 
to decide a case as she thinks is right or best, all things consid-
ered. She may not engage in social or economic engineering 
at large. For, as the Supreme Court repeatedly acknowledged 
in the cable transmission cases, means as well as ends are for 
the legislature to determine. Rather, applying analogical rea-
soning to the details that give a case its novelty, the judge must 
bring the case within a rule –  if not a rule  about overnight 
passengers on steamboats, then a rule about guests in public 
accommodations or, still more generally, a rule about liability 
for injury to others. At some level of generality, the facts of 
the case will no longer be unique, and, making an analogical 
connection to the facts of another case, the judge will have a 
basis for decision according to the law. Of course, as particu-
lar facts are disregarded and the description becomes more 
general, not only one but several rules are likely to be more or 
less on point, and the judge will have to choose, by analogical 
reasoning, which is most nearly applicable. 

Legal Reason
[66]
66
 Courts sometimes speak of a case as a “case of ﬁ rst impres-
sion,” meaning that no similar case has previously been 
decided. Just as there is not a sharp line that separates a case 
“on all fours” from cases that are only more or less similar, 
there is not a sharp line between a case of ﬁ rst impression and 
other cases. No case is wholly unlike prior cases; there are 
always similarities, which can be emphasized or passed over. 
If, examined up close, two cases seem to be very different, 
from a more distant perspective the details fade and a more 
general similarity appears. Considered as a case involving the 
liability of a steamship operator for an overnight passenger’s 
loss,  Adams  was a case of ﬁ rst impression. Considered as a 
case involving the liability of persons who provide sleeping 
accommodations for travelers, it was, according to the court, 
if not on all fours with the innkeeper cases, very similar  – 
analogous –  to them and dissimilar to the railroad sleeping 
car cases. Had there been no special rule for innkeepers or 
had the court not been persuaded by the analogy between 
innkeepers and steamboat operators, no narrower analogy 
being available, the court would have considered the facts 
from a still more distant perspective and, presumably, found 
a similarity to cases in the general category of liability for 
another person’s loss. Insofar as  Katz involved a wiretap 
without any physical trespass of a conversation made from 
a public telephone booth, it was a case of ﬁ rst impression. 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[67]
Nevertheless, the Court found that there was signiﬁ cant simi-
larity to cases that involved a business ofﬁ ce, a friend’s apart-
ment, or a taxicab, not to mention  Olmstead , which was so 
closely on point (despite any number of differences) that the 
Court was obliged to overrule it. 
 The same is true in the small number of cases in which a 
court turns its back on a rule that appears clearly to be appli-
cable and declares a contrary rule. Whatever differences there 
may be between the facts of the present case and the facts of 
prior cases in which the existing rule was applied, they are 
deemed too slight to permit a difference in result, and the 
court announces another rule that gives new and different 
signiﬁ cance to those facts. The Supreme Court’s decision in 
 Fortnightly effectively, if not in so many words, overruled its 
decision thirty- seven years earlier in  Jewell- LaSalle  that the 
reception and transmission of a radio broadcast was a “per-
formance” within the meaning of the Copyright Act. The later 
case involved television, not radio; nonetheless, the Court 
regarded the facts of the cases as too similar for it to hold 
that the reception and transmission of a television broadcast 
is  not a performance without applying its revised analysis to 
radio as well. Sometimes, albeit rarely, a court undertakes to 
review a long line of prior decisions that have cohered in set-
tled rules and to reconsider an entire rubric of the law. Such 
cases do not overrule past decisions precisely on point; the 

Legal Reason
[68]
68
reasoning expressed in the court’s opinion may radiate more 
broadly and generate revisions in the law that affect cases 
involving quite different issues.  32 The decision in  Katz was 
such a landmark. Discarding the requirement of a trespass, 
on which it had relied in  Olmstead , and replacing it with the 
notion of a “legitimate expectation of privacy” as the core of 
the Fourth Amendment, the Court prompted reconsidera-
tion of issues that had little directly to do with eavesdropping 
on telephone conversations.  33 On the other hand, even after 
being overruled, some residue of prior decisions may remain, 
especially if they have become doctrinally embedded. After 
the decision in  Katz , the Supreme Court several times noted 
that although the element of trespass was no longer critical, 
whether an expectation of privacy is legitimate depends sig-
niﬁ cantly on one’s connection with the premises where the 
invasion of privacy occurs.  34 
 Whether its reach is narrow or broad, “overruling” is not 
like a wild card that a court is free to play, provided that it does 
not play the card too often. Rather, it occurs because a court 
concludes that the rule that was previously in place is incon-
sistent with some other rule of more general application and 
that, both appearing to be applicable to the particular facts, 
the former must give way. In effect, the court concludes that 
facts that had been thought to distinguish a case of that kind 
and to warrant a distinct rule do not do so and, therefore, that 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[69]
the more general rule applies. On rare occasions, a court may 
overrule a relatively narrow rule simply because it has proved 
to be unworkable or to have unforeseen consequences.  The 
instrumental aspect of such a decision is evident, but it does 
not eliminate the requirement that the new rule not be incon-
sistent with other rules that prevail over it.  35 The law is, in a 
sense, a “  seamless web,” not because it prescribes in advance 
the outcome of every case that may arise, but because when a 
case does arise, however unusual it may be, the outcome is to 
be found within the law. 
 The pattern of legal reasoning described above is only 
that, a pattern, which allows considerable variation in detail. 
Lawyers and judges have individual rhetorical styles, which 
are reﬂ ected in briefs and oral arguments and in judicial 
opinions. Someone who follows the workings of an appellate 
court may be able to identify the author of an opinion from 
its style, even though it is written to reﬂ ect the views of other 
members of the court as well. Individual differences aside, 
the pattern of reasoning generally changes as a case advances 
from the trial court to an intermediate appellate court and 
from there to the highest court of the jurisdiction, which has 
ﬁ nal judicial authority. A trial judge, having primary respon-
sibility to determine the facts and being subject to appellate 
review on matters of law, is likely to stay close to the higher 
courts’ statements of the law. He lacks authority to overrule a 

Legal Reason
[70]
70
decision of a higher court and rarely will rely on a distinction 
of fact that has no foundation in a higher court’s reasoning. 
An appellate court, on the other hand, relying for matters of 
fact on the ﬁ ndings below, exercises more independent judg-
ment about the law and its correct application to the facts. 
It is freer to look beyond the area of the law that is immedi-
ately at stake and to reconsider the applicable rule in light 
of more general rules and rules drawn from other contexts. 
The highest court has the greatest freedom in this respect. 
It is less likely to regard its own decisions as indicative of 
a settled rule and more likely to ﬁ nd room for an interpre-
tation that is not clearly signaled. But throughout, the task 
remains the same: to apply the law as it is, however narrowly 
or broadly conceived, to the concrete facts of the case, in all 
their particularity.  
 c.  The Hierarchy of Rules  
 If now we return to the model of legal reasoning as a hierar-
chy of rules, it can be seen more clearly why it is inadequate. 
Being concerned entirely with rules and their relationship 
with one another and having no place for analogical argu-
ment, the model lacks means for deciding a concrete case. 
The rules have reciprocal effect, but the achievement of 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[71]
consistency among them is empty, because no method is given 
or allowed for attaching one rule or another to the facts of a 
case. If a case closely resembles another case in which a rule 
was declared, the lack of attachment between the rule and 
the facts of the later case may be overlooked, on the basis of 
the similarity. As the cases discussed in  Chapter 1  illustrate, 
however, in a seriously contested case, more than one rule is 
likely to be claimed to be applicable, which may be consistent 
among themselves and have a place within the hierarchy of 
rules. At that point, the rules themselves are inert and require 
an analogical argument to bring the reasoning to closure. 
 Although those who defend the model of law as a hierarchy 
of rules forcefully reject the “ mechanical jurisprudence” of 
classical legal theory of the nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries,  36 they end up in the same place. It was the cen-
tral tenet of classical theory that the law could be expressed 
as a formally complete deductive system. The need for ana-
logical reasoning was recognized, but the deductive system 
was preserved by supposing that the reach of a legal concept 
was determinate and that “analogical reasoning from similar 
cases or principles provided a self- executing process of dis-
covery, at least for those learned in the law.  ” 37 The error, even 
absurdity, of that position, essential as it was to maintenance 
of law as a deductive system, made it an easy target for the 
 Legal Realists. Instead of asserting that analogical reasoning 

Legal Reason
[72]
72
is fully determinate, the hierarchical model’s exclusive focus 
on rules hides it from view; no more than the classical theory 
does the model explain how, without analogical reasoning, a 
case is decided. 
 If this model is inadequate as a complete account of legal 
reasoning, it is not to be rejected altogether. Although rules 
unaided by analogical reasoning are powerless, it is true also 
that without a consistent, relatively stable body of rules, ana-
logical reasoning would be aimless. (  The same is true of ana-
logical practical reasoning, which supposes that the causal 
properties of things being compared are stable, even if the 
physical processes are unknown.) For within a legal order, 
the body of rules provides the criteria of relevance that dis-
tinguish a good analogy from a bad one.  38 Were a court con-
fronted with two inconsistent rules derived from prior cases 
that resembled the case before the court in just the same 
way, analogical reasoning would not help the court to ren-
der a decision, unless the prior cases were ﬁ rst distinguished 
in some way that enabled the court, looking at the facts of 
the case before it, to choose between them. It is, therefore, a 
major part of the work of the law, carried on not only in the 
course of adjudication but in secondary activities like draft-
ing restatements and writing treatises, to reconcile cases in 
the manner of the hierarchical model. If judges rarely under-
take a full “justiﬁ catory ascent,” 39 nevertheless the process of 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Legal Reasoning
[73]
reconciliation and systematization goes on piecemeal all the 
time and occasionally is embodied in a full statement that 
approximates the ideal model. 
 As cases dealing with a particular area of the law are 
decided, the rules dealing with topics within that area 
are elaborated in greater detail, some distinctions being 
approved and embodied in rules and others being asserted 
and, after consideration, rejected. The demand for consist-
ency leads in time to the formulation of general princi-
ples that account for the distinctions that are made. One 
might, then, suppose that analogical reasoning is essential 
for application of a body of law while it is young, but dis-
pensable once it has matured and broad general principles 
encompassing more particular rules and distinctions have 
been articulated. It has been suggested that   natural science 
develops in much that way and that the displacement of 
analogical reasoning by explanatory principles is the mark 
of a mature science.  40 Although cases would continue to 
arise, they would mostly be settled on the facts, without 
explicit analogical argument. Some such movement in that 
direction does occur. But it is a matter of more or less, not 
the elimination of analogical reasoning altogether. The end-
less variability of the familiar, accompanied by discoveries 
in the natural sciences, development of new technologies, 
and changes in the political and social context, presents 

Legal Reason
[74]
74
issues that have not been seen before, which call for new 
distinctions or revisions of distinctions that had previously 
been made. The rationalization of the law is a continuing 
process that does not achieve the clarity and stability of a 
deductive system. Human motivation and experience are 
too protean for that.  
www.ebook3000.com

[75]
 CHAPTER 3 
 Objections  
 The variety of scholarly responses to the central role of ana-
logical arguments in legal reasoning has been noted. They 
range from approval of their use as a means of achieving 
political consensus (qualiﬁ ed by a concession that they are 
logically defective), to simple disapproval because they do 
not address important practical issues, and, most common 
of all, dismissal as ﬂ awed or disguised deductive arguments 
and not a distinct form of reasoning at all. Scarcely any of the 
responses regard analogical arguments as what they purport 
to be: arguments valid on their own terms. For all that, law-
yers and judges rely on analogical arguments routinely and 
display no doubt about their merit, although, of course, they 
do their best to defend their own analogical arguments and 

Legal Reason
[76]
76
question those on the other side. Moreover, the scholars’ criti-
cal response is largely ignored by those who are teachers of 
the law. What passes for analogical reasoning is at the heart 
of the Socratic method on which law professors, without 
apology, heavily rely in the classroom. 
 There is more common ground among those who dispar-
age analogical legal reasoning than immediately appears. 
They share a belief that what appears to be reasoning by 
 analogy, inferring one similarity from another, is not valid, 
that it does not and cannot work. The difﬁ culty is not that we 
are unable to perceive   similarities between one thing or event 
or circumstance and another: between wine and cranberry 
juice, or between an inn and a steamboat. On the contrary, 
it is that we can and do perceive such similarities, as well as 
dissimilarities –  all too many of them. There are numberless 
similarities between one concrete entity and another of the 
same general kind. 1 Nor is it that the similarities on which 
we rely are not really there. But, it is asserted, nothing in a 
similarity as such links the entities in question in the manner 
of an analogy. On the face of it, instead of supposing that, 
since wine and cranberry juice are both red and salt removes 
a wine stain, it will probably remove a cranberry juice stain 
as well, one might suppose that since drinking too much wine 
will make you drunk, drinking too much cranberry juice will 
also make you drunk, or that salt and talcum powder both 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[77]
being white, a pinch of talcum powder will improve the taste 
of the soup. Instead of reasoning that since a steamboat that 
provides overnight lodging is entrusted with a person’s goods 
in circumstances similar to those of an inn, its operator 
should be similarly liable for the person’s loss, one might as 
easily reason that since a steamboat and a railroad sleeping 
car both transport passengers, the operator of one should be 
no more liable than the operator of the other. One can take 
the step from one similarity to another only if it contains an 
explanation, or at least an indicator of the explanation, of the 
latter. So, it is argued, in order for an analogy to succeed, it 
must incorporate, if not explicitly then implicitly, a general 
rule that applies to both things being compared and provides 
that all members of a class to which both belong (signaled, 
perhaps, by the observed similarity between them) have the 
further characteristic that is in doubt. With such a rule in 
place, the analogy is readily converted into a deductive argu-
ment from which the conclusion about the further   similarity 
that is in question readily follows. The differences among the 
various criticisms of analogical reasoning are not so much 
about what is wrong with it on its face, about which there is 
general agreement, but what the response should be: whether 
to reconstruct it as a deductive argument, or to dismiss it out 
of hand, or to assign it some function other than reasoning 
that accounts for its ubiquity in legal analysis. 

Legal Reason
[78]
78
 a.   Deduction  
 Peter  Westen states the position clearly:
 One can never declare  A to be legally similar to  B without 
ﬁ rst formulating the legal rule of treatment by which 
they are rendered relevantly identical  …  Before one has 
identiﬁ ed the prevailing legal rule, one has no way of 
knowing whether the acts are legally similar or dissimilar. 
After one has identiﬁ ed the prevailing rule, the similarities 
or dissimilarities of the two acts follow as a logical 
consequence: their similarity or dissimilarity ... is simply 
another way of saying that they either do or do not both 
fully satisfy the terms of the prevailing rule.  2 
 Westen refers speciﬁ cally to legal similarity, but the point 
he makes is more general. It is, he argues, meaningless to 
say that one thing is similar to another abstractly, without 
identifying a ground that indicates which among their innu-
merable similarities and dissimilarities you have in mind. 
In most ordinary circumstances, the reference is obvious or 
taken for granted and need not be stated expressly; but some 
such indication must be contained in or implied by a declara-
tion that two things are similar, to establish the relevance of 
the particular similarities (and irrelevance of the dissimilari-
ties) at stake.  So also   Danny Priel has observed, “Standing on 
its own analogy is ‘not grounded in logic or “reality,” ’ so any 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[79]
attempt at justifying analogical reasoning turns out to be a 
case of rule- following in which the general rule is not speci-
ﬁ ed  .” 3 Hence the need for a “legal rule of treatment” applica-
ble to both of the things being compared. It is perhaps not 
clear whether  Westen means to describe the mental process 
of a person who makes such a declaration or the declaration 
itself. It is evident, at any rate, that most analogies are made 
without express reference to a rule of the kind that he sup-
poses. But it makes no difference which he has in mind. For 
neither in the actual process of analogical reasoning nor in 
a reconstruction of the analogy is such a rule ordinarily to 
be found. 
 In   Adams v.  New Jersey Steamboat Co ., 4 for example, in 
which the New York Court of Appeals had to decide whether 
the operator of a steamboat was liable as an insurer for a pas-
senger’s loss, there was no prior decision declaring a steam-
boat operator’s liability. There were, however, several other 
rules that might have been thought relevant: a rule about inn-
keepers, which imposed an insurer’s liability; a rule about the 
operator of a railroad sleeping car, which did not impose such 
liability; and a rule about tort liability generally, which also 
did not impose an insurer’s liability. None of the rules said 
anything about a steamboat. There were, of course, many 
similarities and dissimilarities between a steamboat with 
staterooms and an inn, between a steamboat and a railroad 

Legal Reason
[80]
80
car with sleeping berths, and between a steamboat and any 
number of other things. Since the court’s task was not to 
come up with a decision on whatever grounds  in vacuo  but to 
decide  according to the law , the question that the court had 
to answer was which of those other rules should be applied 
to the matter of a steamboat’s liability – that is to say, which 
of  the similarities and dissimilarities between a steamboat 
and the rest were most relevant to the liability of a steamboat. 
If the provision of private sleeping accommodations is what 
counts, a steamboat is like (analogous to) an inn –  unless the 
dissimilarities between a means of transportation on water 
and a stationary building on land are overriding. If provid-
ing transportation with sleeping accommodations is what 
counts, a steamboat is like a railroad sleeping car – unless 
the dissimilarities between traveling on water and on land 
and between a stateroom and a berth are overriding. If the 
emission of steam is what counts, a steamboat is like a tea-
kettle –  but no one thought that that similarity was relevant. 
The court concluded that the steamboat was “for all practical 
purposes, a ﬂ oating inn” and decided accordingly.  5 
 Explaining its reasoning, the court said that public policy 
favored imposing a high responsibility on innkeepers because 
of the “conﬁ dence … reposed in them” and the “temptation 
to fraud and danger of plunder.”  6 Steamboat operators also 
having conﬁ dence reposed in them and being subject to like 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[81]
temptations, the court’s conclusion followed. One can con-
struct a general rule to cover the case: innkeepers and steam-
boat operators, having the conﬁ dence of the public and being 
tempted to fraud, ought to be [are] liable as insurers. But 
that merely duplicates the analogy itself. The rule depends on 
the analogy rather than the other way around. No rule more 
general than that is intimated by the court’s opinion, which 
speaks only about steamboats, and not generally even about 
them. If, thereafter, a case were to arise in which a sailing 
yacht provided staterooms to a small number of passengers 
on a cruise, would the rule about innkeepers apply despite 
all the dissimilarities between that case and  Adams ? Or a 
case involving a steamboat that provided no staterooms but 
only berths, like a railroad sleeping car? The lawyers on both 
sides of such cases would argue that the result in  Adams sup-
ported their respective clients, pointing to the similarities and 
dissimilarities between  Adams and the case then before the 
court. And the court’s decision in each case would extend the 
rule of  Adams  or qualify it only so far as the facts of that case 
required, leaving further elaboration of a rule to future cases 
in which, once again, the similarities and dissimilarities to 
what had gone before would be debated.  
 Similarly, in   Katz v. United States , 7 although the Court indi-
cated that it did not matter whether there was a trespass and 
that Katz’s legitimate expectation of privacy in the telephone 

Legal Reason
[82]
82
booth sustained his rights under the Fourth Amendment 
(as it would in a business ofﬁ ce, a friend’s apartment, or a 
taxicab), there was no rule before  Katz was decided that dic-
tated that result, although prior cases might have led one to 
speculate in that direction. Nor, after  Katz was decided, was 
there any certain rule broader than the terms of the analogy 
itself that followed from the decision. If lawyers and others 
referred to a “legitimate expectation of privacy” as the criti-
cal element in Fourth Amendment cases, that was not a ﬁ rm 
rule but a speculative, imprecise generalization, as subse-
quent cases, presenting other similarities and differences, 
made clear. Although it might have been thought that, as a 
matter of fact, a person has a legitimate expectation of pri-
vacy and, therefore, a protected Fourth Amendment interest 
in a friend’s automobile, in an enclosed yard surrounded by 
a high fence, or in a sealed trash bag placed at the curb for 
collection, it turned out that in some circumstances that was 
not so, anything to the contrary that the Court had seemed to 
say in  Katz notwithstanding.  8 
 The difﬁ culty with the thesis that the use of an analogy in 
legal reasoning depends on a rule establishing its relevance 
is not just that it ﬁ nds no support in the briefs and opinions 
it purports to elucidate, which are rife with analogical argu-
ments unaccompanied by any rule.  By the same reasoning 
that would require a rule about the particular similarit(ies) 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[83]
on which an analogy rests, so also would there have to be a 
rule for each and every one of the innumerable other simi-
larities and dissimilarities between the two things being com-
pared. Otherwise, how would one know that there was not 
some other feature of one or both that also was relevant to 
the outcome?  9 In  Adams , on what basis could the court have 
concluded that the relevant similarity was the conﬁ dence 
that lodgers/ passengers repose in innkeepers and steamboat 
operators and the temptation to fraud, rather than something 
else, like the fact that both serve meals (meaning that a boat 
that served no meals would not be similarly liable), or that it 
made no difference that an inn is stationary and a steamboat 
is not? Were those and every other comparison that might be 
made between inns and steamboats embodied in a “prevail-
ing legal rule”? The suggestion refutes itself. The court’s argu-
ment is nevertheless comprehensible and persuasive (even if 
it is not demonstrably true), because the analogy,  in light of 
what we know about the law , makes it so.  
 Preoccupied with the major premise, those who would 
reconstruct an analogy as a deductive argument lose sight of 
the minor premise altogether.   A rule has no traction unless 
we are able to identify the members of the class to which 
the rule applies.  10 Our ability to use general terms at all, to 
 recognize the general in the particular, requires us not only to 
recognize the particular attributes of things but also to sort 

Legal Reason
[84]
84
the attributes into those that are and those that are not rel-
evant to the general terms by which we may refer to them at 
one time or another. So, referring to the same object, a child 
may identify it as a toy, a truck, a ﬁ re truck, a piggy bank, or 
a gift from Uncle Daniel. It is all those things and many oth-
ers, and according to where the child’s attention is directed, 
he will identify it as one or the other without resort to a rule 
of any kind. One could provide a rule: “Well, something that 
is hollow, and has a slot at the top for inserting coins is (prob-
ably) a piggy bank.” But where would that get us, except to 
other general terms for which other rules would be required? 
Requiring a rule to account for analogical reasoning buries 
thought under an avalanche of general propositions, every 
general term requiring resort to a rule that requires another 
rule for application of yet another general term.  
 Because a case is to be decided according to the law, it is 
easy to suppose that the “  rule of the case,” according to which 
it is decided, must already have been part of the law. From 
that, it is not a large step to the proposition that the deci-
sion depends on the rule, and the further proposition that, as 
Westen says, the rule precedes and is essential to the validity 
of an analogy on which the decision rests. That, however, has 
the matter backwards. Although the materials –  a statute and 
interpretations of it, prior decisions, and so forth  –  on the 
basis of which the case is decided are available beforehand, 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[85]
the rule of the case itself is not. The rule is a generalized state-
ment of the decision, not the predicate on which the deci-
sion rests. To be sure, once a case has been decided, the rule 
of the case is a part of the materials on which decisions  in 
future cases  are based (and, as such, is itself subject to inter-
pretation). In those cases as well, analogical reasoning is the 
means by which the materials of the law are brought to bear 
on the particular facts.  11 
 It is not by chance that those who insist that reasoning 
by analogy is deductive in form write about an unexpressed 
“rule” as the major premise of a syllogism and do not say 
what the content of such a rule is in a concrete case. Their 
argument being formal, they say little about how the rule is 
derived, or what it should contain, except that, to satisfy the 
syllogism, it must contain both items being compared. In 
 Adams , such a rule might have referred to steamboats with 
staterooms, or to steamboats, or to boats, or to vehicles, all 
of which would have covered the facts of the case. And in 
 Katz , the rule might have referred to telephone booths, or to 
enclosed spaces, or to an expectation of privacy, and so forth. 
Casting the analogy on which the result depends as a deduc-
tive inference from a rule foreshadows and predetermines the 
holding, which is not known until the outcome of the case 
is known. The holding, of course, embraces the facts of that 
case, but whether it applies also to other more or less similar 

Legal Reason
[86]
86
cases remains to be determined by analogical arguments in 
future cases. Inevitably, then, the “general rule” that is pos-
ited remains abstract and indeterminate, nothing more than 
a shadow cast by the premise that there must be one. Strictly 
speaking, the “class” that the supposed rule speciﬁ es is closed 
and contains only two members, the source and the target 
of the analogy, which determines the rule, rather than being 
determined by it. 
 In sum, the supposition that the matter of relevance on 
which the weight of an analogy depends can be eliminated (and 
the analogy with it) by folding it into the statement of a general 
rule that applies deductively –  “as a logical consequence” –  to 
the facts at hand is mistaken. It resembles the formalist belief 
that if the rules of a legal order are sufﬁ ciently articulated, the 
correct decision of a case can be found by deductive inference. 
It is not so. The elaboration of rules is an essential feature of 
adjudication, without which analogical reasoning would be 
without direction. It does not displace analogical reasoning 
but enables it to proceed according to the rule of law.  
 b.   Induction  
 A different critical assessment of analogical legal arguments 
asserts that, except as they may aid in the elaboration of an 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[87]
 inductive argument, they are useless and often worse than 
useless. Looking for similarities between cases, it is said, 
diverts attention from a court’s proper concern, which is the 
practical consequences of a decision one way or the other. 
Although this critique appears to address the substance of 
analogical arguments and not their form, its generality evi-
dently depends on the assumption that they are formally 
 inadequate and not simply badly reasoned in particular cases. 
With or without a rule to support a deductive inference, the 
similarity between source and target, it is said, does not bear 
the weight of the conclusion. Rather than relying on analo-
gies, lawyers and judges should make empirically grounded, 
inductive arguments. So   Richard Posner, an eminent judge 
and legal scholar, has observed:
 If [lawyers] have a case involving the appropriate 
system of property rights for a new natural resource, 
say petroleum, they examine decided cases dealing with 
“similar” resources, say water or rabbits. They do not go 
out and talk to petroleum engineers, ecologists, or natural- 
resources economists. They treat the issue as one  internal  
to legal materials, an issue of the relations between legal 
concepts.  12  
 Posner’s evident scorn for legal research is startling. All 
the talk in the world with engineers, ecologists, and even 

Legal Reason
[88]
88
economists is beside the point unless what they have to 
say is reﬂ ected in the law.  13 Himself a distinguished judge, 
Posner does not follow his own prescription, as, of course, 
he cannot, without disregarding the distinction between 
legislation and adjudication.  14 So long as he allows that 
a rule may have force as a rule  –  not because it is right 
but because it is the rule –  he has to rely on analogies to 
mediate between the rule and the concrete facts of a case, 
although he rightly inveighs against their casual or careless 
use. The resources that he commends are so valuable, as 
he says, not because they enable a judge to dispense with 
analogies but because they help to ensure that the analogies 
are sound. 
 Posner does not recommend that past cases be ignored 
altogether. He says that a court ought to “quarry” or “exca-
vate” the cases cited to it, to uncover the purpose (the “latent 
rule”) that a case lays down.  15 But he says little about how the 
results of such excavation are to be used, and one may con-
clude that his concessions in this regard are mostly window 
dressing. When he gets down to it, he believes that a court 
ought to decide according to its view of the best policy. (A 
lawyer presumably ought to argue for policies that favor his 
client.) Describing a court’s explicit reliance on an analogy as 
a “surface phenomenon,” 16 when he approves of the result, he 
discerns a different argument, which he describes as “policy 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[89]
analysis.”  17 When he disapproves, he allows that the court 
may indeed have relied on analogical reasoning, but to its 
downfall; failure to apply policy analysis as he recommends 
means that “nonsense can ensue.”  18 
 So, discussing cases in which the Supreme Court con-
sidered whether radio and television broadcasters could 
transmit copyrighted material without authorization,  19 he 
rejects the Court’s opinions, which rely heavily on analogy, 
and provides a lengthy analysis of his own, which includes 
a reference to “the physics of radio reception and transmis-
sion,” a statement of what he believes to be the purpose of 
copyright, and an economic analysis of cable television.  20 
Moving smoothly between description of how judges actu-
ally decide cases and prescription of how they ought to 
decide, Posner does not say how the Court –  or any court –  
is to uncover all this in its “excavation” of prior cases. Nor 
does he say what a judge is to do if her excavation uncovers 
a rule that conﬂ icts with her sense of what sound policy is. 
His deployment of   economic analysis in the cable broadcast 
cases is revealing. That is Posner’s preferred form of policy 
analysis, about which he has written extensively. 21 But sup-
pose a judge does not subscribe exclusively to that mode of 
analysis. Or suppose, as is more than likely, a judge is not 
as adept at economic analysis  as he is. All too often, what 
Posner says is to be brought to the surface by “excavation” 

Legal Reason
[90]
90
is not there until he puts it there, and what is there is to be 
disregarded unless it conforms to his theory. 
 Posner has no need for analogical arguments, because he 
has little use for rules as such at all. He approves a theory of 
adjudication that he calls “  everyday pragmatism,” which, he 
says, is “the method of inquiry used by ordinary people,” who 
“[use] common sense to resolve problems.”  22 As he sees it, the 
task of a judge when he decides a case is not to determine the 
applicable rule of law and apply it, but to decide in light of all 
the facts of the case what policy is best and apply that policy. 
She has a special institutional obligation to consider what 
judges before her regarded as the best policy in similar cases, 
but such consideration does not constrain her decision except 
insofar as it comports with everything else to be considered, 
including the relevant empirical sciences, political and social 
values, and so forth. The “rule” of a similar case decided in 
the past is merely data that informs the judge’s own decision, 
which is in turn uniquely applicable to the case before her 
and serves only as data for judges coming after: “[u] nless a 
precedent is authoritative in the sense of announcing a major 
premise that cannot be questioned, it can be a source only of 
data that are anecdotal in character or of reasons, considera-
tions, values, policies.”  23 
 Insisting that adjudication is really  policy analysis, Posner 
confuses or conﬂ ates rules and policy altogether.   The rule of 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[91]
law in his view signiﬁ es “a due regard (not exclusive, not pre-
cluding tradeoffs) for the political and social value of conti-
nuity, coherence, generality, impartiality, and predictability in 
the deﬁ nition and administration of legal rights and duties.”  24 
It is as if an umpire were to declare: “Strike three. But the 
batter is not out. In this instance, considering the purposes 
and policy behind the ‘three strikes, you’re out’ rule and con-
sidering also that this is the batter’s ﬁ rst season in the majors, 
that he has not had a hit all week, and that his mother is in 
the stands, considering that the other team is well ahead, tak-
ing fully into account the value of consistency and impartial-
ity, I conclude all things considered that the game of baseball 
will be best served if the batter is allowed four strikes. Play 
ball.” The umpire had better look for other work, not because 
his analysis is necessarily defective –  who knows whether the 
three- strike rule is the best we can do in this instance? –  but 
because he is not supposed to engage in policy analysis at all. 
There is a rule, and he is expected to follow it.  
 Posner does not like that, and he does his best to equate 
following a rule with following a rule blindly or unintelli-
gently. But the equation is simply willful. Law being a pur-
posive human activity, intelligent application of a rule of law 
calls for attention to its underlying purposes and, if you will, 
policies. That is an entirely different matter from determining 
independently (albeit with a hasty glance backwards) what 

Legal Reason
[92]
92
purposes and policies are best in each instance. Often, per-
haps usually, the value of adhering to the law as it is will out-
weigh any bad consequences. Nevertheless, in Posner’s view, 
it is consequences that count, and if, “all things considered,” 
the best consequences will follow from disregarding the law, 
the pragmatic judge should disregard it.  25 
 The position that Posner takes is so contrary to the usual 
understanding that one wonders if he can really mean it.  26 
And, indeed, one may believe that, in practice, it means less 
than it pretends. Calculation of the short-  and long- term 
consequences of adhering to the rule of law and the nega-
tive consequences of departing from it is bound to be impres-
sionistic and indeﬁ nite. One may suppose, therefore, that it 
would be a rare case in which a pragmatic judge’s decision 
would differ signiﬁ cantly from that of her more traditional 
colleague. Furthermore, the need to employ analogical rea-
soning to bring the law to ground in a concrete case affords 
room within the traditional mode of adjudication for consid-
eration of consequences. The more weighty the consequences 
urging the pragmatist to disregard some rule of law, the more 
likely they are to point away from the conclusion that it is, 
indeed, that rule of law that is applicable. 
 One might conclude, therefore, that everyday pragma-
tism is more a theory and an attitude than a practice with 
practical signiﬁ cance. But Posner denies that pragmatism 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[93]
is reserved for exceptional cases “in which truly exigent cir-
cumstances … exert unbearable pressure,”  27 and he associ-
ates pragmatism with a political theory that undermines the 
distinction between adjudication and legislation that makes 
the rule of law so central to the former.  28 One can say only 
that the theory and practice that Posner espouses is a radical 
departure from both the jurisprudential and the common- 
sense understanding of what adjudication is.  
 Then what of the   analogical arguments that ﬁ ll the pages 
of briefs and law reports? Posner does not admit them at 
all. The use of analogical argument, he says, “belongs not 
to legal thought, but to legal rhetoric.”  29 And its rhetori-
cal function in judicial opinions is not to reveal the court’s 
thinking but to hide it. Lacking legislative authority (and, 
apparently, competence) judges are able to “get away with” 
legislating incrementally, by pretending that an analogy to 
prior decisions dictates their conclusion.  30 “[M] ost English 
and American judges,” he asserts, would agree with his 
description of what they do “though not in these words.”  31 
We are evidently to suppose a vast conspiracy among the 
judges and the lawyers who appear before them, who rely 
on one another not to spill the beans. In order to make legal 
decisions “more acceptable to the laity,” he writes, “law 
schools should and do teach … how to think like a policy-
maker or legislator …  and  how to talk and write in the style 

Legal Reason
[94]
94
of judicial opinions.”  32 One wonders what a law school that 
adopted Posner’s curriculum would teach in the (required) 
course on legal ethics. 
 Posner’s thesis follows directly from his dismissal of ana-
logical arguments as nonreason and, therefore, irrelevant to 
the substance of adjudication. His characterization of adjudi-
cation as policy analysis is, then, inescapable, because there 
is nothing to tie any rule of law,  as a rule , to the particular 
facts of a case, the function that an analogy performs. And, 
mopping up, he ﬁ nds a nonsubstantive role for the analogical 
arguments that he discards, which are too ubiquitous to be 
ignored; hence, their subsidiary rhetorical function.  
 c.  Abduction  
 Scott Brewer has given the most elaborate account of the 
use of analogical arguments in legal reasoning, which draws 
on work of the American philosopher   Charles Peirce about 
the process of scientiﬁ c discovery.  33 According to Peirce, 
when a scientiﬁ c researcher comes across an unfamiliar phe-
nomenon and looks for an explanation, he typically begins 
by settling on one or a small number of likely explanatory 
hypotheses out of the limitless number of possible explana-
tions. The choice of hypothesis is not validated deductively, 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[95]
as an inference from premises assumed to be true, or induc-
tively, by empirical evidence. Nevertheless, it is not entirely 
random, because someone who is familiar with the ﬁ eld is 
far more likely to come up with the correct hypothesis than 
someone who knows nothing about it. Otherwise, the task of 
scientiﬁ c discovery would be endless. Peirce called the pro-
cess of selecting a hypothesis “abduction.”  
 So, observing one morning that the lawn is wet, someone 
might abduce the hypothesis that it had rained the previ-
ous night. It is true, of course, that the grass would be wet 
if a water main had burst, or if the ﬁ re department had 
opened the ﬁ re hydrant nearby, or if the neighbor’s children 
had staged a water ﬁ ght on the lawn, or if any number of 
other things had happened. But knowing what he knows, 
the  hypothesis that it rained seems more likely. If he cared 
enough, he would then conﬁ rm or refute the hypothesis by 
checking the weather report in the newspaper, or asking a 
friend who was awake during the night, and so forth. The 
best- known examples of abductive inference are the “deduc-
tions” of   Sherlock Holmes, who makes elaborate inferences 
from a few small   observations. The possibility that there are 
other, equally plausible ways to account for his observations 
is mostly ignored. 
 Brewer regards   abduction, which is a less familiar concept 
than deduction or induction, as a form of inference like the 

Legal Reason
[96]
96
other two, in which there is a particular relation between the 
truth of the premises and the truth of the conclusion. Just as 
the truth of the premises of a valid deductive argument guaran-
tees the truth of the conclusion, and the truth of the premises 
of a valid inductive argument makes the truth of the conclu-
sion probable, the truth of the premises of an abductive argu-
ment makes the truth of the conclusion possible. It is evident 
that abduction is a very weak form of inference, if, indeed, it is 
properly regarded as an inference at all. Brewer believes that 
it is, because if the grass were  not wet, it would not be possible 
that it had rained. Nevertheless, the hypothesis that is abduced 
remains only that, a hypothesis, until it is conﬁ rmed.  
 Brewer adapts the notion of abduction to adjudication. He 
includes analogical legal arguments within a broad family 
of arguments characterized by “the use of examples in the 
process of moving from premises to conclusion.”  34 Among 
other kinds of legal argument within this family, he mentions 
reasoning from precedents, application of “equal protection” 
norms, and the “ ejusdem generis ” canon for the construction 
of documents.  35 An   analogical argument, he says, consists 
of more than the analogy itself. It is a patterned series of 
steps, the “rational force” of which depends on “the relation 
 between the truth of the argument’s premises and that of its 
conclusion.”  36 His principal concern is to show that the use 
of an analogy in the manner he describes gives the resulting 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[97]
argument a good deal more rational force than is generally 
supposed. 
 The pattern, Brewer says, includes three steps:
 1.   Abduction in a context of doubt . A judge must decide 
whether some term that has legal signiﬁ cance applies to the 
facts of a case. More concretely, she is uncertain how to clas-
sify something legally with respect to the matter in question. 
So, for example, it may be uncertain whether it is a  search 
to which the Fourth Amendment applies, if a trained dog 
sniffs closed luggage left in a railway station and signals to 
the police that it contains drugs. If it is a search, then, unless 
requirements of the Fourth Amendment have been met, 
 information obtained as a result of the sniff is not admissible 
in evidence against the owner of the luggage, because the sniff 
violated his constitutional rights. If the sniff is not a search, 
the Amendment is not applicable, and the information is con-
stitutionally admissible. Noting some examples of police con-
duct that are more or less similar, and relating the dog- sniff 
(the  target ) by analogy to one or more of them (the  source ), 
the lawyer or judge  abduces a rule that appears acceptably to 
sort the target and the source into conduct that is or is not a 
search and thereby determines whether the sniff is a search. 
 So, Brewer avers, having to decide whether to admit the 
evidence obtained by use of a drug- snifﬁ ng dog, a judge may 

Legal Reason
[98]
98
take note of rules established in prior cases: if a police ofﬁ cer 
in a public place sees something in plain view, it is not a search 
for purposes of the Fourth Amendment, whereas if he opens 
luggage and observes something plainly visible inside, it is a 
search; if he overhears a conversation in a public place, it is 
not a search, but if he listens surreptitiously to a conversation 
in a private place, it is a search; and so forth. Considering these 
and other rules, the judge abduces a rule that resolves the case 
before her: if a police ofﬁ cer obtains information about a per-
son or thing in a public place without intrusion on the person 
or taking possession of or interfering with the use of the thing, 
it is not a search for purposes of the Fourth Amendment. 
 Brewer calls this abduced rule an “analogy- warranting rule,” 
or AWR.  37 It is analogy- warranting because it contains in the 
generalized form of a rule the analogical connection between 
the source and the target that inspired it. So in this instance, the 
judge notices the similarity between observing or overhearing a 
person in a public place and a dog snifﬁ ng a container in a pub-
lic place, and she concludes by analogy that since the former 
is not a search under the Fourth Amendment, the latter also is 
not; the evidence is, therefore, admissible. The AWR provides a 
generalization from which a conclusion about the facts of the 
particular case –  a dog snifﬁ ng a suitcase – can be deduced. 
Although the rule as stated is sufﬁ cient to resolve the case at 
hand deductively, it extends no further, and it may have to be 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[99]
reﬁ ned in another case with different facts. If a police ofﬁ cer 
were to use an X- ray machine that allowed him to see what is 
inside a container without opening it or taking possession of it, 
by its terms the rule would be applicable. But, confronting the 
new facts, one might want to amend the rule by adding “and 
without using a technological device.” Or one might not. 
 There are differences between the process of abduction 
that Peirce described and the process of analogical reason-
ing that interests Brewer. The abduced scientiﬁ c hypothesis is 
 descriptive: it explains the observed phenomenon in question 
(a dog snifﬁ ng luggage). An abduced AWR in Brewer’s account 
describes a rule of law that has normative consequences. The 
difference, which may be signiﬁ cant for other purposes, does 
not affect Brewer’s basic point, which is that the function of 
analogy in legal reasoning is not to validate a conclusion but 
only to  prompt  the reasoning that validates it, as the abduced 
scientiﬁ c hypothesis prompts the experimentation that con-
ﬁ rms (or disconﬁ rms) it as the desired explanation. As the 
subsequent steps of Brewer’s process make plain, the analogy 
plays no part in the validation itself.  
 2.   Conﬁ rmation or disconﬁ rmation of the AWR . The AWR 
as initially abduced is only preliminary. Having the abduced 
AWR before her, the judge tests it by considering whether its 
application acceptably classiﬁ es the target phenomenon and 

Legal Reason
[100]
100
other related phenomena, those that she had in mind when 
formulating the AWR and others. She considers arguments of 
policy and efﬁ ciency that explain and justify the AWR or, on 
the other hand, contradict it. So, in the case of the drug- sniff-
ing dog, arguments that support the AWR might include:  
 (1)   A snifﬁ ng dog signals the presence of nothing except 
drugs, so there is no signiﬁ cant invasion of privacy.  
 (2)   If a container does not contain drugs, its owner will 
not even be aware that it has been sniffed.  
 (3)  Trained dogs are an effective, inexpensive, and 
unintrusive way to control the transportation of 
illegal drugs.  
Arguments that contradict the AWR might include: 
 (1)   What a person deliberately conceals from view 
should not ordinarily be subject to exposure 
without his consent.  
 (2)   Persons should not have to be on guard against 
unusual and undetectable methods of investigation.  
 (3)   The lawfulness of a police practice should not depend 
on what, if anything, it turns up.  
Brewer calls such arguments, which are the kind that Posner 
would include in “policy analysis,” “analogy- warranting 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[101]
rationales,” or AWRas.  38 Working back and forth with the 
facts of the case, examples of other similar facts, and rel-
evant legal doctrine, by a process of reciprocal “reﬂ ective 
adjustment,” the judge arrives at a rule that acceptably 
classiﬁ es the phenomenon with respect to the issue before 
him. 39  If a dog is made to sniff luggage, without interfering 
with it or its owner, for the purpose of revealing whether it 
contains drugs, it is not a search to which the requirements 
of the Fourth Amendment apply . Brewer continues to call 
this modiﬁ ed rule an “AWR,” although the analogy, having 
prompted the initial AWR by abduction, has no further role 
to play and is discarded. The rule that is eventually con-
ﬁ rmed may have little relation to the AWR with which the 
judge’s reﬂ ections began. 
 3.   Application of the AWR . Having formulated a rule to 
cover the facts of the case, the judge applies it and reaches 
the appropriate conclusion –  the evidence is admissible – by a 
valid deductive inference.  40 
Although Brewer refers to the whole three- step process as 
an analogical argument, it is apparent that the work of the 
analogy is completed in the ﬁ rst step. True to his observation 
that abduction from an analogy to a rule is not a valid infer-
ence, the signiﬁ cance of the analogy is in his view not logical, 
not justiﬁ catory at all, but epistemological or psychological. 

Legal Reason
[102]
102
At most, it explains how the judge happened to hit on that 
particular rule out of all the possible rules. Having set the 
judge on the right track, the analogy has no more to do; it 
helps her neither to reach a correct decision nor even to 
determine whether she has in fact reached it. Once the initial 
AWR has been formulated, the analogy drops from sight and 
need never be mentioned again or, indeed, even be known; for 
aught that appears, the AWR might just as easily have been 
found in a dream or, as sometimes is said, have “popped” 
into the judge’s head.  41 Both elements of the analogy, the 
source and the target, may reappear in the second, conﬁ rma-
tory stage, but only as examples, among others, by which to 
test the AWR. The relationship between AWR and AWRa is 
established by ordinary arguments of policy and efﬁ ciency, 
on one hand, and consistency, on the other. The third step 
of the process, application of the conﬁ rmed AWR to the par-
ticular facts, is, as Brewer insists, deductive. Looking back 
at the argument from the end to the beginning, one does not 
encounter the analogy as such at all. What is offered as an 
account and defense of analogical argument in legal reason-
ing turns out to assign it only an incidental and dispensable, 
if common and often useful, role. All the work that counts, 
the work of  justiﬁ cation, is done in the second step, by the 
AWRas. When the elaborate structure that Brewer builds is 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[103]
unwrapped, its core is not so different from Posner’s account 
of adjudication. 
 It is apparent that Brewer is led to embed an analogy in this 
three- step process because he believes that, standing on its 
own, it has no rational force. An analogy, he explains, consists 
of an observed similarity between two phenomena, identiﬁ ca-
tion by observation or otherwise of some further characteris-
tic of the source, and the conclusion that the target also has 
that characteristic. The   logical form of an analogy is thus: 
 (1)   A (the source) has characteristics  p ,  q , and  r ; 
 (2)   B (the target) has characteristics  p ,  q , and  r ; 
 (3)   A has also characteristic  s ; 
 (4)   Therefore, B has characteristic  s . 
But propositions (1)– (3) do not lead to (4). They establish (by 
abduction) only that it is  possible that B has characteristic   s . 
To sustain (4) an additional premise is needed: 
 (3 1 ) If anything that has characteristics  p ,  q , and  r 
has characteristic  s , then everything that has 
characteristics  p ,  q , and  r has characteristic  s . 
 With the addition of (3 1 ), one has a valid deductive argument, 
or syllogism. More simply stated:  

Legal Reason
[104]
104
 (3 2 ) Anything that has characteristics  p ,  q , and  r has 
characteristic  s ; 
 (2) B has characteristics  p ,  q , and  r ; 
 (4) Therefore B has characteristic  s. 
 A straightforward analogy, embracing neither a proposi-
tion of the form (3 1 ) nor a proposition of the form (3 2 ), is 
simply invalid. From a   logical point of view, there is no more 
to be said. Brewer avoids this by associating the analogy with 
the inductive second step (conﬁ rmation of the AWR) and the 
deductive third step (application of the AWR), but they do not 
buttress the analogy so much as ignore it. If, as he says, the 
completed argument depends on the relation between prem-
ises and conclusion, its rational force is no greater with the 
analogy than without it, as substitution of a dream for the 
analogy as the source of the AWR makes plain. Thus, despite 
his claim to defend the use of reasoning by analogy, Brewer 
seems at one with a group to whom he refers as “  skeptics,” 
who reject analogical reasoning   altogether.  42 
 Brewer contrasts the skeptics with those who have more 
conﬁ dence in the persuasive force of an analogy, whom he 
calls “mystics.” 43  Levi, who endorsed analogical reasoning 
without explaining it, was presumably a mystic. Among recent 
scholars, the mystic- in- chief, Brewer says, is Cass Sunstein, 
who has generally followed   Levi’s lead.  44 Like Levi, Sunstein 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[105]
observes that “reasoning by analogy … is the mode through 
which the ordinary lawyer operates,”  45 and he commends it 
as a means of resolving disputes when there is not agreement 
about underlying principles. Lawyers and judges resort to 
analogical reasoning, he says, when they lack a “comprehen-
sive theory that would account for the particular outcomes 
[analogical reasoning] yields.”  46 Such reasoning, Sunstein 
says, gives rise to “[i] ncompletely theorized agreements,” 
which permit resolution of concrete disputes despite more 
fundamental incertitude or disagreement.  47 Whereas Levi 
had found democratic virtues in such outcomes, because “the 
examples or analogies urged by the parties bring into the law 
the common ideas of the society,”  48 Sunstein sees no special 
connection with democracy. It would be “most surprising,” 
he observes, “if we could identify any mechanism translat-
ing democratic wishes into analogical reasoning  …  The 
force of any argument by analogy really turns on underlying 
principles and not on community desires.”  49 Nevertheless, he 
commends the use of analogy, because it frequently allows a 
heterogeneous and even deeply divided community to achieve 
a limited consensus that preserves the rule of law.  
 Brewer gently derides the mystics as believing that an 
analogy “has some ineffable quality that merits our entrust-
ing it with deep and difﬁ cult matters of state.”  50 His point 
is well taken. Levi acknowledges explicitly that analogical 

Legal Reason
[106]
106
reasoning is logically ﬂ awed, and Sunstein, in effect, does as 
well. Extolling the virtues of incompletely theorized agree-
ments reached on the basis of an analogy, Sunstein says in 
an aside: “To be sure, analogical reasoning cannot proceed 
without identiﬁ cation of a governing idea … to account for 
the results in the source and target cases.” 51 The analogy is 
important nevertheless, he says, because it “helps identify the 
governing idea.” 52 That, however, has no more to do with the 
validity of the conclusion than Brewer’s abductive step does. 
From a logical point of view, the crux of the matter is that 
analogical reasoning “cannot proceed” on its own. Taking his 
words at face value, Sunstein is a skeptic in mystic’s clothing. 
And, indeed, why ought we credit Levi’s or Sunstein’s benign 
view of analogical arguments? If, as they say, analogical argu-
ments are bad arguments, why should we suppose that they 
regularly lead to valuable conclusions? Levi and Sunstein 
must be mistaken either about the formal weakness of the 
arguments or about the arguments’ merits.  
 Brewer himself has remarkably little to say about an anal-
ogy, beyond pointing out its deductive invalidity. He does say 
that “there is inevitably an uncodiﬁ able, imaginative moment 
in exemplary, analogical reasoning,” and that “[t] here is an 
art to making apt, instructive, compelling analogies.”  53 This 
“uncodiﬁ able, imaginative moment,” or “art,” is otherwise 
unexplained. Brewer avoids his own criticism of the mystics 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[107]
only by arguing, in effect, that whatever may be the ground or 
origin of an analogy, it has no formal place in a proper legal 
argument anyway, and, therefore, does not affect the argu-
ment’s rational force. 
 The heart of the matter, Brewer asserts, and the reason 
why analogies are so hard to tame, is the requirement of   rel-
evant similarity . 54 All accounts of analogical argument agree 
that an analogy is successful and justiﬁ es its conclusion only 
if the observed similarity between the source and the target is 
relevant to the further similarity that is in question. Although 
it may be said loosely that whether an analogy is good or 
bad depends simply on the extent or strength of the similar-
ity between the two things being compared, the difference 
is a matter not of quantity or strength but of relevance. Two 
items that closely resemble one another might nevertheless 
compose a bad analogy, because they are dissimilar in some 
respect that is highly relevant to the matter at hand but is 
otherwise insigniﬁ cant. 
 The point is obvious. No one, except a small child, would 
expect a red tennis ball to taste like an apple, although 
they are considerably similar in size, shape, and color; 
those similarities, strong enough in some respects, are not 
relevant to how they taste. But, Brewer says, the notion 
of relevant similarity is “tenaciously resistant to concep-
tual explication” and leaves the logical force of analogical 

Legal Reason
[108]
108
arguments “largely mysterious and unanalyzed.”  55 The sec-
ond step of his process, conﬁ rmation of the AWR, might 
be regarded as an effort to unpack the notion of relevant 
similarity, without a commitment to the epistemic priority 
of either the observed similarity or the factors that make 
it relevant. So, one might say, a source and target are rel-
evantly similar and the analogy is successful if there are 
reasons (AWRas) to conclude that the characteristics that 
are observed to be similar are regularly accompanied by the 
characteristic that   is in doubt. But Brewer intends more –  
and less  – than that. He wants to account for the promi-
nence of analogies in legal reasoning and, therefore, to give 
them an effective place in legal arguments; hence the role of 
analogy in the ﬁ rst step, abduction to the AWR. In the end, 
however, his interest is not epistemological but logical, not 
the psychological or intellectual origins of a legal argument 
but its rational force. Consequently, denying an analogy any 
rational force of its own, Brewer has no analytic use for it 
in the completed argument and discards it. Even if judges 
and lawyers give independent weight to an analogy and do 
not construct their arguments according to his model, he 
says, we should reconstruct them in that fashion in order 
to display their rational force. The reconstruction avoids 
the invalid abductive inference from conclusion to premise, 
or consequence to antecedent, in which the analogy plays 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[109]
a role, by replacing it with a convincing, inductively vali-
dated argument for a proposition from which a conclusion 
about the case at hand can be formally deduced. The con-
ﬁ rmed AWR is, in effect, the major premise and the facts 
of the case the minor premise of an ordinary syllogism. In 
the end, aside from starting things off with an unexplained 
analogy –  an “uncodiﬁ able, imaginative moment” –  Brewer’s 
account of analogical legal argument is no more than a 
repackaging of the deductive and inductive arguments of 
others. Without quite saying so, Brewer simply combines 
the analyses of  Westen and   Posner. 
 Brewer believes that his account sustains our aspiration to 
the   rule of law.  56 Just what the rule of law signiﬁ es concretely is 
far from clear; aspirationally, it is closely allied with the view of 
law as reason, not subject to individual will or whim but rather 
conforming to rational criteria.  57 According to that view, a con-
crete legal problem is solved not by considering it in all its con-
crete particularity and devising an equally particular  solution, 
but by ﬁ nding or formulating a rule that has hitherto, explic-
itly or implicitly, been applied to problems of that kind and 
will thereafter also be so applied. Making a place for the AWR, 
which is itself brought into reﬂ ective adjustment with other 
legal rules by the AWRas, appears to satisfy this feature of law, 
and the deductive form of the eventual argument gives it the 
force of formal logic. It is not an accident, however, that the 

Legal Reason
[110]
110
third step of the argument omits entirely not only the analogy 
with which the argument began but also, and in this regard 
more signiﬁ cantly, the AWRas. Since the whole point of the sec-
ond step is to fashion an AWR that conforms to the particular 
facts of the case, application of the AWR in the third step is no 
more than conﬁ rmation of a conclusion that has already effec-
tively been reached. There is no guarantee that the AWR in its 
ﬁ nal form will be applied in a subsequent case. It will simply be 
one among other rules and policies considered as AWRas lead-
ing to formulation of a conﬁ rmed AWR for that case. Nor is 
there a guarantee that it will retain just the same form even as 
an AWRa; it will be up to the court in later cases to extract the 
rule of that case. In its ﬁ nal form, Brewer’s argument achieves 
formal validity at the price of being an empty shell. 
 In the fully expanded argument, on the other hand, the 
AWRas are prominently included, but only at the price of 
undermining the rule of law. The initial abduction of the AWR 
in the ﬁ rst step is not sufﬁ cient to sustain the claim of reason; 
nor could it be, because, as Brewer insists, an abductive infer-
ence is formally invalid. It has to be conﬁ rmed by reference 
to the AWRas that explain and justify it. Yet it is precisely 
the point of the rule of law and the whole function of the 
AWR in Brewer’s account that a rule ordinarily be applied 
because it is the rule and not because it is independently 
justiﬁ ed. Brewer’s second step brings us remarkably close to 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[111]
Posner’s legal pragmatism. To be sure, a rule may be called 
into question and, if it is, reasons for following it may have to 
be provided. Even then, however, adherence to the rule of law 
and a proper respect for the difference between legislation 
and adjudication dictate that the reasons be sought within 
the fabric of the law and not in the open spaces of policy and 
its efﬁ cient implementation. Choosing or framing one rule 
rather than another may call for intelligent consideration of 
the legal landscape being mapped. But that is another matter 
from subjecting the rule of a case to conﬁ rmation or discon-
ﬁ rmation in every instance, by explanatory and justiﬁ catory 
reasons at large. Brewer may respond that he does not require 
a full- blown inquiry into AWRas in every instance; if the pos-
ited AWR is well  known and uncontested, it may be accepted 
on that basis. The question, however, is not whether we may 
not sometimes take a shortcut but whether we want to go 
that route at all. Wanting to steer a middle course between 
the formalists, who claim for the law the validity of a deduc-
tive system, and those who, rejecting formalism, believe that 
law and policy are alike, Brewer leaves us with some of the 
 difﬁ culties of both. The formalist’s claim is sustained, but the 
deductive system on which he relies is empty. And the anti-
formalist is released from even the restraint of adherence to a 
rule, because he is invited in every instance to subject the rule 
on which he relies to the test of instrumental justiﬁ cation. 

Legal Reason
[112]
112
 Seeking to domesticate analogical legal arguments and 
bring them within the ambit of inferential logic, Brewer does 
not, as he believes, sustain the rule of law but defeats it. No 
self- contained body of rules, however they are determined 
and however they may be related to one another, can pre-
scribe fully the rules’ application to the speciﬁ c facts of a con-
crete case. Rules simply as rules remain inevitably general. 
Without the tether that analogical arguments provide, the 
rule of law would be an abstract ideal cut off from the deci-
sion of actual cases.  
 In sum, purporting to explain the prominence of analogi-
cal arguments in legal reasoning, Brewer relegates the anal-
ogy itself to an insigniﬁ cant role. Because he believes that 
an analogy on its own terms rests on an invalid inference 
and has no rational force, he assigns it merely the inciden-
tal function of setting in motion his three- step sequence of 
abduction, induction, and deduction. One may wonder why 
the complete sequence is called an “analogical” argument 
at all, if not to account, however superﬁ cially, for the fact 
that the use of analogy is a distinguishing characteristic of 
legal reasoning. At the same time, depriving the analogy of 
any independent signiﬁ cance, his account of legal reason-
ing contains no means by which rules are made to apply to 
concrete cases as rules and not simply as the best course to 
follow, all things considered. When all is said and done, he 
www.ebook3000.com

Objections
[113]
leaves unexplained the puzzle of lawyers’ and judges’ reli-
ance on analogical reasoning, on the one hand, and its wide-
spread scholarly disparagement and rejection, on the other. 
 Brewer’s defense of the rational force of analogical legal 
argument, reconstructed as he prescribes, is, at bottom, an 
effort to vindicate law as   reason rather than will, in the tra-
dition of theories of   natural law, according to which the 
validity of law depends on its conformity to some exter-
nal standard of truth and not simply on the authority of 
those who promulgate it. If, the defense goes, analogical 
arguments can, despite appearances, be subjected to the 
demands of reason, then ﬁ delity to law may be warranted.  58 
The reconstruction does not succeed, because it has the 
effect not of validating analogical arguments but of  making 
them irrelevant. Their place in   legal reasoning is too insis-
tent for that. The use of analogy is, as everyone agrees, not 
occasional or incidental but pervasive, and on its face it is 
part of the argument; it is not merely an interesting aside 
or the report of a psychological event. Nor can it be dis-
missed as only a curious habit of the legal profession –  what 
the French call a  déformation professionelle  –  or simply a 
mistake. If the normative force of law depends on its com-
mitment to reason, a place has to be found for analogical 
arguments on their own terms.  

[114]
114
 CHAPTER 4 
 Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, 
and the Rule of Law  
 a.  Analogical Reasoning  
 How then do we do it? If an analogy is neither a suppressed 
deductive argument nor, certainly, an inductive argument, 
what is it, and why do we –  ought we –  have conﬁ dence in 
the conclusion? How do we account for perception of the 
complex similarities on which an analogical legal argument 
may depend: the similarity between a steamboat and an inn, 
on which the court relied in  Adams ; between a “live” perfor-
mance and the reception and transmission of a radio broad-
cast, as in  Jewell- LaSalle ; and between a telephone booth 
and a business ofﬁ ce, a friend’s automobile, and a taxicab, 
as in  Katz ? What guides the selection and reliance on one 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[115]
similarity among all the others that might be mentioned and 
a multitude of dissimilarities? The theories dismissive of ana-
logical reasoning discussed in previous chapters assume that 
the logic of deductive and inductive argument deﬁ nes the 
bounds within which those questions must be answered; no 
answer being found there, they conclude that there is none 
and that an analogical argument, thus unconstrained, is too 
weak to support the weighty consequences of an adjudica-
tion. Answers are found, however, not in abstract reason but 
directly in our experience of the world. 
 The   ability to reason analogically is a rich subject for inves-
tigation and analysis. Full discussion of the issues that it pre-
sents and of experimental results and explanatory theories 
is beyond the scope of this book. I go no further here than 
to indicate the lines of inquiry that conﬁ rm what we already 
know: that we rely on analogical reasoning, usually with con-
siderable success, all the time, in life as in law. References 
for further study are included in a Note on the Problem of 
Universals in  Appendix A . 
 The evidence is convincing that the capacity for analogi-
cal reasoning is hardwired in us (and, incidentally, in ani-
mals) and develops initially at a very early age –  within the 
ﬁ rst twelve months.  1 It is not fundamentally distinct from the 
capacity, also hardwired, to recognize the general in the par-
ticular –  the redness of an apple, a ﬁ re engine, and a clown’s 

Legal Reason
[116]
116
nose –  without which we should be unable to describe or refer 
to anything that is not immediately present and which, there-
fore, is implicit in all learning. The idea of   relevant similarity, 
which has been so much discussed in connection with ana-
logical reasoning, emerges   not much later, as soon as such 
recognition develops beyond the mere perception of similar 
stimuli –  the color red –  to include the capacity to sort one’s 
perceptions into discrete entities that persist over time and 
remain the same even though some of their qualities change –  
a red apple, a red ﬁ re engine, a clown’s red nose. The child 
puts down his apple and walks away. When he goes back to it 
later, someone has taken a bite out of it, and the child com-
plains, because  his apple  is no longer just as it had been. When 
he sees a ﬁ re engine, he knows what it is because he has a toy 
ﬁ re engine, even though the toy is very much smaller than 
what he now looks at. The clown takes off his red nose, and 
the child claps (or cries), because the clown who now stands 
before him is the same clown, yet different. Interacting with a 
very young child from day to day, one can observe the child’s 
puzzlement about such transformations gradually dissipate. 
For the present purpose, what is signiﬁ cant is that when the 
child identiﬁ es  his apple ,  a ﬁ re engine ,  the clown , he not only 
perceives the similarity between what he saw before and what 
he sees now, but also, so far as the identiﬁ cation is concerned, 
looks past the differences between them, which may be very 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[117]
substantial and in another context would be critically impor-
tant. As the child’s vocabulary and conceptual understanding 
expand, his ability to distinguish relevant and irrelevant simi-
larity and difference increases in complexity, so that without 
hesitation he can, according to the context, refer to a toy as 
his toy, a ﬁ re truck, a truck, a gift from his uncle, a piggy 
bank, and so forth. Each of those references requires him to 
sort the characteristics of the same object, those that are rel-
evant and those that are not, in a different way. If you ask 
him to show you another truck, another gift from Uncle Dan, 
or another piggy bank, he will sort other objects in ways that 
again require him to distinguish among relevant similarities 
and differences.  
 There are large psychological and epistemological ques-
tions about how this process is learned and applied and how 
it is to be understood, questions that may fairly be said to be 
about the nature of thought itself. There is no question, how-
ever, that the ability is acquired very early and that it cannot 
be assimilated or reduced to deductive reasoning, because 
deductive reasoning depends on it.  2 Unless one is able to iden-
tify an object as a member of a class despite its differences 
from other members of the class, no deductive inference is 
possible. Thus, according to   Westen’s account,  3 the child’s 
description of his toy as a ﬁ re engine should be reconstructed 
in the following fashion: “Anything of whatever size that is 

Legal Reason
[118]
118
red, has six wheels, carries a coiled hose and ladders … is a 
ﬁ re engine. This (toy) is red, has six wheels, carries a coiled 
hose and ladders … Therefore, it is a ﬁ re engine.” Aside from 
the pointlessness of such a reconstruction, which would bury 
ordinary speech under a deductive landslide, it does not do 
the work that Westen’s account requires; the general proposi-
tion on which the deduction depends is itself dependent on 
the ability to identify relevant similarities composing a class 
of ﬁ re engines that includes, for some purposes and not oth-
ers, both the real thing and the   toy. 4 
 There is, of course, a great difference between the percep-
tible similarities of things, like color and shape, and the more 
complex similarities that signal or explain their common 
behavior, on which analogies like those that served Edna and 
Charlie depend.  5 One can see that an apple and a ﬁ re engine 
are the same color; but one cannot see that if he steps on an 
apple, it will be squashed and will not squeal (or sprout wings 
or ... ) or that if he pulls the lever on the toy ﬁ re truck, a siren 
will sound and the truck will not explode (or do a tap dance 
or ... ).  6 The latter requires awareness not only of how things 
appear to the senses but also of how they act on other things 
and react to the action of other things on them. This aware-
ness begins later than the awareness of perceptual similari-
ties like color and shape, at around the age of three.  7 Once 
the general notion of cause and effect has been acquired, 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[119]
however, such information –  what qualities of things are asso-
ciated in what circumstances with what effects –  accumulates 
rapidly. Thereafter, it is as available to us as perceptual simi-
larities and is itself commonly a basis on which we sort things 
into kinds. To refer to something as a “knife” requires one 
to understand that if something with a sharp edge is rubbed 
against something else  –  not all things, tomatoes but not 
rocks –  the latter “breaks.” Having that understanding, one 
can identify a thing as a knife and also understand an analogy 
between a knife and another kind of thing –  an axe or a bolt of 
lightning –  that has a similar effect  . Some of the information 
that accumulates, that which is closest to our interests and 
activities, is gradually organized into a coherent whole that 
includes structural explanatory relationships. Much of it, like 
what Edna knows about wine stains and Charlie about car 
engines, much or most of the time, simply accumulates as the 
lessons of experience, which are integrated imperfectly with 
other information, as the occasion demands. Even in this dis-
ordered state, it is variously available, and it is indispensable 
to navigating the course of our lives. 
 Until quite recently, the prevailing theory about the devel-
opment of analogical reasoning in children was that the 
 capacity arises in early adolescence.  8 Children younger than 
eleven or twelve were thought generally to be able to under-
stand simple relationships (kitten/ cat, puppy/ dog) but not the 

Legal Reason
[120]
120
“higher- order” structural relationship between two simple 
relationships (kitten : cat :: puppy : dog) that is the basis for 
an analogy. 9 Tests of children at various ages appeared to con-
ﬁ rm this theory, which corresponded to a general account of 
child development that described stages of cognitive ability.  10 
More recent work indicates that children reason analogically 
much earlier than had been thought, and it supports a differ-
ent explanation for a child’s inability to grasp an analogy: what 
the child lacks is not the capacity to reason analogically as 
such but the knowledge on which an analogy depends.  11 Until 
a child has learned that a kitten is a young cat and a puppy is 
a young dog, she will not understand an analogy that depends 
on the fact that a kitten and a puppy are younger versions 
of a cat and a dog. She is likely to understand an analogy 
that compares her to a kitten before she understands why her 
father calls her “Tadpole,” although the relevant similarity 
in both cases is the same. Furthermore, coherent knowledge 
structures, in which pieces of information are embedded in 
a conceptual system and related integrally, serve analogical 
reasoning better than isolated fragments of discrete informa-
tion. 12 A child is better able to identify the relevant similarity 
that associates a kitten, a puppy, a tadpole, and a caterpil-
lar analogically if she has a general understanding about the 
development of living things. According to this “knowledge- 
based” account, for which the evidence is strong, analogical 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[121]
reasoning does not implicate a cognitive faculty distinct from 
ordinary processes of thought. Not cognitive ability as such 
but experience and the knowledge that goes with it are the keys 
to effective analogical reasoning. Once the necessary experi-
ence is absorbed and understood, the ability to use it analogi-
cally follows, as an incident of that same understanding. 
 The   normatively freighted concepts that inform the law –  
responsibility, trust, fraud, and the like –  are a step further 
away from perceptual similarities than explanatory concepts 
of cause and effect. There is, however, nothing to suggest that 
the capacity for analogical reasoning is different or operates 
differently in that context. Until a child has some  conceptual 
understanding of what a moral imperative is, he will not be 
much impressed if he is asked, “How would you like it if some-
one did that to you?” Asking such a question of a small child, 
a parent may be bafﬂ ed and frustrated by the response, “I 
won’t let anyone do that to me.” Once a child’s  understanding 
expands to include normative relations, their use  analogically 
is not far behind, as the familiar exchange “You shouldn’t hit 
your sister” /  “She hit me ﬁ rst” amply shows.  
 The experimental ﬁ ndings in cognitive and developmental 
psychology as well as patterns of ordinary thought that we all 
recognize give no support to accounts of analogical reasoning 
according to which the critical notion of   relevant similarity is 
unexplained or mysterious or is attributed to an obscure and 

Legal Reason
[122]
122
ineffable “intuition.” Relevance has the same meaning in this 
context that it has in others. Without having any general rule 
or principle to work with, we often can tell with reasonable 
assurance what is likely to be relevant, because we have had 
more or less similar experiences in the past and are able to 
call them to mind and because we have a general sense, also 
acquired from experience, of how things work.  13 Sometimes 
experience fails us. Who would have thought that the mold 
that forms on bread and other foods would be the source of 
an invaluable medicine?  14 But over a large range, our experi-
ence is orderly and serves   us well. If it were not, if stepping 
on an apple were as likely to make it cry out or sprout wings 
as to squash it, and so forth, we should have more to concern 
us than how to make a good analogy. 
 The same basis of understanding applies in law. No rule 
declares generally that inns and steamboats, or operators 
of inns and operators of steamboats, are alike  –  for many 
purposes they are not –  or that all situations in which one 
person trusts another and the latter is subject to temptation 
should be treated alike – for many purposes they should not. 
Nevertheless, someone who is familiar with the law of torts 
would readily suppose that the rule about an innkeeper’s 
liability has a bearing on a question about the liability of a 
steamboat operator, not because he has in mind a rule that 
applies to both but because his knowledge of the law tells him 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[123]
that the similarities between them relate to factors that com-
monly have a bearing on liability. So also, if his knowledge 
extends so far, it would occur to him that there is another 
rule, about the operator of a railroad sleeping car, which also 
may be relevant and points in a different direction. More gen-
eral knowledge about the law of torts and still more general 
understanding of the law’s approach to matters of commer-
cial dealing and personal and interpersonal responsibility 
may suggest other relevant rules and will help him to assess 
the comparative relevance of one rule or another. (It is in this 
manner that the “vertical and horizontal ordering” of justiﬁ -
catory principles, about which Ronald   Dworkin has written, 
takes hold).  15 In the same way, he will quickly dismiss most of 
the concrete details of the situation before him, like the menu 
for dinner and what Adams wore to bed, as irrelevant to the 
defendant’s liability, not because he knows and can recite a 
multitude of rules so providing but because his accumulated 
experience in the law tells him that those facts are not likely 
to count. 
 After the decision in   Olmstead in 1928, it would have 
been obvious to someone with knowledge of that case that 
an invasion of privacy that did not involve a physical tres-
pass probably did not violate the Fourth Amendment, even 
if the precise circumstances were quite different. There was 
no all- embracing rule to that effect, however, and he would 

Legal Reason
[124]
124
have had to rely on his more general knowledge of the Fourth 
Amendment and, more broadly, of rules about trespass in the 
law of property to be sure that some nontrespassory  intrusion 
other than eavesdropping was likewise not a  violation. Forty 
years later, when   Katz was decided, there was not a rule that 
made the absence of a trespass irrelevant. But someone who 
had followed the progression of cases since  Olmstead would 
have been aware that the requirement of a trespass was under 
attack, and a more general awareness of the  recent extension 
of a defendant’s constitutional rights in other respects might 
well have suggested that the element of a trespass was no 
longer as relevant as a person’s reasonable expectation of pri-
vacy in the circumstances. For that reason, the government’s 
brief in  Katz  argued that there could be no violation of the 
Fourth Amendment in the absence of a trespass, but, plainly 
aware that the rule of  Olmstead was  vulnerable, it argued on 
other grounds that eavesdropping on Katz’s telephone conver-
sation did not violate his rights under the Fourth Amendment, 
even if the requirement of a trespass were eliminated.  16 
 Although the need to reason analogically is common to 
all legal systems that subscribe to the rule of law, one would 
not expect the analogies that are used to be everywhere the 
same, even when the legal issues addressed are alike. The 
reasoning, including analogical reasoning, of a British court 
is likely to be more comprehensible to an American lawyer 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[125]
than is the reasoning of a French court, because of the com-
mon British and American legal heritage, although the diver-
gence of the two, as well as all the differences between British 
and American life generally, might interfere. Such compari-
sons aside, our ability to get along in the law depends on its 
reasonable predictability. In this respect, the coherence and 
stability of a legal order is an analog of the orderliness of 
nature. The analogy is not complete, because our knowledge 
of the natural order depends on the overriding premise that 
its regularities are part of an objective reality that is there to 
be discovered. Regularities of the legal order, on the other 
hand, are the product of human design and have to be con-
structed. Nevertheless, in an ongoing legal order, they enable 
us to subject analogies in the law to the ordinary demands of 
substantive reasonableness, in light of what we know. 
 In short, support for the analogy on which an analogical 
legal argument depends is found in its legal context or, more 
simply, in the law itself. Those who insist that there is no basis 
for validating a legal argument except by deduction or induc-
tion suppose that lawyers and judges make their arguments 
in a vacuum, as if they have no more reason to choose one 
analogy over another than would a visitor from Mars who 
was asked to explain why the lawn is wet.  17 But that is as false 
in law as it is in ordinary affairs. If Edna, relying on the fact 
that salt and talcum powder are both white, had suggested to 

Legal Reason
[126]
126
Mary that she add a dash of talcum powder to the soup, Mary 
would have had good reason to prefer her usual recipe, even 
though she probably knows nothing about the properties of 
sodium chloride – salt – or hydrous magnesium silicate – talc. 
As Hume observed, so far as one can tell from appearances, 
talcum powder is as likely to improve the taste of soup as 
salt. A  child, making make- believe soup, might well stir in 
some talcum powder. But Mary knows better; her accumu-
lated knowledge and experience tell her that talcum powder 
belongs in the medicine cabinet, not in the spice rack. Some 
analogies  are  better than others, not just because they hap-
pen to appeal to our imagination or individual sensibility but 
because they correspond more closely to our experience and 
understanding. 
 So also in the law. If Adams’s lawyer had argued that the 
steamboat operator was liable for Adams’s loss because the 
steamboat provided musical entertainment after dinner, as do 
many inns, or if the steamboat operator’s lawyer had argued 
that it was not liable because Adams had slept in the nude, 
the judge might reasonably have been perplexed, because 
nothing in the law of torts or elsewhere in the law supported 
the suggestion that a shipboard concert or a person’s noctur-
nal (un)dress has anything to do with liability for a loss by 
theft. On the other hand, the relation between the parties, 
more particularly the conﬁ dence of a guest or passenger in 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[127]
an innkeeper’s or steamboat operator’s honesty, and the lat-
ter’s temptation to betray that conﬁ dence are just the sort of 
consideration that tort law and the more general legal back-
ground indicated were relevant. 
 The legal knowledge and experience that lawyers and 
judges bring to the facts of a case tell them, just as Mary’s 
knowledge and experience tell her, that some similarities 
count for the matter at hand and others do not. Their ability 
to make such distinctions is no more mysterious in the one 
case than it is in the other. If a legal analogy cannot be put 
to the test in the same way that a practical analogy can, it 
is nevertheless subject to tests of consistency and coherence 
with rules of law that together indicate the relevance of par-
ticular facts to the issue in question, although neither indi-
vidually nor collectively do they prescribe conclusively for 
the speciﬁ c situation.  18 If rules that are directly relevant are 
silent or inadequate to settle the matter, then there is resort 
to other, more remote rules, for whatever light they may 
shed. In a close case, there may ﬁ nally be a choice between 
two alternatives –  inns or railroad sleeping cars –  that no 
rule alone or in combination with others resolves com-
pletely. The disagreement that remains after a case has been 
fully argued and considered is not unique to the law, nor is it 
a defect. It is the inevitable concomitant of the effort to con-
ﬁ ne the variety of human experience within general rules.  

Legal Reason
[128]
128
 b.  Legal Education  
 Christopher Columbus   Langdell, having recently been 
appointed Professor and Dean of the Harvard Law School, 
introduced the case method of legal education in his ﬁ rst class 
on Contracts in 1870.  19 He had two objectives. The ﬁ rst was 
to establish law as a science, by applying a scientiﬁ c method 
of analysis to reported cases, which he regarded as raw mate-
rial comparable to experimental data in the physical sciences. 
The second was to reform legal education. Pedagogy also 
would employ the method of science; as if in a laboratory, 
students would extract legal doctrines from the cases them-
selves, instead of receiving them in lectures and treatises. 
Langdell’s jurisprudential ambition to place law on a scien-
tiﬁ c footing was not successful (although he himself never 
abandoned it).  20 It became a subject of derision, lampooned 
as “  mechanical   jurisprudence,” and was a chief target of the 
Legal Realists in the early twentieth century.  21 It has now no 
signiﬁ cant support. The triumph of Langdell’s pedagogy, on 
the other hand, is complete. In part because of its adoption 
and championing of the “  case method” of instruction, under 
Langdell’s deanship   Harvard Law School became the leading 
law school in the country.  22 More than a hundred years later, 
the case method remains the standard form of legal instruc-
tion. Although the texts that students read now contain much 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[129]
more than cases (mostly appellate opinions), which were the 
sole material of Langdell’s courses, they are still known as 
“casebooks,” and cases still dominate their content.  Oddly, 
the reasons for the failure of Langdell’s ﬁ rst objective and for 
the success of the second are closely related. 
 The idea that law could be studied scientiﬁ cally did not 
originate with Langdell; the reference to science did not   nec-
essarily mean more than that, one way or another, law is a 
body of knowledge containing true principles that can be stud-
ied and learned. Legal doctrine, it was supposed, composes a 
coherent, logically orderly system, which provides a correct 
outcome for every case. According to a view prominent in the 
ﬁ rst half of the nineteenth century, at the apex of the system 
are transcendental principles of natural justice and reason, 
from which the doctrine is deduced. Therefore, although deci-
sions in actual cases are evidence of the law, they are not to 
be relied on entirely, because judges err and cases may be in 
conﬂ ict. The effort of the legal scientist is to discern the true 
ﬁ rst principles and to work from there.  23 Langdell’s notion of 
legal science was quite different. The doctrines of the law, he 
argued, are not to be traced to transcendental principles, but 
are to be found exclusively in cases. The study of cases them-
selves, scientiﬁ cally pursued, would, he thought, yield a small 
number of fundamental principles from which the outcomes 
of concrete cases follow.  24 It remained obscure how, without 

Legal Reason
[130]
130
circularity, the outcome in particular cases could be deduced 
from the hierarchy of principles and at the same time pro-
vide the raw material from which the principles are derived 
inductively.  25 
 There are a number of reasons to reject so doctrinaire (if 
not, indeed, mechanical) a view of the judicial function, not 
least its tendency to treat the prescriptive content of the law 
and the descriptive statements of science as equivalent. As a 
strictly formal matter, aside from the inconsistency of regard-
ing the law as both an inductive science and as a deductive, 
hermetically sealed system, what Langdell’s conception of the 
law omitted was a means for bridging the gap between facts 
and law, or law and facts. It included neither a method of rea-
soning from the bottom up –  from the decision of a case to a 
rule broader than the facts of the case itself –  nor a method of 
reasoning from the top down –  from a rule to facts to which 
the rule does not in terms apply. Nor was there anything in 
legal science as Langdell conceived it that corresponds to the 
 experimental results by which the descriptive regularities of 
 natural science are corrected and conﬁ rmed. It was into this 
gap that the   Legal Realists and, more recently, adherents of 
 Critical Legal Studies poured their scornful demonstrations 
that a rule of law isolated from its context could be made to 
yield precisely contrary conclusions.  26 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[131]
 In class, however, under the direction of someone who 
is knowledgeable about the law, the case method proved to 
be an excellent pedagogical technique to exercise students’ 
capacity for analogical reasoning at the same time that 
they acquire the knowledge of the law that informs it. The 
full- scale classroom discussion of a case typically begins, 
as   Langdell began his class on Contracts in 1870,  27 with a 
request that a student “state the facts.” The reason for that 
is not simply to mirror the usual structure of a lawyer’s 
argument or the opinion of a court. Rather, it is because 
what is to be gleaned from the opinion ﬁ rst of all is the law 
as it applies speciﬁ cally to the facts of that case. Thereafter, 
the sequence of questions varies according to professorial 
style, but the course of discussion typically follows a com-
mon pattern. Students are asked what arguments for each 
side the court considered in its opinion and how it dis-
posed of them, whether there are other persuasive argu-
ments that the court did not consider, what the outcome of 
the case and the holding –  the rule of law that determined 
the outcome –  are, and, ﬁ nally, whether the court’s reason-
ing and its result are sound. Discussing the arguments and 
the outcome, students are expected to relate the facts of 
the case to relevant rules of law that they have encoun-
tered in other cases and to consider whether the outcome 

Legal Reason
[132]
132
is consistent with those rules.  28 So also, the holding will 
be tested by comparing it with the holdings of other cases 
that are more or less similar. Just what the holding is may 
itself be a topic for discussion. At its narrowest, the hold-
ing will apply only to the very facts of the case; stated more 
broadly, it will apply to other situations in which the facts 
may be considerably different. Throughout this discussion, 
students’ understanding of the law is likely to be tested 
by questions requiring them to apply the putative holding 
and related rules to a series of “hypos,” hypothetical situ-
ations in which the facts vary from the actual facts, which 
progress from a small variation to larger and larger ones 
or from a very large variation to smaller and smaller ones 
and ﬁ nally to one that is scarcely distinguishable from the 
actual facts. (Hence the so- called slippery slope on which a 
student engaged in such a discussion is likely to ﬁ nd him-
self standing.) Thus the discussion is always brought back 
to the question whether the holding of the case applies to 
particular facts, which is pursued dialectically by the vari-
ation of one fact or another and the increasingly precise 
enunciation of the  holding itself.  29 The class discussion 
thus mirrors the work of lawyers and judges in the course 
of adjudication. It is a continuous exercise in analogical 
reasoning (as well as, of course, much else), a correct state-
ment of the law being pursued by the progressive inclusion 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[133]
of variant facts within, or their exclusion from, its range of 
application. 
 Early in their legal education, it occurs to many students 
that this method of instruction is uncommonly wasteful; if 
the professor knows the law, why doesn’t she tell the students 
what it is and let them learn it, instead of beating around the 
bush and, very likely, ﬁ nally leaving them in the dark any-
way? Not infrequently, after the ﬁ rst few weeks students ﬁ nd 
themselves bewildered. If they express their bewilderment to 
the professor, she is likely to reply, “Don’t worry. It will come 
together.” And, usually, by the end of the semester, it does. 
Learning the law means more than memorizing the rules that 
have been set down in past cases, even a very large number of 
them; it means understanding how the rules would be applied 
to other cases with different facts.   Although Langdell himself 
did not see it just that way, the genius of the case method is 
that it equips students to understand legal doctrine in use, 
not only the “black letter rule” but also what speciﬁ c details 
in a novel situation may have a bearing on whether and how 
the rule is applied. Time spent studying the  Adams case has 
value beyond the rule that a steamboat operator, in those par-
ticular circumstances, is liable as an insurer for a passenger’s 
loss. A student who appreciates the reasoning as well as the 
result will take away also a more general sense of the kind of 
consideration that affects one person’s liability for another’s 

Legal Reason
[134]
134
loss, which, together with the lessons of other more or less 
similar cases, may apply not only in a subsequent case having 
to do with the liability of a steamboat operator in somewhat 
different circumstances but also in a case involving the liabil-
ity of an airplane carrier or a taxicab driver or, even more 
remotely, the case of someone who gives bad advice about 
how to remove a stain from a tablecloth. The facts of all of 
those cases will afford some basis for arguing that the rule or 
the reasoning in  Adams should be applied, as well as a basis 
for arguing that it should not. The discussion in class, as later 
in practice, proceeds by analogical reasoning. That is what 
“thinking like a lawyer” means.  
 c.  The Rule of Law  
 The large, unexceptional role that analogical reasoning plays 
in the affairs of everyday life invites attention to the resis-
tance on theoretical grounds to acknowledging its role in the 
law, all the more so because argument “by analogy” is widely 
recognized as a distinctive characteristic of legal reasoning. 
The persistent effort of legal scholars to downgrade analogi-
cal reasoning, if not, indeed, to dismiss it altogether, is sim-
ply ignored by the lawyers and judges who regularly employ 
it. On the face of the matter, the lawyers and judges have 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[135]
the better of it. Why ought our inability to demonstrate the 
validity of an analogical argument as if it were a logical proof 
or to verify it experimentally be regarded as an obstacle in 
law any more than it is in ordinary affairs? Scholars and law 
students, no less than lawyers and judges, debate the mer-
its of legal arguments and usually reach a measure of agree-
ment. In view of the range and variety of the issues and the 
consequences for the parties, it is hardly surprising that there 
are close cases and disagreement about the outcomes. If cer-
tainty is not attainable, nevertheless a reasonable certitude 
generally is. There are widely shared criteria for appraising 
an argument that depends signiﬁ cantly on the use of anal-
ogy, and it is evident that the ability to make such arguments 
effectively has much to do with professional competence in 
the law. 
 No single idea contributes more to the respect that 
Americans have for their government and legal system than 
that they are subject to the rule of law:  ours is a   “govern-
ment of laws, and not of men.”  30 Just what the rule of law 
signiﬁ es is a good deal more complex than John Marshall’s 
famous aphorism suggests.  31 Common to all its more particu-
lar meanings, however, is the understanding that the law is 
 available to be known in advance by those who are entrusted 
with its application. It is closely connected to the require-
ments of accessibility and clarity, which enable persons who 

Legal Reason
[136]
136
are willing to do so to conform their conduct to the law.  32 It 
speaks most directly, however, not to those who comply with 
the law but to those who declare it. They are not to decide for 
themselves what the law is but are to seek it out, to discover 
and apply it as it is.  33 
 It is easy to grasp why analogical arguments may appear to 
subvert the rule of law. If the question is isolated from its legal 
context, who can say with any assurance whether a steam-
boat is more like an inn or a railroad sleeping car, or even 
specify how the question is to be answered? Yet if the answer 
is indeterminate in any particular case until the question has 
been answered  in that case , must not a decision that rests on 
the answer likewise be indeterminate? And must not the law 
of that case – the rights and obligations of the parties – then 
be a function of the subjective judgment of whoever it is that 
makes the analogy? Nor does the decision once made avoid a 
like indeterminacy in the future. Subsequent cases that pre-
sent different facts may be found to call for application of a 
different analogy. Is not law so grounded a rule of men, by 
any other name, and not a rule of law at all?  34 
 It is no great matter if Mary’s tablecloth does not come 
clean or Charlie’s lawn mower won’t start. One can always try 
something else. In law, not only may getting it wrong have 
large, often unpredictable consequences for the losing party, 
but also one of the most important normative dimensions of 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[137]
our experience is compromised. Law claims our allegiance 
and, having a monopoly of legitimate force, demands our 
compliance. The effort to bolster the rational sufﬁ ciency of 
analogical legal argument is prompted by concern that if the 
adjudicative process is insufﬁ cient rationally, it is insufﬁ cient 
normatively as well. Any lingering uncertainty about the out-
come of a case is thought to reﬂ ect uncertainty about what 
the law is and to that extent to reveal a breach in the law 
itself. If the same uncertainty attaches to any analogical argu-
ment, nevertheless, the implications outside the law are not 
so far- reaching. 
 Without quite saying so, those who reject analogical legal 
reasoning make the same demand of law that drove the dis-
credited quest for a “  legal science” in the nineteenth century. 
From that perspective, however useful an analogy may be to 
persuade, being neither an inductive nor a deductive argu-
ment, it has no credentials in reason, so that to rest a deci-
sion to any extent on an analogical argument undermines its 
authority. Brewer makes that point explicitly. Rejecting both 
the “skeptical” and the “mystical” accounts of analogy,  35 he 
says that his primary aim is to show that an analogical argu-
ment is far more disciplined intellectually and has “a much 
higher degree of  rational force ” than is generally allowed.  36 He 
accomplishes his aim by embedding an analogy in a sequence 
of inductive and deductive reasoning, in which it has only 

Legal Reason
[138]
138
an incidental role and no role at all in justifying the conclu-
sion. A  similar concern is evident in   Posner’s observations 
that lawyers’ training and experience equip them with “essen-
tially casuistic tools” and that “legal reasoning is, essentially, 
debaters’ reasoning,” which he contrasts unfavorably with 
empirically grounded inductive reasoning.  37 So also,   Westen, 
Priel, and others who reconstruct an analogical argument as 
a deductive inference. 
 A requirement that law be demonstrable (or veriﬁ able) 
and certain is no less misconceived as a standard by which to 
measure the rule of law than it is as a program by which to 
achieve it. Rationality does not demand so much. The effort 
to proceed by rule dictates only that rules, including their 
range of application, be stated as clearly as the subject mat-
ter permits and that the persons who are charged to apply 
the rules try conscientiously to abide by their terms and have 
the necessary experience and learning to do so. It calls for 
ofﬁ cial integrity, not the elimination of human judgment. 
The requirement of determinateness, after all, is a require-
ment that the rules have bounds that are reasonable and 
practically accessible, not a requirement that the bounds be 
self- executing. 
 There is no guarantee that a rule of law will be applied 
correctly. The intervention of human judgment makes it pos-
sible that a decision will be mistaken, or foolish, or biased, 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[139]
or perverse. Room for human judgment is room for all the 
errors of which human beings are capable. As Justice   Jackson 
famously observed of the Supreme Court, “We are not ﬁ nal 
because we are infallible, but we are infallible only because 
we are ﬁ nal.”  38 Recognizing the possibility of error, one can 
adopt practices that reduce its likelihood:  providing ample 
opportunity for debate and discussion, avoiding obscure 
language that conveys no clear meaning, explaining deci-
sions fully, and exposing the explanation to ofﬁ cial review or 
simply the informed consideration of others. Failure in any 
of these respects may, indeed, compromise the rule of law. 
Sometimes, despite the best effort, the application of a rule 
will be contested, and it will not be possible to say conﬁ dently 
what the right answer is.  39 In the largest sense, recognition of 
that uncertainty does not mark a departure from the rule of 
law. On the contrary, it conﬁ rms it.  
 The impulse to insulate law from the fallibility of human 
judgment has a long history. It springs from the conviction 
that the very notion of law, and with it justice, lacks mean-
ing unless it is unequivocal, not merely reasonable but, in 
some sense, true. How can a rule or a decision be law, it is 
thought, if its credentials are only the reasonableness and 
good faith of the persons who declare it? If the law’s claim to 
the authority of reason rests on so inﬁ rm a foundation, must 
one not conclude that, after all is said, its authority is not 

Legal Reason
[140]
140
that of reason but only the will of those who have the power 
to enforce it? 
 The question can be traced in Western thought to the 
debate in classical Athens between those, like   Plato, who 
believed that the cosmos is normatively ordered, which 
order is timeless and true, and those, notably the   Sophists, 
who believed that the normative order of human existence 
is a matter of convention only, established by the effort of 
human beings themselves.  40 For the former, laws of a human 
community that contravene the normative order of the cos-
mos –  the normative natural order –  are not true law and in 
the course of time are falsiﬁ ed; ultimately, each person has 
his due, whatever the community’s own laws might provide to 
the contrary. For the latter, the concepts of right and wrong, 
justice and desert, have meaning only as human constructs, 
which have no source of validity beyond the community’s 
own established normative order. Later, under the inﬂ uence 
of Christian theology, the Platonic view embraced the idea of 
a divine Creator, who provides alike for the natural order and 
for humankind, for whom God’s Providence is law, accessi-
ble to   reason and, therefore, enabling human beings to have 
a share in their own providence. It was a corollary of this 
view that human laws that do not conform to the providen-
tial order are not true law. The opposed view insisted that 
even as a matter of God’s Providence, the natural order and 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[141]
the law for humankind are products of   will, God’s will, which 
is not subordinate to reason and, therefore, not accessible 
to human reason.  41 Human law might be contrary to God’s 
will, but there are no certain means to determine whether 
that is so and, therefore, there is no certain test of the law’s 
validity external to the law itself. Underlying the metaphysi-
cal complexities of these positions was a profound effort to 
situate the human experience of freedom and the notion of 
individual responsibility and desert within the causal order 
of nature.  42 
 The jurisprudential debate has, for the most part, drawn 
back from its metaphysical origins. United within the camp 
of   natural law are theories that maintain one way or another 
that it is intelligible to speak of laws as true or not true, that 
human reason can discern the true law, and that the obliga-
tory character of law attaches fully only to true law.  43 Theories 
of   legal positivism assert that law is entirely a product of 
human effort, that human reason can discern no objective 
truth against which law can be measured, and that the obliga-
tory character of law generally or of particular laws cannot 
be demonstrated with certainty. The moral evaluation of law, 
which natural law regards as intrinsic to its nature, is not  
regarded by legal positivism as less important, but neverthe-
less as separate from the question of   what the law is. The phe-
nomenon of   Nazism presented the issue starkly. Proponents 

Legal Reason
[142]
142
of natural law asked: What moral claim to our allegiance can 
the idea of law have, if it can attach to unspeakable evil?  44 To 
which legal positivists replied: Even, or especially, in those 
extreme circumstances, we bear the burden of moral judg-
ment, for which there is no responsibility except our own and 
from which there is no escape.  45 
 As memory of the Nazi experience has receded, the   urgency 
of the search for objectivity in the law has lessened. The 
terms of the debate have changed, but the debate continues. 
Among recent scholars in contemporary American jurispru-
dence who have an afﬁ nity with the   natural law tradition are 
those who believe that the answer  to many, or most, consti-
tutional questions can be determined with certainty, either 
because the “plain meaning” of the constitutional text leaves 
no room for disagreement or because the “original intent” 
of the Framers of the Constitution, revealed by the text and 
sometimes by supplementary materials, is certain and per-
mits no deviation. It will perhaps seem contrary to the notion 
of natural law to associate it with the Constitution, which is 
itself the product of human effort and compromise. It may 
seem still further from the notion of natural law to associate 
with it those who trace constitutional law to the intent of the 
Framers, a particular group of human actors with variable, 
often contentious ideas and motivations. Not infrequently, 
however, those who rely on “original intent” as the dispositive 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[143]
answer to current controversies treat the Constitution simply 
as an authoritative – objectively valid – text and use original 
intent as a formula to avoid the need for interpreting the text. 
 The afﬁ nity between “originalism,” as it is called, and nat-
ural law is not based on their agreement about substantive 
issues. Originalism supports many rules as a matter of consti-
tutional law that generally have no place in doctrines of natu-
ral law. Likewise, natural law is commonly thought to afﬁ rm 
certain human rights that an originalist does not recognize 
as constitutional rights, because he cannot locate them in the 
text of the Constitution, although, perhaps, he would sup-
port their statutory enactment. The afﬁ nity is, rather, a com-
mon attitude toward questions about the law and a common 
approach to their resolution. Both originalism and natural 
law regard certainty about what the law is not only as desir-
able but as achievable and as a criterion of true law –  not in 
every case, but in many and the most important. Originalists 
rely on the Constitution in much the way that adherents of 
natural law rely on human reason, by itself or with some met-
aphysical support. They are alike prone to dismiss disagree-
ment with their conclusions as simply a mistake.  
 Successors to   legal positivism include those who believe 
that the Constitution provides no certain answer even for con-
stitutional questions. Although the text of the Constitution 
interpreted in light of the intention of the Framers, so far as 

Legal Reason
[144]
144
it is known, is the starting point for the decision of constitu-
tional issues, it is not the end. The vast social, political, and 
economic changes between the eighteenth century and the 
present have also to be considered. Many issues that concern 
us now were simply not conceived in the same way when 
the Constitution was written. Application of the text and the 
original intent behind it to our current circumstances calls 
inescapably for fallible human judgment and, perforce, opens 
the way to uncertainty.  
 The connection between the jurisprudential debate and 
matters of constitutional interpretation is illustrated clearly, 
if a little perversely, by a debate in the 1940s and  ʼ 50s between 
Justice   Black and Justice   Frankfurter about the application 
to state criminal proceedings of speciﬁ c provisions of the Bill 
of Rights, which, as drafted, applies only to the federal gov-
ernment. Justice Black argued that all the provisions having 
to do with criminal process had been incorporated into the 
Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment,    which 
applies to the states, and that the provisions were thereby 
made applicable to the states.  46 Justice Frankfurter rejected 
such wholesale incorporation; instead, he argued that the 
Due Process Clause has an “independent potency,” which 
absorbs some provisions of the Bill of Rights and not oth-
ers, according to their content, as part of the meaning of due 
process.  47 Accordingly, only those provisions of the Bill of 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[145]
Rights that had been absorbed apply to the states.  48 Part of 
the disagreement between Black and Frankfurter had to do 
with the intention of the drafters of the  Due Process Clause; 
Justice Black asserted and Justice Frankfurter denied that 
they had intended to incorporate the provisions of the Bill of 
Rights that were in question.  49 Each side also deployed con-
siderations of federal policy, Black urging that considerations 
of federalism did not justify having different criminal pro-
cedures in federal and state courts and Frankfurter urging 
that they did. But the heart of the matter lay deeper. Black’s 
insistence on incorporating the text of the various provisions 
of the Bill of Rights, without any selectivity, was driven by 
his belief that, at least at the constitutional level, law could, 
and should, satisfy objective criteria, which are proof against 
subjective individual judgment. His incorporation thesis, he 
believed, achieved that, because in his view the meaning of 
the incorporated provisions was known. He derided what he 
called Frankfurter’s “natural law” approach, which, he said, 
left judges free to pick and choose which provisions to apply 
and how to apply them, according to their individual sense of 
justice.  50 Frankfurter acknowledged the burden of decision 
and the possibility of error, but he insisted that the traditions 
of the judiciary and the discipline and detachment of con-
scientious judges provided more guidance than did the auto-
matic application of supposed plain meanings of selected 

Legal Reason
[146]
146
constitutional language, which, he said, would lead inevitably 
to arbitrary results.  51 
 In fact, although Frankfurter did not disclaim the label of 
natural law, it was Black himself who took the characteristic 
natural law position. Placing overriding value on certainty, he 
thought that he achieved it by relying directly on the words of 
the Constitution, which had a deﬁ nite meaning and provided 
an objective test for the correct result.  52 Frankfurter,   accept-
ing the burden of decision and the possibility of error, made 
room in his constitutional theory for the incertitudes of   legal 
positivism. 
 The role of analogical reasoning in adjudication is   closely 
related to the jurisprudential debate (and within it, the debate 
about constitutional meaning). There is, on one hand, a 
demand for certainty and a belief that it is achievable, despite 
the persistence of disagreements in fact and an inability to 
overcome them, except as a matter of personal conviction. 
On the other hand, there is acceptance of uncertainty and 
recognition that disagreement is not always to be avoided 
and may even be conducive to a satisfactory outcome. Set 
against the background of this larger debate, discussion of 
analogical reasoning takes on greater signiﬁ cance. Law gives 
expression to a community’s values and in turn shapes the 
community and affects conduct in ways vastly more pervasive 
and far- reaching than the judgments of a court. Nevertheless, 
www.ebook3000.com

Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, and the Law
[147]
adjudication   is the means by which law takes hold formally 
and ﬁ nally and, in a sense, has its concrete being. If close 
attention to the process of adjudication provides no guaran-
tee that the laws applied are sound, it is also true that until 
the laws are applied, they remain general and abstract and, 
however sound in principle, are vulnerable to distortion and 
error. It is, therefore, of ﬁ rst importance that the adjudicative 
process be understood. 
 Analogical reasoning is central to that process. It allows 
us to govern our lives according to general rules without dis-
claiming the singularity of human experience. The goal is not 
certainty but a reasonable assurance that rules are applied as 
predictably and even- handedly as the variousness of human 
behavior permits. Nor can certainty be achieved by reconsti-
tuting analogical reasoning as, or supplanting it with, induc-
tive or deductive arguments, because the rules to be applied 
are prescriptive and their terms are general. That does not 
leave us without resort to reason in the form of human rea-
sonableness, which is enough. 
 The effort to transcend the limits of human reason in the 
workings of the law has a benign purpose. It is to ensure that 
the law’s moral authority and power to compel are not mis-
used and to achieve justice in the small affairs that constitute 
most lives even as we try to do in matters of general social con-
cern. Conﬁ dence that there is a source of true justice and that 

Legal Reason
[148]
148
it is attainable has often provided a bulwark against human 
iniquity or weakness and may sustain the effort to achieve the 
justice that is within our grasp. Transcendental verities have 
also, however, swept aside doubts that a more cautious and 
self- consciously human understanding would have respected. 
Commitment to a just cause ought not require an infallible 
proof in advance, lest conviction be mistaken for proof and 
further deliberation be thwarted. The law especially, because 
it touches all one’s life and for most human purposes is ﬁ nal, 
has need of incertitudes even as it aspires to clarify its vision 
of the good. Reliance on the human capacity to reﬂ ect and 
deliberate about human ends and how to achieve them does 
not yield the truths of abstract reason or empirical science. 
It gives no haven from doubt and requires us continuously 
to evaluate and reconsider our conclusions and to be alert to 
the possibility of error. For just those reasons, it is our safest, 
least treacherous path to a just social order.  
www.ebook3000.com

[149]
 APPENDIX A 
 Note on the Problem of   Universals 
 The process of analogical reasoning depends on the percep-
tion of similarities and the ability to sort them according to 
one’s purpose. With that in mind, study in depth of analogi-
cal reasoning might begin with some consideration of the 
group of related ontological, epistemological, and linguistic 
issues that are commonly grouped together as “the problem 
of universals,” which goes back in the philosophic literature 
to Plato and Aristotle. Crudely deﬁ ned, a universal is any  cat-
egory : man, woman, or person, as opposed to my friend Jenni; 
screwdriver or tool, as opposed to the screwdriver that I left 
on my workbench; race or running, as opposed to the 10K 
race along Main Street last Saturday morning; anger or emo-
tion, as opposed to Jim’s anger when Paul laughed. Framed 

Appendix A
[150]
150
ontologically, the general issue has to do with the existence 
of “natural kinds” (called by Plato “Forms” or “Ideas”) cor-
responding to general terms. Even to state the issue that way 
raises difﬁ culties. One can certainly write an essay about the 
category of entertainers who are called clowns. But does the 
 category of clowns exist in any stronger sense than that, as an 
actual part of what there is? If so, it assuredly does not exist 
in just the same way that the particular clowns one sees at 
the circus exist. Framed epistemologically, the general issue 
is how we come to know and understand general terms like 
“clown” in a way that enables us to use them. For we surely do 
not acquire such knowledge by perceiving categories them-
selves, as we see and hear a particular clown. Framed linguis-
tically, the general issue is how to give an adequate account 
of the function and operation of general terms in language. 
Whether the issue is posed ontologically, epistemologically, or 
linguistically, the universal that is at stake is, in some sense, 
the same. 
 There is a good brief introduction to the problem of uni-
versals in W. V. Quine’s essay,  Natural Kinds , in W. V. Quine, 
 Ontological Relativity and Other Essays  114 (1969), reprinted 
in Hilary Kornblith, ed.,  Naturalizing Epistemology  57 (2d ed. 
1994). Hilary Staniland,  Universals (1972) is a short and acces-
sible general survey, which includes material about the onto-
logical formulations of the problem in Plato and Aristotle and 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix A
[151]
the epistemological formulations of the British empiricists 
(Locke, Berkeley, Hume) as well as more recent work. There 
is also a useful bibliography. Richard I. Aaron,  The Theory of 
Universals  (2d ed. 1967)  is a more elaborate and penetrat-
ing study, also with historical material. There are excellent 
topical essays at a high level and a selective bibliography in 
Michael J. Loux, ed.,  Universals and Particulars: Readings in 
Ontology  (Notre Dame Press ed. 1976). Recently, the problem 
of universals  has been overtaken, if not taken over, by work 
on categorization in the ﬁ eld of cognitive psychology, as to 
which, see below. 
 Since about 1970, often stimulated by interest in learn-
ing and instructional methods or in artiﬁ cial intelligence and 
computer science, there has been extensive experimentation 
and analysis of analogical reasoning in   cognitive and devel-
opmental psychology. One set of studies has examined the 
conditions in which an analogy is likely to be a reliable basis 
for a conclusion – what was discussed generally in the text 
under the rubric of “relevance” –  and another has examined 
the cognitive conditions for the formation and recognition of 
an analogy. The studies indicate that similarities between a 
source and target are more likely to contribute to an analogy 
that is effective in both respects if they are systematic, that is 
pervasive and consistent, and not merely discrete “surface” 
resemblances, like the same color or shape. For a survey of 

Appendix A
[152]
152
work of this kind, see Dedre Gentner,  The Mechanisms of 
Analogical Learning , in Stella Vosniadou and Andrew Ortony, 
eds.,  Similarity and Analogical Reasoning  199– 241 (1989). The 
results of such studies have been applied extensively in com-
putational models of analogical reasoning used to develop 
computer programs. They have also been used in the devel-
opment of methods of classroom teaching generally. 
 For a highly accessible general introduction to the sub-
ject of analogical reasoning, see Keith J. Holyoak and Paul 
Thagard,  Mental Leaps: Analogy in Creative Thought (1995). 
Informative essays on many topics are collected in David 
H. Helman, ed.,  Analogical Reasoning  (1988) and Vosniadou 
and Ortony, above. Both collections contain essays describ-
ing and evaluating computational models of analogical 
reasoning. 
 A good deal of attention has been given to the  develop-
ment of analogical reasoning in children. Experiments 
are described and the results discussed in Usha Goswami, 
 Analogical Reasoning in Children  (1992) and in Ann L. Brown, 
 Analogical Learning and Transfer: What Develops? in Vosniadou 
and Ortony, above, at 369– 412. Goswami presents persuasive 
experimental evidence for the theses that the capacity for 
analogical reasoning is present very early and that its devel-
opment depends on the acquisition of conceptual and sys-
tematic knowledge beyond simple perceptual resemblances.  
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix A
[153]
 Analogy and   metaphor have much in common. The differ-
ence between them might be described (metaphorically) as 
the distance between the things being compared. Whereas 
the similarities on which an analogy is based are likely to 
be evident once they are pointed out and the strength of an 
anal ogy depends on the relevance of the similarities to the 
mat ter in question, the similarity that supports a metaphor 
may be elusive; the metaphor’s strength may depend on the 
striking juxtaposition of things that are at ﬁ rst glance unlike 
one  another. Many of the issues about analogy and metaphor 
that are studied in epistemology, linguistics, and cognitive 
 psychology overlap. A useful collection of essays about met-
aphor, which brings together work from the different ﬁ elds 
and contains a lengthy bibliography, is Andrew Ortony, ed., 
 Metaphor and Thought (2d ed. 1993). 
 Another kind of study in cognitive psychology has 
explored the pervasive presence of analogy and metaphor in 
thought and language, not as a deliberate step in reasoning 
and communication but as deeply embedded in the catego-
ries by which we understand and describe our experience. 
“[A] nalogical and metaphorical projection is pervasive in 
human understanding at a level of meaning and reason-
ing below that of propositional relations.” Mark Johnson, 
 Some Constraints on Embodied Analogical Understanding , 
in David H.  Helman,  Analogical Reasoning   1, 26 (1988). 

Appendix A
[154]
154
“Our explicit reﬂ ective analogizing typically rests upon a 
massive interconnected web of experientially- embodied 
analogical connections and processes of which we are sel-
dom aware.” Id. at 39. Such studies provide persuasive 
evidence that general terms are not more or less accurate 
(objective) abstract representations of what they describe, 
independent of the circumstances of their user and use; 
rather they comprise a richly embodied conceptual sys-
tem that depends heavily not only on our physical selves 
but also on every aspect  –  psychological, social, histori-
cal, linguistic –  of our humanness. So, it is argued, general 
terms are not susceptible to logical transformations in the 
manner of deduction but have to be analyzed contextu-
ally. And, it follows, the goal cannot be certain truth, any 
departure from which is unacceptable, but must be a more 
limited, situational kind of reasonableness that reﬂ ects 
this embedded humanness. The leading work in this area 
has been done by George Lakoff and Mark Johnson. See 
George Lakoff,  Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things (1987); 
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson,  Metaphors We Live By 
(1980); Mark Johnson,  The Body in the Mind  (1987). Mark 
Johnson,  Moral Imagination  (1993) is a powerful study of 
the implications of this work for moral philosophy and eth-
ics. Steven L. Winter,  A Clearing in the Forest  (2001) applies 
this work in the ﬁ eld of law with striking results.  
www.ebook3000.com

[155]
 APPENDIX B 
 Biographical Notes 
 Lawrence A.  Alexander , Warren Distinguished Professor of 
Law, University of San Diego School of Law. Writes exten-
sively on jurisprudence and constitutional law. 
 Scott   Brewer , Professor, Harvard Law School. Writes on 
jurisprudence and evidence. 
 Ronald   Dworkin (1931– 2013) , Professor of Jurisprudence, 
University of Oxford, and Professor, New  York University 
School of Law. Wrote extensively on jurisprudence. Works 
include  Taking Rights Seriously  (1977),  A Matter of Principle 
(1984), and  Law ’ s Empire (1986). 
 Melvin A.    Eisenberg , Jesse A.  Choper Professor of Law, 
University of California, Berkeley, School of Law. Writes on 

Appendix B
[156]
156
contracts, corporations, and legal process. Works include  The 
Nature of the Common Law (1988). 
 Lon L.   Fuller (1902 – 1978) , Professor, Harvard Law School. 
Wrote extensively on jurisprudence, legal theory, and con-
tracts. Principal jurisprudential works include  The Law in 
Quest of Itself  (1940),  The Morality of Law  (rev. ed. 1977), and 
 Positivism and Fidelity to Law  –  A Reply to Professor Hart , 71 
Harv. L. Rev. 630 (1958). 
 R. Kent   Greenawalt , University Professor, Columbia Law 
School. Writes extensively on jurisprudence, constitutional 
law, and the First Amendment. Works include  Conﬂ icts of 
Law and Morality  (1987),  Law and Objectivity  (1992), and 
 Private Consciences and Public Reasons (1995). 
 H(erbert) 
L(ionel) 
A(dolphus) 
  Hart 
(1907 – 1993) , 
Professor of Jurisprudence, Oxford University. Wrote exten-
sively on jurisprudence. Works include  The Concept of Law 
(2d ed. 1994);  Law, Liberty and Morality  (1963),  Punishment 
and Responsibility  (1968), and  Positivism and the Separation 
of Law and Morals , 71 Harv. L. Rev. 593 (1958). 
 Oliver Wendell   Holmes, Jr. (1841 – 1935) , Professor of Law, 
Harvard Law School; Chief Justice, Supreme Judicial Court 
of Massachusetts; Justice of the Supreme Court of the United 
States (1902– 1932). Wrote extensively on many legal subjects, 
www.ebook3000.com

Appendix B
[157]
including jurisprudence and legal theory. Works include  The 
Common Law  (1881) and The  Path of the Law , 10 Harv. L. Rev. 
457 (1897). 
 Edward Hirsch   Levi (1911 – 2000) , Professor of Law and 
Dean, The University of Chicago Law School; President, The 
University of Chicago; Attorney General of the United States 
under Presidents Ford and Carter, 1975– 1977. Principal juris-
prudential work is  An Introduction to Legal Reasoning  (1949). 
 Neil   MacCormick (1941– 2009) , Regius Professor of Public 
Law, Edinburgh University; Member for Scotland, European 
Parliament. Wrote principally on jurisprudence, legal theory, 
and constitutional law. Works include  Legal Reasoning and 
Legal Theory (1978). 
 Charles   Peirce (1839 – 1914) , American philosopher and 
logician, founder of the philosophical school of pragmatism. 
Wrote principally on logic but extensively also on many other 
subjects. Writings are collected in  The   Collected Papers of 
Charles Sanders Peirce , vols. 1– 6 (C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss, 
eds., 1931– 1935), vols. 7– 8 (A. Burks, ed., 1958). 
 Richard A.    Posner , Judge of the United States Court of 
Appeals for the Seventh Circuit; Lecturer at The University of 
Chicago Law School. Writes extensively on many legal sub-
jects, notably in the ﬁ eld of law and economics ( Economic 

Appendix B
[158]
158
Analysis of Law  (6th ed. 2003)). Jurisprudential works include 
 The Problems of Jurisprudence  (1990),  Overcoming Law 
(1995), and  Law, Pragmatism, and Democracy (2003). 
 Danny   Priel , Associate Professor, Osgoode Hall Law School, 
York University (Canada). Principal interests are legal theory, 
private law, and law and the social sciences. 
 Willard Van Orman   Quine (1908– 2000) , Professor of 
Philosophy, Harvard University. Wrote extensively on philoso-
phy, logic, and language. Works include  From a Logical Point 
of View  (2d ed. 1961),  Word and Object  (1960), and  Ontological 
Relativity and Other Essays  (1969). Selections from his writ-
ings are collected in  Quintessence (R. F. Gibson, ed., 2004). 
 Cass R.    Sunstein , Robert Walmsley University Professor, 
Harvard Law School. Writes extensively on jurisprudence, 
constitutional law, and administrative law. Principal jurispru-
dential work is  Legal Reasoning and Political Conﬂ ict (1996). 
 Peter   Westen , Frank G. Miller Professor of Law, Emeritus, 
University of Michigan Law School. Writes extensively on 
 jurisprudence and criminal law and procedure.  
www.ebook3000.com

[159]
 Notes 
 Introduction 
 1  See, in addition to books cited elsewhere, Ruggero J. Aldisert,  Logic for 
Lawyers  (3d ed. 1997); Robert Alexy,  A Theory of Legal Argumentation 
(R. Adler and N. MacCormick, trans.) (1989); Fernando Atria,  On Law 
and Legal Reasoning  (2001); Steven J. Burton,  An Introduction to Law 
and Legal Reasoning  (2d ed. 1995); Martin P. Golding,  Legal Reasoning 
(1984); Peter Goodrich,  Legal Discourse  (1987); Clarence Morris,  How 
Lawyers Think  (1994); William Read,  Legal Thinking  (1986); Frederick 
Schauer,  Thinking Like a Lawyer  (2009); Elias E.  Savellos,  Reasoning 
and the Law  (2001); Kenneth J.  Vandevelde,  Thinking Like a Lawyer: 
An Introduction to Legal Reasoning  (1996). For a strong statement 
that  “thinking like a lawyer is just ordinary forms of thinking clearly 
and well,” see   Larry   Alexander ,  The Banality of Legal Reasoning ,  73 
Notre Dame L. Rev.  517  ( 1998  ).  
 2   See pp. 115–121 . 
 3  Much has been made in jurisprudential literature about the difference 
between rules and principles. Ronald Dworkin developed the distinction 
in his article  The Model of Rules , 35 U. Chi. L. Rev. 14 (1967), reprinted 
in Ronald Dworkin,  Taking Rights Seriously 14– 45 (1977). For a helpful 

Notes
[160]
160
(skeptical) discussion of the distinction, see   Frederick  Schauer  , 
 Prescriptions in Three Dimensions ,  82  Iowa L.  Rev.  911  ( 1997  ). The 
difference between rules, which, generally speaking, provide a 
determinate response to speciﬁ c facts, and standards, which call for 
consideration of all the circumstances, has also been much discussed. 
See, e.g.,  Duncan  Kennedy  ,   Form and Substance in Private Law 
Adjudication ,  89 Harv. L.  Rev. 1685,  1687 –  1713  ( 1976  );   Kathleen M.  
 Sullivan  ,   Foreword, The Justices of Rules and Standards ,  106  Harv. L. Rev. 
24,  56 – 123 ( 1992 ). Whatever importance these distinctions may have, 
they have no relevance here. I frequently refer to “rules” as including 
rules, principles, and standards.  
  4  Whether the law is constructed from the top down or from the bottom 
up is a matter of considerable importance, see pp. 129 – 131 , although 
that is usually left out of account in the construction of the metaphorical 
pyramid, which is left to the individual imagination. It has not escaped 
notice, however, that either way, the pyramid does not stand on its own 
and requires external scaffolding. The dependence of rule on rule must 
come to an end somewhere. If the pyramid is built top down, there 
seems to be nothing holding up the apex; and if it is built bottom up, 
the base seems itself to rest on air. Providing a skyhook for the apex 
or a  foundation for the base is the perennial task of jurisprudence. 
See pp. 141 – 144 . 
  5  The strongest recent defense that there is a “right answer” has been 
made by Ronald Dworkin. See Ronald Dworkin,  Hard Cases , 88 Harv. 
L.  Rev. 1057 (1975), reprinted in Ronald Dworkin,  Taking Rights 
Seriously 81– 130 (1977); Ronald Dworkin,  No Right Answer? , 53 
N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1 (1978), reprinted in Ronald Dworkin,  A Matter of Principle , 
119– 145 (1985). 
  6  Dworkin,  Taking Rights Seriously  n.5 at 87, 88. Information about legal 
scholars and others whose views are discussed in the text is given in 
 Appendix B . 
  7  Id. at 117. 
  8  Ronald Dworkin,  In Praise of Theory , 29 Ariz. St. L. J. 353, 357 (1997).  
  9  Dworkin,  Taking Rights Seriously n.5 at 105. 
 10  An important strand of twentieth- century American jurisprudence 
questions more fundamentally whether adjudication is principled 
in the manner that the model suggests.   The Legal Realist school of 
jurisprudence, prominent in the 1930s, and the Critical   Legal Studies 
school, prominent in the 1980s, asserted that the rules on which 
courts purport to rely are a mask for what are essentially political 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[161]
decisions:  there is not a clear separation between legislation and 
adjudication, and judges, consciously or not, conform the results that 
they reach to policies determined otherwise. Although the arguments 
of the Realists and “Crits,” as they are called, are a valuable corrective 
to simplistic assertions that rules in and of themselves dictate their 
application to concrete cases, the wholesale rejection of the force of 
rules is unconvincing. The Realists and Crits made their case only by 
misconceiving or disregarding entirely the role of analogical reasoning 
in making rules work. They thus fell into the same trap, albeit to 
contrary effect, as the legal formalists whose theories they derided.  
See pp. 129 – 130  .  
 11   Edward H.  Levi,  An Introduction to Legal Reasoning  3  & n.5 (1949). 
“The logical fallacy is the fallacy of the undistributed middle or the fallacy 
of assuming the antecedent is true because the consequence has been 
afﬁ rmed.” Id. at n.5. Levi referred to analogical reasoning as “reasoning 
by example” or “reasoning from case to case.” Id. at 1.  
 12  Id. at. 
 13  Richard A. Posner,  Overcoming Law 177, 519– 520 (1995). 
 14   Id. at 519. Posner says that he does not “wish to bad- mouth analogy,” id., 
and he has use for it in a number of ways. See id. at 518– 522; Richard 
A.  Posner,  The Problems of Jurisprudence  86– 92 (1990). But the praise 
is faint. “[R] easoning by analogy,” he says, has “no deﬁ nite content or 
integrity; it denotes an unstable class of disparate reasoning methods.” 
Id. at 86. Observing that “[t]he heart of legal reasoning as conceived by 
most modern lawyers is reasoning by analogy,” id., he says, “I merely 
question whether reasoning by analogy, when distinguished from logical 
deduction and scientiﬁ c induction on the one hand and stare decisis on 
the other, deserves the hoopla and reverence that members of the legal 
profession have bestowed on it.” Id. at 90.  
 15  Larry  Alexander ,   Bad Beginnings ,  145  U. Pa. L.  Rev . 57,  86  ( 1996  ). 
For similar views, see, e.g., Melvin Aron Eisenberg,  The Nature of the 
Common Law  83 (1988) (“Reasoning by analogy differs from reasoning 
from precedent and principle only in form”); Kent Greenawalt, 
 Law and Objectivity  200 (1992) (“[R] easoning by analogy is not 
sharply divided from reasoning in terms of general propositions”); 
Neil MacCormick,  Legal Reasoning and Legal Theory  161, 186 (1978) 
(“[N]o clear line can be drawn between arguments from principle 
and from analogy”; “Analogies only make sense if there are reasons of 
principle underlying them”); Peter Westen,  On “Confusing Ideas”:   Reply , 
91 Yale L.J. 1153, 1163 (1982) (“One can never declare  A to be legally 

Notes
[162]
162
similar to  B without ﬁ rst formulating the legal rule of treatment by 
which they are rendered relevantly identical”). Dworkin’s “vertical and 
horizontal ordering” of legal reasoning, see pp. 6–7 , also belongs in this 
camp. He has observed: “[A]nalogy without theory is blind. An analogy 
is a way of stating a conclusion, not a way of reaching one, and theory 
must do the real work.” Dworkin, n. 8, at 371. Cass Sunstein appears 
to agree in principle –  “[A]nalogical reasoning cannot proceed without 
identiﬁ cation of a governing idea”  –  but he believes that in practice 
analogical reasoning helps to identify the idea rather than the other 
way around. Cass Sunstein,  Legal Reasoning and Political Conﬂ ict  65 
(1996). See p. 106 .  
 16  See pp. 131– 134 . 
 17  On the rule of law, see pp. 134– 136. 
 18  See H. L. A. Hart,  Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals , 71 
Harv. L. Rev. 593, 613 (1958); Lon L. Fuller,  Positivism and Fidelity to 
Law – A Reply to Professor Hart , 71 Harv. L. Rev. 630, 659– 660 (1958). 
 19  For a good introduction to the debate, see Antonin Scalia,  A Matter of 
Interpretation (1997), which contains an essay by the Justice, a leading 
exponent of “originalism,” and ﬁ ve commentaries. Ronald Dworkin’s 
much- discussed interpretive theory is set forth in Dworkin,  A Matter 
of Principle  n.5, at 119– 177, and Ronald Dworkin,  Law’s Empire  45– 
86 (1986). William N.  Eskridge, Jr.,  Dynamic Statutory Interpretation 
(1994), provides a thorough discussion of legal interpretation, with many 
references. 
 20  Sunstein, n. 15 at 75.  
 21  151 N.Y. 163 (1896). 
  22  Adams  is discussed in connection with analogical legal argument in Scott 
Brewer,  Exemplary Reasoning:  Semantics, Pragmatics, and the Rational 
Force of Legal Argument by Analogy , 109 Harv. L.  Rev. 923, 1003– 1016 
(1996) and in Golding,  Legal Reasoning  n.1, at 46– 48, 102– 110.  
 23   Buck v.  Jewell- LaSalle Realty Co. , 283 U.S. 191 (1931);  Fortnightly 
Corp. v. United Artists Television, Inc. , 392 U.S. 390 (1968);  Teleprompter 
Corp. v.  Columbia Broadcasting System ,  Inc. , 415 U.S. 394 (1974); 
 Twentieth Century Music Corp. v. Aiken , 422 U.S. 151 (1975). 
 24  277 U.S. 438 (1928). 
 25  389 U.S. 347 (1967). 
 26  The choice of these three examples has no special signiﬁ cance. Analogical 
arguments are ubiquitous.  Adams , as noted, has been used as an example 
by others in their discussions of analogy. The choice of the other two 
examples is due to the fact that I  regularly taught copyright and 
constitutional criminal procedure.  
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[163]
 Chapter 1 Steamboats, Broadcast Transmissions, 
and Electronic Eavesdropping 
  1  Adams v. New Jersey Steamboat Co. , 151 N.Y. 163 (1896). 
  2  Id. at 166. 
  3  Id. at 167. 
  4  Id. 
  5  Id. 
  6  Id. at 168– 170. 
  7  Id. at 170. 
  8  Id. 
  9  Id. at 168– 169. 
 10  Id. at 169. 
 11   “In the latter case [a passenger in a stateroom], when he retires for the 
night, he ought to be able to rely upon the company for his protection  with 
the same faith that the guest can rely upon the protection of the innkeeper, 
since the two relations are quite analogous . In the former [a passenger in 
a sleeping car] the contract and the relations of the parties differ at least 
to such an extent as to justify some modiﬁ cation of the common law 
rule of responsibility [i.e., the rule applicable to innkeepers].” Id. at 169 
(emphasis added)  Adams v. New Jersey Steamboat Co .  
 12   Act of March 4, 1909, Ch. 320, §1(e), 35 Stat. 1075.  
 13  283 U.S. 191 (1931). 
 14  Id. at 199 (footnote omitted).  
 15  Id. at 199 n.7.  
 16  Id. at 201 (footnote omitted).  
 17  Id. at 199. 
 18  Id. at 201 n.10.  
 19  392 U.S. 390 (1968). 
 20  Id. at 395– 396. 
 21  Id. at 399. 
 22  Id. (footnote omitted).  
 23  Id. at 400. 
 24  Id. at 401. 
 25  Id. at 397 n.18. Justice Fortas, dissenting, observed that applying the 
provisions of the Copyright Act to television, which did not exist when 
the Act was enacted, was “like trying to repair a television set with a 
mallet.”  Fortnightly Corp. v. United Artists Television, Inc. , 392 U.S. 390, 
403 (1968). In the absence of congressional action, he favored adhering 
to the reasoning in  Jewell- LaSalle , which, he said, might not be “an 

Notes
[164]
164
altogether ideal gloss on the word ‘perform,’ ” but had “at least the merit 
of being settled law.” Id. at 407.  
 26  415 U.S. 394 (1974). 
 27  Id. at 403– 404. 
 28  Id. at 407– 411. 
 29  Id. at 403 (quoting  Fortnightly , 392 U.S. at 398).  
 30  Id. at 408. 
 31  Id. at 414 n.15.  
 32  Id. at 414 (footnote omitted).  
 33  Id. at 415 (Blackmun, J., dissenting).  
 34  Id. at 417. 
 35  Id. at 422. 
 36  422 U.S. 151 (1975). 
 37  Id. at 159. 
 38  Fortnightly , 392 U.S., at 395. 
 39  In the 1976 revision of the Copyright Act, Congress went the other way. 
The Act provides:  “To ‘perform’ a work means to recite, render, play, 
dance, or act it, either directly or by means of any device or process.” 
17 U.S.C. §101. 
 40  Olmstead v. United States , 277 U.S. 438 (1928). 
 41  Id. at 464. 
 42  Id. 
 43  Id. at 464– 465. 
 44  Id. at 466. 
 45  Id. at 465– 466. 
 46  Id. at 471, 478 (Brandeis, J., dissenting).  
 47  Id. at 475– 477 (1928). The cases that Brandeis mentioned involved 
opening a sealed letter that had been deposited in the mail, the production 
of a document in response to a subpoena, and the taking of papers from 
an ofﬁ ce by a friendly visitor.  
 48  Id. at 485, 487 (Butler, J., dissenting). The fourth dissenter was Justice 
Holmes, whose opinion went off on another ground. Id. at 469.  
 49   389 U.S. 347 (1967). 
 50  That position was, of course, supported by  Olmstead . The government 
relied principally on a case decided after  Olmstead ,  Goldman v. United 
States , 316 U.S. 129 (1942), in which the Court had upheld the 
admissibility of evidence obtained by placing a listening device against 
the other side of a wall of the defendant’s ofﬁ ce. See p. 55 . Taking note 
of criticism of the  Goldman decision, the government argued also that, 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[165]
even if a trespass were not required, a public telephone booth was not 
a “constitutionally protected area,” i.e., the Fourth Amendment did not 
apply at all to intrusions into the booth. Brief for the Respondent at 14– 
17,  Katz v. United States , 389 U.S. 347 (1967) (No. 35). Declaring in a 
much- quoted aphorism that “the Fourth Amendment protects people, not 
places,” id. at 351, the Court rejected that argument.  
 51  Silverman v. United States , 365 U.S. 505 (1961). 
 52  Katz , 389 U.S. at 353.  
 53  Id. at 365 (Black, J., dissenting).  
 54  Id. at 366. 
 55  Id. at 373. 
 56  Katz , 389 U.S. at 352 (footnotes omitted).  
 57  Id. at 359 (Douglas, J., concurring), 362 (White, J., concurring).  
 58  Id. at 353. 
 59  Id. at 350– 351 (footnotes omitted).  
 60  E.g., privacy of association and the prohibition of unconsented 
peacetime quartering of soldiers, protected respectively by the First and 
Third Amendments. Id. at 350 n.5. The analogy between eavesdropping 
and a search and seizure of tangible objects is all the more obvious now 
because it has been applied repeatedly in the years since  Katz .  
 61   See p. 106 . 
 62  Olmstead , 277 U.S., at 464 (emphasis supplied).  
 63  Katz , 389 U.S., at 351– 352 (emphasis supplied).  
 64  Id. at 352. 
 65  The phrase “legitimate expectation of privacy,” which became the rubric 
for identiﬁ cation of a Fourth Amendment interest, see  Rakas v. Illinois , 
439 U.S. 128, 143 (1978), is derived (inexactly) from Justice Harlan’s 
concurring opinion in  Katz , 389 U.S. at 360. The opinion for the Court 
in  Katz made the same point, somewhat more obliquely. Id. at 352. 
When there is and when there is not a legitimate expectation of privacy 
became a major topic of Fourth Amendment jurisprudence. See  Rakas , 
above;  Minnesota v. Carter , 525 U.S. 83 (1998). 
 Chapter 2 Analogical Legal Reasoning 
  1  See p. 105 . 
  2  From the perspective of   cognitive psychology, the matter is a good 
deal more complex. There have been many experiments and much has 

Notes
[166]
166
been written about what makes an effective analogy, either drawn from 
one’s own experience and knowledge or presented as the solution to 
one problem and recognized as a possible solution to another, different 
problem. Such explanations are the cognitive face of explanations in 
terms of causal connectedness   or, simply, relevance, which is discussed 
below, at pp. 115 – 122 . 
  3  As it happens, salt is as effective –  not very – on a cranberry juice stain 
as it is on a  red wine stain. It works as an absorbent. When it absorbs 
the liquid from the stained cloth, it also absorbs some of a water- soluble 
compound called an anthocyanin, which accounts for the red color of 
both red wine and cranberry juice. Other methods of removing stains 
would also be equally effective on both.  But Edna will be disappointed 
if she presses her analogical reasoning too far. The pigmentation of 
tomatoes and watermelons is different, and stains from them require 
different treatment.  
  4  They would, of course, not be literally   the same. There is no clear line 
between sameness and similarity, because no two things are alike or 
unlike in all respects. To say that two phenomena are “the same” is itself 
to display the capacity to distinguish relevant and irrelevant similarities 
and differences that ﬁ gures so large in analogical reasoning.  See 
pp. 115 – 117 .  
  5  “ Restatements” are codiﬁ cations of case law in a general area. They are 
the product of   The American Law Institute, a private foundation based 
in Philadelphia, which includes among its members leading lawyers, 
judges, and law professors. They are drafted by a committee and are 
ﬁ nally approved by the membership as a whole. Although they have no 
formal legal authority, they are given weight and are often cited in judicial 
opinions.  
  6  Judges on the same court or a lower court in the same jurisdiction may 
be bound to adhere to a prior ruling. But there is usually some scope for 
them to consider what a prior ruling actually was and to “distinguish” 
the cases. In any event, judges who are not so bound commonly refer to 
rulings in other cases and consider them on the merits.  
  7  An appellate court may, of course, declare that the lower court’s decision 
was correct or incorrect. But there is then no test of the correctness 
of the appellate court’s decision, unless it is subject to review by a still 
higher court.  
  8  If there are not opposed parties, the case name will typically identify the 
party most centrally concerned and the nature of the issue, e.g., “ In the 
matter of [the guardianship of] Smith. ” 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[167]
  9   In practice, the differences among adjudication, legislation, and 
administration are not so clear. Administrative agencies in particular 
often perform functions partaking of all three. Nevertheless, they are 
expected to perform their various functions in a manner that reﬂ ects the 
kind of function being performed.  
 10   See U.S. Const., Art. III, §2. The requirement of a case or controversy may 
be weakened by provisions for a court to answer a hypothetical question 
or a request for an “advisory opinion” from some other governmental 
body. The Constitution of Massachusetts, amend. 85, for example, 
provides: “Each branch of the legislature, as well as the governor or the 
council, shall have authority to require the opinions of the justices of 
the supreme judicial court, upon important questions of law, and upon 
solemn occasions.”  
 11   Chief Justice Warren’s opinion in   Miranda v.  Arizona , 384 U.S. 436 
(1966), is a rare exception, one of the reasons why the Supreme Court’s 
pronouncement of the “Miranda rules,” having to do with police 
interrogation of a criminal suspect, was heavily criticized as being 
“legislative” rather than “judicial.”  
 12   If Adams’s purpose in making the trip had been to deliver stolen property, 
would that have made a difference? Or if he had drunk a great deal of 
wine at dinner? Or if there had been a thunderstorm while he slept? 
Possibly none of those facts would in itself have affected the outcome. 
But with sufﬁ cient ingenuity, one can imagine them, together with other 
facts, making a difference.  
 13   John Chipman Gray,  The Nature and Sources of the Law  (2d ed. 1921), 
now regarded as a classic of jurisprudence, is a good introduction to the 
subject of the proper sources of a legal decision. Benjamin N. Cardozo, 
 The Nature of the Judicial Process  (1921), another classic, is an excellent 
general discussion. More recent discussions of the same subject are 
contained in works about legal interpretation generally, as to which see 
pp. 142–144.
 
  Adherents of   Legal Realism and   Critical Legal Studies, see p. 160 n.10, 
questioned whether the sources of law in adjudication are different from 
the sources of legislation and social policy generally. See, e.g.,   Karl N.  
 Llewellyn  ,   Some Realism About Realism  –   Responding to Dean Pound , 
 44  Harv. L.  Rev .  1222  ( 1931 ); Roberto Mangabeira Unger,  The Critical 
Legal Studies Movement  (1986). Both Legal Realism and Critical Legal 
Studies were motivated in large part by a political agenda that sought 
to undermine claims of objectivity that reference to “law” validated.  
Among recent scholars, Richard Posner, himself an acclaimed judge, 

Notes
[168]
168
assimilates law to policy, in his professed theory if not openly in actual 
practice. See pp. 88 – 92. To rather different effect, some theories of law 
and the relation between law and morality urge that moral and political 
principles that have not been enacted into positive law are among the 
sources to which a judge should refer. See, e.g., Ronald Dworkin, 
 Taking Rights Seriously  81– 130 (1977). Such theories do not contradict 
the proposition that the sources of the answer to a question about the 
correct legal outcome of a controversy must be found within the law. 
Rather, they assert that the principles in question are implicit in the law 
or, at any rate, are unavoidably bound up in its correct interpretation. 
The question whether there is an articulable set of deﬁ nite moral and 
political principles that are part of the law itself is near the heart of the 
debate between most schools of  natural law and   legal positivism. See 
pp. 139 – 142 . For a different account of the division between the two, 
see Lloyd L. Weinreb,  Natural Law and Justice 97– 126, 259– 263 (1987). 
 14  In the absence of a settled rule that prescribes an outcome, it may appear 
that the judge must ﬁ ll the gap by exercising her discretion, informed by 
considerations outside the law. It is true that a judge has more discretion 
in such a case. Nonetheless, her obligation is to decide according to the 
law. The method of analogical reasoning enables her to do so. See pp 
66 – 67.  
 15   Even in such a case, reasoning by analogy is not altogether absent, 
although it may be unnoticed. See p. 170 n.30 . 
 16  Adams v. New Jersey Steamboat Co ., 151 N.Y. 163, 167, 170 (1896). 
 17  Id. at 167. 
 18  “Constructively” and “quasi- ” mean roughly “might as well have been.”  
 19  Silverman v. United States , 365 U.S. 505 (1961). 
 20  Goldman v. United States , 316 U.S. 129 (1942). 
 21  Silverman , n.19, at 509, 511. 
 22  Id. at 513. 
 23  Katz v. United States , 389 U.S. 347, 348, 352 (1967). 
 24  Id. at 352– 353. Bringing the facts within the rule has its limits. There 
is a well- known anecdote about a dean of Worcester College at Oxford 
University, who lived on the grounds of the college and kept a dog 
named Flint in his rooms. Someone was said to have objected, because 
a university regulation excluded dogs from college grounds. According 
to the story, the dean responded, “Sir, my dog is a cat.” See John Walsh, 
“Harry’s Dogs,” in Lesley Le Claire,  For Harry  54, 57– 58 (2001). The 
dog remained in the dean’s rooms, but one may believe that the dean’s 
reply stretched the limits of language and its interpretation to  –  or 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[169]
beyond –  the breaking point. The strict classiﬁ cation of animal species 
makes it difﬁ cult, without tongue in cheek, to urge that a dog is a cat – 
but if Flint had been a good mouser, who knows? The dean’s response 
would have been less remarkable if, instead of characterizing the facts to 
make his point, he had interpreted the law and said, in the manner of a 
legal argument, that despite the unqualiﬁ ed language of the regulation, 
it was not intended to apply to college ofﬁ cers or to the dean, or that the 
prohibition against dogs did not include very small dogs or dogs that are 
well behaved.  
 25  See, for example,   Crisci v. Security Insurance Co. of New Haven, Conn. , 
426 P.2d 173 (Cal. 1967), in which the plaintiff, who suffered a large 
judgment against her in a personal injury action, sued the defendant, 
her insurer, for refusing to settle the claim at a much lower ﬁ gure, within 
the amount of the insurance policy. The plaintiff claimed damages 
including an amount for mental suffering. Upholding an award of 
damages to the plaintiff that included compensation for the amount of 
the judgment against her and for her mental suffering, the court said 
that her claim was based both on an implied covenant in the contract 
of insurance, as a matter of the law of contracts, and on the defendant’s 
negligent conduct, as a matter of the law of torts.  The border between 
contract and torts is not rigid, and poaching from one to the other is 
common.  
 26  Except for convenience, the rubrics are not as such part of the law, 
although at one time they might have been so regarded, because they 
determined the “  forms of action,” procedural requirements for cases of 
one kind or another. See F. W. Maitland,  The Forms of Action at Common 
Law (1936). The rubrics themselves are as likely to be determined by 
some external consideration, like the law school curriculum or the scope 
of a treatise or restatement, as by a real boundary between one area of 
conduct and another.  
 27  “There are no rules for particulars.” Frederick Schauer,  Playing by the 
Rules  17 (1991). That is why, when a court wants to overrule a prior 
case without quite saying so, it declares that the rule of that case is 
“limited to its own facts,” as the Supreme Court said of  Jewell- LaSalle 
in  Fortnightly . See p. 23 . For another example, see   Kirby v. Illinois , 406 
U.S. 682, 689 (1972), in which the Court, having changed its mind about 
the constitutional basis for limits on police interrogation of suspects, 
see  Miranda v. Arizona , 384 U.S. 436, 465– 466 (1966), declared that its 
holding two years earlier in   Escobedo v. Illinois , 378 U.S. 478 (1964), was 
“limited … to its own facts.”  

Notes
[170]
170
  28  Even “men eighteen years old” is not without ambiguity. See   Parker v. State , 
484 A.2d 1020 (Md. App. 1984), in which the defendant argued that he 
was not triable as an adult because he was not eighteen years old at the 
time of the offense charged against him; the offense was committed on his 
eighteenth birthday at 9:45 a.m., and he was born at 12:50 p.m. Referring 
back to an English case decided in 1663, the court rejected the argument.  
The incertitude can be eliminated by enumerating all the members of a 
closed category (“John, Jane, and Janet Jones”) rather than naming the 
category itself (“the children of James Jones whenever born”); but that 
would deprive the proposition in question of the generality required of a 
rule. (If James Jones were an eighty- year- old widower, one might suppose 
that the category of “the children of James Jones” was effectively closed. 
But the category is general, and incertitude remains: for example, whether 
a child whom he later adopts or the children of the widow whom he later 
marries are included.) 
 
  For a well- known discussion of this problem in relation to law, which 
distinguishes between a general term’s “core of settled meaning” and 
“a penumbra of debatable cases in which words are neither obviously 
applicable nor obviously ruled out,” see   H. L. A.   Hart ,   Positivism and the 
Separation of Law and Morals ,  71   Harv. L. Rev .  593 ,  607  ( 1958  ), and  Lon 
L.  Fuller  ,  Positivism and Fidelity to Law –  A Reply to Professor Hart ,  71  
 Harv. L. Rev .  630 ,  661 –  669 ( 1958  ).  
 29   “Particular fact- situations do not await us already marked off from each 
other, and labelled as instances of the general rule, the application of 
which is in question; nor can the rule itself step forward to claim its own 
instances … Canons of ‘interpretation’ cannot eliminate, though they can 
diminish, these uncertainties; for these canons are themselves general 
rules for the use of language, and make use of general terms which 
themselves require interpretation. They cannot, any more than other 
rules, provide for their own interpretation.” H. L. A. Hart,  The Concept of 
Law 126 (2d ed. 1994). 
 30  Even when a case is on all fours with a prior case, an element of analogical 
reasoning is necessary, because no two cases are alike in  all  respects, and 
a rule cannot dispositively determine its own application, any provision 
about its range of application having itself to be interpreted. One might 
say, therefore, that strictly speaking, analogical reasoning is needed to 
connect the rule of an earlier case to the particular facts of a later one 
on all fours with it. The similarity between the facts of the two cases 
being so strong, however, and the dissimilarities so obviously irrelevant, 
there is no need to make the analogy explicit. In such a case, the process 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[171]
of thought more closely resembles the ordinary use of general terms, 
which we are able to extend easily and uncontroversially to particular 
instances not precisely similar to anything that we have seen before.  
The capacity for analogical reasoning is inherent in our ability to use 
general terms. See pp. 115 – 117 .  
 31   Because, presumably, the defendant in the earlier case  was an 
innkeeper, however, the court’s observation about those who provide 
accommodations on water would have been dictum, because it was not 
necessary to the decision. Courts sometimes observe that dictum is not 
binding in a later case. See, e.g.,   Harris v. New York , 401 U.S. 222, 224 
(1971), rejecting as dictum some of the Court’s opinion ﬁ ve years earlier 
in   Miranda v. Arizona , 384 U.S. 436 (1966). But the distinction between a 
holding and dictum is not always clear and, in any event, if it is the same 
court in both cases (and its membership has not changed), it is likely to 
treat all its words with respect.  
 32  A well- known constitutional decision of this kind is  Brown v. Board of 
Education of Topeka , 347 U.S. 483 (1954), in which the Court declared 
that the “separate but equal” doctrine of  Plessy v. Ferguson , 163 U.S. 537 
(1896), has no place in public education.  Brown  set the law on a new 
course not only in the ﬁ eld of public education but also with respect to 
racial discrimination generally.  An example of such a landmark decision 
in American common law is  MacPherson v. Buick Motor Co ., 111 N.E.  
1050 (N.Y. 1916), in which the court greatly expanded the liability of 
the seller of a dangerous article for injury to someone other than the  
purchaser. For one among many discussions of  MacPherson , see Edward 
H. Levi, An  Introduction to Legal Reasoning 20– 25 (1949). 
 33   In   Rakas v. Illinois , 439 U.S. 128 (1978), for example, the Supreme Court 
reconsidered the question of   standing, that is,  who is entitled to assert 
a violation of the Fourth Amendment as a ground for the suppression 
of evidence in a criminal case. It abandoned a rule that had roots in 
the trespass rationale of  Olmstead and substituted a rule that made a 
“legitimate expectation of privacy” critical.  
 34  See, e.g.,  Rakas v.  Illinois , 439 U.S. 128, 144 n.12 (1978);  Minnesota 
v. Carter , 525 U.S. 83, 88– 91 (1998). 
 35  See, for example,  California v.   Acevedo , 500 U.S. 565 (1991), in which 
the Court revised the rules about when police ofﬁ cers can, without a 
search warrant, search a piece of luggage or a similar container found 
in a car. Making strict inferences from two distinct lines of prior cases, 
the Court had previously stated complex rules that depended on whether 
the police had probable cause to believe that the item to be seized was 

Notes
[172]
172
in the container itself or simply somewhere in the car. Concluding that 
the rules were difﬁ cult to apply and to enforce and added little to the 
protection of privacy, the Court substituted a rule that applied uniformly 
in both situations. It acknowledged that it was making the change 
because the prior rules were confusing, but it asserted that despite their 
stricter logic, the uniform rule was no less consistent with the values of 
the Fourth Amendment.  
 36  See pp. 128 – 130 . 
 37  Morton J. Horwitz,  The Transformation of American Law   1870– 1960 , 203 
(1992) (footnote omitted).  
 38  That is not to say that an analogy is in any sense deducible from the rules. 
See p. 127 . 
 39  See p. 7 . 
 40  See W. V. Quine,  Natural Kinds , in W. V. Quine,  Ontological Relativity and 
Other Essays  114, 135– 138 (1969), reprinted in Hilary Kornblith, ed., 
 Naturalizing Epistemology 57, 72– 74 (2d ed. 1994). 
 Chapter 3 Objections 
  1  If two entities are of entirely different kinds –  a day of the week and a pig –  
it may be difﬁ cult to perceive any similarities between them. Metaphors, 
which suggest unusual similarities, have power just because they elude 
the usual categories.  
  2  Peter Westen,  On “Confusing Ideas”: Reply , 91 Yale L.J. 1153, 1163 (1982) 
(footnote omitted).  
  3  Danny Priel,  Book Review , 57 J. Legal Educ. 579, 581 (2007).  
  4  151 N.Y. 163 (1896). 
  5  Id. at 167. Westen’s reference to “the prevailing legal rule,” without saying 
how it is determined which legal rule prevails, begs the question. If a 
steamboat is analogous to an inn, then one legal rule prevails. If it is 
analogous to a railroad sleeping car, then another rule prevails. And if it 
is neither, there is a third rule. Nor can the prevailing rule simply mirror 
 all  the characteristics of the particular case, which would deprive it of the 
quality of a rule.  
  6  Id. at 166. 
  7  389 U.S. 347 (1967). 
  8  See, e.g.,  Rakas v. Illinois , 439 U.S. 128 (1978) (automobile);  California 
v. Ciraolo , 476 U.S. 207 (1986) (yard);  California v. Greenwood , 486 U.S. 
35 (1988) (trash).  
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[173]
  9  “ If the world in which we live were characterized only by a ﬁ nite number 
of features, and these together with all the modes in which they could 
combine were known to us, then provision could be made in advance 
for every possibility. We could make rules, the application of which to 
particular cases never called for a further choice. Everything could be 
known, and for everything, since it could be known, something could 
be done and speciﬁ ed in advance by rule. This would be a world ﬁ t for 
‘mechanical’ jurisprudence.  Plainly, this world is not our world  …  ” 
H. L. A. Hart,  The Concept of Law 128 (2d ed. 1994). 
 10  The dialogue “All  glots  are blue.”/ “But there are no  glots .”/ “I know. And 
they are all blue” might please admirers of Lewis Carroll, but it does 
not tell us anything about the world (except, of course, that there are no 
 glots ).  
 11  “It is the merit of the common law that it decides the case ﬁ rst and 
determines the principle afterwards. Looking at the forms of logic 
it might be inferred that when you have a minor premise and a 
conclusion, there must be a major, which you are also prepared then 
and there to assert. But in fact lawyers, like other men, frequently see 
well enough how they ought to decide on a given state of facts without 
being very clear as to the  ratio decidendi  … It is only after a series of 
determinations on the same subject matter, that it becomes necessary 
to ‘reconcile the cases,’ as it is called, that is, by a true induction to 
state the principle which has until then been obscurely felt.”   Oliver 
W.   Holmes  , Jr.,   Codes, and the Arrangement of the Law ,  5   Am. L. Rev  . 
 1 ( 1870  ), reprinted in  The Early Writings of O. W. Holmes, Jr ., 44 Harv. 
L. Rev. 717, 725 (1931).  
 12  Posner,  Overcoming Law  519. “ ‘[I] s it,’ he asks, ‘more than habit and 
indolence that causes lawyers and judges to look for the ethical and 
political materials of judgment in previous decisions rather than in 
scholarly literature, statistical compendia, and everyday experience?’ ” 
Richard A. Posner,  The Problems of Jurisprudence 94 (1990). Answering 
his own question, he says, “ ‘Well, it is a little more,’ insofar as the 
‘blinkered vision’ that results contributes to ‘greater stability in 
law.’ ” Id.  
 13  Posner’s inﬂ uential theory of the economic foundations of law confronts 
this issue ambiguously. It is often unclear whether his theory is intended 
as analysis of the law as it is, which uncovers policies latent in it, or 
as a prescription for the law as it ought to be. See Richard A. Posner, 
 Economic Analysis of Law  (6th ed. 2003). If it is the former, the theory 
describes the work of judges; if the latter, it prescribes in the ﬁ rst 

Notes
[174]
174
instance for legislators and only interstitially (insofar as it also reveals 
policies latent in the law) for judges.  
 14  For a lucid statement of the bounds within which a judge works, see 
Posner’s opinion in  Scheiber v.  Dolby Laboratories, Inc .,  293 F.3d 1014 
(7th. Cir. 2002). 
  15  Posner, n.12, at 518; Richard A. Posner,  Reasoning by Analogy , 91 Cornell 
L. Rev. 761, 763 (2006). Posner goes to some pains to avoid describing what 
lawyers and judges do as thinking  –  if not reasoning  –  analogically. He 
says that if two cases are very similar it is a matter not “of analogy but of 
subsumption,” and if they are merely similar, the question is whether “the 
cases are distinguishable.” He refers also to “pattern recognition, a deeply 
ingrained capability of the human mind.” Richard A. Posner,  How Judges 
Think 183 (2008). All of those phrases, like the metaphors of “excavation” 
and “quarrying,” are circumlocutions for the inquiry into relevant similarity 
that is at the heart of analogical thinking.  
 16   Posner,  Reasoning by Analogy n.5 at 765. 
 17  Id. at 764. “[Law] is best regarded as a policy science –  though maybe a 
primitive one, given its curious dependence on those policy considerations 
that can be culled from published judicial opinions …” Posner, n.12, at 
519.
 
  Discussing  Katz v.  United States , 389 U.S. 347 (1967), in which an 
analogy between “a business ofﬁ ce  …  a friend’s apartment, or  …  a 
taxicab” and “a telephone booth” ﬁ gures prominently in the Court’s 
explanation of the result (which he evidently approves) id. at 352, 
Posner dismisses the analogy, saying that it related to a “peripheral” 
issue and that the principal issue was whether wiretapping without a 
trespass is ever a Fourth Amendment search, as to which “analogies 
were irrelevant and were not employed.” Posner,  Reasoning by Analogy 
n.15, at 773. In fact, the Court disposed of the latter issue summarily, 
with the observation that the requirement of a trespass had already 
“been  …  eroded.”  Katz , 389 U.S.  at 353. The analogy was placed in 
the middle of what most people regard as the crucial paragraph of 
the opinion.   Id. at 352. The question whether the Fourth Amendment 
extends beyond a person’s home, which Posner says is “peripheral,” 
continues to trouble the Court. See, e.g., the opinions of Chief Justice 
Rehnquist and Justice Scalia in  Minnesota v.  Carter , 525 U.S. 83, 85 
(Rehnquist), 91 (Scalia) (1998). It is with respect to that issue that the 
Court relied on the analogy between a public telephone booth and other 
locations outside the home.  
 18  Posner,  Reasoning by Analogy n.15, at 770. 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[175]
 19  See pp. 19 – 27 . 
 20  Id. at 770– 772. The Court was not unaware of the relevance of the 
matters to which Posner adverts. On the contrary, it stated repeatedly 
that its task was to construe the copyright statute,  not to perform 
the legislative task of accommodating “competing considerations of 
copyright, communications, and antitrust policy.”  Fortnightly Corp. 
v.  United Artists Television Inc. , 392 U.S. 390, 401 (1968). See  Buck 
v. Jewell- LaSalle Realty Co ., 283 U.S. 191, 201 n.10 (1931);  Teleprompter 
Corp. v. Columbia Broadcasting System, Inc. , 415 U.S. 394, 414 (1974); 
 Twentieth Century Music Corp. v.  Aiken , 422 U.S. 151, 167 (Burger, 
C.J., dissenting). All the same, looking at the succession of cases more 
than forty- four years, one is impressed by the weakness of the Court’s 
reasoning, not because it relied on analogy but because it did it so badly.  
 21   See, e.g., Posner, n.13.  
 22  Richard A. Posner,  Law, Pragmatism, and Democracy 49, 52, 53 (2003). 
 23   Posner,  The Problems of Jurisprudence , n.12, at 90. 
 24  Posner,  Reasoning by Analogy , n.15, at 61. 
 25  Id. at 13, 64. 
 26  One might add that in ordinary circumstances, “the method of inquiry 
used by ordinary people,” which Posner approves, is far more likely to 
be reasoning by analogy than the extended empirical inquiry that he 
recommends.  
 27  Id. at 82. 
 28  See id. at 158– 212. 
 29  Posner,  Reasoning by Analogy n.15, at 765. 
 30  Id. at 773. 
 31  Id. 
  32   Id. at 768– 769. 
 33  Scott   Brewer ,   Exemplary Reasoning:  Semantics, Pragmatics, and the 
Rational Force of Legal Argument by Analogy  ,  109  Harv. L. Rev .  923 ( 1996 ). 
 34   Id. at 934. 
 35  Id. at 934– 938. 
 36  Id. at 928. 
 37  Id. at 962. 
 38  Id. 
 39  Id. at 963. 
 40  Id. 
 41  Talking about the process of scientiﬁ c discovery, Brewer suggests that a 
dream might serve in place of an analogy. Id. at 979.  
 42  Id. at 933, 953– 954. 

Notes
[176]
176
 43  Id. at 933, 952– 953. 
 44  Id. at 952. 
 45  Cass Sunstein,  Legal Reasoning and Political Conﬂ ict 69 (1996). 
 46   Id. at 68. 
 47  Id. at 35. 
 48  Edward H. Levi,  An Introduction to Legal Reasoning 5 (1949). 
 49   Sunstein, n.45, at 75.  
 50  Brewer, n.33, at 933.  
 51  Sunstein, n.45, at 65.  
 52  Id. 
 53  Brewer, n.33, at 954, 964.  
 54  Id. at 933. 
 55  Id. 
 56  See id. at 1027.  
 57  See pp. 139– 141 . 
 58  One may object that, whatever the rational force of the reconstructed 
argument, the uneliminable normative element of the AWRa leaves law 
ultimately a product of will. Brewer does not address that question. 
I think he would say that unless the argumentation of legal reasoning 
is valid, it hardly matters what footing there is for the law’s normative 
stance; if his rescue of the rational force of legal argument is not 
sufﬁ cient to dispose of the broader issue, nevertheless, it is necessary. 
His evident passionate concern for the rationality of law makes it most 
unlikely that he would give it all up as a bad job anyway. For myself, 
the assertion that the inability to  demonstrate  the ultimate normative 
ground of law –  its dependence on a   basic norm, see Hans Kelsen,  Pure 
Theory of Law  46 (trans. from the 2nd German ed., M. Knight, trans., 
1967) or “  rule of recognition,” see H. L. A. Hart, The Concept of Law 
94– 95 (2d ed. 1994) –  means that it is (ultimately) a product not of 
reason but of will unduly restricts the bounds of reason, the mistake 
that I believe Brewer makes with respect to legal argumentation. See 
pp. 150 – 152 .  
 Chapter 4 Analogical Reasoning, Legal Education, 
and the Rule of Law 
  1  Usha Goswami,  Analogical Reasoning in Children  13, 99– 115 (1992); 
Keith J.  Holyoak and Paul Thagard,  Mental Leaps; Analogy in Creative 
Thought 75– 100 (1995). On animals, see id. at 39– 73. 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[177]
  2  “ [S] urely there is nothing more basic to thought and language than our 
sense of similarity; our sorting of things into kinds. The usual general 
term, whether a common noun or a verb or an adjective, owes its 
generality to some resemblance among the things referred to. Indeed, 
learning to use a word depends on a double resemblance:  ﬁ rst, a 
resemblance between the present circumstances and past circumstances 
in which the word was used, and second, a phonetic resemblance 
between the present utterance of the word and past utterances of it. And 
every reasonable expectation depends on resemblance of circumstances, 
together with our tendency to expect similar causes to have similar 
effects  …  We cannot easily imagine a more familiar or fundamental 
notion than this [notion of similarity], or a notion more ubiquitous in its 
applications … And yet, strangely, there is something logically repugnant 
about it. For we are bafﬂ ed when we try to relate the general notion of 
similarity signiﬁ cantly to logical terms.” W. V. Quine,  Natural Kinds , in 
W. V. Quine,  Ontological Relativity and Other Essays  114, 116– 117 (1969), 
reprinted in Hilary Kornblith, ed.,  Naturalizing Epistemology  57, 58– 59 
(2d ed. 1994). 
 
  “A standard of similarity is in some sense innate  …  Moreover, [in 
behavioral terms] … it can be said equally of other animals that they 
have an innate standard of similarity too. It is part of our animal 
birthright. And, interestingly enough, it is characteristically animal in 
its lack of intellectual status. At any rate we noticed earlier how alien 
the notion is to mathematics and logic.” Quine at 123; Kornblith at 63.  
  3  See p. 78 . 
  4  I refer here to similarities among things: apples, ﬁ re engines, a clown’s 
nose, and the like. There are also, of course, similarities and dissimilarities 
among persons, among actions or occurrences  –  swimming is more 
(less?) like running than walking; a storm is more (less?) like a ﬁ re than a 
ﬂ ood –  and among qualities – red is more like orange than blue; a trumpet 
sounds more like a tuba than a violin. How similarity and dissimilarity 
among discrete “particulars” are to be  analyzed and explained is at 
the heart of the problem of universals.  For references, see Note on the 
Problem of Universals in  Appendix A . 
  5  See p. 40. 
  6  The  locus classicus  is in   David Hume,  A Treatise of Human Nature  77 
(L. A. Selby- Bigge, ed., 1888): “When I cast my eye on the  known qualities 
of objects, I immediately discover that the relation of cause and effect 
depends not in the least on  them .” 
  7  Goswami, n.1 at 35. See generally id. at 35– 40.

Notes
[178]
178
 
  A common signal of a child’s developing awareness of causal relations, 
all too familiar to the child’s parents, is an unceasing ﬂ ood of “Why?” 
questions. As the concept of causation falls into place and the differences 
among causes, reasons, and purposes are learned, the use of “Why?” 
questions becomes more discriminating, and some that were previously 
asked are dropped.
 
  Whether there is a fundamental epistemological difference between 
awareness of simple perceptual similarities and awareness of causal 
regularities seems to me an open question, although I  suspect that 
there is not. Both seem clearly to be learned, or perhaps one should 
say “acquired,” from experience, and, certainly, neither can be taught 
as abstractions, not, at least, until it has been acquired from concrete 
instances.  
  8  Goswami, note1, at 3– 4, 17– 19. 
  9  Id. at 6– 9. 
 10  Id. at 19. 
 11  See id. at 35– 98. When our grandson Carter, then about ﬁ fteen months 
old, was with us in New Hampshire, he looked out the window one 
morning and said rather excitedly, “Bow- wow!” There was, in fact, not a 
dog outside but a moose. It was not Carter’s inability to discern relevant 
similarity that led him astray, but his limited experience with animals. 
According to what he knew, he had made no mistake; the moose was, 
indeed, relevantly similar –  four legs and so forth –  to a dog or, as he 
would have put it, a bow- wow. 
 12  Id. at 14, 93– 97. 
 13  To say that we are able to draw an analogy between source and target 
without knowing a general rule or principle that accounts for it is not, 
of course, to say that there is no such principle. The predictability of 
experience depends on the stability of causal relationships; it is the task 
of science to capture and express that stability in explanatory principles.  
 14  See Margaret Goldsmith,  The Road to Penicillin 150– 156 (1946). 
 15   See p. 7 . 
 16  See p. 164 n.50 . 
 17  See p. 95 . 
 18  It is these tests of consistency and coherence that lend color to the claim 
that analogical reasoning is really deductive.  
 19  Charles William Eliot, who had become President of Harvard University 
in 1869, appointed Langdell the Dane Professor of Law on January 6, 
1870. Charles Warren,  History of the Harvard Law School and of Early 
Legal Conditions in America 354, 359 (1908). Langdell gave his ﬁ rst 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[179]
lectures, on Negotiable Paper and Partnership, in the spring term. Id. 
at 363. On September 27, 1870, the Faculty of Law held its ﬁ rst formal 
meeting, and it elected Langdell as the Law School’s ﬁ rst Dean, id. at 
370– 371, evidently because no one else on the faculty was interested in 
the job.   Charles W.   Eliot ,   Langdell and the Law School ,  33  Harv. L. Rev . 
 518 ,  519 ( 1920  ). See William P.  LaPiana,  Logic and Experience  11– 14 
(1994). Eliot became a committed supporter of the case method and had 
much to do with its establishment at Harvard and elsewhere.   Anthony  
 Chase  ,   The Birth of the Modern Law School ,  23   Am. J. Legal Hist .  329  
( 1979 ). 
 
  Langdell’s ﬁ rst class is described in some detail in Samuel F. Batchelder, 
 Christopher C.  Langdell , 18 Green Bag 437 (1906), which also gives 
information about Langdell’s youth, education, and professional life 
before he joined the faculty.  
 20  For an insightful study of Langdell’s jurisprudence, see   Thomas C.   Grey , 
 Langdell’s Orthodoxy ,  45  U. Pitt. L. Rev .  1 ( 1983 ). 
 21  See, e.g., Jerome Frank,  Law and the Modern Mind  127– 158 (1970); 
 Roscoe  Pound ,  Mechanical Jurisprudence ,  8  Colum. L. Rev .  605 ( 1908 ). 
 22  Robert Stevens,  Two Cheers for 1870:  The American Law School , in 
Donald Fleming and Bernard Bailyn, eds.,  Law in American History  (5 
Perspectives in American History) 403, 426– 427 (1971). 
 23  See  Grey , note 20, at  29 – 38 . So, for example,   Nathan Dane observed in the 
Introduction to his  Abridgment , a highly regarded digest of American law 
and standard work: “Having treated a subject, or an important case, in its 
parts, it has been found useful, if not necessary, to make, in some cases, 
some remarks, comments, or notes, to explain, not only for the beneﬁ t 
of those who most need explanation, but to caution against admitting 
judicial decisions as authorities, where the remote principle, on which 
they were made, is not admitted.” Nathan Dane,  A General Abridgment 
and Digest of American Law vii (1823). 
 24  LaPiana, n.19, 55– 70. Langdell’s methodology, especially its assumption 
that legal science is a deductive system akin to mathematics, is traced 
back to the past in   M. H.   Hoeﬂ ich  ,   Law & Geometry: Legal Science from 
Leibniz to Langdell ,  30  Am. J. Legal Hist .  95 ( 1986 ). 
 25  See Grey, n.20, at 20– 27. 
 26  See, e.g., Karl Llewellyn’s famous juxtaposition of opposed canons of 
statutory construction in   Karl N.   Llewellyn  ,   Remarks on the Theory of 
Appellate Decision and the Rules or Canons About How Statutes Are To Be 
Construed ,  3  Vand. L. Rev .  395 ( 1950 ). Llewellyn’s more complete (and 

Notes
[180]
180
not unfavorable) view of appellate decision- making is set forth in Karl 
N. Llewellyn,  The Common Law Tradition  (1960). See also   Clare  Dalton  , 
 An Essay in the Deconstruction of Contract Doctrine ,  94 Yale L. J.  997 
( 1985 ). For the history of Legal Realism in the United States, see Morton 
J.  Horwitz,  The Transformation of American Law   1870– 1960 , 169– 246 
(1992). There is an insightful description of the legal realist movement 
in   Lon L.   Fuller ,   American Legal Realism ,  82  U. Pa. L. Rev .  429 ( 1934 ). 
Selections of the writings of the Legal Realists are found in William 
W. Fisher III, Morton J. Horwitz, and Thomas A. Reed, eds.,  American 
Legal Realism  (1993). On Critical Legal Studies, see Roberto Mangabeira 
Unger,  The Critical Legal Studies Movement  (1986). For a bibliography, 
see   Duncan  Kennedy  and   Karl E.   Klare ,   A Bibliography of Critical Legal 
Studies ,  94 Yale L. J.  461 ( 1984 ). 
 27  Batchelder, n.19, at 440.  
 28  This description applies most fully to “common- law” subjects that 
typically are part of the ﬁ rst- year curriculum, like torts, contracts, and 
property. In courses that depend heavily on statutory material, the 
relevant rules will be derived from a statute (as interpreted in prior 
cases).  
 29  To the dismay of some students in their ﬁ rst weeks at law school 
(and sometimes later), there may be small place in the discussion for 
consideration of how the decision in the case affected the parties, 
whether it was fair, or whether it would serve the public interest if it were 
applied generally. For the teacher may temporarily (or, if the teacher is 
of a certain bent, permanently) foreclose such questions by insisting that 
the question before the class is what the law  is and not what the law 
 ought to be. In my own view, although it is often important to make the 
distinction between the two questions, the latter question is as important 
as the former. Not only is the moral evaluation of law important in itself, 
but also, because such evaluation is part of the context that determines 
the relevance of one analogy or another, it has a bearing on what the 
law is.  
 30  Marbury v. Madison , 5 U.S. (1 Cranch.) 137, 163 (1803).   John Adams had 
used the phrase earlier in a draft of a constitution for Massachusetts. 
See Massachusetts Constitution of 1780, pt. 1, art. xxx, in Charles 
Kettleborough, ed.,  The State Constitutions  658 (1918). See id. at 654n. 
 James Harrington had used the phrase more than a hundred years before 
that in  The Commonwealth of Oceana  (1656). See  The Political Works 
of James Harrington  155, 182 (J. G. A. Pocock, ed., 1977). By referring 
only to Americans, I do not mean to express doubt that the rule of law 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[181]
is a universal, or well- nigh universal, ideal. There are, of course, and 
have been, actual societies in which the rule of law as it is commonly 
understood does not prevail.  
 31  Joseph Raz,  The Authority of Law  210– 229 (1979) provides a good general 
overview. For a careful exposition of the various meanings of the rule of 
law in jurisprudential and especially constitutional debate, see   Richard 
H.  Fallon  , Jr.,   “The Rule of Law” as a Concept in Constitutional Discourse , 
 97  Colum. L. Rev .  1 ( 1997 ). 
 32  See Lon L. Fuller,  The Morality of Law  (rev. ed. 1977). Fuller’s extended 
discussion of “the morality that makes law possible,” id. at 33, may 
itself be regarded as a statement of what the rule of law requires. See id. 
at 33– 94. 
 33  Even that apparently simple statement is freighted with complexities. In 
a sense, to ask what the law  is rather than what it  ought to be  commits one 
to the rule of law. Such verbal maneuvers do not address the underlying 
issues.  
 34  Doubts of this kind do not infect only cases applying rules derived from 
judicial opinions. They may arise whenever a court is called on to apply a 
rule to facts not precisely like any to which it has previously been applied. 
Even if the rule is contained in an authoritative text, like a statute or an 
express judicial precedent, the authority of the text is not dispositive of its 
own interpretation.  
 35  See p. 104 . 
 36  Scott   Brewer ,   Exemplary Reasoning:  Semantics, Pragmatics, and the 
Rational Force of Legal Argument by Analogy ,  109  Harv. L. Rev .  923 ,  934 
( 1996 ). 
 37  Richard A.   Posner ,   Legal Scholarship Today ,  45  Stan. L. Rev .  1647 ,  1654 
( 1993 ). 
 38  Brown v. Allen , 344 U.S. 443, 540 (1953) (concurring opinion).  
 39   Ronald Dworkin has made much in his jurisprudence of the thesis 
that an adjudicated case has a “right answer.” See Ronald Dworkin, 
 Hard Cases , 88 Harv. L. Rev. 1057 (1975), reprinted in Ronald Dworkin, 
 Taking Rights Seriously  81– 130 (1977);   Ronald  Dworkin  ,   No Right 
Answer? ,  53   N.Y.U. L.  Rev .  1 ( 1978 ), reprinted in Ronald Dworkin, 
 A Matter of Principle  119– 145 (1985). He is clear, however, that there 
is no procedure for demonstrating what the right answer is and that 
reasonable lawyers and judges may and often do disagree about what 
the right answer is.  Taking Rights Seriously , above, at 81. His thesis is, 
in the ﬁ rst instance, a forceful defense of the sufﬁ ciency of law and, 
therefore, a defense of the rule of law, which builds on his model of law 

Notes
[182]
182
as a coherent, comprehensive body of rules. See pp. 6–7 . In the context 
of adjudication, he argues, the law contains within itself the ultimate 
political and moral principles on which law ﬁ nally depends. See id., 
at 105. Accordingly, a judge making the “justiﬁ catory ascent” from a 
legal rule must, even at the highest level, not look to sources outside 
the law but must search out the principles embodied within it. At 
that level of justiﬁ cation, his thesis may be thought to prescribe an 
attitude more than a method; whichever it is, adherence to the rule of 
law is its core. Abstracted from the concrete task of adjudication and 
considered as a theory about the nature of law, Dworkin’s right- answer 
thesis lends itself to the claim that the positive law, properly conceived, 
generates the criteria of its own validity. In his fully developed theory, 
which he calls “law as integrity,” Dworkin seems to take that position, 
which he grounds not on the substance of the laws but on the nature 
of law as such. He acknowledges that this view of law incorporates 
substantive normative principles, but they are, he asserts, implications 
of the notion of law as the source of order in a human community. See 
generally Ronald Dworkin,  Law’s Empire  87– 275 (1986). In this aspect, 
the theory has an afﬁ nity with theories of natural law, see pp. 139 – 142 , 
an afﬁ nity that Dworkin acknowledges. See id., at 35– 36, 263, 297;   Ronald  
 Dworkin  , “  Natural” Law Revisited ,  34  U. Fla. L. Rev .  165 ( 1982 ). For a 
critical assessment of the theory, see Lloyd L. Weinreb,  Natural Law and 
Justice 117– 122 (1987). 
  40  In Protagoras’s phrase, “man is the measure of all things.” Quoted in 
Plato,  Theaetetus 160d (F. M. Cornford, trans.), in Edith Hamilton and 
Huntington Cairns, eds.,  The Collected Dialogues of Plato  866 (1961). To 
say that norms are conventional did not imply that they are insigniﬁ cant 
(“merely conventional,” as we might say) or easily changed. The Greek 
word  nomos , translated here as “convention,” might refer to laws of great 
importance and long standing; it took its meaning in large part from its 
opposition to  physis , the term used to describe the natural order. For a 
brief introduction and references, see Weinreb, n.39, at , 26– 30.  
 41   So, it was debated whether God willed what was (objectively) good, or 
the good was whatever God willed, because God willed it. The theological 
terms of the debate masked the question that was at the bottom of 
it:  whether the norms of human behavior are true or real and can be 
found out by human reason. See Weinreb, n.39 , at 64– 65. 
 42  See id. at 15– 66, 224– 265. 
 43  See, e.g., John Finnis,  Natural Law and Natural Rights  (1980). See 
generally Weinreb, n.39 at 101– 126. 
www.ebook3000.com

Notes
[183]
 44  Fuller argued that the dilemma that legal positivism poses between 
obeying a thoroughly evil statute, which has yet some claim to 
obedience, and doing what we think right and decent “has the verbal 
formulation of a problem, but the problem it states makes no sense. It 
is like saying I have to choose between giving food to a starving man 
and being mimsy with the borogoves.”  Lon L.  Fuller ,  Positivism and 
Fidelity to Law –  A Reply to Professor Hart ,  71  Harv. L. Rev .  630 ,  656 
( 1958  ).  
 45   On the debate between natural law and legal positivism, see Weinreb, 
n.39 at 97– 101, 259– 265. “To use in the description of the interpretation 
of laws the suggested terminology of a fusion or inability to separate what 
is law and ought to be will serve … only to conceal the facts, that here if 
anywhere we live among uncertainties between which we have to choose, 
and that the existing law imposes only limits on our choice and not the 
choice itself.”   H. L. A.   Hart ,   Positivism and the Separation of Law and 
Morals ,  71  Harv. L. Rev .  593 ,  629 ( 1958 ). 
 46   Adamson v. California , 332 U.S. 46, 68 (1947) (Black, J., dissenting).  
 47   Id. at 66 (Frankfurter, J., concurring).  
 48   See id. at 66– 68. 
 49  Justice Black’s historical argument is contained in an appendix to his 
opinion in  Adamson , 332 U.S.  at 92. For Justice Frankfurter’s view, 
see id. at 62– 67. For a thorough response to Justice Black’s historical 
argument, see   Charles  Fairman ,   Does the Fourteenth Amendment 
Incorporate the Bill of Rights? ,  2  Stan. L. Rev .  5 ( 1949  ), which rejects 
Black’s conclusion.  
 50  See, in addition to  Adamson , 332 U.S. at 69, 90,  Rochin v. California , 342 
U.S. 165, 174– 177 (1952) (Black, J., concurring). For a later tirade by Black 
against the “natural law” approach, see  Griswold v. Connecticut , 381 U.S. 
479, 511– 513, 522– 524 (1965) (Black, J., dissenting). Justice Souter used 
the label of “natural law” pejoratively, on an entirely different subject, in 
 Alden v. Maine , 527 U.S. 706, 763 (1999) (dissenting opinion). See id. at 
763– 798. The majority rejected Justice Souter’s characterization. See id. 
at 758– 789. 
 51   Adamson , 332 U.S. at 65, 67– 68 (Frankfurter, J., concurring);  Rochin , 342 
U.S. at 169– 172. 
 52   Black’s belief that incorporation of the clauses of the Bill of Rights would 
eliminate the need for judicial judgment was severely tested when the 
Court declared that the Sixth Amendment’s provision for trial by jury, as 
incorporated and made applicable to the states, did not mean that a jury 
had to be composed of twelve persons, although it had previously been 

Notes
[184]
184
so interpreted as applied to federal trials.  Williams v. Florida , 399 U.S. 78 
(1970). Agreeing with that conclusion, Black said that it followed “solely 
as a necessary consequence of our duty to re- examine prior decisions 
to reach the correct constitutional meaning in each case.” Id. at 107 
(Black, J., concurring). Prior decisions to the contrary “were based … on 
an improper interpretation” of the Sixth Amendment. Id. He did not 
explain how the Court’s duty could be performed without the exercise of 
human, that is to say fallible, judgment. Frankfurter, who was no longer 
on the Court when  Williams  was decided, would not have accepted the 
“correction.” See  Rochin v. California , 342 U.S. 165, 169– 170 (1952). 
www.ebook3000.com

[185]
 Index  
 abduction,   94 – 96 ,  97 – 99 
 Charles Peirce’s account of,  
 94 – 95 
 adjudication,   1 – 2 ,  3 – 4 ,  49 – 70  See 
 Posner, Richard 
 case of ﬁ rst impression,   66 – 67 
 factual context,    49 – 50 
 law and facts,   49 – 67 
 legal basis for,    50 – 51 
 legislative and executive action 
compared,    49 
 overruling,    67 – 69 
 rules of decision,   46 ,  50 –56 ,  59 
 use of analogy,    64 
 Adams, John,    180 
  Adams v. New Jersey Steamboat Co ., 
 13 ,  16 – 19 ,  34 ,  79 – 81 
 administrative process,   1 – 2 ,  35 
 Alexander, Larry,    9 ,  155 
 American Law Institute,    166 
 analogical reasoning,   4 – 5 ,  9 – 12 , 
 37 ,  38 – 39 ,  115 ,  117 – 21 , 
 146 – 48 ,  151 – 54 .  See 
 adjudication, analogy, case 
method, legal reasoning   
 deduction compared  ,  5 , 
 82 – 83 ,  86 
 induction compared,    5 
 Brewer’s account of,  
 96 – 104 ,  106 – 13 
 in children,   116 – 17 ,  119 – 21 ,  152 
 in law classes,    131 – 32 
 “mystics” and “skeptics,”    104 – 6 
 practical analogical reasoning,  
 40 – 48 ,  63 – 64 
 reasoning by example,    4 ,  9 
 scholarly critique,   7 – 12 ,  75 – 113 
 analogy,   4 .  See  analogical reasoning  , 
 metaphor  ,  similarity   
 logical form,    103 – 4 

Index
[186]
186
 relevant similarity,  
 107  – 8 ,   116  – 27  
 “source” and “target,”   107 – 8 
 basic norm,    176 
 Black, Hugo,   30 – 31 ,  144 – 46 
 Brandeis, Louis,    29 
 Brewer, Scott,   155 .  See  analogical 
reasoning 
 on legal reasoning,    96 – 113 
 on relevant similarity,    107 – 8 
 on rule of law,   109 – 10  
 Brown v. Board of Education of 
Topeka ,   171 
 Buck v. Jewell- LaSalle Realty 
Co .,   19 – 27 
 Butler, Pierce,    29 
 cable television.   See  CATV systems  
  California v. Acevedo ,   171 – 72 
 case method,   128 – 29 .  See  legal 
education 
 use of analogy,    10 – 11 
 case or controversy,   49 ,  167 
 CATV (cable television) systems,  
 22 – 25 ,  34 
 cognitive psychology,  
 151  – 54  ,  165  – 66  
 constitutional interpretation,   
 and legal positivism,    143 – 44 
 and natural law,    142 – 43 
 originalism,    142 – 43 
 Copyright Act of 1909,   19 – 20 ,  21 
 Crisci v. Security Insurance Co. of 
New Haven, Conn .,   169 
 Critical Legal Studies.,   130 , 
 160 – 61 ,  167 
 Dane, Nathan,    179 
 Deductive argument,    78 
 Due process Clause,    144 – 45 
 Dworkin, Ronald,   6 – 7 ,  123 ,  155 
 Eisenberg, Melvin,    155 
 Escobedo v. Illinois ,   169 
 forms of action,   169  
 Fortnightly Corp. v. United Artists 
Television, Inc .,  22 – 23 ,  24 ,  25 
 Fourth Amendment,   14 ,  27 – 32 
 Standing,    171 
 Frankfurter, Felix,    144 – 46 
 Fuller, Lon,    156 
 Goldman v. United States ,   55 
 Greenawalt, Kent,    156 
 Harrington, James,    180 
 Harris v. New York ,   171 
 Hart, H.L.A.,   156 
 Harvard Law School,    128 
 Holmes, Jr., Oliver Wendell,   156 , 
 164 ,  173 
 Hume, David,    177 
 Inductive argument,   5 ,  87  
 Jackson, Robert,    139 
 Katz v. United States ,  14 – 15 ,  29 – 32 , 
 33 ,  35 ,  81 – 82 ,  124 ,  174 
 Kirby v. Illinois ,  169  
 Langdell, Christopher Columbus,  
 128 – 30 ,  131 ,  133 
 Law,  3 .  See  adjudication 
 hierarchy of rules,   6 – 7 ,  12 ,  70 – 74 
 natural science compared,    73 
 “seamless web,”    69 
 will or reason,   13 ,  113 ,  140 – 41 
www.ebook3000.com

Index
[187]
 law and economics.   See  Posner, 
Richard  
 legal education,   10 – 11 ,  128 – 34 
 case method,   15 ,  128 – 29 ,  131 – 32 
 Socractic dialogue,    10 
 legal formalism.   See  “mechanical 
jurisprudence,” “legal science”  
 legal positivism,   12  ,  141  ,   143  – 44  , 
 168  
 convention (nomos),   182  
 Legal Realism,   13 ,  71 ,  128 ,  130 , 
 160 – 61 ,  167 
 legal reasoning,   3 – 4 ,  11 – 12 ,  48 – 70 , 
 168.   See  adjudication  , 
 analogical reasoning, 
 practical reasoning 
compared,    43 ,  72 
 pyramidal structure,    6 – 7 
 use of analogy,    4 ,  113 
 “legal science,”   129 – 30 ,  137 
 Levi, Edward,   8 ,  13 ,  104 – 6 ,  157 
 MacCormick, Neil,    157 
 Macpherson v. Buick Motor 
Co .,   171  
 Marbury v. Madison ,   180 
 “mechanical jurisprudence”,   71 , 
 128 ,  173 .  See  legal fomalism  , 
 legal reasoning  
 metaphor,    153 – 54 
 Miranda v. Arizona ,  167 ,  171  
 natural law,   12 ,  113 ,  140 – 41 , 
 142 – 43 ,  168 .  See  constitutional 
interpretation  
 nazism,   12 ,  141 – 42 
 Olmstead v. United States ,  14 ,  27 – 29 , 
 35 ,  123 – 24 
 originalism,    142 – 43 
 Parker v. State ,   170 
 Peirce, Charles,   94 – 95 ,  157 .  See 
 abduction  
 Plato,    140 
 Posner, Richard,   8 – 9 ,  87 – 94 ,  109 , 
 138 ,  157 
 “everyday pragmatism,”    90 – 93 
 law and economics,    89 
 on analogical argument,    93 – 94 
 policy analysis,    90 
 rule of law,    90 – 92 
 Priel, Danny,   78 – 79 ,  158 
 Quine, Willard Van 
Orman,    158  ,   177  
 Rakas v. Illinois ,   171 
 restatements,    166 
 rule of law,   135 – 39  .  See   Brewer, 
Scott, Posner, Richard  
 rule of recognition,    176 
 rule of the case,   57 ,  59 –65 ,  84 –85 
 rules .  See  legal reasoning 
 hierarchy of,   6 – 7 ,  12 
 Sherlock Holmes,    95 
 Silverman v. United states , 
 55 – 56 
 similarity,   76 – 77 ,  115 – 16 ,  118 – 21 , 
 166 ,  170 – 71 ,  177 .  See  analogy 
 causal relations,    118 – 19 
 normative relations,    121 
 relevant similarity,  
 82 – 83 ,  116 – 27  
 Sophists,    140 
 Stone, Harlan Fiske,    29 
 Sunstein, Cass,  13  ,   33  ,   43  , 
 104  – 5 ,   158  
 “incompletely theorized 
agreements,”    105 

Index
[188]
188
 Teleprompter Corp v. Columbia 
Broadcasting System, 
Inc .,   23 – 25 
 Twentieth Century Music Corp. v. 
Aiken ,   25 – 26  
 Universals,   83 – 84 ,  149 – 51 .  See 
 similarity  
 Westen, Peter,  78 – 79 ,  109 ,  117 – 18 , 
 138 ,  158 
 wine stain,   166 
www.ebook3000.com

