

Praise for The Shortest History of
Economics
‘If you read just one book about economics, make it
Andrew Leigh’s clear, insightful, remarkable – and
short – work’
Claudia Goldin, Professor of Economics, Harvard University
WINNER OF THE 2023 NOBEL PRIZE IN ECONOMICS
 
‘This short book is bursting with insights about
economics, illustrated by memorable stories and
historical events. People who are curious about but
confused by economics will learn enough from this
to be conversant for life’
Caroline M. Hoxby, Professor of Economics, Stanford University
 
‘Essential reading for anyone looking to understand
today’s economy’
Betsey Stevenson, Professor of Economics, University of Michigan


Contents
Title Page
Introduction
1.  Out of Africa and into Agriculture
2.  The Grand Canal, the Printing Press and the
Plague
3.  The Age of Sail
4.  The Industrial Revolution and the Wealth of
Nations
5.  Trade, Travel and Technology Take Off
6.  Economic Models and the Modern Factory
7.  World War I and the Depression
8.  World War II and Bretton Woods
9.  The Glorious Thirty?
10.  Markets, Markets Everywhere
11.  Inflation Targeting and Inequality
12.  Hot Markets and a Hotter Planet
13.  The Pandemic and Beyond
14.  Economics: Past, Present and Future
Acknowledgements
Image Credits
Index
Also in this series
Copyright

Introduction
in prehistoric times, the only source of artificial light was a
wood fire. To produce as much light as a regular
household lightbulb now gives off in an hour would have
taken our prehistoric ancestors fifty-eight hours of
foraging for timber.1 By Babylonian times, the best
lighting technology was a lamp that burned sesame oil.
To produce the same amount of light, a Babylonian
worker in around 1750 BCE would have had to work for
forty-one hours.
An earthenware lamp, which used a cotton wick and oil or ghee.
Then came candles. Initially made from animal fat,
they were time-consuming to produce (and smelt awful).
Even in the late 1700s, the typical worker would have to

devote five hours’ work to producing candles that emitted
as much light as a regular household lightbulb gives off
in an hour. Through the 1800s came developments in gas
lamps, which reduced the time cost of an hour of light to
a few hours of work.
With the invention of the electric bulb, light got
cheaper still. By the early 1900s, it took just minutes of
work to buy an hour of light. Today, less than one second
of work will earn you enough money to run a modern
household lightbulb for an hour. Measured in terms of
artificial light, the earnings from work are 300,000 times
higher today than they were in prehistoric times, and
30,000 times higher than they were in 1800. Where our
ancient ancestors once toiled to brighten their nights, we
rarely even think about the cost as we flick on a light.
The progression of lighting technology: a candle, incandescent bulb,
fluorescent bulb and LED bulb.

Two forces have driven this remarkable change.
Lighting technologies are better (and still improving by
the day). And workers are more productive, which means
that we earn more in an hour than our ancestors did.
The history of light illuminates some key themes of this
book. Where prehistoric people had to do everything,
modern workers specialise in what we do best. Markets
allow us to exchange our output with that of other
people. Prices create incentives to produce more when
there’s a shortage and less when there’s a glut. Yet the
market system is far from perfect. Unemployment,
cartels, traffic congestion, overfishing and pollution are
just a few of the problems that emerge when markets fail.
This small book tells a big story. It is the story of
capitalism – of how our market system developed. It is
the story of the discipline of economics, and some of the
key figures who formed it. And it is the story of how
economic forces have shaped world history. Why didn’t
Africa colonise Europe instead of the other way around?
What happened when countries erected trade and
immigration barriers in the 1930s? Why did the Allies win
World War II? Why did inequality in many advanced
countries fall during the 1950s and 1960s? How did
property rights drive China’s growth surge in the 1980s?
How does climate change threaten our future prosperity?
You’ll find answers to these questions and more in this
book.
Economics can be defined as a social science that
studies how people maximise their wellbeing in the face
of scarcity. It considers the behaviour of people as
individuals, and how we work together in households and
corporations. It focuses on how we interact in markets, in
which buyers and sellers together determine the
equilibrium 
price. 
Economics 
also 
considers 
what
happens when markets fail, and how public policy might
ameliorate poverty, climate change or price-fixing.

This is a story that blends microeconomics and
macroeconomics.2 Microeconomics is the study of how
individuals make decisions. Macroeconomics looks at the
economy as a whole. Too often, popular books about
economics focus on one or the other. Freakonomics,
Discover Your Inner Economist and 50 Things That Made
the 
Modern 
Economy 
introduce 
the 
reader 
to
microeconomics. The Return of Depression Economics,
Slouching Towards Utopia and This Time Is Different help
explain macroeconomics. This book synthesises both
perspectives. We’ll move chronologically through history,
touching on the decisions of individuals and the
trajectory of entire societies.
Critics who think economics is bleak, moneygrubbing
or narrow-minded like to quote Thomas Carlyle’s
description of the discipline as ‘the dismal science’,
ignoring where the criticism comes from. Carlyle, an
influential British essayist of the 1800s, was a racist who
believed that slavery should be reintroduced in the West
Indies. The ‘dismal’ view Carlyle was attacking was that
all people are equal. Like many economists, I wear the
insult with pride.
Carlyle also disparagingly said, ‘Teach a parrot the
terms supply and demand and you’ve got an economist.’3
Supply and demand graphs can be handy, but you won’t
find them in this book. And you certainly don’t need to
have studied any economics to enjoy the stories that
follow. Learning to think like an economist can change
your life for the better. The secret of our discipline is that
the most powerful insights come from a handful of big
ideas that anyone can comprehend.
I’ve mentioned one of these ideas already: incentives.
In sporting contests where there’s a big first prize and a
small second prize, performance improves. Runners go
faster. Golfers finish in fewer shots.4 Incentives can even

affect when we’re born. When Australia introduced a
‘baby bonus’ for children born on or after 1 July 2004,
that day set a record for the number of births.5 Why?
Because expectant mothers delayed induction procedures
and caesarean section operations to get the financial
reward. When the United States changed inheritance tax
rates, the timing of deaths shifted too: indicating that a
small number of people died later (or earlier) to minimise
their tax bill.6 There’s a cliché that nothing in life is
certain except death and taxes. In this case, tax rates
changed, and death rates followed.
That’s not to say that economics is all about greed.
Elinor Ostrom, the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in
economics, found many contexts – from fisheries in
Indonesia to forests in Nepal – in which people
cooperated to manage scarce resources. In her Nobel
Prize lecture in 2009, Ostrom criticised the tendency of
economists to design institutions for entirely self-
interested individuals. Instead, she argued, ‘a core goal
of public policy should be to facilitate the development of
institutions that bring out the best in humans’. Incentives
matter, but I’ll endeavour to capture Ostrom’s optimism,
and show that economists can be idealists too.
Another big idea of economics is specialisation. How
many of us can provide a good haircut, replace a broken
car windscreen, turn grapes into wine, or write a
smartphone app? Given a few months, most people could
learn to do each of these tasks with some level of
proficiency, but unless you’d enjoy the experience, a
better approach is to pay an expert, and focus instead on
what you do best. If you spent your life aiming to become
reasonably good at everything, you’d probably end up as
the human equivalent of a Swiss Army knife – with a
finicky knife, annoyingly tiny scissors and an impractical

screwdriver. Job specialisation is one of the keys to the
modern economy.
The process of making things has become specialised
too. For example, some Chinese cities have become
expert in making a single kind of product. Yiwu produces
most of the world’s Christmas decorations. Huludao
makes a quarter of the world’s swimwear. Danyang is
known as ‘spectacles city’. Taizhou, which has long
specialised in bathroom products, has now become a
global centre for innovation in intelligent toilets.7
As specialisation flourishes, trade becomes invaluable.
Boeing’s 787 Dreamliner includes batteries from Japan,
wing tips from South Korea, floor beams from India,
horizontal stabilisers from Italy, landing gear from
France, cargo doors from Sweden and thrust reversers
from 
Mexico.8 
A 
typical 
smartphone 
could 
most
accurately be labelled ‘Made in the World’. By sourcing
components and raw materials from the lowest-cost
suppliers, it becomes possible to create items that would
be unaffordable if they had to be built using only local
materials.
Perhaps the most powerful illustration of specialisation
came when designer Thomas Thwaites decided to make a
toaster from scratch – using only his own labour and raw
materials he had personally sourced.9 Thwaites obtained
iron ore from a disused mine in England, copper from a
mine in Wales, and mica from a mountain in Scotland.
When a home blast furnace failed to make steel, he
resorted to smelting iron ore in his microwave. The
plastic casing came from melting down garbage. In the
end, Thwaites’s toaster experiment took nine months. If
we value his time at the average wage in the United
Kingdom at the time, the labour cost was £19,000, plus
around £1000 for expenses.10 Thwaites’s £20,000 toaster
was about 5000 times costlier than if he had bought one

at his local retailer for £4. Oh, and store-bought toasters
actually work. When Thwaites plugged his toaster in, it
lasted five seconds before it began melting down.
Another principle of economics is that big events are
rarely driven by sudden shifts in norms or culture. More
often, dramatic changes are due to new technologies or
changing policies. If you want to understand why
international trade boomed in the post-war decades, it
helps to know about the invention of the standardised
shipping container in 1956 and the reduction in global
tariffs through successive rounds of world trade talks. If
you want to know why basketball games today are more
exciting than half a century ago, consider the role of the
shot clock and the three-point rule. This book seeks to
unearth the hidden economic forces behind wars,
religious movements and social transformations.
The story of economics starts with the agricultural
revolution that saw communities move from hunter-
gatherer tribes to create the civilisations of Ancient
Egypt, Greece and Rome. Trade between regions was
enabled by water-borne transport. China’s Grand Canal
connected provinces. The age of sail connected Europe,
Africa and the Americas – transporting agricultural
products, manufactured goods and enslaved people in a
highly profitable triangular trade.
The 
next 
major 
revolution 
was 
the 
industrial
revolution, 
which 
kickstarted 
manufacturing 
and
turbocharged economic growth. Alongside the new
gadgets 
came 
intellectual 
breakthroughs, 
as 
the
discipline of economics took shape. By the early 1900s,
the innovation of the assembly line saw cars produced at
ever-decreasing prices, and globalisation knitted the
world together like never before. Two world wars and the
Great Depression broke many of those connections,
destroying lives, livelihoods and linkages.

For many in the advanced world, the post-war era was
a period of shared prosperity, but growth was patchier
elsewhere. In China, the early decades of communist rule
were marked by capricious policies that undermined
growth until the country’s market turn in 1978. In India,
the big change came in 1990. Growth across much of
Asia saw a growing divergence between living standards
in that region and those in slower-growing Africa. By the
beginning of the twenty-first century, inequality within
many countries had risen sharply.
Much of economics is now focused on questions of
market failure. A great deal of competition policy is
motivated by curtailing monopoly power. A central
concern of the macroeconomics pioneered by John
Maynard Keynes is reducing unemployment. Climate
policy addresses the market failure that means pollution
can be profitable for companies, but ruinous for the
planet. Similarly, behavioural economics acknowledges
that humans do not always behave like cool, calculating
happiness-maximising machines, but tend to deviate in
systematic ways from the rational rule. As the discipline
of economics has evolved, both theory and data have
allowed researchers to build better models of human
behaviour, making economics more interesting and more
useful.
But before we get to Homo economicus, we must start
at the beginning, with the way that economics shaped our
species, Homo sapiens.
Notes
1.
 William Nordhaus, 1997, ‘Do real-output and real-wage measures
capture reality? The history of lighting suggests not’ in William
Nordhaus and Charles Hulten (eds), The Economics of New Goods,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 29–66.
2.
 The blending of microeconomics and macroeconomics has a long
history. For a discussion of Paul Samuelson’s 1948 Neoclassical

Synthesis and the teaching of modern economics through the CORE
curriculum, see Samuel Bowles and Wendy Carlin, 2020, ‘What
students learn in economics 101: Time for a change’, Journal of
Economic Literature, 58(1): 176–214.
3.
 Quoted in Avinash Dixit, 2014, Microeconomics: A Very Short
Introduction, Oxford University Press, Oxford, p. 50.
4.
 Jeff Borland, 2008, Microeconomics: Case Studies and Applications,
Cengage, Melbourne, p. 19.
5.
 Joshua Gans and Andrew Leigh, 2009, ‘Born on the first of July: An
(un) natural experiment in birth timing’, Journal of Public Economics,
93.1–2: 246–63.
6.
 Wojciech Kopczuk and Joel Slemrod, 2003, ‘Dying to save taxes:
Evidence from estate-tax returns on the death elasticity’, Review of
Economics and Statistics 85(2): 256–65.
7.
 Lucy Black, 2020, ‘Picking a product’, CKGSB Knowledge, 19
November.
8.
 Benjamin Zhang, 2017, ‘Trump just used Boeing’s new global airliner
to attack globalization’, Business Insider, 18 February.
9.
 Thomas Thwaites, 2011, The Toaster Project. Or A Heroic Attempt to
Build a Simple Electric Appliance from Scratch, Princeton
Architectural Press, Princeton, NJ.
10.
 The median UK weekly wage in 2009 was around £490, or £19,000
for nine months. Thwaites’s parts and travel totalled £1187. When I
emailed him to check these figures, Thwaites wryly noted that my
estimate of £20,000 was precisely the price at which he had sold the
toaster to the V&A Museum.

1
OUT OF AFRICA AND INTO AGRICULTURE
modern humans evolved in southern africa around 300,000
years ago.1 Our ancient ancestors had language, art and
dance, raised children in family units and told stories.
Around 65,000 years ago, they invented spears and bows
for hunting, needles for sewing and boats for travelling.2
Unlike earlier primates, their capacity for language and
abstract thought allowed Homo sapiens to engage in
collective learning: building a shared knowledge base
that exceeded the capacity of any individual person.3 But
their lives largely remained nomadic: hunting animals
and feeding on local plants, then moving on when the
resources were gone.
Early societies differed in providing for those who
could not work. Some prehistoric societies show evidence
of caring for the elderly – carving canes so they could
walk and chewing food for those whose teeth no longer
worked. Other hunter-gatherer societies – especially the
ones that moved long distances – tended to kill or
abandon those who were elderly or disabled, lest they
endanger the whole group’s prospects.
So what was life like for most people in this era?
‘Nothing is more gentle than man in his primitive state,’
wrote Swiss philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau. His
English counterpart Thomas Hobbes took an utterly
different view, declaring that early human life was
‘solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short’.

Thanks to forensic archaeology (sometimes dubbed
‘CSI Palaeolithic’), modern researchers have been able to
glean a great deal about life in this era. They estimate
that two-fifths of babies did not live to see their first
birthday. Life expectancy was around thirty-three years.4
Violence was ever-present – from competitors in your
own tribe and attackers from neighbouring groups. Up to
15 per cent of people in nomadic societies died a violent
death.5 Before the age of farming, most people would
have shivered through winter, and gone to bed with
growling stomachs. Hobbes was right. Rousseau was
wrong.
Settled agriculture has no single origin point, but one
of the ‘firsts’ took place in northwestern India. The town
of Kalibangan, about three hours’ drive from the border
with Pakistan, was once the confluence of two rivers. It is
home to one of the world’s major archaeological sites: the
oldest ploughed field. Here, furrows are ploughed both
north–south and east–west, suggesting that two crops
were grown together – perhaps cereals and mustard.6
Kalibangan was a major city in the Indus Valley
civilisation, which prospered from 3300 to 1300 BCE.
Farming allowed people to settle and build more
comfortable homes – some even had flush toilets. Their
builders hit upon the ideal brick size: the dimensional
ratio of 1:2:4 that is still in use today.7 Adults wielded
bronze tools and played dice games. Archaeologists have
unearthed children’s toys such as whistles and spinning
tops. In contrast with nomadic living, settled agriculture
provided the environment in which tools and toys could
be made and used.
The agricultural revolution spurred the Indus Valley
civilisation to trade with others. To move goods across
land, its citizens built carts – possibly the first use of
wheeled transport in history. Their cities were laid out in

a grid pattern, just as many modern cities are today. They
built boats and dredged a canal. Indus Valley traders
brought back raw materials such as jade from China,
cedar wood from the Himalayas and lapis lazuli from
Afghanistan. In return, they sold jewellery, pottery and
metal tools.
At its peak, the Indus Valley civilisation had a
population of around 5 million people.8 Yet it remained
undiscovered by archaeologists until the 1920s. A major
reason for this is that the civilisation was relatively equal.
Ancient Egyptians built the pyramids, Ancient Greeks
built the Acropolis, and Ancient Romans built the
Pantheon. Big edifices were typically a marker of vast
differences in wealth and power – what one scholar has
called the ‘monumental problem’.9 By contrast, the Indus
Valley civilisation constructed few monuments. At the
time, this served their people well, but it meant that
Indus Valley cities remained unseen for over 2000 years
after the area’s rivers dried up and the civilisation
collapsed.

The Indus Valley civilisation did not build the kinds of monuments that
signified wealth inequality in other civilisations.
Farming marked a turning point for the world economy
because it allowed communities to build up a surplus.
Storing food enabled people to eat well all year round. It
also provided an early form of insurance against famine if
the harvest failed. When people’s consumption is less
volatile than their incomes, economists say that they are
‘consumption 
smoothing’. 
Consumption 
smoothing
explains why many people in modern economies borrow
to buy a home, save for retirement and take out health
insurance. The uncertainty that plagued people’s lives in
prehistoric times must have been extremely stressful for
many citizens. Even today, the working poor in advanced
countries suffer from large swings in income from month
to month, causing considerable anxiety and making it
hard to plan for the future.
In a few places, food was plentiful enough that hunter-
gatherers could live a fulfilling life. On the western edge
of the Kalahari Desert live a group of people called the

!Kung (the exclamation point is pronounced with a click
of the tongue). The area has many mongongo trees,
whose nuts are high in protein and fat, and can be stored
for long periods. Traditionally, the average !Kung ate
around 300 nuts a day, providing about one-third of their
energy intake. As one member of the !Kung told a visitor,
‘Why should we plant [crops] when there are so many
mongongo nuts in the world?’10 But the !Kung are the
exception. In most of the world, farming meant that
people could consume more calories and be more certain
about where their next meal would come from.
The Levant, an area bordering the eastern edge of the
Mediterranean Sea, was especially promising for farmers.
Following the end of the last ice age, the Levant
experienced several long dry periods, which prompted
societies to experiment with farming. From 10,000 to
8000 BCE, farmers bred crops by selecting those with
larger seeds and a less bitter taste. The Levant, part of
what is sometimes called ‘the fertile crescent’, happened
to have several plant species that could be domesticated
(adapted for human use). These eight ‘founder crops’ –
emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, hulled barley, peas, lentils,
bitter vetch, chickpeas and flax – were essential to the
development of agriculture.11 Early farmers developed
flint knives and grindstones to assist with harvesting and
processing. 
Societies 
moved 
from 
being 
nomadic
communities 
to 
having 
settlements 
built 
around
agriculture.
The most important invention that enabled agriculture
was the plough. Breaking up the earth makes planting
easier, brings up fresh soil nutrients, and buries weeds.
Early farmers did this using sticks and hoes: not all that
different from the way you might till the soil in a garden
vegetable plot today. But the plough made it possible to
use the energy of animals to turn the soil.

Early Egyptian ploughs were scratch ploughs, akin to a
stick being pulled through the earth. During the Qin and
Han dynasties (221 BCE to 220 CE), Chinese farmers
developed the turn plough, which turns the soil upside
down, creating furrows.12 Settled agriculture was five or
six times more productive than foraging.13 The plough
brought the end of a society in which everyone’s
occupation was effectively ‘food finder’. Indeed, one
historian has argued that the entire modern world is the
result of the plough.14
Ploughs changed power dynamics too. Digging stick
agriculture is relatively gender-equal, but ploughs
require significant upper body strength to pull the plough
or control the animal that pulls it. So the plough made
farming a more male-dominated activity. The legacy of
this technology has echoed down the generations.15 In
countries where plough use was uncommon (such as
Rwanda and Madagascar), gender norms are more equal
than in countries where plough use was common (such as
Mauritania and Ethiopia). Even among immigrants who
have recently moved to advanced countries, those from
countries with a heritage of plough use are less likely to
believe that women should have jobs outside the home.
Some regions of the world were more amenable to
farming than others. Eurasia happened to have plant and
animal species that were well suited to domestication. As
we have seen, Eurasia’s native plants included variants of
barley, wheat and legumes, which could be stored for
months. Other regions had bananas and yams, which
spoiled in days. With animals, it was a similar story.
Eurasia had goats, sheep and cattle, which could be used
for meat, milk and hides. By contrast, African zebras and
Australian kangaroos are harder to tame.

It was easier to migrate within similar climates (east to west) than varied
climates (north to south).
The shape of the continents mattered too. Where
Eurasia is wide, Africa and the Americas are long. This
means that people could explore (and exploit) Eurasia
while staying in the same climatic band. Eurasia’s east–
west explorers did not have to develop new ways of
surviving in an unfamiliar environment, and their farming
innovations could spread across similar climates. But
adventurers in Africa and the Americas had the more
arduous task of travelling north–south. As geographer
Jared Diamond notes, these initial coincidences explain
why Eurasia colonised Africa, the Americas and Oceania,
rather than the other way around. Because wealth
ultimately fuelled military might, bigger agricultural
revolutions laid the groundwork for empire-building.
In theory, the agricultural revolution could have made
everyone better off. Because farming was more efficient
than hunting and gathering, it did not require the labour
of everyone in the society. For the first time, that opened
the possibility for people to specialise as craftspeople and
builders. Farming enabled cities, where people invented

new tools and traded in flourishing markets. The Indus
Valley civilisation might be the best example in history of
a community where settled agriculture led to shared
prosperity.
Unfortunately, the agricultural revolution also created
the potential for less benign rulers to emerge. Hunter-
gatherers were mobile, which meant that nobody owned
much property. By contrast, farming created surpluses.
This made it possible for leaders to enrich themselves
and 
their families, extracting resources from 
the
population to fund a repressive army. In many societies,
rulers won power by force, and used fear to keep the
population in check.
The societies that emerged from the agricultural
revolution were often highly unstable. During its 500-year
history, the Roman Empire had seventy-seven emperors.
Half were murdered, and still more died in battle or by
suicide.16 Just one-third of Roman emperors died from
natural causes. In one exceptionally brutal eighteen-
month period, Nero died by suicide, Galba was murdered,
Otho died by suicide and Vitellius was murdered. On the
battlefield, war was sometimes fought Bellum Romanum
– an all-out approach that involved destroying crops,
raping women and enslaving or executing captives. Given
the choice, the victims of Rome’s brutal expansion might
have preferred to forego the benefits of the agricultural
revolution and remain hunter-gatherers.
Another unexpected downside of settled agriculture
was that diets tended to be less diverse. Hunter-
gatherers consumed a broad range of berries, nuts and
animals, while people in farming communities often got
most of their calories from just a few starchy plants. One
study, based on examining skeletal remains before and
after the agricultural revolution, estimates that average
heights dropped by about 10 centimetres (4 inches).17

Hobbes was right that life was ‘short’ in the state of
nature, but the initial effect of the agricultural revolution
was a shorter population.
At first, the agricultural revolution increased rates of
malnutrition, crowded people into disease-ridden cities
and worsened inequality. Yet it also enabled innovators,
who ultimately laid the foundation for people to have
longer and more enjoyable lives than those of our stone
age ancestors.18 Just as agriculture created the potential
for capricious dictators to arise, it also produced an
environment in which people could think about improving
themselves and the world around them.
An intellectual elite had time to tinker with ideas, build
models and develop fresh ways of engaging with the
world. Ancient Mesopotamia made breakthroughs in
mathematics, maps, writing and sailing boats. Ancient
Egypt innovated in art, writing and architecture. The
Mayan civilisation made discoveries in astronomy and
record-keeping. The Ancient Greeks achieved advances in
science, technology, literature and democracy. There was
even an early welfare state. From 98 to 272 CE, Rome
had a program known as the alimenta, which provided
food and subsidised education to orphans and poor
children. But it helped only a fraction of those in need,
and was terminated by Emperor Aurelian.
Where a society put its inventive energies varied
enormously. To construct the Great Pyramid of Giza
around 2600 BCE required use of trigonometry and
Pythagoras’ theorem. It remained the world’s tallest
building for the next 3,800 years. Yet Ancient Egyptians
did not invent the wheel – they relied instead on tens of
thousands of workers, who hauled stone blocks from
quarries on sledges. The rulers of Ancient Rome built
aqueducts and beautiful high-domed buildings. Yet they
did not widely adopt the waterwheel or the windmill, and

it was not until after the fall of the Roman Empire that
watermills became commonplace across Europe.19
Why didn’t the remarkable thinkers of this era pay
more attention to labour-saving devices? Economics
provides an answer. When labour costs are low, there is
less incentive to invest in technologies that make workers
more efficient. In our modern era, European restaurants
invested in electronic ordering systems decades before
restaurants in the United States. The reason was simple:
hiring waiting staff is costlier in Europe, so firms have an
incentive to make them as productive as possible.
THE ECONOMICS OF RELIGION
The period of classical antiquity saw the start of the three Abrahamic
religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. One reason for their rise goes
back to a key insight from economics: that competition benefits
consumers, by encouraging greater innovation. So it is no coincidence
that these faiths emerged in an era of intense religious competition.
The same forces shape religion in the modern age. Churchgoing rates
are higher in North America (with robust competition between
denominations) than in Scandinavian countries (where churches often
have a government-granted monopoly). Noting the relationship between
diversity and religiosity, US president Thomas Jefferson quipped that in
matters of religion, the maxim should be ‘Divided we stand, united, we
fall.’20
When it comes to religion, competition boosts participation.

Economists also observe that the strict requirements of many religions
– including restrictions on food, clothing and social mixing – have an
economic purpose. Without such rules, it would be easy for outsiders to
slip into the group and enjoy its benefits without paying the cost. Five out
of six people in the world today are religious.21 Over the lifecycle, people
tend to become less religious, but because religious parents have more
children, the world is projected to become more religious over the coming
decades. Theologically moderate religions tend to have more lapsed
members, while theologically conservative religions tend to have the
highest birthrates. Thus the fastest-growing religions tend to be those
with the strictest doctrines.
Likewise, when the innovators of Ancient Egypt and
Ancient Rome were considering the most pressing
technology problems, they did so in a society where much
of the work was carried out by enslaved people. With so
many in bondage, the ruling class didn’t have much
interest in raising the output of the enslaved class.
Slavery in the Ancient world wasn’t just morally wrong –
it also reduced the incentive to make people more
productive.
Similar issues arose in Ancient China, where an
abundance of workers muted the incentive to exploit new
innovations. The Chinese were well ahead of their
European counterparts in the manufacture of silk cloth,
the production of items made of bronze and steel, and the
use of paper for writing. The magnetic compass was
invented in China around the fourth to the second
century BCE. Yet these inventions did not transform the
economy in the ways that might have been expected. In
Ancient China, aristocrats dominated the ruling elite, and
the prevailing view was one of disdain for merchants and
commerce. As a result, innovations in metalwork were
largely in weapons and artworks, not practical tools.22
The invention of the compass did not turn China into a
leading maritime power. Economic success requires more
than inventions. It also takes the right institutions for
inventions to change lives.

One invention that emerged in many ancient societies
was money. Money has three qualities. First, it is a unit of
account, providing a common language to express the
value of different items. Rather than saying that two cows
are worth one axe, we can say that both are worth one
silver coin. Second, it is a store of value, allowing wealth
to be held in a form that does not rot or die. Third, it is a
medium of exchange, simplifying commerce between
people who might want to buy two cows, but don’t have
an axe to offer in exchange.
Money emerged in different forms. In Ancient Greece,
coins were produced between 700 and 600 BCE, and
came to be known as drachma, meaning ‘a handful’.23 In
the Ancient Olympics, winners received prizes of up to
1,000 drachma to accompany their olive wreaths.24 The
Romans were relatively late in producing currency, but
when they began making silver coins in 269 BCE near the
temple of Juno Moneta, some bore the word ‘Moneta’,
which gave us the word money.
Coins provided a straightforward way to pay for daily
items. Coins could be carried in a pouch while travelling.
They were an essential aspect of the sprawling Roman
Empire. Sometimes the first people knew of a new
emperor was when they saw his image on a coin.
But coins are not the only possible form of money. On
the Yap islands in Micronesia, stone sculptures were used
as money. The largest of these stones was 3.6 metres (12
feet) in diameter. It was not moved when it changed
ownership – instead the Yapese kept the stone in place
and everyone in the community took note of the new
owner. This made large stone sculptures inconvenient for
commerce, but it is not as unusual as it sounds. In
modern times, central banks sometimes hold gold in their
vaults. When the gold is sold, it often involves just a

change in an electronic ledger, without the physical gold
moving at all. The Yapese would appreciate it.
Yapese stone money made from carved limestone.
Whether in the form of sculptures or coins, a common
feature of money in this era was that it had inherent
value. In some cases, merchants would issue promissory
notes to one another, but money was made of something
precious. This would change around 1000, when the
Chinese government became the first in the world to
issue paper money – inherently worthless pieces of paper
that represented a promise of value.
Another aspect of economic development was the
increase in trade volumes between regions. As we have
seen in the case of the Indus Valley civilisation,
specialisation within a society led to the production of
new goods, such as clothes and tools. That in turn led to

specialisation between societies, which is the basis for
trade. When one society is comparatively better at
producing a product or service, then it can potentially
benefit from trade.
Wait, why did I write comparatively better, rather than
just better? To see this, let’s go back to specialisation in
the workforce. Suppose that the best pottery maker in
the village is also the best baker. Now imagine that she is
ten times better than the next person at pottery, but only
twice as good at baking. In this example, the output of
the community will be greatest if she spends all her time
doing pottery, and buys her bread from someone else.
What holds for our master potter also applies to
countries, cities and regions. Imagine that Ancient China
produced both silk and gold more cheaply than Ancient
Rome, but that the Chinese were ten times more efficient
at producing silk, and only twice as efficient at mining
gold. In that case, it might make sense for China to
export silk and import gold. Trade along the Silk Road
depended only on comparative advantage, not absolute
advantage. Even a country that produces everything
more efficiently than its neighbours can gain from trade.
Yet there’s a reason that even modern societies do not
import heavy, low-value products such as gravel. When
the cost of transport is high, relative to the value of the
products being moved, trade becomes uneconomic. Even
after the invention of the wheel, the poor quality of most
roads meant that it was usually easier to strap loads onto
the backs of horses and camels than to move them on
carts. Consequently, most land trade was confined to
products such as wine, olive oil, precious stones, valuable
metals and rare spices. Around 300 CE, the price of a
wagonload of wheat doubled if it was transported 500
kilometres (about 300 miles).25

Notes
1.
 Carina Schlebusch, Helena Malmström, Torsten Günther, Per Sjödin,
et al., 2017, ‘Southern African ancient genomes estimate modern
human divergence to 350,000 to 260,000 years ago’, Science
358(6363): 652–5.
2.
 Nicholas R. Longrich, 2020, ‘When did we become fully human? What
fossils and DNA tell us about the evolution of modern intelligence’,
The Conversation, 9 September.
3.
 David Baker, 2022, The Shortest History of the World, Black Inc.,
Melbourne, p. 110.
4.
 Caleb E. Finch, 2010, ‘Evolution of the human lifespan and diseases
of aging: Roles of infection, inflammation, and nutrition’, Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 107, suppl 1: 1718–24.
5.
 Steven Pinker, 2011, The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence
Has Declined, Viking, New York. Another paper puts the figure at 2
per cent, which is still considerably higher than in modern times:
Mark Pagel, 2016, ‘Lethal violence deep in the human lineage’, Nature
538(7624): 180–1.
6.
 Paul Salopek, 2018, ‘Cities of silence’, National Geographic, 31
August.
7.
 Ibid.
8.
 Hetalben Sindhav, 2016, ‘The Indus Valley Civilisation (Harappan
Civilisation)’, International Journal of Social Impact 1(2): 69–75.
9.
 Philip Coggan, 2020, More: A History of the World Economy from the
Iron Age to the Information Age, Hachette, New York, p. 26.
10.
 Jeremy Cherfas, 1989, ‘Nuts to the desert’, New Scientist, 19 August,
pp. 44–7.
11.
 Melinda A. Zeder, 2011, ‘The origins of agriculture in the Near East’,
Current Anthropology 52 (S4): S221–S235.
12.
 Shuanglei Wu, Yongping Wei, Brian Head, Yan Zhao and Scott Hann,
2019, ‘The development of ancient Chinese agricultural and water
technology from 8000 BC to 1911 AD’, Palgrave Communications 5(1):
1–16.
13.
 Tim Harford, 2017, ‘How the plough made the modern economy
possible’, BBC World Service, 50 Things That Made the Modern
Economy, 27 November.
14.
 James Burke, 1978, Connections, Macmillan, London, p. 12.
15.
 Alberto Alesina, Paola Giuliano and Nathan Nunn, 2013, ‘On the
origins of gender roles: Women and the plough’, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 128(2): 469–530.
16.
 François Pieter Retief and Louise Cilliers, 2006, ‘Causes of death
among the Caesars (27 BC – AD 476)’ Acta Theologica 26(2): 89–106.

17.
 Average height went down from 5’10” (178 cm) for men and 5’6”
(168 cm) for women to 5’5” (165 cm) and 5’1” (155 cm): Michael
Hermanussen and Fritz Poustka, 2003, ‘Stature of early Europeans’,
Hormones (Athens) 2(3): 175–8.
18.
 The difference between the short-term and long-term impacts of the
agricultural revolution is why Jared Diamond is wrong to describe it as
the worst mistake of the human race: Jared Diamond, 1999, ‘The
worst mistake in the history of the human race’, Discover Magazine, 1
May. For example, without the agricultural revolution, it is unlikely
that the world would have had the benefit of Diamond’s brilliant
writings.
19.
 Between the sixth and tenth centuries, watermills were widely
adopted across Europe. By the time William the Conqueror carried out
his ‘Domesday Book’ survey of England in 1086, he found an average
of almost two watermills for every English village: Rondo Cameron,
1989, A Concise Economic History of the World: From Paleolithic
Times to the Present, Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford,
p. 71.
20.
 Laurence Iannaccone, 1998, ‘Introduction to the economics of
religion’, Journal of Economic Literature, 36(3): 1465–95.
21.
 Pew Research Center, 2017, The Changing Global Religious
Landscape, PEW Research Center, Washington DC.
22.
 Cameron, 1989, p. 83.
23.
 Donald Kagan, 1982, ‘The dates of the earliest coins’, American
Journal of Archaeology 86(3): 343–60.
24.
 Neil Faulkner, 2012, A Visitor’s Guide to the Ancient Olympics, Yale
University Press, New Haven, CT, p. 126.
25.
 This estimate is based on edicts issued by Roman Emperor Diocletian,
who ruled from 284 to 305 CE. See Coggan, 2020, p. 32.

2
THE GRAND CANAL, THE PRINTING PRESS AND
THE PLAGUE
given that water covers more than two-thirds of our
planet’s surface, the planet should perhaps be called
‘water’ rather than ‘earth’. For millennia, humans have
travelled by water, in boats powered by oars, sails or
both. Moving goods on water was cheaper than
transporting them by land. This made rivers and oceans
more important to commerce than roads. Chinese rulers
in the Sui dynasty (581 to 618 CE) built the Grand Canal,
the longest canal or artificial river in the world. At more
than 1600 kilometres (1000 miles) in length, it connects
the Yellow River and the Yangtse River. The original
impetus for constructing the canal was so that the
government in Beijing could collect grain levied as
taxes.1
But the canal also helped spur trade between
provinces, and contributed to the economic engagement
and cosmopolitan openness that saw China thrive during
the Tang dynasty (618 to 907 CE). The closure of the
Grand Canal in the 1800s (due to severe storms and the
rise of sea shipping) caused economic hardship and social
unrest 
in 
surrounding 
provinces, 
reflecting 
how
important it was.2 Today the Grand Canal is less famous
than the Great Wall, but it was more significant
economically. The construction of the Grand Canal
boosted prosperity, encouraged travel and improved
political stability. By the year 1000, Chinese living

standards were higher than in England; converted into
today’s currency, the average daily income per person
was US$3.36 in China, compared with US$3.15 in
England.3
Around the world, the importance of water travel
meant that the most successful cities were coastal,
ideally with deep-water ports that allowed ships to
shelter from a storm. Lisbon, Alexandria and Athens were
among the cities that prospered in the golden age of
maritime transport. Port cities became financial centres.
In Genoa, moneychangers stored the coins of merchants,
settled debts by moving money between accounts, and
provided loans to finance new voyages.4
In Venice, a novel form of risk sharing called the
colleganza allowed poorer merchants to finance sea
voyages by agreeing to share the profits with investors.5
The system created a pathway to upward mobility for
merchants, and by the early 1300s, Venice was a world
banking centre. Then Venice’s established families closed
the colleganza off to commoners, entrenching their
position at the top of the economic hierarchy. Patronage
replaced merit. This contributed to Venice losing its
position as a leader in global commerce, and suffering a
series of military defeats. Innovation and egalitarianism
were replaced by insider cronyism – and Venetians were
poorer for it.
SOCIAL MOBILITY
Under China’s ancient fēngjiàn system, India’s traditional caste system
and European medieval feudalism, a person’s position in society was
determined from birth. Mobility across generations was limited, because a
child’s social status was a function of their parents’ status.
Most people in modern capitalist societies are appalled by such a rigid
class system. People across the ideological spectrum prize social mobility
– the idea that anyone can ‘make it’. Yet in practice, countries differ
considerably in the degree to which children’s outcomes are related to

those of their parents. The highest levels of mobility tend to be found in
Scandinavia, while the lowest are in Latin America.
One reason for this is that inequality (the gap between rich and poor) is
strongly related to mobility (the relationship between incomes of parent
and child). We can think of this using the analogy of a ladder, with
inequality represented as the gap between the rungs, and mobility as the
chance that someone climbs up or down. When the rungs are further
apart, less climbing takes place. This has become known as ‘the Great
Gatsby Curve’.6 
Because 
Latin 
America 
is 
more 
unequal 
than
Scandinavia, it is also less mobile.
Until now, we’ve been discussing social mobility across a single
generation. But another approach makes it possible to look across
multiple generations, to test for the persistence of dynasties. To
understand long-term patterns of social mobility, economist Gregory Clark
uses rare surnames to test whether societies are fluid or static.7 Take the
case of Samuel Pepys (1633–1703), the diarist who served as secretary of
the English Admiralty. In the past five centuries, people with the surname
Pepys have attended Oxford and Cambridge universities at a rate at least
twenty times that of the general population. Where we can observe the
value of their estates, Pepyses left wealth at least five times the British
average. Only in a society with extremely low levels of social mobility
would we expect a name to persist among the elites in this way.
Rare elite surnames endure in other countries too. United States tax
authorities reported the names of top income earners in the early 1920s.
A century later, people with those surnames are three to four times as
likely to be doctors or lawyers. United States residents with the high-

status surname Katz, for example, are six times as likely to be doctors
and lawyers.
In Japan, samurai surnames date back to before the 1868 Meiji
Restoration. In the modern age, they are overrepresented at least fourfold
among doctors, lawyers and scholarly authors. In China, Qing surnames
overrepresented 
among 
the 
nineteenth-century 
elite 
are 
also
overrepresented among contemporary corporate board chairs and
government officials.
In Chile, surnames overrepresented among landowners in the 1850s
are still overrepresented among high-earning occupations. In Sweden, a
set of ‘noble surnames’ were created in the 1600s and 1700s. In the
current era, those names have twice their expected share of doctors and
five times their expected share of lawyers. Social status is remarkably
persistent, even over ten generations.
Another city whose fortune was shaped by the shipping
trade was Bruges, located on the Zwin estuary. The city
was so affluent in 1301 that when the Queen of France
visited, she remarked, ‘I thought I alone was queen, but I
see that I have six hundred rivals here.’8 Two centuries
later, when the Zwin estuary silted up, Bruges’s economy
withered. The region’s commercial centre moved 80
kilometres (50 miles) west, to Antwerp, where ships
could dock easily. Eventually, wits suggested that
‘Bruges-La-Mer’ be renamed ‘Bruges-La-Morte’.
Trade and migration were at their most valuable when
they brought new ideas, and products that could be
replicated. Reading glasses were invented in Italy around
1290, and quickly spread across Europe. Traders brought
maize to China in the 1300s (and later, sweet potatoes),
providing staple food sources in regions that did not get
enough rainfall to sustain rice; this led to rapid
population growth in the ensuing centuries.9 The
moveable-type printing press was invented in Germany
around 1440, and kickstarted the printing revolution.
More books were produced in the next fifty years than
had been produced in the previous thousand years.10
Economists describe physical goods as ‘rivalrous’ and
ideas as ‘non-rivalrous’. When I hand over three apples to

you, I no longer have three apples. But if I teach you to
juggle apples, then we both share the fun (particularly if
we don’t mind eating bruised apples). The idea of non-
rivalry is essential to how economists think about
innovation. In the case of reading glasses and the
printing press, neither innovation was protected by
intellectual property laws. This was a boon for consumers
because it meant that others could copy, adapt and
improve them. But the ability to freely copy reduced the
incentive to invent. Over the coming centuries – starting
with Venice’s patent statute of 1474 – countries put in
place patent laws, which gave inventors a temporary
monopoly in exchange for sharing their idea.
The dispersion of knowledge also got a boost from one
of the key social changes of this period: the Reformation.
When Martin Luther and his followers split off from the
Catholic Church, they encouraged their adherents to read
the Bible for themselves. This boosted literacy levels and
helped fuel economic development in Protestant areas of
Germany. Indeed, even in modern-day Germany – 500
years after Luther – Protestants tend to be more
educated and have higher incomes.11
In the Middle Ages – the period from the fifth century
to the fifteenth century – religion also affected economic
development in other ways. Tight bonds of trust among
Jewish communities made them ideally placed to succeed
in the moneylending and money-transfer business, which
was both profitable and stigmatised. From its inception in
610 
CE, 
Islam 
was 
closely 
connected 
to 
trade
(Mohammed was a merchant), and trust between
Muslims helped to increase commerce in Islamic
communities.12 Economics also helps explain religious
wars. Aside from recapturing Jerusalem, the First
Crusade (1096–1099) can also be seen as an attempt by

the Catholic Church to expand its monopoly over new
territories.13
During the Middle Ages, many in Europe lived under
feudalism, a system in which land was owned by the lords
and farmed by the peasantry. In effect, peasants fed the
nobility in exchange for protection against bandits. There
were few chances to move up the hierarchy, and the
clergy maintained the social order.
It was not uncommon for artisans to literally carve
their prices in stone on the wall, knowing that their rates
would not change much from one generation to the next.
There were some technological changes (such as the
proliferation of watermills we noted earlier), but life
remained tough. Even by the end of the Middle Ages,
most people would have eaten a plain diet, with only
occasional meat and fish to supplement unappetising
stews and unvarying starchy grains. There were no
printed books, most homes had little furniture, and no
one had running water. An infected scratch could lead to
death, and illness was common. One in three babies died
before their first birthday, and childbirth claimed the life
of one-third of mothers.14
The worst bacteria was yersinia pestis, dubbed the
Black Death. The bubonic plague originated in Central
Asia and was brought to Europe in 1347 by Genoese
traders sailing from the Black Sea. It killed around one-
third of Europe’s population – a higher toll than even the
most brutal wars. In Cairo, it killed half the population.
Muslims making the hajj brought the disease to Mecca in
1349. In cities, proximity accelerated the spread of the
disease, so people fled to the countryside. Among the
most famous accounts is Giovanni Boccaccio's The
Decameron, a collection of stories centred upon ten
young people who flee Florence – a city where three-
quarters of the population may have died. From 1300 to

1400, the world population shrank from 430 million to
350 million.
'Lord have mercy on London': a woodcut depicting the Black Death.
The Black Death also provides a dramatic illustration
of economics in action.15 A scarcity of workers doubled
European real wages (that is, wages after inflation).
Suddenly land was relatively abundant, so rents declined.
This helped shift the power balance in favour of peasants
and against landowners. To a large extent, the plague
killed feudalism. The Black Death also affected prices.
Over the long run, simple foodstuffs such as wheat
became cheaper, as higher-cost farms ceased production.
Manufactured goods that required a lot of labour became
more expensive. With wages rising and land rents falling,
farmers shifted their production towards land-intensive
agriculture, 
such 
as 
cattle 
and 
sheep 
farming.

Responding to the increase in their incomes, workers
started to eat more meat. There was a growing demand
for beer, a marker of living standards in this era.
Growth in Europe may have been slow by today’s
standards, but by the 1400s, it was the most affluent
region of the globe. As we have seen, Europe’s success
was rooted in luck. Compared with Africa and the
Americas, Eurasia had more domesticable plants and
animals, and its wide geography allowed people to range
further while staying in the same climatic band.
Notes
1.
 Cameron, 1989, p. 83.
2.
 Yiming Cao and Shuo Chen, 2022, ‘Rebel on the canal: Disrupted
trade access and social conflict in China, 1650–1911’, American
Economic Review, 112(5): 1555–90.
3.
 These figures are in 2011 US dollars and are drawn from Jutta Bolt
and Jan Luiten van Zanden, 2020, ‘Maddison style estimates of the
evolution of the world economy. A new 2020 update’, Maddison
Project Database, University of Groningen, Groningen.
4.
 Niall Kishtainy, 2017, A Little History of Economics, Yale University
Press, New Haven, p. 17.
5.
 Diego Puga and Daniel Trefler, 2014, ‘International trade and
institutional change: Medieval Venice’s response to globalization’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(2): 753–821.
6.
 Miles Corak, 2013, ‘Inequality from generation to generation’, in
Robert Rycroft (ed.), The Economics of Inequality, Poverty, and
Discrimination in the 21st Century, ABC-CLIO, Santa Barbara, CA, pp.
107–26.
7.
 Gregory Clark, 2014, The Son Also Rises: Surnames and the History
of Social Mobility, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.
8.
 Quoted in Tim Harford, 2006, The Undercover Economist, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, pp. 201–2.
9.
 Masao Uchibayashi, 2006, ‘Maize in pre-Columbian China found in
Bencao Pinhui Jingyao’, Yakugaku Zasshi: Journal of the
Pharmaceutical Society of Japan, 126(1): 27–36.
10.
 Baker, 2022, p. 157.
11.
 Sascha O. Becker and Ludger Woessmann, 2009, ‘Was Weber wrong?
A human capital theory of Protestant economic history’, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 124(2): 531–96.
12.
 Coggan, 2020, p. 57.

13.
 Gary Anderson, Robert B. Ekelund, Robert F. Hebert and Robert D.
Tollison, 1992, ‘An economic interpretation of the medieval crusades’,
Journal of European Economic History 21(2): 339–63.
14.
 Coggan, 2020, pp. 7–8.
15.
 Şevket Pamuk, 2007, ‘The Black Death and the origins of the “Great
Divergence” across Europe, 1300–1600’, European Review of
Economic History 11(3): 289–317.

3
THE AGE OF SAIL
the 
relative 
prosperity 
of 
europe 
funded 
steady
improvements in maritime technology. The ships of this
era were three-masted or ‘full-rigged’, had sturdier hulls,
and used rudders instead of steering oars. Advances in
sails made it possible to tack into the wind. Bigger ships
could make longer voyages. Better compasses, maps and
understanding of wind patterns allowed ships to follow
the fastest routes. The invention of the sea astrolabe
allowed sailors to determine their latitude.
Still, there was plenty that early explorers didn’t know.
When Christopher Columbus sailed across the Atlantic in
1492, he was expecting to reach India and China, not the
Americas (the inaccurate naming of the West Indies
reflects this mistake). Other major expeditions followed.
In 1498, Vasco da Gama established a sea route to India.
In 1519, Ferdinand Magellan began an expedition that
would be the first to circumnavigate the globe (though
Magellan himself did not make it home, dying in a battle
in the Philippines). Economics was at the heart of these
expeditions – explorers sought to fund their journeys with
new products, new markets and new land.
Discovering new countries and lowering the cost of
transport were both integral to the growth of trade. In
the 1500s, the ‘Columbian exchange’ brought corn,
potatoes and chillies from the Americas to Europe, and
oranges, sugar and pigs to the Americas. Tragically, it
also brought diseases such as smallpox, measles,

influenza and chickenpox to the Americas, killing more
than four-fifths of the population in some places.
Another abominable aspect of trade was the trafficking
of more than 12 million people across the Atlantic Ocean
between 1501 and 1866.1 The scale of this brutal
enterprise is mind-boggling.2 In the 1700s, Europeans
trafficked around 10 per cent of Africa’s population
across the Atlantic. Packed onto ships, underfed and
vulnerable to disease, over one in ten captured people did
not survive the journey. In slave markets, it was routine
to separate parents from their children, and spouses from
one another. An analysis of the New Orleans slave market
(the largest in the United States) estimates that more
than four-fifths of people sold were separated from
immediate family members.3
The Portuguese were responsible for almost half of all
enslaved people taken, with Brazil being the destination
for more than one-third of them. The Spanish, French and
Dutch were also prominent slave traders. In destination
colonies in the Caribbean and the Americas, enslaved
people were forced to work on labour-intensive crops –
initially sugar, then cotton and tobacco. Slave holding
was a major source of wealth in some European nations,
accounting for around 5 per cent of British national
income by the late 1700s and helping fuel the country’s
industrial development.4
During the same era, gold and silver became vital
exports. From 1500 to 1800, tens of thousands of tonnes
of silver were shipped to Spain from Mexico and Bolivia.
However, in an era of hostility between European
powers, sailors could not expect safe passage if they
encountered ships from other nations. In one incident,
English explorer-turned-pirate Francis Drake robbed a
Spanish ship carrying 36 kilograms (79 pounds) of gold

and 26 tonnes (29 US tons) of silver. He was lauded as a
hero in England and reviled as a criminal in Spain.
But perhaps Spain should not have been so outraged
by Drake’s theft, because the massive influx of gold and
silver would ultimately harm its economy.5 Precious
metals were the currency of the day, so the arrival of
ships laden with gold and silver was the equivalent of a
modern government printing too much money. Prices of
goods and services rose. Imports grew and exports
shrank. Tellingly, the region where the precious metals
arrived, 
Andalusia, 
suffered 
earliest. 
Spanish
manufacturers of ships, rope and silk found themselves
unable to compete on the world market, and their
businesses collapsed. In 1500, Spain was one of the
world’s wealthiest nations. Two centuries later, it was a
backwater. An echo of Spain’s experience is the modern-
day resource curse, in which valuable mineral assets can
end up impoverishing a nation. Among low-income
nations, those with significant resource deposits tend to
grow more slowly.
THE MEDICI
Among the most successful philanthropists in history were Italy’s Medici
family. By sponsoring a slew of artists, including Brunelleschi, Botticelli,
Da Vinci, Michelangelo and Raphael, they helped bring about the Italian
Renaissance. They supported astronomer Galileo Galilei, commissioned
Florence’s Boboli Gardens and built the Uffizi Gallery.
Originally from a village in northern Tuscany, members of the Medici
family moved to Florence in the twelfth century, making their living in the
textile trade. In 1397, the family formed the Medici Bank, which became
the largest bank in Europe. They were among the first to use double-entry
bookkeeping, and benefited from Florence’s strength in crafts, controlled
by a series of powerful guilds.

Lorenzo de’ Medici, dubbed
Lorenzo the Magnificent,
was the most significant
patron of the Italian
Renaissance.
As bankers, the Medici family had an interest in economic stability, and
formed relationships with other powerful families in Florence. Their focus
was on acquiring resources through trade, not seizing land through
military conquest. For most of the 1400s, Florence was ruled by three
generations of the Medici: Cosimo, Piero and Lorenzo.
The rule of the Medici in Florence was interrupted on two occasions
(1494–1512 and 1527–1530), but they continued to build their power
across Italy. Between 1513 and 1605, the Medici family produced four
popes of the Catholic Church – Pope Leo X, Pope Clement VII, Pope Pius IV
and Pope Leo XI. In the same era, the family also produced two queens of
France: Catherine de’ Medici and Marie de’ Medici. The family’s power
waned in the eighteenth century, but their enduring impact on art and
architecture continues to inspire wealthy patrons today.
Although European colonialists brought deadly viruses,
they were also susceptible to local diseases. Because the
risks varied dramatically, disease patterns shaped the
patterns of colonialism in the ‘Age of Discovery’.6 In the
early 1600s, the English Pilgrim Fathers considered
sailing the Mayflower to Guyana in South America, but
ultimately chose the North American coast because of the

high mortality rates in Guyana. In West Africa, malaria
and other tropical diseases claimed the lives of about half
of all European settlers in the first year after arriving –
effectively thwarting attempts to establish roads and
institutions. There was little incentive to invest in areas
where the chance of dying was so terrifyingly high.
In territories where settler mortality was relatively
low, such as what would become Canada, the US, Chile
and Australia, colonial powers invested in everything
from railways to universities. In areas where settler
mortality was high – such as in Nigeria, Angola and
Madagascar 
– 
the 
relationship 
was 
fundamentally
extractive, designed to remove as much wealth as
possible. Settlers took slaves, gold and other precious
commodities. The extractive approach reached its nadir
at the end of the colonial era, when Belgium’s King
Leopold II ruthlessly exploited the Congo: killing,
maiming and stealing from the native population. Though
nothing 
can 
excuse 
the 
barbarism 
of 
extractive
colonialism, the differing prevalence of malaria helps
explain why European settlers invested far more in the
than in West Africa, and why the trans-Atlantic slave
trade went from east to west, rather than the other way
around.
Colonialism was not always a government enterprise.
The largest company in history may well have been the
Dutch East India Company, a multinational formed in
1602 by the merger of several trading companies. Over
the next two centuries, the Dutch East India Company
maintained armed forces, built forts, concluded treaties
with native rulers and generally behaved like a colonial
power. It traded in spices, silk, coffee, sugarcane and
wine, owned hundreds of ships and employed tens of
thousands of people. With its operations centred on
Indonesia, the company had major outposts in China,
Japan, India, Sri Lanka and South Africa.

Because investors could buy shares in the Dutch East
India Company, it was the world’s first public company.
From the standpoint of investors, this was attractive
because it pooled risk. Rather than chancing everything
on a single ship, shareholders could invest a small
amount in many different shipping expeditions. Seafaring
was potentially profitable but also immensely hazardous.
Pirates, storms and scurvy could doom a voyage. Prices
might suddenly change. Just as most modern investors
prefer a broad portfolio of stocks, the investors of the
1600s preferred to put their money in a big company.
Investors also liked the fact that the Dutch East India
Company was a monopoly, with the Dutch government
granting it an exclusive power to operate in Asia on
behalf of the Netherlands. But consumers paid the price,
as the company used its market position to overcharge on
routes that it controlled.
Much the same was true of the British East India
Company, whose monopoly allowed it to mint money,
raise an army, collect taxes, run criminal trials and
transport enslaved people from Asia and Africa. In the
Indonesian Maluku Islands, then known as the Spice
Islands, conflict between the company and its Dutch
counterpart helped provoke four Anglo-Dutch wars. In
India, the power of the British East India Company was
largely unchecked. Through force of arms and treaties
with Indian provincial rulers, the British East India
Company came to control two-thirds of the Indian
subcontinent – the area that makes up modern-day India,
Pakistan and Bangladesh.7 The British East India
Company has touched our world in astonishing ways. Its
tea was dumped into Boston Harbor at the start of the
American Revolution, and conflict over its opium sales to
China sparked the Opium Wars. Tea merchant Thomas
Twining and university benefactor Elihu Yale got their

start working for the British East India Company (the
company fired Yale for corruption, and his ill-gotten gains
helped kickstart the university that bears his name).
A print depicting ships of the British East India Company leaving Woolwich.
Risk on the high seas called forth ingenious economic
solutions. In Ancient Greece, those organising a shipping
voyage sold ‘bottomry bonds’, which paid a high rate of
interest if the ship reached port, but nothing if it sank. In
1293, Portugal’s King Denis established Europe’s first
marine insurance fund, allowing merchants to organise
voyages without bearing the entire risk of catastrophe.8
The 
origins 
of 
insurance 
remain 
relevant 
today.
Insurance is most useful when it covers a ruinous risk:
the house burning down, crashing into an expensive car,
the death of a family’s sole earner. But if the cost of an
item is less than a month’s income, you’re probably
better taking the risk. Insure your home, not your mobile
phone.

Throughout history, one of the greatest risks humans
have faced is running out of resources. And if you don’t
have much money to begin with, poverty is hard to insure
against. In the Middle Ages, before social insurance, the
destitute received little help. In England, assistance for
those who were unable to work emerged from a strong
moral sense that welfare was only for the ‘deserving
poor’. In the 1500s, begging was punished by whipping,
jail, branding (with the letter ‘V’ for vagabond) and even
hanging. This left many who were unable to work with a
choice between starvation or punishment.
In France, the Moulins Ordinance of 1561 established
a system of poor relief that required local authorities to
provide assistance to the poor, while empowering
authorities to demand that able-bodied individuals work
in exchange for any aid they received. A similar
philosophy underpinned the English Poor Laws of 1601,
which provided meagre rations through parishes, but
withheld these ‘parish loaves’ from the ‘undeserving
poor’. Even when society could afford to feed those who
were starving, there was an excessive concern that
providing aid could blunt the incentive to work.
Shakespeare wrote most of his plays between 1590
and 1610. Watching Hamlet or Romeo and Juliet, the
Bard and his generation can feel close to us, grappling
with the same challenges of love, hope and betrayal.
There are even economic lessons – The Tempest reminds
us of the hazards of global commerce, The Merchant of
Venice explores the problem of enforcing contracts and
Henry IV Part 1 contains insightful observations on the
sometimes overlooked virtues of scarcity.
But in another sense, the world of Shakespeare was a
long way away. His was an age of slavery and
superstition. During the 1500s and 1600s, nearly one
million people were killed for the crime of witchcraft.

Such was the scale of the brutality that in one German
town, 400 were killed on a single day. Most of the victims
were poor women, many of them widows. In one
intriguing analysis, economist Emily Oster shows that
bad harvests were a strong predictor of witchcraft trials.9
When economic conditions deteriorated, people looked
for a scapegoat. The most active period of witchcraft
trials coincided with the coldest periods of the ‘little ice
age’: in the 1590s and between 1680 and 1730.
TULIP MANIA
Tulips were introduced to Europe from the Ottoman Empire in the mid-
1500s. Their intense colours made them unlike any flower seen in Europe
at the time. Botanists bred different varieties, creating a profusion of
colours. Horticulturalists discovered that by infecting the bulbs with the
mosaic virus, it was possible to create petals streaked with a second
colour.
With their strong financial markets, the Netherlands became the
epicentre for tulips during the 1600s. Tulip sales occurred in the dormant
phase, from June to September, when bulbs can be dug up and relocated.
As tulip mania grew, the prices of tulips infected with the mosaic virus
surged. This was not entirely irrational, since a fashionable tulip could
only be propagated by budding the infected mother bulb, not through
ordinary seed propagation. In 1625, a Semper Augustus tulip bulb sold for
2000 guilders, the modern equivalent of US$16,000.10 In 1637, prices
crashed.

The Semper
Augustus tulip
caused a stir in
1620s Europe.
The collapse of the tulip market is often referred to as one of history’s
first financial bubbles. But like all good tales, this one contains elements
of exaggeration. Economists observe that the extraordinary prices were
only paid for the scarcest bulbs (those infected with mosaic virus), and
that prices fell by around two-thirds to four-fifths over a five-year period –
not as dramatic a drop as has sometimes been reported.
Tulip mania encouraged the flowering of innovation. By the early
1700s, Dutch botanists had created many new varieties, and the hyacinth
replaced the tulip as Europe’s most fashionable flower. Unlike other
financial bubbles, tulip mania did not affect the Dutch economy, which
continued to prosper throughout this era.
Notes
1.
 Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database, at slavevoyages.org.
2.
 The slavery statistics in this paragraph and the next are from David
Baker, 2022, pp. 171–2.
3.
 ‘Family separation among slaves in America was shockingly
prevalent’, The Economist, 18 June 2022.
4.
 Stephan Heblich, Stephen Redding and Hans-Joachim Voth, 2022,
‘Slavery and the British Industrial Revolution’, NBER Working Paper
30451, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
5.
 Carlos J. Charotti, Nuno Palma and João Pereira dos Santos, 2022,
‘American treasure and the decline of Spain’, Economics Discussion
Paper Series EDP-2201, University of Manchester, Manchester.

6.
 Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson, 2001, ‘The
colonial origins of comparative development: An empirical
investigation’, American Economic Review 91(5): 1369–1401.
7.
 ‘Armies of the East India Company’, National Army Museum website,
www.nam.ac.uk/explore/armies-east-india-company (undated).
8.
 John Brande Trend, 1957, Portugal, Praeger, New York, p. 103.
9.
 Emily Oster, 2004, ‘Witchcraft, weather and economic growth in
Renaissance Europe’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(1): 215–28.
10.
 Peter Garber, 1990, ‘Famous first bubbles’, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 4(2): 35–54.

4
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION AND THE WEALTH
OF NATIONS
in the sweep of human history, rising living standards are a
relatively new phenomenon. As we have seen, the
agricultural revolution enabled populations to expand,
but the material circumstances for most people barely
changed. In Japan, the average real income was US$2.80
a day in 1000, and US$2.90 a day in 1700.1 This was not
an exceptional story: it would have been unusual in this
era for children to live more prosperous lives than their
parents. Indeed, one economic historian goes further,
arguing that in the 1700s most of the world’s population
lived lives that were no better than their ancestors’ on
the African savannah.2 They were no taller, their life
expectancy was no longer, and they consumed no more
calories. The tea-sippers who populate Jane Austen’s
novels were the rare exception in a world where poverty
was the norm. Mostly, economic growth had led to a
bigger population, not a better standard of living.
All that changed with the industrial revolution. Since
then, life expectancy at birth has doubled, real incomes
have increased fourteen-fold, and average heights have
increased by around 10 centimetres (4 inches).3 In the
modern economy, we expect growth to deliver higher
living standards with each successive generation. But
before the industrial revolution, economic growth was
patchy and slow.

Economist Robert Allen argues that the best way of
understanding the industrial revolution is as a set of
interlocking revolutions.4 English agriculture was highly
productive, thanks to selective plant breeding, improved
soil tillage, and rotation of crops. Because fewer people
were required to produce food, England experienced an
‘urban revolution’, with one-quarter of the population
living in cities by 1750. Urbanisation, in turn, fuelled a
‘commercial revolution’: a product of the dense social
networks in London and other English cities. Imports and
exports grew rapidly, and private banks emerged to
facilitate 
the 
shipping 
trade. 
Cities 
also 
enabled
innovation. As economist Alfred Marshall would later
note, physical proximity creates something ‘in the air’ –
an environment in which new ideas are rapidly shared
and improved. Just as technology firms today are more
productive in Silicon Valley, industrialists were more
productive in the English cities of the industrial
revolution.
Among 
the 
interlocking 
revolutions, 
the 
most
important was technological. During the 1700s, ‘a wave
of gadgets swept over England’.5 James Hargreaves’s
spinning jenny let workers spin multiple threads,
eventually making the process of producing cotton thread
100 times more efficient in a single generation.6 The iron
industry was transformed by using coke rather than
charcoal, the puddling process to produce bar iron, and
larger blast furnaces. Thomas Newcomen invented the
steam engine in 1712, and James Watt refined it in the
1760s and 1770s. England’s abundant coal reserves were
important to the success of steam and began contributing
to the build-up of atmospheric carbon that we now know
causes climate change.

James Watt's coal-powered steam engine, patented in 1769.
‘General-purpose technologies’ are innovations that
can supercharge economic development, but often take
time to have an impact. Coal-powered steam engines
ultimately revolutionised factories, transformed shipping
and 
enabled 
train 
travel. 
Yet 
it 
took 
time 
for
manufacturers to make the most of coal power. When
James Watt’s patent expired in 1800, British factories
were still using three times as much water power as coal
power.7 The first major railway line – from Liverpool to
Manchester – did not open until 1830. It was not until the
middle of the century that half the growth in Britain’s
labour productivity was due to coal. One reason the
industrial revolution lasted such a long time is that it took
almost a century for people to properly harness coal.

The same pattern can be seen with other general-
purpose technologies. The electric motor was invented in
the 1880s, but its productivity gains only came in the
1920s, when assembly lines were reconfigured to use
them effectively. Similarly, millions of us bought personal
computers in the early 1980s, but the productivity gains
from the new devices didn’t come until the late 1990s,
when office work was reconfigured around computers.
When it comes to coal power, electric motors and
computers, general-purpose technologies underwhelm in
the short run and dazzle in the long run.
Institutions were vital to the industrial revolution.
Capital markets allowed investors to raise funds.
Insurance markets allowed them to hedge risk. In Britain,
the currency was relatively stable and law courts were
relatively 
independent. 
The 
power 
of 
the 
British
monarchy was constrained, and its parliamentarians were
generally 
well 
disposed 
towards 
industry 
and
entrepreneurship. This created a fertile environment for
risk-taking and long-term investment.8
Modern economics emerged from the same crucible as
the industrial revolution. On 8 March 1776, James Watt’s
first profitable dual-cylinder steam engine entered the
market.9
The 
next 
day 
another 
Scotsman, 
Adam 
Smith,
published The 
Wealth 
of 
Nations, 
a 
foundational
economics text. The Wealth of Nations was the product of
a startlingly original mind. Smith went to the University
of Glasgow at age fourteen, then began his postgraduate
work at Oxford’s Balliol College, starting at age
seventeen. Smith’s nonconformist thinking may have
been shaped by his Oxford experience. As one biographer
wrote, his college was ‘Jacobite, Tory, factional, costly
and Scotophobic; and Adam Smith was Presbyterian,
Whiggish, sociable, impecunious and a Scot’.10 Smith was

passionate and eccentric. He is said to have once walked
out of his house in his dressing gown, thinking about
economics, and only realised his error when he reached
the next town, 19 kilometres (12 miles) away. On another
occasion, he apparently fell into a tanning pit while
animatedly discussing free trade.11
The Wealth of Nations begins with a description of a
pin factory. Working alone, Smith argued, a worker
would be lucky to make one pin a day. But a team of ten
people, specialising in different parts of pin-making,
could produce 4,800 pins per person per day. He also
showed how people’s apparent self-interest can be
socially beneficial in a market system, noting that, ‘It is
not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or
the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their
regard to their own interest.’ Markets play a powerful
coordinating role. That’s why you’re more likely to see
shortages of meat, beer and bread in a communist
economy than a capitalist economy.
Smith didn’t think that markets were perfect. Unlike
some of the economists who would follow him, he was
worried about monopolies, the excessive influence of
business on politics, and collusion between companies.
‘People of the same trade seldom meet together,’ he
wrote ‘but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against
the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices.’ At the
time, there was little to prevent companies colluding
against the public interest, exploiting their market power
to raise prices well above the cost of production, and co-
opting government into passing laws that deterred new
entrants.
Just as the industrial revolution was beginning,
political revolutions were occurring on both sides of the
Atlantic. The American Declaration of Independence
(1776) and the French Revolution (beginning in 1789)

had their origins in the principle of individual liberty. Just
as markets aggregate individual preferences into prices
and quantities, democratic elections aggregate individual
preferences to choose governments. More than two
centuries on, the evidence is clear: living standards are
higher in market economies than controlled economies.
Likewise, democracies tend to be richer, and spend more
on health and education. Never in history have two fully
democratic countries gone to war.12
Free markets and democracy don’t always go together,
but there’s a certain synergy between them. The collapse
of feudalism showed people that they could choose their
own 
careers. 
As 
they 
gained 
more 
economic
independence, it was natural that people also wanted a
say in choosing their own governments.
Yet these were also war-ravaged times. For two
decades, from 1792 to 1815, the French waged a series
of conflicts – known as the Revolutionary and Napoleonic
Wars – against a rolling series of European adversaries.
By the time of Napoleon’s final defeat in 1815, millions of
men had been killed. Such expensive conflicts also had
macroeconomic consequences. Like many governments
since, the British government in the 1790s decided to pay
for its armaments by printing more banknotes. Since
1717, Britain had operated under a gold standard, which
allowed holders of banknotes to exchange them for gold.
Having massively increased the money supply, the British
government temporarily suspended the right of banknote
holders to exchange them for gold and increased the
price level by 59 per cent over three years. A disparaging
cartoon led critics to call the Bank of England ‘the Old
Lady’, a name that persists today.13 The gold standard
would be largely abandoned during the Great Depression,
partially 
reinstated 
in 
the 
1944 
Bretton 
Woods
Agreement, and permanently dumped in the early 1970s.

James Gillray’s cartoon satirising the government’s financial policy led people
to call the Bank of England ‘the Old Lady’.
Economic thinking of this time had its roots in
philosophy. ‘It is the greatest happiness of the greatest
number’, wrote philosopher Jeremy Bentham in 1776,
‘that is the measure of right and wrong’. Bentham is
generally 
regarded 
as 
the 
founder 
of 
modern
utilitarianism – the notion that if we have a choice, we
should prefer the outcome that produces the greatest
good for the greatest number of people.
Utilitarianism can seem obvious at times. If a ship is
sinking, and you can safely fit twice as many people on
the lifeboats, then the outcome is twice as good. But
utilitarianism 
can 
also 
produce 
uncomfortable
conclusions. With a train bearing down upon five people,
would you flick a switch to send it on a track where it
would kill one person instead? If you were in a medical

centre, with five people about to die because they needed
a different organ, would you harvest the necessary body
parts from the next healthy person to walk in the door?
Despite its occasionally discomforting implications,
utilitarianism is the main framework of thinking that
economists use today. Building on the work of Bentham,
English economist William Stanley Jevons brought an
increasingly mathematical approach, explaining the
notion of diminishing marginal utility. Anyone who’s
enjoyed the first glass of water on a hot day more than
the second glass has experienced diminishing marginal
utility. This simple principle has surprisingly wide
implications. It explains why most people prefer a varied
diet and enjoy travelling to different places. Across
people, diminishing marginal utility can be used to make
the case for progressive taxes and social welfare. If a
dollar brings more happiness to a labourer than a
billionaire, then redistribution can improve overall utility.
The labourer might use the money to visit a dentist, while
the billionaire might choose slightly better upholstery on
their private jet.
English philosopher John Stuart Mill shaped the notion
of Homo economicus: modelling people as seeking to
maximise wellbeing.14 Mill also helped introduce the
notion of opportunity cost – the value of the next best
thing that you give up. For example, working an
overnight shift has a higher opportunity cost than
working a day shift. Overnights mean missing out on a
regular night’s sleep and time socialising with friends
and family. Likewise, taking time off work to study a full-
time Master of Business Administration comes at the
opportunity cost of lost earnings. Opportunity cost can
also be a helpful way of making decisions. For example, if
you’re undecided about an expensive purchase, a handy
rule of thumb is to compare it with the next best way you

might spend that amount of money. Perhaps the
opportunity cost of buying that stylish outfit is not seeing
your favourite band in concert.
Intellectual developments of the time were shaped by
the inventions of the age. In 1835, German chemist Justus
von Liebig invented the modern mirror, by depositing a
thin layer of silver onto glass. For the first time in history,
people could accurately see what they looked like. As
historian Steven Johnson notes, ‘Before mirrors came
along, the average person went through life without ever
seeing a truly accurate representation of his or her face,
just fragmentary, distorted glances in pools of water or
polished metals.’15 Mirrors enabled artists to paint self-
portraits. They created a more self-centred world, which
helped fuel modern capitalism and the market system. In
turn, this led to more sales of mirrors.
Clocks also reshaped society. With the invention of the
pendulum, clocks became more accurate than sundials,
and household clocks began to proliferate. Watches
became considerably more accurate with the invention of
the balance spring. Inventors added a minute hand
(which previously wasn’t sufficiently accurate to bother
with) as the precision of their timekeeping devices
improved. This allowed factories to set shift schedules
with a reasonable expectation that workers would show
up on time. It facilitated train travel, which relied on
timetables. Accurate timekeeping was also a boon to sea
travel, since ocean chronometers made it possible to
determine a ship’s longitude. Quality clocks accelerated
the 
transition 
from 
cottage 
production 
to 
mass
production, from home schooling to public schooling, and
from the irregular rhythms of the pre-industrial era to the
discipline of the industrial age.16
Not everyone was excited by the new inventions that
underpinned the industrial revolution. In 1811, a group of

aggrieved textile workers met in secret and wrote to
factory owners under the pen name ‘Ned Ludd’,
threatening to smash mechanical knitting machines if
they continued to be used. Thousands joined their cause.
Legend had it that Ned Ludd lived in Sherwood Forest,
like Robin Hood. The Luddites even received support
from poet Lord Byron, who used his first speech to the
House of Lords to argue that the Luddites were ‘honest
and industrious’, and that their violence was a product of
‘the most unparalleled distress’. His was a minority view.
The British government passed laws making machine-
breaking a capital offence, and mobilised so many
soldiers against them that at one point there were more
troops fighting the Luddites than battling Napoleon.
Hundreds of Luddites were transported to Australia for
their crimes.

An engraving depicting Ned Ludd, the
fictional figurehead for the Luddite
movement.
While the real wages of handloom weavers fell during
this period, the Luddites were wrong to claim that
technological 
changes 
would 
cause 
mass
unemployment.17 In the decade from 1811 to 1821, the
number of jobs in the British economy increased by more
than 10 per cent.18
Britain’s parish-based welfare system assumed that
those distributing welfare knew the recipients personally,
which became increasingly difficult as the population
grew and mobility increased. This led to the creation of
impersonal workhouses, a system that assumed the poor
were inherently lazy, and therefore should only be given
sustenance in exchange for hard work. Britain’s new Poor

Law, enacted in 1834, used workhouses to provide food
and housing to those in need.
Women at the Westminster Union workhouse.
But workhouses did not want to feed everyone, so they
added features that made things especially unpleasant
for residents, such as prison-like uniforms, and the
separation of men and women. Given that Britain’s elite
were the ‘landed gentry’, who made their money from
inherited real estate, it seems likely that the poor worked
a good deal harder than the rich. The hypocrisy was not
lost on nineteenth-century novelists such as George Eliot,
Thomas Hardy and Charles Dickens, who chronicled the
brutality of the workhouse system. In Ireland, the
country’s poor law proved utterly inadequate when the
potato crop failed in the 1840s. Around one million
people died, and a similar number fled the country.
Forced to compete against new products, industrialists
often turned to governments for help. These claims were
mocked by French economist Frédéric Bastiat, who wrote

a satirical petition arguing that candlestick makers could
not possibly compete against ‘the ruinous competition of
a rival who apparently works under conditions so far
superior to our own for the production of light’. In order
to compete against this rival – the sun – the petition
asked for a law requiring that curtains be closed at all
times. Doing so, it argued, would create jobs for farmers,
whalers and candelabra manufacturers.
Writing tongue-in-cheek, Bastiat was making a key
economic point: the costs of blocking new technologies
are often unseen. If people use more candles, they will
have to cut back their spending in other areas. In another
faux petition, Bastiat implored the government to ban
everyone from using their right hand, on the basis that
this would vastly increase the demand for workers. This
is sometimes known as the ‘lump of labour’ fallacy – the
idea that there is a fixed amount of work to be done,
which can be simply reallocated across the population. In
fact, because workers are also consumers, changes that
make employees less productive are likely to reduce their
earnings, which will shrink their spending, which will in
turn have a negative impact on the economy.
Bastiat has been dubbed ‘the most brilliant economic
journalist who ever lived’.19 His impact on economics is
all the more remarkable given that Bastiat’s public career
lasted just six years, before his life was cut short by
tuberculosis. Although the principles of economics were
mostly shaped by British and North American thinkers,
French thinkers were especially influential in the 1700s
and 1800s. The terms ‘entrepreneur’ and ‘laissez faire’
(let it be) reflect this period of French influence.
The technological changes of the industrial revolution
were paralleled by the growth of trade. By the 1800s,
trade had transformed the lives of people around the
world. Cotton and woollen products flooded into China,

along with matches, needles, umbrellas and window
glass.20 The average European drank tea, consumed
chocolate and traded with silver coins.
Not everyone liked trade, for the simple reason that a
cheaper import can drive domestic producers out of
business. Recognising this, producers may lobby for laws
to block imports. A few who will lose a lot tend to be
more politically influential than many who will gain a
little. This remains true even if the total gains of the
many outweigh the losses of the few. This political
dynamic led Britain in 1815 to impose a tariff on grain
imports to protect local farmers, with the result that
British wheat cost twice as much as Dutch wheat.21 The
fight over the Corn Laws would prove to be a pivotal
point in the development of economics. One of the early
campaigners against the tariffs was David Ricardo.
At a young age, Ricardo made a large fortune as a
stockbroker. He then turned to politics and intellectual
life, buying a seat in parliament. He became fascinated
by economics, discovering Adam Smith’s work while on
holiday, and deciding to devote his parliamentary career
to abolishing the Corn Laws, which Ricardo believed
would make Britain ‘the happiest country in the world’.22
Ricardo’s writings are harder to follow than Smith’s, with
a fellow member of parliament describing Ricardo as one
who ‘argued as if he had dropped from another planet’.23
Yet he introduced the idea of comparative advantage
(which we saw earlier) – a principle that is fundamental
to explaining why even the most unproductive nation can
benefit from trade. Although Ricardo died before the
Corn Laws were scrapped, he played a vital role in
putting Britain on the path towards free trade.
Notes

1.
 These figures are in 2011 US dollars and are drawn from Bolt and
Luiten van Zanden, 2020.
2.
 Gregory Clark, 2007, A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of
the World, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, p.38.
3.
 Bolt and Luiten van Zanden, 2020; Max Roser, Cameron Appel and
Hannah Ritchie, 2013, ‘Human height’, available at
ourworldindata.org/human-height.
4.
 Robert Allen, 2017, The Industrial Revolution: A Very Short
Introduction, Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 4–7.
5.
 T.S. Ashton, 1948, The Industrial Revolution 1760–1830, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, p. 42.
6.
 R.U. Ayres, 1989, Technological Transformations and Long Waves,
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, Lazenburg,
Austria, p. 17.
7.
 Nicholas Crafts, 2004, ‘Steam as a general purpose technology: A
growth accounting perspective’, Economic Journal 114(49): 338–51.
8.
 Coggan, 2020, pp. 100–1.
9.
 Alexander C.R. Hammond, 2019, ‘Heroes of progress, Pt. 13: James
Watt’, HumanProgress.org, 7 March.
10.
 Jesse Norman, 2018, Adam Smith: What He Thought, and Why It
Matters, Penguin, London.
11.
 Todd Buchholz, 1999, New Ideas from Dead Economists: An
Introduction to Modern Economic Thought, Penguin Books, London,
p.14
12.
 Organisations such as the Polity Project and the Economist
Intelligence Unit define full democracies as countries that respect civil
liberties, have a democratic political culture and guarantee judicial
independence and media freedom.
13.
 Ben Broadbent, 2020, ‘Government debt and inflation’, Bank of
England speech, 2 September.
14.
 Mill’s writings underlay the concept of ‘Homo economicus’, although
he did not use the term: see Joseph Persky, 1995, ‘Retrospectives: The
ethology of homo economicus’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(2):
221–31.
15.
 Steven Johnson, 2014, How We Got to Now: Six Inventions That Made
the Modern World, Riverhead Books, New York, p. 32.
16.
 E.P. Thompson, 1967, ‘Work–discipline, and industrial capitalism’,
Past and Present 38: 56–97.
17.
 John Brown, 1990, ‘The condition of England and the standard of
living: Cotton textiles in the northwest, 1806–1850’, Journal of
Economic History 50(3): 591–614.
18.
 Joshua Gans and Andrew Leigh, 2019, Innovation + Equality: How to
Create a Future That Is More Star Trek Than Terminator, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, p. 24.

19.
 J.A. Schumpeter, 1954, History of Economic Analysis, Oxford
University Press, New York, p. 500.
20.
 Wolfgang Keller and Carol H. Shiue, 2020, ‘China’s foreign trade and
investment, 1800–1950’, NBER Working Paper 27558, NBER,
Cambridge, MA.
21.
 Allen, 2017, p. 97.
22.
 Steven Pressman, 1999, Fifty Major Economists, Routledge, London,
p. 36.
23.
 Quoted in Kishtainy, 2017, p. 40.

5
TRADE, TRAVEL AND TECHNOLOGY TAKE OFF
in the 1840s, a series of failed harvests pushed up British
grain prices. The decade came to be known as the
‘hungry 
forties’. 
The 
growing 
power 
of 
urban
industrialists added to the pressure on rural aristocrats.
For a while, economics held centre stage in English
political debate. In 1843, The Economist was founded
with the help of the Anti-Corn Law League. In the words
of Walter Bagehot, an early editor of the magazine,
‘There has never, perhaps, been another time in the
history of the world when excited masses of men and
women hung on the words of one talking political
economy.’1 The debate over free trade roiled the nation,
and was commemorated in poems, needlework, busts and
cakes.2 In 1846, the Corn Laws were abolished.
According to one analysis, only the top 10 per cent of
Britons were left worse off, with the bottom 90 per cent
benefiting. The forces of free trade had won the battle.
Elsewhere, trade was a literal battle. In response to
the Chinese government’s refusal to allow British traders
to import opium from India, British warships attacked on
behalf of the drug dealers. In a series of battles around
Guangzhou, 
Hong 
Kong, 
Hangzhou, 
Ningbo 
and
Zhenjiang, more than 3,000 people were killed. One
scholar 
calls 
Britain’s 
attacks 
a 
case 
of 
‘narco-
imperialism’.3 The conflict led to the 1842 Treaty of
Nanking, under which China agreed to open five
additional ports to trade and to hand over the territory of

Hong Kong to the British. Within four decades, opium
imports to China topped 6,000 tonnes a year.4
A depiction of the Battle of Chinkiang (now Zhenjiang) in July 1842.
Buoyed by the success of Britain’s ‘trade or die’
policies, the United States sent four warships to Japan in
1853, demanding the country end restrictions on trade.
The invasion helped end Japan’s shogun era, a seven-
century period in which the country was led by military
dictators. The last shoguns, the Tokugawa shogunate,
curtailed trade, limited diplomatic ties and banned
virtually all travel into or out of Japan. The 1867 Meiji
restoration, which consolidated power in the hands of the
emperor of Japan, began opening Japan to the world. The
Meiji government also had a strong emphasis on
education, which in turn allowed the country to adopt
technology more rapidly.
Under the slogan ‘rich country, strong army’, Japan’s
modernisers abolished the caste system and allowed

people to take any job.5 Samurai warriors – then
numbering nearly two million – were replaced by a
national army and compulsory military service for all
men. Japan’s government prioritised investments in
railway and telegraph systems, and adapted Western
technologies to account for the fact that labour was
cheaper in Japan than it was in Europe and North
America. A treaty with Western powers had capped
Japanese tariffs at 5 per cent, so the country could not
keep out foreign competition. Instead, state-led economic
development 
became 
vital 
to 
the 
country’s 
rapid
productivity improvements.
American polymath Benjamin Franklin once wrote that
‘no nation was ever ruined by trade’. Yet even as they
were encouraging other countries to open up, Europe and
North America were imposing tariffs on imports. This was
partly due to the need for revenue. Before broad-based
income taxes, tariffs were a major source of revenue for
many nations. Wars such as the Napoleonic Wars and the
US Civil War were often funded by an increase in tariffs.
Tariffs were easy to administer and good for the
government budget, but bad for the economy as a whole.
Tariffs have been likened to a country impeding shipping
by putting rocks in its own harbours. Removing the rocks
(abolishing tariffs) benefits a country regardless of what
its trading partners do. But in practice, countries have
often put more political weight on exports than imports.
Under this ‘mercantilist’ approach, nations agree to cut
tariffs only if their trading partner does the same. An
early deal of this type came in 1860, when Britain agreed
to remove almost all tariffs in exchange for France
reducing its tariffs. The agreement included a ‘most
favoured nation’ clause, which means that the trading
partner also gets the best deal offered to any other
nation. Over the next decade or so, trade agreements

were struck across Europe, and their most favoured
nation clauses helped spread free trade across the
continent.6 
Trade 
had 
the 
effect 
of 
‘unbundling’
production and consumption.7 Trade means that things
no longer need to be made and sold in the same country.
Trade in this period ought to have helped the poorest
nations grow. After all, empires typically operated as free
trade areas. The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869
almost halved the seagoing distance from London to the
Arabian Sea. But imperial powers tightly constrained the
range of goods exported from their colonies, and
managed trade for the benefit of the centre over the
periphery. During this era, the economies of Western
Europe began to pull away from the rest of the world.
From 1820 to 1900, living standards in Europe more than
doubled, while living standards in Asia and Africa did not
rise at all.8
The idea of the corporation was fundamental to
advancing the industrial revolution. Just as the Dutch and
British East India Companies allowed investors to pool
risks across multiple seafaring expeditions, so too
industrial corporations let financiers share the risk of
new ventures in this era. Companies had existed since
Roman times, but they proved vital in the case of risky
ventures, such as exploring for mineral deposits, building
railways into new regions, or selling an exotic product.
Corporations 
also 
encouraged 
specialisation, 
by
providing a vehicle through which a rich investor might
back the business idea of a penniless entrepreneur. In
1855, the United Kingdom passed the Limited Liability
Act, which provided that if a company collapsed,
creditors could not recover their debts by pursuing the
shareholders personally.
Corporations solved the problem of how to get
investors to put money into risky ventures: limit the

downside so that owners cannot lose more than they
invest. But corporations also became large employers,
whose bargaining power massively exceeded that of their
individual workers. The solution to this problem was the
creation of the trade union, in which workers organised
to demand better pay and conditions. However, during
the early decades of the industrial revolution, unions
were illegal. In 1834, six English agricultural workers,
who came to be known as the Tolpuddle Martyrs, were
transported to Australia as punishment for forming a
union. After public marches and a petition signed by
800,000 supporters, their sentences were overturned. It
was a sign of the strong community support for workers’
rights.
The gains from the industrial revolution took a
surprisingly long time to flow to British workers. By the
1830s, half a century after the start of the industrial
revolution, real wages had hardly grown. Other markers
showed a similar pattern. British life expectancy in the
early 1800s was between thirty-five and forty, barely
higher than it had been in the 1500s.9 Moreover, city-
dwellers could expect to live a decade less than rural
residents, as a lack of sanitation and cramped conditions
contributed to the spread of disease. Medicine in this era
did little to help: bloodletting with leeches, consuming
mercury and taking shots of whisky were common
treatments. But in the 1840s, British wages began to rise,
along with other markers of development. From 1820 to
1870, the literacy rate increased from half to three-
quarters of the population.10
Alongside the industrial revolution came industrial-
scale warfare. From 1861 to 1865, the US Civil War
ravaged the country. With the use of mass-produced
weapons, railroads, steamships and telegraphs, the Civil
War was industrial in its scale, and in its carnage. More

than 600,000 combatants – one in five soldiers – lost their
lives. At the end of the war, more than three million
enslaved people were freed.
To economists, one of the striking features of the Civil
War is the imbalance in resources between the two sides.
A larger population and bigger economy do not
guarantee victory (particularly if one side is willing to
devote a greater share of its resources to the conflict).
But money matters. As the saying goes, God is usually on
the side with the bigger battalions.
At the outset of the war, the North had a population of
21 million, more than twice the South’s population of 9
million. The South was a primarily agricultural economy,
with the North producing 90 per cent of the country’s
manufactured goods. Critically, the North produced 97
per cent of the country’s firearms.
From an economic standpoint, the notable feature of
the war is that the South held out as long as it did. Poor
military tactics on the part of the North helped prolong
the war, but ultimately the economic disparity between
the two regions determined the outcome. During the
course of the Civil War, the South funded 60 per cent of
its costs through inflation (compared with 13 per cent for
the north).11 By the end of the war, the South was
printing so much money that goods cost ninety-two times
as much as they had done when the conflict began.
This was an era in which nations had been established,
but travel across borders was essentially unimpeded. Few
people held passports, and going to another country was
simply a matter of boarding a train or ship. In 1851,
massive gold discoveries in the Australian town of
Ballarat caused an influx of migrants. Over the ensuing
two decades, Australia’s settler population quadrupled,
from 440,000 to 1.7 million. A century earlier, the British
colonialists had seen Australia as little more than an

open-air prison. By the late-1800s, transportation of
convicts had ceased, and migrants flowed in from
Europe, Asia and the Americas. Many tried their luck at
gold prospecting, but a substantial number worked in
other industries, where wages were typically much
higher than in the countries they were leaving.
OLD MASTERS AND YOUNG GENIUSES
Analysing creative careers, economist David Galenson has discovered an
intriguing pattern.12 Those who do their best work at a younger age
tended to be conceptualists, driven by a single breakthrough idea. By
contrast, those who produce their masterwork late in life are generally
experimentalists, whose work is the gradual product of trial and error.
Among artists, Raphael, Johannes Vermeer, Vincent van Gogh and
Pablo Picasso were conceptualists, who did their most important work
early in their lives. Picasso painted his breakthrough cubist masterpiece
Les Demoiselles d’Avignon at age twenty-five. Rembrandt, Michelangelo,
Titian and Cézanne were experimentalists, who did their most important
work late in life. Cézanne said he felt like he was always inching towards
perfection.
The poets e.e. cummings and Sylvia Plath found their inspiration
internally and formulated their poems conceptually, producing their best
work in their twenties and thirties. Meanwhile, Marianne Moore and
Wallace Stevens drew on real experiences observed in their daily lives,
producing their major works in their forties and beyond.

American poet Marianne Moore won
the Pulitzer Prize and the National
Book Award for her Collected Poems
in 1951, aged sixty-three.
Conceptual novelists include James Joyce and Herman Melville, whose
best work was created at a young age. Old masters include Charles
Dickens and Virginia Woolf, whose experimentation sought to reflect the
world around them. Movie director Orson Welles was a conceptual young
genius, producing Citizen Kane at age twenty-six, while Clint Eastwood is
an experimental old master, who only became an important director in his
sixties.
Conceptualists find. Experimentalists seek.
Part of the reason that Australian workers earned
more than their British and American counterparts was
that employees were scarce. That gave Australian
workers more power than northern hemisphere workers.
After a strike in 1855, Sydney stonemasons were among
the first workers in the world to win the right to an eight-
hour day. With plenty of land and few people, Australian
wages in the 1880s were the highest in the world, and
the Australian labour movement came to play an
influential role in politics. In the coming decades,
Australia would be among the world’s first countries to

allow women to vote and stand for office, set a national
minimum wage and hold elections on a Saturday (to
maximise voter turnout).
Elsewhere, this era saw major developments in the
welfare state. In the 1880s, with the social democrats
gaining 
on 
him 
electorally, 
conservative 
German
chancellor Otto von Bismarck introduced into parliament
a package of reforms that provided health insurance,
accident insurance and an old-age disability pension. The
reforms were world-leading for the time, though modest
by 
today’s 
standards. 
The 
‘sickness 
funds’ 
that
underpinned Bismarck’s health insurance programs were
two-thirds funded by workers. Pensions were paid to
those who passed the age of seventy, at a time when
average thirty-year-old Germans could only expect to live
to their early sixties.13
Meanwhile, some of the key innovations in health care
came from France. By the 1860s, France had built one of
the world’s largest sewerage systems – mirroring the
street layout. Writer Victor Hugo described it as ‘a
beautiful sewer; the pure style reigns there’. In the mid-
1800s, nations had begun to show off their new
innovations at world fairs, and at France’s 1867
International Exposition, visitors were offered tours of
the sewer. Parisian homes were quickly connected to the
new sewerage system, helping to reduce the prevalence
of infectious diseases (we might call it ‘the drain gain’).
French scientist Louis Pasteur, who had lost three
children to typhoid, developed the germ theory of disease
and was instrumental in policies to provide cleaner
drinking 
water 
and 
isolate 
infectious 
patients 
in
hospitals. At the start of the industrial revolution,
infectious diseases were a major reason why city-dwellers
had higher mortality rates than their country cousins.

Far-sighted governments made cities safer, which in turn
spurred urbanisation.
Tourists visit Paris's state-of-the-art sewerage system designed by Eugène
Belgrand and Baron Haussmann.
French obstetrician Stéphane Tarnier developed the
humidicrib to sustain infants born prematurely. Visiting
the Paris Zoo in 1880, Tarnier saw an exhibit of
incubators for exotic birds and realised the same
principle could be applied to newborn babies. Within
three years, his invention had boosted the survival rate of
underweight babies in his hospital from 35 per cent to 62
per cent.14 Over the ensuing decades, better infant care
would prove to be a key driver of rising life expectancy.
Improvements in infant mortality saved many families the
anguish of burying a child. And knowing their children
were more likely to survive, women bore fewer babies.
Reflecting the French focus on health reforms in this era,

in 1893 the French government created a limited
program of free health care for the destitute, which
proved extremely popular, expanding in the following
decade well beyond the expectations of those who
designed the program.
Economic growth underpinned these social reforms,
but it also allowed the concentration of economic power.
In the United States, John D. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil
Company eliminated virtually all its competitors by
buying them up or squeezing them out. By 1880, it
controlled 90 per cent of the oil-refining business.
Rockefeller and his associates then set up the Standard
Oil Trust – a series of complex legal structures designed
to shield the company’s operations from scrutiny. Behind
this shield, the organisation used its monopoly power to
drive up prices and profits. In an attempt to tackle these
problems, Congress passed the Sherman Antitrust Act in
1890. Yet it was not until the following decade that
antitrust enforcement began in earnest – thanks partly to
the work of investigative journalists such as Ida Tarbell,
who uncovered the structures of the Standard Oil
Company.

Wall Street was one of the most valuable streets on the board
of the original Monopoly game, which was created as a
radical warning.
Not every attempt to put a spotlight on monopolies
worked as intended. In the late-1800s, feminist writer
Lizzie Magie was outraged by the power of ‘robber
barons’ such as Cornelius Vanderbilt, John D. Rockefeller
and Andrew Carnegie. Reading the ideas of economist
Henry George introduced Magie to the way in which
monopolies could allow extreme wealth and deep poverty
to coexist. She subsequently developed a board game,
dubbed ‘The Landlord’s Game’, designed to serve as an
interactive critique of monopoly power. Magie’s motive
was to show players how land grabbing enriched
property owners and impoverished tenants. Yet when,

three decades later, Parker Brothers produced a modified
version of her game, stripped of its radical overtones and
marketed to the public as ‘Monopoly’, the biggest
monopolist became the winner. Magie was paid just
US$500, but neither received the credit for her game nor
achieved the lasting social justice impact she intended.
As the 1800s drew to a close, some of the world’s
fastest-growing cities were in the United States. One
reason was that US city planners were more likely to lay
out streets in a grid pattern, while many older European
cities followed the local topography, or were laid out in a
radial pattern. The radial layout made cities easier to
defend, but grids are more economically efficient –
maximising the use that can be made of street frontage,
and making it easier to connect homes to sewerage and
transport lines. Chicago is the world’s most gridded city.
Rome is one of the least gridded.15
Gridded cities tended to produce the world’s first
skyscrapers. By the 1890s, buildings of at least ten
storeys could be found in Chicago, New York and St
Louis. Two technologies were essential to skyscrapers.
The Bessemer process enabled the mass production of
steel beams that could hold the weight of the soaring
structure. And the passenger elevator allowed people to
reach the higher floors. While the technologies were
available globally, regulation also influenced where they
were constructed. Stricter fire safety and zoning laws
constrained the development of skyscrapers in many
European cities during the early twentieth century, while
US cities gave more freedom to developers. The
differences can still be seen in the world’s skylines.
Notes
1.
 Mr Cobden, 1965, The Collected Works of Walter Bagehot, Norman St
John-Stevas (ed.), vol. 3, p. 216.

2.
 A.C. Howe, 2008, ‘Anti-Corn Law League’, Oxford Dictionary of
National Biography [online resource].
3.
 Allen, 2017, p. 119.
4.
 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 2008, World Drug Report
2008, United Nations, New York, p. 175.
5.
 This discussion of Japan’s economic development draws on Allen,
2017, pp. 119–24.
6.
 Cameron, 1989, pp. 275–6.
7.
 Richard Baldwin, 2006, ‘Globalisation: The great unbundling(s)’,
Prime Minister’s Office, Economic Council of Finland.
8.
 Bolt and Luiten van Zanden, 2020.
9.
 Allen, 2017, p. 76.
10.
 From ‘Our World in Data’, at ourworldindata.org/grapher/cross-
country-literacy-rates.
11.
 Matthew J. Gallman, 1994, The North Fights the Civil War: The Home
Front, Ivan R. Dee, Chicago, p. 95.
12.
 David Galenson, 2006, Old Masters and Young Geniuses: The Two
Cycles of Artistic Creativity, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
13.
 Sophia Twarog, 1997, ‘Heights and living standards in Germany,
1850–1939: The case of Wurttemberg’ in Richard H. Steckel and
Roderick Floud (eds), Health and Welfare During Industrialization,
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 285–330.
14.
 Peter Dunn, 2002, ‘Stéphane Tarnier (1828–97), the architect of
perinatology in France’, Archives of Disease in Childhood: Fetal and
Neonatal Edition 86(2): F137–9.
15.
 Geoff Boeing, 2019, ‘Urban spatial order: Street network orientation,
configuration, and entropy’, Applied Network Science 4(1): 1–19.

6
ECONOMIC MODELS AND THE MODERN
FACTORY
at the turn of the twentieth century, Englishman Alfred
Marshall was the world’s most influential economist. His
1890 textbook Principles of Economics drew on his
mathematical talents (he had achieved the prestigious
rank of ‘Second Wrangler’ in his Cambridge maths
exams) and was focused on how economics could improve
social wellbeing. Supply and demand, Marshall wrote,
were like the blades of a pair of scissors. In a graph with
price on one axis and quantity on the other, the line
representing supply generally slopes up because more
people are willing to provide a good or service when the
price is higher. The line representing demand tends to
slope 
down 
because 
of 
the 
familiar 
concept 
of
diminishing marginal utility: the more that consumers
have of something, the less they are willing to pay for
each additional unit. For suppliers, price and quantity
increase together. For consumers, there is a negative
relationship between price and quantity. In both cases,
trade-offs are at play: higher prices cause new suppliers
to stop making other things and focus on this one, while
higher prices cause some existing buyers to stop
consuming this thing in favour of its substitutes.
Where the two lines cross is the market equilibrium –
the point at which supply meets demand. If Marshall had
wanted to buy a diamond in 1900, he would have noted
that the market reflected the willingness of buyers to
acquire diamonds and sellers to part with them. The

equilibrium price is the price at which the amount that
sellers are willing to sell exactly matches the amount that
buyers are willing to buy. Earlier economists had graphed
supply and demand, but the chart is known as the
‘Marshallian Cross’ because his was the most complete
and persuasive description of the model.1
Considering 
producers, 
Marshall 
distinguished
between a company’s fixed costs – such as the land and
buildings it owns – and its variable costs – such as the
labour and raw materials it uses. In the long run, a
company will go out of business if it cannot cover the
costs of maintaining and replacing its assets. But in the
short term, what most affects the price that a company
charges for its outputs are its variable costs. The price of
cotton will be quickly affected by changes in the cost of
water, while the impact of rising machinery costs will be
felt more slowly.
Marshall was a skilled mathematician, but the
popularity of his textbook was due to his ability to convey
ideas through diagrams and examples – methods that
economists have used to teach students ever since. As
Marshall 
once 
summarised 
his 
system: 
‘(1) 
Use
mathematics as a shorthand language, rather than as an
engine of inquiry. (2) Keep to them till you have done. (3)
Translate into English. (4) Then illustrate by examples
that are important in real life. (5) Burn the mathematics.
(6) If you can’t succeed in 4, burn 3. This last I did often.’
In other words, economists should employ mathematics
as a useful tool to illustrate the world – but not get
carried away with esoteric mathematics that fails to shed
light on how the economy works. More economists should
follow Marshall’s advice.
Marshall expressed important ideas with striking
clarity. In some instances, it is surprising they came so
late in history. Markets and mathematics had been

around for thousands of years. ‘Economics’ comes from
the Ancient Greek term oikonomia, which roughly
translates as ‘household management’. Ancient Greek
mathematicians understood Pythagoras’ theorem, could
approximate pi, and knew how to estimate the area under
a parabola. Yet a solid exposition of supply and demand
only emerged around the turn of the twentieth century.
The early part of the twentieth century also saw the
formation of a critical economic institution: the US
Federal Reserve. The Fed was not the first central bank,
but its quirky creation story bears retelling. In 1907,
when a banking collapse threatened the system, leading
financier J.P. Morgan had summoned colleagues to his
Madison Avenue mansion and locked the door. ‘This is
the place to stop the trouble,’ he told them. Morgan
pledged millions of dollars to at-risk banks and persuaded
his fellow bankers to do the same. The panic subsided.
Three years later, representatives of major US
commercial banks again took the initiative, convening a
secret ten-day meeting on Jekyll Island in Georgia. The
bankers pretended they were on a duck-hunting trip, and
boarded their train one at a time so as not to be seen
together. One banker apparently even toted a shotgun to
give the trip an air of authenticity. The report proposed
the architecture of what would become the US Federal
Reserve, eventually comprising twelve regional banks
with the power to issue currency. Following some tense
negotiations in Congress, the Federal Reserve was
created in 1913. The United States would not be solely
reliant on financial plutocrats to avert the next banking
crisis.
Central banks had existed since the seventeenth
century (the Bank of Amsterdam, the central bank of
Stockholm and the Bank of England were all founded in
the 1600s), but in the twentieth century, central banks

increasingly took on the role of providing stability to the
economic system. Regular commercial banks use money
from short-term deposits to make long-term loans.
Because they borrow short and lend long, even the best-
managed bank is vulnerable to running out of cash if all
its depositors simultaneously demand their money back.
By guaranteeing people’s deposits, a central bank can
prevent bank runs, and make the financial system more
stable. Typically, this doesn’t involve a cent changing
hands: once people know that their deposits are
guaranteed, the panic is avoided. We might think of
financial stability as a public good: a benefit that flows to
everyone, undiminished by the number of people who
enjoy a more stable system. In the modern era, central
banks also have an important role in targeting inflation,
to which we will return shortly.
The assembly line at Ford Motors, Dearborn, Michigan.

One of the hottest new products of the era was the
automobile, 
and 
its 
evolution 
owes 
much 
to
specialisation. At first, cars were as unaffordable as they
were desirable, but in 1908 Peter Martin, an executive at
Ford, proposed the idea of an assembly line. Martin got
the idea from visiting a Chicago slaughterhouse, where
carcasses moved between workers, who each sliced off a
standard cut of meat. In a Detroit plant, experiments with
assembly lines showed that they allowed workers to
produce cars far more quickly. When the system was put
into operation, vehicles came off the line so speedily that
Ford decided it could no longer allow customers to
choose the colour of their cars. It turned out that black
paint dried fastest. Accordingly, Henry Ford decided that
a customer ‘can have a car painted any color that he
wants so long as it is black’.2 The assembly line is now a
standard part of many manufacturing facilities, but at the
time it was radical to flip the process: for the car to move
towards the parts rather than the other way around.
Innovation reshaped retail too. In 1909, Harry
Selfridge opened a new kind of department store in
Oxford Street, London. Selfridges aimed to make
shopping fun. He structured the store so that customers
could handle items for sale, encouraged staff to make
women shoppers feel welcome and trained them to
specialise in different product lines. Selfridge cleverly
positioned the perfume counter on the ground floor,
invitingly 
called 
his 
customers 
‘guests’, 
and 
ran
advertisements with the line ‘the customer is always
right’.

An early Woolworth store in New York.
Other retailers focused on price. In the United States,
Frank Woolworth created a series of stores that sold
products for five and ten cents. These ‘five-and-dime
stores’ were said to operate on the principle ‘pile ’em
high and sell ’em cheap’.3 In 1912, Woolworth floated on
the stock market with 596 stores across the country. With
such a large network of stores, they were able to use
their buying power to negotiate lower prices with
suppliers. Walmart, ÆON, Aldi, Tesco and Carrefour are
modern heirs to this retail strategy, which delivers lower
prices for consumers and fatter returns for shareholders,
while squeezing suppliers and independent retailers.
Technological innovation shaped substance use too. In
the 1880s, James Bonsack’s cigarette-rolling machine had
revolutionised the industry, and by the 1910s, cigarette
consumption was rising rapidly (in the United States it

would peak in the 1960s, with half of men smoking
regularly). Heroin was marketed by Bayer from 1898 to
1910 as an over-the-counter cough suppressant. Cocaine
was added to Coca-Cola until the early 1900s. In 1913,
one expert claimed that nearly a quarter of US doctors
were addicted to morphine.4
While effective, Bayer's cough
medicine also proved highly
addictive.
This was an era of mass migration. Passports were still
rarely required. Just as migrants had flocked to the
Australian gold fields, millions took advantage of the
improvements in shipping technology to migrate from
Russia to Canada, from Germany to New Zealand, or
from the Netherlands to Indonesia. The new ships had
steel hulls and were powered by coal engines. In the
1850s, it took migrants fifty-three days to sail from
Liverpool to New York. By the 1910s, the journey had
been cut to just eight days.5 When economists look at
migration, they mostly see people who are relocating to

places where they feel safer, happier and more
productive. Migrants are not just mouths to feed; they
also bring muscles that build and minds that inspire. It is
a mistake to see migrants as merely a new source of
demand – they are also a new source of supply.
World War I broke this interconnected world. War
came despite the strong commercial ties between the
combatants (in 1914, Lloyd’s of London insured most of
the German shipping trade).6 When the nations of Europe
sleepwalked into war, much of the world’s trade and
migration ceased. And while its origins were unexpected,
the ultimate result was not. At the outbreak of hostilities,
the Allied powers (Britain, France, Russia and their
allies) had far more resources than the Central powers
(the German Empire, the Austro-Hungarian Empire and
their allies). The Allied powers had five times the
population, eleven times the territory and three times the
income.7
The fact that the conflict took four years and claimed
around 20 million lives reflects the ineptitude of the
generals and the intransigence of the political leaders.
But when the conflict ended, the side with the larger
economic base had won.
In Russia, the turmoil was just beginning. The 1917
communist revolution promised ‘peace, land and bread’.
It delivered a six-year civil war and catastrophic
economic outcomes. Average incomes quickly halved.8 In
some Russian cities, average caloric intake halved too.
The conflict, the ensuing famine and the spread of
infectious diseases led to 13 million premature deaths.
Lenin’s regime abolished private ownership of land and
forbade the selling or renting of land. This prohibition
would remain in place until 1990.
TRAGEDY OF THE COMMONS

Suppose that a group of farmers all have access to a common meadow,
where they can let their cows graze. It would be in their collective interest
to prevent overgrazing. But it is in each farmer’s individual interest to put
one more animal onto the commons. If the farmers fail to coordinate, then
the likely outcome is that the pasture will be overgrazed.
The tragedy of the commons arises from negative externalities – costs
that are not reflected in market prices. In this instance, each new cow
imposes a small negative externality on the ecosystem. Since the cow’s
owner does not pay anything for this externality, the result can be a
catastrophe. In the Newfoundland cod fishery off the coast of Canada, for
example, the use of new fishing technology such as sonar led to a
collapse in fish stocks, with the cod population falling to 1 percent of its
historic level between 1985 and 1995.9
Elinor Ostrom analysed how
some traditional groups
developed rules to share
common resources.
In other instances, communities have found ingenious solutions. In
2009, Elinor Ostrom became the first woman to win the Nobel Prize in
Economics for her work on how local communities had managed common
pool resources. In Nepal, rice farmers worked together to manage water.
In Kenya, communities cooperated to manage forest resources. In
Indonesia, local fishers carefully managed fish stocks.
The lesson of Ostrom’s research is not that user management will
always work, but that it is possible. In the successful cases, she observed,
locals were actively involved in creating the rules, rather than having
them imposed by outsiders. User management worked when enforcement
was done by locals, with straightforward mechanisms for resolving
disputes, and modest sanctions for initial breaches. The tragedy of the
commons is not inevitable.

Notes
1.
 Thomas M. Humphrey, 1992, ‘Marshallian cross diagrams and their
uses before Alfred Marshall: The origins of supply and demand
geometr y’, Economic Review, 78: 3–23.
2.
 Henry Ford and Samuel Crowther, 1922, My Life and Work, Garden
City Publishing Company, Garden City, New York, p. 72.
3.
 Coggan, 2020, p. 156.
4.
 See, for example, ‘Say drug habit grips the nation’, The New York
Times, 5 December 1913, p. 8.
5.
 Tim Hatton, personal communication.
6.
 Niall Ferguson, 2008, The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of the
World, Penguin, New York, p.186.
7.
 Stephen Broadberry and Mark Harrison (eds), 2005, The Economics
of World War I, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. The
calculation is for 1914, so the Allied powers include Russia (which
would later drop out) but exclude powers that joined later (such as
Italy and the United States).
8.
 Andrei Markevich and Mark Harrison, 2011, ‘Great War, Civil War,
and recovery: Russia’s national income, 1913 to 1928’, Journal of
Economic History 71(3): 672–703.
9.
 George Rose and Sherrylynn Rowe, 2015, ‘Northern cod comeback’,
Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 72, no. 12: 1789–
98.

7
WORLD WAR I AND THE DEPRESSION
the economic damage of world war i went well beyond 1918.
In the peace settlement, Germany was required to pay
reparations of 132 billion gold marks (the sum was
expressed in gold reserves). This was equivalent to
around half of the country’s pre-war wealth.1 It was a
vast amount; beyond anything the German economy
could support, and the country’s government struggled to
make even the initial payments.2
To meet its debts, the German government began
printing money. Lots of money. The resulting inflation
steadily eroded the value of the German mark. Citizens
sometimes needed wheelbarrows to carry their wages.
The 
government 
produced 
new 
banknotes 
– 
first
representing thousands of marks, then millions, then
billions, then trillions. An item that cost 1 German mark
in 1918 cost 1 trillion marks in 1923.
Hyperinflation creates havoc in the economy. Shoppers
purchase everything on instalment, buying everything
with part payments because unspent cash is losing value.
Restaurants must keep rewriting their menus. Taxis have
to continually change their meters. On a single day in
November 1923, the price of bread in Germany was
seven times higher at the end of the day than it had been
at the beginning.3 Eventually, German policymakers
restored the link between currency value and gold,
bringing hyperinflation under control, and allowing
Germany to enjoy a period of relative prosperity in the
late 1920s. But memories of hyperinflation made

policymakers excessively cautious in the face of the
depression that was to come. Amid this economic turmoil,
Hitler became chancellor in 1933.
Children play with almost worthless banknotes in the
inflation-afflicted Weimer Republic.
The ‘roaring twenties’ saw the evolution of jazz,
dancing and Art Deco. Across much of the advanced
world, consumer spending and economic growth boomed.
At a dinner on 15 October 1929, prominent Yale
economist Irving Fisher told his audience that ‘stock
prices have reached what looks like a permanently high
plateau’. But Fisher was wrong. Just over a week later,
the market suffered its biggest-ever one-day sell-off: the
first of a series of major losses that would become the

Great Depression. By 1932, the US stock market was 89
per cent down from its 1929 peak.
Speculation was partly to blame for the crash. As share
prices had risen, more people had piled into the market,
hoping to get rich quickly. Businessman Joseph Kennedy,
father of the future US president John F. Kennedy,
apparently told friends that he knew something was
amiss when talk of shares spread outside his usual
circles: ‘If the shoeshine boys are giving stock tips, then
it’s time to get out of the market.’ But few saw the crash
coming. Many had borrowed to invest, and the resulting
price drop left them penniless. Across the world, financial
markets followed the US share market downwards.
Although four-fifths of the population did not own
shares (stock-owning shoeshine boys may not have been
so common after all), the market crash swiftly had an
impact on the rest of the economy. Businesses stopped
investing. Frightened citizens stopped spending. In turn,
less consumption meant less economic activity. Millions
lost their jobs. In the United States, unemployment
peaked at 25 per cent, meaning that one in four workers
who wanted a job were unable to find one. Tent cities
sprang up in London’s Hyde Park, New York’s Central
Park and the Sydney Domain. Latin America was
especially hard hit by the Depression, which contributed
to the rise of authoritarian nationalism. In 1930, miliary
juntas seized power in Argentina and Brazil.

The Great Depression was felt around
the world.
Studying the problem of the Great Depression, British
economist John Maynard Keynes argued that the problem
occurred because people’s actions affected one another
in unexpected ways. Keynes likened the problem to a
situation in which members of a bee colony decide that
they will live thrifty lives. Thrift might seem virtuous, but
because one bee’s consumption is another’s production,
the colony collapses and all the bees in their hollow tree
are left miserable. Keynes argued that the solution was
for the government to spend money – ideally on public
works projects – to restart the economy.
This was not a universal view among economists.
Perhaps the most articulate exponent of the alternative
perspective was Austrian economist Friedrich von Hayek.
Hayek saw economic downturns as a necessary evil. He
believed that government policies in the pre-crisis period
made interest rates too low, which led firms to borrow
unwisely. When the crisis came, it was those imprudent

firms that collapsed. A recession was less like an
avoidable illness and more like the inevitable hangover
that follows a drinking binge.4
It isn’t hard to see the moral messages behind these
two analyses. To Hayek, recessions represented a clean-
out of bad investments. Keynes saw recessions as painful
and unnecessary. Hayek believed that government
intervention would only make things worse. Keynes
thought that government had a valuable role in
smoothing the economic cycle. Hayek feared that
democratic governments could erode liberty and believed
that transitional dictatorships were sometimes necessary.
The 
differences 
between 
these 
two 
economists
extended to their personal lives. Hayek was the more
austere figure, raised by emotionally distant parents at a
time when Austria was losing on the battlefield and
suffering economically. He was cold and reserved; one
biography reckons he had only three close male friends in
his life.5
In contrast, Keynes was brimming with self-belief. He
had learnt economics in his spare time, and when he
underperformed in an exam he cheerfully opined, ‘I
evidently 
knew 
more 
about 
economics 
than 
my
examiners.’6 Keynes was a collector of Picassos, Renoirs
and Matisses, and an investor who was a multimillionaire
by today’s standards. He kept diaries of his sexual
exploits (with men and women), recording sixty-five
encounters in 1909, twenty-six in 1910, thirty-nine in
1911 and so on.7 Indeed, his broad tastes may have
contributed to Keynes’s open-mindedness and liberal
world view. Keynes had a knack for friendship and both
he and his wife, Lydia, were members of the Bloomsbury
Group of English writers and painters. Another member
of that group, writer Virginia Woolf, described Keynes as
‘a gorged seal’ with a ‘double chin, ledge of red lip’ and

‘little eyes’. He was cosmopolitan, optimistic and
confident, qualities that helped make him the most
influential economist of the early twentieth century.
The Keynes–Hayek difference was summed up in a
mock rap battle penned by video producer John Papola
and economist Russ Roberts. The chorus goes:
We’ve been going back and forth for a century
[Keynes] I want to steer markets,
[Hayek] I want them set free
There’s a boom-and-bust cycle and good reason to
fear it
[Hayek] Blame low interest rates.
[Keynes] No … it’s the animal spirits
Keynesians thought recessions were like natural
disasters: a shock that could hit any of us. Modern
policymakers are largely Keynesian (although we differ in
how big the government response to shocks should be).
One critic of Hayek argued that his approach to
recessions was ‘as unsuitable as denying blankets and
stimulants to a drunk who has fallen into an icy pond, on
the grounds that his original problem was overheating’.8
Hayek’s influence on mainstream economics today is not
through his views on managing the business cycle, but
from his writings on ‘the invisible hand’ of the market,
which note how spontaneous order can emerge from a
free market in which individuals are pursuing their own
self-interest.
The 1930s Depression is referred to as the ‘Great’
Depression partly because it lasted so long. Rather than
listen to Keynes, some nations pursued austerity – cutting
government budgets in the face of the downturn.
According to one study, unemployment in 1939 – a
decade after the stock market crash – was above 10 per

cent in Belgium, Canada, Denmark, the Netherlands,
Norway and the United Kingdom.9 For many households,
incomes after inflation were lower in 1939 than they had
been a decade earlier.
One of the factors that prolonged the Great Depression
was a retreat from openness. In 1930, US Republicans
Reed Smoot and Willis Hawley co-sponsored legislation to
increase tariffs on over 20,000 agricultural and industrial
imports. Demonstrating their profession’s commitment to
free trade, 1,028 economists wrote an open letter urging
President Herbert Hoover to veto the Smoot-Hawley
Tariff Act. Demonstrating the tendency of politicians to
ignore economists on trade matters, the president signed
it into law.
The increase in tariffs hurt United States firms by
raising the prices of many of their inputs. Hundreds of
car parts were targeted, which harmed the automotive
industry. The tariff on wool rags was more than doubled,
damaging textile manufacturers who used wool rags to
make cheap clothing.10 Other countries responded with
fresh tariffs of their own.11 French increases in car tariffs
virtually closed its market to mid-priced US vehicles.
Spain raised tariffs on many products exported by the
US, including sewing machines, razor blades and tyres.
Canada raised tariffs and imposed ‘anti-dumping’ duties.
Immigration 
restrictions 
tightened 
in 
the 
years
following the end of World War I.12 Canada banned
migration from some of the countries it had fought
against. 
The 
US 
Congress 
passed 
immigration
restrictions that effectively banned all migrants from Asia
and reduced national quotas from other countries.
Policies were tightened further still in the 1930s.
Australia imposed an immigration fee equivalent to one-
quarter of the average annual Australian wage. Thailand
introduced a literacy test and expensive residence

permits. 
New 
Zealand 
closed 
its 
Department 
of
Immigration. Migration from Europe was lower in the
1930s than it had been in the mid-1800s.
The Depression also led to a significant slowdown in
international capital flows. In prior decades, investment
flowed 
from 
high-income 
to 
low-income 
countries,
chasing higher returns, and often following migrant
flows. Both the supply of foreign investment and the
demand for overseas investment dropped. From Vietnam
to Brazil, a wave of foreign investment in the first three
decades of the century began to peter out in the 1930s.13
Yet the Depression also helped create the political
conditions for progressive reform. One of its key
architects was workers’ rights advocate Frances Perkins.
Early in her career, Perkins witnessed the Triangle
Shirtwaist Factory fire in New York City, in which 146
workers – most of them young migrant women – were
killed by a fire in a city building where the exits had been
locked to prevent workers taking unauthorised breaks.
The experience caused Perkins to take a job working for
the City of New York, where she championed safer
workplaces and a cap on the maximum number of hours
that women and children could work.
In 1933, newly elected president Franklin D. Roosevelt
appointed Frances Perkins as the US Secretary of Labor,
making her the first woman to hold a cabinet post.
Perkins helped design the United States Social Security
Act, a key part of Roosevelt’s New Deal. Enacted in 1935,
social security provided direct payments to the elderly,
and over the coming decades dramatically reduced aged
poverty. Although it was funded by payroll taxes, social
security allowed people to get back more than they
contributed. Its first monthly beneficiary, Vermont
schoolteacher Ida Fuller, began receiving benefits in
1940, when she retired after having paid US$25 in social

security taxes. Fuller lived to age 100, collecting a total
of US$22,889. Accounting for inflation, her benefits were
over 200 times what she had paid in taxes.
President Roosevelt signs the Social Security Act in 1935, with Frances Perkins
in attendance.
The 1930s also saw considerable progress in the way
that economists thought about market failure. No one
was more crucial to that work than Joan Robinson.
Robinson grew up in a family that valued unorthodox
thinking and nonconformity, and joined the faculty of
Cambridge University in 1931. While Keynes dominated
macroeconomics at the time, Robinson’s focus was on
microeconomics, and testing some of Alfred Marshall’s
analysis.
In 1933, Robinson published The Economics of
Imperfect Competition, which flipped economic thinking
about the way markets typically operate. Marshall’s

models had tended to assume an economy in which
markets were composed of many buyers and many
sellers. That might be a fine depiction of a few sectors,
such as the stock market. But what about the British East
India Company? Robinson’s work presented vigorous
competition not as the normal state of affairs but as a
special 
case. 
Where 
others 
imagined 
a 
dynamic
marketplace with lots of traders, Robinson’s analysis
recognised 
that 
monopolies 
and 
oligopolies 
were
common.
Robinson also introduced the concept of monopsony:
the situation in which a seller has pricing power over its
suppliers. In a one-company town, the employer has
monopsony power over workers, allowing it to pay them
less than their true value. If a supermarket chain controls
most of the grocery sector, it can exert monopsony power
over farmers, paying them less than they would receive in
a competitive market.
Robinson’s relentless curiosity meant that she was
constantly questioning ideas – including her own. Thirty-
six years after The Economics of Imperfect Competition
came out, she wrote a harsh eight-page critique of her
own book, then made it the preface to the second edition.
Yet despite her significant intellectual contributions,
Robinson was not made a full professor until 1965.
Perhaps not coincidentally, that was the year her
husband retired from Cambridge. In 1975, there were
such strong rumours that she would win the Nobel Prize
that Businessweek published a long profile of her work
ahead of the announcement. But the prize went
elsewhere.
We take it for granted today that economists can
calculate economic output, but modern national accounts
did not emerge until the 1920s and 1930s. The goal was
to obtain an accurate series over time of production and

expenditure, which would make it possible to determine
changes in the total income of a nation. In the United
Kingdom, Arthur Bowley and Josiah Stamp attempted a
comprehensive analysis of a single year. A.E. Feavearyear
followed up with a study examining how the British
national income was spent – looking separately at
everything from rabbits to religious donations. Another
statistical pioneer was Colin Clark, who had a successful
career at Cambridge University and an unsuccessful tilt
at politics (he stood for the British Labour Party on three
occasions), 
before 
moving 
to 
Australia, 
publishing
pathbreaking estimates of national income. In the United
States, Simon Kuznets and the National Bureau of
Economic Research (founded in 1920) played a leading
role in systematising the collection of national statistics
on prices, earnings, savings and profits. For academics,
the 
collection 
of 
data 
facilitated 
research. 
For
policymakers, measuring economic output facilitated
timely interventions to avoid recession.
The way that official statistics are handled by
autocracies is a reminder that we should not take the role
of statisticians for granted. In 1937, Joseph Stalin
announced that the Soviet Union would conduct a census
– the first for more than a decade. Stalin had been
boasting that under his policies the population was
growing rapidly – adding more people each year than the
entire population of Finland. It was a lie. His policies had
caused famine and mass emigration, and the census
results showed a population that was at least 10 million
people smaller than Stalin had claimed. The 1937 census
also showed that most of the population were religious, a
result at odds with the anti-religious views of the
leadership. Stalin ordered that the results not be
published. The chief of the census bureau, Olimpiy
Kvitkin, was executed.

SADIE ALEXANDER
The first African American woman to receive a doctorate in economics
was Sadie Alexander, whose parents had both been enslaved. Alexander’s
dissertation, written at the University of Pennsylvania, focused on Black
families that had migrated north to Philadelphia. Through interviews with
one hundred families, she analysed living standards and spending
patterns. Though many lived in overcrowded homes, Alexander found,
two-thirds got by without any outside assistance – particularly if they
bought goods in bulk and managed to avoid paying higher prices because
they were Black.
Graduating in 1921, Alexander was unable to find a job in economics
befitting her ability. She returned to the University of Pennsylvania to
study law, then joined her husband’s firm – working together on civil
rights lawsuits to desegregate Philadelphia’s cinemas and hotels. But her
public speeches are rich in economic insights.14 In one, she noted how
policies to help poor whites inadvertently harmed African Americans.
When President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s 1933 National Industrial Recovery
Act boosted wages in certain sectors, employers in those industries fired
Black workers and hired whites in their place. Alexander dubbed the law
‘the Negro Reduction Act’.
To achieve racial equality, Alexander argued, full employment was
essential. Because Black workers were ‘the last to be hired and the first to
be fired’, they suffered most in an economic slump. Full employment also
improved racial attitudes. Alexander argued that full employment
strengthened democracy by ameliorating white workers’ ‘fears of
economic rivalry’. In a strong labour market, Alexander contended,
political demagogues were less likely to find a foothold. She was ahead of
her time: recent research shows that economic crises raise the odds that
right-wing populists win office.15

Notes
1.
 Broadberry and Harrison, 2005, p.28.
2.
 An outcome predicted by John Maynard Keynes, 1919, The Economic
Consequences of the Peace, Macmillan, London.
3.
 Coggan, 2020, p. 181.
4.
 Paul Krugman, 1998, ‘The hangover theory’, Slate, 4 December.
5.
 Bruce Caldwell and Hansjoerg Klausinger, 2022, Hayek: A Life 1899–
1950, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
6.
 Kishtainy, 2017, p. 104.
7.
 Richard Davenport-Hines, 2015, Universal Man: The Seven Lives of
John Maynard Keynes, William Collins, London, p. 214.
8.
 Lionel Robbins, 1971, Autobiography of an Economist, Palgrave,
London, p. 154.
9.
 Walter Galenson and Arnold Zellner, 1957, ‘International comparison
of unemployment rates’ in The Measurement and Behavior of
Unemployment, NBER, Cambridge, MA, pp. 439–584. Some recent
studies differ slightly – for example putting Australia above 10 per
cent and the UK just below 10 per cent. In 1939, US unemployment
also exceeded 10 per cent: see fred.
stlouisfed.org/series/M0892AUSM156SNBR.
10.
 The examples of how tariffs hurt domestic production are drawn from
Alan Reynolds, 1979, ‘What do we know about the Great Crash?’
National Review, 9 November.
11.
 The examples of retaliatory trade measures in this paragraph are
drawn from Kris James Mitchener, Kevin Hjortshøj O’Rourke and
Kirsten Wandschneider, 2022, ‘The Smoot-Hawley trade war’,
Economic Journal 132(647): 2500–33.
12.
 The examples of immigration restrictions in this paragraph are drawn
from Joseph Ferrie and Timothy Hatton, 2015, ‘Two centuries of
international migration’, Handbook of the Economics of International
Migration, 1: 53–88.
13.
 See, for example, Nick Freeman, 2002, ‘Foreign direct investment in
Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam: A regional overview’, Paper prepared
for the Conference on Foreign Direct Investment: Opportunities and
Challenges for Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam, 16–17 August, Hanoi.
14.
 Sadie Alexander (ed. Nina Banks), 2021, Democracy, Race, and
Justice: The Speeches and Writings of Sadie T. M. Alexander, Yale
Press, New Haven, CT; ‘Economists are rediscovering a lost heroine’,
The Economist, 19 December 2020.
15.
 Manuel Funke, Moritz Schularick and Christoph Trebesch, 2016,
‘Going to extremes: Politics after financial crises, 1870–2014’,
European Economic Review 88, 227–60.

8
WORLD WAR II AND BRETTON WOODS
as 
fascism 
rose, 
the 
allies mistakenly attempted to
appease Hitler. The 1938 Munich Agreement allowed
Germany to annexe the Sudetenland. The 1939 Nazi–
Soviet Pact facilitated Germany’s invasion of Eastern
Europe. Economic factors mattered too. Japan’s imperial
ambitions were partly a product of its lack of domestic
energy reserves. Hyperinflation and the burden of World
War I reparations caused resentment among many
Germans. Germany’s invasion of Russia represented an
attempt to gain control of additional oil reserves in the
region between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea.1
Economics also suggests that the outcome of World
War II could have been predicted from the fundamentals.
Just as with the US Civil War and World War I, the
balance of resources at the outset strongly favoured the
eventual winner. Compared with the Axis powers
(Germany, Italy, Japan and their allies), the Allied powers
(the United Kingdom, France and their allies) had more
than twice as many people, more than seven times as
much territory, and a combined income that was 40 per
cent higher.2
Germany’s early victories owed much to the skill of
generals such as Erwin Rommel, and tactics such as
blitzkrieg 
(lightning 
war) 
and 
bewegungskrieg
(manoeuvre warfare). As one economic historian puts it,
‘Everybody – the Poles, the Dutch, the Belgians, the
French, the Yugoslavs, the Greeks, the British, the
Americans, and the Russians – who faced the Nazis failed

more or less equally, both tactically and operationally, at
least in their initial encounters, and in no small number
of subsequent encounters.’3
Yet there were no decisive battles in World War II.4
Not Pearl Harbor. Not Midway. Not Kursk. Not even
Stalingrad. The war was primarily a contest of industrial
production, and the Allied powers had more resources at
their disposal. This was true even midway through the
war, because while Hitler’s Germany had annexed much
of Europe, the United States and the Soviet Union had
joined the conflict on the side of the Allies. In 1942, the
Allied powers still retained a decisive advantage in
people, territory and income. Aircraft carriers illustrate
the differential: although Japan grasped their strategic
value early, the Allied powers built nine-tenths of the
carriers produced during the war.
The combatant nations differed in how much of their
economy they devoted to the war effort.5 Italy never
devoted more than one-quarter of its economy to World
War II, while at its peak Japan was devoting more than
three-quarters of its economy to the military. The United
Kingdom and Russia also managed to deliver more than
half of their output to the war, while the United States
devoted two-fifths of its economy to the war. Put
together, this gave a substantial advantage to the Allied
powers. When it came to the production of munitions, the
Allied powers produced at least twice as many rifles,
tanks, aircraft, mortars and warships. The Axis powers
were literally outgunned.
Over the course of the war, the economic damage of
World War II was more devastating than that of World
War I, largely because the technology of killing had
advanced so much in the intervening years. In the air,
World War I’s biplanes and zeppelins played a relatively
minor role, while World War II saw squadrons of bombers

devastate cities with incendiary – and ultimately atomic –
bombs. On the oceans, World War II featured aircraft
carriers, enabling naval battles in which the opposing
ships never saw one another. Long-range bombers, jet
fighters, self-guiding torpedoes and cruise missiles all
emerged from World War II. All up, World War II claimed
three times as many lives as World War I had done.
As well as new inventions, World War II brought
advances in econometrics – the application of statistical
techniques to economic questions. One practical concern
was how best to reinforce bombers to increase their
chances of surviving enemy fire. Naive colleagues had
looked at the underside of returning aircraft and, seeing
disproportionate damage to places like the tail, had
suggested reinforcing those spots. But mathematician
Abraham 
Wald, 
a 
Jewish 
refugee 
from 
Hungary,
recognised that they were only seeing part of the picture.
What they saw was the damage that a bomber could
sustain and still return home. The absence of returning
bombers with nose damage suggested that it was
precisely 
spots 
like 
this 
that 
required 
additional
reinforcement. Wald’s techniques continue to be used by
econometricians today.

What was missing from the data? Every plane that had been shot down.
The peace that followed World War II was more
enduring partly because countries learnt the lessons of
the previous conflict. Through the Marshall Plan, the
United States provided US$13 billion to Western Europe,
equating to around 3 per cent of the region’s annual
economic output.6 In Germany and Japan, the occupying
powers placed considerable emphasis on restoration,
with the result that both became major industrial powers
within a generation.
Economists played a central role in building an
international economic architecture that would sustain
peace. In 1944, a conference in Bretton Woods, New
Hampshire, brought together representatives from all
forty-four Allied nations. It was a curious gathering.
Keynes represented the United Kingdom, hoping to avoid
the economic mistakes that had been made after World
War I. The United States was represented by Harry
Dexter White, who is rumoured to have been a Russian
spy. France was represented by Pierre Mendès France,
which must have made things easy for those writing out
the name cards.

Out of this unlikely gathering came an agreement to
end economic isolationism, and an acceptance that trade
and capital flows would make for a richer and more
stable world. Bretton Woods led to the creation of the
World Bank, which sought to raise living standards in the
poorest nations, and the International Monetary Fund,
which aimed to help countries avoid financial crises. The
Bretton Woods Agreement partially restored the gold
standard, with one US dollar fixed to 1/35th of an ounce
of gold, and other countries’ currencies pegged to the US
dollar. However, the ability to convert banknotes into
gold was restricted to official international transactions,
and rarely occurred in practice.
Macroeconomists in the post-war years continued to
build on the work of Keynes. One larger-than-life figure
was Bill Phillips. Born on a New Zealand dairy farm,
Phillips worked as a cinema manager, gold miner and
crocodile hunter before training as an engineer and
enlisting in World War II, where he spent three years in a
Japanese 
concentration 
camp. 
While 
incarcerated,
Phillips learnt Chinese from other prisoners, and helped
build a secret radio. After the war, he enrolled to study
sociology at the London School of Economics, but soon
switched to economics. In 1949, working in his landlady’s
garage, Phillips used water pumps to build a hydraulic
model of the economy.7 Designed initially as a teaching
aid, the machine turned out to be good at simulating the
effect of potential policy changes – showing how
changing government spending and taxation affects the
‘circular flow’ of income. Around a dozen were built,
including one at the University of Cambridge that
remains operational to this day.

Bill Phillips with his Monetary National Income
Analogue Computer (MONIAC).
Advances on Keynes’s models were developed by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Paul Samuelson.
Samuelson’s ‘pragmatic Keynesianism’ argued that sticky
prices and wages prevented full employment from being
achieved purely through the market, providing an
economic justification for government intervention in
times of crisis. While economists tend to communicate
mostly through articles rather than books, textbooks are
important, and Samuelson’s 1948 textbook is one of the
most important of them all. Samuelson thought that
Keynes’s book The General Theory of Employment,
Interest, and Money was ‘a work of genius’, yet riddled
with contradictions and poorly written. Samuelson

believed that mathematics was the natural language of
economics and set about formalising Keynes’s ideas
mathematically – in the process helping to move
economics away from storytelling and towards equations.
As Samuelson contentedly noted, ‘I do not care who
writes the nation’s laws, so long as I can write its
textbooks.’
One of the ideas emphasised in Samuelson’s textbook
was comparative advantage, a principle articulated by
David Ricardo more than a century earlier. Comparative
advantage shows that when two countries trade with one
another, both stand to benefit. Difference is what makes
trade work. Countries trade because certain crops grow
better in different parts of the world, because some
nations have developed a knack of producing particular
products, or because lower wage levels make labour-
intensive goods cheaper to manufacture. Brazilian coffee,
Swiss clocks and Bangladeshi textiles each represent a
difference embodied in an export. Later in his career,
Samuelson described comparative advantage as the best
example in the social sciences of a proposition that is
both true and not obvious.
Many policymakers had forgotten this insight in the
1930s, as the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act sparked a rise in
protectionism and a fall in trade volumes. But after World
War II, trade began to grow again. In 1947, countries
representing more than four-fifths of global trade signed
up to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Between them, they agreed to reduce 45,000 tariffs,
affecting US$10 billion of world trade.
World War II was a powerful spur in the expansion of
the welfare state. Governments raised taxes, introduced
rationing of food and clothing and provided family
payments. The memory of the Depression and the
suffering on the battlefield led many to believe that after

the peace it was time to build a fairer society. In the
United Kingdom, economists Janet and William Beveridge
produced a key report in 1942 that identified five evils –
squalor, ignorance, want, idleness and disease – and
proposed a national insurance scheme that would provide
for those who were unemployed, sick or elderly. The
philosophy underpinning the Beveridge Report differed
from Bismarck’s reforms: where Bismarck’s was about
individual contributions, the Beveridge approach entailed
a universal government program. So powerful was the
demand for this kind of social program that the British
people threw the Churchill government out of office in
1945, electing a Labour government that promised a
social safety net that would provide for its citizens ‘from
the cradle to the grave’.
This expansion of the welfare state paralleled an
increase in the role of government in the economy.
Across advanced nations, the government’s share of the
economy grew from an average of 24 per cent in 1937 to
28 per cent in 1960.8 After the end of World War II, the
United Kingdom nationalised its railways, coal mines,
electricity supply industry, much of the iron and steel
sector and the Bank of England. France nationalised the
car company Renault, which had collaborated with Nazi
occupiers, as well as the gas and electricity industry and
most of the banking and insurance sectors. New Zealand
nationalised the Bank of New Zealand. Sweden, which
had remained neutral during the war, concluded the
process of nationalising its railways.
Across the advanced world, the increasing role of
government was reflected in a higher tax take. Prior to
World War II, the average worker in many countries did
not pay income tax. World War II saw income taxes
expanded to cover most workers. This was facilitated by
the 
introduction 
of 
pay-as-you-go 
taxation, 
which

required employers to deduct income taxes and remit
them to the government. Workers could always find out
how much tax they had paid, but were less likely to
resent losing the money if they never saw it in the first
place.
Notes
1.
 For more detail, see Coggan, 2020, p. 198.
2.
 The economic comparisons of World War II are drawn from Mark
Harrison, 1998, The Economics of World War II: Six Great Powers in
International Comparison, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK. The calculation is for 1938, so includes the Allied countries that
would be lost (Poland, Czechoslovakia, France and its empire), while
excluding nations that would later join the Allied side (the Soviet
Union and the United States).
3.
 J. Bradford DeLong, 2023, Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic
History of the Twentieth Century, Hachette, New York, p. 304.
4.
 Phillips Payson O’Brien, 2015, How the War Was Won: Air-Sea Power
and Allied Victory in World War II, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
5.
 Harrison, 1998.
6.
 J. Bradford DeLong and Barry Eichengreen, 1993, ‘The Marshall Plan:
History’s most successful structural adjustment program’ in Rudiger
Dornbusch, Wilhelm Nolling and Richard Layard (eds), Postwar
Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, pp. 189–230.
7.
 Selwyn Cornish and Alex Millmow, 2016, ‘A.W.H. Phillips and
Australia’, History of Economics Review 63(1): 2–20.
8.
 Vito Tanzi and Ludger Schuknecht, 2000, Public Spending in the 20th
century: A Global Perspective, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, p. 6.

9
THE GLORIOUS THIRTY?
one of the striking things about life is how much of it is
determined by luck. At the moment your parents got
together, the odds that the particular sperm and ovum
that created you would join up was less than one in a
million. Worldwide, most of the differences in income are
determined by a person’s country of birth and the social
position of their parents.1 Unless you think you got to
pick your parents, that’s luck too.
In the job market, luck is all around us. A young person
who finishes high school during a recession will find it
harder to get a job – a ‘scarring’ effect that can persist
for a decade or more. Some workers pick promising
careers, only to find that technology has made them
jobless. When a large firm in a small town goes bust, it
can be near-impossible for everyone to find work in the
same area. There’s the misfortune of disability – from
congenital anomalies to workplace injuries – that can
make it difficult for a person to earn enough to support
themselves. And there’s the possibility that a person lives
longer than their savings will last – a lucky outcome in
terms of enjoying more years, but an unlucky one in a
society that doesn’t provide for its elderly.
In the post-war era, redistribution from the lucky to
the unlucky occurred through both the welfare system
and the tax system. Income taxes were highly progressive
– meaning that top earners paid a higher percentage of
their income. The Beatles song ‘Taxman’ had the
collector giving ‘one for you’ and keeping ‘nineteen for

me’. They weren’t exaggerating. At that time, members of
the band were in the top tax bracket, which made them
subject to a 95 per cent supertax. Above that threshold,
nineteen out of every twenty dollars the band made was
paid in tax. Some years later, the Rolling Stones
decamped from Britain to avoid tax, calling the resulting
album Exile on Main St.
In the workforce, unions had become an increasingly
powerful force, affecting virtually every aspect of working
life. The way unions operated could be strikingly
different. In Sweden, trade union federations negotiated
national wage agreements with central employer bodies.
In Australia, unions argued wage cases before industrial
tribunals. In the United States, unions bargained directly
with company management. In countries that were still
ruled by colonial powers, unions were often at the
vanguard of national independence movements and
campaigns for greater local control. Across the world,
sick leave, holiday leave, weekend pay loadings, safety
standards, anti-discrimination laws, job security and pay
itself have all been shaped by unions. Whether or not you
are a union member, it is likely that your job would look
quite different if unions had never existed.

Trade unions campaigned for higher wages, safer working conditions and anti-
discrimination laws.
The post-war decades saw unions grow strongly in
many advanced nations. By the 1970s, one in three
employees in the OECD group of advanced nations were
union members (today, the figure is less than one in six).2
The strength of unions in the post-war era was partly a
function of the structure of the economy. One way to
think about unionisation is as a contest between
employees to organise together across a workplace, and
employers to establish new workplaces. This helps
explain why unionisation rates tend to be higher in
factories 
and 
the 
public 
sector 
than 
in 
start-up
enterprises. In many nations, a strong manufacturing
sector proved fertile ground for union organising, which
in turn ensured good wages in these jobs. During the
1950s and 1960s, manufacturing offered a pathway to the
middle class for workers with little formal education.

Yet formal education was just what many workers were
acquiring during this period, as school completion rates
rose and tertiary education became increasingly common.
This was a major factor in the reduction of inequality that
occurred in many advanced nations during the post-war
decades. One theory of inequality is that it depends on
the relative growth in education and technology.3 If
education stagnates while technology advances, society
tends to become more unequal. When the level of
education grows faster than new technologies emerge,
society becomes more equal. The best way of reducing
inequality, according to this theory, is by ensuring that
everyone gets a great education.
Another grand theory of inequality – not inconsistent
with the idea of a race between education and technology
– focuses on the difference between the rate of economic
growth (g) and the rate of return on capital investment
(r). Capital assets such as land and corporate equity tend
to be skewed towards the most affluent (the top 10 per
cent today own 76 per cent of global wealth), so a high
return on capital disproportionately benefits the richest.4
In his book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, French
economist Thomas Piketty proposed that when r > g,
inequality rises. This, he argued, is the normal state of
human affairs.
In the post-war decades, by contrast, the rate of return
on capital in many advanced countries was dramatically
below its long-run average, while the rate of economic
growth was significantly above its historic average. With
r < g, inequality in many high-income countries fell.
Across the advanced world, jobs were plentiful, wages
rose faster than profits, and earnings rose faster on the
factory floor than in the corner office.
The effect may have been widespread, but each nation
took pride in its success. The French called the three

post-war decades les Trente Glorieuses. The Italians
referred to il boom economico. The Spanish dubbed it el
milagro económico español (the Spanish economic
miracle). Germans called it das Wunder am Rhein (the
Miracle on the Rhine). My own research shows that
voters were more likely to re-elect governments that had
delivered high economic growth, but that voters were not
very good at distinguishing between governments that
were lucky enough to hold office when the world
economy was strong and those that were skilful enough
to outperform the global average.5
The 
glorious 
decades 
didn’t 
just 
create 
lucky
politicians. This was the era when many Europeans got
cars for the first time and many Americans bought their
first freezer. Televisions and record players proliferated.
One of the chief drivers of wealth equalisation was the
spread of home ownership. For example, when World
War I came to an end, 23 per cent of the British housing
stock was owner-occupied. By the late 1970s, the figure
had risen to nearly 58 per cent.6
The post-war decades also saw the large-scale entry of
women into the paid workforce. Non-economists often
attribute this to evolving social norms. But economists
point also to the role of technology and policy. Electric
stoves, vacuum cleaners, running water, refrigerators
and 
washing 
machines 
simplified 
household work,
transforming many women’s lives. The contraceptive pill
allowed women greater control over when to have
children. As economists such as Claudia Goldin have
pointed out, this in turn created a stronger incentive for
women to invest in education.
For entrepreneurs, franchising created a new hybrid –
a cross between setting up an independent small
business and buying shares in a large firm. In 1953,
Richard and Maurice McDonald sold their first franchise

in Phoenix, Arizona. The following year, hard-driving
businessman Ray Kroc used the franchising model to
eventually grow McDonald’s into the largest restaurant
chain in the world.
An early McDonald's restaurant from the 1950s.
Hotels, supermarkets and real estate agents are also
significant users of franchising. The model allows outlets
to benefit from national advertising campaigns and
standardised production processes, but also loads much
of the risk onto the small franchisee, who may be at a
negotiating disadvantage when dealing with the large
franchisor.
The uptake of new technologies created unexpected
effects. In 1955, one in fifty US homes had an air
conditioner. By 1980, a majority did. Air conditioning
spread rapidly around the world (there are now more
than two billion air conditioners globally). The technology

enabled a mass migration towards the equator in many
advanced 
countries. 
Americans 
moved 
to 
Florida.
Australians moved to Queensland. Equatorial and desert
cities such as Singapore, Dubai and Doha boomed. Air
conditioning literally rearranged the world.7
The spread of economics into other disciplines can be
traced to this era. One day, economist Gary Becker found
himself running late for a meeting.8 If he parked legally,
he realised, he would be late. Only by illegally parking
could he arrive at the meeting on time. Becker calculated
the chance of getting caught, multiplied it by the fine,
and decided that the expected cost was smaller than the
expected benefit of getting to the meeting on time. The
experience led him to produce a seminal article: ‘Crime
and punishment: An economic approach’.9 Rather than
assuming that criminals are stupid, Becker reasoned, why
not think about how they would behave if they were
trying to maximise their wellbeing like everyone else?
One implication of this work is that deterrence depends
on both the penalty and the odds of detection. If potential
criminals place little value on the long term, then
doubling police patrols might be a more cost-effective
way to reduce street crime than doubling jail sentences.
Becker’s work also brought the tools of economics to
the study of discrimination.10 Racist employers, he
reasoned, will end up paying a bigger wage bill. By
refusing to hire minority job applicants, racist employers
are narrowing the pool of people they are willing to
employ. So to get the same calibre of employees, they will
end up paying more than a non-racist employer. In a
competitive market, in which customers do not share the
employer’s prejudices, being a racist will lead to lower
profits. Becker’s work implies that greater competition
will put the economic squeeze on racist employers –
providing an economic incentive for them to choose the

best candidate for the job. The same holds for other
forms of discrimination, including against women, older
workers, religious minorities, people with disabilities and
LGBTIQA+ people. Competition alone will not eliminate
discrimination, but it can play a positive role.
During this period, applied economics also continued
to advance. One key area was in separating correlation
from causation. People with big shoes tend to be taller,
but wearing larger shoes won’t make you grow. People
who eat ice cream are more likely to get sunburnt, but
passing up a cold treat on a hot day won’t protect you
from skin cancer. In the realm of economics, it is tricky to
determine the impact of foreign aid on economic growth
(since aid is often directed towards countries in distress),
or to disentangle the impact of exporting on company
performance (since better-managed firms often have a
more global outlook).
THE SHIPPING CONTAINER
In the early 1950s, docks were covered with an assortment of cartons,
drums and crates. Loading a ship might involve hauling coils of steel wire,
loose pieces of timber, bales of cotton and barrels of olives. Cargo was
routinely damaged. Workers were often injured or killed. Getting
everything onto a ship could take days. The expense of loading and
unloading ships sometimes accounted for half the total transport costs.
For many goods, international trade was out of the question.

The largest ships can carry over 10,000 containers.
The inventor of the modern shipping container was US trucking
entrepreneur Malcolm McLean. On 26 April 1956, McLean put fifty-eight
containers aboard the SS Ideal X, and sailed them from New Jersey to
Texas. His containers had a twistlock mechanism above each corner,
allowing the containers to be easily moved using cranes. Over the coming
decades, McLean and others in the transport industry debated the
specifications, finally settling on a standard. Today, a majority of the
world’s shipping containers measure 12.2 metres long by 2.4 metres wide
by 2.6 metres high. Each container can typically carry 30 tonnes. Modern
container ships are hundreds of metres long and carry thousands of
containers. Loading or unloading takes a few hours, managed by
computer systems that ensure the ship remains stable throughout.
The standardised shipping container has reduced freight costs so much
that they barely factor. A standardised steel box brought the world closer
together.
In laboratory science, researchers have control over
what is in each test tube, but things are messier when
dealing with people in the real world. Yet medicine had
begun to shift towards randomised trials. Shortly after
the end of World War II, researchers tested tuberculosis
treatments and the polio vaccine by comparing them
against patients who had been randomly selected to
receive a placebo. Social scientists saw how they could
use similar techniques. In 1962, randomised policy trials

took a significant step forward, with the commencement
of two social experiments testing early childhood
interventions. The Early Training Project in Tennessee
and the Perry Preschool Project in Michigan evaluated
whether high-quality early childhood programs could
make 
a 
difference 
for 
extremely 
disadvantaged
preschoolers.
The Perry Preschool Project’s randomised trial showed large
differences between the ‘program’ group and the ‘no
program’ control group.
By the time the participants reached adulthood, the
differences were clear, with those who had received early
intervention recording higher incomes and lower arrest
rates than their counterparts in the control group. These
programs not only reshaped economists’ thinking about
early childhood, but also contributed to the growing
interest in randomisation as a tool to separate correlation
from causation.
Economic integration continued to increase during the
post-war decades. Following the creation of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, countries signed

significant tariff deals in 1949, 1951, 1956, 1962, 1967,
1979 and 1994. The European Economic Community was
formed in 1957, removing all tariffs between its six
founding 
members, 
and 
steadily 
attracting 
more
members over the coming decades. Today, the European
Union is the world’s most significant trading bloc,
comprising twenty-seven countries and over 400 million
people.11 It allows people in smaller countries to enjoy
many of the benefits that those in large democratic
nations take for granted. There are only two-thirds of a
million people in Luxembourg, but they have the freedom
to travel, work and trade anywhere across the European
Union, rather than being limited to the products and
opportunities available in their own tiny nation.
Air travel, once the privilege of the super-rich,
continued to fall in price. Relative to other items, airfares
dropped by one-quarter during the 1960s, while flying
speeds almost doubled.12 The year 1970 saw the
introduction of the Boeing 747, the first wide-bodied
aircraft, which could carry around 400 passengers.
Growing demand for flights led to another problem:
passengers often paid for their tickets at the airport, and
slow credit card processing caused some travellers to
miss their planes. In 1970, American Airlines, IBM and
American Express conducted the first trial of a magnetic
stripe credit card at Chicago’s O’Hare airport. The
technology simplified air travel, and the retail experience
more broadly. It also encouraged the growth of personal
debt. Median credit card debts today exceed US$300 in
India, US$1,500 in China and US$5,000 in the United
States.13 A plethora of studies have shown that when
people pay with credit cards rather than cash, they are
more prone to overspending – making decisions that they
later regret.14

One reason we may regret a purchase is that many
goods drop in value the moment we leave the store. In
1970, 
economist 
George 
Akerlof 
explained 
why.15
Suppose sellers of used cars know whether they have a
high-quality car (a ‘peach’), or a low-quality car (a
‘lemon’). Buyers do not know this information. This
causes sellers of lemons to flood the market. Knowing
they are likely to get a lemon, buyers are only willing to
pay lemon prices. So peach owners don’t sell, and the
used-car market becomes ‘a market for lemons’. The
research, which would eventually earn Akerlof the Nobel
Prize, was rejected by three journals before being
published – a fact that continues to provide consolation to
economists whose work is rejected (the rejection rate in
the top five economics journals is now around 95 per
cent).16
The prosperity of this period wasn’t universal. After
Mao Zedong’s Chinese Communist Party took power in
1949, many business leaders were executed. Agriculture
was collectivised, reducing the incentive for peasant
farmers to work hard because any additional produce
from their labours had to be shared across the entire
community. In 1958, Mao launched the ‘Great Leap
Forward’, a madcap plan in which farmers were
encouraged to produce iron and steel in backyard
furnaces. Millions of perfectly good pots and pans were
melted into scrap iron.
In the same year, Mao demanded that people eliminate
sparrows, on the basis that they ate grain. The campaign
called on people to make so much noise that the sparrows
died of exhaustion. Millions of sparrows died, which
meant that they were not around to eat the locusts that
devoured much of the following year’s crop. Eventually,
Mao imported 250,000 sparrows from the Soviet Union to
restore the ecosystem. Crop losses contributed to a 40

per cent drop in rice and wheat output between 1957 and
1961, and a famine that killed tens of millions.17
More chaos was to come. Starting in 1966, the
Cultural Revolution empowered Mao’s Red Guards, who
attacked 
scientists, 
scholars 
and 
intellectuals.
Universities and schools were closed, and millions of
urban youths (including future president Xi Jinping) were
sent to live in the countryside – often missing out on any
formal education. Ongoing political struggles left many
parts of the government in disarray, contributing to
tragedies such as the 1975 Banqiao Dam failure, which
inundated at least five million homes, and killed tens of
thousands of people. The result of Mao’s policies can be
seen by comparing the Chinese economy with its
neighbours’. During Mao’s time in office, real per capita
incomes in Hong Kong grew twice as fast as in mainland
China. South Korea grew four times faster than China.
Japan grew five times faster.18
In Cuba, Fidel Castro led a revolution in 1959 that
overthrew the government and established a communist
dictatorship. The government took over significant
sectors of the economy, broke up large landholdings, and
redistributed agricultural land to peasants. Over the
decade after the Cuban revolution, living standards
flatlined. Castro and his fellow revolutionaries knew little
about economics. According to one (possibly apocryphal)
story, at a late-night meeting of the leadership, Castro
looked around the room and asked for ‘a good economist’
to become president of the National Bank of Cuba. A
sleepy Che Guevara raised his hand. Surprised, Castro
said, ‘Che, I didn’t know you were a good economist.’
Guevera immediately apologised: ‘Oh, I thought you
asked for a good communist!’19
Elsewhere in Latin America, some countries began to
shift away from global engagement. In Argentina,

economist Raúl Prebisch advocated import substitution
industrialisation, in which low-income countries sought to
build up a manufacturing sector based around products
for which there was substantial domestic demand. While
comparative 
advantage 
trade 
theory 
implies 
that
countries should specialise, import substitution suggests
that countries could benefit from creating a diverse
manufacturing 
base. 
Many 
advocates 
of 
import
substitution also supported raising tariffs to discourage
imports. This proved to be especially damaging when
tariffs were imposed on goods that were themselves used
for production, such as arc welders, tractors or office
equipment. Import substitution industrialisation did not
produce the hoped-for economic gains and would be
largely abandoned by the final decades of the twentieth
century.
In the decade after World War II, a wave of nations
gained independence, including the Philippines, Jordan,
Syria, Libya, Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam. The largest
was India, which turned decisively away from capitalism.
A 
clunky 
centralised 
planning 
system, 
rampant
corruption and a lack of trade with the world contributed
to what was dubbed ‘the Hindu rate of growth’.
Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s prime minister from 1947 to
1964, had been influenced by what he saw when he
visited the Soviet Union and was determined that the
government should heavily regulate the economy. Nehru
initiated a series of ‘Five Year Plans’, modelled on the
Soviet system. India’s ‘licence raj’ meant that up to
eighty agencies had to be satisfied before a firm could
commence operations.20 The Indian government would
often then decide what was produced, and at what price
it would be sold. This approach constrained innovation
and reduced productivity growth.

Yet unlike China, India experienced no famines in the
period after independence in 1947. One theory for this
was developed by Indian economist Amartya Sen, who
witnessed the 1943 Bengal Famine as a nine-year-old
child – helping to hand out rice to victims of a disaster
that ultimately killed around three million people while
the country was under British rule. Sen argued that
famines are not simply about food production; they can
also be caused when governments divert food away from
where it is needed. Democracies with a free press, Sen
concluded, are extremely unlikely to suffer a famine.
Sen’s approach emphasises human capabilities – the
ability to act in one’s own interest. Human flourishing, he
argues, is not merely about ‘freedom from’ (the freedom
from interference by others) but also about the ‘freedom
to’ (such as the freedom to get an education or actively
participate in the democracy).

Hungry citizens waiting in line at a soup kitchen during the 1943 Bengal
Famine.
Sen has significantly influenced the United Nations’
Human Development Report, which ranks countries on a
broader set of indicators than economic output. In many
cases, these metrics go together. Countries that are more
democratic tend to enjoy more rapid rates of economic
growth.21 Nations with more rights for LGBTIQA+ people
have higher incomes and higher rates of wellbeing.22
Countries that encourage women to participate fully in
society generally have higher living standards.23
The potential of markets to boost prosperity, and the
importance of capabilities to human flourishing, can be
seen in the trajectories of East and West Germany, and
North and South Korea. After four decades of communist

rule, living standards in East Germany were one-third of
West German levels.24 After almost eight decades of
communism, living standards in North Korea are 1/23rd
of the level in capitalist South Korea.25 Both experiments
also show that communism fails to encourage what
Amartya Sen calls human capabilities. Along their shared
border, it was the communist nation – not its capitalist
counterpart – that built a wall and threatened to shoot its
citizens if they tried to leave.
The late 1970s marked a turning point, in which many
nations turned towards markets. For some, it led to the
question of whether capitalism had gone too far. For
others, the introduction of markets proved to be the
difference between having enough to eat and going to
bed hungry every night.
HUNGRY FOR CHANGE
History’s worst famines include France in 1693–94, Ireland in 1740–41 and
1846–52, Finland in 1868, the Soviet Union in 1921–22 and Cambodia in
1975–79.26 In each of these incidents, more than 5 per cent of the
population died. Poor countries are most vulnerable to famines, as they
have fewer resources to draw upon in hard times. Famines have often
been precipitated by back-to-back harvest shortfalls, typically caused by
extreme weather events. But they can be exacerbated by governmental
failure. Totalitarian governments are more prone to making policy
mistakes, concealing the true extent of the disaster, and refusing outside
assistance.
When famine strikes, people are more likely to die from disease than
actual starvation. The people most likely to die are the poorest, young
children and the elderly. Women are less likely than men to die in
famines, most likely due to the physiological fact that women’s bodies
have a higher fat-to-muscle ratio than men’s.

Bridget O’Donnell and two of
her children, who suffered
during the 1846–52 Irish
Potato Famine, which killed
12 per cent of the
population.
Over time, the proportional death toll of famines has fallen. Even so, in
the twentieth century, famines killed more people than the two world
wars combined. Today, drastic crop failure need not lead to famine. The
Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Food Programme, two
United Nations bodies created to prevent famines, are generally able to
provide food relief if they are allowed into a country. The danger of famine
now comes from political risk more than agricultural risk. With good
governance, the world can make famine history.
Notes
1.
 Branko Milanović, 2008, ‘Where in the world are you? Assessing the
importance of circumstance and effort in a world of different mean
country incomes and (almost) no migration’, Policy Research Working
Paper 4493, World Bank, Washington, DC.
2.
 OECD, 2019, Negotiating Our Way Up: Collective Bargaining in a
Changing World of Work, OECD, Paris.
3.
 Jan Tinbergen, 1974, ‘Substitution of graduate by other labour’,
Kyklos 27(2): 217–26; Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz, 2008, The

Race Between Education and Technology, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
4.
 Andrew Stanley, 2022, Global Inequalities, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
5.
 Andrew Leigh, 2009, ‘Does the world economy swing national
elections?’, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 71(2): 163–81.
6.
 Alan Holmans, 2005, Historical Statistics of Housing in Britain,
Cambridge Centre for Housing & Planning Research, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK, pp. 130, 143.
7.
 Steven Johnson, 2010, Where Good Ideas Come From: The Natural
History of Innovation, Penguin, New York, pp. 214–15.
8.
 Kishtainy, 2017, p. 134.
9.
 Gary Becker, 1968, ‘Crime and punishment: An economic approach’,
Journal of Political Economy, 76(2): 169–217.
10.
 Gary Becker, 1957, The Economics of Discrimination, University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
11.
 These figures are post-Brexit.
12.
 Air Transport Association of America, 1970, 1970 Air Transport Facts
and Figures, ATAA, Washington, DC.
13.
 ‘Credit card debt statistics’, available at
balancingeverything.com/credit-card-debt-statistics/, updated 6
January 2023.
14.
 Anja Achtziger, 2022, ‘Overspending, debt, and poverty’, Current
Opinion in Psychology: 101342.
15.
 George Akerlof, 1970, ‘The market for lemons: Quality uncertainty
and the market mechanism’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(3):
488–500.
16.
 David Card and Stefano DellaVigna, 2013, ‘Nine facts about top
journals in economics’, Journal of Economic Literature 51(1): 144–61.
17.
 Coggan, 2020, pp. 234–5.
18.
 Author’s calculations, based on Bolt and Luiten van Zanden, 2020.
19.
 Helen Yaffe, 2009, Che Guevara: The Economics of Revolution,
Palgrave Macmillan, London, p. 21.
20.
 Gordon Corera, ‘India: The economy’, BBC, 3 December 1998.
21.
 Marco Colagrossi, Domenico Rossignoli and Mario A. Maggioni. 2020,
‘Does democracy cause growth? A meta-analysis (of 2000
regressions)’, European Journal of Political Economy 61: 101824.
22.
 MV Lee Badgett, Sheila Nezhad, Kees Waaldijk and Yana van der
Meulen Rodgers, 2014, ‘The relationship between LGBT inclusion and
economic development: An analysis of emerging economies’, Williams
Institute and US AID, Washington, DC.
23.
 Aniruddha Mitra, James T. Bang and Arnab Biswas, 2015, ‘Gender
equality and economic growth: Is it equality of opportunity or equality
of outcomes?’, Feminist Economics 21(1): 110–35.

24.
 Angus Maddison, 2006, The World Economy. OECD, Paris, p. 178.
25.
 Author’s calculations, based on Bolt and Luiten van Zanden, 2020.
26.
 Cormac Ó Gráda, 2007, ‘Making famine history’, Journal of Economic
Literature, 45(1): 5–38.

10
MARKETS, MARKETS EVERYWHERE
in 1978, in the tiny chinese village of Xiaogang, eighteen
villagers met to sign a secret contract that could have
cost them their lives. Like other parts of China, Xiaogang
had suffered terribly during the Great Leap Forward. Out
of a population of 120 people, more than half had died
during the years from 1958 to 1960.1 In the 1970s,
people were still desperately hungry. They knew that
agricultural output could be higher – but they also knew
that the incentives of the collectivist system worked
against it.
At that time, everything was owned by the collective.
Yen Jingchang, one of those who signed the contract,
summed it up by saying, ‘Work hard, don’t work hard –
everyone gets the same. So people don’t want to work.’2
The contract, signed in a house with a mud floor and
straw roof, went directly against the dictates of the
communist authorities. It stated that each family would
have its own plot of land and be allowed to keep part of
the output. The agreement was so dangerous that the
villagers also agreed to provide for each other’s children
if one was jailed or executed. The document, signed
under an oil lamp, was hidden inside a piece of bamboo in
the roof of one of the villagers, Yen Hongchang.
Yet it wasn’t the document that gave them away, it was
the fact that the output from private plots was so much
higher. Previously, farmers had only started work on the
collective farms at the sound of a whistle. Now, some
began tending their private farms before sunrise. At the

end of the year, Xiaogang’s harvest was bigger than the
previous five years combined. Local officials angrily
interrogated Yen Hongchang. But he was lucky. China’s
new president, Deng Xiaoping, liked their ideas and
encouraged other villagers to try similar experiments.
Within a few years, Xiaogang’s secret had become
China’s road out of poverty.
In the shift away from collectivisation, practice often
outpaced laws. For example, it was not until 1988 that
China legalised private businesses employing more than
seven people.3 Yet the transformation was rapid and its
implications far-reaching. In the decade following the
1978 reforms, around 10 million Chinese – a number
equivalent to the modern-day population of Sweden –
were brought out of poverty every year.4
The changes were also a reminder of the economic
tenet that societal changes tend to be driven more by
technology and policy than social norms. Nowhere is the
impact of policy clearer than with communist societies.
Just as the Russian Revolution ushered in a collapse in
living standards, the 1978 changes made the difference
for millions of people between going hungry and having
enough to eat. Since that year, economic growth in China
has averaged over 9 per cent annually. Trade has been a
critical component of this growth, allowing Chinese
manufacturers to sell to a global market.
At the same time that China was increasing the role of
the market, the United Kingdom and the United States
were moving in a similar direction. The election of
Margaret Thatcher in 1979 and Ronald Reagan in 1980
led to much less government intervention in the
economy. In the United Kingdom, Thatcher privatised
most of the utilities that had been in public hands. Public
housing tenants were given the right to buy their
properties – in the case of long-term tenants, at half the

market value. More than one million public housing units
were privatised. Home ownership initially rose, and then
fell as many of the new owners on-sold their homes to
professional landlords.
In the United States, Reagan’s eight years in office saw
the top individual tax rate reduced from 70 per cent to 28
per cent. In the face of a strike by air traffic controllers,
Reagan fired more than 10,000 workers, and hired non-
union replacements. Business leaders followed his
example. In the next few years, striking copper miners,
meat packers, bus drivers and paper workers found
themselves out of a job.5 The power of unions began to
wane. Reagan also reduced government regulation,
easing price controls on cable television, ocean shipping,
natural gas and interstate trucking services.6
An economist who advised both Thatcher and Reagan
was the University of Chicago’s Milton Friedman.
Articulate and energetic, Milton Friedman and his wife
Rose Friedman wrote popular books with titles such as
Capitalism and Freedom and Free to Choose, created a
ten-part television documentary on economics and
penned regular newspaper articles. As a libertarian,
Friedman believed in the primacy of freedom, which led
him to oppose military conscription, support drug
legalisation and advocate smaller government. Friedman
criticised the claim that government payments could help
economies avoid recession. Instead, he proposed a
permanent income hypothesis, under which households
anticipate that current government spending will need to
be paid for by future tax increases. To spend is to tax,
argued Friedman.
The permanent income hypothesis is elegant, but it
does a poor job of describing how people actually behave.
Either because people aren’t perfectly rational or
because they believe that government stimulus will grow

the tax base, government spending can boost total
economic activity. In practice, households do not cut back
their spending in anticipation of future tax bills.
Regardless of their political stripes, governments don’t
respond to recessions by sternly waggling their finger at
the immorality of people who overextended their
finances. Instead, they take the Keynesian approach of
providing timely, targeted and temporary fiscal stimulus.
As former central banker Mark Carney has noted, ‘Just as
there are no atheists in foxholes, there are no libertarians
in financial crises.’7
Friedman was not the only influential ‘Chicago School’
economist in the 1980s. In competition policy, Robert
Bork and Richard Posner argued for a more relaxed
approach to corporate mergers, known as the consumer
welfare standard. Big could be beautiful, they claimed,
pointing to instances in which larger firms produced their
products more efficiently. During the 1980s, this strand
of thought became increasingly dominant in the United
States and around the world. What mattered, according
to the Chicago School, was not whether a merger or a
pricing policy harmed competitors but whether it could
be 
shown 
to 
damage 
consumers. 
Under 
Reagan,
competition laws were curtailed, and banks were given
freedom to invest in a broader range of assets.
During the 1980s, many other advanced nations sought
to downsize the public sector, cutting corporate tax rates
and individual tax rates. A wave of privatisations swept
the world, with governments in Europe, Asia and Latin
America selling off state-owned enterprises such as
telephone carriers, ports, toll roads, electricity producers
and railways.8 At the time, many economists believed that
these enterprises would operate more efficiently under
private ownership, where they would be subject to the

rigours of the market and might face competitive
pressure.
In practice, privatisation now appears to have been
overhyped. In many cases, the assets that were privatised
were natural monopolies, whose dominant position made
them impervious to threat from competitors. Anyone who
wants to compete against a privatised railway monopoly
may have to invest millions of dollars in new tracks and
trains – something likely to deter most new entrants.
Selling 
a 
monopoly 
railway 
might 
bolster 
the
government’s coffers, but if it pushes up the price of train
tickets over coming decades, it’s a crummy deal.
In business school, budding CEOs learn about Michael
Porter’s ‘five forces’ that determine whether a firm can
enjoy unusually high profits.9 Industries get a big thumbs
up from managers and investors when there is no
competition, when potential entrants face barriers, when
suppliers have little bargaining power, when customers
have few alternatives, and when there is no threat of
substitute products.

But while the five forces are good for profits, they’re
bad for consumers. Competition policy typically runs in
precisely the opposite direction – towards boosting
competition, encouraging new entrants and ensuring that
monopolists do not abuse their power in their dealings
with 
suppliers 
and 
customers. 
Short-sighted
privatisations – as in the railway example above – often
yielded a high initial sale price, but effectively levied a
long-term tax on consumers, who ended up paying more
to the privatised utility. Economists today tend to be
more sceptical of privatisations that could lock in a
monopoly provider.
BEAUTY PAYS
‘Personal beauty’, said Aristotle, ‘is a greater recommendation than any
letter of reference.’ The economics of beauty studies the relationship
between attractiveness and income. This is possible because while
beauty is in the eye of the beholder, people behold it similarly. It turns out
that if you ask multiple raters to assess a subject’s attractiveness, they
come up with comparable answers.
Crunching data from several surveys that include assessments of
attractiveness and measures of earnings, economist Dan Hamermesh
estimates that the best-looking workers make about 10 per cent more
than the worst-lookers.10 In advanced nations, this can add up to
hundreds of thousands of dollars over a career. In general, the
relationship between attractiveness and wages is stronger for men than
for women. The beauty effect persists in occupations with little customer
interaction, suggesting that employer discrimination against less
attractive people may be at play. The phenomenon has been dubbed
‘lookism’, but few jurisdictions outlaw discrimination against people based
on their physical appearance.

Babies stare longer at beautiful
faces.
Beautiful people also benefit in other ways. Attractive people are also
more likely to secure loans. Attractive political candidates are more likely
to be elected. Attractive criminal defendants are more likely to be
acquitted. Attractive students receive higher grades for their class
presentations. Attractive professors – even economics professors –
receive higher teaching evaluations. Even babies will gaze longer at
attractive faces.
But don’t fret if you’re not gorgeous. Those who aren’t conventionally
comely should remember the theory of comparative advantage, and focus
on their other strengths, such as brains, brawn and personality.
Notes
1.
 Ke Wang, 2008, ‘Xiaogang Village, birthplace of rural reform, moves
on’, China.org.cn, 15 December.
2.
 This account is largely drawn from David Kestenbaum and Jacob
Goldstein, 2012, ‘The secret document that transformed China’, Planet
Money, 20 January.
3.
 Nicholas Lardy, 2016, ‘The changing role of the private sector in
China’ in Iris Day and John Simon (eds), Structural Change in China:
Implications for Australia and the World, Reserve Bank of Australia,
Sydney, pp. 37–50.
4.
 Shujie Yao, 2000, ‘Economic development and poverty reduction in
China over 20 years of reforms’, Economic Development and Cultural
Change 48(3): 447–74.
5.
 Julia Simon and Kenny Malone, 2021, ‘Looking back on when
President Reagan fired the air traffic controllers’, NPR Morning
Edition, 5 August.
6.
 William A. Niskanen, 1988, Reaganomics: An Insider’s Account of the
Policies and the People, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

7.
 Mark Carney, 2021, Value(s): Building a Better World for All, William
Collins, London, p. 173.
8.
 William L. Megginson and Jeffry M. Netter, 2001, ‘From state to
market: A survey of empirical studies on privatization’, Journal of
Economic Literature 39(2): 321-389.
9.
 Michael Porter, 1979, ‘How competitive forces shape strategy’,
Harvard Business Review 57: 137-145.
10.
 Daniel Hamermesh, 2011, Beauty Pays: Why Attractive People Are
More Successful, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

11
INFLATION TARGETING AND INEQUALITY
during the 1980s, economic policymakers made steady
progress in reducing inflation. We have previously
encountered 
inflation 
in 
its 
most 
insidious 
form:
hyperinflation. Like post–World War I Germany, Hungary
experienced a brutal bout of hyperinflation after World
War II. At one point, annual inflation in Hungary reached
419,000,000,000,000,000 per cent, and the government
issued a 100-quintillion note (‘1’ followed by twenty
zeros).1 In 1989, with prices doubling every month,
Argentina’s government announced that the country had
exhausted its supply of banknote paper. It had literally
run out of paper. Under Robert Mugabe, Zimbabwe’s
hyperinflation reached a point where prices were
doubling every day. In one instance, Zimbabwean ATMs
for a major bank gave a ‘data overflow error’ because
they could not handle the number of zeros in the
withdrawal.2
The risk of hyperinflation had spurred the adoption of
the gold standard, which fixed a currency’s value to the
precious metal. In practice, this turned out to be clunky.
There was no reason to expect the pace of world gold
mining to match the rate of economic growth in countries
that used the gold standard. If miners encounter a vast
gold deposit, do we really want it to reduce the value of
money? The end of the gold standard in the early 1970s
meant that countries could increase the money supply in
line with growth in the population and living standards.
Major economies also began to decouple their currencies

from one another, abandoning fixed exchange rates in
favour of ‘floating’ exchange rates, which were set by the
supply and demand for their currency.
But in the era when central banks were under the
control of politicians, economic factors weren’t the only
consideration in managing inflation. Governments found
it tempting to engineer a pre-election boom, which was
often followed by a post-election bust. It might have
helped politicians keep their jobs, but many regular
workers lost their jobs in the crash that tended to follow
the election. The problem is so stark that you can literally
pick the election years out of the economic charts. In the
post-war decades, economic growth rates in the United
States tended to be lower in the year after the election
than in the election year itself. A similar pattern could be
seen in Europe.
Sometimes the political meddling in interest rate
setting was direct, but it could also be covert. Facing
rising inflation in 1972, US president Richard Nixon
feared that the Federal Reserve would slow the economy
by increasing interest rates. In an attempt to bully the
central bank, Nixon leaked the falsehood that Federal
Reserve Chair Arthur Burns was demanding a 50 per cent
pay rise.3
The exposure of the ‘political business cycle’ led to a
new development. Fiscal policy would still be controlled
by elected politicians, but monetary policy would be
carried out independently by central banks. Across the
advanced world, the 1980s saw a steady increase in the
degree of independence of central bankers. Step by step,
central bankers in high-income nations moved from
having no more autonomy than regular public servants
towards having almost the kind of independence enjoyed
by judges.

Not 
only 
were 
central 
bankers 
increasingly
independent; they also began to target inflation directly.
In the 1970s and 1980s, central banks had been targeting
intermediate metrics – such as the quantity of money or
credit – but there was an increasing recognition that the
relationship between inflation and the money supply
could be rubbery. As one frustrated central banker put it,
‘We didn’t abandon the monetary aggregates, they
abandoned us.’4
Beginning in 1990, the New Zealand government
required its central bank to keep inflation between 0 and
2 per cent, making it the first country to ask its central
bank to explicitly focus on inflation. After many years of
double-digit annual inflation, New Zealand sought an end
to such wild price volatility.
Other countries swiftly followed. Canada in 1991. The
United Kingdom in 1992. Australia in 1993. Today, most
central banks have adopted inflation targets, typically
around 2 per cent – a level that is thought to keep prices
stable, while avoiding deflation. Just as high inflation can
cause instability, deflation is a problem because it can
stall spending, as households put off major purchases in
anticipation of buying products more cheaply next year.
In practical terms, central banks control short-term
interest rates. This allows them to affect the long-term
interest 
rates 
charged 
by 
commercial 
banks 
for
household and business borrowing.
Why does the interest rate have such a big effect on
the economy? One way to think about interest rates is
that they reflect the ‘price’ of choosing to consume today
rather than tomorrow. When interest rates are low,
businesses and individuals have an incentive to bring
forward their plans. Want to open a new office or buy a
house? Low interest rates might just tip the balance.
Conversely, higher interest rates make borrowing less

attractive, reducing economic activity by encouraging
delayed gratification. To the central bank, interest rates
are like the brake and accelerator on a car – tap the
correct pedal at the right time, and you can promptly get
to your destination without running off the road.
Some central banks target only inflation, while other
central banks have a dual mandate, focusing on
additional factors such as unemployment. In practice, this
may be a smaller difference than it appears. Thanks to
the work of Bill Phillips – the man who built a hydraulic
model of the economy – we know that in the short term
there is a strong relationship between inflation and
unemployment. So a central bank that focuses on
inflation will invariably affect jobs and growth too. The
aim is to keep the economy in a ‘goldilocks state’ – not
too cold, not too hot.
Have 
inflation 
targeting 
and 
central 
bank
independence been a success? In terms of inflation, yes.
Following the oil shocks of the 1970s, annual inflation in
the United States was over 6 per cent for ten years,
peaking at 14 per cent in 1980.5 Through the 1990s and
2000s, inflation stayed low. It was a similar story in the
UK and Japan, where inflation peaked at over 20 per cent
in the 1970s, before being brought down to a low and
steady level in the 1990s and 2000s.

Inflation and central bank independence in advanced countries
The challenge for central bankers is that interest rates
affect future behaviour, so monetary policy will always be
shaped by their best guess of what is about to happen. As
the head of the US Federal Reserve once put it, the aim is
to take away the punch bowl just as the party is warming
up.6 As we will see, the early decades of the twenty-first
century posed fresh challenges for central bankers as
they tried to get the balance right.
While New Zealand was pioneering inflation targeting,
India was preparing to implement some of the most
significant reforms in its history – changes that went
directly to the balance between government and the
market. In 1991, Indian finance minister Manmohan
Singh presented a budget to parliament that abolished
most of the ‘licence raj’ – the system that dictated what
firms could produce. The rupee was devalued, benefiting
exporters, and some industries were opened to foreign

investment. The spur for reform had been a crisis in
foreign exchange. India had barely enough foreign
currency to last a fortnight and had just shipped forty-
seven tonnes of gold to London as collateral for an
emergency loan.7 The changes, Singh argued, would
mark India’s emergence as a ‘major economic power in
the world’.
Like Britain’s repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846 and
China’s shift towards private property in 1978, India’s
1991 reforms had a massive impact on the economy.
Economic growth accelerated, and the private sector
grew 
rapidly. 
The 
Tata 
Group, 
India’s 
largest
multinational conglomerate, expanded its operations in
everything from chemical production to consulting
services. In a neat reversal of colonialism, Tata
purchased the United Kingdom’s largest tea maker,
Tetley, and iconic British car brand Jaguar. However, the
story of the Indian reforms is also a reminder of the risk
of focusing on averages. In the pre-reform era, Indian
incomes grew much more quickly for the bottom 50 per
cent than for the top 1 per cent. In the post-reform
period, Indian incomes grew substantially faster for the
top 1 per cent than for the bottom 50 per cent.8
India is a more challenging environment for new
entrepreneurs than many other low-income nations. In
2020, the World Bank estimated that starting a business
in India requires ten procedures, takes seventeen days,
and costs nearly one month’s average earnings.9 At the
other extreme, starting a business in the Eastern
European nation of Georgia requires one procedure,
takes a day and costs the equivalent of one week’s
average wages.
For the second half of the twentieth century, trade
volumes had grown faster than global economic output,
reflecting increasing economic integration. But the trend

accelerated from 1985 to 1995 – a period that one trade
historian refers to as the decade in which ‘the world
changed’.10 Some countries became more open because
they had exhausted their supply of foreign exchange.
Other nations were persuaded by global institutions such
as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund
that 
trade 
would 
boost 
prosperity. 
The 
wave 
of
democratisation that swept the world in this decade also
tilted politics towards lower tariffs and away from
protecting crony companies.
In 1994, the World Trade Organization finally came
into being. Half a century earlier, Bretton Woods had
nvisaged 
the 
creation 
of 
an 
‘International 
Trade
Organisation’, but the US Senate had baulked at the
proposal, forcing the world to rely instead on the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. Yet despite this clunky
name, the institution oversaw a reduction in the average
worldwide tariff from 22 per cent in 1947 to 3 per cent
today.11
Another spur to trade was the decision by eleven high-
income European countries to adopt a common currency,
the Euro. Commencing in 1999, the Euro made it easier
for people to trade and travel. The downside was that
participating countries lost the flexibility to devalue their
currency in a crisis. This danger was brought into sharp
relief a decade later, when the European Debt Crisis saw
the governments of some southern European nations
incapable of repaying their debts and unable to devalue
their currency. The resulting austerity measures caused a
deep recession in Greece.
Trade was particularly important to the economic
trajectory of Asian nations. Four ‘tiger’ economies
(Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore) successfully
adopted an export-led approach to economic growth,
enjoying rapid gains in average incomes from the 1960s

to the 1980s. In the 1980s, China negotiated most
favoured nation agreements with the US and the
European Union, ensuring that tariffs on its exports
would be no higher than those applying to other trading
partners. In 2001, China joined the World Trade
Organization.
Other Asian nations followed a similar path. In the
1990s, commentators began to talk about five ‘tiger cub’
economies 
– 
Indonesia, 
Malaysia, 
the 
Philippines,
Thailand and Vietnam. An export-oriented manufacturing
sector, foreign investment, and gains in education
contributed to the rise of these countries from low-
income to middle-income over the course of two
generations. One way to see the effect is to compare
these more open economies with the more closed
economies of Latin America (such as Brazil and
Argentina). In the middle of the twentieth century, East
Asian living standards were less than half the level in
Latin America. By the end of the century, the gap had
almost closed.12
The shift of financial power towards Asia was
highlighted when an English options trader based in
Singapore brought down Barings, the oldest merchant
bank in London. Twenty-eight-year-old Nick Leeson was
trading in derivatives – financial instruments that derive
their value from another asset. The simplest derivatives
are agricultural futures. Suppose a wheat farmer is
worried about changes in the price of wheat between
now and harvest day. The futures market allows her to
sell her crop at today’s price for delivery on a future day.
Another form of derivative is an option to buy or sell at a
given price, which can be used to shift risk.
But just as insurance shifts risk from the customer to
the insurance company, derivatives involve shifting risk
to another trader. Leeson’s early trades for Barings had

gone well, accounting in one year for a tenth of the firm’s
profits, but when he ran into problems, he set up an
‘error account’ to hide his losses from the management
team. In 1995, Leeson placed a trade that amounted to a
bet that the Japanese stock market would not fall. When
the Kobe earthquake hit, he lost the bet. The problem
was made worse by the dangers of derivative trading.
When you own shares, the worst that can happen is that
their value goes to zero. By contrast, when you own
certain derivatives, your losses are unlimited. Barings
lost more than US$1 billion. The bank collapsed and
Leeson was jailed. A generation on, derivatives continue
to be scrutinised by regulators. Derivatives can reduce
risk for individual traders, yet they can also make the
whole financial system more volatile.
Despite the volatility of financial markets, the story of
the 1990s for many people in Asia was one of growing
prosperity. Explaining economic development is a central
goal of economics, and someone who has provided fresh
insights into how poor countries become rich has one of
the most unusual life stories of any economist.
At the age of twenty-six, Justin Yifu Lin was serving in
the Taiwanese army as a company commander on
Taiwan’s Kinmen Island, a few kilometres from the
Chinese mainland. He told his men there would be a
military exercise that night, and that if they saw anyone
in the water they were not to shoot. Then, after dark, he
entered the water and swam to the Chinese mainland,
where he defected to the communist regime. The
following year, studying economics at Peking University,
he had another lucky break. Nobel Prize–winning
economist Theodore Schultz was visiting China, and Lin
served as his translator. Schultz was so impressed with
the young man that he arranged a full scholarship for him
to complete his PhD at Chicago University. A successful
research career followed.

Lin’s theory, expressed in numerous books, articles
and speeches during his time as the World Bank’s chief
economist, is that the low-income countries which did
best in the post-war era not only shared a market
orientation, stable macroeconomic policies and an
economic openness, but were also guided by a proactive
state.13 
Governments 
in 
these 
countries 
identified
business sectors that they saw as having a comparative
advantage, and assisted them by establishing special
economic 
zones, 
investing 
in 
infrastructure 
and
promoting foreign investment. Where Raúl Prebisch’s
Latin American approach advised countries to wall
themselves off from foreign competition, Lin’s East Asian
strategy suggested that countries support key export
industries 
by 
funding 
research 
and 
building
infrastructure. Yet even this approach is risky, since
governments may pick the wrong sector, or find that a
temporary policy has become permanent. As the critics
note, 
‘infant 
industry’ 
support 
often 
endures 
for
industries that are well out of diapers.
Even 
in 
the 
most 
market-oriented 
nations,
governments have played a powerful role in spurring
technological 
development.14 
University 
College
London’s Mariana Mazzucato points out that major
technological breakthroughs have often come when
governments have invested in technological ‘missions’ –
such as landing on the Moon or building the internet. The
‘entrepreneurial state’ has been a driving force behind
innovations that are often wrongly attributed to the
private sector.
The rapid spread of technology has been a key reason
why world population and life expectancy have continued
to rise. In 1798, cleric Thomas Malthus argued that the
supply of food could not outpace population growth and a
large-scale famine and population die-off was inevitable.

In 1968, biologists Anne and Paul Ehrlich declared that
‘the battle to feed all of humanity is over’. They went on
to forecast that ‘in the 1970s the world will undergo
famines – hundreds of millions of people are going to
starve to death’. The Ehrlichs callously advised ending all
food aid to India, a nation that was ‘so far behind in the
population-food game that there is no hope that our food
aid will see them through to self-sufficiency’.
India’s population is now more than twice as large as it
was when the Ehrlichs wrote their book. Malnutrition and
child mortality are down, while life expectancy and
average heights are up. India’s fertility rate has fallen
below the ‘replacement rate’ of 2.1 births per woman –
the level at which the population can be expected to
sustain itself.15 On current projections, the global fertility
rate will fall below the replacement rate in approximately
a generation, after which the world population will peak
at around 10 billion people and then begin to decline.16
Why were Malthus and the Ehrlichs wrong? A major
reason is that innovation debunked the doomsayers.
Barbed wire allowed large animals to be contained
cheaply, facilitating large-scale cattle and sheep farming.
Tractors enabled larger-scale cropping, saving farmers
vast numbers of hours of labour. The Haber-Bosch
process made it possible to convert atmospheric nitrogen
into ammonia-based fertiliser. Instead of mining tropical
islands for guano, fertiliser is produced industrially, with
global production exceeding two hundred million tonnes
each year. Half the nitrogen in your body right now was
created using the Haber-Bosch process.17
A key development in the ‘green revolution’ of the
1960s was the breeding of semi-dwarf, disease-resistant
wheat, which could produce nearly twice as much as
regular wheat. Norman Borlaug, who led the introduction
of these plants into India, Pakistan and Mexico, is

credited with saving over one billion lives. More recently,
genetically modified crops have allowed farmers to
increase yields while reducing pesticide use. More than
one-tenth of the world’s cropland is now genetically
modified. Declining usage of pesticides – partly spurred
by Rachel Carson’s book Silent Spring – has been good
for the natural environment. It has also contributed to a
drop in pesticide poisonings and farmer suicides.18
Researchers are currently exploring a range of possible
genetic 
modifications, 
including 
vitamin-augmented
vegetables, and plants that carry out photosynthesis
more efficiently.
In medicine, modern antibiotics transformed how
doctors treat bacterial infections. A century ago, the son
of US president Calvin Coolidge died from an infected
blister on his toe after a game of tennis. A few years
later, penicillin was discovered by Alexander Fleming. By
the time of the D-Day landings, millions of doses of
penicillin were ready for Allied troops. In the post-war
era, penicillin was made available for civilian use. Today,
antibiotics are used (and overused) across medicine and
agriculture. Vaccines for tuberculosis, tetanus, polio,
hepatitis B, measles, influenza, pneumonia and COVID
have saved millions of lives.
Economists have also been instrumental in expanding
the take-up of effective treatments. In the 1990s, experts
disagreed on whether anti-malarial bed nets should be
sold or freely given away. Some argued that villagers who
received a free bed net would not value it as highly and
might choose to use it as an inefficient fishing net, rather
than a lifesaving protection for themselves and their
children. To settle the matter, researchers conducted a
series of large-scale randomised trials, in which some
recipients were offered free bed nets, while others were
given a chance to buy them at a subsidised price. It

turned out that free bed nets had a much higher take-up
rate and were equally likely to be used for their intended
purpose.19 As a result, donor agencies shifted towards
the provision of free bed nets. Led by Esther Duflo,
Abhijit Banerjee, Michael Kremer and Dean Karlan,
randomised 
trials 
have 
become 
ubiquitous 
in
development economics. The strength of randomisation is
that it provides a powerful means of identifying causal
effects.
It is easy to overlook the massive increase in global
population and life expectancy that has been facilitated
by health and agricultural innovation. Since 1800, the
world’s population has grown from 1 billion to 8 billion
people. Back then, no country had an average life
expectancy above forty years. Today, every nation has an
average life expectancy above forty years. Global average
life expectancy has risen from under thirty in 1800 to
over seventy today.
From an economic standpoint, this increase in life
expectancy may well be more important than the increase
in average incomes. Suppose you could choose between
living healthily for twice as long or having twice as much
income – which would you pick? I’d go for the longevity,
and I know many friends who would do the same. This
point also serves as a reminder that what lies at the heart
of economics is wellbeing, not income. As Australian-born
economist Justin Wolfers notes, economics is no more
about money than architecture is about inches. Money is
a useful measuring tool when comparing costs and
benefits, but it is not the ultimate end goal.
None of this is to suggest that technological progress
and access to global markets have solved all the world’s
problems. Many nations appear to be stuck in a ‘middle-
income trap’ – unable to make the leap into high-income
status. Those countries that have accomplished this

transition – such as Japan, Singapore and South Korea –
are the exceptions. At the end of 2020, 719 million people
were in extreme poverty – defined as living on less than
US$2.15 a day. Most of those people live in Sub-Saharan
Africa.
In most countries around the world, inequality has
risen over the past generation. In some countries, the
rich have not just accelerated away from the rest, but the
poor have become poorer. Following the break-up of the
Soviet Union, alcoholism increased, mortality rates rose
and oligarchs thrived. The poorest half of Russians have
real incomes about one-quarter below where they were in
1980.20 Since the end of communism in 1989, 99 per cent
of Russia’s growth has gone to the top tenth of income
earners. Putin’s Russia is probably more unequal than the
nation ruled by Tsar Nicholas II.
One way of visualising the distribution of global growth
is what has come to be known as ‘the elephant curve’.
This chart, originally created by Serbian-born economist
Branko 
Milanović, 
and 
since 
updated 
by 
other
researchers, depicts the growth rates experienced across
the world’s income distribution from 1980 to 2016: with
the poorest people on the left, the richest on the right,
and the global middle class in the centre.

Total income growth by percentile across the world, 1980–2016
If you squint, you might make out the shape of an
elephant: sluggish growth at the very bottom (the tail),
more rapid growth for those between the twentieth and
thirtieth percentiles (the back), then weak growth for the
upper-middle (the downward curve of the trunk), and
spectacular growth among the those with the highest
incomes (the tip of the trunk). Strong economic growth in
the emerging economies gives a pronounced hump. The
squeezed middle in advanced nations traces the bottom
of the trunk. And the rising prosperity of the global elite
produces the upstretched trunk, pointing skywards.
In general, countries tend to be more equal if
education keeps pace with technological developments, if
unions are strong and if taxes are progressive. Equality is
also improved if the economic growth rate (g) keeps pace
with the rate of return on capital (r).

There are different ways of reducing inequality
through the social safety net. The European model tends
to provide a more generous level of support to those who
are 
jobless. 
The 
US 
model 
focuses 
instead 
on
encouraging work. One of the ways this is done is
through the Earned Income Tax Credit, a program that
tops up the wages of low earners, particularly those with
children. At its most generous, the program provides a 40
per cent subsidy – which means a person earning US$20
an hour would be getting US$28 an hour after the Earned
Income Tax Credit.
Which of the two models is better depends on what you
think technology will do to the world of work.21 The job
pessimists argue that artificial intelligence–driven robots
are steadily getting smarter and will soon be able to do
every task imaginable – so we had better prepare for a
workless world. The job optimists point out that this kind
of argument has accompanied plenty of past waves of
technology, 
from 
mechanical 
knitting 
machines 
to
desktop computers, yet work is still around. As a
congenital optimist, my own inclination is towards
policies that encourage work. For many of us, a job isn’t
just a source of income, it’s also a source of meaning and
identity. People who lose their jobs experience a
happiness drop that goes well beyond the loss of a pay
packet. It’s too early to give up on the world of work.
Health care is another area where the US model
differs markedly from the European model. One way to
think about this is the ‘iron triangle of health care’, which
posits that health systems face trade-offs between cost,
quality and access.22 The United States provides high-
quality health care to those lucky enough to be covered,
but spends more on health care than any other advanced
nation, while still leaving some people uncovered.

European systems are less likely to give patients the very
latest treatments, but tend to be universal.
The economics of health care reminds us that some
technological breakthroughs justify additional health
spending.23 Beta blockers have lowered the incidence of
heart attacks, and the increased use of surgery to treat
heart attacks has substantially increased the odds that a
patient survives. For low-birth-weight infants, special
ventilators and treatments such as artificial surfactants
to improve lung development have raised the odds that a
tiny baby will grow up healthy. Cataract surgery has gone
from a substantial procedure that involved a three-night
hospital stay and frequent complications to a day
procedure that takes less than half an hour. Each of these
technological developments has given us an increase in
healthy life expectancy that justifies the investment. Yet
in areas such as spinal fusion for back pain, there seems
to be little evidence that patients are healthier. With the
rise of personalised medicine and robotic surgery, the
iron triangle of health care will be further tested. The
choices that countries make will affect both growth and
inequality.
The 
most 
unequal 
countries 
have 
tended 
to
underinvest in public services, a phenomenon that
economist John Kenneth Galbraith once called ‘private
opulence and public squalor’.24 In Rio de Janeiro, crime-
stricken favelas can easily be seen from the luxury hotels
that line Ipanema beach. In Cape Town, those who live in
the city’s mansions use private generators, private
transport, private education and private security, while
those in shacks must survive with intermittent power,
unreliable trains, struggling schools and an annual
murder rate of 1 in 1500. In Delhi, the most affluent
families boast retinues of servants, while air pollution is
among the worst in the world.

The wealth gap in Rio de Janeiro, with swimming pools next to shanty towns.
THE ECONOMICS OF SPORT
Sport constitutes less than 1 per cent of the global economy, but it can
serve as a microcosm for understanding economic behaviour more
broadly.25 The discipline dates back to analysis of the baseball labour
market in the 1950s, but it exploded around the turn of the millennium,
marked by the formation of the Journal of Sports Economics in 2000.
Market structure matters. The problem of monopoly power is even
greater in sport than in the regular economy. Few fans want to witness a
walkover. To maintain ‘competitive balance’, many sporting codes share
revenues, cap salaries and give bottom-of-the-league teams preference
when drafting players for the next season.
Sport is a useful laboratory for studying how snap judgements can be
racially biased, with a study of NBA basketball referees finding that they
tend to give more personal fouls to players of the opposite race.26 Sport
also provided insights into the impact of long COVID. Studying European
soccer players in the season before vaccines became available, those
who had caught COVID noticeably underperformed. Even eight months
after their infection, these young athletes made 5 per cent fewer passes
than their COVID-free teammates.27

When teams are more evenly matched, crowd attendance
is larger.
Sport is an arena in which people respond to the incentives created by
the rules – even if they are outside the spirit of the game.28 In the 2012
Olympics, four teams in the women badminton doubles were disqualified
for attempting to lose early matches so as to get a better draw in the
knock-out stages of the tournament. Incentives are everywhere.
Notes
1.
 Coggan, 2020, p. 224.
2.
 ‘$100 billion for three eggs’, Herald Sun, 25 July 2008.
3.
 Coggan, 2020, p. 258.
4.
 Gerald Bouey, governor of the Bank of Canada, speaking in 1982.
5.
 Kenneth Rogoff, 2022, ‘The age of inflation’, Foreign Affairs,
Nov/Dec.
6.
 William McChesney Martin Jr, 1955, ‘Address before the New York
Group of Investment Bankers Association of America’, 19 October.>
7.
 ‘One more push’, The Economist, 21 July 2011.
8.
 Facundo Alvaredo, Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez
and Gabriel Zucman, 2017, World Inequality Report 2018, Paris
School of Economics, Paris, pp. 123–30.

9.
 World Bank, Doing Business project, available at
www.worldbank.org/en/programs/business-enabling-
environment/doing-business-legacy (the project was discontinued in
2021).
10.
 Douglas Irwin, 2022, ‘The trade reform wave of 1985−1995’, AEA
Papers and Proceedings, 112: 244–51.
11.
 Chad Bown and Douglas Irwin, 2015, ‘The GATT’s starting point:
Tariff levels circa 1947’, NBER Working Paper 21782; World Bank,
‘Tariff rate, applied, weighted mean, all products (%)’, available at
data.worldbank.org/indicator/TM.TAX.MRCH.WM.AR.ZS.
12.
 Bolt and Luiten van Zanden, 2020.
13.
 See, for example, Justin Yifu Lin, 2019, ‘New structural economics:
The third generation of development economics’, GEGI Working Paper
27, Global Development Policy Center, Boston University, Boston.
14.
 Mariana Mazzucato, 2013. The Entrepreneurial State: Debunking
Public vs. Private Myths in Risk and Innovation, Anthem Press,
London.
15.
 ‘India’s population will start to shrink sooner than expected’, The
Economist, 2 December 2021.
16.
 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
Population Division, 2022. World Population Prospects 2022, United
Nations, New York.
17.
 Steven Ritter, 2008, ‘The Haber–Bosch reaction: An early chemical
impact on sustainability’, Chemical and Engineering News 86(33).
18.
 Stuart Smyth, 2020, ‘The human health benefits from GM crops’,
Plant Biotechnology Journal 18(4): 887–8.
19.
 Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), 2018, ‘Free bednets to
fight malaria’, J-PAL Evidence to Policy Case Study.
20.
 Facundo Alvaredo, Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez
and Gabriel Zucman, 2017, World Inequality Report 2018, Paris
School of Economics, Paris, pp. 113–22.
21.
 For a longer discussion of this point, see Gans and Leigh, 2019.
22.
 William Kissick, 1994, Medicine’s Dilemmas: Infinite Needs Versus
Finite Resources, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
23.
 These examples are drawn from David Cutler and Mark McClellan,
2001, ‘Is technological change in medicine worth it?’, Health Affairs
20(5): 11–29.
24.
 John Kenneth Galbraith, 1958, The Affluent Society, Houghton Mifflin
Company, Boston.
25.
 The Business Research Company, 2023, Sports Global Market Report
2023, The Business Research Company, London.
26.
 Joseph Price and Justin Wolfers, 2010, ‘Racial discrimination among
NBA referees’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(4): 1859–87.

27.
 Kai Fischer, J. James Reade and W. Benedikt Schmal, 2022, ‘What
cannot be cured must be endured: The long-lasting effect of a COVID-
19 infection on workplace productivity’, Labour Economics 79,
102281.
28.
 Graham Kendall and Liam Lenten, 2017, ‘When sports rules go awry’,
European Journal of Operational Research 257(2): 377–94.

12
HOT MARKETS AND A HOTTER PLANET
at the start of 2000, the website pets.com ran a million-
dollar Super Bowl ad, featuring its sock puppet mascot,
and held an initial public offering, which raised US$82
million. By the end of the year, the stock price had
crashed from US$11 a share to US$0.19 a share. It
turned out that the company had a clever marketing
strategy, but its business strategy was based on selling
cat litter and dog food at prices well below cost. This
meant that the more customers pets.com attracted, the
more money it lost. Pets.com became the mascot for that
year’s tech wreck.
In the prior decade, the web had grown rapidly. This
‘Web 1.0’ phase saw the growth of search engines, file-
sharing, government websites and commercial activity.
By the end of the twentieth century, the number of
worldwide internet users was doubling annually.1 Some
firms, such as Google and Amazon, would go on to
dominate their industries. Others, like pets.com, eToys,
GeoCities, Webvan and garden.com, could not produce
enough revenue to satisfy their investors.
The bursting of the US technology bubble – like the
Asian Financial Crisis a few years earlier – turned out to
be a regional slump rather than a global one. From its
peak in 2000, the tech-heavy NASDAQ share market fell
by 78 per cent, and the September 2001 terrorist attacks
prolonged the downturn. Yet the recession was relatively
brief, and the rise in unemployment was relatively

modest. Many nations, including the United Kingdom,
Canada and Australia, avoided recession entirely.
In 2002, the Nobel Prize in economics was awarded to
Princeton’s Daniel Kahneman, for his work in developing
behavioural economics. The economics prize was not one
of the original Nobel Prizes; it only began in 1969, funded
by the Swedish central bank to honour its 300th
anniversary. 
Non-economists 
sometimes 
question
whether it is a real Nobel Prize, but to economists, it is
the profession’s highest honour.
Kahneman is a psychologist, and his work shows a
series of systematic departures from the standard
rational model of Homo economicus. You are 8,000 times
more likely to die from a mosquito bite than a shark bite,
and 4,000 times more likely to die in a car crash than a
plane crash.2 But many people worry more about sharks
and planes than mosquitoes and cars. We waste money
on slot machines while under-saving for retirement.
Restaurants make us spend more by putting an expensive
item on the menu (it inflates our estimate of what a
reasonable meal should cost). Online retailers trick us
into 
unnecessary 
purchases 
through 
time-limited
‘lightning deals’. Our night selves stay up late because –
as comedian Jerry Seinfeld once put it – getting only five
hours of sleep is a problem for ‘morning guy’.
Working with Amos Tversky (who would have shared
the Nobel if he had not passed away in 1996),
Kahneman’s 
contribution 
was 
to 
take 
behavioural
economics beyond a series of quirky results and
incorporate it into an overall theory of decision-making.
The brain, Kahneman argues, uses two ‘systems’.3
System One is fast, instinctive and emotional. This system
is predisposed to behavioural biases. The anchoring bias
means that people are more likely to buy a product if it
has been marked down from an initially higher price. The

planning 
fallacy 
means 
that 
the 
typical 
kitchen
remodelling project ends up costing twice what was
anticipated at the outset.
System One is used when we are making snap
judgements or applying rules of thumb, and tends to be
prone to bias. System Two is more rational, but slower.
When multiplying 2 × 2, we use System One. When
multiplying 17 × 24, we use System Two. System Two is
more effortful and tends to be more rational. When
deciding what kind of washing machine to buy, it is worth
engaging System Two so as to make the best possible
decision. The point of Kahneman’s work is not to ask us
to be calculating and rational about every decision, but to
recognise when our behavioural biases might cause us to
make costly mistakes. Today, behavioural economics is
taught as a standard part of economics, and its
implications are especially important when studying how
people take risks and buy insurance, how we trade off the
future against the present, and how we can be ‘nudged’
into making better decisions.
One of the biggest decisions facing humanity is how to
handle global warming. In 2005, the British government
commissioned economist Nicholas Stern to write a report
on the economics of climate change. Delivered the
following year, the Stern Review was to be one of the
most significant economic reports on climate change ever
written. Economists had long been familiar with the
concept of an externality, thanks to the work of
Cambridge’s Arthur Pigou nearly a century earlier.
Suppose a dirty factory is located next to a laundry and
that when the factory is running it deposits soot on the
laundry’s sheets. This is an example of a market failure,
because the factory does not pay for the cost it imposes
on the laundry. The simplest answer is a ban on polluting
factories 
in 
laundry 
districts 
(or 
the 
reverse).
Alternatively, the government could impose a ‘Pigouvian

tax’, with the size of the tax equating to the value of the
harm that the factory does to the laundry. Another
economist, Ronald Coase, suggested that if transaction
costs were sufficiently small, then the parties could
bargain their way to an efficient outcome (though he
acknowledged that this would rarely occur in practice).
In his report, Nicholas Stern concluded that climate
change was the biggest market failure the world had ever
seen. Carbon pollution imposed massive social costs, but
emitters had faced little incentive to cut back. Left
unchecked, Stern argued, climate change would have
adverse impacts on food production, access to water, and
population health. Water shortages, coastal flooding and
hunger could affect hundreds of millions of people,
disrupting life on a scale equivalent to the world wars.
These costs would likely be equivalent to losing 5 per
cent of global income every year forever – and might be
as high as losing 20 per cent of global income each year.
The Stern Review concluded that by spending a much
smaller amount – approximately 1 per cent of global
income – greenhouse emissions could be substantially
reduced, limiting the worst impacts of climate change.
The key to action was to ensure that investment which
would inevitably be made – in modernising energy
production, updating transport networks and so on – was
done in a way that reduced carbon emissions.
Scientific reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change had drawn the world’s attention to the
issue, with some scientists arguing that the planet had
entered a new geological epoch, the Anthropocene. The
Stern Review applied an economic lens: showing that the
benefits of acting outweighed the costs. Central to the
report’s conclusion was that it put pretty much the same
weight on the future as the present, choosing not to apply
a normal economic discount rate to the future. This is
different from how economists often analyse long-term

decisions. In considering whether to build a motorway, a
government will typically scale down future benefits to
reflect the fact that the money could otherwise be
invested, earning a return that would make it more
valuable in the future.
With climate change, the analysis is different. If we use
standard economic discount rates to diminish future
costs, we are effectively saying that the lives of future
generations should be considered less valuable than
those 
of 
people 
living 
today. 
When 
assessing
infrastructure projects, the US Office of Management and
Budget suggests that agencies conduct their analysis
using discount rates of up to 7 per cent. But a discount
rate of 7 per cent implies that if benefits are a decade
away, then they need to be twice as big as the costs, and
that if they are a century away, they need to be 868 times
the cost. Applied across individuals, this suggests that
the value of one person living a century ago is equivalent
to the value of 868 people living today. But would we
really think that the value of King George V equates to
the population of an entire high school today? To avoid
such an absurd result, Stern opted to use a lower
discount rate, placing increased weight on the wellbeing
of future generations.
While the release of the Stern Review prompted debate
among economists around the choice of discount rates,
its essential conclusions are now broadly accepted.
Economists have worked with governments to design a
variety of schemes to reduce emissions – which are now
falling in most advanced nations. A central challenge is
China’s greenhouse emissions, which account for one-
third of the global total and have been steadily rising over
recent years. Encouraging more low-income nations to
reduce emissions is now central to addressing the world’s
biggest market failure.

Markets don’t always fail, however, and it can be
useful to recognise the amount of value created by the
simple act of trading. Your morning cup of coffee likely
costs less than the maximum you would be willing to pay:
we call the difference ‘consumer surplus’. Likewise, the
café likely sells it for more than the minimum it would be
willing to accept: we call that gap ‘producer surplus’.
In 2005, Canadian blogger Kyle MacDonald vividly
illustrated this principle by trading his way from a red
paperclip to a house. First, he traded his paperclip for a
fish-shaped pen. Then he traded the pen for a hand-
sculpted doorknob. Then he traded the doorknob for a
camp stove. This went on until his fourteenth and final
trade: swapping a movie role for a small house. At each
step, MacDonald valued the new item more highly than
the old item – but he traded with someone who valued the
old item more than the new. MacDonald didn’t just get
himself a house – he did so through fourteen trades that
each made another person better off.

Kyle MacDonald with the first and last of his traded items.
MacDonald wasn’t the only one who was keen to get
his hands on a house. By 2005, the US economy had
recovered from the short-lived tech crisis, and a housing
boom was underway. This was an era when home prices
were rising across the advanced world. On average, it
took a middle-income couple with two children seven
years of income in 1995 to pay for a 60 square metre
(650 square foot) apartment in their country’s capital
city. By 2005, the price of that same apartment had risen
to ten years of income.4
In the United States, the rise in prices was especially
steep. In 2007, economist Robert Shiller took his series of
US house prices over the previous century and plotted
them on a rollercoaster simulation.5 The simulator
swooped viewers up and down, before finally taking them
on a huge rise. As it ended, viewers could see that the
rollercoaster was poised higher than ever before.

While prices were rising, lending standards were
falling. In Bakersfield, California, a strawberry picker
with an income of US$14,000 and no English was lent the
full purchase price of a US$720,000 home.6 These NINJA
loans (no income, no job, no assets) were written on the
assumption that prices would continue to rise, allowing
borrowers to refinance. On the lending side, loans were
‘securitised’ – which meant that they were packaged and
sold on to investors. The theory was that this would
distribute the risk more broadly and allow the market to
grow more rapidly. The problem was that it changed the
incentives. Traditionally, banks lent money to people to
buy homes, and the bank lost money if the borrower
couldn’t repay. With securitisation, the people writing the
loans were no longer taking the risk, which created an
incentive to lend too much to people who could not afford
to repay.
MIND THE GENDER PAY GAP
Worldwide, hourly wages for women are 20 per cent less than for men.7
This represents a sizeable gap, though it has narrowed over time. On
average, the gender pay gap was twice as large in the 1960s as it is
today.8 In Europe from 1300 to 1800, the gender pay gap was larger still,
with women often earning only half as much as men.9
What explains the gender pay gap? Historically, one factor was that
women had less formal education than men. That’s no longer true, with
women’s educational attainment exceeding men’s in most countries. But
a significant factor is the occupations that men and women work in. Jobs
in the care economy are dominated by women and tend to pay lower
wages. Occupations such as engineering and computer programming are
male-dominated and tend to pay above-average wages.

Claudia Goldin won the 2023 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences
‘for having advanced our understanding of women’s labour market
outcomes’. To accompany its announcement, the Royal Swedish Academy
of Sciences released this cartoon, illustrating Goldin’s findings on the role
of parenthood in widening the gender pay gap.
In the past, some economists thought that men and women were freely
choosing their occupations. Recent research has questioned this view. For
example, we know that women are more likely to be sexually harassed at
work, and that this harassment can deter women from certain
occupations. If technical jobs have higher rates of sexual harassment,
then this can widen the gender pay gap by discouraging women from
choosing those career pathways.
Another factor is discrimination. Women report higher levels of
discrimination at work, although this has diminished over the past
century. One intriguing study following transgender men and women finds
that those who transition female tend to experience a wage drop, while
those who transition male tend to experience a wage gain.10
Perhaps the largest contributor to the gender pay gap in the modern
era is the motherhood penalty. In many nations, earnings trajectories for
childless men and women are not dramatically different. But among those
who have children, women generally spend more time out of the labour
force than men. When women have children, their earnings typically fall
or flatline. This is not only because mothers often work part time, but also
because they can find themselves on a less attractive career trajectory,
sometimes dubbed ‘the mummy track’. With less experience in the labour
market, women are paid lower wages than men.
This pay gap is particularly large in what Harvard economist Claudia
Goldin calls ‘greedy jobs’.11 In many countries, women are severely
under-represented in time-intensive roles such as chief executives, law
firm partners, politicians and surgeons. Occupations that make it difficult
to combine career and family tend to have the highest gender pay gaps.
Likewise, gender gaps are larger in countries where access to childcare is

more limited. One consequence of the motherhood penalty is that the
gender pay gap tends to be much bigger if we measure it in terms of
lifetime earnings rather than hourly wages. Even in advanced countries,
the average lifetime earnings of mothers are only about half the lifetime
earnings of men – similar to the hourly wage gap five hundred years
ago.12
Investment bank Goldman Sachs was one of the
financial organisations that bundled together risky
‘subprime’ 
housing 
loans 
into 
mortgage-backed
securities. Buyers of these securities effectively owned a
slice of many mortgages. That reduced investors’
exposure if a single NINJA homeowner defaulted on their
loan, but still left investors vulnerable if the whole
housing market slumped. Goldman marketed these
products widely, including to retirement funds. One
Goldman trader boasted of selling subprime mortgages to
‘widows and orphans’. Meanwhile, Goldman was betting
that the housing market would fall – a trade that became
known as ‘the big short’. Goldman would later argue that
it had made no secret of the fact that it was betting
against the product it was selling to its customers.
When the market crashed, average US home values
dropped by around one-fifth. By 2008, one in ten
mortgage holders had negative equity – meaning that
their mortgage was worth more than their home. Millions
of borrowers defaulted on their loans and lost their
homes. Yet Goldman Sachs remained commercially
successful. In 2009, the firm made a profit of US$13
billion, and paid billions of dollars in bonuses. Goldman’s
chief executive, Lloyd Blankfein, received a US$9 million
bonus.
The financial crisis has been compared with Agatha
Christie’s Murder on the Orient Express, in which
everybody did it. Greedy bankers, incompetent credit
rating 
agencies, 
gullible 
home 
owners 
and 
lax
policymakers each bear some share of the blame. In

response, coordinated action by the G20 delivered fiscal
stimulus across the world’s twenty largest economies.
But many still suffered enduring harm. In the US, the
unemployment rate for Black workers rose above 10 per
cent, and stayed there for more than six years, while the
unemployment rate among white workers never reached
double digits.13 This is a common pattern in recessions
across countries. Education and assets serve as shock
absorbers – making people less vulnerable to crises.
Conversely, economists are realising that volatility and
disadvantage go together.
Development economists have increasingly pinpointed
the role of corruption in holding economies back. In
2009, Malaysian prime minister Najib Razak established
a sovereign wealth fund known as 1MDB, which was used
to channel hundreds of millions of dollars of public money
into political campaigns for his party, and personal
spending for his associates. Jho Low, a key mastermind of
the 
scam, 
purchased 
multimillion-dollar 
homes 
in
London, New York and Los Angeles, a US$35 million
Bombardier Global 5000 jet, US$8 million of jewellery for
his then-girlfriend Miranda Kerr, and a multi-day party
that involved chartering an international flight to
celebrate New Year’s Eve in both Sydney and Las Vegas.
The stolen money was even used to fund The Wolf of Wall
Street – a film about a fraudulent stockbroker and his
opulent lifestyle. At one point, Low was thought to have
more free cash at his disposal than anyone else in the
world.
Economists studying corruption have noted the various
ways that it can stymie development. The thefts
perpetrated by Indonesia’s president Suharto, Zaire’s
president Mobutu and the Philippines’ president Marcos
reduced growth and increased inequality in their
countries. Public money stolen to buy palaces, luxury cars

and yachts is not available to be spent on government
health and education programs. In business, corruption
raises prices, lowers innovation and undermines honest
public servants. Corruption flourishes when economic
power meets crooked politics outside the public eye. One
researcher sums up the drivers of corruption in an
equation: corruption equals monopoly plus discretion
minus accountability.14
Economists are also increasingly recognising the role
of tax havens in enabling corruption. The 1MDB
embezzlement was enabled by bank accounts in the
British Virgin Islands. The Panama Papers, Pandora
Papers, Lux Leaks and other disclosures have revealed
widespread use of tax havens by drug lords, dictators and
money launderers, as well as by the ultra-wealthy. On one
estimate, four out of every five dollars in offshore
accounts is there in breach of other countries’ tax laws.15
Economic research on the scale of the problem has
helped put pressure on tax havens to share information
with tax administrations around the world.
In low-income countries, the program Tax Inspectors
Without Borders provides expertise to enable nations to
conduct rigorous audits – in some cases producing tax
gains 100 times larger than the cost of paying the
auditors. Another useful approach is the concept of
‘odious debt’, under which the international community
agrees that money lent to a despot is not a true loan to
the government but should be regarded as a personal
loan.16 The idea of odious debt is to change lenders’
incentives. If a bank knows that a loan to help an autocrat
buy weapons will be void if the country becomes a
democracy, then it might think twice before making the
loan in the first place. In turn, this may help to defund
dictators.

As growth resumed after the financial crisis, so too did
the steady realisation that some of the claims made by
the world’s money managers might be hollow. In one
exercise, 
researchers 
followed 
up 
the 
forty-three
companies profiled in Tom Peters and Robert Waterman’s
book In Search of Excellence. They found that just two
years later, almost one-third were in serious financial
trouble.17 The most influential business book of its era
didn’t always identify the most successful firms. In
another exercise, Raven, a six-year-old chimpanzee,
outperformed 99 per cent of professional Wall Street
brokers by throwing darts to choose her stocks.18
The big question for fund managers is whether they
can beat the average performance of the share market.
According to a recent report, 65 per cent of actively
managed US equity funds underperform the share
market over a one-year period.19 In other words, the
typical year sees about two-thirds of actively managed
funds grow by less than the share market average. Over a
five-year period, the share of underperformers grows to
88 per cent. Over a ten-year period, 92 per cent of
managed funds underperform the share market.
The problem isn’t that these money-managers are
stupid, it’s that beating the share market is difficult, as
economic theory predicts. When deciding whether to buy
or sell a stock, analysts scrutinise every skerrick of
information to understand the product, the management
team and the market conditions. Share market analysts
have been known to use satellite images to count cars in
parking lots to estimate retail demand and to study long-
range 
weather 
forecasts 
to 
predict 
crop 
yields.
Algorithmic trading models are programmed to spot
small pricing differences across markets and exploit the
difference within milliseconds.

A basic maxim of the share market is the efficient
market hypothesis: that the price of a stock reflects all
publicly available information. Since it is illegal to trade
based on ‘insider’ information, most actively managed
funds – as well as most individual day traders – fail to
beat the average return on the share market. As
economists like to say, it’s rare to find a $20 note on the
sidewalk, because someone else is likely to have grabbed
it first.
A popular alternative to actively managed funds is an
index fund. An index fund simply comprises the
companies on the share market, held in proportion to
their market size. For example, an S&P 500 index fund
today would include about 7 per cent Apple, 1 per cent
Chevron, 0.1 per cent FedEx, and a proportionate share
of the other 497 firms in the index. The returns on an
index fund are designed to match the share index that it
is tracking, minus a management fee. Because tracking
the index is a trivial exercise, index funds can charge fees
that are far smaller than actively managed funds that are
paying stock pickers to choose their investments.
When Vanguard founder Jack Bogle created the index
fund in 1975, critics derided it as ‘Bogle’s folly’. But by
the 2010s, index funds were the gorillas in the room.
According to one estimate, these passive investors
controlled one-fifth of the US share market in 2011 (a
figure that would grow to two-fifths over the coming
decade).20 One of the big three index investors –
Vanguard, BlackRock and State Street – is the largest
shareholder for nine-tenths of the firms on the S&P
500.21
Economists quarrel about many things, but a survey of
over forty top economists (including several Nobel Prize
winners) found not a single economist who disagreed
with the proposition that investors do better from

investing in index funds.22 Index funds even have the
unlikely backing of Warren Buffett, who despite being an
active investor believes that most people would be better
off putting their money into low-cost index funds. ‘If a
statue is ever erected to honour the person who has done
the most for American investors’, Buffett wrote to his
shareholders in 2017, ‘the hands-down choice should be
Jack Bogle.’
Across the world, the 2010s saw an unprecedented
volume of money looking for investment opportunities.
From Canadian pension funds to high-saving Chinese
families, a global glut of savings began to push down
interest rates. Harvard’s Larry Summers warned that the
world may be entering a period of ‘secular stagnation’, in
which productivity and growth had slowed. George
Mason University’s Tyler Cowen argued that compared to
the transformative twentieth-century breakthroughs of
mass education, mass migration, electrification and
transport, the economic gains from computerisation and
smartphones 
were 
relatively 
modest.23 
Internet
innovations such as Wikipedia, YouTube and Google had
advantaged the intellectually curious, but had only a
limited impact on productivity. A more optimistic view is
that the productivity impacts of computing power – like
coal power and electricity before it – could come decades
after the innovation first emerged.
Low interest rates posed a challenge to monetary
policymakers. Analysing historical data going back 5000
years, Bank 
of 
England 
economist Andy Haldane
concluded that interest rates had never before been this
low.24 He likened central banks’ attempts to raise
interest rates to the story of a child whose kite gets
lodged in a tree and who throws one thing after another
into the branches in his attempts to dislodge it. Asset
purchases, liquidity schemes and forward guidance,

Haldane noted, had been similarly ineffective at raising
interest rates. By the late 2010s, central bankers in many
countries found themselves grappling with deflation.
A common problem for central bankers in this era was
the ‘zero lower bound’ – arising from the fact that it’s
tricky to charge someone a negative rate of interest. If I
can store cash without cost, why should I lend it to you so
you can give me back less money than I started with?
Central bankers turned instead to ‘quantitative easing’,
purchasing financial assets in an attempt to support the
economy. By the end of the 2010s, four major central
banks – the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the
Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank –
collectively held more than US$20 trillion in financial
assets – a sum approximately equal to the annual
economic output of the United States.25
Some economic damage during this era was self-
inflicted. After championing global efforts to reduce trade
barriers for more than half a century, the United States
abruptly reversed course in 2018, imposing tariffs on
steel, aluminium and a plethora of imports from China.
Announcing 
the 
tariffs, 
President 
Donald 
Trump
characterised them as a way of punishing foreigners, but
in fact the cost was largely borne by Americans. For US
households, Trump’s tariffs constituted one of the largest
tax increases in decades.26 Because many more US
workers are employed in steel-using sectors such as
construction and car manufacturing than in steel
manufacturing, it has been estimated that sixteen jobs
were lost for every additional job created.27 Furthermore,
trading partners imposed retaliatory tariffs, reducing US
export volumes by 10 per cent for the affected
products.28 Like military wars, trade wars tend to
produce more losers than winners.

In a 2016 referendum, 52 per cent of Britons voted to
leave the European Union, which took effect in 2020.
Brexit led many UK-based firms to shift offices to
continental Europe and created considerable uncertainty
for importers and exporters. Brexit impeded the free flow
of people, services, goods and capital between the United
Kingdom and continental Europe. The UK’s Office of
Budget Responsibility puts the long-run cost of Brexit at
4 per cent of UK income.29 Economists were almost
universal in opposing Brexit, but were unable to counter
a campaign driven by anti-establishment sentiments, a
backlash 
against 
immigration 
and 
a 
distrust 
of
international institutions.
In the twenty-first century, economists turned our
attention to a wide range of topics – from corruption to
climate change – that might have been considered
beyond the remit of the discipline in prior generations.
Economists acknowledged the limitations of the purely
rational model, using behavioural economics to explain
why people often save too little and eat too much. And,
like the debate over the Corn Laws and the Smoot-
Hawley Tariff Act, the Trump tariffs and Brexit were a
reminder that while openness may be good economics,
isolationism often wins elections.
Notes
1.
 See www.internetworldstats.com/emarketing.htm.
2.
 In recent years, malaria deaths have averaged around 600,000
(World Health Organization World Malaria Report), while shark
deaths have averaged around seventy (Florida Museum of Natural
History’s International Shark Attack File). Motor vehicle fatalities
have averaged around 1.3 million (World Health Organization), while
aviation fatalities have averaged around 300 (Aviation Safety
Network).
3.
 Daniel Kahneman, 2011, Thinking, Fast and Slow, Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, New York.

4.
 OECD, 2022, ‘HM 1.2 House Prices’, OECD Affordable Housing
Database, OECD, Paris.
5.
 Shiller’s 2007 rollercoaster simulation can be viewed at
www.youtube.com/watch?v=kUldGc06S3U.
6.
 Michael Lewis, 2010, The Big Short: Inside the Doomsday Machine,
WW Norton, New York.
7.
 International Labour Organization, 2018, Global Wage Report
2018/19: What Lies Behind Gender Pay Gaps, ILO, Geneva.
8.
 Doris Weichselbaumer and Rudof Winter-Ebmer, 2005, ‘A meta-
analysis on the international gender wage gap’, Journal of Economic
Surveys 19 (3): 479–511.
9.
 Alexandra de Pleijt and Jan Luiten van Zanden, 2021, ‘Two worlds of
female labour: gender wage inequality in western Europe, 1300–
1800’, Economic History Review 74 (3): 611–38.
10.
 Kristen Schilt and Matthew Wiswall, 2008, ‘Before and after: Gender
transitions, human capital, and workplace experiences’, BE Journal of
Economic Analysis & Policy 8(1).
11.
 Claudia Goldin, 2021, Career and Family: Women’s Century-Long
Journey Toward Equity, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
12.
 Rick Glaubitz, Astrid Harnack-Eber and Miriam Wetter, 2022, ‘The
gender gap in lifetime earnings: The role of parenthood’, DIW Berlin
Discussion Paper 2001, DIW, Berlin; Fatih Guvenen, Greg Kaplan, Jae
Song and Justin Weidner, 2022, ‘Lifetime earnings in the United
States over six decades’, American Economic Journal: Applied
Economics 14(4): 446–79.
13.
 Jhacova Williams, ‘Laid off more, hired less: Black workers in the
COVID-19 recession’, RAND blog, 29 September 2020.
14.
 Robert Klitgaard, 1988, Controlling Corruption, University of
California Press, Oakland, CA.
15.
 Annette Alstadsæter, Niels Johannesen and Gabriel Zucman, 2018,
‘Who owns the wealth in tax havens? Macro evidence and implications
for global inequality’, Journal of Public Economics 162: 89–100.
16.
 Seema Jayachandran and Michael Kremer, 2006, ‘Odious debt’,
American Economic Review 96(1): 82–92.
17.
 Tim Harford, 2020, How to Make the World Add Up: Ten Rules for
Thinking Differently About Numbers, Little, Brown Book Group,
London.
18.
 See www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/most-successful-
chimpanzee-on-wall-street.
19.
 Tim Edwards, Anu R. Ganti, Craig Lazzara, Joseph Nelesen and
Davide Di Gioia, 2022, ‘SPIVA U.S. Mid-Year 2022’, S&P Dow Jones
Indices, New York, p. 7.
20.
 Alexander Chinco and Marco Sammon, 2022, ‘The passive-ownership
share is double what you think it is’, available at
ssrn.com/abstract=4188052.

21.
 Annie Lowrey, 2021, ‘Could index funds be “worse than Marxism”?’,
The Atlantic, 5 April.
22.
 IGM Economic Experts Panel, 2019, ‘Diversified investing’, Initiative
on Global Markets, Chicago Booth, Chicago, 28 January.
23.
 Tyler Cowen, 2011, The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the
Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually)
Feel Better, Dutton, New York.
24.
 Andrew G Haldane, 2015, ‘Stuck’, Speech given at the Open
University, Milton Keynes, 30 June.
25.
 See the Atlantic Council’s ‘Global QE Tracker’, available at
www.atlanticcouncil.org/global-qe-tracker/.
26.
 Steve Liesman, 2019, ‘Trump’s tariffs are equivalent to one of the
largest tax increases in decades’, CNBC, 16 May.
27.
 Joseph Francois, Laura Baughman and Daniel Anthony, 2018, ‘Round
3: “Trade discussion” or “trade war”? The estimated impacts of tariffs
on steel and aluminum’, Trade Partnership, Washington, DC, 5 June.
28.
 Pablo Fajgelbaum, Pinelopi Goldberg, Patrick Kennedy and Amit
Khandelwal, 2020, ‘The return to protectionism’, Quarterly Journal of
Economics 135(1): 1–55.
29.
 ‘Impact of Brexit on economy “worse than Covid”’, BBC News, 27
October 2021.

13
THE PANDEMIC AND BEYOND
in early 2020, the emergence of covid plunged the world
economy into the worst downturn since the Great
Depression of the 1930s. As countries locked down,
global income in the second quarter of 2020 fell by 5 per
cent.1 Business investment plummeted, tourism and
migration virtually ceased, and spending on services
plunged. Every advanced economy entered recession.
Across the world, around 400 million jobs were lost.2 To
support households, governments provided more than
US$10 trillion in support to affected workers and firms.
In 2019, global government debt was equivalent to ten
months of worldwide income. In 2020, global government
debt jumped to a full year of worldwide income.3
Two inventions were crucial. COVID tests helped solve
what economists refer to as an ‘information problem’ –
making it possible for people to self-isolate in the early
phase of the disease so as not to infect others. COVID
vaccines provided a substantial benefit to those taking
them – reducing the chance of death to less than one-
tenth of the risk for unvaccinated people.4 Vaccines also
provided a significant positive externality, by reducing
the rate of disease spread. Because of this positive
externality, governments around the world provided
vaccines free, rather than asking people to pay for them.
To monetary policymakers, a surprise of COVID was
the impact on inflation as lockdowns were lifted.
Households unleashed a flood of pent-up spending, while

Russia’s invasion of Ukraine caused energy prices to
spike. Suddenly central banks found themselves dealing
with inflation that rivalled that of the 1970s. Because
curbing inflation called for interest rate rises rather than
reductions, there was no need for unconventional
monetary policy. The problem was the anguish that high
rates caused to mortgage holders and business owners
who had become accustomed to cheap money. Many
people questioned why central banks hadn’t acted
earlier, and why their forecasts had wrongly anticipated
low inflation and low interest rates.
The answer goes to a general challenge in economics:
forecasting is hard. Like weather forecasters and sports
pundits, central bankers can’t always be sure what’s
around the corner. As baseball philosopher Yogi Berra
once put it, ‘It’s tough to make predictions, especially
about the future.’ Academic economists tend to be
dubious of forecasts, noting that crises are often
precipitated by unexpected shocks. Conflict, pandemics,
famines, bankruptcies, defaults and trade wars are often
missed by economic models that concentrate only on
slow-moving variables.
As well as being attacked for having imperfect
foresight, central bankers have been criticised for a
multitude of other sins. Why didn’t they do more to
prevent the build-up of government debt? Why did
central banks in places like Australia, Ireland and the
United States allow house prices to double within a
decade around the start of the millennium? Why did
central banks allow households to take on so much debt?
The answer is something known as the ‘Tinbergen
Rule’, which simply notes that if you have only one tool,
you can only target one objective. The primary tool for
central banks is interest rates. The Tinbergen Rule points
out that if house prices are skyrocketing while inflation is
below the target, central banks can’t solve both

problems. Similarly, if families are facing runaway
inflation, yet some households are overstretched on their
mortgages, central banks must choose which problem to
solve.
One contributing factor to supply chain blockages
during the COVID pandemic was the high degree of
concentration across many markets. In the United States,
virtually all infant formula is made by a handful of
companies, and imports are heavily restricted. When the
largest manufacturer, Abbott, closed its biggest plant due
to possible contamination, it caused a crisis. At its peak,
seven out of ten US supermarkets carried no infant
formula. The small number of producers had created
chokepoints, and parents were paying the price.
The ‘Chicago School’ view of competition policy – that
monopolies 
could 
serve 
consumers 
well 
in 
many
instances – was coming under increasing scrutiny. From
infant formula (where nine-tenths is made by four
companies) to coffins (where the top two producers make
four-fifths of all coffins), concentrated markets were
literally a cradle-to-grave phenomenon.
Market concentration wasn’t just the result of large
firms outgrowing their competitors. Applying the Chicago
School’s 
consumer 
welfare 
standard, 
competition
authorities and courts had allowed a plethora of mergers,
including Facebook’s purchase of Instagram, Google’s
purchase of YouTube, and brewer AB InBev’s purchase of
SABMiller. Yet economists were now concerned that
market concentration might have other adverse impacts.
In terms of annual income, the largest firms are on the
scale of nations. Walmart is about the economic size of
Thailand. Amazon is the size of Austria. ExxonMobil is the
size of Peru. Perhaps, economists began to think, big
wasn’t beautiful after all.
The fear about market dominance was felt most keenly
in technology, where a winner-takes-all dynamic often

applies. 
In 
advanced 
nations, 
five 
firms 
known
colloquially as ‘MAMAA’ – Meta, Apple, Microsoft,
Alphabet 
and 
Amazon 
– 
dominate 
social 
media,
smartphones, software, search and online shopping. In
China, the four players known as ‘BATX’ – Baidu, Alibaba,
Tencent and Xiaomi – dominate search, e-commerce,
social media and smartphones.
Economists 
became 
increasingly 
concerned 
that
concentrated markets hurt workers as well as consumers.
One-fifth of US workers have a clause in their
employment contract limiting their ability to take a job
with any company that competes with their current
employer.5 A clandestine set of deals between Silicon
Valley firms not to hire each other’s software engineers
reduced employees’ salaries. Joan Robinson’s concern
about monopsony power remains highly relevant.
Monopsony power can also hurt suppliers. Apple’s App
Store has been described as a ‘walled garden’, in which
Apple charges app developers up to 30 per cent of any
revenue that they make through the app store. Similar
concerns were being raised in China, where Alibaba was
caught preventing merchants selling their goods on rival
platforms, and fined the equivalent of US$2.8 billion. The
nine firms – MAMAA and BATX – are among the world
leaders in artificial intelligence. So they stand to gain
dramatically 
from 
breakthroughs 
in 
computing
technology.6
While many fear that technology may supersize the
megacorps, technological advances could reduce the size
of some companies. Ronald Coase’s seminal analysis of
the boundaries of the firm proposed that whether a job
should be done in-house or outsourced depends on
transaction costs and information costs. If online
platforms make it easier to source the labour of non-
employees or connect with other organisations, they

could end up shrinking the firm. Most Meta content
moderators don’t work for Meta. Most Amazon delivery
drivers 
don’t 
work 
for 
Amazon. 
In 
the 
future,
multifaceted corporate conglomerates such as Mitsui,
Swire and Tata may struggle against more specialised
competitors.
Competition policy isn’t the only area that is being
affected by the increasing power and usage of computing
technology. Mathematics professor Hannah Fry gives a
series of examples in which algorithms have produced
troubling results.7 When they googled their own names,
African 
Americans 
were 
more 
likely 
than 
white
Americans to see advertisements targeted at people with
criminal records. Women were less likely than men to be
served online advertisements for high-paying executive
jobs.
In one incident, the British supermarket Tesco was
contacted by a customer who shared a store loyalty card
with her husband and had seen condoms in the ‘my
favourites’ section. It must be a mistake, she told the
supermarket. It wasn’t, but the supermarket quietly
apologised for the data error, rather than be the cause of
a marital rift. In the US justice system, judges sometimes
make decisions based on algorithms that calculate the
chances that a person will reoffend.8 Yet defendants can
be refused access to the information that has led to the
decision. In China, the social credit system has denied
millions of citizens access to flights and high-speed rail
trips on the basis of their low ‘trustworthiness’, which
can be due to jaywalking, failing to visit one’s elderly
parents, or criticising the government online.
Social psychologist Shoshana Zuboff dubs the use of
private data by corporations ‘surveillance capitalism’,
noting the way that it is leading to increasingly targeted
advertising and a growing corporate demand for user

data.9 As the examples above show, big data has the
potential to worsen inequality. Yet economists are also
making use of large datasets to answer questions that
were previously out of reach. One exemplar is Harvard’s
Raj Chetty, whose Opportunity Insights laboratory uses
big data to study economic opportunity.
Using tax data on almost the entire US population over
nearly three decades, Chetty’s team analysed economic
mobility – the propensity of people to move up or down
the income distribution from one generation to the
next.10 For children born in the 1940s, they showed,
nearly nine in ten could expect to earn more than their
parents. But for children born in the 1980s, only half
could expect to earn more than their parents. The
research showed that neighbourhoods have a powerful
causal impact on children. Mapping opportunity across
the United States, they reported that counties with less
concentrated poverty, less income inequality, better
schools, a larger share of two-parent families, and lower
crime rates generally produce better outcomes for
children in poor families.
In another set of studies, analysing Facebook data for
more than 70 million US residents, Chetty and his team
showed that friendship networks are strongly class-
based.11 People in the top tenth of the socioeconomic
distribution have twice as many friends who are also in
the top tenth than they have friends in the bottom half of
the distribution. The rich and poor also have different
kinds of friends. Those at the top are more likely to have
friends from university, while those at the bottom are
more likely to have close friends in their neighbourhood.
The researchers are also able to calculate friendship
patterns at a local level – demonstrating that people in
the US Midwest are more likely to be friends with people
in a different social class.

FORENSIC ECONOMICS
Forensic economics has uncovered wrongdoing in surprising places.12 One
study compares snow reports from ski resorts with those from
government weather stations. Ski resorts report more snowfall, and the
gap is much larger on weekends. Another study finds that Wine Spectator
magazine provides higher ratings – relative to other publications – to
wines that advertise in its pages. Similarly, personal finance magazines
are more likely to recommend the funds of their advertisers. Fashion
magazines are more inclined to feature the outfits of their advertisers.
In figure skating, forensic economics finds
that judges tend to give higher scores to
athletes from their countries.
Incentives can distort behaviour. Observing what happens when real
estate agents sell their own houses, an economic study reveals that
agents’ homes stay on the market for ten days longer and sell for 4 per
cent more than average. Education economists find that on days when
schools have high-stakes tests, they are more likely to suspend poorly
performing pupils. Schools also serve higher-calorie foods on test days.
Forensic economics can even unearth corruption. When Indonesian
dictator Suharto suffered health scares, the share price of politically
connected firms dropped too. When conflicts worsen in countries that are
under 
a 
United 
Nations 
arms 
embargo, 
stock 
prices 
of 
arms
manufacturers rise. Drawing on work in psychology, researchers noted

that humans have a bias in making up numbers. We overuse certain digits
(such as 7) and consecutive pairs (such as 1–2 or 3–4). Election results
from Nigeria and Iran show these suspicious patterns. Results from
elections in Sweden and the United States do not. The richer the data, the
more that forensic economics will reveal about poor behaviour.
Chetty’s work is an example of the way in which
economics has become more data-focused. In economics
journals, it is increasingly rare to see research that sets
out a theoretical model without using data to test its
predictions. Economists’ use of randomised experiments
has grown massively since the preschool studies of the
1960s, and researchers have become more adept at using
natural experiments to identify causal impacts. The rise
in computing power has reduced the cost of analysing
huge datasets. My own PhD research in 2004, analysing a
dataset of more than one million people, could not have
been done on a laptop a decade earlier.13 A decade later,
the code would have run in seconds rather than hours.
Big data analytics is a beneficiary of Moore’s Law (the
remarkable increase in computing power over recent
generations).
Big data is also producing insights on uncomfortable
topics such as sex and race. Crunching results from
internet searches, Seth Stephens-Davidowitz found that
in places that are least tolerant of homosexuality, people
are more likely to google the question ‘Is my husband
gay?’14 Searches for racist jokes correlate strongly with
voting patterns for Donald Trump in the 2016 election.
Parents are twice as likely to search for ‘Is my son
gifted?’ than ‘Is my daughter gifted?’. Parents are also
twice as likely to search for ‘Is my daughter overweight?’
than ‘Is my son overweight?’ To reduce racism, sexism
and homophobia, it is first vital to understand the
problem. Big data makes it possible to go where surveys
cannot.

Satellite data is also uncovering the truth about
economic prosperity. At night, affluent parts of the world
light up like a Christmas tree, while the poorest regions
go dark. A similar pattern holds within the same country
over time: faster growth is associated with more light at
night. Within the US, satellite data reveals the legacy of
historical transport patterns. Back when many goods
were moved by river, there were certain locations in the
US that required portage. These portage locations were
places where two rivers came close but did not join up.
Consequently, cargo had to be unloaded from one boat
and carried over land to the next boat. More than a
century after portage ceased, these places continue to be
thriving economic centres.15
Another study, analysing global satellite data over two
decades, found that dictators are more likely to lie about
their country’s growth – reporting better economic
numbers than their satellite images would suggest.16
Satellite images are also being used by researchers to
study deforestation in Brazil and pollution in Indonesia.
The images are now sufficiently fine-grained that they
have allowed researchers to count the number of trees
owned by individual farmers in Uganda, and to measure
which houses in a Nairobi slum have upgraded their
roofs.17
New kinds of data also remind us of the importance of
updating economic statistics so that they measure what
we care about. National income accounts were developed
at a time when most jobs were on farms or in factories.
The online economy poses new challenges to the bean-
counters. In one study, people were asked how much they
would have to be paid to give up various free internet
services for a year.18 People responded that they would
have to be paid US$17,000 to give up search, US$8000 to
forego email, US$3000 to lose maps, and US$1000 to

sacrifice streaming video. Because national accounts
measure value-added, not consumer wellbeing, they may
miss these important benefits.
Unpaid work has been badly neglected in economic
statistics. If a man pays a housekeeper to cook his dinner,
clean his home and care for his child, then her income is
included in the national accounts and she is regarded as
part of the labour force. If they marry and she continues
this work, then she no longer receives a wage (any money
that moves between them is regarded as a transfer within
the household), and she is counted as being outside the
labour force.19 Feminist economists have pointed out that
unpaid work may account for most of the world’s work.
While researchers such as Auckland University of
Technology’s Marilyn Waring have cogently critiqued the
way that economic statistics are collected, it remains the
case that national income accounts include the work of
men who manufacture handguns but exclude the work of
women who breastfeed babies.20 Using smartphones to
better capture how people use their time, while
maintaining user privacy, is a key frontier in modernising
our economic statistics.
Notes
1.
 Rakesh Padhan and K.P. Prabheesh, 2021, ‘The economics of COVID-
19 pandemic: A survey’, Economic Analysis and Policy 70: 220–37.
2.
 Padhan and Prabheesh, 2021.
3.
 International Monetary Fund, 2022, 2022 Global Debt Monitor, IMF,
Washington, DC, p. 7.
4.
 See, for example, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021,
‘Morbidity and mortality weekly report’ 70(37), 17 September.
5.
 Evan P. Starr, James J. Prescott and Norman D. Bishara, 2021,
‘Noncompete agreements in the US labor force’, Journal of Law and
Economics 64(1): 53–84.
6.
 Amy Webb, 2019, The Big Nine: How the Tech Titans and Their
Thinking Machines Could Warp Humanity, Public Affairs, New York.

7.
 Hannah Fry, 2018, Hello World: Being Human in the Age of
Algorithms, WW Norton, London.
8.
 Cathy O’Neil, 2016, Weapons of Math Destruction, Crown, New York.
9.
 Shoshana Zuboff, 2019, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The
Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power, Profile Books,
New York.
10.
 Raj Chetty, David Grusky, Maximilian Hell, Nathaniel Hendren,
Robert Manduca and Jimmy Narang, 2017, ‘The fading American
dream: Trends in absolute income mobility since 1940’, Science
356(6336): 398–406; Raj Chetty and Nathaniel Hendren, 2018, ‘The
effects of neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility I: Childhood
exposure effects’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3): 1107–62;
Raj Chetty and Nathaniel Hendren, 2018, ‘The effects of
neighborhoods on intergenerational mobility II: County level
estimates’, Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(3): 1163–1228.
11.
 Raj Chetty, Matthew O. Jackson, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel
et al., 2022, ‘Social Capital I: Measurement and Associations with
Economic Mobility’, Nature 608(7921): 108–21; Raj Chetty, Matthew
O. Jackson, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel et al., 2022, ‘Social
Capital II: Determinants of Economic Connectedness’, Nature
608(7921): 122–34.
12.
 All forensic economics examples are from Eric Zitzewitz, 2012,
‘Forensic economics’, Journal of Economic Literature, 50(3): 731–69.
13.
 The research was ultimately published as Andrew Leigh, 2010, ‘Who
benefits from the earned income tax credit? Incidence among
recipients, coworkers and firms’, BE Journal of Economic Analysis and
Policy 10(1).
14.
 Seth Stephens-Davidowitz, 2017, Everybody Lies: What the Internet
Can Tell Us About Who We Really Are, Bloomsbury, London.
15.
 Hoyt Bleakley and Jeffrey Lin, 2012, ‘Portage and path dependence’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(2): 587–644.
16.
 Luis Martinez, 2022, ‘How much should we trust the dictator’s GDP
growth estimates?’ Journal of Political Economy 130(10): 2731–69.
17.
 These examples and many more are summarised in Dave Donaldson
and Adam Storeygard, 2016, ‘The view from above: Applications of
satellite data in economics’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 30(4):
171–98.
18.
 Erik Brynjolfsson, Avinash Collis and Felix Eggers, 2019, ‘Using
massive online choice experiments to measure changes in well-being’,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116(15): 7250–5.
19.
 Kishtainy, 2017, pp. 208–9.
20.
 Marilyn Waring, 1988, If Women Counted: A New Feminist
Economics. Harper and Row, San Francisco.

14
ECONOMICS: PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE
economist max roser once observed that news frequency
shapes news coverage.1 Weekly magazines have a
different focus from daily papers, which in turn have a
different focus from social media. But what if we had a
newspaper that came out every fifty years? Roser argued
that such a newspaper would be far more likely to discuss
long-term positive trends. Instead of celebrity gossip, the
front page of a fifty-year newspaper today might report
on the global child mortality rate dropping from 14 per
cent to 4 per cent, or the fact that services employment
now constitutes a majority of all jobs worldwide.2
This book began with the story of light – an example of
how technology has turned something that was a luxury
for our ancestors to something that is so trivially cheap
that we rarely think about its cost. In the long sweep,
much of economic development is like this. Advances in
child health are epitomised by the story of Queen Anne –
the most powerful woman of her age. Between 1684 and
1700, she fell pregnant seventeen times. All but one of
her pregnancies ended in stillbirth, miscarriage or
childhood death. Three centuries on, even the poorest
parents are unlikely to lose a child. Advances in
sanitation and medicine have saved millions of lives. In
real terms, workers in most countries now earn more in a
day than their counterparts of 1900 earned in a week.
From the plough to the internet, technology has driven
revolutions in economic activity. Societies have also
benefited from comparative advantage. Across the labour

market, specialisation has played a vital role in
increasing prosperity. If you’ve honed a set of skills,
you’ll know instinctively why a society of specialists can
enjoy higher living standards than a group of generalists.
And this principle plays out across countries as it does
among individuals. Trade allows countries to specialise in
what they do best. Having a trading partner isn’t a
threat, it’s an opportunity. Trade is at the heart of the
modern economy, and the prosperity it has generated.
Trade is a key reason why hundreds of millions of people
in China have been pulled out of poverty in recent
decades, and why China’s heft on the global stage again
more closely matches its population size.
It is easy to take for granted the improvement in living
standards. As we have seen, the oppressive forces of
feudalism, colonialism and slavery once dominated the
lives of many of the world’s peoples. Psychologist Steven
Pinker tells us that his favourite words are the
encyclopedia entry that begins ‘Smallpox was an
infectious disease’.3 Thanks to human progress, a disease
that killed 500 million in its final century can now be
referred to in the past tense.4 Pinker notes that, due to
better diets and more schooling, IQ scores have risen so
rapidly that the average person today would score better
than 98 per cent of the population a century ago. The
odds of a typical European being murdered are less than
one-tenth of what they would have been 500 years ago.
Across the globe, attitudes on gender, race and sexuality
have become more progressive, such that young Middle
Eastern Muslims are about as tolerant as young Western
Europeans were in the 1960s. Within a few generations,
flush toilets, refrigerators, air conditioners and washing
machines went from luxuries to necessities.
But has growth made us happier? In the 1970s,
economist Richard Easterlin looked at early cross-

national surveys of life satisfaction and concluded that
beyond a certain point, more money did not make people
any happier. The ‘Easterlin Paradox’ was accepted
wisdom until the 2000s, when new analysis, based on
much more extensive surveys, showed that it did not
hold.5 Within countries, people with higher incomes are
happier. Across countries, people in nations with higher
incomes are happier.
More than happiness, this new data shows that within
and across countries, people with more income are more
likely to say that they feel well rested, that they are
treated with respect, that they smile and laugh a lot, and
that they eat good-tasting food.6 People with higher
incomes – and people in nations with higher incomes –
are less likely to say that they suffer physical pain,
boredom or sadness. Within countries, people who have
higher incomes are more likely to say that they
experienced love. Sorry, Paul McCartney, money can buy
you love.
While money continues to buy more happiness, the
principle of diminishing marginal utility still holds.
Increases in happiness seem roughly proportional to the
percentage increase in income – meaning that a 10 per
cent increase in income buys the same happiness boost to
a homeless person as it does to a socialite. Yet that 10
per cent increase equates to many more dollars for
someone who is rich than for someone who is poor.
Consequently, the increase in inequality that has
occurred in many nations over the past generation might
have had an adverse impact on happiness. One of the
best arguments for a redistributive welfare state and
progressive taxation is that a dollar brings more pleasure
to someone who does not have many dollars to begin
with.

Income gaps between countries are even larger than
those within countries. Western European incomes now
average US$109 a day, while incomes in Latin America
average only US$39 a day, and in Africa just US$10 a
day.7 The typical US resident produces almost as much
output in a month as the average Nigerian does in a year.
One factor driving growth in Africa is urbanisation, since
people tend to be more productive when they move from
a rural area to a city. Yet only half of the continent’s
population currently lives in towns and cities.8 One
reason is that African land ownership rights are often
unclear, making people reluctant to invest in housing,
and limiting the ability of city governments to raise
property tax revenue. Sorting out land titling systems
sounds mundane, but it will be fundamental to Africa’s
future prosperity.
The rise in inequality is not the only cause for
economic concern. Research by economist George
Akerlof on the economics of identity has highlighted the
importance 
of 
considering 
how 
people 
perceive
themselves. In the standard economic model, the only
point of working is to earn income to consume. But the
economics of identity reminds us that many people’s
identity is centred around what they produce, rather than
what they consume. We are more likely to ask someone
we’ve just met ‘What do you do?’ than ‘What do you buy?’
So when the twin forces of technology and trade have
taken away factory jobs in advanced nations, it’s cold
comfort to tell the struggling middle class that televisions
are getting cheaper. The rise of populist politicians is
partly a backlash against the loss of secure working-class
jobs, and a reminder of the importance of low
unemployment to a stable society.
Since the Luddites, new technologies have been
accompanied by frightening forecasts of job losses that

have not eventuated. The latest challenge is posed by
artificial intelligence. OpenAI’s ChatGPT interface can
debug 
computer 
code, 
write 
a 
corporate 
mission
statement and summarise new scientific advances. ‘GPT’
stands for Generative Pre-trained Transformer, but it
could also stand for general-purpose technology. Like
coal-powered steam engines and electricity, artificial
intelligence may ultimately be transformative. The
widespread adoption of artificial intelligence is likely to
boost average incomes, but many jobs could go the way
of 
switchboard 
operators 
and 
lighthouse 
keepers.
Economics reminds us that the cheaper a technology
becomes, the more firms are likely to adopt it – with the
biggest gains accruing to those who own the machines.
In the long run, artificial intelligence also represents a
catastrophic risk to humanity.9 At some point, intelligent
machines are likely to outperform humans at all possible
tasks. Not long after that, the gap between their abilities
and ours will be like the gap between us and our
household pets. When this happens, it will be crucial that
these machines share our values and are willing to
peacefully coexist with humanity.

An artwork showing the world’s last selfie,
produced by the author using artificial
intelligence engine DALL·E.
Rogue artificial intelligence is probably the biggest
long-term threat to humanity’s future, but another key
vulnerability comes from climate change. Economists talk
about ‘tail risk’ – small chances of very bad outcomes. In
the case of global warming, the tail risks come because
we do not know how much carbon will be emitted in the
future and how the planet will react to it. Further
uncertainty comes from potential adverse feedback loops
– such as the melting of the Greenland ice sheet or the
loss of the Amazon rainforest. We know that climate
change will be bad – but it could be very bad indeed.10
When facing small chances of catastrophe in our
personal lives, economic thinking reminds us to buy
insurance – paying a small annual premium to insure
against the potential loss of our home, or the death of the
primary income earner. Similarly, in the case of risks to
humanity, we should spend a modest amount now on

ethical artificial intelligence and cutting carbon emissions
– as well as on reducing other existential risks, including
bioterrorism and nuclear conflict.
Averting catastrophe will allow humanity to use the
tools of economics to solve more prosaic problems. Due
to traffic congestion, the average speed of traffic in
London, Boston, Paris and Brussels is around 18
kilometres per hour (11 miles per hour), which is roughly
the pace at which a horse might have trotted down those
streets in the 1800s.11 Traffic congestion costs the typical
driver forty hours a year in Germany, fifty-one hours a
year in the United States and eighty hours a year in the
United Kingdom.12 From Toronto to Mexico City,
reducing traffic congestion would represent a major
improvement in the quality of life for millions of city-
dwellers.
WHAT’S THE WORST THAT COULD HAPPEN?
Much of the discussion around the risk of artificial intelligence focuses on
‘bad’ outcomes, including misinformation, algorithmic discrimination and
the loss of jobs to automation. But another source of danger is the chance
of catastrophe. Once artificial intelligence exceeds human intelligence,
machines may accelerate away from us, as computers have done in
board games such as chess and Go. Artificial intelligence would be
humanity’s last invention.
It is impossible to know what lies beyond that transition point, which
scientists have dubbed ‘the singularity’. Will the future look more like Star
Trek or Terminator? Will productivity deliver lives of tranquillity to
everyone, or will superintelligent machines decide that humanity is
superfluous to their purposes?

Economists who study uncertainty point out that it is useful to consider
the full range of possibilities, not just the most likely. Economists use the
notion of ‘expected value’, which involves multiplying the cost or benefit
of an outcome by its probability. If there is a 1 per cent chance of winning
$100 million, the expected value is $1 million. Similarly, the fair insurance
premium for an item worth $100 million with a 1 per cent chance of loss
would be $1 million.
A survey of expert artificial intelligence researchers finds that the
median researcher expects the singularity to occur in 2059.13 The median
researcher says that there is a 5 per cent chance of an outcome that is
‘Extremely 
bad 
(e.g. 
human 
extinction)’. 
Two-thirds 
of 
artificial
intelligence researchers believe that society should place greater priority
on artificial intelligence safety. In expected value terms, even small
chances of disaster have large costs.
From a macroeconomic standpoint, a key frustration is
that, nearly a century after the Great Depression,
economists have failed to tame the boom-and-bust cycle.
As a profession, we should be disappointed that modern
economies still produce an economic crisis every decade
or two. Crisis management is a significant part of the role
of modern governments. Putting recessions in the rear-
view mirror will mark a major achievement in economics.
Living in a capitalist economy, it is easy to take
markets for granted. When we go to the supermarket, we
assume that it will stock abundant quantities of every
product we want. During the COVID crisis, people were
shocked when stores briefly ran out of toilet paper.

Within weeks, supplies were back to normal, despite the
onset of a once-in-a-century pandemic. The workings of
the ‘invisible hand’ once bewildered communist officials.
After the breakup of the Soviet Union, one Russian
official contacted a British economist, asking, ‘Who is in
charge of the supply of bread to the population of
London?’14 In the twenty-first century, the Russian and
Chinese economies have transitioned from communism to
capitalism, yet both are far from open democracies.
In 1946, US journalist Henry Hazlitt wrote Economics
in One Lesson, the lesson being that market prices reflect
opportunity costs. Seven decades later, the University of
Queensland’s John Quiggin wrote Economics in Two
Lessons, the second lesson being that there is sometimes
a wedge between market prices and true value. Hazlitt
showed why markets foster growth, a key reason why
capitalist 
economies 
have 
produced 
higher 
living
standards than communist economies. Quiggin explained
how markets can fail, producing pollution, unemployment
and bullying monopolies. This book has told both sides of
the story – how open markets have brought millions out
of poverty, and why it is essential to address market
failures for economies to prosper. Capitalism doesn’t
guarantee the wellbeing of those who lack capital.
One way to think about the role of government is as a
risk manager: providing social insurance against risks as
diverse 
as 
earthquakes, 
diseases 
and 
recessions.
Standard government payments are not the only way to
mitigate risk. Income-contingent loans – in which
repayments only become due when the borrower’s
income passes a reasonable threshold – are used by some
countries in place of college loans. Economists have
suggested that income-contingent loans might also be
used to provide assistance for drought-stricken farmers,

struggling businesses or economically disadvantaged
regions.15
The story of economics is also the tale of innovation. At
the start of the twentieth century, the world had no
planes, no radios and hardly any cars. By the end of the
century, we surfed the internet on wifi-enabled laptops,
flew on jet planes to meetings on the other side of the
globe, and filled cities with skyscrapers. From air
conditioners to antibiotics, barbed wire to the Haber-
Bosch process, new technologies have reshaped our lives.
Technologies have made markets work better too. One
study found that when mobile phone service was
introduced 
in 
the 
Indian 
fishing 
industry, 
prices
converged and wastage was virtually eliminated.16
Technology benefited consumers and producers alike.
Innovation rarely involves just the hard work of a lone
genius.17 Technological development isn’t solely the work
of Gutenberg, Curie, Edison, Lovelace, Gates, Jobs,
Doudna and Musk. 
More 
commonly, 
technological
breakthroughs occur in collaborative teams. The vacuum
tube and the television depended on multiple firms, while
a plethora of other innovations (including radar, the
internet, 
germ 
theory, 
the 
pacemaker, 
magnetic
resonance imaging and quantum mechanics) flowed out
of non-market institutions such as government agencies
and universities. Key technologies that power your
smartphone – including GPS, voice-activated personal
assistant and touchscreen display – were funded by
government. At the heart of the economics of innovation
is the question of how governments can continue to foster
this kind of research.
Economics has practical advice for all aspects of life.
Some stock-pickers claim that they can time their
investing to sell at the peak and buy at the trough. Yet
the evidence suggests that, rather than moving in

predictable cycles, share prices follow a ‘random walk’.
Even John Maynard Keynes – the twentieth-century
economist who did most to help smooth the business
cycle – gave up on the idea of business cycle investing.18
At the outset, I said that this book aimed to do three
things: tell the story of how capitalism and the market
system emerged; discuss the key ideas and people who
shaped the discipline of economics; and outline how
economic forces have affected world history.
I hope that, in reading it, you see the history of
humanity a little differently. When you look at a map of
the world, recall how the shape of continents helped
determine who colonised who. When you see a mirror,
think about how its invention contributed to the rise of
consumer culture. When you use a big tech platform,
consider the way in which you are effectively paying with
your data rather than with cash. Recognise your good
fortune to live at a time when most of humanity has
access to schools, vaccines and the internet.
The development of modern economics coincided with
the industrial revolution, but it was not until the Great
Depression 
that 
economists 
developed 
a 
deep
understanding of the business cycle. Entranced by the
efficiency of markets, early economists underestimated
the ways in which market failure could occur, and were
too quick to dismiss the role of government in making
markets work better. More recent research has explored
the dangers of monopolies and the risks of climate
change. Behavioural economics is now a standard part of
the curriculum, and the analysis of large datasets has
become central to the work of many modern economists.
Market 
designers 
have 
pioneered 
the 
matching
algorithms that underpin many kidney donations. Auction
experts have devised auctions that raise billions of dollars
for 
government 
from 
the sale of electromagnetic

spectrum rights. Development economists have run
randomised trials that save lives and raise incomes.
Since 
most 
of 
us 
will 
not 
become 
economics
researchers, the biggest contribution of economics is in
helping us to live a better life. When making a tricky
decision, weigh the costs and benefits. Consider the
opportunity costs – what are you giving up? Think on the
margin – asking whether one more of something is worth
having. And don’t forget externalities – the positive and
negative impacts of your decisions on other people. From
education to entrepreneurship, from socialising to the
share market, economics can help you live a better life.
Notes
1.
 Max Roser, 2016, ‘Stop saying that 2016 was the “worst year”’, The
Washington Post, 29 December.
2.
 Child mortality figures from ourworldindata.org/child-mortality (for
early 1970s) and childmortality.org (for 2021, the most recent year
available at the time of writing). Services employment figures from
World Bank (indicator SL.SRV.EMPL.ZS).
3.
 Steven Pinker, 2018, Enlightenment Now: The Case for Reason,
Science, Humanism, and Progress, Viking, New York.
4.
 On the death toll from smallpox, see Donald Henderson, 2009,
Smallpox: The Death of a Disease, Prometheus Books, Amherst, New
York, p. 12.
5.
 Betsey Stevenson and Justin Wolfers. 2008, ‘Economic growth and
happiness: Reassessing the Easterlin paradox’, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, Spring 2008, pp. 1–87; Angus Deaton, 2008,
‘Income, health, and well-being around the world: Evidence from the
Gallup World Poll’, Journal of Economic Perspectives 22(2), pp. 53–72.
6.
 Stevenson and Wolfers, 2008.
7.
 The daily income estimates in this paragraph are from Bolt and
Luiten van Zanden, 2020.
8.
 OECD/SWAC, 2020, Africa’s Urbanisation Dynamics 2020:
Africapolis, Mapping a New Urban Geography, West African Studies,
OECD Publishing, Paris.
9.
 For more on catastrophic risk, see Andrew Leigh, 2021, What’s the
Worst That Could Happen? Existential Risk and Extreme Politics, MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.

10.
 Gernot Wagner and Martin L. Weitzman, 2016, Climate Shock: The
Economic Consequences of a Hotter Planet, Princeton University
Press, Princeton NJ.
11.
 Bob Pishue, 2023, 2022 INRIX Global Traffic Scorecard, INRIX,
Kirkland, WA.
12.
 Pishue, 2023.
13.
 Zach Stein-Perlman, Benjamin Weinstein-Raun and Katja Grace,
‘2022 expert survey on progress in AI’, AI Impacts, 3 August 2022,
https://aiimpacts.org/2022-expert-survey-on-progress-in-ai/.
14.
 Coggan, 2020, p. 357.
15.
 Bruce Chapman (ed.), 2006, Government Managing Risk: Income
Contingent Loans for Social and Economic Progress, Routledge,
London.
16.
 Robert Jensen, 2007, ‘The digital provide: Information (technology),
market performance, and welfare in the South Indian fisheries sector’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3): 879–924.
17.
 The discussion in this paragraph draws on Johnson, 2010, pp. 230,
236.
18.
 Harford, 2020, p. 273.

Acknowledgements
One of the best developments in modern economic
scholarship is that an increasing share of research is co-
authored. I have learned much of my economics from my
collaborators and am grateful for the many conversations
that have shaped our research and made me a better
economist. Thanks too to my parliamentary colleagues –
economists and non-economists – who have encouraged
me to bring an economic perspective to our deliberations.
At Black Inc., the team of Chris Feik, Kirstie Innes-Will
and Jo Rosenberg have helped sharpen my arguments
and shape my prose.
Jeff Borland, Paul Burke, Wendy Carlin, Bruce
Chapman, Selwyn Cornish, Guido Erreygers, David
Galenson, Joshua Gans, Ross Gittins, Bob Gregory,
Nicholas Gruen, Dan Hamermesh, Tim Hatton, Richard
Holden, Sebastian Leigh, Jan Libich, Xin Meng, Alex
Millmow, Christine Neill, Alberto Posso, Adam Triggs and
Justin Wolfers provided valuable comments on earlier
drafts. Special thanks to my parents, Barbara and
Michael Leigh, for their loving encouragement and
detailed feedback.
This book is dedicated to my wife, Gweneth, and our
three boys, Zachary, Theodore and Sebastian. I hope that
you grow up in a society in which good economic policy
internalises the externalities, the market gives you
choices aplenty, and economics provides dazzling insights
on our remarkable world.

Image Credits
P. Maxwell Photography/Shutterstock.
Vladimir Gjorgiev / Shutterstock.
Courtesy of Archestudy.
Jared Diamond. Image via Wikimedia Commons.
IR Stone/Shutterstock.
Image via r/ArtefactPorn, Reddit.
Mary Long and Holaillustrations / Shutterstock.
Unknown artist, c. 1665. Image via Wikimedia Commons.
Workshop of Bronzino, Portrait of Lorenzo the
Magnificent, c. 1565–69, Uffizi Gallery. Image via
Wikimedia Commons.
Duncan1890 / iStockPhoto.
Unknown artist, c. 1640, Norton Simon Art Foundation.
Image via Wikimedia Commons.
James Watt’s Patent via itakehistory.com.
Heritage Image Partnership Ltd / Alamy Stock Photo.
Working Class Movement Library catalogue. Image via
Wikimedia Commons.
Chronicle / Alamy Stock Photo.
Watercolour by Richard Simkin held in the Anne S.K.
Brown Military Collection, Brown University. Image via
Wikimedia Commons.

Photograph by Carl Van Vechten, 13 November 1948,
Van Vechten Collection at Library of Congress. Image via
Wikimedia Commons.
Chronicle / Alamy Stock Photo.
The Landlord’s Game, designed by Lizzie J. Magie
(Phillips), published in 1906 by the Economic Game
Company, New York. Image: Thomas Forsyth.
Photographer unknown, Henry Ford Interview, Literary
Digest, 1 July 1928. Image via Wikimedia Commons.
Martin Forstenzer / Hulton Archive / Getty.
Mpv_51. Image via Wikimedia Commons.
© Holger Motzkau 2010. Image via Wikimedia Commons.
Pictorial Press / Alamy Stock Photo.
Fotosearch / Stringer / Getty Images.
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division
Washington. Image via Wikimedia Commons.
Unknown photographer, c. June 1921. Image via
Wikimedia Commons.
Artwork by Trevor Bragdon / Pitch + Persuade.
From ‘The Phillips Machine Project’ by Nicholas Barr,
LSE Magazine, June 1988, no. 75, p.3. Image via
Wikimedia Commons.
People’s History Museum.
Carol M. Highsmith Archive, Library of Congress. Image
via Wikimedia Commons.
apiguide / Shutterstock.
Fig. 2 taken from Kathryn Cardarelli and Rachael S.
Jackson, Education Policy as Health Promotion, white
paper presented at the First Annual Conference of the J.

McDonald Williams Institute in Dallas, Texas, in October
2005.
Bettmann / Getty Images.
Illustrated London News, 22 December 1849. Image via
Wikimedia Commons.
Art_Photo / Shutterstock.
Graph by Alan Laver based on ‘Inflation and central bank
independence: OECD countries’, Our World in Data.
Graph by Alan Laver, based on Fig. 2, World Inequality
Report 2018, compiled by Facundo Alvaredo, Lucas
Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel
Zucman, presented at the Paris School of Economics.
Caio Pederneiras / Shutterstock.
Alex Bogatyrev / Shutterstock.
CP PHOTO / Troy Fleece.
©Johan Jarnestad/The Royal Swedish Academy of
Sciences.
Leonard Zhukovsky / Shutterstock.
DALL-E, used under an Open AI Responsible Licence.

Index
Page numbers in bold refer to images.
1MDB embezzlement 1, 2
accident insurance 1
Africa 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
African Americans 1
‘Age of Discovery’ 1
agriculture
agricultural revolution 1, 2, 3
Chinese collectivisation 1
English agriculture, 1700s 1
‘founder crops’ 1
land-intensive agriculture 1
technological innovations 1, 2
air conditioning 1
air travel
fares 1
first magnetic stripe credit card 1
aircraft carriers 1, 2
Akerlof, George 1, 2
Alexander, Sadie 1, 2
algorithms 1, 2, 3
American Declaration of Independence (1776) 1
Americas 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; see also Latin America; North America
Anglo-Dutch wars 1
Anthropocene 1
antibiotics 1
Anti-Corn Law League 1
antitrust enforcement 1
Argentina 1, 2, 3, 4
artificial intelligence 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Asia 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7; see also Eurasia; and names of individual countries
assembly lines 1, 2, 3
attractiveness, relationship to income 1
Australia
‘baby bonus’ 1
central bank 1, 2
gold discoveries 1, 2

immigration 1
labour movement 1, 2
national income 1
penal colony 1, 2, 3
settlers 1, 2, 3
and US technology bubble 1
Austro-Hungarian Empire 1
autocracies 1
Bagehot, Walter 1
bank investing 1
Bank of England 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Banqiao Dam failure (1975) 1
Barings bank collapse 1
Bastiat, Frédéric 1
BATX 1, 2
Bayer’s cough medicine 1, 2
Becker, Gary 1
‘Crime and punishment: an economic approach’ 1
bed nets, anti-malarial 1
behavioural economics 1, 2, 3, 4
Belgium 1
Bengal Famine (1943) 1, 2
Bentham, Jeremy 1
Bessemer process 1
Beveridge Report 1
big data 1, 2, 3
Bismarck, Otto von 1
Black Death 1
Bloomsbury Group 1
Boccaccio, Giovanni, The Decameron 1
Bogle, Jack 1
Bonsack, James 1
boom-and-bust cycle 1
Bork, Robert 1
Borlaug, Norman 1
Bowley, Arthur 1
Brazil 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Bretton Woods Agreement (1944) 1, 2, 3
Brexit 1
Britain see United Kingdom
British East India Company 1, 2, 3, 4
Bruges 1
Buffett, Warren 1
Burns, Arthur 1
business start-ups 1

Cambodia 1
Canada 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
capabilities, human 1, 2
capital flows, international 1, 2
capital investment rate of return 1
capital markets 1
capitalism 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Carlyle, Thomas 1
Carnegie, Andrew 1
Castro, Fidel 1
causation, separating from correlation 1, 2
census 1
central banks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; see also Federal Reserve (US, The Fed)
Chetty, Raj 1, 2
‘Chicago School’ economists 1, 2
child health 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
China
Ancient Chinese inventions 1
capitalist economy 1
credit card debt 1
Cultural Revolution 1
economic growth 1, 2
Grand Canal 1
‘Great Leap Forward’ 1, 2
greenhouse emissions 1
opium imports and sales 1, 2
paper money 1
shift from collectives to private business 1, 2
sparrow elimination campaign 1
specialisation examples 1
trade 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
‘trustworthiness’ of citizens 1
Chinese Communist Party 1, 2, 3, 4
cigarette-rolling machine 1
circular flow of income 1
cities 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
gridded cities 1
Clark, Colin 1
Clark, Gregory 1
climate change 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
value of lives of future generations 1, 2
clocks and watches 1
coal power 1
Coase, Ronald 1, 2
cocaine in Coca-Cola 1
collectivisation 1
colleganza 1

colonialism 1, 2, 3, 4
Columbus, Christopher 1
command economy 1
communism 1, 2, 3; see also Chinese Communist Party
comparative advantage 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
competition 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
computing power 1, 2, 3, 4
conceptualists 1
consumer spending 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7; see also government spending
consumer surplus 1, 2
consumer welfare standard 1, 2
consumers and consumer culture 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
consumption smoothing 1
containers and container ships 1, 2, 3
contraceptive pill 1
Corn Laws 1, 2, 3, 4
corporations 1
correlation, separating from causation 1, 2
corruption 1, 2, 3
costs
fixed costs 1
labour 1, 2, 3
variable costs 1
see also opportunity cost
COVID 1, 2, 3, 4
long COVID 1
tests and vaccines 1, 2
creative careers 1
credit cards 1
crime, economic approach 1
crisis management 1
Crusade, First (1096–1099) 1
Cuba, revolution (1959) 1
currencies 1
Euro 1
US dollar 1
deflation 1, 2
democracies 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
democratisation 1
Deng Xiaoping 1
Denmark 1
derivatives trading 1
dictatorships 1
diet
after the agricultural revolution 1
food sourced by trade 1

hunter-gatherers 1
Middle Ages 1, 2
diminishing marginal utility 1, 2, 3
discrimination 1
an economic approach 1
diseases 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
germ theory 1
see also health care
Drake, Francis 1
drinking water 1
Dutch East India Company 1, 2
Early Training Project, Tennessee 1
Earned Income Tax Credit 1
Easterlin Paradox 1
econometrics 1
economic discount rate 1
economic growth
2010s 1
and elections 1
industrial revolution 1
and inequality 1, 2
post-World War II decades 1
economic output 1
economics 1
applied economics 1
French influence, 1700s and 1800s 1
modern economics 1
origin of the term 1
role in helping people to live a better life 1
spread into other disciplines 1
The Economist 1
education 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
egalitarianism 1; see also inequality
Egypt, Ancient 1, 2, 3, 4
Ehrlich, Anne and Paul 1
eight-hour day 1
elections 1, 2, 3, 4
electric motor 1
electromagnetic spectrum rights 1
‘elephant curve’ 1
elevators 1
empire-building 1
employment
discrimination 1, 2
loss of secure working-class jobs 1
restraint of trade clauses in contracts 1

role of luck in the job market 1
see also full employment; unemployment; unions; unpaid work; wages
Eurasia 1, 2; see also Asia; Europe
Euro 1
Europe 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23
cities 1
see also names of individual countries
European Debt Crisis 1
European Economic Community 1
European Union 1, 2, 3
exchange rates 1
expected value 1
experimentalists 1
explorers 1
externalities 1, 2, 3, 4
famines 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11; see also food supply
fascism 1
Feavearyear, A.E. 1
Federal Reserve (US, The Fed) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
feudalism 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Finland 1
fiscal policy 1
Fisher, Irving 1
fixed costs 1
Florence 1, 2
Food and Agriculture Organization 1
food supply 1; see also famines
Ford Motors 1, 2
forecasting 1
foreign investment 1
forensic economics 1
France 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
health care innovations and reforms 1
World War II 1
see also French Revolution (beginning 1789)
France, Pierre Mendès 1
franchising 1
free markets 1, 2
free press 1
free trade 1, 2
freedom 1, 2
French Revolution (beginning 1789) 1
French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars 1, 2
Friedman, Milton 1
Friedman, Rose 1

friendship, and social class 1
Fry, Hannah 1
full employment 1, 2
Fuller, Ida 1
Galenson, David 1
Gama, Vasco da 1
gender norms, influence of the plough 1
gender pay gap 1
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1, 2, 3
genetic modifications 1
George, Henry 1
Georgia 1
Germany 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
hyperinflation 1, 2, 3, 4
post-World War II 1, 2
World War I 1, 2, 3
World War II 1
global income 1, 2
globalisation 1
gold 1, 2
gold standard 1, 2, 3
Goldin, Claudia 1, 2, 3
Goldman Sachs 1
goods, drop in value after purchased 1
government debt 1, 2, 3
government role in the economy 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
government spending 1, 2, 3, 4; see also consumer spending
Great Depression 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
‘Great Gatsby Curve’ 1
Greece 1
Ancient Greece 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Guevara, Che 1
Haber-Bosch process for fertiliser 1, 2
Haldane, Andy 1
Hamermesh, Dan 1
happiness 1
Hargreaves, James 1
Hawley, Willis 1
Hayek, Friedrich von 1
Hazlitt, Henry, Economics in One Lesson 1
health care 1, 2, 3, 4; see also diseases
health insurance 1
heroin 1
Hitler, Adolf 1, 2, 3
home ownership 1, 2

Homo economicus 1, 2
Homo sapiens 1
homophobia 1
Hong Kong 1, 2, 3
housing market
prices 1, 2, 3
subprime housing loans 1, 2
Hungary, hyperinflation 1
‘hungry forties’ (1840s) 1
hunter-gatherer societies 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
hyperinflation 1, 2, 3
identity economics 1
import substitution industrialisation 1
incentives 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17
income-contingent loans 1
incomes
economic mobility 1, 2
‘elephant curve’ 1
gaps between countries 1
and happiness 1
household income 1
importance related to longevity and wellbeing 1, 2
largest firms 1
real income 1, 2, 3, 4
real per capita income 1
reasons for differences 1, 2, 3
swings in income 1
see also global income; national income
incubators for premature babies 1
index funds 1
India 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12
economic reforms, 1991 137–8
‘Five Year Plans’ 1
independence 1
Indonesia 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
Indus Valley civilisation 1, 2, 3, 4
industrial revolution 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
inequality 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
agricultural revolution impacts 1, 2, 3
economic growth rate and capital investment rate of return 1, 2
relative growth in education and technology 1, 2
see also egalitarianism
infant formula 1
‘infant industry’ support 1
inflation 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
role of central banks 1, 2, 3

innovation and inventions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9; see also technological
innovation
insurance 1, 2
intellectual ideas 1
interest rates 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 1
International Monetary Fund 1, 2
internet 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Ireland 1, 2, 3
iron industry 1
isolationism 1, 2
Italy 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; see also Rome, Ancient
Japan 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
incomes 1, 2
trade 1, 2, 3
World War II 1
Jevons, William Stanley 1
Kahneman, Daniel 1
Kalibangan, India 1
Kennedy, Joseph 1
Keynes, John Maynard 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money 1
‘pragmatic Keynesianism’ 1
Keynes–Hayek difference, mock rap battle (Papola and Roberts) 1
Korea 1
Kroc, Ray 1
!Kung people 1
Kuznets, Simon 1
Kvitkin, Olimpiy 1
labour
costs 1, 2, 3, 4
see also slavery
labour market 1, 2; 3, 4, 5
post-World War II decades 1
see also employment; full employment; unemployment; unions; wages
labour-intensive goods 1
‘landed gentry’ 1
Latin America 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7; see also Argentina; Brazil
Leeson, Nick 1
Lenin, Vladimir 1
Levant 1
LGBTIQA+ people 1, 2
Liebig, Justus von 1
life expectancy 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8

life satisfaction 1
lighting technologies 1, 2
Limited Liability Act 1855 (UK) 1
Lin, Justin Yifu 1
literacy 1, 2
living standards 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15
‘lookism’ 1
Low, Jho 1
luck 1
Luddites 1, 2, 3
‘lump of labour’ fallacy 1
MacDonald, Kyle 1, 2
macroeconomics 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
Magellan, Ferdinand 1
Magie, Lizzie 1
Malaysia 1, 2
Malthus, Thomas 1, 2
MAMAA 1, 2
managed funds 1
manufacturing sector 1, 2, 3, 4
Mao Zedong 1
market concentration 1
market equilibrium 1
market failure 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
market system 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
new entrants 1, 2
Marshall, Alfred, Principles of Economics 1, 2
Marshall Plan 1
‘Marshallian Cross’ 1
Martin, Peter 1
mathematics 1, 2, 3, 4
McDonald’s 1, 2
McLean, Malcolm 1
Medici family 1
Medici, Lorenzo de’ 1, 2
medicine see health care
Mexico 1, 2, 3, 4
microeconomics 1, 2
Middle Ages 1, 2
migration 1, 2, 3
role of air conditioning 1
Milanović, Branko 1
Mill, John Stuart 1
mirrors 1, 2
Monetary National Income Analogue Computer (MONIAC) 1, 2
monetary policy 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

money 1, 2
monopolies 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
Monopoly game 1, 2
monopsony 1, 2
Moore, Marianne 1, 2
Moore’s Law 1
Morgan, J.P. 1
morphine 1
most favoured nation clauses 1
motherhood penalty 1
Moulins Ordinance (1561) 1
Munich Agreement (1939) 1
national accounts 1
National Bureau of Economic Research 1
national income 1, 2, 3
circular flow 1
high-income countries 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
low-income countries 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
middle-income countries 1, 2, 3
see also global income
national income accounts 1
National Industry Recovery Act 1933 (US) 1
nationalisation 1
Nazi–Soviet Pact (1939) 1
Nehru, Jawaharlal 1
Netherlands 1, 2, 3, 4
New Zealand
Bank of New Zealand nationalisation 1
central bank focus on inflation 1, 2
immigration 1, 2
Newcomen, Thomas 1
Newfoundland cod fishery 1
Nixon, Richard 1
non-rivalry in innovation 1
North America 1; see also United States
‘odious debt’ 1
oil 1
oligopolies 1
Opium Wars 1, 2, 3
opportunity cost 1, 2, 3
Opportunity Insights laboratory 1
Ostrom, Elinor 1, 2, 3
outsourcing 1
Papola, John 1

Parker Brothers 1
Pasteur, Louis 1
patent laws 1
penicillin 1
pensions 1
Perkins, Frances 1, 2
permanent income hypothesis 1
Perry Preschool Project, Michigan 1
personal computers 1
pets.com 1
Philippines 1, 2, 3, 4
Phillips, Bill 1, 2, 3
Pigou, Arthur 1
Piketty, Thomas, Capital in the Twenty-First Century 1
Pinker, Steven 1
ploughs 1
Poor Laws, England (1601 and 1834) 1, 2
population, global 1, 2
Porter, Michael, ‘five forces’ 1
ports 1, 2
Posner, Richard 1
poverty 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
Prebisch, Raúl 1, 2
prices 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
controls 1
equilibrium price 1, 2
monopsony power 1
privatisation impacts 1
retail strategies 1
sticky prices 1
supply and demand impacts 1
printing press 1
privatisation 1, 2, 3
producer surplus 1
productivity 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13
public sector and services 1, 2, 3
‘quantitative easing’ 1
quantity, relationship to price 1
Quiggin, John, Economics in Two Lessons 1, 2
racism 1, 2, 3, 4
railroads 1; see also train travel and transport
randomised trials 1, 2, 3
policy trials 1
rate of return on capital investment 1, 2
rationing 1

Razak, Najib 1
Reagan, Ronald 1, 2
recessions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
redistribution 1, 2, 3, 4
Reformation 1
religion, economic aspects 1, 2
rents 1
resource curse 1
Ricardo, David 1, 2
Rio de Janeiro 1, 2
rivalrous physical goods 1
‘roaring twenties’ 1
Roberts, Russ 1
Robinson, Joan 1, 2
The Economics of Imperfect Competition 1
Rockefeller, John D. 1, 2
Rome, Ancient 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
Rommel, Erwin 1
Roosevelt, Franklin D. 1, 2, 3
Roser, Max 1
rulers 1, 2
rural areas, life expectancy 1
Russia 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
invasion of Ukraine 1
see also Soviet Union
Samuelson, Paul 1
satellite data 1
Schultz, Theodore 1
securitisation of housing loans 1
Selfridge, Harry 1
Sen, Amartya 1, 2
sewerage systems 1, 2
sexism 1, 2
Shakespeare’s plays, economic lessons 1
share market 1, 2, 3, 4; see also index funds; managed funds
share market crash (1929) 1
Sherman Anti-trust Act 1890 (US) 1
Shiller, Robert 1
ships and shipping 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
container ships 1, 2, 3
insurance 1
see also water-borne transport
silver trade 1
Singapore 1, 2, 3, 4
Singh, Manmohan 1
the singularity 1

skyscrapers 1
slavery 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
Smith, Adam, The Wealth of Nations 1, 2
Smoot, Reed 1
Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, 1930 (US) 1, 2, 3
social class 1, 2
social mobility 1
Social Security Act, 1935 (US) 1, 2
social welfare 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
British parish-based system 1
‘deserving poor’ 1
and incentive to work 1, 2
post-World War II expansion 1, 2
support to jobless 1, 2
universal programs 1
South Korea 1, 2, 3
Soviet Union 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
World War II 1
see also Russia
Spain 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
specialisation 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
and trade 1, 2, 3, 4
spending see consumer spending; government spending
spinning jenny 1
sport economics 1
Stalin, Joseph 1
Stamp, Josiah 1
Standard Oil Trust 1
statistics 1, 2, 3
steam engines
coal-powered engines 1, 2
dual-cylinder engines 1
Stern Review on climate change 1
stock market see share market
subprime mortgage crisis 1, 2, 3
substitute products 1
Sudetenland 1
Suez Canal 1
suppliers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
supply and demand 1, 2
international capital flows 1
migrants 1
surnames of the elite 1
‘surveillance capitalism 1
Sweden 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
‘tail risk’ 1

Taiwan 1, 2
Tarbell, Ida 1
tariffs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
Tarnier, Stéphane 1
Tata Group, India 1
tax havens 1
Tax Inspectors Without Borders 1
taxation 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
pay-as-you-go income tax 1
‘Pigouvian tax’ 1
progressive taxes 1, 2, 3, 4
technological innovation 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
in agriculture 1
air conditioning 1
bursting of US technology bubble 1
cost of blocking new technologies 1
development by collaborative teams 1
general-purpose technologies 1, 2
government role 1
and inequality 1, 2, 3
market dominance 1
mechanical knitting machines 1, 2
in medicine and health 1, 2
military technology 1
substance use 1
and women in the workforce 1
and the world of work 1, 2, 3
see also computing power
Thailand 1, 2
Thatcher, Margaret 1
Thwaites, Thomas 1
‘tiger cub’ economies 1
‘tiger’ economies 1
Tinbergen Rule 1
Tokugawa shogunate 1
Tolpuddle Martyrs 1
totalitarian governments 1
trade
agricultural revolution impact 1
‘Columbian exchange,’ 1500s 1
global trade 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
growth, 1800s 1
growth, 1985 to 1995 138–40
Indus Valley civilisation 1, 2
industrial revolution 1, 2, 3
Muslim connections 1
new ideas and products 1

specialisation role 1, 2, 3, 4
see also Bretton Woods Agreement (1944); comparative advantage; Corn
Laws; free trade; General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade; tariffs;
World Trade Organization; and under names of countries
trade agreements 1
trade-offs 1
traffic congestion 1
trafficking 1; see also slavery
tragedy of the commons 1
train travel and transport 1, 2; see also railroads
transport
costs 1
first wheeled transport 1, 2
see also train travel and transport; water-borne transport
transportation of convicts 1, 2, 3
Treaty of Nanking (1842) 1
Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire, New York 1
Trump, Donald 1, 2, 3
tulip mania 1
Semper Augustus tulip 1, 2
Tversky, Amos 1
Twining, Thomas 1
Ukraine, invasion by Russia 1
uncertainty 1, 2, 3, 4
unemployment 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
support for the jobless 1, 2
unions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
United Kingdom 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7
central bank focus on inflation 1, 2
employment 1
home ownership 1
increase in role of the market 1
money supply increase, 1790s 1
national income 1
nationalisation 1
World War II 1
see also Brexit
United Nations, Human Development Report 1
United States 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
cities 1
Civil War 1, 2, 3
health care 1
inequalities 1, 2, 3
inflation 1, 2
Marshall Plan 1
national income 1

social welfare 1, 2
stock market crash (1929) 1
tariffs 1, 2
trade 1, 2, 3
World War II 1, 2
see also Federal Reserve (US, The Fed)
unpaid work 1
urbanisation 1, 2, 3
user management of resources 1
utilitarianism 1
Vanderbilt, Cornelius 1
variable costs 1
Venice 1, 2
Vietnam 1, 2, 3
wages 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12; see also gender pay gap
Wald, Abraham 1
water power 1
water-borne transport 1, 2, 3, 4; see also ships and shipping
Watt, James 1
wealth equalisation 1
weapons 1, 2
welfare state see social welfare
wellbeing 1
White, Harry Dexter 1
witchcraft 1
Wolfers, Justin 1
women
gender pay gap 1
participation in society 1
in the workforce 1
Woolf, Virginia 1
Woolworth stores 1, 2
workers’ rights 1, 2
workhouses 1
World Bank 1, 2, 3
world fairs 1
World Food Programme 1
World Trade Organization 1
World War I 1, 2, 3, 4
World War II 1, 2, 3, 4
a contest of industrial production 1
peace 1
Xi Jinping 1
Xiaogang, China 1

Yale, Elihu 1
Yap islands, stone sculptures as money 1, 2
‘zero lower bound’ 1
Zimbabwe, hyperinflation 1
Zuboff, Shoshana 1


Also in this series
The Shortest History of Europe by John Hirst
The Shortest History of Germany by James Hawes
The Shortest History of England by James Hawes
The Shortest History of China by Linda Jaivin
The Shortest History of Democracy by John Keane
The Shortest History of the Soviet Union by Sheila
Fitzpatrick
The Shortest History of Greece by James Heneage
The Shortest History of War by Gwynne Dyer
The Shortest History of India by John Zubrzycki
The Shortest History of the Crown by Stephen Bates
The Shortest History of Sex by David Baker
The Shortest History of Italy by Ross King

Copyright
First published in 2024
by Old Street Publishing Ltd
Notaries House, Exeter EX1 1AJ
This ebook edition first published in 2024
All rights reserved
© Andrew Leigh
The right of Andrew Leigh to be identified as author of this work has
been asserted in accordance with Section 77 of the Copyright, Designs
and Patents Act 1988
This ebook is copyright material and must not be copied, reproduced,
transferred, distributed, leased, licensed or publicly performed or used
in any way except as specifically permitted in writing by the publishers,
as allowed under the terms and conditions under which it was purchased
or as strictly permitted by applicable copyright law. Any unauthorised
distribution or use of this text may be a direct infringement of the
author’s and publisher’s rights, and those responsible may be liable in
law accordingly.
ISBN 978-1-91308-350-2

