
 
 
LESSONS IN 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
 
 
 
Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Lessons in Project Management 
Copyright © 2011 by Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, record-
ing, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of the copyright owner and the publisher. 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-3834-8 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-3835-5 
Trademarked names may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark symbol 
with every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use the names only in an editorial 
fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringe-
ment of the trademark. 
Lead Editor: Jeffrey Pepper 
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, 
Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Michelle Lowman, James Markham, 
Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pepper, Frank Pohlmann, Douglas 
Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh 
Coordinating Editor: Jennifer L. Blackwell 
Copy Editor: Mary Behr 
Compositor: Mary Sudul 
Indexer: SPi Global 
Cover Designer: Anna Ishschenko 
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 233 
Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax 201-348-
4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com.  
For information on translations, please contact us by e-mail at info@apress.com, or 
visit www.apress.com.  
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, 
or promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. 
For more information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page 
at www.apress.com/bulk-sales. 
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. Al-
though every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the 
author(s) nor Apress shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to 
any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the infor-
mation contained in this work.

 
 
 
 
 
My work on this book is dedicated to my wife Pam 
and my (now grown) children Lindsay, Sean, and 
Ashley. Without their love, support, and good  
humor, none of my work would be possible. 
—Tom Mochal 
 
For my wife Erika and our two amazing kids 
Emelia and Samuel. Thank you so much for your 
constant support and unconditional love.  
Special thanks to my brother and co-author, Tom, 
for allowing me to help tell these great stories and 
lessons on project management. 
—Jeff Mochal 
 

 
v
Contents 
About the Authors ...........................................................................................................vii 
Introduction.........................................................................................................................viii 
The Year Begins—On a Slippery Note ................................................................. 1 
Chapter 1: Understand the Characteristics of a Project........................................... 3 
Chapter 2: Always Have an Identified and Committed Sponsor............................. 7 
Chapter 3: Report Status on All Projects ...................................................................11 
Chapter 4: Focus on Deadline Dates...........................................................................15 
Chapter 5: Apply Some Level of Project Management Discipline .........................19 
Chapter 6: Define and Plan the Work First ...............................................................23 
Chapter 7: Don’t “Microbuild” or Micromanage the Workplan...........................27 
Chapter 8: Hire a Diverse Project Team ....................................................................31 
Chapter 9: Define the Many Aspects of What Is In Scope and Out of Scope ...35 
Chapter 10: Use the “Big Three” Documents .............................................................41 
Chapter 11: Use Scope Change Management ..............................................................45 
Chapter 12: Collect Metrics.............................................................................................49 
Chapter 13: Give Performance Feedback Routinely...................................................53 
Chapter 14: Ensure Issues Management Is Everyone’s Responsibility ....................57 
Chapter 15: Shorten Long Meetings to Sharpen the Focus ......................................63 
Chapter 16: Identify the Root Cause of Problems......................................................67 
Chapter 17: Use Quality Assurance to Validate Project Status...............................71 
Chapter 18: Cancel Projects That Lose Business Support........................................77 
Chapter 19: Use Risk Management to Discover Potential Problems .....................81 
Chapter 20: Focus Quality Management on Processes, Not People ......................85 
Chapter 21: Don’t Use Your Estimating Contingency for Scope Changes ...........89 
Chapter 22: Develop a Communcation Plan for Complex Projects.......................93 
Chapter 23: Scale Your Processes Based on Project Size.........................................97 

 
vi 
Chapter 24: Plan the Project Even If You Start the Work at the Same Time ... 101 
Chapter 25: Identify the Critical Path and How This Path Drives the End Date....... 105 
Chapter 26: Change Assumptions to Revise an Estimate....................................... 109 
Chapter 27: Don’t Forget Face-to-Face Communication on Your Project........ 115 
Chapter 28: Make Quality a Mindset and Ongoing Process................................... 119 
Chapter 29: Batch Small Scope Change Requests for Sponsor Approval........... 123 
Chapter 30: Manage Your Vendor Projects Proactively ......................................... 127 
Chapter 31: Look for Risks Inherent to Your Project ............................................ 131 
Chapter 32: Get Sponsor Approval Before Investigating Large Scope  
Change Requests....................................................................................... 135 
Chapter 33: Make Sure the Cost of Collecting Metrics Does Not Exceed  
Their Value ................................................................................................. 139 
Chapter 34: Use Multiple Estimating Techniques ..................................................... 143 
Chapter 35: Keep Your Schedule Up to Date .......................................................... 149 
Chapter 36: Use Issue Management to Choose the Best of Bad Alternatives........ 153 
Chapter 37: Collect Metrics That Can Lead to Fundamental Improvements ...... 157 
Chapter 38: Evaluate All Risk Response Options in the Risk Plan ....................... 161 
Chapter 39: Manage Client Expectations.................................................................... 165 
Chapter 40: Use Milestones to Track Overall Progress......................................... 169 
Chapter 41: Catch Errors as Early as Possible .......................................................... 173 
Chapter 42: Gain Sponsor Approval for Scope Changes Requiring  
Budget and Deadline Deviation ............................................................. 177 
Chapter 43: Be Proactive to Accelerate the Project Schedule.............................. 181 
Chapter 44: Use the Work Breakdown Structure to Identify All the Work .... 187 
Chapter 45: Write Your Status Reports from the Reader’s Perspective ........... 191 
Chapter 46: Update Your Risk Plan Throughout the Project................................ 195 
Chapter 47: Don’t Deliver More Than the Client Requested............................... 201 
Chapter 48: Make One Person Responsible for Each Activity .............................. 207 
Chapter 49: Focus on Deadlines to Keep Your Project from Wandering ......... 211 
Chapter 50: Gain Agreement on Project Metrics Ahead of Time........................ 215 
Year-End Recap .............................................................................................................. 219 
Index 
....................................................................................................................... 221 
 

 
vii
About the Authors 
Tom Mochal, PgMP, PMP, TSPM is the President of 
TenStep (www.TenStep.com), a management consult-
ing and training company with over 50 offices around 
the world. Tom is also the author of 10 additional 
books on a variety of project management, people 
management, and related topics. Tom is an interna-
tionally recognized speaker, lecturer, instructor, and 
consultant to companies and organizations around the 
world. He won the Distinguished Contribution Award 
from the Project Management Institute for his work 
spreading knowledge of project management around the world. 
Jeff Mochal is currently Director, Communication 
and External Relations for ConAgra Foods, a Fortune 
500 food company with net sales of $12.7 billion. Jeff is 
responsible for external communication for ConAgra 
Foods, developing and executing key media relations 
strategies designed to strengthen the reputation of 
ConAgra Foods and its brands with key stakeholder 
groups. Jeff has extensive expertise in crisis communi-
cation, issues management, change management, em-
ployee engagement, and media relations. He currently 
lives outside of Chicago and is pursuing his MBA from the University of 
Notre Dame. 
 
 
 

 
viii 
Introduction 
This book represents insights and experience gained from 30 years of ex-
perience working on projects, managing projects, and managing people who 
were managing projects. Like most project managers, I didn’t learn formal 
project management before I started managing projects. Initially, managing 
projects just meant determining the work that needed to be done and 
working with one or more people to get it done. After managing projects a 
few times, I became more comfortable planning out the work and managing 
it to completion. These projects ranged from small and large enhancement 
projects to multimillion dollar initiatives. 
This type of project management experience is typical of the way most peo-
ple learn to manage projects. Most project managers have very little formal 
project management training and no mentoring at all. They do, however, 
have good organizational skills and a good feel for the work needed to 
complete the deliverables required for the project. If they are really good, 
they also have decent estimating skills, which will ensure they have enough 
budget and time to complete the project. 
That was my story until the mid-1990s, when I was a director at a large 
beverage company. When I took the position, I inherited a number of pro-
jects—one of which was politically sensitive and under pressure to finish 
within a six-month deadline. The approach of the previous project manager 
seemed reasonable enough; however, it became clear the work involved 
with the project has been greatly underestimated. For a variety of reasons, 
the project took almost 18 months to go live—not the six months origi-
nally estimated. 
The most frustrating part of this project for me was not being able to pro-
vide the guidance and coaching needed for the project manager. I didn’t 
have the formal project management knowledge required to rescue it. At 
one point, I even set up daily meetings with the project manager, but it 
seemed a case of the blind leading the blind.  
My next assignment at the same company was to build a Project Manage-
ment Office (PMO) and deploy formal project management processes 

 
ix 
throughout the worldwide IT organization. I started as the contributor on 
this project and gradually acquired more responsibility until I became the 
program manager of the entire initiative. This allowed me to make the tran-
sition from the typical “seat-of-your-pants” project manager to one who 
understood the methodology side as well. When your job is to build the 
methodology and coach and train others, you gain an in-depth understand-
ing of project management and how to do it well. So, that is what I did for 
three years. 
After three years, I decided to leave the large company and I thought a lot 
about what I had learned. I spent most of my career managing work without 
formal project management training. Now I had formal training and experi-
ence using a large scale mega methodology. I wanted to apply my back-
ground and experience to create a project management process that pro-
ject managers would understand and accept. The result is the TenStep® Pro-
ject Management Process (TenStep) available at www.tenstep.com. 
When I developed the TenStep Process, I focused on two overriding princi-
ples. First, the methodology would be scalable, meaning it would be easy to 
understand and apply for project managers managing small, medium, and 
large projects. This allows project managers to manage small projects with a 
minimum level of project management structure and not feel guilty. It also 
applies a much higher level of project management structure to large pro-
jects without apology. 
Second, the 10 steps of the TenStep methodology would be aligned in a way 
that represents a progression of project management competencies. The 
lower steps represent processes every project manager should practice on 
every project. As the steps get higher, more rigor and sophistication are 
typically required, especially for larger and more complex efforts. 
When I worked in the large PMO, I also had the pleasure of coaching and 
training project managers around the world. As I was doing this coaching, I 
realized it was easier for project managers to learn if I included examples 
within the lessons. For instance, it was easier for project managers to learn 
change management if I could apply the principle to their projects, including 
specific examples of applying scope change management plus instances of 
misusing the process. If I couldn’t think of examples relevant to specific pro-
jects, I would come up with examples from other projects to which they 
could relate. 
This book is the culmination of that teaching method. The marketplace is 
full of project management books, columns, best practices, tips, and traps. 
The question is not “Can you find project management techniques?” The 

 
x
question is “Will you remember the right techniques at the appropriate 
time to apply it on your project?” 
Let’s face it: very few columns or books are compelling enough to be read 
over and over again. That is the case with project management content. 
Project management books tend to get read once (or maybe just scanned) 
and never picked up again. I felt I could communicate a project management 
lesson more effectively if I could tell a story, a parable perhaps, that show-
cases a project management lesson. The reader would have the context of 
how the lesson really applies on a project. The lesson would then be easier 
to understand and, more importantly, to remember. 
This book applies 50 important project management lessons in 50 easy-to-
digest stories. In addition to the main lesson, each story also mixes in other 
project management concepts and definitions. I hope you find the informa-
tion in this book valuable in your job, and I hope you can apply the lessons 
to your projects. 
—Tom Mochal 
  

 
The Year  
Begins— 
On a Slippery Note 
The snow was still falling, although lightly and with fewer flakes, as I 
stared out the bedroom window on the morning of January 4. I could al-
ready smell the coffee brewing downstairs in the kitchen, and I longed 
to pour myself a cupful to warm my insides. But last night’s snowstorm 
had made a mess of the driveway, and I knew the only way my family 
and I were getting out of the house today was to start digging now. The 
storm had deposited about six inches of heavy snow, and it took about 
an hour to carve a clear path from the garage to the street. Time to in-
vest in a snow blower, I thought. 
The morning shovelling took much longer than anticipated, leaving me 
barely enough time to grab a shower and get dressed, let alone have 
breakfast with my now-awake wife, Pam, and our 5-year-old son, Tim. 
Sensing my anxiety and realizing I was running late, Pam poured my 
coffee and cream into a cup-sized Thermos and wrapped a couple 
pieces of toast in a paper towel. I grabbed both items, planted kisses on 
Pam and Tim, and headed out the garage door to start my day. 
I had barely driven a block when I felt the back end of my Honda turn 
to the left, against my wishes, and begin skidding toward the curb. As I 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

The Year Begins—On a Slippery Note 
 
2  
came to a stop, I could see in my rear-view mirror that the newly fallen 
flakes were hiding patches of ice underneath. The day had just begun 
and I had driven less than a half-mile from my house, but I knew one 
thing for certain—I was going to be late for my first day as Project Man-
agement Advisor at Mega Manufacturing. 
Mega Manufacturing is the nation’s fifth largest manufacturer. Like all 
large companies, they have a lot of projects and they want to improve 
how they manage these projects. The perception is that projects take 
too long, cost too much, and don’t fully meet the company expectations. 
One way to implement project management processes in a large organi-
zation is through a focused Project Management Office (PMO). Mega 
Manufacturing realizes this. Our company President wanted to start a 
major initiative this year to build a PMO and then use the PMO to build a 
better environment for project success. The plan was to start building a 
PMO in the IT organization and then elevate that organization to be an 
Enterprise PMO. However, budget tightening and a number of other busi-
ness priorities forced this broader initiative to be postponed for a year. 
I have been working at Mega for ten years and was recently assigned to 
a new position as Project Management Advisor. My position was funded 
as a temporary measure to start to prepare project managers for this 
larger initiative. It was a good opportunity for me, and I was excited to 
use my knowledge of project management to help others in the com-
pany become more efficient and successful with their projects. When I 
took the job, I knew I would have an opportunity to work with many 
project managers—some well trained and highly experienced, and some 
brand new to the concept. Jerry Ackerman was in the latter group. I was 
meeting him first thing that morning. I hoped that meeting went better 
than my morning commute. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
1 
Understand the 
Characteristics 
of a Project 
 
Jerry and I had scheduled a meeting prior to the company closing for New 
Year’s Day, and I found him waiting outside my office when I arrived. 
“Jerry, I am terribly sorry to be so la—” 
“Tom! Good to see you,” he interrupted. “Don’t be silly about being late. 
I just got here 15 minutes ago myself.” 
“It took me longer than anticipated to get the snow shovelled this morn-
ing. I must be moving slower in my old age!” 
“A shovel? We need to get you a snow blower!” 
I smiled at his suggestion, recalling I had similar thoughts just a few 
hours earlier. 
Jerry and his wife, Barbara, were trying to buy their first house, but the 
hunt for the perfect home had been long and difficult. He shared some 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

 Understand the Characteristics of a Project 
 
4  
of those struggles with me, and we talked at great length about the 
house my wife and I purchased a few years ago. 
“The right house will come along, Jerry. Did you see any you liked this 
weekend?” 
“Not really, Tom. We looked at a few open houses on Sunday, but the 
weather prevented us from looking at any more. We are trying to re-
main optimistic, but it’s really starting to drive us crazy.” 
“Well, stick with it,” I said, trying to sound reassuring. 
Jerry was a relatively new employee who worked in the Information Infra-
structure department. He had big, blue eyes and a thick head of hair with 
shaggy sideburns. The sideburns and bushy hair gave him the slightly 
nerdish appearance that many people have come to expect of people 
who work with computers. If it was possible to tell such things based on a 
person’s appearance, he also looked like someone who liked to work with 
technology more than people. He had just been given the responsibility of 
upgrading the company’s phone system but wasn’t sure he was ready for 
the task. The work involved inspecting the phone lines, replacing the lines 
where needed, and upgrading the software. Jerry predicted the effort 
would take four months to complete and cost upwards of $350,000. 
There would be six people involved, although not all full time. 
After talking awhile longer about his house-hunting experiences, I asked 
Jerry if he wanted to talk a bit about his upcoming project. 
“Sure,” he said. “Actually, I am not sure there is anything you can help 
me with. Aren’t you supposed to help project managers?” 
I was initially taken aback, thinking I had perhaps missed something. 
“Well, yes. But it sounds like you have a pretty important project. Are 
you an experienced project manager?” 
“Project? Project manager?” Jerry questioned, sounding unsure. “We 
don’t do projects in this department. We just go ahead and get the 
work done.” 
The light bulb went off in my head, and I knew I was going to have my 
hands full. Not only was Jerry an inexperienced project manager, he 
didn’t even know he was the project manager! 
“Jerry,” I said, “let’s talk.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
5  
LESSON  
Most work typically falls into one of the following categories: 
 
Support work is associated with keeping current production 
processes working and stable, such as fixing a crashed computer 
application. 
 
Operations work is associated with the ongoing execution of a 
company’s business processes, such as entering accounting transac-
tions or ordering supplies. 
 
Overhead includes vacation and sick time. 
 
Management and leadership is associated with the time spent 
managing people and moving the organization forward to achieve its 
business goals. 
 
Projects are temporary work used to do new things and build new 
or enhanced products.  
Project work is the area of interest in my new job. Projects are not some-
thing only certain departments do—they are how work gets done. In fact, 
projects can exist in any functional area. This is a key difference between 
the work a person does and the organization where that person works. For 
instance, your department may execute some projects as well as perform 
support type work. Your operations area may execute projects as well as 
operations work. Your management team may even do projects in addition 
to their management work. This highlights the difference between your 
functional group and the actual type of work you perform. Although there 
are differing definitions of projects, all projects have three major character-
istics—a finite time frame, uniqueness, and deliverables. 
First and foremost, a project must have a start and end date. Although one 
could quibble about the exact dates, there must be a time before the work 
existed and there must be a time when the work no longer exists. Entering 
transactions into an accounting system, for instance, is not a project because 
the activity goes on indefinitely. Answering questions from the users about 
the accounting system software is not a project either, since those ques-
tions will be asked indefinitely as well. On the other hand, Jerry’s work to 
upgrade the phone system was not happening before, and at some point it 
will be completed (even if it goes over its deadline, it will either be com-
pleted or cancelled). The phone system may be upgraded again, but if that 
happens, there will be a time gap between the upgrades, so the work is not 
continuous. The next upgrade will have a start and end date as well. 

 Understand the Characteristics of a Project 
 
6  
All projects are also unique. They have unique characteristics, unique deliv-
erables, unique people, and unique circumstances. As a contrast, if you 
worked for the help desk, over time you would begin to master your job 
since there is a certain rhythm and pattern to the work. Once you get some 
experience, you find you can handle the repetitive nature of the work by 
following a certain set of processes and procedures. This is an example of 
ongoing operations. Working at the help desk today is similar to working 
there yesterday and it will be similar tomorrow and a year from tomorrow. 
On the other hand, projects are unique. This characteristic makes them 
hard to estimate and hard to manage. Even if the project is similar to one 
you have done before, new events and circumstances will occur. Each pro-
ject typically holds its own challenges and opportunities. 
Lastly, all projects produce one or more deliverables (deliverables also may 
be called products). These deliverables could be anything from a computer 
application to an analysis document; from a recommendation to a new 
house. If the work does not result in the creation of one or more deliver-
ables, then it is not a project. Even if your project is building a service, you 
would have deliverables such as a procedures manual, training classes, and 
perhaps marketing literature. 
Most people also assign other characteristics to projects. These include a 
defined scope, a defined set of resources (people, money, equipment, sup-
plies, etc.), common objectives (stated or unstated), and an assigned project 
manager and project team.  
It is important to note there are no upper or lower limits in terms of effort, 
cost, or duration. A project might take 10,000 hours to complete, or it 
might take 10 hours to complete. Very small projects are typically called en-
hancements or discretionary requests. Of course, how one manages these 
small and large projects is not the same. The 10 hour project probably does 
not have any formal project management techniques applied to it at all. A 
large project will require much more rigor and structure. 
Projects can be found in all types of businesses—from marketing to manu-
facturing to movie studios. Yes, even in the Information Infrastructure de-
partment where Jerry works! How many times have major initiatives failed 
because they were not organized and managed as a project? Many, many 
times. Jerry wants to just “get the work done.” That type of thinking is fine 
for a 40-hour project where work can be planned and defined in your head. 
However, this initiative is too big, too complex, and too important for Jerry 
to manage in his head. He will have a better chance of success if he defines, 
structures, and manages the work as a project. When I meet with him next, 
the education process will continue. 

C H A P T E R 
2 
Always Have an 
Identified and 
Committed 
Sponsor 
 
The next day I had an opportunity to meet with Ashley Parker, the pro-
ject manager on a large Marketing information database project that 
was just beginning a major new phase. Ashley was married and had two 
children. She often volunteered at her kids’ school and helped out once 
a month at their neighborhood church. She was wearing dark pants 
with a plain red turtleneck and red-framed glasses when she came into 
my office at a little past 2 p.m. Good, solid business clothes—nothing 
fancy, but nothing odd either. On second look, the red glasses did give 
her a bit of pizzazz. Her hair was shoulder length, and she stood about 
5’ 3”, even with heels on. She had a solid image, but I’d soon see if she 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

 Always Have an Identified and Committed Sponsor 
 
8  
was a solid project manager. I had known Ashley for about three years, 
although we had never really worked together before. 
“Hello Ashley. How are you?” I asked as she entered my office. 
“I am doing okay, I guess. Am I interrupting you?” 
“Not at all. I’m just filling out a form for new business cards.” 
Ashley smiled and sat down in the chair in front of my desk. She had a 
look of concern on her face, so I asked her to give me an update on her 
project. She informed me that her team had just completed phase one 
of the project. The next phase needed to start right away, but she 
wasn’t sure the business client was fully involved. The original business 
sponsor had recently been reassigned, and Ashley hadn’t met the new 
manager in that role. 
We discussed her situation for a few minutes. 
“In today’s rapidly changing business environment, it is not uncommon 
for companies to experience turnover of key project resources,” I ex-
plained. “The Marketing and Sales department seems to have more 
people coming and going than most. That’s one reason it makes sense to 
break large projects down into phases, each of which can be managed 
as an individual project. You are very smart to use this approach. When-
ever you complete one phase, you always have a chance for a checkpoint 
to make sure everything is ready to proceed to the next phase.” 
“Thanks,” she responded. 
“Did you complete a Project Charter document before the project 
started?” I asked. 
“Yes, I did,” she answered. 
“How old is it?” 
“It was written and approved four months ago.”  
“I assume your previous sponsor approved the project. Has the new 
sponsor seen the Project Charter?” 
“I don’t think so,” Ashley responded. “He has so many things on his 
mind; I don’t think our project is on his radar screen yet.” 
“You are entering a new phase,” I confirmed with Ashley, who nodded. 
“Have you updated the Project Charter to reflect the new work?” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
9  
Ashley shook her head. “We haven’t been able to get the time we need 
from the sponsor and the client to validate the remaining work.” 
“Okay, the worst thing would be to continue the project without busi-
ness involvement and then have to redo much of the work later on—or 
even cancel the whole project for lack of sponsorship. Let’s not keep 
things going based on their own momentum. Now is the time to revali-
date business commitment and sponsorship, and make sure you are still 
on the right track. Then you can refocus the team for the next phase.” 
LESSON  
The term client is used in multiple contexts. Sometimes the term refers to a 
specific person and sometimes the term refers to the group of people re-
ceiving the project benefit. For instance, if you say, “The client asked us to 
include some new requirements,” you may be referring to a specific person 
or you may be referring to the generic client organization. Some organiza-
tions use the term customer or user to refer to the person or group receiv-
ing value from the project. At Mega Manufacturing, we use the term client.  
Sponsors have ultimate authority over projects, and they are almost always 
within the client organization. In most companies, the simplest way to iden-
tify the sponsor is to ask who is providing funding for the work. The spon-
sor also resolves major issues and changes, approves major deliverables, and 
provides high-level direction. The sponsor acts as a champion for the pro-
ject within his or her organization—and elsewhere as needed. If the project 
is large and the sponsor is senior enough in the company, he or she may 
take on the role of executive sponsor and delegate the day-to-day decision 
making to a lower-level project sponsor. 
Typically, a project would not get funded or started without a sponsor. 
However, in some projects, the sponsor tends to sink into the background 
and does not remain actively engaged in the project. When this happens, the 
client organization can start to lose interest and focus. Good project man-
agers should make sure this never happens. The sponsor should be kept as 
actively involved as possible. To accomplish this, project managers should 
meet with the sponsor regularly, keep him or her informed of project pro-
gress, and frequently ask for direction and advice. 
All projects need an active sponsor—either an executive sponsor or a tac-
tical project sponsor. If the project does not have an active sponsor, the 
project manager may feel obligated to fill the void and make many of the 

 Always Have an Identified and Committed Sponsor 
 
10  
business decisions that are really the responsibility of the sponsor. This 
may keep the project going in the short term but almost always results in a 
less than optimal solution from a business perspective.  
Unfortunately, even an engaged sponsor sometimes leaves in the middle of a 
project. This is the situation Ashley faces. She has a project in progress and 
is ready to move from one phase to the next. Many project managers would 
be tempted to just keep the project moving and continue working until 
someone tells them to stop. Ashley, however, recognizes that this is not 
right because two very big problems can occur. 
First, new sponsors have new ideas and new requirements. To a certain ex-
tent, that is the privilege of being the sponsor. Ashley wants to make sure 
she understands any differences between the desires of the old sponsor and 
the new one. Otherwise, she may end up having to perform more work lat-
er when the new sponsor finally has more time to pay closer attention. 
Second, transitioning from one sponsor to another can lead to a lack of focus 
from the client organization. Ashley recognizes this since she told me her cli-
ents were not as engaged as they should be. This usually manifests itself in 
the form of unanswered phone calls, unreturned messages, missed meetings, 
or missed deadlines. In Ashley’s case, the loss of focus from her client orga-
nization is probably directly related to the loss of her original sponsor. 
It’s not easy to stop a project, especially since the resources allocated to 
the project could become idle or could potentially be reassigned. However, 
Ashley cannot continue without an identified sponsor and client commit-
ment. She should talk to her manager and the client manager about validat-
ing who the new sponsor will be and get him or her engaged soon. If the 
project is still important to the client, Ashley should be able to get a new 
sponsor involved, reenergize the client group, and continue the work. If she 
cannot get a new client sponsor, she and her manager need to put the pro-
ject on hold. It would be a potentially painful step, but not as painful to the 
company as completing an irrelevant project. Once clients understand that 
a project will be put on hold, they will have to make a decision on its rele-
vant importance. If it is important enough, it will receive the proper level of 
focus. If not, the project will probably not be continued. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
3 
Report Status 
on All Projects 
 
Mega Manufacturing is headquartered in Dickens, Illinois, population 
90,000. The laid-back town is located about 55 miles northeast of Chi-
cago, and Mega Manufacturing is by far its leading industry. The second 
biggest source of jobs in the town is Northeast Illinois State University, a 
small liberal arts college with an annual student population of 8,000. 
Pam and I moved to Dickens 11 years ago when I was hired in Mega’s 
IT department. Several months after we moved, the university hired 
Pam as ticket coordinator in the Athletics department. She is currently 
sports information director for the university, a title she has held for the 
last three years. 
Although fairly small, the town is genuinely charming and very beautiful, 
with many tree-lined streets and an open, inviting attitude. We tell our 
out-of-town friends our city is very family friendly, with great schools, 
plenty of parks, and a low crime rate. And when we want to get away 
for the weekend, we just hop in the car and head for Chicago. 
That’s exactly what Mike Miller did over the weekend. He and his fam-
ily spent Saturday and Sunday in Chicago, catching a Bulls game on Sat-
urday night. Mike was a popular employee in our office and had a great 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

 Report Status on All Projects 
 
12  
great reputation as a patient, thoughtful man who would bend over 
backwards to help a friend or colleague. His office was full of family 
photos, including several pictures of his kids in their baseball uniforms, 
soccer uniforms, and his youngest daughter in a ballerina tutu. He 
asked me to stop by on January 13 to discuss a project he was doing to 
install document management software in the Legal department.  
“How is life treating you Mike?” I asked as I entered his office. 
“Oh, good and bad, Tom,” he responded. “The kids and I just got back 
from a fun weekend in Chicago catching the Bulls crush the Cleveland 
Cavaliers. So that was good.” 
“And what’s the bad?” 
“Well, it’s this darn project I am working on. That’s why I asked you to 
stop by today. I could really use your advice, Coach.”  
I smiled. Mike gave me the nickname “Coach” at last year’s annual 
New Year’s Eve party when my transfer was announced. He liked to call 
people by nicknames, and I had to admit the practice carried a certain 
degree of charm and camaraderie. Mike always made you feel like a 
friend, even if you were meeting him for the first time. 
“Give me some of the details, Mike. What exactly is the problem?” 
“My sponsor saw a report on the desk of the finance director showing 
the status on a big project underway in the finance area. He started to 
ask questions, and now it turns out I need to do a status report as well.” 
“Interesting,” I said. “Sounds like you don’t currently report status. Is 
that right?” 
“No, we don’t,” Mike said. “Now my sponsor wants a status report like 
the one from finance. This report is four pages long and contains more 
detail than we track here. It’s going to take us a long time to get the 
report done—time we could be spending working on the project.” 
I could see where this was leading. “Don’t you consider communicating 
with your business clients part of your work on the project?” I asked. 
“We were communicating fine without having to do a four-page status 
report. We always took time to let the client know what was going on 
whenever he asked. You know, it’s all this paperwork that turns people 
against methodology.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
13  
“Project managers need to consider effective, proactive communication 
as part of their job,” I replied. “But let’s be clear: there is a difference 
between ‘reporting status’ and ‘status reports.’” 
LESSON  
Many years ago, a good project manager might have gotten away with being 
a poor communicator. The clients typically didn’t like it, but as long as pro-
ject managers could deliver the goods, clients were inclined to let them do 
their own thing. 
In today’s world, however, projects need to be undertaken in partnership 
with clients, and the partnership absolutely requires solid communication. If 
you are managing a large project, you may have a multifaceted communica-
tion approach. On a smaller project, the communication needs are simpler. 
However, reporting status is not an option. It is a requirement on all pro-
jects, large and small.  
Status reporting can take many forms depending on the size of the project. 
The project manager may request that team members submit status reports 
on a weekly, biweekly, or monthly basis. These reports are used by the pro-
ject manager to understand the detailed status of the work against expected 
target dates. These team status reports also include specific problems, con-
cerns, and risks that team members are encountering.  
The project manager also creates status updates for his or her functional 
manager, as well as the sponsor and other stakeholders. This status re-
port contains summarized information that is of more interest to these 
stakeholders. These are typically written documents, although they could 
be e-mail messages or web page updates. They could even be voicemail 
messages. 
In addition to status reports, most projects have some form of status meet-
ing. Again, these could be at different levels. The project manager might 
have a weekly status meeting with members of the team and a separate sta-
tus meeting with sponsors, managers, and a steering committee. Typically 
one meeting will not suffice, since the level of detail and audience interest is 
vastly different between senior management and the project team. 
The main function of status reporting is to communicate project accom-
plishments, but you should also use it to highlight any major problems, 
changes, risks, etc. The purpose of status reporting is to manage expecta-
tions and to ensure that all participants and stakeholders have a common 

 Report Status on All Projects 
 
14  
understanding of the project today and what the future looks like. No one 
likes surprises. Proactive and ongoing communication is the key to making 
it all work. 
It sounds like Mike does not see proactive communication as a core respon-
sibility of the project manager. Mike is a reactive communicator. He says he 
provides a full status of the project whenever his sponsor asks for it, but 
what he doesn’t realize is this lack of effective, proactive communication is 
exactly what is causing the sponsor to request additional information in the 
form of a formal status report. 
My discussion with Mike centers around two main points. 
 
Proactive communication is absolutely part of the job of a project 
manager. The ability to proactively anticipate the communication 
needs of your stakeholders is one of the criteria separating casual 
project managers from mature and professional project managers. 
 
Reporting status is not the same as a status report. Reporting status is 
something all project managers need to do. Paper status reports are 
just one delivery mechanism. 
While the sponsor has requested a specific four-page status report he saw 
elsewhere, there are probably many alternatives. Mike should talk with the 
sponsor to determine what his information needs are, and then provide that 
information. Managers do not want to see the day-to-day minutia that is oc-
curring on the project. They usually want you to stick to the major facts and 
tell them if they should be worried about anything. A common technique is 
to report the status of a project with an overall color code of green (okay), 
yellow (caution), or red (in trouble). Remember as well that the status re-
port is a recap. If any major problems or events occur during the month, 
you should be communicating at the time of the occurrence. 
It sounds like Mike’s department does not have a standard status reporting 
process, so he’ll need to work with the sponsor on how to best meet the 
sponsor’s desire for more project information. Generally, the sponsor will 
be reasonable. If certain types of information are hard to report, chances 
are he will not require it. As mentioned earlier, there are many ways to re-
port status. A formal status report document may not be needed at all. 
Understanding the informational needs of your stakeholders is a part of 
communications planning. This should be done at the beginning of a project. 
Mike is playing catch-up now, but this experience should strengthen his un-
derstanding of this critical project management function so he can do better 
in the future. 

C H A P T E R 
4 
Focus on 
Deadline Dates 
 
January 15 brought an unusual amount of excitement and happiness to 
the office, especially considering we had just been hit with our second 
big snowstorm of the year. I figure the joyful spirit was attributable to it 
being payday. I heard a lot of people talking about overspending during 
the holidays and how they were in need of a financial shot in the arm. I, 
too, spent more than I planned and was excited to get my first pay-
check as project management advisor. My promotion came with a nice 
raise, but I wasn’t sure what my new semi-monthly compensation would 
be after taxes. I received my paycheck by mid-morning and was pleased 
with the new total. 
Leaning back in my office chair, I picked up the framed picture on my 
desk of Tim as a newborn baby and stared in amazement at how little 
he was at birth and how quickly he was growing. He had bright green 
eyes like his mother and a big head like his dear old dad. I was still star-
ing at his picture when Lindsay Peterson arrived. Her quiet knock broke 
my trance, and I stood up quickly to greet her. 
“Lindsay, come in, come in! Sorry I didn’t see you right away.” 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Focus on Deadline Dates 
 
16  
“That’s okay, Tom,” she replied. “I find myself doing the same thing 
with my new girl.” 
Lindsay worked in the Application Support area and had recently re-
turned from maternity leave after the birth of her daughter Patricia in  
November. Her husband Al was a carpenter by trade and made quite a 
lot of money as an insurance contractor. I had not seen Lindsay in sev-
eral months, but she looked much the same, with the addition of black 
circles under her eyes. As a parent, I understood about sleepless nights 
with a newborn. 
“So how is life with little Patricia?” 
“You know, she is only two months old, but I already find it hard to re-
member life without her. She is such a wonderful little baby, and she 
brings so much joy to Al and me. We’ll have to invite you and Pam over 
for dinner one night so you can see her.” 
I thanked her for the offer and took a few minutes to peruse the pic-
tures of Patricia she pulled from her purse. She was a cute baby with a 
round face and blue eyes. I was a little surprised to see she was bald, 
though, as Lindsay and Al both had full, thick heads of hair. 
“So please tell me about your project,” I said, returning to my chair.  
Lindsay’s Application Support team did not do projects often, but when 
they did, the projects tended to be complex. Her current project was a 
good example. She was managing a complex enhancement to a Sales 
department application. They had the most knowledge of this package, 
since they supported it on an ongoing basis. 
“I’m not sure what to do,” she began. “I’ve got good people on the 
team, but we are falling behind schedule. Some team members have 
been unable to allocate the time required to get the work done on 
schedule. Most of them are trying to balance work on my project with 
their other support responsibilities. When the current release has prob-
lems, they need to shift time over for that.” 
“How are you managing the project plan and keeping track of end 
dates?” I inquired. 
“Every Wednesday and Friday I ask the team to give me an update. I 
ask for the number of hours spent on each assigned activity and what 
percent is complete. The problem is it seems that the work is always 90 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
17  
percent complete. By the time it’s 100 percent complete, we have 
missed the deadline. When I talk to people about the project falling be-
hind, they tell me they haven’t been able to allocate the time the activity 
requires. If the activity takes 40 hours of effort, they don’t consider it a 
problem unless they go over 40 hours. If it takes them a week longer to 
work all 40 hours, they still think they are doing okay.” 
I drilled a little deeper. “What is the purpose of asking people how 
many hours they worked on each activity?” 
Lindsay was a little puzzled. “Having the team report hours tells me 
how much time they are spending on each project activity and helps me 
to validate how close the original estimates were.” 
“Okay. I think you are getting that information,” I agreed. “But it’s not 
enough. You’re falling behind. What information would be the most 
helpful for future project planning?” 
She thought for a minute. “The deadline dates are really the most im-
portant. What I really want to know is when the work will be done.” 
LESSON  
Have you ever managed a project where the work was always 90 percent 
complete? After a period of frustration, you realize that asking people what 
percentage of work is complete is only of limited value. 
Estimating effort hours is important in setting up the original schedule and 
determining completion dates. But once the schedule is created and activi-
ties are assigned, the focus should switch to getting the work done on time. 
This does not mean actual effort hours are unimportant. They are impor-
tant—especially if you are charging a client on an hourly basis, or if the pro-
ject team contains contract resources charged on an hourly basis. 
However, in a typical internal project utilizing internal resources, it is easier 
and more effective to manage the project based on the assigned end dates. 
Then just one question needs to be asked and validated: When will the 
work be done? 
Lindsay’s project showcases a common scenario. An activity may have 
been estimated to take 40 effort hours and two weeks to complete. Of 
the two estimates, the more important aspect of success is whether the 
work was completed within the two weeks. To a certain extent, it really 

Focus on Deadline Dates 
 
18  
doesn’t matter if the actual effort took 30 hours or 60—as long as it is 
completed within two weeks (assuming, of course, there are no charges 
for each excess hour of work). When Lindsay receives status updates 
from the team, she should validate whether each activity will be completed 
by its deadline. If team members think it will, then Lindsay is fine. If they 
don’t think it will, then Lindsay can take corrective action if necessary. 
Regardless of how diligent your team members are, some deadlines will still 
be missed. If the work is not complete, the project manager’s question is 
still “When will the work be done?” This line of questioning eliminates the 
problem of an activity being 90 percent complete, then 95 percent com-
plete, then 99 percent complete but one, two, and then three weeks late. 
Asking for the completion date also allows the team member to personally 
recommit to a new deadline date. This personal commitment makes the 
team member more motivated to actually meet the deadline date.  
There are reasons for keeping track of percent complete at a project level 
for those using Earned Value Management techniques. There are also rea-
sons to keep track of actual effort hours. However, for schedule manage-
ment, focus on when the work will be done. Managing the effort hours and 
the budget are two indicators of success, but managing by completion date 
is the best way to keep a project focused on its deadlines. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
5 
Apply Some 
Level of Project 
Management 
Discipline 
—Even On Small Projects 
Susan Chang phoned me on January 19 and asked for a quick meeting 
the next day to discuss her manufacturing project. When I arrived at 
her office she was on the phone, although she motioned for me to come 
in. Susan had straight black hair which she often wore pulled back with 
a clip or rubber band. She was born in Taiwan, but her parents were 
killed when she was a baby. An American soldier adopted her and 
brought her back to the States to live with him and his wife in Dickens. 
She was now in her early 30s. My knowledge of her came mostly from 
other people, although I did chat with her briefly at the New Year’s Eve 
party and she told me some of her background. Taking my seat, I can 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Apply Some Level of Project Management Discipline 
 
20  
hear her saying “Mommy needs to go now, sweetie.” After she hung up, 
she explained that her youngest was home sick from school. 
“She wanted to tell me her grandma was going to make her grilled 
cheese and chicken soup for lunch. She just loves grilled cheese.” 
“That’s funny,” I said. “How long has she been sick?” 
“Only a few days,” she replied. “It’s just a cold, but you know how 
quickly those germs can spread. We figured it would be in everyone’s 
best interest to keep her home for a few days.” 
One of the things I did know about Susan was that she was a germ 
freak. She kept little moist towelettes in her desk drawer to wipe off the 
phone and doorknobs periodically, and she also washed her hands more 
than anyone else I knew. 
“Probably best,” I offered. “So tell me, Susan, what’s going on with  
your project?” 
“Well, our client is very upset with us right now,” she began. “The cli-
ent’s request started off simply enough. First, we were asked to create a 
new report to show the manufacturing run rate over the previous three 
months. Then, as we were finishing this off, he decided he wanted us to 
estimate the run rates over the next three months as well.” 
“Did you note this as a change?” I asked. 
“No,” Susan replied quickly. “We don’t do projects in our group—just 
small enhancements. The original request should have only taken us  
20 hours to complete. That’s the typical size of the enhancements we 
perform.” 
I thought for a second about her comment “We don’t do projects in our 
group” and was reminded of my meeting with Jerry a few weeks back. 
“That’s fine for the initial request,” I replied. “But how about the 
changes the client is asking for now?” 
Susan hesitated for a few seconds. “That was a more complex piece of 
work requiring a few extra weeks. We didn’t have all of the data we 
needed, so we had to make some changes to capture the right informa-
tion. We also had some trouble understanding how the new report 
should be calculated.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
21  
I was starting to get the picture. “Okay, how much time has been spent 
on this?” 
“It’s hard to say,” she answered. “But we’ve had one to two people as-
signed to this for the last six weeks.” 
Six weeks! No wonder the client is unhappy! 
LESSON  
This situation occurs all the time. You start off with a small request that 
seems easy to complete. Then, before you know it, you have spent weeks 
and hundreds of hours on it. How did you end up in such straits? You may 
have just misunderstood and underestimated the original request. But what’s 
more likely is that the original, simple request has become more complicated 
thanks to additional changes, additions, and revisions from the client. 
Earlier, when I defined a project, I said enhancements are considered pro-
jects because they have a beginning and an end, they result in a deliverable, 
and they have resources applied. An enhancement that takes 1,000 hours 
to complete is easy to categorize as a project. You can tell right away that 
it is big. However, Susan’s small enhancement fits the definition of a project 
as well. 
If this was a formal project, Susan would have developed a Project Charter 
that included a description of scope. Of course, Susan cannot be expected 
to manage a 20-hour request as a formal project. These types of projects 
can be planned and managed in her head. However, Susan did not recognize 
the fact that her request had evolved from a 20-hour project into one that 
will take hundreds of hours to complete. At this point, the work has already 
consumed several weeks and a couple hundred hours—and it is not over 
yet! Looking back, the work should have been run as a small- to medium-
sized project. 
How should you manage work that starts off small but ends up being much 
larger? The answer is to manage small requests informally but use the ap-
propriate project management techniques when necessary. In Susan’s case, 
when she received the major change, she should have performed some basic 
change management. If Susan did not understand the impact, she should 
have asked for time to further investigate. She could have then done a more 
complete analysis of the new work and created a new estimate of the effort 
hours and duration required to complete the changes. She would then have 
had more solid information to take back to the client to validate that he un-
derstood the impact of the changes in terms of time and effort. 

Apply Some Level of Project Management Discipline 
 
22  
If she had talked to the client and explained to him the consequences, he 
could have made a decision as to whether the incremental value of the re-
quest was worth the extra time and effort. This would have been a good 
use of informal change management. 
When the work became larger, Susan should have also started communicat-
ing more proactively, creating weekly status updates to better manage the 
client’s expectations. In many cases, it is not the time delay that the client is 
upset about; it is the lack of communication explaining the status and the 
challenges. Again, if the client was better informed as to the consequences 
of his request, he may have realized earlier that the request was not worth 
this level of effort. 
It does not usually make sense to stop a small piece of work and go through 
a formal project planning stage when the work starts to grow. However, 
that assumes the change only requires an incremental increase in effort and 
time. For instance if a 40-hour project grows to be 60 hours, you don’t 
need to go through formal change management or formal planning.  
On the other hand, if the work ends up being more substantial than origi-
nally thought, other project management practices may come into play, 
including better defining the work, building a simple schedule, and formally 
managing scope, issues, and communication. This is the case with Susan’s 
project. It started off small and she managed it informally. That’s fine. How-
ever, she should have recognized when the subsequent project changes 
caused the scope and effort of the project to increase substantially; that was 
the time to introduce more formal project management discipline and tech-
niques—including better project communications with the client. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
6 
Define and 
Plan the  
Work First 
 
I had been looking forward to my second meeting with Jerry for several 
days. His office was in a separate wing of our building, and I rarely saw 
him during the day. In fact, I had only seen him in person once since our 
initial meeting and that was in the first-floor cafeteria when we were 
both grabbing a quick sandwich before afternoon meetings. 
Jerry was still finding his way at Mega Manufacturing and was still a no-
vice when it came to project management. We had been e-mailing each 
other a couple times a week for the last three weeks, and I was really 
beginning to feel like part of his team. Although I was not doing any of 
the work related to his upgrade of the phone mail system, I did feel like 
I was part of the planning process, advising Jerry on how best to get the 
job done. I had a personal stake in seeing Jerry and his project succeed 
because I felt that advising him was exactly why I was given the position 
as project management adviser. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Define and Plan the Work First 
 
24  
Jerry and I had agreed to meet for lunch, and I was reading the morning 
paper when I saw him enter the lunchroom. I usually eat lunch at my 
desk unless I am meeting with someone, so relaxing and reading the 
paper seemed like a luxury. 
“Hey, Jerry. Glad to see you again,” I said as I shook his hand. 
“Good to see you again, too, Tom. Thanks for all the help you’ve been 
providing. I really appreciate it.” 
“Not a problem. I am glad to be of help. How are you doing?” 
“Well, I am beginning to feel a bit overwhelmed, to be honest with  
you. It’s partly because of this project and partly because of our house 
frustrations.” 
“You guys still haven’t found a house?” 
“No. In fact, we have lost a little bit of our enthusiasm about it. My wife 
is busy at her job, too, so we have not been able to devote a lot of time 
and energy to it lately. Our realtor sends us daily updates with links to 
new houses on the market or price changes, and it’s nice to be able to 
look at the pictures online, but nothing has really panned out.” 
“What sort of things are you looking for?” 
“Well, Barbara would like to have an older home, something with some 
charm and character. But we both like some of the modern conven-
iences like central air and a newer kitchen. We would also like a big 
master bedroom, and we both seem to like more open and spacious 
floor plans. It’s amazing how many homes in Dickens don’t have central 
air conditioning. I guess it’s hard to think about that now since it is so 
cold. But come the summer, it gets so hot and humid here.” 
“Well, it certainly sounds like you know exactly what you are looking for 
in a house. I guess the question is whether you can find what you want 
in this market. I am sure if you keep looking, you will find something.” 
Jerry and I began eating our lunches and talked a bit more about 
houses. In time, the conversation turned back to work, and we began 
discussing his phone mail project. I could tell he was struggling with the 
ideas behind project management and still wanted to focus his attention 
on “just getting the work done.” Unfortunately, I had been hearing some 
complaints around the office about the initial progress of the team’s 
work, and I thought it was important to address them right away. 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
25  
“So, tell me, how are things progressing with your project?” I asked, put-
ting down my turkey sandwich. 
“Everything is going well. We have made some good progress.” 
“I’m sure you have,” I replied. “But I heard there was some trouble when 
you tried to rewire the second floor. My understanding is that many peo-
ple were disrupted because they lost phone access for two days.” 
“Yes, but it wasn’t totally our fault,” he protested quickly. “We didn’t 
realize we had to do both sides of the floor. We thought that only half 
the phone lines needed to be rewired.” 
“You and I have been discussing the need for planning more before your 
team jumps in to begin working. Do you think more planning would 
have helped in this case?” 
Jerry realized where my question was heading. His initial philosophy was 
all about “just doing the work.” Now he was open to a better alternative. 
LESSON  
It is not uncommon at the completion of a project to look back and reflect 
on how the project progressed. This is called an End-of-Project Review 
Meeting. For projects that were challenged or unsuccessful, these meetings 
are sometimes called postmortems. When the team discusses the reason for 
problems, a common theme seems to dominate—a general lack of definition 
and planning. A common lament is, “We should have spent more time plan-
ning.” Of course planning is a big topic. It means you should have spent 
more time understanding the nature of the work, expectations, deliverables, 
scope, estimates, risks, etc. 
People ask how much time should be spent in the planning phase of a pro-
ject. The answer is simple: you need to spend sufficient time planning to 
make sure you know what you are doing. All projects should start with an 
up-front definition and planning process. The planning process scales de-
pending on the size of the project. If it’s a small project, the process does 
not have to be elaborate. The planning may take place in your head. On the 
other hand, if it’s a very large project, the planning process itself could take 
many months and thousands of hours. The time spent adequately planning 
the work will be more than made up for by a smoother running and more 
focused project over the long term. 

Define and Plan the Work First 
 
26  
The up-front planning work involves four major aspects. 
 
Defining the work: This is the process of defining objectives, 
scope, risks, assumptions, etc. This information needs to be docu-
mented by the project manager and approved by the project spon-
sor to ensure there is a common understanding of the nature of the 
project. Defining the work tells you “what” you are doing.  
 
Building a project schedule: The schedule tells you “how” you 
will execute the project. The schedule lists the activities, estimated 
length, estimated effort, resources applied, dependencies between 
the activities, etc. At any given time, the schedule reflects your best 
guess of the work required to complete the project.  
 
Allocating a project budget: The budget reflects the estimated 
cost of the project and how those costs will be allocated. The 
budget reflects the costs of all the resources required to complete 
the project (labor and non-labor). The budget may not be as impor-
tant if you are using internal resources on the project and if you are 
not charging back for the hours.  
 
Defining the Project Management Plan (if appropriate): The 
Project Management Plan describes the processes you will use to 
manage the project. This includes the processes you will use to 
manage risk, scope, communication, quality, procurement, etc. A 
formal Project Management Plan is generally not needed for a small 
project but is absolutely vital as projects get larger.  
They say that in every failure there is an opportunity to learn. In general, I 
agree with this, but what I really wish is that we could get the learning with-
out the failure. I feel this way about Jerry. I spoke to Jerry earlier about de-
fining and planning his work, but he never really bought into the value until 
now. Before today, he was polite and tried to follow some of what I was 
suggesting, but I could tell his heart was not in it. He had not internalized 
the benefit of “sufficient” planning.  
When we discussed the problem he encountered rewiring the second floor, 
Jerry suddenly realized that more planning and a better understanding of 
what was required for this portion of the project might have avoided the 
mistake. An investment of a few more hours of planning may have resulted 
in closer estimates, better resource allocation, and getting the work done 
right the first time. Now I sense Jerry will try harder to plan the remainder 
of the project, instead of just giving it lip service. 

C H A P T E R 
7 
Don’t  
“Microbuild”or 
Micromanage 
the Workplan 
 
After my first month on the job, I felt like things were going very well. I 
had met with many people at Mega Manufacturing, and I felt my work 
was helping people to save valuable time, while also making the com-
pany money by increasing productivity. I was also further strengthening 
an old friendship with Wayne Moretti, a vice president and my new boss.  
Wayne and I went back a long way. He hired me as an associate IT 
specialist right out of college, when we both lived and worked in New 
York, and took an interest in my professional growth and development. 
Later, after I had moved to Atlanta and Wayne had moved to Dickens, 
he convinced me to relocate back to the Midwest and join him at Mega 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Don’t “Microbuild” or Micromanage the Workplan 
 
28  
Manufacturing. After a long career, Wayne announced last December 
that he would be retiring this year at the age of 60. 
It was Wayne who first talked to the CIO about staffing a position to help 
people manage projects. The IT department at Mega Manufacturing  
realized it needed to manage projects in a better way. The medium-term 
direction was to build a Project Management Office and utilize a common 
set of project management processes throughout the organization. How-
ever, budget cutbacks and competing priorities had pushed this back for 
at least one year. This year Wayne was able to gain approval for a pro-
ject management advisor—me. After discussing the position with Wayne 
for a couple weeks, I decided to accept it. Wayne’s backing gave me in-
stant credibility in the office, and I found myself very busy quickly. 
Before I stepped into this role, Wayne spent time mentoring project man-
agers in his department, but he felt he was only moderately successful. 
He didn’t feel he had the focused time or the right level of project man-
agement competency himself to be a strong mentor. One of the people 
Wayne worked with was Reyna Andersen. Reyna was a few months into 
a large project to implement the first phase of a basic customer relation-
ship management (CRM) package at our company. Wayne wanted me to 
meet with her to begin offering counsel when needed.  
“Why don’t you tell me about your current situation?” I asked Reyna 
when we met in her office Monday morning. “Wayne told me you ran 
into a little glitch.” 
“Well, when I built the schedule, I added a 15 percent allocation for 
project management work,” Reyna began.“But I find myself spending 
more time than that. The schedule administration is really adding up. I 
am assigning work, following up to make sure it is completed, and up-
dating the schedule. But it seems that’s all I ever do.” 
I asked Reyna if I could have a look at the schedule. She handed me a 
stack of paper almost too painful to hold. “Wow!” I exclaimed, as I 
thumbed through the schedule. “This thing weighs more than the Yel-
low Pages! You have more than 1,200 activities listed over the next 
four months!” 
“Well, it is comprehensive,” Reyna replied proudly. “I want to make 
sure I understand the work to be done, and that my team does as well.” 
“You do need to understand the work to be done,” I agreed. “Your team 
members need to understand as well. But you are probably giving them 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
29  
more direction than they need. For instance, I see an activity for setting 
up a biweekly meeting. Why do you have five subtasks for this activity?” 
Reyna gave me the detailed response. “Well, you have to determine the 
participants, perform a calendar search, get a conference room, sched-
ule the free time, and notify everyone.” 
“You’re right; those all are steps to setting up a meeting,” I concluded. 
“But remember what you said about understanding the work to be 
done? Don’t you think if you just had one activity for setting up the 
meeting, you and your team would still know what to do?” 
LESSON  
There is no hard-and-fast rule to describe the level of detail you should use 
to define activities in your schedule. However, there are two rules of thumb.  
First, as Reyna suggested, the schedule must be at a level where both the pro-
ject manager (Reyna) and the project team can understand the work. That is 
why the schedule may be at different levels of granularity for different activi-
ties. If a piece of work is well understood, it can be placed on the schedule at 
a higher level. However, if the nature of the assignment is not clear, then the 
activity should be broken down into its more basic components (in some 
companies, these lowest-level statements are called tasks). The project man-
ager may even need to have a meeting with other team members to deter-
mine exactly what needs to be done for some larger activities. 
The second rule of thumb is that the schedule must be at a level that allows 
you to control the work. In general, an activity should never be longer than 
two weeks of duration. This would translate to around an 80-hour activity if 
you assign it to one full-time person. If the person is half-time, perhaps the 
largest activity is 40 hours. On the other hand, if you assign work to a sub-
team of three full-time people, the activity might be up to 240 effort hours 
(two weeks of 40 hours each, times three people).  
One of the key elements of schedule management is to understand that you 
do not really know the status of an activity while it is in progress. Yes, the 
team member may say they are 50 percent done or they may tell you they 
can still hit the deadline. But you don’t really know for sure until the dead-
line date (or when the work is completed). This means if you assign an activ-
ity that is estimated to be completed in two weeks or less, you should nev-
er have to wait more than two weeks to understand whether the work is 
on track or not. If it is not completed, you have time to address any prob-
lems and take corrective action. 

Don’t “Microbuild” or Micromanage the Workplan 
 
30  
This two-week rule is a good rule of thumb if you are working on a typical 
six-month project. However, what if your project is two months long? In 
that case, the two-week rule may not be appropriate because you may not 
have enough time for corrective action once you determine an activity is 
late. For example, if you assign an activity with a deadline of three weeks, 
your project may be almost half over before you fully realize there is a 
problem. Since the project is so short, a better high end for an activity might 
be one week. Likewise, if you have a very short project of one month, per-
haps no activity should be longer than three days. In fact, if you are in the 
last week of a project, you may be assigning short duration work that is no 
longer than a few hours. In all of these cases, if you have an activity that re-
quires more effort or duration than your threshold, you need to break the 
larger activity into one or more smaller activities. 
Reyna likes to control things, but she is not following the first rule of thumb: 
she is not leaving the schedule at a level where the project manager and 
team members understand the activities. Reyna has fallen into the trap of 
building the schedule at too discrete a level. This has caused it to become 
inflated, cumbersome, and very hard to manage. Adding ten activities to the 
schedule where five will suffice (or perhaps one) adds extra work from a 
planning perspective and from a management perspective. Updating the 
schedule takes much longer, and understanding the remaining work of the 
project is much more difficult. The worst part is the extra activity produces 
very little incremental value, and is, in fact, detrimental. Reyna does not 
need that level of detail to manage the work and her team does not need 
that level of detail to understand what is needed. 
Reyna has allocated 15 percent of the project effort hours toward project 
management activities. This is a good rule of thumb and should be plenty of 
time. She needs to free up more of her time by simplifying the schedule 
dramatically. When she does, she will still be able to control the project, but 
she will free herself up from the reactive drudgery caused by micromanag-
ing. As I mentioned earlier, there is a time for very close schedule manage-
ment using very short duration activities. This happens at the end of a pro-
ject, phase, or when you are dealing with problems. This is the time when 
micromanaging may be appropriate. But you don’t normally need this level 
of schedule control and this is not the way that you would typically manage.  
If you feel you are spending too much time managing the schedule and as-
signing work, you may be right. Make sure you are managing work at a level 
where you and your team members can understand the work assignments, 
while at the same time maintaining proactive control so that you can re-
spond appropriately if problems arise. 

C H A P T E R 
8 
Hire a Diverse 
Project Team  
Without Compromising on the Best Candidates 
On February 7, I asked Jerry to stop by my office to discuss the current 
status of his project to upgrade the phone mail system. I was also anx-
ious to share with him the news regarding the Morettis’ house going on 
the market. He was wearing a light brown sweater when he walked into 
my office, and it looked like he got a haircut recently. It was still shaggy, 
but not as shaggy as usual. 
“Have a seat, Jerry. I have really been looking forward to meeting with 
you today.” 
“Why is that, Tom?” he asked with a puzzled look on his face. 
“Tell me, have you guys had any luck finding a house?” 
Jerry talked for five minutes on the continuing struggle he and his wife 
were having. They were only looking at houses every other weekend 
now and were fast growing weary of the hunt. I was trying hard to listen 
to his concerns, but finally I couldn’t hold back any longer. 
“Jerry, I might have found the perfect house for you guys!” 
He could tell I was excited and asked me to tell him the story. I gave 
him all the information I could think of on Wayne’s house, and I could 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Hire a Diverse Project Team 
 
32  
see Jerry’s expression growing brighter and brighter the more I talked. I 
agreed to meet him and his wife for lunch on Sunday and bring them by 
the Morettis’ house so they could have a quick tour. He was so excited 
that he almost left my office to call his wife. I convinced him to stay a 
few minutes longer to brief me on the status of his project. 
“So, how have things been going on your project? Did you put a good 
team together?” I asked. 
“I think I did, Tom,” Jerry replied. “I personally interviewed all of the 
candidates to make sure we got the best possible workers. In fact, a lot 
of the team members remind me a lot of myself! I think it’s going to be 
easy working with a group like that. We are having a few minor prob-
lems in the early-going, though. I thought it would be a fairly simple task 
to gather requirements from the client, but it’s not going so well. It’s al-
most like they’re from another planet!” 
“What do you mean by that?” I asked. “I have managed a lot of pro-
jects and encountered a lot of problems, but working with aliens has 
never been one of them!” 
“Well,” Jerry started, “I recall managing similar projects in the past and 
I assumed that this client would have similar expectations as previous 
ones. But a lot of their needs are completely foreign to me. My sugges-
tions are going unheeded. I just can’t seem to understand where they 
are coming from.” 
“But it sounds like you have a great team to help you out,” I offered. 
“Have you tried including some different team members in the require-
ments-gathering meetings to get some different perspectives? I’m sure 
someone can identify with your client.” 
“That’s the thing. I can’t find anyone else who can help me deal with 
this client. Johnny, Jake, Gary, Edward, Billy—they’re all in the same 
boat as I am, feeling confused and frustrated.” 
“Hmm…it would appear that your hiring didn’t go as well as you 
thought,” I speculated. 
“Why do you say that?” he asked, genuinely perplexed. “I really feel like 
I identified personally with all the people I ended up hiring. They’re the 
best of the best!” 
“Yes, but what exactly do you mean by ‘best’?” I replied. 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
33  
LESSON  
To many people, “diversity” conjures up images of hiring inferior quality for 
the sake of meeting quotas. However, the focus on diversity is much more 
complicated. No company is going to jump onto the diversity bandwagon if 
there are not real business benefits. But companies have found there are, in 
fact, long-term business benefits associated with a diverse workforce.  
Why is diversity awareness necessary at all? Let’s assume your project team 
has an opening. You want to hire the best candidate available, right? Of 
course, looking for the “best” candidate can be a highly subjective matter. 
What does it mean to be the “best” candidate?  
In many cases, there is a clear “best” candidate based on experience and 
skill level. However, if multiple candidates are equal in the aforementioned 
categories, the hiring manager tends to rate a person’s qualifications using 
his own background as a measuring stick. After all, if a project manager has 
a certain background and ends up in the position he is in today, wouldn’t it 
make sense for him to look for those same traits in another person? How-
ever, typically when the manager makes this type of subconscious decision, 
he also tends to pick a person that physically looks like him as well.  
Project managers also want to make sure they hire someone that will get 
along with the rest of the team. Again, if there are multiple candidates with 
close qualifications, the project team may choose a candidate that is more 
like themselves. 
If teams are left on their own, these natural biases tend to result in a like 
group of people hiring a similar candidate. In some organizations and on 
some projects, this results in a bias against workers of the opposite sex. In 
other businesses, there is a bias based on age, culture, and race.  
Companies, especially large ones, have tried to formalize and standardize 
the recruiting and hiring process in a way that allows each candidate to be 
judged based on the same set of criteria. The goal of a standardized process 
is usually not to hire diverse workers. The goal is to remove as many of the 
subconscious biases as possible and to ensure that the most qualified candi-
date is hired.  
In addition to just being fair to all candidates, diversity has the following 
benefits to your company and your project team:  
 
Making better decisions: People from the same types of back-
grounds can have a tendency to think alike and this can affect the 
decisions that people make. Project managers need a diverse set of 

Hire a Diverse Project Team 
 
34  
opinions to make the best technical decisions, to communicate 
more effectively with their clients, and to design and build the most 
creative solutions.  
 
Hiring better people: Ultimately, there is value in being able to 
hire the best person, regardless of the person’s background. In 
many cases, organizations that do not value diversity end up hiring a 
group of people that all look and act the same. They will tell you 
that they are always hiring the “best.” But is it really true that the 
“best” people all look and act the same? I don’t think so. If the en-
tire team looks and acts the same, I would assume you have not 
hired the best people. You have just hired clones of your current 
team. 
 
Running better projects: You have to be experienced at manag-
ing diverse people to excel in today’s global marketplace. Can a pro-
ject manager manage a worldwide distributed team if he has never 
managed people that are different than him? Can you service your 
diverse customer community effectively without a diverse project 
team? Managers will struggle to manage global projects if they don’t 
have skills and experience with a diverse set of team members. 
The bottom line is that there is value in having a diverse workforce and a 
diverse project team. If this was just an artificial feel-good idea, it would not 
be so important to so many companies. However, companies have found 
that valuing diversity results in hiring better people and providing real busi-
ness benefit.  

C H A P T E R 
9 
Define the 
Many Aspects 
of What Is In 
Scope and Out 
of Scope 
 
I purposely scheduled all my meetings for the beginning of the day on 
February 14. I always bought Pam a dozen roses for Valentine’s Day, 
and I wanted to leave work early to stop by the florist. I wanted to leave 
especially early today because I was also planning a romantic dinner for 
the evening. My last appointment was with Danielle Bartlett, a young, 
single woman who had been with the company for about four months. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Define the Many Aspects of What Is In Scope and Out of Scope 
 
36  
She was wearing a black sweater and black pants, and she looked a lit-
tle glum when she entered my office. 
“Hey Danielle, good to see you,” I said as she sat down. “What’s with 
the all black today? You studying to become a Jedi Knight?” 
Danielle smiled for a brief moment then slumped her shoulders back 
down. “Actually, Tom, I hate Valentine’s Day,” she said, trying again to 
smile. “Let me rephrase that: I hate being single on Valentine’s Day!” 
I nodded my head and smiled. Danielle seemed like a nice woman and I 
wanted to offer her some reassurance, but I didn’t know her very well 
and I didn’t think anything I said would make her feel better, so instead 
we talked about work. She was beginning the early stages of a construc-
tion cost-estimating package for the Facilities department, and she had 
e-mailed me a draft of her Project Charter document. I thought a few 
areas needed more work, including more definition and clarity around 
the project scope. 
“Danielle, I’ve heard different people talk about the benefits of this cost 
estimating package and it seems like everyone has a different idea 
about what the final solution will look like. But when I read your scope 
statement, it left me with more questions than answers.” 
“I’ve defined the scope as best I know it,” she replied. “I’ve stated that 
we will be implementing a tool to help estimate costs on major construc-
tion projects. It seems pretty clear to me.” 
“Well, I wonder if it is clear to the people reading the Project Charter,” I 
said. “First of all, are you clear on whether the tool will be available 
worldwide or just in the U.S. division?” 
“That’s an easy one,” she answered. “Other countries have different con-
struction rules and regulations. Initially, we will use the tool only for U.S. 
construction projects. It may be customized for other countries later.” 
“Okay,” I said. “Your business client is the Facilities department. But 
I’ve also heard that the tool might be of use in the Capital Accounting 
Group so they can allocate costs more effectively to the appropriate 
capital accounts.” 
Again, Danielle had the answer. “My sponsor said I didn’t have to worry 
about the accounting implications. If they want to leverage the package, 
they will need to wait until the initial implementation is completed.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
37  
I had one more question to drive home the point. “I also heard that 
people like the idea of being able to use the tool on their laptop. Then 
they can enter information when they are at the construction site and 
update it in real time.” 
Danielle was starting to get the picture. “Actually, the standalone capa-
bility will be available in a subsequent upgrade product. By the way, I 
get your point. Given the different expectations people have for this pro-
ject, I guess the original scope statement was pretty vague.” 
LESSON  
Defining scope is perhaps the most important part of the project planning 
process. If you don't know what you are delivering and the boundaries of 
the project, you have no chance for success. In addition, if you have not 
done a good job of defining scope, managing scope will be almost impossi-
ble. Defining scope is not hard, but it does take an understanding of the 
components. Let's first think of scope in terms of high-level and low-level.  
High-Level Scope: Deliverables and  
Boundaries 
High-level scope is defined in the project planning process. There are two 
major aspects of defining scope on your project: deliverables and boundaries.  
 
The deliverables: If you are not sure of how to define scope on 
the project, you should at least include the deliverables (or prod-
ucts). Understanding the deliverables goes a long way toward un-
derstanding the scope of the project. You should focus on the final 
deliverables of the project first, and then any interim project deliv-
erables that are especially important.  
 
Project boundaries: A project boundary is anything that can be 
expressed in terms of both an in-scope and out-of-scope statement. 
For example, Danielle is going to look for a tool that is to be used in 
the United States, but she is not considering the rest of the world. In 
this case, the United States is in scope and the rest of the world is 
out of scope. If she was considering the needs of the entire global 
company, this would not have been a good boundary statement since 
she could not have stated a good out-of-scope statement. 

Define the Many Aspects of What Is In Scope and Out of Scope 
 
38  
Once you have described the deliverables and the boundaries, you have 
completed high-level scope. This should be enough for the planning process. 
Low-Level Scope: Requirements 
 Knowing the deliverables and perhaps a short description will not be 
enough for you to actually build the deliverables. You need something else: 
requirements (also called specifications). Think about what the requirements 
are—they are actually nothing more than a detailed description of your 
deliverables. Requirements can be broken up into two categories: features 
and functions.  
 
Features (product requirements) describe the physical charac-
teristics of the deliverables. If you were building a bridge, for in-
stance, most of the requirements would be features. These might 
include the number of cars the bridge will hold, the strength of the 
steel, the length of the span, etc. 
 
Functions (process requirements) describe how people inter-
act with a deliverable and how a deliverable interacts with other 
deliverables. For example, if you need to change invoicing and billing 
transactions, most of the requirements could end up being process 
oriented. This would include how billing transactions move from 
orders to invoicing to accounts receivable.  
Together, the features and functions define the project deliverables in more 
detail. The deliverables are understood early in the project and help make 
up high-level scope. The detailed requirements describe the deliverables in 
more detail. The requirements make up low-level scope. In fact, once the 
project starts executing, most scope change requests will end up being 
changes to requirements.  
Danielle’s scope statement is very typical of how some project managers de-
fine project scope. It is brief and to the point, but it also leaves questions in 
the minds of readers. Remember, the purpose of defining scope is to clearly 
articulate what you are taking responsibility for delivering on the project. 
You don’t want to define your project, gain sponsor approval, and then have 
questions arise later about exactly what is included in your project. 
Based on the little I know of Danielle’s project, I have already identified 
three areas where she should further clarify what is in scope and out of 
scope—and there may still be more areas. The good news is she knows the 
information. However, she is not sharing the information nor being clear to 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
39  
the reader. She should be much clearer about what locations and organiza-
tions will be included in the initial deployment. Because there is some con-
fusion in other related organizations, she should state specifically that the 
accounting group and other groups are out of scope. She should also be 
clear about the major features and capabilities that will and will not be in-
cluded. The scope statement is not the place to put requirements, but the 
question of whether the solution can be used with a laptop sounds like it is 
an area of potential confusion. By being clear in the high-level scope defini-
tion, Danielle can better manage expectations and the change process dur-
ing the project. 
Why is this discussion on project scope important? It’s important because a 
lack of scope is one of the primary causes of problems on projects. Al-
though there are a number of causes for poorly managing scope on a pro-
ject, one of the primary causes is that the scope was never defined well in 
the beginning. It is impossible to manage project scope if it’s never defined 
and approved. Now that you better understand the components of scope, 
you will be in a position to make sure projects define scope well. Then you 
can manage change effectively. This does not mean that changes cannot oc-
cur. It means that change is recognized and managed. 

C H A P T E R 
10 
Use the  
“Big Three” 
Documents 
Project Charter, Project Schedule, and  
Requirements as the Foundation for Your Project 
I pulled our car slowly into the driveway on Baker Street and squinted at 
the front door in an attempt to determine if this was indeed Wayne’s 
house. Pam and I had been here several times before, but the house 
next to Wayne’s looked similar from the outside and I always got them 
confused. The Morettis had invited us and another couple over for din-
ner, and we were early, as usual. I grabbed the bottle of wine from the 
back seat and we headed toward the front door. 
Wayne greeted us and led us into the kitchen where his wife Elsie was 
busy cooking. The Morettis’ house was warm and cozy, a combination 
of old world charm and modern-day conveniences. Wayne liked to 
have the newest gadgets and gizmos, and his home certainly reflected 
it. He took the most pride in showing off his basement, complete with 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Use the “Big Three” Documents 
 
42  
plasma TV, pinball machine, pool table, bar, leather recliners, and 
fireplace. His collection of beer steins was prominently displayed on 
several walls and shelves. 
Wayne had just opened our bottle of wine when the doorbell rang. Elsie 
greeted the new guests and brought them into the kitchen where 
Wayne introduced them as the Henleys—Patrick and Carolyn. Patrick 
was a manager in the finance division at our company and Carolyn was 
a kindergarten teacher. Wayne asked all of us to sit around the dining 
room table and talk, while Elsie brought out several appetizers. She also 
poured glasses of wine for the Henleys. 
Patrick and I sat next to each other at the table and, after a bit of small 
talk, began discussing his job. It turned out he was responsible for man-
aging a project to implement new finance procedures for the Accounting 
department. The work had been going on for three months.  
Obviously, his work struck a chord with me and I was excited to learn 
more. 
“The project has taken longer than I originally estimated,” Patrick ad-
mitted. “We seem to be trying to hit a moving target. First, we were just 
going to implement some additional auditing processes. Then we were 
asked to update the company chart of accounts. Now they want us to 
standardize the entire auditing process. The original project was esti-
mated to take two months. My manager keeps asking me when the 
work will be done, but how can I know when they keep adding more? 
She is anxious for us to finish so she can start us on a new project of in-
terest to her.”  
“Interesting,” I replied. “Given the three months you have invested al-
ready, and the changes you have picked up, how much of the project is 
left to complete?” 
“Well, that depends on the accounting users,” he explained. “If they ac-
cept our team’s recommendations for the auditing process, the work 
might be completed in another two months or so. However, based on 
what we have done so far, the target always seems to be changing. Just 
as we think we are making progress, we find out something else needs to 
change. Just last week, for instance, we found out that the auditors now 
want us to compare our auditing practices against others in our industry.” 
“Do you have anything written down describing what you are doing or 
what your client is asking for?” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
43  
I knew the answer before I asked the question. “No,” he said. 
Again, I thought of Jerry and Susan. Looks like they “don’t do projects” 
in Patrick’s area either. 
LESSON  
Processes associated with managing a project have little value if you don’t 
know what you are delivering and how you are going to do it. That is why 
the upfront definition and planning processes are so valuable. You can be 
the greatest workload manager in the world, but you are going to fail if you 
don’t have agreement on what you are delivering and what it takes to get 
the work done. There are three major documents that build this founda-
tion for a project: the project charter, the project schedule, and the busi-
ness requirements. 
The project charter defines the project deliverables, scope, assumptions, 
risks, costs, timelines, approach, etc. It is absolutely vital to have this docu-
ment in place before you start the project work. This does not have to be a 
30-page document. Scalability is still the rule. Small projects may be defined 
in a couple of pages. Enhancement requests might need just one page. 
Larger projects need more planning information and will have a longer char-
ter. It is important to gain agreement with your sponsor on the work to be 
accomplished. If you can’t easily gain consensus on what the project is 
delivering, then it is even more vital that the work waits until agreement is 
reached. The project charter also communicates the project essentials to 
other stakeholders for their agreement and feedback. 
The project schedule describes how you will execute the project, including 
building and deploying the deliverables. You may be able to plan out the ac-
tivities for a small project in your head. However, as projects get larger, the 
schedule needs to be documented in a tool of some kind. The schedule al-
lows you to estimate the overall timeline and helps you see the critical path 
of work driving the deadline. 
Once the schedule is built, it must be kept current so that you can tell 
whether you are falling behind. An updated schedule also tells you how 
much work remains to complete the project. 
The business requirements describe in more detail the characteristics, fea-
tures, and functions of the deliverables. The project charter describes the 
main deliverables of the project as part of the project scope.  However, the 
details and characteristics of the deliverables are not in the project charter. 

Use the “Big Three” Documents 
 
44  
Normally, this level of detail is not known when the project charter is cre-
ated. The business requirements describe the details of the deliverables so 
that you can design and build them correctly. Gaining approval on this 
document also ensures that a common set of expectations with the business 
client exists. If you don’t have defined and approved requirements, you will 
find it difficult to manage scope effectively. 
Looking at Patrick’s project, it is clear he has not yet established the project 
foundation. He has no charter, schedule, or requirements. Consequently, he 
is not able to control scope (which would be in the project charter), he 
does not know how much work is required to complete the deliverables 
(from the schedule), and he is not sure how to build the deliverables (from 
the business requirements). It is not possible to know how much work is 
left or whether he is on the right track. Without these three “friends” he 
will be lost. 
Given the track record of the project so far, the best advice for Patrick is to 
pause the project and quickly write up the project charter, schedule, and 
requirements documents. This will validate whether Patrick and his sponsor 
are in agreement on the work, what that work looks like, and how much 
time and effort it will take to accomplish the work. If he is on the right 
track, he should be able to resume his work and take the project to com-
pletion. If he is not on the right track, the sponsor can decide whether the 
work should proceed given the effort required to get it back on track. Right 
now, no one can make an informed decision since there is no agreed-upon 
information on which to base a decision. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
11 
Use Scope 
Change  
Management 
To Allow the Sponsor to Make the Final Decision 
(Many Times The Sponsor Will Say “No”) 
Jerry and I met on February 22 in my office to discuss his phone mail 
project and his housing situation with the Morettis. Jerry and Barbara 
had visited Wayne and Elsie several times since our initial meeting and 
house tour, and Jerry and Wayne had begun talking about the price. 
Jerry seemed energized by his housing success, and he thanked me re-
peatedly for connecting him with Wayne. We talked at great length 
about his plans for moving in over the summer, and he made a special 
point of telling me that Wayne had agreed to leave his pool table and 
pinball machine as housewarming gifts.  
If left unchecked, Jerry would have probably talked forever about the 
house, but eventually I focused his attention on work-related matters. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Use Scope Change Management 
 
46  
After four weeks of work, the phone mail system was going through 
some initial pilot testing. 
“As we have been checking the phones and the wiring, we have also 
been working on the new voicemail software. We have the software in 
pilot test now and the test is going smoothly,” Jerry began. “But yester-
day we received a request to change the call forwarding feature. The 
pilot team says it is more confusing to use than the old version, and 
they want the old functionality back.” 
“If I remember your project charter, you stated you were going to im-
plement the new upgrade as is, with no custom modifications,” I replied. 
“If your clients are requesting changes to the software, it sounds like a 
change request to me.” 
“You’re right,” Jerry agreed, “but it’s not only a scope change—it’s also 
a distraction. The vendor’s first estimate is that the change will take two 
extra weeks and cost us around $10,000. Then we will have to retest to 
make sure nothing else is broken. In addition, this slightly customized 
version of the software may cause us more problems down the road. I 
really wish we didn’t have to do it.” 
I was sympathetic to Jerry’s concerns, but I had an idea where this 
would all end up. “I don’t think your situation is as bad as you think,” I 
suggested. “You have enough information about the impact on the pro-
ject to talk to your sponsor. First, make sure she is willing to proceed 
with the change.” 
“Good idea,” Jerry said hopefully. “I’ll try to have a short meeting with 
her this afternoon.” 
Later that day Jerry called me. “Well, I just had a great meeting with 
the sponsor,” he said in an upbeat tone. 
“And what did she say about making the change the pilot team recom-
mended?” I asked. 
“She emphatically told me ‘Forget about it!’” Jerry replied, sounding 
more relaxed. “She said the new upgrade might be different, and it may 
not be perfect, but it’s good enough!” 
Just as I thought, I said to myself. 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
47  
LESSON  
There are two major reasons why projects have problems. The first is a ba-
sic lack of upfront definition and planning. The second is poor scope change 
management processes. Remember that scope refers to the box that defines 
the work of your project. High-level scope includes deliverables and bound-
ary statements. The business requirements make up lower-level scope.  De-
fining scope allows you to ensure you have an agreement with your sponsor 
on the box your project is responsible for. Defining scope also provides the 
baseline against which you can perform scope change management through-
out the project. 
Scope change management is necessary to protect the initial agreement you 
have with the sponsor. In the project charter, you agree to deliver a certain 
set of products for a certain level of effort, cost, and duration. If the basic 
nature of the products change, it is reasonable to expect the associated 
cost, effort, and time to complete the work may change as well. 
One of the conflicts project managers face is that they don’t want to say 
“no” to someone who asks for a scope change. The requestor could be a 
client manager, stakeholder, or end user. If the requestor asks for changes, 
the project manager usually feels an instinct to say, “Yes, we can do it.” 
Somehow, saying “no” to the request is seen as not being client focused or 
not satisfying the client’s needs. 
The beauty of scope change management, however, is that the project man-
ager does not have to be the “no” guy. In fact, the project manager does 
not need to decide one way or another—that is not the job of a project 
manager. The project manager’s job is to identify the request and take it 
through the scope change management process. This includes evaluating the 
impact of the change on the project, looking at alternatives, and taking the 
information to the project sponsor for resolution. 
Sponsors should make decisions on scope changes because it is their project 
and ultimately they’re the ones that need to live with the results. The spon-
sor and the project team set expectations in the signed project charter. This 
is further clarified in the approved business requirements. These are the ex-
pectations that are in place. If people have requests for changes to these 
agreements, the sponsor needs to make the decision on whether to ap-
prove the change or not. This decision should be based on the business 
value provided and the overall impact on the project in terms of cost, deliv-
ery time, or quality. 

Use Scope Change Management 
 
48  
The sponsor also has the added advantage of organizational power. Al-
though it is sometimes hard for the project team to say “no” to the client, 
the sponsor doesn’t have that problem. Clients and end users usually work 
in the sponsor’s organization. Since the sponsor is paying for the project, 
they are usually more concerned about it completing as promised within the 
budget and delivery date. 
This change in expectations may be fine. The sponsor may ask your team to 
change the project scope and also agree to the corresponding change in ef-
fort, cost, and scope. However, this is not a given—especially if the changes 
are very large or very small. 
Jerry’s sponsor is typical. She didn’t have much patience for changes in 
scope resulting in marginal benefit. Small changes viewed as critical to the 
end users usually pale when viewed from the sponsor’s perspective. On the 
other hand, if the change is important enough, the sponsor can provide the 
incremental budget and timeline required to complete the extra work. A 
side benefit of going to the sponsor is that after invoking the process once 
or twice, fewer scope change requests come up. People are much less likely 
to request changes without a very good business case if they realize the 
sponsor is actively evaluating all of these requests. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
12 
Collect Metrics 
To Evaluate How Well You (and Your Project) 
Are Performing 
I had been working as project management advisor for almost two full 
months now and I was interested in some feedback regarding my per-
formance in this new role. My boss Wayne agreed to talk with some of 
his management peers to see if they had heard anything from their 
staff. Our meeting today was to discuss this feedback. 
I entered Wayne’s office around 3 p.m. and found him poking his finger 
at a shiny new tablet. “New iPad?” I asked. “Yes, indeed,” he replied. “I 
bought it last night on my way home from work. Still getting use to the 
keyboard on the screen, though.”  
Wayne put his iPad down on a stack of paperwork on his desk, then 
opened his desk drawer and pulled out a brochure and handed it to me, 
smiling. “Desert Oasis” is sprawled in fancy italic type across the front, 
with overlapping photos of a golf course, pool, and an elderly couple en-
joying lunch. 
“What’s this?” I asked. 
“Our new home,” he replied. Wayne mentioned a few weeks ago how 
he and Elsie were going to move to a warmer climate this summer after 
his retirement and how a friend had recommended the Desert Oasis re-
sort. Apparently, he and Elsie had flown to Arizona last October and 
toured the property. The tone of his voice told me he was excited. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Collect Metrics 
 
50  
Of course, I was happy for Wayne and his wife. But I knew it would be 
tough seeing him retire and move away. In fact, after a few weeks of re-
flection, I was still somewhat in shock. 
Wayne sat down in the big leather chair in front of his desk and ges-
tured for me to take a seat. Putting the brochure back in the drawer, he 
pulled out a file folder and sat back contentedly. 
“Well, I’ve got more good news, Tom,” he started. “I spoke with four 
managers and all the feedback on your job performance was positive. 
Even your friend Jerry put together a decent project charter and schedule. 
In the past, he would have been a third of the way to disaster by now.” 
“That’s great to hear,” I said. “But was there any other feedback?” 
“Not really. Just a lot of positive comments” 
“Well, the feedback is nice, and I believe I am on the right track, but 
right now this is just ‘feel-good’ feedback. I guess it’s time I start to col-
lect some more meaningful data on the value I’m providing.” 
“Value?” Wayne questioned. “The feedback I received was that you 
have been providing a lot of value.” 
“Yes, and I appreciate the kind words. But the feedback is from fellow 
managers whom you have worked with for years. I hope their kind 
words are true, but I need to collect some more meaningful, quantitative 
comments on the value I am providing. I’m preaching the value of col-
lecting metrics to the project managers I am working with—I guess I 
need to start taking some of my own medicine.” 
LESSON  
What if a publicly-traded company could not tell a shareholder its rev-
enues or profits for the fiscal year? That company would have some seri-
ous problems to address. Likewise, if the same shareholder asked a com-
pany executive how its products were viewed in the marketplace, and he 
replied only with a “good,” that would not be very comforting for the 
shareholder, either. 
The preceding examples never happen, though, because companies collect 
metrics. They collect financial information on revenue and costs, and they 
collect data on how their products are perceived in the marketplace. For 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
51  
good or for bad, they typically know much of the information they need to 
run the business. 
On a much smaller scale, a stakeholder might ask you how successful a re-
cent project was, or how efficient a billing process is, or, in my case, what 
value I am providing with my coaching service. These questions are usually 
harder to answer. 
Many (probably most) companies have no idea whether they are getting val-
ue for the dollars they spend on projects, and they have only a vague idea 
about the success of individual projects. Defining and collecting an appropri-
ate set of metrics is the only way to get quantitative and qualitative informa-
tion. Collecting metrics provides the information necessary to improve 
processes and gives results that show if expectations are being met. 
My situation is a good example. I am providing a service to the organization, 
but I need to collect information to show the effectiveness and value of the 
service I provide to project managers. I can’t just rely on anecdotal com-
ments from high-level managers. I need more facts and should be collecting 
metrics in the following areas: 
 
The number of project managers I am assisting, both current month 
and year-to-date. 
 
A satisfaction survey asking project managers about my service level 
and the value (or lack of value) I added to their projects. 
 
A survey question about whether I kept my commitments within 
the agreed-upon time frame. 
 
Any quantifiable numbers in terms of cost or time savings that can 
be attributed to my services. 
My job represents one small component of the entire organization. All 
teams should be collecting metrics. If an organization is not familiar with col-
lecting metrics, the basic philosophy should be to just start collecting 
them—even if they turn out to be the wrong ones. It is important to start 
collecting some metrics—and to modify them over time if they don’t pro-
vide indications of how effective and successful a project or process is. Met-
rics are the best way to quantitatively show if you (or your project) are im-
proving and whether you have truly met expectations. 

C H A P T E R 
13 
Give  
Performance 
Feedback  
Routinely 
Not Just During Formal Reviews 
My last appointment on the last day of February was with Miles 
O’Brien. Miles grew up in New York and was the oldest brother in a 
large Irish family. He had curly red hair, a white complexion, and bright 
green eyes. Miles was perhaps best known for his office attire on St. Pa-
trick’s Day. Every year he came to work dressed in a bright green suit 
and tie with a green top hat. I had been meeting with him on an ad-hoc 
basis to talk about his project to install a new release of the company’s 
contract management application for the Purchasing Department. He 
came by my office around 4 p.m. 
“How are you, Miles?” I asked as he entered my office. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Give Performance Feedback Routinely 
 
54  
“I’m a little hungry, but otherwise things are great.” 
“I’ve got some leftover snacks from my lunch today. Would you like 
some crackers with peanut butter?” 
“No thanks, Tom. I’m actually on a diet. I need to lose about ten 
pounds before St. Patrick’s Day or I won’t be able to fit into my suit.” 
“In that case, we better get you some donuts and candy!” I replied with 
a chuckle. 
“Oh, c’mon! Are you telling me you don’t like my green suit?” Miles said 
with a smile. He told me he tried it on several weeks ago and noticed the 
pants were a bit snug, which was why he needed to shed a few pounds. 
He was trying a low-carb diet in the hopes of losing the weight quickly. 
“Not to be morbid, Miles, but didn’t the inventor of that low-carb diet 
pass away a few years back? Maybe it’s not a good diet plan after all.” 
“Not sure about that, Tom,” he replied. “Truth is I am just trying to 
shed a few pounds quickly, and a friend of mine told me low-carbing it 
would do the trick.”   
“Well, best of luck to you,” I said as we both sat down. “Why don’t you 
fill me in on your project’s status?” 
“We were testing the new release of our package when we discovered a 
major problem in one of the components,” he began. “This testing was 
assigned to a team member but he seems to have missed the problem.” 
“It’s too bad you discovered the problem so late in the project,” I said, 
“but at least you found it.” 
“To be honest, Tom, we’ve been having testing problems for quite a 
while now. Arthur, the team member assigned to this work, has missed a 
number of problems. He is probably not the best person for the job, but 
everyone on the project already has a full plate, so the task fell to him.” 
“Well, I’m assuming he has testing experience,” I said. 
“Yes, he has the experience but it’s not his favorite thing to do, so I 
don’t think he’s motivated. I think he can do better, but he’s getting 
sloppy and cutting corners. I have already made a note to discuss this 
with him at his next performance review. Hopefully the problem will re-
solve itself before long.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
55  
“Miles, repeated mistakes from anyone deserve immediate attention,” I 
explained to him. “I don’t think you can afford to wait until Arthur’s per-
formance review.” 
LESSON  
The world is made up of people with various skills and talents. Often, peo-
ple’s talents drive them to work in certain areas where they excel. In other 
cases, the individual talents and the jobs they perform are not aligned. Some-
times this lack of alignment can be overcome with hard work and motivation. 
Unfortunately, sometimes the gap can’t be overcome. These are the times 
when you have to deal with the individual as a performance problem. 
As a project manager, you don’t usually have total management control over 
your team members. Usually you share responsibility with the team mem-
ber’s functional manager. However, this doesn’t mean that you are power-
less to work with team members that are not meeting expectations. In fact, 
you have an obligation. Developing and managing team members are key re-
sponsibilities of a project manager—at least over the duration of the project.  
How do you deal with team members that are not meeting expectations? 
Try this approach. 
 
Give immediate feedback: Performance feedback should be 
given immediately after you observe a problem. Giving the feedback 
immediately allows it to have maximum impact.  
 
Gather your facts: Feedback should not be generic or vague. It 
also should not be based on what someone else said. The feedback 
should be based on your own observations. For instance, if the per-
son is not meeting his deadlines, you should have multiple examples 
that you can point to. If you think a person is disruptive, you should 
have specific instances where you observed this behavior.  
 
Meet in person: Once the factual examples are ready, have a pre-
liminary performance discussion. There are three targeted objec-
tives to this meeting: 
 
To make the employee aware of the perceived performance 
problem. To be fair, he or she may not realize that there is 
a problem.   
 
To get the employee’s feedback and response to your obser-
vations. 

Give Performance Feedback Routinely 
 
56  
 
To determine a short-term action plan. This is critical and will 
be the key to turning the performance around.   
This discussion is valuable for both the project manager and the 
team member.  
 
Escalate to the functional manager: In most cases, this pre-
liminary, fact-based discussion is enough to turn the situation 
around. There is no need for follow-up. However, if the problems 
continue, your next course of action is to bring this situation to 
the attention of the team member’s functional manager. The func-
tional manager can provide further guidance and may well have to 
get involved to try to resolve the problem. For some team mem-
bers this might mean being removed from the project team, set-
ting up a performance plan, or even being fired. These are options 
available to the functional manager that are usually not available to 
the project manager. 
One of the most difficult aspects of being a project manager is that you of-
ten (always?) have limited functional control over your team members. This 
makes it difficult to respond when people do not perform to your expecta-
tions. Resolving performance problems on your team may not be totally in 
your control, but you don’t have to give up, either. You do have options. 
You need to work with the team member first to try to resolve the situa-
tion between the two of you, and then escalate the problem to the func-
tional manager if necessary. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
14 
Ensure Issues 
Management Is 
Everyone’s  
Responsibility 
 
March arrived in Dickens with a bang. A large cold front from the north 
created a snowstorm that deposited another three inches of fresh snow 
on the ground. Pam was very busy at work preparing for the men’s col-
lege basketball conference tournament, which was being hosted by 
Northeast Illinois State. I was busy painting our living room, replacing 
the kitchen tile, and helping people manage projects at work. 
My first meeting on Monday was with Mike Miller, whose project was to 
install document management software in the Legal department. Mike 
and I had driven to Chicago two weekends ago to catch a Bulls game, 
and we were quickly becoming good friends. After three months in my 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Ensure Issues Management Is Everyone’s Responsibility 
 
58  
role as project management advisor, I began to realize that I had very 
few friends to talk to about my own work. Most of my friends were col-
leagues from the office, and when we got together it was so they could 
talk to me about how work was going for them.  
Mike, however, was always eager to listen and always seemed to have 
something insightful and meaningful to say. He was also a big sports 
fan, and we could spend hours debating who was the best NFL quarter-
back of all time. He liked Joe Montana from the 49ers, but I preferred 
Johnny Unitas of the Baltimore Colts—old “Johnny Hightops.” 
When he arrived at my door, I was surprised to find him holding what 
appeared to be a gift. “It’s for you,” he said as he handed me the box. 
“Open it.” I tore the paper from the box and opened it slowly, trying 
to add some dramatic flair. As I pushed the tissue paper aside, a smile 
formed across my face and I let out a loud laugh. It was a Joe Mon-
tana jersey. 
“I thought you might get a kick out of that!” he said as he closed my of-
fice door. 
“That’s great, Mike. Thanks a lot! Although I’m not quite sure what to 
do with it!” 
“Maybe you can re-gift it to me,” Mike said as he took a seat and 
pulled out his project folder from his briefcase. At the Bulls game, Mike 
mentioned his project was going very smoothly. I remembered him say-
ing his team had not yet encountered any major problems. In fact, they 
were scheduled to begin testing the software last week. 
“Well, Mike, you almost completed the project without any hassle. But it 
sounds like something came up.” 
“You’re right, Coach. I shouldn’t have told you how smoothly things were 
going. Looks like I jinxed myself!” 
“What’s the trouble?” 
“A problem was uncovered late in our project,” he began. “It turns out 
the document management software doesn’t interface well with one of 
our existing legacy systems, which is causing the legacy system to lock 
up on a regular basis.” 
“That’s a surprise,” I replied. “What kind of feedback have you been 
getting from the team members doing the testing?” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
59  
“That’s the frustrating part. I’ve been getting periodic updates from 
them and they’ve never mentioned this problem. The team said they 
thought they could resolve it on their own.” 
“Have you notified your clients?” I asked. 
I could tell he was frustrated. “You are not going to believe this, but the 
clients already knew about the problem! Since they were helping to test 
the old system, they were the ones who discovered the problem to be-
gin with.” 
“So, most of the team knew, except you,” I concluded. “Many technical 
people are natural problem solvers. They probably thought they could 
resolve this on their own. They also may have felt that raising an issue 
would have generated scrutiny of their work. They may not understand 
that issues management raises the visibility of a problem so it can be 
resolved quickly.” 
“Two weeks ago, we probably could have resolved this and still met our 
project timeline. Now, the resolution may cause the end date to slip.” 
LESSON  
All projects encounter problems. In fact, for a larger project, there may be 
people talking to the project manager every day about one type of problem 
or another. These are not issues. Most are just typical problems requiring 
quick decisions to be made from one or more decent alternatives. At other 
times, there may not even be a problem involved. For example, it may be a 
team member just doesn’t know how to respond to a certain situation. 
On the other hand, a formal issue is a problem that will impede the pro-
gress of the project because it cannot be entirely resolved by the project 
team. In other words, an issue is a big deal. It is a problem requiring special 
project management processes, including: 
 
Proactive communication with the client, sponsor, team members, 
and other interested stakeholders. 
 
Consistent and ongoing follow-up to ensure the issue is resolved as 
quickly as possible. 
 
Special problem-solving techniques if the issue is not easy to under-
stand or address. 

Ensure Issues Management Is Everyone’s Responsibility 
 
60  
Sometimes when project team members hear about issues management, 
they think project management processes don’t apply to them. After all, 
project management processes are for project managers, right? Wrong! 
To be successful, the entire team needs to understand that they are all 
part of the process. For issues management, one of their primary respon-
sibilities is to raise issues when they see them. This responsibility isn’t lim-
ited to the project team. All stakeholders should surface and escalate any 
issues they encounter.  
Raising an issue isn’t a negative. It is a proactive way to identify a problem so 
the team can apply appropriate resources, find alternatives, and implement a 
resolution. On a large project, for instance, you may have a fairly rigorous 
process for managing issues. This entire process could look something like 
the following: 
1. Solicit potential issues from any project stakeholders, including the 
project team, clients, sponsors, etc. An issue can be surfaced 
through verbal or written means, but it must be formally doc-
umented using an Issue Submission Form. This form includes a de-
scription of the issue, the impact to the project, potential resolu-
tions, recommended course of action, who should be involved in 
resolving the issues, and more.  
2. Enter the issue into the Issues Log for tracking purposes. 
3. Assign the issue to a project team member for investigation (project 
managers could assign it to themselves). The team member will in-
vestigate options that are available to resolve the issue. For each 
option, he or she should also estimate the impact to the project in 
terms of budget, schedule, and scope. 
4. The various alternatives and impact to the problem are documented 
on the Issue Submission Form. Take the issue, alternatives, and pro-
ject impact on the Issue Submission Form to the appropriate stake-
holders for a resolution. The actual people that are involved in re-
solving the issue are the same ones that were identified on the Issue 
Submission Form.  
5. Document the resolution or course of action on the Issue Submis-
sion Form. 
6. Document the issue resolution briefly on the Issues Log. 
7. Make the appropriate adjustments to the project schedule and 
budget, if necessary. 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
61  
8. If the resolution of an issue causes the project budget or duration 
to change, the current project charter may need to be updated. 
9.  Communicate issue status and resolutions to project team mem-
bers and other appropriate stakeholders through the Manage 
Communication process, including the Project Status Report. 
On Mike’s project, team members discovered a problem and thought they 
could resolve it on their own. This is an admirable first step. You don’t want 
to raise an issue for a problem the team can resolve itself. However, when 
the initial resolution attempts did not succeed, they should have raised this 
problem with Mike. Mike might have had other ideas on how to resolve the 
problem before it became an issue. If those ideas did not work, Mike could 
have raised a formal issue, which would have invoked a proactive issues 
management process. Since a third-party package was involved, the problem 
may not have been within the team’s control to resolve. The team could 
have identified options to resolve the problem, suggested workarounds, or 
changed the project scope with the sponsor to make the issue irrelevant. Of 
course, all of these options are still available now. However, it may be too 
late to complete the project by the deadline date since the issue was not 
raised in a timely manner. 

C H A P T E R 
15 
Shorten Long 
Meetings to 
Sharpen the 
Focus 
 
I had just finished setting up another meeting with Jerry Ackerman when 
Ashley Parker walked into my office. We were going to lunch together to 
discuss her project, and she was a little early. There was a nice Italian 
restaurant, Mama Leoni’s, a few miles south of our office, and we de-
cided to go together in Ashley’s SUV. It beats eating peanut butter and 
crackers at my desk any time. 
Mama Leoni’s was a family establishment built in the 1950s; it was 
renovated in the 1980s but still retained the original leather booths. An-
thony and Tina Leoni, the owners, still cooked on occasion, but Anthony, 
Jr., the Leoni’s oldest son, now handled the day-to-day management of 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Shorten Long Meetings to Sharpen the Focus 
 
64  
the restaurant. The building had withstood both fire and flood during its 
30-year history but had never closed for longer than two months. 
It was March and I had not seen Ashley since early January when she 
was struggling with a sponsor who had been reassigned during her pro-
ject. I knew she had been able to gain agreement from her new sponsor 
on the work required for the next phase of her project, so we had not 
had reason to talk since. After ordering lunch, we got down to business. 
“So, what’s the latest, Ashley? Everything okay with your new sponsor?” 
“Oh yes, he’s a great person. He’s very professional and very thorough.” 
“Sounds great. How can I help you then?” 
Ashley began discussing her project. She was having trouble with her 
status meetings, which she held once a week with her clients and team 
members. She said she was having a hard time covering everything on 
the agenda in two hours. 
“Your status meetings are two hours?” I asked, surprised. “Tell me 
more. What does your agenda look like?” 
Ashley went over the contents of the meeting matter-of-factly, counting 
off the items that she and her team discussed on her fingers—an up-
date on the project and schedule, a discussion of the action items from 
the previous meetings, outstanding issues, and change requests. People 
could also add other small items to the agenda as needed. 
“The agenda sounds good,” I said. “Where do you think the meeting is 
breaking down?” 
“I think the team tries to do too much problem solving during the meet-
ing. We end up spending all of our time hashing and rehashing many of 
the same items from week to week. We also tend to get side-tracked, 
and it seems like we can never finish the meeting on time. Some mem-
bers of the team think we need to lengthen the meetings to two-and-a-
half or three hours.” 
“I have a better idea,” I said quickly. “To get your meeting more fo-
cused and to better utilize everyone’s time, don’t add more time—
reduce it instead. Cut the meeting back from two hours to one.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
65  
LESSON  
Status meetings are essential to ensure that the project team and the client 
maintain healthy and open communication and to ensure everyone’s expec-
tations are in sync. Even many of the light agile project methodologies rely 
on frequent, short team meetings to share information and status. A tradi-
tional status meeting usually includes the project team members. The meet-
ing can also include clients (the people gaining the benefit of the project) and 
perhaps even the sponsor. Because many of the project decision makers are 
there, these meetings may seem like a good time to resolve open issues and 
action items. 
In a large company like Mega Manufacturing, it can be difficult to get the 
right people focused and on the same page for decision making. If you can 
get all of them into a meeting, the temptation is to use that time to discuss 
and resolve problems. Unfortunately, this may result in people delaying their 
day-to-day decisions and instead bringing items to the status meeting for 
discussion and resolution. This diverts from the main purpose of the meet-
ing and may result in less urgency in the day-to-day work environment. 
On the surface, this might not seem too bad. After all, the right people are 
there. Why not engage in problem-solving and decision-making activities? 
The problem is that this is not the purpose of the status meeting. The pur-
pose is to keep everyone up to date with what is going on, at a level where 
the information is of interest to all (or almost all) of the participants. In ad-
dition to a recap of project status, items such as change requests, issues, or 
new risks should be discussed because they could impact everyone. 
Bringing routine items to the status meeting for resolution will cause the 
meeting to break down—just as Ashley is experiencing. Small problems or 
questions that impact only a few people end up being discussed by a subset 
of the team. As the questions change, different people get engaged, but not 
everyone is involved. In a two-hour meeting, each person may only be ac-
tively participating for 30 to 45 minutes, and then wishing they were some-
where else for the remainder. Of course, not everyone can be actively en-
gaged for the entire meeting, but 45 minutes out of a one-hour meeting is 
much better than 45 minutes out of a two-hour meeting. 
As the project manager, Ashley can and should change the format and the 
agenda of the meeting. More than anyone else, she is responsible for mak-
ing sure people’s time is treated valuably. If she is not careful, people will 
start to complain that they are wasting their time, and they will begin to 
skip the meetings. 

Shorten Long Meetings to Sharpen the Focus 
 
66  
The good news is that Ashley seems to understand the meetings are not  
effective in their current format. She knows they are not able to cover all of 
the important business because they are spending too much time problem 
solving. Her solution to extend the meeting seems appropriate, but it will 
cause even greater problems. Instead, she should use shorter meetings to 
force the team to be more focused. This will require better planning for the 
meeting, including communicating discussion items before the meeting starts. 
It would be wrong to imply that no decision making can occur at a status 
meeting. Decision making regarding issues, risks, and changes is perfectly ac-
ceptable. If everyone knows what topics will be covered ahead of time, they 
can discuss them rapidly and resolve them quickly. If it becomes clear that a 
quick and easy resolution is not possible, then further discussion and deci-
sion making needs to be tabled and resolved offline. 
The project manager normally acts as the meeting facilitator at a status 
meeting and is responsible for making sure the meeting is relevant and does 
not get side-tracked. So, while Ashley is certainly frustrated by how the 
meetings are turning out, she is also responsible for controlling the agenda 
and making sure the discussion stays on track. 
Ashley must be firm in keeping the discussion on point. These may be valu-
able conversations, but they are usually not appropriate for the status 
meeting. Items need to be identified, taken offline, and resolved in another 
forum. One option for her to consider is to reduce the formal status meet-
ing to one hour and keep the second hour open for any members who 
need further time for discussion. The people who were not impacted 
would be free to leave. 
In general, longer meetings can leave numerous opportunities to wander. 
Short meetings force more focus on the areas needing coverage. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
16 
Identify the 
Root Cause of 
Problems 
 
Jade Johnson was an older woman with curly black hair and a big nose. 
As far as I knew, she had never been married and still lived in an old 
house on Rutherford Street she bought more than 25 years ago. In my 
10-plus years at Mega Manufacturing, I hadn’t been able to find anyone 
who knew much about her, which was strange because she could tell 
you the life story, including the latest gossip, of everyone in the office. 
In fact, it was spooky how much she knew about people. My first meet-
ing with Jade was memorable. My wife and I had just moved to Dickens 
and it was only my second day on the job. A colleague introduced us 
when we bumped into her by the vending machines in the break room. 
The first thing she said to me was, “So, you’re the one who bought that 
house on Wood Ranch. Tell me, how do you and Pam like the place?” I 
remember feeling an odd sensation in my stomach. I had never met this 
woman before, and yet she knew where I lived and my wife’s name. A 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Identify the Root Cause of Problems 
 
68  
few months later, I discovered one of her sources: she sometimes ate 
lunch with a woman in Human Resources. Ten years later and I was still 
very careful with what I said around her. 
She stopped by my office early Tuesday morning to discuss an issue she 
was having on her project to add an accounts receivable interface with 
another bank. 
“Hello, Tom. How are you today?” she said in a raspy voice. 
“I’m doing fine. Sounds like you have a cold.” 
“Just getting over one, actually. So, I hear you hooked up Jerry with the 
Morettis’ place. I was surprised to find out Wayne is leaving Dickens. 
Tell me, where are he and his wife moving? Someplace south?” 
I stared blankly into her face and shrugged my shoulders. I knew 
Wayne was going to Arizona, but I didn’t know if it was common know-
ledge yet. If I told Jade, I knew it soon would be. She turned her head 
slightly to the right and squinted her eyes as she stared back at me for 
several seconds. Finally, she sat down and turned her focus to her 
project, which came as quite a relief to me. 
Jade said her project required a number of changes to the interface files 
going to and coming from our main bank. She told me she was frus-
trated because the support staff at the bank was not available to help 
her team resolve a data transmission problem. My first question was 
whether she tried escalating the issue at the bank. 
“I guess that’s the next step,” she replied, tapping her long nails on my 
desk. “But they have really been difficult to work with. This is the third 
time I have escalated problems because their staff is unavailable. They 
must hate to hear from me by now.” 
I perked up. “This is interesting,” I said. “Whenever I see a pattern, it 
makes me think a symptom of the problem is being resolved rather 
than the root cause. Why are the bank people unavailable?” 
“They are allocated to other projects and are too busy to help us with 
our problems.” 
“Okay, but why are the bank people allocated to other work?” 
“Well, I was told they have a huge workload. Their people all get fully 
allocated, which means it’s hard for us to get help when we need it.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
69  
“Wait a minute,” I said. “We are making a major change to our inter-
face. We should be a part of their workload. Why aren’t they allocating 
resources to us?” 
Jade thought for a minute, and the nail tapping stopped as she realized 
the answer. 
LESSON  
As you saw earlier, issues are major problems that will impede the progress 
of a project—problems not totally within the ability of the project team to 
resolve. Every issue has cause(s) and every issue has effect(s) on the project. 
Some complex issues also have symptoms, which outwardly may look like a 
cause, but are not actually at the root-cause level. Symptoms are directly or 
indirectly related to the problem, but are not the cause of the problem it-
self. A symptom is actually more of an effect of the problem. 
Sometimes, in the heat of the battle, the project manager sees the effect an 
issue has on the project and looks quickly at the cause. In some cases, this 
first attempt at problem resolution actually addresses and fixes the cause. 
However, in other cases, the resolution only addresses a symptom, rather 
than the actual root cause. In many cases, resolving a symptom might, in 
fact, be good enough. The issue may go away and not return. However, if 
another similar issue arises later, it might mean that a more fundamental 
resolution is required. 
Let’s look again at Jade’s problem. Since her initiative requires major 
changes to the bank interface, she should have involved the bank staff in the 
planning process. However, she neglected to do so. If her team had not ex-
perienced any problems, this lack of planning might not have been a prob-
lem. However, the interface is complicated, and the team has run into a 
number of problems. 
When her team hit the first problem, Jade realized the bank was not very 
responsive. However, she did not think the problem through to find the 
root cause of the response-time problem. Her initial assumption was prob-
ably that they were not responsive because they did not have a good cus-
tomer service mindset. But it turns out this is not the case.  
The way to get to the root cause is by asking a series of “why” questions. 
After asking a series of “why” questions, Jade would have realized the bank 
support staff was unavailable because they were allocated to other pro-
jects and other clients. Jade did not communicate with the bank about her 

Identify the Root Cause of Problems 
 
70  
project and her potential support needs. Escalating the support issue at 
the bank only resolved the symptom at the time, which was that their staff 
was unavailable. 
Jade resolved the particular problem she faced the first time, but she did not 
get to the root cause. Unfortunately, the problem did not go away for good. 
A little later a similar problem occurred with the bank’s allocation of their 
staffing resources. Again, Jade resolved the particular problem facing her 
team at that time by escalating the lack of support staffing, but she did not 
resolve the root cause. Since this was the second time this problem oc-
curred, Jade should have realized that her first attempt at problem resolu-
tion did not resolve the root cause of this problem. 
So now she is bringing this to my attention. When I first hear the problem, I 
also jump toward resolving the symptom by escalating the problem once 
again at the bank. However, when Jade says this is the third time the prob-
lem has occurred, I know the root cause is not being addressed. The bank 
can’t be responsive because the support staff is allocated to other custom-
ers. They are not allocated to Jade’s project because she did not include 
them in her planning. Therefore, the bank doesn’t know of her testing needs 
and didn’t allocate any support resources to her project. Her best option 
now is to work with the support manager at the bank to get a person as-
signed to this project to help her team when they have problems. This 
should resolve the root cause of the problem. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
17 
Use Quality  
Assurance to 
Validate  
Project Status  
 
I bought my son Tim a special set of Mickey Mouse golf clubs last 
Christmas, and he seemed to enjoy swinging them in the backyard when 
the weather allowed and in the basement when the weather didn’t. The 
first week of April brought mild temperatures, so on the first sunny day I 
took Tim to play his first round of miniature golf. In my opinion, he put-
ted fairly well for a youngster, although I wasn’t sure if he enjoyed 
putting the ball into the hole as much as through the clown’s nose or 
over the bumps and hills. I hoped he wouldn’t be disappointed when he 
went to his first real golf course and didn’t find any windmills or con-
crete banks off of which to bounce his ball. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Use Quality Assurance to Validate Project Status 
 
72  
I was telling the story of our day on the miniature links to Marketing 
Manager Bailey Jenkins, who had been working with Ashley on the Mar-
keting information database project. Ashley and I had met a few times to 
discuss this project, but this was my first time meeting with Bailey. I knew 
Bailey was really into meditation because I heard nature CDs playing in 
her office the last time I visited with Ashley, who explained that Bailey 
likes to meditate during her lunch hour. 
“I tell you, Bailey, he might just be the next Tiger Woods!” I said, finish-
ing my story about Tim and miniature golfing. 
“Well, you know, Tom, Tiger did get his start in golf at about the 
same age as your son,” Bailey offered. “Perhaps his destiny is along 
the same path!” 
“Could be!” I replied. “Of course, he also watches Kung Fu Panda three 
times a day, but it’s probably too early to call him Bruce Lee.” 
Bailey flashed a smile that said she recognized my attempt at humor 
but had no idea who Bruce Lee was. I decided to put the kung fu talk 
aside to focus on project management instead. 
“Bailey, it’s always a pleasure for me to get to meet with our client 
managers. How can I help you?” 
“The vice president of Marketing has a lot of interest in making sure 
this information database is implemented successfully,” Bailey began. 
“He has given us the necessary time, but he has also made it very clear 
he doesn’t want to hear excuses if it misses the deadline. I think Ashley 
is doing a good job, especially given the confusion that occurred when 
our old vice president was transferred. I guess I’m nervous because of 
the high visibility. We cannot afford to fail.” 
I acknowledged Bailey’s nervousness. “That’s a natural feeling, Bailey. In 
fact, you and Ashley are both on the hook for the success of this project. 
If there are problems, the VP is going to look to you for answers. It 
won’t be good enough to say Ashley was the project manager and it was 
her responsibility.” 
“That’s exactly my point,” Bailey agreed, taking a deep breath. “The VP 
put me in charge of this project to make sure we hit our project budget 
and deadline. However, most of my background is in the finance area. I 
reviewed the business requirements document created by the project 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
73  
team, but I don’t have the expertise to evaluate the information. I want 
to be able to track the project adequately without getting involved in the 
details, but I don’t know what questions to ask.” 
“It’s hard for functional managers to be subject matter experts for every 
project in the organization,” I said. “Your VP shouldn’t expect you to 
have that level of knowledge. However, there are questions you can ask 
to make sure projects are progressing as expected. These questions are 
part of your quality assurance role.” 
LESSON  
Managers want to delegate responsibility and autonomy to project manag-
ers, but they know they also retain a level of responsibility if the project is 
in trouble or fails. This accountability applies to the sponsor as well. Pro-
jects that fail or overrun their budgets and deadlines also reflect poorly on 
the sponsor and, to varying degrees, on all other management stakeholders. 
So it’s not surprising that a sponsor, functional manager, or other high-level 
manager wants to understand the status of a project. Of course, they can 
read status reports, but those are pretty much the project manager’s view-
point on status. In many cases, the status reports are so vague it is hard to 
know for sure what is going on. 
So how do managers better understand the real status of a project? They 
could review the documentation being prepared, but most managers are not 
experts in the business aspects of all the projects in their organization. If the 
work involves an IT development project like Ashley’s, they rarely have the 
expertise to understand the design documentation or the program code. 
Activities that focus on understanding the quality of deliverables are called 
quality control. Quality control is the responsibility of peers and specialists. 
Managers generally need to rely on quality assurance techniques instead. 
Quality assurance does not focus on deliverable quality. Instead, quality as-
surance focuses on the processes that are used to build deliverables. If man-
agers can’t ensure that deliverables are of high quality based on their own 
experience, they must, at a minimum, feel that the project team used a solid 
process to build the deliverable. 
In this instance, Bailey is in the project sponsor role, which was delegated to 
her by the vice president, who is the executive sponsor. Bailey is in the 
Marketing department, but her real expertise is in finance, and the executive 
sponsor named her as the project sponsor to ensure the project meets its 

Use Quality Assurance to Validate Project Status 
 
74  
budget and deadline commitments. It’s not surprising that she is uncomfort-
able reviewing the business requirements document produced by the pro-
ject team. Bailey can’t look at the business requirements document and 
know for sure whether the requirements are correct and complete. 
Fortunately, she doesn’t have to. She should put on her quality assurance hat 
instead. What she really needs to know is how the requirements were cre-
ated. To find out, she can ask some simple questions, such as the following:  
 
Who was involved in generating the requirements? 
 
Who reviewed the requirements?  
 
Who has approved the requirements so far?  
Although she does not understand the detailed requirements herself, she 
should at least know a good process when she hears it. If she thinks the  
eliverable was created using a poor process, she can withhold her approval 
until a better process is followed. If she feels the process to create the re-
quirements was sound, she should feel comfortable to approve the docu-
ment. Here are some examples of poor processes and good processes.  
Signs of a bad process: 
 
The requirements were generated by talking to only one or two 
people. 
 
No one has done a preliminary review of the content. 
 
The requirements were not approved by any of the people that 
provided requirements  
 
Key users were not involved in the requirements process. 
 
The document is sloppy, poorly formatted, and hard to read. 
Signs of a good process: 
 
The requirements were generated by getting all the key users and 
stakeholders together in a facilitated session for a full day. 
 
Additional interested stakeholders from Legal, IT, and HR were 
consulted to understand how this project would impact their de-
partments.  
 
The document has already been reviewed and approved by all major 
users and stakeholders. 
 
The document looks good, reads well, and follows a standard tem-
plate format. 
In this example, quality assurance was used to understand whether a specific 
deliverable was acceptable and should be approved by the sponsor. However, 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
75  
quality assurance is used on an ongoing basis by managers to understand the 
status of a project. The manager needs to ask questions regarding project 
management processes. This includes questions related to schedule, budget, 
issues, risk, quality, communication, etc. Quality assurance focuses on pro-
jects, and these are the processes used to manage a project. 
Quality assurance is not a one-time activity. It should be an ongoing part of 
your project. The manager of the project manager and the sponsor are the 
key individuals who should be performing a quality assurance check at the 
end of every phase or during every major milestone. 
If the project manager can explain and justify the process used to create the 
project deliverables, there is a good likelihood that the deliverables are ac-
ceptable. If the project is also using sound project management processes, 
the manager or sponsor performing the quality assurance check should have 
confidence that the project is on track.  

C H A P T E R 
18 
Cancel Projects 
That Lose 
Business  
Support 
 
“Hey, Tom! How are you doing? Everything going okay?” I didn’t look up 
from my computer screen but immediately recognized Sam’s voice. Sam 
Boyd, our Human Resources manager, was very “charismatic,” to put it 
politely. It was mid-April and Sam was completing our company recruit-
ing for spring college graduates. 
“I am doing just fine; thanks for asking. How are things in Human  
Resources?” 
“Everything is going great. I just finished an interview with a young man 
by the name of Ron Jobs, who will be graduating from Northeast Illinois 
State next month. I’m really impressed with him. He will graduate top of 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Cancel Projects That Lose Business Support 
 
78  
his class and he seems sharp as a tack. I’d like to offer him a position 
here. Of course, I have to get an interview team set up....” 
“Did you say his last name was ‘Jobs’?” I interrupted. 
“Yes, but no relation to Steve. That was the first question I asked!” 
“Don’t blame you. I’m just checking to make sure your interest in him 
as a candidate isn’t tainted by any desire for a new iPhone!” 
Sam chuckled. Just then my phone rang. As a rule, the only time I inter-
rupted a face-to-face discussion was when my boss was calling, but Sam 
motioned that he had to leave anyway, so I waved good-bye and picked 
up the call. I was surprised to find Emma Flood on the other end. 
Emma was the IT director in our Chicago office and she wanted me to 
evaluate a project significantly over budget and long overdue to assess 
whether it is now on the right track. I agreed to offer my input and ar-
ranged to meet via teleconference later in the day with two of the major 
project participants. 
My first meeting was with Curtis Chapman, the project manager. He 
was desperately trying to establish a revised schedule and budget. I 
asked him what the project sponsor thought of the revised schedule, 
and he said he had exchanged e-mails with her and she seemed happy 
that the project might finally be completed. I also asked whether the 
project charter had been updated. He insisted that there was really no 
need to update it since the original assumptions, deliverables, scope, etc. 
were the same as before. 
Then I talked with Jennifer Adams, the project sponsor. Jennifer was 
very unhappy with the whole project and used the opportunity to vent 
her frustrations with the IT team. She held nothing back, saying it was 
doubtful the business value of the project would be achieved with the 
increased budget, and recent business changes made it questionable 
whether the original requirements were still valid. She said she would 
just be glad when the whole project was complete and behind her. 
After the meetings, I collected my thoughts for a recommendation to 
Emma. When I spoke with her again, she was extremely curious as to 
what I thought of the project and its chance for future success. 
I came right to the point. “Unless something changes very quickly, I 
think the project should be cancelled.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
79  
LESSON  
One of the advantages of being the project adviser is that I normally don’t 
have any attachment to the projects I evaluate. Ownership, or partial 
ownership, of a project can sometimes cloud one’s ability to make ra-
tional decisions. 
It is generally believed that if a project is approved, it must have inherent 
business value. In addition, the value must be such that the project is priori-
tized higher than other competing projects that are nominated but not ap-
proved. However, project business value can change as the project pro-
gresses. Market conditions change, project cost estimates change, and busi-
ness priorities change. A project with great business value today might be 
irrelevant months, weeks, or even days later. 
With that in mind, let’s look at the project in the Chicago office. This pro-
ject has already failed once, and is about to fail again. Sure, the project might 
be able to hit its revised timeline and budget—but what will the result be 
from a business perspective? The IT team, led by Curtis, is determined to 
deliver the project as it was originally defined, even if the assumptions and 
expectations of the client have changed considerably. Curtis wants to pre-
tend everything is okay, even though he must realize the inherent problems 
with the initiative at this point. To be charitable, he may be hearing what he 
wants to hear from Jennifer, the project sponsor. He hears the sponsor say-
ing she will be happy when the project is completed, but what she really 
wants is to get rid of the project. This is hardly the endorsement needed to 
proceed. The business situation has also changed, and the sponsor doubts 
the deliverables are even valid anymore. 
Jennifer, the project sponsor, is not helping, either. In fact, she may be more 
at fault here, since she knows the project is probably a failure. The IT team 
could probably make the excuse that they were continuing the project be-
cause the sponsor never told them to stop. This is a poor excuse, but it 
might provide them with a bit of cover if the project implodes. 
Jennifer, on the other hand, doesn’t have any excuses. She is willing to spend 
additional company resources on an effort she has lost confidence in and 
from which she has already mentally checked out. She doubts the business 
value of the deliverables. She doesn’t want to make the mental investment 
to try to revise the objectives or the scope to make the deliverables rele-
vant again. Furthermore, the fact the sponsor is willing, even eager, to voice 
her displeasure with the project team is probably a sign the relationship be-
tween the sponsor and project manager has deteriorated beyond recovery. 

Cancel Projects That Lose Business Support 
 
80  
Jennifer doesn’t want to admit the work and money so far have been 
wasted. Since our company does not do a good job following up on whether 
projects achieve their business value, she probably feels the better alterna-
tive is to complete the project, gain some business value, and chalk the 
whole thing up to experience. 
Both sides want to complete the project—but for the wrong reasons. The 
investment that has been made in this project may already be lost, and it ap-
pears that further investment in the project in its current form would be 
throwing even more good money away. After I make my report to Emma, 
she might be in a position to recommend that the project business case be 
re-evaluated. It’s possible the project could continue with new sponsorship 
and a new project manager, but it would then probably need to restart with 
the planning process to make sure it is still delivering something of value to 
the new sponsor.  
There is a lot working against this project. For now, the project should be 
placed on hold or simply cancelled. Sometimes it’s better not to complete a 
project. This is one of those times. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
19 
Use Risk  
Management 
to Discover  
Potential  
Problems 
 
I received an e-mail from Jade Johnson on April 30 asking if she could 
come by and see me. Jade’s team was making a number of changes to 
the interface files going to and coming from our main bank. I told her 
she could come by in the afternoon. She was a little vague and ex-
plained that her problem was not yet “official,” but she would contact 
me in a few days. I wasn’t sure what she meant, but she said she would 
explain later. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Use Risk Management to Discover Potential Problems 
 
82  
Jade called me a week later to schedule an afternoon meeting, and I 
had to admit she had aroused my curiosity. She arrived five minutes 
early for our appointment, and since I was already in my office, I asked 
her to come in. 
“How are you today, Jade?” 
“I’m fine, Tom. How are you?” 
“Things are great; thanks for asking. Tell me, though, Jade, what’s going 
on with your project? You mentioned last week you had a problem, but 
it was not an ‘official’ problem. Can I assume it is now?” 
“Sorry for the confusion, Tom. Yes, it is a problem now. You see, last 
week I was speaking to one of our team members and she told me 
Kristen in the Finance department is pregnant! She then told me it was 
a secret for now and I shouldn’t mention it to anyone. Of course, this 
causes a big problem for us, but I could not address it until she officially 
announced it. I got an e-mail from Kristen this morning letting me know 
about her pregnancy, so now I guess the cat’s out of the bag.” 
Jade explained how many of the activities in the project plan relied on 
Kristen’s expertise; she was going to be instrumental in the success of 
the project since she provided the business expertise and leadership for 
setting up the bank interfaces a few years ago. Jade wanted to rely on 
Kristen again, but Kristen’s e-mail mentioned she was three months 
pregnant and would be taking an extended leave from work after the 
baby was born. 
“Here is my dilemma,” Jade said. “If we’re lucky, we will have the pro-
ject done by the time Kristen has her baby. But if the baby comes early 
or if the project is delayed, we could be in trouble.” 
I asked Jade how she planned to account for this. 
“Well, I called you just to be sure,” she said. “I think this is definitely an 
issue. And you know what you always say—‘issues are big problems.’” 
I laughed. “I guess I should look into trademarking that saying if it is so 
easily quoted! In this situation, though, the issue is not yet a problem. It 
is a potential problem. You should identify it and manage it as a pro-
ject risk.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
83  
LESSON  
Issues and risks are related but not the same. Issues are large problems 
present today that will impede the project if left unresolved. They must be 
focused on and resolved quickly. You have no other choice. By its nature, 
issues management is a reactive project management process, since you do 
not invoke it until the issue has already arisen. 
On the other hand, risks are future conditions or circumstances outside 
the control of the project team that will have an adverse impact on the 
project should they occur. (There is a concept of positive risk but that is a 
topic for another lesson.) In other words, an issue is a current problem 
that must be dealt with, whereas a risk is a potential future problem. The 
good thing about a risk is you have some time to deal with the potential 
problem. Risk management is the process of identifying, analyzing, respond-
ing to, and controlling project risks. Risk management is a proactive project 
management process, since you are trying to deal with potential future 
events before they occur. 
Risk management is not a one-time process. You should always identify risks 
at the beginning of the project during the up-front planning process, but you 
should also periodically look at remaining work to identify any new risks. 
This evaluation can take place on a periodic basis (e.g., monthly) or at pro-
ject milestones. 
Such is the case with Jade’s project. When the project started, there was 
no mention of the risk associated with losing Kristen, the strongest and 
most experienced analyst in the client organization. This makes sense. Al-
though there is a very small chance any individual person might leave a pro-
ject team, there is no reason to elevate this to a risk needing to be identi-
fied and managed. 
However, circumstances have changed, and now there is a definite possibil-
ity that Kristen will not be available before the project is completed. Kris-
ten is still on the project today, so there is no issue to be dealt with imme-
diately. There is, however, a potential problem in the future. It is possible 
that the project will be over before Kristen leaves or past a point where 
Kristen’s expertise is critical. However, this result can’t be taken for 
granted, hence the need to identify this as a project risk. 
Identifying this as a risk is the first step. Next is to analyze the risk to see if 
it is important enough to manage. If it is, a risk plan must be created to re-
spond to the risk. In this case, Jade must put a risk plan in place to respond 
to this potential problem. A common objective of the risk plan is mitigation, 

Use Risk Management to Discover Potential Problems 
 
84  
which means you try to minimize the probability of the risk occurring 
and/or minimize the impact to the project if the risk occurs. (There are 
other risk response options, which will be explained in another lesson). 
Looking at Jade’s project, the timing of the new baby’s arrival can’t be con-
trolled, so eliminating the risk event is not an option. However, since Jade 
has identified this risk early, she has plenty of time to minimize the impact of 
the event to ensure the project can still be completed successfully. Potential 
options for Jade to consider include: 
 
Accelerating the work Kristen needs to perform so there is a higher 
likelihood it will be completed before she leaves. This could still be 
risky since she may have to leave early.  
 
Cross-training a replacement who can take over from Kristen if she 
has to leave early. 
 
Replacing Kristen with another resource, while still utilizing her as a 
backup and a mentor for her replacement (if this fits with the Hu-
man Resources policies).  
Since Jade has time, this project risk will likely be resolved before there is an 
impact on the project. That is the nature of risks. Since they are future 
events, you have some time to minimize them or prepare for them before 
they occur.  
 
 

C H A P T E R 
20 
Focus Quality 
Management 
on Processes, 
Not People 
 
Jerry called me to set up an afternoon meeting on May 1. I invited him 
to lunch, but he asked for a rain check as his schedule was crazy. Jerry 
and I exchanged e-mails frequently, so I knew that he and his wife were 
getting excited about moving into Wayne’s house. The Morettis were 
moving to Arizona in July and planned to leave Illinois during the last 
week of June. Jerry was already beginning to pack up the apartment, 
preparing to move in shortly after the Morettis moved out. Jerry had 
filled out the necessary paperwork to take over ownership of the Moret-
tis’ home and had already secured the mortgage from the bank. I volun-
teered to help him move when the time came and he gladly accepted. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Focus Quality Management on Processes, Not People 
 
86  
Jerry was also approaching a significant milestone at Mega Manufactur-
ing—or at least I thought it was significant. He was in the final week or 
two of his project to upgrade the phone mail system, and most of the 
changes had already been implemented. He had not had a major prob-
lem pop up for almost a month, and I could tell his confidence was sky-
high as he witnessed the fruits of his labor. At least it was sky-high be-
fore last Friday. 
Jerry arrived on time for our meeting and began filling me in on the 
problem he had encountered. He was wearing a blue suit with a red-
and-yellow-striped tie. 
“Why the fancy suit, Jerry? Do you have a job interview today?” I joked. 
“No, actually Barbara and I are celebrating our anniversary today. I am 
taking her to a pricey restaurant for dinner right after work.” 
“That’s great. Happy anniversary!” I said, standing up to shake his 
hand. “Sounds like buying the Moretti’s house was perfectly timed. 
Makes for a great anniversary gift!” 
“We are definitely excited about that, to be sure. Still, though, doesn’t 
get me out of the fancy dinner!” 
I smiled knowingly. Jerry filled me in on his dinner plans before getting 
down to business. 
“The CIO asked us to give him a demo of the new voicemail software,” 
he started. “This should not have been a problem, but when we went to 
his office, wouldn’t you know it—the system didn’t work right! We had 
to come back half an hour later to finish the demonstration. He liked 
the new system, but I’m not sure he is totally confident in our ability to 
install it.” 
“Sounds embarrassing,” I said. “What went wrong?” 
“We’re trying to get additional people trained on how to install the 
software,” he replied. “Unfortunately, we assigned one of our newer 
people to work on the CIO setup, and he missed one of the steps. 
Maybe he can’t be trusted to do the upgrade. We may have to remove 
him from the project.” 
“Whoa,” I cautioned. “You have thousands of phones to upgrade. I 
think you are going to need all the help you can get. Tell me, what pro-
cedures are in place to help these new technicians?” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
87  
Jerry thought carefully for a minute. “The techs are supposed to under-
stand the phones and the voicemail software. We spent time showing 
each person what needs to be done for the upgrade, and we assume 
they are skilled enough and professional enough to do the job.” 
I started to see a problem with the team’s quality process. “You know, 
you are going to have to upgrade dozens of phone switches and thou-
sands of phones for this project. It seems to me that even if your team 
is very diligent, there is a good chance problems will crop up on some of 
the installations. High-quality projects are only partially the result of 
good people. They are also the result of having good quality processes. 
When quality problems like this surface, don’t blame your people—fix 
your processes instead.” 
LESSON  
If people always produced high-quality results, there would be no need for 
quality management. However, even the best people make mistakes, includ-
ing project managers! Sometimes they don’t even know it. For instance, 
quality problems can result from simple misunderstandings. You may be  
doing everything right as far as you know, and problems can still occur. 
One core project management responsibility is to manage the overall quality 
of the deliverables produced. Creating a quality plan that identifies quality 
control activities and quality assurance activities is one aspect of managing 
the overall quality. 
Quality control activities validate the specific quality of the deliverables. It is 
also referred to as inspection. For instance, a peer review of engineering de-
sign specs is a quality control activity. 
Quality assurance activities focus on the processes used to create the deliv-
erables. This is also called prevention. The thought is that if you have good 
processes, you will build good deliverables. Quality assurance could include a 
quality audit to ensure all aspects of a manufacturing process were followed.  
A project team can’t deliver consistent, high-quality products without good 
processes in place. Of course, you want to have good, motivated people as 
well. But if you put good people into a complex, chaotic situation without 
good processes or guidelines, they are bound to struggle. 
Quality processes must be scaled to the size, complexity, and importance of 
the project. Small projects should have simple, basic quality checks built into 

Focus Quality Management on Processes, Not People 
 
88  
the schedule. Larger projects should have good overall quality processes in 
place, as well as metrics to determine the level of quality being produced. 
The team should monitor the quality metrics and improve the overall work 
processes when possible. 
Note that nothing described so far focuses on people. There is no mention 
of hiring only the best people or reassigning people who make mistakes. If 
good processes are in place, and if people work according to those proc-
esses, then everything should be fine. In a quality-focused organization, you 
don’t blame people when things go wrong. People are bound to make mis-
takes. It’s human nature. When mistakes occur, you make process changes 
to prevent the errors from occurring in the future.  
Let’s go back and look at Jerry’s project. Jerry’s frustration with a team 
member’s performance is misplaced. Sure, it hurt when the upgrade process 
failed for the CIO. But other employees are bound to face similar problems 
as the upgrade is rolled out. What is he going to do—replace every team 
member who makes a mistake? Instead, Jerry needs to focus on processes. 
Right now Jerry is asking his team members to perform their work with 
very little structure and support, while he hopes nothing will go wrong. 
That’s not a recipe for success.  
Instead, he should create a quality process to ensure everyone will be suc-
cessful. This process could include activities such as providing better initial 
training, creating written procedures or checklists, pairing up new members 
with more experienced people, and having a second person perform quick 
random checks of the phones as they are converted. Quality-focused orga-
nizations (and projects) realize that prevention is the first choice of action 
over inspection—although they are both important. Prevention (QA) helps 
ensure good processes are in place to prevent errors. Inspection (QC) en-
sures that any remaining errors are caught. Jerry needs a Quality Plan with 
both aspects in place to ensure his project progresses with as high a level of 
quality as possible.  
 
 

C H A P T E R 
21 
Don’t Use Your 
Estimating 
Contingency 
for Scope 
Changes 
 
May 5 was a fun day for the employees at Mega Manufacturing. The 
company always paid for a nice Cinco de Mayo luncheon from Tico 
Taco, one of the few Mexican restaurants in Dickens. For most people, 
the annual party provided a nice opportunity to get outside and enjoy 
socializing with colleagues in an open environment. It was always fun to 
see Dennis Lucas, our CEO, wearing a sombrero. Dennis was in his 60s 
and wore small, round glasses on his tiny head. He was also bald, 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Don’t Use Your Estimating Contingency for Scope Changes 
 
90  
which allowed the sombrero to slide over his ears to the top of his 
glasses—always an entertaining sight to see. 
I was enjoying a burrito with extra jalapeños when Jeff Erickson came 
over to say hello. Jeff had just returned from a week’s vacation in the 
Bahamas, which he won from a radio station after correctly identifying a 
montage of songs from the 1980s. He had a dark tan and a bright 
smile on his face. 
“I take it the vacation went well,” I said as I shook his hand. 
“It was incredible, Tom, and so relaxing. My wife and I tanned on the 
beach every day and just listened to the waves crashing as we sipped 
piña coladas. I feel like a new man!” 
Jeff and I worked a lot together when I was still with the IT department, 
but I had not spoken to him since the New Year’s Eve party. He was a 
tall guy with a big body frame. He liked to lift weights and frequently 
worked out at the gym during his lunch hour. He was not the typical 
computer nerd, which is probably why we got along so well when we 
worked together. 
“Say, Tom, I wonder if I could ask your opinion on a problem I am hav-
ing with a project?” 
“Sure Jeff. What’s going on?” 
Jeff gave me a quick summary of his project involving the installation of 
manufacturing software for one of his clients. He spoke about his project 
charter and the progress his team had made so far. He also mentioned 
it was the fourth time he had installed this software at one of our plants. 
“The installation process for this software is similar at each plant, but 
each plant has its own unique needs. For instance, the plant manager in 
our current installation has requested we implement a custom inventory 
management module the other plants don’t need.” 
“A custom module?” I asked in surprise. “I thought you said you were 
only going to implement base package functionality. If there is a new 
business need, I hope you are invoking scope change management.” 
“I talked to the client about scope change,” he replied. “But he knows 
our cost estimate includes a 15 percent contingency. He approved the 
additional contingency, so he thought we could use that funding for this 
new work.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
91  
“Tell me, why did you include the 15 percent estimating contingency?” 
“The contingency covers a couple of unknowns,” Jeff explained. “I am 
the only one on the team who has done this kind of project before and 
it may take some time to get the rest of my team up to speed. We are 
also installing a newer release of the package than was installed at the 
other plants. The other packages are all an older release.” 
“Those sound like valid reasons to add contingency,” I concluded. 
“What will happen if your people need extra time with the learning 
curve or the new software has some unexpected glitches, but you have 
used up your contingency on work outside of scope?” 
Jeff was getting the idea. “I guess the project will be over budget. Then I 
will look like a bad project manager, even though I thought I was being 
client focused.” 
LESSON 
The only time you know for sure what a project will cost and how long it 
will take is after the work is completed. By its very nature, estimating is a 
guess. Of course, by using proper estimating techniques, you can make it a 
very close guess. However, there is always some degree of uncertainty in 
an estimate. 
One of the steps in the estimating process is to add contingency to reflect 
the level of uncertainty associated with the estimate. If your estimate is at a 
high level, the contingency could be plus or minus 50 percent or more. 
However, even if most of the facts are known, a contingency of plus or mi-
nus 15 percent is not unreasonable. This contingency can apply to effort, 
cost, and schedule. 
When you place a contingency in the project, everyone should understand it 
is there to absorb the estimating uncertainty. However, once the estimate is 
approved, there may be pressure to use the contingency budget for addi-
tional and/or new requirements instead. Your client may start to think of the 
contingency as “extra money” to be spent as needed. Although it is tempting 
to use the contingency when new functionality is requested, the project 
manager must ensure the estimating contingency is used as intended. 
Jeff’s project has just begun, and there is already a request to use the con-
tingency. Using the contingency for this additional requirement would open 
the project up to two risks. First, the project could go over budget if the 

Don’t Use Your Estimating Contingency for Scope Changes 
 
92  
uncertainties associated with the original estimate come true. The budget 
contingency is there in case activities cost more than estimated. If you use 
the contingency for scope change requests, you will have less left over for 
true estimating errors. As Jeff realizes, he will then be seen as a poor man-
ager (or a poor estimator) even though he thinks he is being client focused 
by agreeing to his client’s request. 
Second, by skipping the change process, Jeff is denying the sponsor an op-
portunity to make a decision as to whether the requested change is justified 
from a cost/benefit perspective. Instead, he and the plant manager are mak-
ing the decision themselves. Although the plant manager is a key stakehold-
er, he is not the person funding this project. He is not the decision maker 
for scope change requests.  
Jeff’s best option now is to push the request through the scope change 
process and let the sponsor determine if it is worth the incremental time 
and cost to the project. If so, the project budget and timeline should be in-
creased to cover the work. 
The client should not worry that the contingency budget will be wasted. As 
the project progresses, portions of the estimating contingency can be re-
leased back to the client if the project is trending on or ahead of budget. 
Any money remaining from the estimating contingency budget at the end of 
the project can be returned to the organization.  
 
 

C H A P T E R 
22 
Develop a 
Communication 
Plan for  
Complex  
Projects 
 
The burritos, tortilla chips, and guacamole were creating a heavy feeling 
in my stomach, so I decided to skip the remainder of the party and take 
a walk. There was a small wine shop about a block south of the Mega 
Manufacturing building, and I thought a quick walk there and back 
would do me good. Of course, one can’t just walk to a wine shop without 
taking a quick look around, so I factored a quick stop into my schedule. I 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Develop a Communication Plan for Complex Projects 
 
94  
figured I could make it there and back in 30 minutes, which would coin-
cide nicely with the end of the Cinco de Mayo party. 
The Wine Depot was owned by Brent Bonds, and it carried a nice vari-
ety of everyday wines as well as a few hard-to-find gems. Brent was very 
knowledgeable and always made good recommendations. A tiny bell 
atop the door rang as I entered, and Brent poked his head over the top 
row of bottles in the Merlot section to say hello. 
I browsed among the wines on display in the store for a few minutes 
and decided to buy a bottle of Columbia Crest Grand Estates Chardon-
nay on sale for $11.99. Pam was making fish for dinner and Brent said 
the chardonnay would go perfectly with the meal.  
“Is this wine going to taste like a tree or like a stick of butter?” I said 
jokingly. 
“Hopefully it will taste like crushed grapes,” Brent said, returning my 
sarcasm. 
“Good one. I’ll let you know how it tasted.” Brent and I exchanged a 
few more kind words before I headed back to the office. 
I was surprised to find Reyna Andersen waiting outside my door. She 
explained she had just come from a meeting with her sponsor. Going 
into the meeting, she was working on a straightforward project to im-
plement a customer relationship management (CRM) package. After 
the meeting, however, the project had become much more complex, 
and she wanted to talk to me about it immediately. I tucked my bottle 
of wine into my bag and asked Reyna to come in and sit down. 
“My sponsor just informed me that her division has reorganized,” she 
began. “We need to implement this CRM package in our Canadian and 
Mexican operations as well.” 
“Wow, that’s a major change!” I replied. “I bet you want to talk to me 
about change management.” 
“Actually, I don’t,” she replied. “I explained to the sponsor her request 
was way outside the scope we agreed to. She agreed and asked us to 
come up with a new estimated budget and end date. My biggest con-
cern is being able to communicate and work successfully in the other 
countries. I have never been to either country, and I don’t know what 
to expect.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
95  
“I think I would have the same concerns,” I agreed. “There are no spe-
cific problems right now, but when you are working internationally, 
communication cannot be taken for granted. The good news is the 
change in scope has come before the project has gone too far. You 
should have time to deal with it.” 
“Exactly!” Reyna replied. “But I don’t know what to do next. This CRM 
initiative requires a culture change for the sales staff. Communication 
was already critical, and now it is even more so. I need to call a team 
meeting to try to get a handle on the communication needs and work 
with my team to plan how we can successfully operate in these differ-
ent cultures.” 
“Bingo!” I said approvingly. “You have solved your own problem.” 
LESSON 
Culture has been described as “how we do things ‘round here.” Culture 
change refers to changing the way people perform their jobs. In other 
words, you are changing how people “do things ‘round here.” Implementing 
a culture change initiative in an organization requires a multifaceted com-
munication strategy to be successful.  
The potential problems associated with a culture change project can usually 
be managed with a Change Management Plan. The key element of a Culture 
Change Plan will be a multifaceted Communication Plan. Creating a Com-
munication Plan involves following a simple process. 
• 
Identify the key clients, users, stakeholders, etc. 
• 
Determine their communication needs. 
• 
Brainstorm ways to fulfill the communication needs. This is an op-
portunity to be creative. 
• 
Evaluate the options in step 3 to determine which provide the most 
value at the least cost and impact to the project—and cover all of the 
stakeholders to some degree. Since you can’t do everything, these are 
the communication activities to start with. 
• 
Fill in the communication activity details and move to the project 
schedule. This includes who is assigned to the communication activity, 
the timing of the communication, the effort required, any dependen-
cies, etc.  

Develop a Communication Plan for Complex Projects 
 
96  
Step 3 is the time to be creative about how you fulfill the communication 
needs. You will need more than just status reports. You will need a multi-
faceted and holistic set of communication activities. Think about communi-
cation options in the following three main categories. 
• 
Mandatory: This generally includes project status reports, legal re-
quirements, financial reporting, etc. This information is pushed out to 
the recipients. 
• 
Informational: This includes information people want to know or 
information that the project team wants to provide for them. This in-
formation is usually made available for people to read but requires 
them to take the initiative or pull the communication. An example is 
having a project website. 
• 
Marketing: These activities help to build buy-in and enthusiasm for 
the project and its deliverables (if you can’t build enthusiasm, at 
least keep people neutral). This communication is pushed out to the 
appropriate people. Examples include newsletters, success stories, 
project posters, milestone celebrations, speaking at department 
meetings, etc. 
Even though Reyna has not had responsibility for an international project, 
others in the company have. She needs to speak to them to determine the 
type of communication and interaction that works best with the Canadian 
and Mexican staff. Once she has a good Communication Plan in place, she 
should monitor it to ensure people are getting the information they need. If 
not, the plan should be modified as appropriate during the project. This 
could mean modifying current communication activities, eliminating ineffec-
tive activities, or coming up with new communication ideas based on the 
experience of the project so far. 
Good proactive communication is vital in a culture change initiative like this. 
It is not the only area Reyna must address, but it is the foundation upon 
which all other culture change activities will be built. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
23 
Scale Your 
Processes 
Based on  
Project Size 
 
Sam in Human Resources set up a meeting with me for the afternoon 
of May 28 with a new employee. It was Ron Jobs, the recent graduate 
Sam mentioned to me last month. He had accepted our offer and had 
been on the job for about a week. The two of them came by my office 
around 2 p.m. and Sam introduced us. 
“Tom Mochal, this is Ron Jobs,” he said. “Ron just graduated from 
Northeast Illinois State and started with us last week.” Ron looked 
young. I wondered if I looked that young when I graduated college. He 
was 22 or 23, and his overall look was crisp and professional. I didn’t 
know how smart or skilled he was, but he looked like a businessman. I 
was impressed. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Scale Your Processes Based on Project Size 
 
98  
“It’s a pleasure meeting you,” I replied. “Actually, I remember Sam 
speaking briefly about you after your initial company interviews. If I re-
member correctly, you were top of your class.” 
“That’s right,” Ron said with pride. “I am really anxious to get started 
and prove myself.” 
“That’s actually why I brought Ron by today,” Sam interjected. “He is 
starting a new project and I want you to give him some advice on how 
best to proceed.” 
Surprisingly, Sam said little else and left shortly thereafter, giving Ron 
and me some time to discuss his assignment. He was responsible for 
creating a real-time equipment utilization report for a manufacturing di-
vision client. Actually, I was a little concerned. It was not unusual to give 
new people responsibility, but to ask Ron to lead a project as his first 
assignment seemed aggressive. Perhaps he had some prior experience 
managing projects at school. 
“Tom,” Ron began, “I know you have a standard project charter docu-
ment and I want some help developing it for the first time. I have a 
good idea what the objectives and scope are, but I’m not sure about a 
couple of the other sections like risk, budget, and the overall approach.” 
“Great,” I replied. “We can walk through the major risks, and I can also 
give you a risk template for you to complete on your own.” 
“Good. I am also not sure exactly how we do budgeting here, so I will 
need some help going over my estimate and determining what the cost 
will be.” 
The kid sure seemed to be asking the right questions. “Not a problem. I 
can give you an overview of how we do budgeting, and then you can 
confirm some of the details with your manager.” 
“I think the only other area I am not sure about is the project approach 
section. I just need more clarity on what you expect to see there.” 
“That section can be a little tricky, but by the time you get your initial 
schedule laid out, you should have the information you need to complete 
the approach. How many people will be working with you on this project?” 
Ron was a little surprised. “Well, right now I am the only one identified,” 
he said. 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
99  
Now it was my turn to be surprised. “Really? You are going to put the 
whole application together yourself?” 
“Yes. There will just be one new online screen to create,” Ron said. 
I was beginning to get the picture. “Ron, how much effort are you esti-
mating it will take to complete this work?” 
“I should be able to complete it in about 40 hours,” Ron said. 
I was able to shift gears and start down a new line of questioning. The 
rest of our conversation focused on gathering only the information Ron 
needed to define a small enhancement project. 
LESSON 
Much of the work done in a company can be structured and organized as a 
project. In turn, all projects need to be managed. However, the process (or 
methodology) used to manage the work needs to scale up and down, de-
pending on the size of the work effort. 
For instance, large projects should have a formal definition and planning 
phase, as well as rigorous processes for managing and controlling the work. 
In fact, it is not unusual for a very large project of 10,000 hours to require 
1,500 hours of project management time. Medium-sized projects still re-
quire some level of planning and some processes for managing and control-
ling the work. For instance, on a 1,000-hour project, only 150 hours of pro-
ject management time might be needed. Note that the percentage is the 
same (15 percent), but the total hours are down considerably. The same ri-
gorous project management processes for a 10,000-hour project would not 
be needed for a 1,000-hour project. 
How about a small project? A person may not need much formal planning 
or managing at all if the project is small enough. The planning and managing 
could probably be done in the person’s head as he goes. For instance, a 10-
hour project may only need an hour of project management. This hour is 
not spent on formal project management procedures, but it might include 
completing a simple work authorization form, mapping a plan of attack in 
your head, and some simple communication with stakeholders. 
Let’s look again at Ron’s project. I give him credit for being eager to follow 
project management processes, but he is not scaling the processes appro-
priately. It doesn’t make sense to spend 10 hours to write a project charter 
for a project requiring only 40 hours of effort. He doesn’t need to define 

Scale Your Processes Based on Project Size 
 
100  
formal objectives, scope, or approach. Those concepts have less meaning 
for small work efforts. The chances of running into a major change or having 
to manage a risk are very small on a project of this size. Even if he does, 
what would be the consequences? Perhaps his 40-hour project will end up 
taking 60 hours. This is 50 percent over its original estimate, but it is not 
going to bankrupt the company. Projects of this size do not need formal 
project management processes. 
Fortunately, our department has some processes and forms that reinforce 
the scalable nature of the work. For instance, we have a one-page document 
called a Service Request Form that is used to define small enhancements and 
other minor initiatives. Once I realized the work effort was small, I made 
Ron aware of this form and we spent the rest of our meeting going over the 
handful of items on it. All projects should be documented and approved—
even small ones. The Service Request Form allows the client manager to see 
the request and the estimated effort. The client manager can then approve 
the service request as well as prioritize the work against all of the other 
service requests that might be under consideration at any given time. 
The lesson for Ron is to make sure he does not blindly follow a methodol-
ogy. Our organization has some standards for all projects, and of course 
these should be followed. However, after the mandatory standards, the rest 
of the project management process should be scaled based on the size of 
the project.  
 
 

C H A P T E R 
24 
Plan the  
Project Even If 
You Start the 
Work at the 
Same Time 
 
Brian White was a project manager in his early 30s who had a reputa-
tion for being very easygoing and extremely well liked. A talented musi-
cian, he often played his guitar around town at open microphone nights 
in bars or coffee shops. He put up fliers in the break rooms advertising 
these events, and there were always at least a few employees who 
showed up to cheer him on. I had never seen him perform, but I heard 
he played a mellow set, including several cover songs from Simon and 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Plan the Project Even If You Start Work at the Same Time 
 
102  
Garfunkel. Given his relatively young age, I was surprised to find out 
about his affinity for the “Bridge over Troubled Water” duo. A few 
weeks ago, I helped Brian put together an estimate for a wireless Inter-
net project for Mega Manufacturing’s R&D department. He had good 
news and bad news when I met with him for the second time. 
“The estimate we worked on a few weeks ago has been accepted!” he 
said, smiling broadly. “However, the timeline for completing the project 
has been shortened. My manager said a couple of other business units 
are interested in the new technology, and they want this proof-of-
concept project completed as soon as possible.” 
“Well, I guess that’s good news,” I agreed. “Do you need help with the 
project charter? I think the project is small enough that we can use the 
abbreviated version.” 
“I agree the definition document is normally important,” Brian said. “But 
we are already past the planning process. Based on this earlier deadline 
date, we are already starting the work.” 
I could foresee potential problems if Brian went forward like this. 
“Really?” I questioned. “What are your deliverables? What is your ap-
proach? Where is your timeline? What is in scope and out of scope?” 
Brian could only give me partial answers, which made me even more 
nervous. The shortened deadline was making him think he didn’t have 
time for planning. 
“It sounds like you only have a vague idea of what you are going to do 
and what the expectations are,” I pointed out. “One of the purposes of 
definition and planning is to ensure you have an agreement with your 
sponsor on what is expected. Otherwise, you will only be able to define 
your plans and deliverables after you have started the project—and by 
then it will be too late to meet your deadline. 
“But what about that deadline?” Brian insisted. “We’ve got to start now 
if we want to get the work done on time.” 
“Planning is not a luxury you do only if you have time,” I countered. 
“Planning is part of the project. If you have a choice, it’s better to define 
and plan the project first, and then execute the plan. However, some-
times you have to start the project immediately and plan the work while 
some of it is already in progress.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
103  
LESSON 
Project managers often need to start working on a project before the plan-
ning is complete. This can be because of time pressure, like Brian’s project, 
or it can be caused by the project team being assigned before the planning is 
complete. In the latter case, the project manager needs to have work avail-
able to keep the team members busy even though planning is not complete. 
This is not an optimal situation, but it happens all the time. 
When project execution starts early, there is a tendency to think you can 
get by without the upfront definition and planning. However, this is not the 
case. If you don’t plan, you won’t know what your deliverables are, what 
your scope is, or what the schedule looks like. Even if you think you know 
the answers, you will not have confirmed that they are correct with your 
sponsor to make sure you are all on the same page. 
It is possible to successfully plan the project after the execution work has 
started. The trick is to assign resources to activities you are confident will 
need to be done in any case. For instance, most projects have some upfront 
analysis work. You can assign resources to work on the analysis while you 
are completing the planning. The ability to assign and manage work—while 
also performing the initial planning—is time consuming and requires the 
project manager to be well organized, disciplined, and able to multitask. 
Some people say it is like changing the tires on a moving vehicle. It’s hard 
work, which is another reason why many project managers skip it if the pro-
ject has already started. 
At some point, the definition and planning work will be completed. The pro-
ject manager now has an agreement with the sponsor on the work that 
needs to be done and a schedule that shows how to get it done. The pro-
ject manager can then confirm the work  completed so far and can make 
sure nothing critical has been missed. You may have assigned and completed 
some unnecessary work, but that is the tradeoff for having to start the work 
early. Hopefully, any wasted work effort will be made up for by an increased 
ability to deliver to an early deadline. On a project like this, the deadline 
date is normally more important than the effort and cost, and your sponsor 
is usually willing to be a little inefficient to achieve the deadline date. 
The reward of this definition and planning is the ability to manage the rest of 
the project proactively. 
What happens if you don’t finish the planning work? The alternative sce-
nario is that the project execution work gets too far ahead and the planning 

Plan the Project Even If You Start Work at the Same Time 
 
104  
process never catches up. If you skip the definition and planning process, the 
risks to the project include the following: 
• 
An inaccurate schedule, resulting in missed activities or extra, un-
necessary activities throughout the project. 
• 
A loose understanding of scope, resulting in a large number of scope 
changes. 
• 
Deliverables that do not meet the client’s expectations. 
• 
Uncertainty of the project risks and how to respond to them. 
In this specific project, I don’t recommend that Brian stop everything to 
complete the definition and the planning process. However, he still needs to 
proceed with the planning while the project is executing. In the short term, 
he can identify work that must be done, regardless of the outcome of the 
planning process, and assign team members to this work. Brian should also 
get formal approval of the Project Charter. Based on the size of his project, 
he can define the work by completing an Abbreviated Project Charter. 
When the Abbreviated Project Charter and schedule are complete, he can 
synchronize the plan with the work already done and proactively manage 
the rest of the project from there. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
25 
Identify the 
Critical Path 
and How This 
Path Drives the 
End Date 
 
The majority of my work involved meeting with people and helping them 
through one or two particular project problems. I rarely had a chance to 
meet with someone regularly and help them complete their project from 
start to finish. That was a big reason why Jerry and I had become very 
comfortable working with each other. Meeting with him regularly made 
me feel like a part of the team and allowed me to see not only the  
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Identify the Critical Path and How This Path Drives the End Date 
 
106  
progression of the project but also his professional progression as he 
learned more and more about being a better project manager. 
Another person I helped frequently—although not as often as Jerry—was 
Ashley Parker. It was the middle of June; her team had just completed 
work on the new marketing information database, and she had invited 
me to attend their project conclusion meeting. The project finished three 
weeks behind schedule and was over budget by 15 percent—not terrible 
numbers, but an interesting discussion ensued as to the cause of these 
overruns and how they could have been avoided. Ashley began the meet-
ing by congratulating the team on a job well done.  
“First off, my sincerest thanks to all of you for working so hard on this 
project. You all did a wonderful job, and you should feel proud of your 
work and our accomplishment. Of course, as with any project, we did 
encounter a few problems. That’s the purpose for our meeting this 
morning. Knowing what we know today, what could we have done dif-
ferently on the project to hit our deadline and budget?”  
Chris, one of the database administrators, spoke up. “For the first half 
of the project, everything seemed to go according to schedule. But some 
of the design decisions we made up front didn’t pan out like we hoped 
and caused us rework delays later on.”  
“That’s a good point,” Ashley noted. “The design work is critical on a 
project deploying new technology. For a project like this, that type of 
work should have been on the critical path.” 
“I think we also lost some focus toward the middle of the project,” Di-
ane contributed. “As we started to create the physical database, we 
were heading into the holiday season. I think things started to slip at 
that point.”  
“You’re right,” Ashley agreed, nodding. “It’s imperative to maintain work 
focus around the holidays. If I had to do it again, I would have added 
some of those activities to the critical path as well.”  
“Another thing I noticed,” Ashley continued diplomatically, “was I had 
problems understanding some aspects of the project management tool 
we were using. About halfway through the project, I was looking at the 
project’s critical path. The tool was cluttering the critical path with lots 
of unimportant activities. Other longer and more important activities 
were not on the path. Next time I run a project, I am going to move the 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
107  
more important activities onto the critical path, so I can place the prop-
er amount of management focus on them.” 
 I decided at this point to put on my coach’s hat. The discussion on key 
learning from the project was a good one, but I didn’t want them to en-
counter other problems on their next project because of faulty under-
standing of the critical path. 
LESSON  
Before I discuss the critical path, I’ll clarify the definition of schedule float. 
Float, or slack, refers to a time lag that can occur between two activities 
without impacting the final deadline. For instance, let’s say you have two ac-
tivities—A and B. Activity B must start after activity A has finished. If activity 
B must start right away, there is zero slack. However, if activity B can start 
two days after activity A finishes without impacting the overall deadline 
date, then activity B has two days of slack. This does not mean activity B 
must wait two days. However, if necessary, activity B could wait up to two 
days without impacting the overall project deadline. 
With that in mind, let’s look at the critical path. Critical path is the name giv-
en to the sequence of activities from start to finish that must be started and 
completed on time for the entire project to complete on time. There is no 
float for any activity on the path. Every project has a critical path of ac-
tivities, and the project end date is based on the length of time to complete 
the tasks on the critical path. 
For example, imagine a project takes 300 days. The critical path might con-
sist of a sequence of 40 activities that would also take 300 days to complete. 
If the first activity on the critical path is 1 day late, the project will take 301 
days to complete, unless another activity on the critical path can be com-
pleted 1 day earlier. 
It is vital the project manager understands the critical path and pays special 
attention to these activities, since any delay on the critical path will result in 
a delay in the entire project. If your project is behind schedule, you must ac-
celerate activities on the critical path to get back on schedule. If the project 
is behind schedule and the project manager is not aware of the critical path 
and how it drives the project end date, it’s likely that precious resources 
will be misapplied on the wrong activities. 
There are two common misconceptions about the critical path. The first is 
that all of the activities on the path are important, or critical. However, this 

Identify the Critical Path and How This Path Drives the End Date 
 
108  
is not necessarily the case. While some activities on the path can be very 
important, it is also likely that many mundane activities are there as well. 
The activities on the critical path are critical from a scheduling perspective 
since they drive the end date, but they may or may not be of critical impor-
tance to the project. 
The second misconception is the project manager can add critical, or impor-
tant, activities to the critical path. This is what I am hearing from Ashley at 
her end-of-project meeting. She would like to have all her critical (impor-
tant) activities added to the critical path because she perceives she will 
spend more time focusing on the activities there. She is right about the addi-
tional scrutiny, but she has a basic misconception about how the critical 
path is calculated and how the activities get there. 
That’s when I step in to explain the critical path to Ashley and the others. 
The critical path is what it is from a scheduling perspective, and the project 
manager can’t add activities to it just because those activities are important. 
In fact, if new activities are forced onto the critical path, the result will be a 
delay on the project. For instance, if you arbitrarily force a 10-day activity 
onto your 300-day project, the result would be that the project takes 310 
days to complete. That’s not what you want. 
I compliment Ashley on her desire to place more focus on certain activities, 
but ask her to determine the most important activities and place the appro-
priate level of focus on those—regardless of whether they are on the criti-
cal path or not. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
26 
Change  
Assumptions  
to Revise an 
Estimate 
 
Working with Jerry for the last six months had been a real treat for me. 
When Jerry first started his project to update the phone mail system, he 
was inexperienced and had no idea how to approach project manage-
ment in an efficient and organized fashion. Now he was much more 
knowledgeable. He wasn’t a seasoned pro by any means, but he had 
come a long way in a short time. We celebrated the completion of his 
project to upgrade the phone system and software a few weeks ago, 
and so far, there had been very few complaints—and an abundance of 
compliments on a job well done. 
In fact, Jerry did such a good job on the phone project he was given an-
other big assignment: deploying an operating system upgrade on all 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Change Assumptions to Revise an Estimate 
 
110  
Mega Manufacturing desktops. It was a large project and involved more 
team members and more responsibility, but Jerry’s confidence was high 
and I could tell he felt capable of handling the job. His confidence was 
noteworthy, especially given where he was just a few months ago. It was 
also significant considering he and his wife would be moving into the 
Morettis’ house in a few weeks. Clearly the organizational skills and 
confidence gained at work were carrying over into his personal life be-
cause he showed no signs of stress or worry about the move. 
Jerry came to see me at the end of June to discuss feedback he had re-
ceived from his manager on the desktop upgrade project. Jerry’s man-
ager had just read his draft project charter. Apparently, he liked the 
overall definition and plan but had a problem with the cost estimate.  
“Are you ready for your big move, Jerry?” I asked as he entered the 
office.  
“We sure are, Tom. Barbara already has a list of things she wants to 
change after we move in. We are both really excited.”  
“Are you planning any major changes?” 
“Not at all. Barb wants to do some painting in certain rooms to better 
match our color schemes, and we are thinking about changing the tile in 
the master bathroom. Small things, really.” 
“Sounds good. As always, let me know how I can help. So tell me, where 
are things with your project?” 
“Well, I’m not sure what to do next,” Jerry began. “I worked with a 
number of technical experts to prepare the effort and cost estimate for 
this project, but my manager says it’s too high.” 
“Did your manager give you any insight as to why he thought the esti-
mate was too high?” I asked. 
“As best I can tell, the estimate is too high because it’s more than the 
budget allocated for this work,” Jerry explained. “He said if the numbers 
were closer to budget, he would just go ahead, but my estimate is 60 
percent more than the initial budget allocation.” 
“Really?” I asked. “Well, the original budget was proposed last year dur-
ing the business planning process. Those numbers are put forward at a 
pretty high level. It is not surprising your more detailed estimate is much 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
111  
higher. It’s also probably much more accurate. Did your boss have any 
advice on how to reduce the number?” 
“Not really,” he replied. “He just said he wanted me to ‘sharpen my 
pencil’ some more and try to get the project estimate down substan-
tially. This really stinks!” 
“Hang in there,” I said encouragingly. “You should not be forced into 
making an estimate you don’t believe in. However, let’s look at some 
options that might help you out.” 
LESSON  
Jerry is not the first person to have an estimate questioned, and he will not 
be the last. This scenario happens all the time. The project to upgrade the 
desktop operating system was proposed and approved last year as part of 
the business planning process. The company also allocated a preliminary 
budget to the work. However, managers don’t have the time to perform a 
detailed effort and cost estimate for each project during the yearly planning 
process. Those budgets are estimated at a high level and need to be vali-
dated once the actual project starts. 
That’s where we are now. Jerry was assigned to the project and is defining 
and planning the work at a lower level of detail. As a result, Jerry has created 
a much more realistic estimate of the costs involved, and his new figures are 
60 percent higher than the original budget. The company expects the esti-
mates to be off somewhat. In fact, Jerry’s boss told him if his estimate was 
closer to the original budget, they could go back and ask for more money. 
However, his boss feels he will not be able to ask for a 60 percent increase. 
That type of increase will either not be funded at all, or the additional fund-
ing will probably require another approved project to be cancelled. 
This puts Jerry in a tough position. The company wants to do the work—
that’s why it was approved for this year. However, now they may not be 
able to afford it. Jerry’s boss wants the estimate reduced and has asked Jerry 
to “sharpen his pencil.” On the surface, Jerry’s manager is asking him to 
make the estimate more accurate. However, the clear implication is he 
wants the estimate reduced. His boss is assuming Jerry’s estimate is sloppy 
or has some inherent padding that can be removed. 
Jerry’s first thought is that he needs to reduce the estimate arbitrarily and 
then take the heat when the work comes in over budget. That is definitely 
not the path to take. Instead, he should look at two areas. 

Change Assumptions to Revise an Estimate 
 
112  
First, Jerry needs to verify his own estimate. If he used an estimating tool or 
a spreadsheet, he should double-check the formulas, confirm that he is using 
the right resource rates, and make sure the non-labor costs are reasonably 
accurate. Once he is convinced his math is accurate, Jerry should also see if 
there is at least one other estimating technique he can use for validation. It 
sounds like he relied on expert opinions to prepare the original estimate. 
He could also estimate the work at a low level using his work breakdown 
structure (or his project schedule if he is at that level). Since the work is 
fairly repetitive on thousands of workstations, he could also look for some 
estimating algorithm that could lead to a logical and reasonable number. 
Second, Jerry should look at his estimating assumptions. All estimates are 
based on a set of explicit and implied assumptions. This is a time to look 
for creative ways to get the work done with less cost and effort, such as 
the following: 
 
Look for less-costly alternatives: This means looking at all costs 
associated with the project to see if less-expensive alternatives exist 
that will accomplish the same thing. For instance, if you are counting 
on contract labor resources, you can see whether they could be re-
placed with employees. If you are proposing new software, see 
whether your company already has something that will work. You 
could evaluate whether existing hardware can be utilized rather 
than buying new machines. If you have training costs in your budget, 
see whether the training can be done in-house instead of sending 
people to formal off-site classes. Remember, the purpose of this 
step is to see if there are alternatives that will allow you to reduce 
costs while still delivering all the required functionality. 
 
Look for process improvements: This step involves looking at 
how you propose to do the work to see if alternative approaches 
or techniques exist that will result in less effort and cost. For in-
stance, if you have trips planned, determine whether some or all of 
the work can be accomplished with phone calls or teleconferences. 
See whether some manual processes can be automated. Perhaps a 
focused group meeting can be utilized to gather requirements in-
stead of traditional one-on-one interview sessions. It may be pos-
sible to outsource some of the work at less cost than it would take 
to do it internally. Again, the purpose of this step is to deliver as 
planned while requiring less effort. 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
113  
 
Negotiate a reduction in scope: The two preceding options al-
low you to deliver all the work requested for less effort and cost 
than was originally proposed. This third option looks for activities 
or parts of the project that can be eliminated. Removing work 
should result in reduced effort and cost. Although all of the work 
on the project may have originally been seen as important, it usually 
turns out some components of the project are more important than 
others. In some instances, work can be deferred until a later date, 
perhaps when a new budget is available. This may result in a less-
than-perfect solution, but one still acceptable to your sponsor.  
Jerry needs to go back and revisit the estimate with these points in mind. 
He may find there are ways to pare down the estimate while delivering 
much of what the company needs. This exercise is not meant to force him 
into committing to a project budget he does not believe in. It is simply 
meant as an honest effort to reduce the estimated cost and effort. 
Jerry owes his manager a complete explanation of how the estimate was 
prepared. If, at the end of this process, Jerry’s estimate is still too high, he 
must ask for the assistance of his manager and other stakeholders to de-
termine whether or how to proceed. 
One option is to not do the project at all. If the cost of doing the project is 
more than the perceived benefit, it simply should not be done. Management 
stakeholders may have other options, including requesting the required in-
cremental budget dollars if they are convinced additional money is justified. 
After seeing Jerry’s second estimate, including reasonable alternatives and 
options, his manager can determine how to proceed. If Jerry’s estimate is 
still too high, his manager will need to take the new number forward for ap-
proval or come up with some alternatives. If Jerry’s estimate is closer to the 
original budget (even if the project scope has been reduced), his manager 
may be able to approve the work and let the project proceed. Either of 
these alternatives is better for Jerry and for the company than purposely 
underestimating the work—and then having to face the consequences later 
when the project goes over budget. 

C H A P T E R 
27 
Don’t Forget 
Face-to-Face 
Communication 
on Your Project 
 
Jean Combs was a tall woman with long, blonde hair. Her husband, Rick, 
was the head football coach at Northeast Illinois State and a friend of 
my wife Pam. Their son Dan was the same age as Tim, and the two boys 
were friends. Jean was a quick learner when given new assignments, so 
when she called me to schedule an afternoon appointment, I knew 
something must have really stumped her on her project for the Finance 
department. 
“Come in, Jean! Good to see you. How are Rick and Dan?” 
“They are both well, thanks for asking. Rick is busy interviewing candi-
dates for defensive line coach at the university now that Jordan McKenzie 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Don’t Forget Face-to-Face Communication on Your Project 
 
116  
has left for Purdue. He’s a little worried since it is already July 1 and 
summer workouts are in progress. Of course, little Dan is still a bundle of 
energy and has recently taken an interest in golf.” 
“That’s funny! Tim has also shown some interest in golf. We’ll have to 
get the two of them together sometime and play miniature golf. We can 
form our own mini PGA Tour!” 
“I am sure Dan would love that!” 
“Tell you what, I’ll give you a call over the weekend and we’ll try to set 
something up. Now, what brings you to see me today?” 
“Well, I could use some help on this project,” she began. “It isn’t in bad 
shape, but we missed a couple of milestone dates by less than a week. I 
think we are back on target now.” 
“That’s good news,” I said. 
“Well, I wouldn’t get too optimistic yet,” she replied, trying to force a 
smile. “The overall schedule is very aggressive. What makes it frustrat-
ing is I received feedback from my sponsor and client manager recently 
saying we need to do a better job communicating what’s going on. I’ve 
tried to communicate as much as possible, including sending out status 
reports. Not that anyone reads them.” 
“This project sounds very important to the Finance department,” I said. 
“Why wouldn’t they read the status reports?” 
“It’s just the way this project has gone,” she replied, clearly frustrated. “I 
don’t think anyone reads the status reports. When we sent out e-mails 
to solicit requirements, we received very few replies. I send out e-mails 
whenever we have problems, but I don’t get any help from the senior 
managers. We also publish risk plans, project news, and current status 
on a shared web server, but very few clients read it. I think it’s unfair of 
them to say now we are not communicating effectively.” 
I see a pattern here. “It certainly sounds like you have provided the cli-
ents with a lot of information,” I noted. “However, when is the last time 
you met with them face to face?” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
117  
LESSON  
One of the key responsibilities of a project manager is to communicate 
proactively to clients, team members, and stakeholders. Some of this com-
munication is routine and obvious, including status meetings and status re-
ports. However, status meetings and status reports are the minimum ex-
pectation for communicating on a project. These communication updates 
help to manage expectations, but they do not satisfy the total communica-
tion needs for most projects. If your project is large and impacts a substan-
tial number of people, a Communication Plan should be created to meet 
the needs of all stakeholders. 
Since proactive communication is probably not her strong suit, Jean has 
found herself communicating in a manner that best suits her needs and 
not the needs of her clients and stakeholders. The approach is based 
purely on an electronic medium. Sure, it’s easier to fire off e-mail mes-
sages. Yes, it might be quicker to place documentation on a shared web 
server for stakeholders to read. But the truth is these forms of communi-
cation are only easier and quicker for Jean and they do not address the 
needs of her clients at all. 
To be fair, there is nothing wrong with Jean’s communication. There is a 
place for e-mail messages, status reports, and collaborative web sites. 
They are vital pieces in an overall Communication Plan. However, they 
should not be used as a way to avoid meeting with your sponsor and cli-
ent managers. There is no substitute for face-to-face meetings and per-
sonal communication. 
Jean is facing a common IT problem. She is providing information, but it is 
not always delivered effectively. She is comfortable working with her team 
members and the lower-level client users, but she is not as comfortable 
talking with the more senior client stakeholders. 
Jean needs to understand that senior managers can receive hundreds of 
messages per day. They also have many initiatives going on simultaneously. 
Jean’s project is important to them, but they have many other competing 
priorities. It is not reasonable to assume they will always be able to sift 
through hundreds of e-mails to find the key bits of information relevant to 
the project. 
This is not meant to be an excuse for them. The senior management stake-
holders should have an interest in the project and should invest the time to 
make sure it has everything it needs to be successful. However, the project 
manager needs to make it easy for them. It is much more likely they will 

Don’t Forget Face-to-Face Communication on Your Project 
 
118  
will remember the things they hear at meetings and from colleagues, even if 
the information is not entirely accurate. 
It certainly looks like Jean is communicating. However, she has not found 
the right forum and format to provide her clients with the information they 
want to know. That is why, in spite of the communication Jean has done, the 
clients are still telling her she needs to communicate more. Actually, it ap-
pears they would like Jean to communicate more effectively with them. 
My advice to Jean is to ask the sponsor and client manager how she can best 
communicate to them. For instance, Jean may need to set up periodic brief-
ings for the sponsor and other senior stakeholders. She might also create 
status updates that are in more of a business memo format. The e-mails and 
status reports will then be much more effective as a means of filling in the 
blanks between personal meetings. This will provide more accurate and reli-
able information for them and make them more comfortable communicating 
directly with her if they have further questions.  
 
 

C H A P T E R 
28 
Make Quality a 
Mindset and 
Ongoing  
Process 
 
I had been trying to cut back on my coffee intake lately. Not that I was 
“Mr. Healthy” but every little bit helped, I figured. Who needs all that 
caffeine anyway? Part of the plan was to avoid drinking coffee at home 
in the morning and instead drink water or juice. So my first cup was usu-
ally in my office as I checked my e-mail. This morning I was returning 
from the break room with my first cup when I ran into Erika Thompson. 
Erika was wearing a black skirt with a red blouse and flag-shaped ear-
rings (it was July 3). Her husband, Martin, was in the Army and was sta-
tioned overseas on an eight-month tour of duty. The Fourth of July was 
very meaningful to her because her father was killed in combat during 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Make Quality a Mindset and Ongoing Process 
 
120  
the Vietnam War. She visited Washington, D.C., last year with her hus-
band, and I remembered her saying it was a moving experience, espe-
cially visiting the Vietnam Memorial. 
“I see you are ready for Independence Day,” I said as she waved her 
hand at me. 
“You bet I am, although it will be tough with Martin away from home.” 
“When does his tour of duty end, Erika? Seems like he has been gone 
for quite some time.” 
“He left right after Christmas last year, so he’ll be back in a few 
months. I can hardly wait!” 
“I bet. Your frantic wave makes me think you have something on your 
mind besides fireworks, though.” 
“You’re right,” she said, taking a deep breath. “I have heard you talk 
about the need for building quality into our solutions. I have a team 
building a new employee self-service module onto our benefits system. I 
wanted to let you know that we have just built a Quality Plan. We 
wanted to do something because Human Resources has a lot of sensi-
tive information, and we need to make sure the information is accurate 
and secure.” 
I was pleased. “Great,” I said. “I think you will find that building quality 
into your process will save you effort and cost over the entire project. 
Tell me about your plan.” 
“We have done a number of things,” she explained. “First, we have a 
Quality Day scheduled every two weeks. That’s the time we check the 
results of everyone’s work to date. Second, we have designated a person 
to check the entire self-service application when it is complete to find 
any errors we may have missed. Third, we have asked one of our clients 
to be responsible for the overall quality of the solution. With these kinds 
of checks in place, we should end up with a good product.” 
I thought for a minute. On the surface, all of this sounded good, but 
something wasn’t quite right. “Erika,” I asked, “what are your develop-
ers doing in between the Quality Days?” 
“They are working hard to build this module,” she explained. “In fact, 
they think they can get more work done since they know reviews will be 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
121  
done every other week and that someone will double-check the applica-
tion at the end of the project.” 
This was starting to confirm my suspicions. “Let’s talk a little further 
about your plan. Building quality into your solution needs to be an inte-
gral part of your development process. It appears you have a series of 
quality events, but you want to make sure people are taking personal 
responsibility for quality as well.” 
LESSON 
A good definition of quality management is that you understand what quality 
means to your client and you put a proactive plan in place to achieve that 
level of quality. This requires a combination of quality planning, quality con-
trol (inspection), and quality assurance (prevention). Repeatedly finding er-
rors and fixing them (quality control) can result in a high quality product, 
but it is a very inefficient process. The best approach is to build a quality 
product the first time. In general, your team can’t build a quality product the 
first time without quality work processes (quality assurance).  
Building a quality product also requires a quality mindset. The team needs to 
be personally concerned about quality, and they need to take responsibility 
for building a quality product. The team needs to be constantly looking for 
ways to do things right the first time and looking for ways to capture any 
defects as early as possible after they have been introduced. 
It appears Erika’s team has great intentions. In fact, her approach may be 
better than doing nothing at all, since it does at least heighten everyone’s 
awareness of the need for quality. However, she appears to have made 
three mistakes that may negate her team’s good intentions. 
First, although it’s okay to focus on quality on a scheduled basis, she needs 
to ensure that her team doesn’t see quality as a series of events. Her team 
members must see quality as a daily aspect of their job. Let’s look at her 
biweekly Quality Days. On the surface, there is nothing wrong with this 
idea. However, consider Erika’s comment about the team getting more 
work done because they can catch errors on Quality Days. Erika needs to 
make sure that her team members are not producing lower-quality work 
because they see Quality Day as a net in which to catch errors. If this is 
the case (and it sounds like it is), her team members are not taking per-
sonal responsibility for getting their work done right the first time. They 
may also be viewing quality as a biweekly event instead of a continuous 

Make Quality a Mindset and Ongoing Process 
 
122  
process. Furthermore, finding and fixing errors after the fact is inefficient. 
It is a direct cause of rework, which is a large time-waster on a project.  
Second, they have designated a person to check all work at the end of the 
project. Again, this may be fine as long as it is a final inspection in an ongoing 
quality process. But, again, Erika needs to be sure team members are not 
producing work of poor quality based on the assumption that someone else 
is responsible for catching errors later on. Catching errors at the end of the 
project is better than not catching them at all, but generally this is the worst 
time to catch them. Errors caught at the end of the project are the most 
costly and time consuming to correct. Catching errors early is a much bet-
ter approach. Her team should be conducting error checks as soon as deliv-
erables are produced. 
Third, designating a client to be in charge of overall quality appears to shift 
the responsibility. It’s great that the client is involved. However, in a quality 
environment, the project team needs to be responsible for quality. In fact, 
each person must be responsible for his work. The client may be asked to 
help verify that the final product meets her expectations, but she should not 
be responsible for the work others are producing. 
Erika’s quality plan should be revised in these areas. First, she can schedule 
walkthroughs and testing inspections throughout the development proc-
ess—not just at arbitrary biweekly Quality Days. Her team should under-
stand that it is responsible for the work it produces—and that it can’t as-
sume others will catch their errors. Lastly, although clients can verify that 
the final solution meets their quality expectations, the overall responsibility 
for quality must remain with the team that is building the solution. These 
changes will ensure the team has a quality mindset and takes responsibility 
for the product it is building. 
 

C H A P T E R 
29 
Batch Small 
Scope Change 
Requests for 
Sponsor  
Approval 
 
Sean Robinson had been in the IT Application Support organization for 
almost 15 years and was one of the best. He knew our Marketing appli-
cations inside and out—and always knew where to find the answers if 
they weren’t already in his head. Like many support specialists, however, 
Sean was not the strongest project manager. Perhaps that’s the nature of 
good support people; they’re used to jumping in and fixing problems 
quickly—a long activity for him might have been 20 hours. Maybe that 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Batch Small Scope Change Requests for Sponsor Approval 
 
124  
was why it was tough for him to develop the patience and structured 
thinking required to plan and manage larger projects. 
In spite of these shortcomings, Sean was often asked to manage pro-
jects to enhance current Marketing applications, and he had enough 
knowledge and experience to deliver small enhancement projects rea-
sonably close to expectations. Sean was also open and willing to learn 
structured project management techniques—at least up to a point. I 
talked to Sean about his current project. He was a little apprehensive. 
Sean said the purpose of his project was to track the response rates of 
direct mail campaigns. The project was projected to last four months 
and had started last month on June 15. Unfortunately, the project was 
already at risk of exceeding its budget and deadline. I asked a standard 
series of questions about how he was managing the project to see if I 
could identify some root causes for why the project was in trouble. I 
asked about the schedule, deliverables, risks, staffing, issues, etc. When 
we got to scope change management, Sean was a little defensive.  
“You know, I am more than willing to use formal project management 
techniques when they make sense,” Sean said, running his hand through 
his thick blonde hair. “But you know Marketing. They always want 
changes after agreeing to the initial scope. I would like to use good 
scope change management, but the changes are always small. You 
know, five hours here, three hours there. Pretty soon you are talking 
about some real hours. I think that’s why we are in trouble.”  
“Let’s talk about your scope change procedures,” I said. “Can you tell 
me how you are managing these small changes?”  
“Our scope management process normally includes gaining sponsor 
approval for changes,” Sean said. “But am I the only person who has 
a busy sponsor? I can’t take every two-hour scope change request to 
him. He would throw me out of his office. So we are trying to be client 
focused and fit as many of these small changes in as possible. What 
other options do I have?”  
“Obviously, you don’t want to bother your sponsor for every small scope 
change request,” I said. “However, there’s another option. Let’s talk 
about this further.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
125  
LESSON  
I can sympathize with Sean. He thinks he has done a good job establishing 
scope, and he is prepared to handle scope changes by taking the change re-
quests to the sponsor, along with the project impact assessment. However, 
he also knows the sponsor is busy and thus hesitates to bother him with 
“minor” scope changes. Sean is probably right. Most likely, the sponsor does 
not want to be bothered with every two- and four-hour scope change re-
quest. There are a couple alternatives, however. 
First, it may be perfectly acceptable for the project manager and the main 
client manager to have some discretionary power to approve small scope 
changes, as long as the changes do not impact the team’s ability to deliver 
the project on time and within budget. Notice that a designated client rep-
resentative must still agree to the scope change request. It is still not a pro-
ject manager decision. The sponsor will need to agree to this delegation of 
authority and then it can be added to the scope change process. If small 
change requests are submitted, they must still be documented with esti-
mates on project impact and business value. This process does not need to 
be elaborate. Each request could simply take up one line of the Scope 
Change Log. 
Note the key caveat: this discretionary authority can be used only if there is 
no impact on the project timeline and budget. This doesn’t help Sean, since 
he stated he is already at risk of going over schedule and budget. 
In Sean’s case, he should utilize a second project management technique for 
small changes—batching small scope changes together. This still means 
keeping track of the small scope changes, their business value, and their im-
pact on the project. When they hit a certain threshold, he can take all of 
them to the sponsor for approval. The threshold could be reached when 
the impact of the scope changes exceeds a target, such as 100 hours. The 
threshold could also be in terms of the number of small requests received, 
such as 10 small requests. 
The result is that instead of visiting the sponsor 10 times for 10 small scope 
changes, he batches them all together and sees the sponsor once for each 
batch of changes. At that meeting, Sean, the client manager, and the sponsor 
can discuss the proposed changes and get sponsor approval. The benefit of 
having the sponsor approve the changes is that he or she can also approve 
the incremental budget and time needed to get the work done. 
Keep in mind, however, that just as this idea of batching requests may be 
new to the project manager, it may also be new to the sponsor. Therefore, 

Batch Small Scope Change Requests for Sponsor Approval 
 
126  
Sean needs to explain the process to the sponsor and get the sponsor’s 
agreement on using this process to manage small scope change requests.  
If you utilize this technique, you may find the sponsor has little patience and 
sympathy for small incremental scope change requests that add only small 
incremental business value. As mentioned in Chapter 11, sponsors typically 
do not want to be distracted from the main business objectives. If the final 
solution meets 80 percent of their needs, they are typically happy. They 
normally don’t care to add too many small requests that may only result in 
the solution meeting 82 percent of their needs. These small changes are just 
a distraction. Although Sean might hesitate to say “no” to scope change re-
quests, the sponsor typically does not have that problem. Usually they are 
more than happy to say “no.”  
Sean’s last comment on being client focused is telling. His team is trying to 
be client focused by agreeing to include as many small changes as possible. 
However, is this really being client focused? If the project goes over budget 
and over its deadline, will the sponsor talk about Sean’s amazing client fo-
cus? Probably not. Instead, the sponsor will talk about how the team missed 
its commitments. 
The best thing Sean can do to be client focused is to meet his commit-
ments on project budget and deadline. His major client is the sponsor. 
With his project now at risk, he should ensure no changes are agreed to 
without sponsor approval and without a corresponding increase in budget 
and schedule. 
 

C H A P T E R 
30 
Manage Your 
Vendor Projects 
Proactively  
 
Pam and I took Tim to the department store to shop for back-to-school 
items. Although was still July, Tim was starting kindergarten in the fall 
and we wanted to spark some excitement in him by buying a few sup-
plies. The school sent us a welcome pack over the summer, including a 
sheet of required tools—the usual fare of pencils, pens, glue, crayons, 
scissors, etc. The first thing we bought was a black-and-red backpack 
with golf balls on it. Tim and I had been practicing golf quite a bit over 
the summer and I promised to take him to a real course next year. 
Leaving the department store, we drove to the Morettis’ old house to 
have dinner with Jerry and Barbara. I was excited to see what they had 
done with it. As we pulled into the driveway, I could already see one big 
change. Jerry had pulled the bushes out from around the house and re-
placed them with flower gardens. There was also a nice bed of flowers 
planted around the mailbox. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Manage Your Vendor Projects Proactively 
 
“Looks like Jerry and Barbara have added some flower power!” I said to 
Pam as we approached the front door. 
On the inside, things were mostly the same, but with all new furniture. 
Jerry said they were still going to paint but decided to plant the flower-
beds first to take advantage of the nice weather. “Good project man-
agement decision,” I said jokingly. Jerry led me down to the basement 
where I was surprised to see the shelves covered in beer steins, just as 
they were when Wayne lived there.  
“I thought that might surprise you,” Jerry said as I looked around. “A 
nice gift from Wayne. He left me all his beer steins. He said he didn’t 
have much use for them in Arizona, and he knew how much I admired 
them when I saw them for the first time. I told Wayne I would continue 
to display them and that he should let me know if he ever decided he 
wanted them back.” 
“That was incredibly thoughtful of Wayne,” I said, admiring a stein with 
a Harley Davidson motorcycle on the front. “Of course, it doesn’t really 
surprise me. Wayne is a great guy.” 
Jerry showed me some of his favorite steins and then grabbed a couple 
beers out of the refrigerator in the bar. Handing one to me, he asked if 
I would mind talking shop for a few minutes. He was still in the early 
stages of his new project to deploy an operating system upgrade on all 
of our desktops, and he said his head was swimming with too much  
information.  
“As you can imagine, the technical considerations for this project are not 
difficult,” Jerry began carefully. “Upgrading a workstation is easy. How-
ever, when you have thousands of workstations, the complexity of com-
pleting the entire project starts to get overwhelming. We are 
outsourcing the majority of the project to one of our vendors. I initially 
thought the vendor would take care of everything; however, they still 
want me to make the overall decisions on schedule, priorities, risks, etc. 
My boss has also told me I am still responsible for the success of this 
project—even though a vendor is doing most of the work.”  
“I think that makes sense,” I said. “In the past, people thought that if 
you outsourced a project, you outsourced the problems as well. This is 
definitely not the case. As the client company, we need to maintain 
overall responsibility and ownership of the project.” 
12  8
  

Lessons in Project Management 
 
1
  
“You’re right,” Jerry agreed. “But how do I manage these vendor re-
sources? They have their own project manager, their own schedule, and 
their own plan. It’s hard enough to manage my own staff. How can I 
keep track of the work when it is managed by a vendor?”  
“The interesting thing about managing outsourced work is that it is not 
too much different than managing your own internal staff. Let’s talk 
about this a little more.”  
LESSON  
Outsourcing of project work is more and more common. In the past, many 
companies experienced poor results from outsourcing. This partly reflected 
the inability of the vendor companies to successfully deliver against the con-
tract. However, it was also partly due to the inability of the client company 
to manage the outsourced relationship proactively. Many companies felt that 
if they outsourced the work, they also outsourced the problems. They also 
felt like they outsourced responsibility and accountability to the vendor.  
The better approach is to recognize that you have a project and you are still 
responsible for it. You may outsource some of the work to a vendor. In 
fact, you may outsource the majority of the work, or all of the work, to a 
vendor. However, you still have overall responsibility for the project. If all 
goes well with the vendor, you do not have much work to do. Unfortu-
nately, in many instances, the vendor does not perform against expectations. 
You need to be proactively managing the project so that you know about 
any problems as soon as possible.  
Many people are not sure what to do when asked to manage a vendor rela-
tionship. Part of the uncertainty stems from the project roles being re-
versed. On a normal internal project, the Project Manager assigns the work 
and manages issues, scope, risk, quality, etc. The Project Manager makes 
sure work is done on time and that the project is progressing. He is held 
accountable for the success of the project.  
On an outsourced project, the vendor’s Project Manager should be the one 
who is worried about the project management details. The vendor’s Project 
Manager is planning and assigning the work as well as managing issues, 
scope, risk, etc.  
In this situation, the client Project Manager takes on a quality assurance role 
to monitor the vendor work. This is the role Jerry should take on his pro-
ject. Fortunately, he understands the basics of project management. He just 
29  

Manage Your Vendor Projects Proactively 
 
13   
needs to apply this knowledge toward monitoring the vendor. Let’s look at 
the following examples: 
 
Schedule: Jerry knows he needs a schedule on his projects. He 
should therefore understand that the vendor Project Manager needs 
a schedule as well. Just as Jerry needs to keep the schedule current, 
he should validate that the vendor’s Project Manager is keeping the 
schedule current.  
 
Scope: Jerry knows how to manage scope on his projects. He 
needs to ensure the vendor is doing the same. 
 
Communication: Jerry needs to make sure there is regular and 
effective communication between his team and the vendor 
team—just as he makes sure his team communicates effectively 
with his client.  
 
Risk: The vendor needs to be assessing and managing risks. After all, 
if the vendor identifies risks, they are also potential risks for Jerry.  
You get the pattern now. Jerry is initially unsure how to manage the vendor, 
but in essence, he manages the vendor the same way he would manage his 
own projects. He needs to validate that the vendor’s Project Manager is 
managing the work proactively. This includes staying on schedule, meeting 
milestone dates, communicating effectively, managing scope, building to ac-
ceptable levels of quality, etc. If Jerry can validate that this is happening on 
the vendor project, chances are the vendor project will complete success-
fully. On the other hand, if there are problems on the vendor project (and 
many times there are), Jerry will know about them early, which provides 
more options for solving them. In either case there is a greater likelihood 
that the project will have a successful outcome.  
 
0

C H A P T E R 
31 
Look for Risks 
Inherent to 
Your Project 
 
The last week of July was hot and muggy in Dickens. The weatherman 
predicted rain for the weekend but said that the week would bring high 
humidity and temperatures in the 90s. Pam was attending a sports con-
ference in Chicago, and Tim and I had plans for a “guy’s weekend” of 
eating pizza and watching the Cubs play a series at Cincinnati on TV. 
Tim liked watching the Cubs play, although he still had a hard time sit-
ting through nine innings of baseball. By about the fourth inning, I usu-
ally had to pull out a deck of cards or a board game. 
I had just ended a phone call with Pam when Danielle Bartlett came by 
for her 11 a.m. meeting. When I last saw her, she was dressed from 
head to toe in black for Valentine’s Day. This time she wore a colorful 
skirt and blouse and appeared to be much happier. I asked her why she 
was so happy. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Look for Risks Inherent to Your Project 
 
132  
“Well, believe it or not, I met a guy on Valentine’s Day, and we’ve been 
dating for the last five months,” she said. “I met him buying beer at the 
grocery store. Turns out we were both alone on the dreaded day, so we 
got to talking and the rest is history.” 
“Wow, that’s exciting,” I replied. “And if things work out well, your boy-
friend will never forget the details of how you guys met. After all, it was 
Valentine’s Day and there was beer involved!” I chuckled. 
“I guess you’re right,” she agreed. “Plus for me, the day is that much 
more romantic since it’s the day we met.” 
“Well, I am glad to see you so happy. Also, I believe more congratula-
tions are in order. I heard your project to implement a construction cost-
estimating package was completed without a hitch.” 
“Thanks,” Danielle smiled back. “However, I don’t know if that was a 
good move or not. My boss thanked me by asking me to manage an-
other project for the Facilities Department. Oh well, I guess that’s why 
they pay me the big bucks!” 
“Well, ‘Ms. Big Bucks,’ what have they got you doing now?” 
“The Facilities department works with a number of vendors and sub-
contractors. They think they can coordinate their work more effectively if 
they have a small intranet portal available that all the vendors can link 
into. Then everyone can get common information and coordinate sched-
ules more effectively.” 
“Great news!” I said in a purposely half-sarcastic tone. 
“Hardly,” she said, taking a seat in the chair in front of my desk. “I’ve 
been talking with the business clients and with my team members,” she 
began. “They keep telling me this is a low-risk project and I should not 
be worried. But I am very uncomfortable right now.” 
“Why are they saying this is a low-risk project?” I asked. 
“The people from Facilities know their business very well,” she replied, 
fanning herself with a file folder. “They think they can create the con-
tent for this web site portal with a minimum of effort from our IT team. 
We just need to set up the secure environment to begin with. In the 
short term, however, many of the clients are starting to work on a major 
office renovation. They are using spreadsheets and e-mail to coordinate 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
133  
work with the vendors and say anything would be better. The IT project 
team just wants to get going. They think they can overcome any prob-
lems that might pop up.” 
“That’s the kind of approach that can get you into trouble,” I said. 
“Sure, problems can be fixed, but at what cost to budget, schedule, and 
quality? What other things are making you uncomfortable?” 
“I only have a few months’ experience with new web technology and the 
two people on my team have less than me,” Danielle answered. “This is 
also my first opportunity to manage a substantial web project that re-
quires third-party access. When I did background checking, I read about 
other companies having problems with this particular release. And be-
sides that ...” 
“Whoa!” I interrupted. “Hold on a minute. I heard three or four risks in 
the last minute alone. I think you are right to be concerned about the 
overall project risk. It seems you are just having a hard time isolating 
the risks and articulating them. Let me find a risk assessment form for 
you to look at. It contains characteristics of projects that bring inherent 
risks with them. Once you have identified all your high risks, you can put 
risk plans in place to respond to them.” 
LESSON  
Sometimes it’s easy to look at a project and see risks. For instance, you may 
have a fixed deadline that will be hard to achieve. This is a risk that is easy 
to see because it’s generic. It’s not specific to your project. In fact, any pro-
ject with a tight deadline will have some risk associated with the schedule. 
These types of generic risks are called inherent risks. 
When you are identifying risks on your project, the first place to look is the 
inherent risks. Some project characteristics, by their very nature, imply 
higher risk. Another example of inherent risk is project size. A project re-
quiring 500 effort hours has less inherent risk than one requiring 5,000 ef-
fort hours, or one requiring 50,000 hours. If you knew nothing else at all 
about the project, you could say the larger project of 50,000 hours is riskier 
than the project of 500 hours. More effort hours means more people to 
manage, more budget to control, and more chances for staff turnover. In 
general, there is more of a chance for people-related problems. Increased 
complexity in any form typically means increased inherent risk. 

Look for Risks Inherent to Your Project 
 
134  
Other inherent risks include using new vendors, implementing new technol-
ogy, having vague requirements, and using an inexperienced project team. 
These are examples of risks that are not specific to a single project. They 
would increase the risks on any project.   
Let’s look at Danielle’s project. She is uneasy about the risks associated with 
it. Her client is telling her it’s no big deal, but she knows better. Based on 
the discussion, her project has the following potential risks: 
 
She and her team are inexperienced with new web technology, 
which makes for more risk than if they had experienced people on 
the team. This is an example of an inherent risk, since any project is 
riskier if the team is inexperienced. 
 
This is Danielle’s first opportunity to manage a substantial project 
that requires interaction with vendors. Her lack of experience could 
be a big risk. This is also an example of an inherent risk, since any 
major project with an inexperienced project manager will be riskier 
than one with an experienced project manager. 
 
It appears the client may not have the time to focus on this project 
because of another large initiative. There is an inherent risk when-
ever there is a question about the commitment of your client. 
Inherent risks are based on the general characteristics of a project rather 
than the specific circumstances of your project. Since they are general in na-
ture, they can be identified and placed in a checklist for all project managers 
to review. This should be the starting point for the risk identification proc-
ess. If you identify an inherent risk, determine whether it is a high risk for 
your project or something lower. If you find high risks (or perhaps medium 
risks), it does not mean that the project should not go forward. It simply 
means the project manager should focus risk plans in those areas of identi-
fied risk to minimize the potential for problems during the project. 
 

C H A P T E R 
32 
Get Sponsor  
Approval Before 
Investigating 
Large Scope 
Change Requests 
 
Mike Miller and I had not worked together for several months but we 
got together for some basketball last weekend at a park near my house. 
After the game, he mentioned some problems with a new project to in-
stall document management software at our worldwide regional head-
quarters. In fact, his team had fallen behind on the project. A very laid-
back guy, Mike didn’t appear to be too worried about the delays, but I 
asked him to drop by my office on Tuesday to discuss things. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Get Sponsor Approval Before Investigating Large Scope Change Requests 
 
136  
“Come on in Mike. Thanks for the game last weekend!” 
“Sure thing, Coach. Hope you weren’t too sore that night!” Mike was a 
bit of a bruiser, especially on the boards. Every time he missed a shot, 
he banged into me as I tried to get the rebound. It was a friendly game 
but with a lot of physical contact. I was a bit sore after our game, but I 
wasn’t about to admit it. 
“I felt great. There’s nothing like a little basketball in August to get you 
sweating. I haven’t played that hard since my college days!” I replied.  
“Wow, has it really been 30 years?” Mike said before bursting into 
laughter. 
“Wow, I really tossed you a softball there. Nice job smacking it out of 
the park!” 
‘Thanks, Coach. Just pulling your leg as always.” 
“I know. After the game you mentioned you were falling behind on your 
project. What’s the story there?” 
“Actually, we aren’t too bad right now, but we have just received a 
change request that may cause us some trouble. You know we recently 
installed document management software for the Legal department 
here in the headquarters. Now we have a new project to install a similar 
system for our other Legal departments in Tokyo and London. However, 
our London client has some off-the-wall ideas that will require making 
substantial customizations to the standard package because of some 
differences in how the London office operates.” 
“A substantial change could require replanning the entire project,” I re-
plied. “I hope you invoked your scope change procedures. This is clearly 
something not envisioned when your project started.” 
“Yes, it’s definitely a scope change,” Mike agreed. “Unfortunately, I can 
already see where this is heading. We can’t make a change of this 
magnitude and still hit our end-of-year deadlines for completing both of-
fices. So, we will spend two weeks looking at the impact to the project 
and preparing a cost estimate. I’m certain the change request will not 
be approved, but we will still be held accountable for hitting our original 
delivery date.” 
“Do your scope change procedures say anything about how much time 
you will spend on investigations?” I asked. 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
137  
“No,” Mike said. “They only say we will investigate the request to de-
termine the impact to the project in terms of effort, cost, and duration. 
The sponsor will then decide if we proceed or not.” 
“That sounds like a good beginning, but you’ve missed something,” I 
concluded. “There is another scope change request that needs to be 
taken to your sponsor.” 
Mike looked puzzled. “What other scope change?” he asked. 
“This may be hard to follow at first,” I said. “But the analysis required 
for the scope change is itself a scope change. It is a substantial piece 
of work you did not count on, and it will impact your effort and sched-
ule. You need to check with the sponsor before even undertaking the 
investigation.” 
“Wow, that’s a great insight and you are obviously right on. Thank God 
your project management is better than your basketball!” 
Walked into another one. 
LESSON  
When you create your initial project estimates, you need to include time 
and effort hours for project management activities. On most projects, the 
rule of thumb is that project management will take 15 percent of the project 
effort hours. For instance, if you estimate a project to take 1,000 effort 
hours, the time allocated for project management would be around 150 
hours, making the final estimate 1,150 effort hours. This covers the time it 
takes to manage the schedule, assign work, communicate effectively, manage 
risks, etc. The time it takes to manage the scope change process is included 
in this percentage as well.  
The 15 percent rule assumes you have typical project management activities. 
It is possible to go over that amount, depending on the type of manager you 
are. Also, some project management activities can increase that percentage. 
For instance, if your project plan is complex or if you have to replan the 
work based on resource changes, you could easily reach 20 or 25 percent. 
Scope change requests would not normally require you to exceed your pro-
ject management estimates. Typically, you just need to guide the requests 
through the scope change process. If the scope changes are approved, you 
should receive the appropriate budget and schedule adjustments. 

Get Sponsor Approval Before Investigating Large Scope Change Requests 
 
138  
Some scope change requests, however, require a substantial amount of time 
to investigate and to estimate. These relatively large scope change requests 
are not taken into account in the 15 percent project management guideline. 
For instance, let’s look again at the earlier example of a project that re-
quires 1,000 effort hours and 150 hours for project management. If you re-
ceive a major scope change request that will take 80 hours to investigate, 
you are obviously going to have trouble fitting it within your project man-
agement time. 
The project manager needs to recognize the potential impact on a project 
when a request comes in requiring scope change management. The project 
manager must also recognize the impact that the investigation associated 
with a scope change request may have on the project. If the scope change in-
vestigation is significant, the project manager must engage the sponsor very 
early in the scope change process. The sponsor needs to understand the na-
ture of the request and then decide if the value of the investigation is worth 
the impact to the project. If the sponsor agrees to the impact, they should 
provide the necessary schedule and budget relief, since this magnitude of in-
vestigation is not covered in the normal project management allocation.  
Mike is in that position today. His project management budget was not built 
to take into account a major scope change investigation like this. Since this is 
unanticipated work, the investigation itself is out of scope. Rather than 
charge ahead with the investigation, Mike should take this request to the 
sponsor immediately. In essence, he should follow his normal scope change 
management process. Unless the business value is high enough to approve 
the impact on schedule and budget, the sponsor will probably reject the re-
quest and leave the original scope intact. If Mike is correct in his view that his 
sponsor would probably not approve the software customizations, it is likely 
he will not approve the scope change investigation either. However, if the 
sponsor does approve the investigation and its impact on the project, the 
budget and schedule can be adjusted to account for this additional work. 
 

C H A P T E R 
33 
Make Sure the 
Cost of  
Collecting  
Metrics Does 
Not Exceed 
Their Value 
 
Charles Riley was an intense man with a great sense of humor who 
was known to work very long hours. His colleagues had nicknamed 
him “Chucky” after the crazy doll portrayed in the movie Child’s Play 
because of his intensity and laser beam focus. I had never met him 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Make Sure the Cost of Collecting Metrics Does Not Exceed Their Value 
 
140  
but had been told by a colleague that his reputation for being intense 
was justified. My colleague also said he was a very funny man who 
appreciated a good joke and loved telling one. I was looking forward 
to our meeting. 
He arrived right on time for our 2 p.m. meeting. 
“Come on in, Charles,” I said as I stood to shake his hand. “How are 
you today?” 
“I’m doing okay, Tom; thanks,” he said, sitting quickly. “I have to tell 
you, though, that I’m having a bit of trouble with this current project of 
mine. We’re doing some work with the Payroll department and I could 
use your help.”  
I noticed as he spoke that he held his hands firm and rigid and fre-
quently darted them out and then up and down, like he was trying to 
karate chop an imaginary board in front of him. As expected, he was 
definitely intense, although I was beginning to think his “Chucky” nick-
name more accurately referred to Chuck Norris. 
“Tell me more about this project and let’s see if I can offer any coun-
sel,” I said. 
He explained that his team was nearing the midpoint on a project to 
develop a new employee datamart for Payroll. Part of the business justi-
fication for this project was the productivity increase that would result 
from the payroll managers being able to write their own ad-hoc requests 
for information. The sponsor wanted Charles to try to measure this 
benefit. This required estimating the time it took to gather information 
today using the manual spreadsheets. This baseline information would 
be used to see whether the new datamart software was more efficient. 
“We built time into our schedule to collect these productivity metrics, 
but we only allocated time for members of the project team. We didn’t 
take into account the time needed by the payroll managers. These 
managers are complaining about having to measure and track this in-
formation. They are busy and don’t have the time to spare to collect a 
lot of extra information.”  
“What information are you trying to collect?” I asked.  
“We gave them a template to track how long it currently takes to find 
the information that they need, so that we can compare it with the 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
141  
length of time it takes with the new software. The problem is the users 
get many requests each week, and it takes extra diligence to stop and 
document what they are doing.” 
“Well, maybe they have a point. Everything we do on a project, including 
the collection of metrics, needs to make sense from a cost/benefit per-
spective,” I said. “How much time does it take to fill out the template?”  
“Some of the people are saying it takes a lot of time. But we’re not 
really sure right now,” he replied.  
“You need to start by understanding the time and cost of collecting the 
metrics. Sometimes people don’t like to do new things based on emotion 
and a resistance to change. However, sometimes the pushback is based 
on facts. It may, in fact, be disruptive to their daily routine. Your team 
will need to dig deeper to understand the effort associated with the col-
lection of this metric and then work with your sponsor to make sure the 
value received is worth this effort. I’m not suggesting it is too much time. 
I am only saying you should estimate the impact of collecting the met-
rics before you start.” 
LESSON  
Collecting meaningful data to help make business decisions is a good thing. 
In fact, most organizations would be better off if they had more information 
about how they are doing their jobs. However, the value attained by collect-
ing this information has to be analyzed in light of the costs of collecting this 
information. It’s a problem if the time and cost to collect the data is greater 
than the value of the resulting information. 
The best metrics are those easily generated by a computer. They are auto-
matically collected at a certain time, and reports can be generated from this 
data to show information in many ways. For instance, your company may tie 
costs against a project through your General Ledger System. If this is the 
case with your company, you’ll find it relatively easy to gather information 
on how you are doing against your budget. 
Project teams, however, don’t usually have the time to create automated 
systems to collect customized metrics. Even if you have the time, the cost 
to develop these custom applications is not normally worth the resulting 
value of the metrics you collect. Therefore, most of the metrics reported 
on a project are collected manually.  

Make Sure the Cost of Collecting Metrics Does Not Exceed Their Value 
 
142  
There are three questions to ask regarding those metrics requiring manual 
collection efforts. 
1. How much effort and cost does it take to gather the information? 
2. Are there less expensive, alternative metrics that will approximate 
the same result? 
3. Is the value of the knowledge gained worth the effort and cost? 
As usual, the definition of value is a matter of opinion—usually the sponsor’s. 
Charles needs to ask these questions today. His sponsor would like to get 
some hard numbers on the productivity gains associated with the new appli-
cation. Charles and his team have come up with a way to determine this 
value by comparing the time it takes using the manual processes today with 
the time that it will take to complete the same function with the new solu-
tion in place. 
Charles has a good solution, but it may come at too high a price. He and his 
team need to do some analysis into the time and cost associated with having 
the users complete the reporting templates. If the time is very short, he can 
proceed to the third question and ask the sponsor if the cost of collection is 
worth the benefit. 
On the other hand, Charles is already getting feedback that the time taken 
to collect the information is high. This does not answer the third question 
since the sponsor is the one who makes the final decision—not the payroll 
managers. The payroll managers may not think the value is there, but the 
sponsor may have other ideas. However, it would be to Charles’s benefit to 
look for some alternatives. For instance, if the payroll managers collect the 
information for two days per week, can the total time estimate be extrapo-
lated from there? Perhaps Charles can ask each person to estimate the 
amount of time he or she spends performing the activity at the end of each 
day. This would be less accurate, but the effort—and therefore the cost of 
collection—would be reduced considerably as well. 
Once Charles has more information on the cost of collecting the metrics, as 
well as some alternatives, he should ask the sponsor for feedback on how to 
proceed. It may be that the sponsor is willing to have people collect very 
accurate data because of the resulting business value. Alternatively, the 
sponsor may decide having less accurate data, but at substantially reduced 
collection costs, is the way to go. In either case, Charles will find it easier to 
collect the metrics since the sponsor made the decision on how to capture 
the data.  

C H A P T E R 
34 
Use Multiple 
Estimating 
Techniques 
 
Alex Jordan was a divorced 45-year old father of two teenage boys. I 
had limited interaction with him on the job, but when we did talk I 
found him to be shy and nervous. He seemed to be more comfortable 
behind a computer screen than in front of people. Still, he seemed like a 
nice guy and no one had ever said anything bad about the quality of his 
work. He knocked on my door around 1:30 p.m. for our meeting to dis-
cuss his project. 
Alex was responsible for a project to upgrade an old version of our 
standard database management software. First, he needed to put to-
gether an estimate of the effort required to complete the project. 
“I need to put together a high-level estimate for this project, and I am 
having a hard time figuring out where to begin. We have more than 
200 databases in our environment, and they each bring their own com-
plexities. I don’t have time to do 200 individual estimates.” 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Use Multiple Estimating Techniques 
 
144  
I asked about estimating by analogy. “Have you discussed the project 
with the people who were responsible for installing the previous release? 
If you knew how much effort they had used, you might be able to esti-
mate the effort for this one.” 
“I wish that were the case,” Alex sighed. “However, the vendor is al-
ready telling us this new release will require a substantially larger 
amount of effort compared to that required for the previous release. I 
will be talking with the people who did the last upgrade, but it doesn’t 
appear that their experience can be leveraged for this project.” 
Next, I thought about estimating based on expert opinion. “Okay, is it 
possible to find someone else who has gone through this before? Per-
haps a database vendor or one of the research analysts could provide 
some insight.” 
“I’m afraid not,” Alex sighed again. “We are one of the first companies 
to install the new release. The vendor is willing to help, since we will be 
one of their beta sites, but they don’t want to put an estimate on the 
table because they don’t know what our learning curve will be.” 
“Okay then, let’s try a modeling approach since much of the work will 
be similar once we understand exactly what is required,” I explained. 
“We can do a paper migration for a complex, medium, and simple da-
tabase and then apply some fairly easy math to estimate the total pro-
ject effort.” 
LESSON  
Many people have an intuitive sense for the effort associated with certain 
types of work. Usually it’s because they have done similar work in the past. 
However, when the work gets outside their comfort zone, they don’t know 
how to put a logical estimate together. 
Fortunately there are a number of formal techniques to estimate work. It is 
hard to say whether one approach is always better than another. It depends 
on the project and the information available. There are some very complex 
and mathematically driven estimating techniques, but there are a number of 
simpler ones as well. The following techniques can be used at a project level 
or activity level: 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
145  
 
Previous history: This is the best way to estimate work. If your 
organization keeps track of actual effort hours from previous pro-
jects, you may have information to help you estimate new work. 
Unfortunately, Mega Manufacturing, like most companies, does not 
save actual effort hours for prior projects. So, Alex will not be able 
to use this specific technique. 
 
Analogy: Even if you don’t keep actual effort hours from previous 
projects, you may still be able to leverage previous work. Analogy 
means you look for similar projects, even if you don’t capture and 
save all of the relevant details. This may just mean sending an e-mail 
to various department managers describing your project and asking 
if they know of any similar projects. If you find one, you can see if 
the project manager can estimate the effort hours on the project, 
and you can use the information as input for your estimate. Alex in-
itially tried this approach by talking to people who worked on the 
last database upgrade, but it appears their experience will not be 
applicable on this project. 
 
Ratio: Ratio is similar to analogy except you have some basis for 
comparing work with similar characteristics, but on a larger or 
smaller scale. For instance, you may find the effort required to 
complete a software installation at the Miami office was 500 hours. 
If there are twice as many people in the Chicago office, you may be 
able to deduce that the Chicago installation will take 1,000 hours. 
Actually, Alex can take advantage of this technique. He can gather 
information on the effort hours it took the prior team to complete 
the upgrade and use that as a floor for his estimate. He would not 
expect his estimate to come at a lower level than this prior, less 
complex, upgrade. He knows his project is larger, so his effort 
hours should be larger as well.  
 
Expert opinion: In many cases, you may need to go to an internal 
or external expert to get help estimating the work. Although this 
may be your first time estimating a certain piece of work, perhaps 
someone else has done it many times. Alex has tried this technique 
as well. He asked the vendor for help estimating the time to up-
grade databases because he was hoping they might have experts. 
The vendor declined to provide an estimate, since they did not have 
much experience with this release of their software. In fact, they 
would like Mega Manufacturing to be a beta site so they can gain 
experience from our project. 

Use Multiple Estimating Techniques 
 
146  
 
Work breakdown structure (WBS): The WBS approach in-
volves breaking work down into smaller pieces. You may look at a 
large piece of work and have difficulty estimating the effort required. 
However, if the work is broken into smaller pieces, the individual 
components will be easier to estimate. When you have estimated all 
the smaller pieces, add them together for the overall estimate of ef-
fort. If you have the time to create a good WBS, you will usually end 
up with a good estimate. In this case, the WBS approach is probably 
not the best one for Alex. His WBS is probably not going to be very 
complicated. The estimating complexity is based on having to repeat 
the conversions so many times.  
 
Parametric modeling: In this technique, you look for a pattern in 
the work so an algorithm or model can be used to drive the overall 
estimate. For instance, if you know you can build one mile of flat, 
one-lane highway for $1 million, you should be able to easily calcu-
late an estimate for ten miles of flat, four-lane highway ($40 million). 
I think Alex can use a parametric modeling approach for this estimate. He 
has 200 instances of database upgrades to perform. Although each of these 
instances is unique, there will obviously be many similarities as well. Alex 
needs to identify a number of unique cases he can use to categorize all 200 
database conversions. 
My recommendation to Alex is to identify a very simple and small database, 
a very complex and large database, and one in the middle. For each of these 
databases, Alex can do a detailed work breakdown analysis to estimate what 
it will take to migrate to the new release. Next, he will look at the entire 
population of databases and categorize them into similar groups of complex, 
medium, and simple. This may require some help from the other members 
of the DBA staff (it doesn’t matter whether a few are misplaced, since it will 
not materially affect the overall estimate). Then, he just needs to multiply 
the number of complex databases by the estimate required to convert one, 
and do the same with the medium and small categories. Finally, he will total 
up the time for database conversion, add the time required for project man-
agement, and add an additional percentage for estimating contingency. The 
numbers might look like the following table: 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
147  
Table 34-1. Alex’s Estimating Table 
 
Effort to Convert 
One Database 
Approximate Number of 
Databases This Size 
Total Effort 
Small 
8 
55 
440 
Medium 
15 
112 
1,680 
Large 
20 
34 
680 
Total Conversion Effort 
 
201 
2,800 
Project Management 
15% 
 
420 
Subtotal 
 
 
3,220 
Estimating Contingency 
10% 
 
322 
Total 
 
 
3,542 
When Alex is done, he will have a fairly scientific, defendable estimate for 
upgrading all 200-plus databases. He used a combination of at least three 
techniques: 
 
Expert opinion to estimate the effort for small, medium, and large 
databases. 
 
Ratio to ensure that the larger the database, the more effort it 
would take. 
 
Modeling to create and apply a model to estimate 201 conversions 
based on three estimates.  
The logic for the estimate seems sound and should be defendable if he is 
challenged.  

C H A P T E R 
35 
Keep Your 
Schedule  
Up to Date 
 
Tim started kindergarten the last week of August, and it was a very 
emotional time for all of us. Pam and I were worried he would have a 
hard time adjusting to school and we were positive he would cry when 
we dropped him off on his first day. It turned out that Pam and I cried 
more than he did! It’s tough watching your child grow up, but it had not 
really hit us how much older he was getting until we watched him run 
away happily into the schoolhouse that first day. 
I told my story to Sean Robinson on Friday when I bumped into him in 
the parking garage at the end of the day. We were both sneaking out a 
bit early to get a jump on the weekend. He was on his way to the gym 
for his nightly workout so he was changing into a pair of tennis shoes 
behind his car. I knew Sean was a bit of a health nut; he enjoyed things 
like wheat germ and carrot juice.  
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Keep Your Schedule Up to Date 
 
150  
“You sound like a really good father, Tom,” Sean said after I finished 
my story. “I’m curious, though; do you find any correlation between rais-
ing a child and managing a project?” 
“If I could find the correlation I’d make a million bucks on the book!” I 
said with a laugh. 
When the laughter died down, I asked Sean about his project. 
“I remember your project duration was about four months,” I said. 
“You’ve been working for two-and-a-half months, right? Seems like you 
should be seeing the end.” 
“You’ve got that right,” Sean said confidently. “We are about 60 per-
cent complete.” 
When a project manager gives me a percentage complete figure for any 
project, it always sets off a little alarm in my head. Percentages are 
usually a sign of some guesswork. It’s not a bad thing to give a high-level 
estimate of the percentage complete, but I decided to explore this an-
swer a little more. 
“Sixty percent complete?” I asked. “Is this a number your project man-
agement software generates?” 
“No. But it’s my estimate of where we are.” 
“Sean, when you and I met before, you had a good schedule that laid 
out the work to be completed. What’s the schedule look like now?” 
“Unfortunately it’s not in as good a shape as it needs to be. We have 
been so busy lately I haven’t even had time to update it.” 
“Well then, let me make a prediction,” I said. “I predict your project will 
miss its deadline because I don’t think you know exactly how much 
work is remaining.” 
LESSON  
Everyone has heard the old adage “Plan the work, and then work the plan.” 
It’s a clever phrase and it’s actually quite true. There is huge payback to the 
project if you first spend quality time defining the work and building a 
schedule. Defining the work ensures that you know what you are doing. 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
151  
Building the schedule allows you to understand how the work will be ac-
complished.  
The second part is important as well. You must work the plan. This means 
you must actually follow your plans, including the schedule, since it is your 
guide to completing the project. 
This is the part that many project managers forget. The “plan the work, 
work the plan” cycle must be repeated throughout the project. It makes 
sense because you never know all of the details when you start a project. 
You can’t foresee or control every possible event when the work is in pro-
gress. The overall plan, especially the schedule, will need to be modified 
over time. 
There are two reasons to update your schedule. First, you need to validate 
the completed work and compare it to the work that was scheduled for 
completion. This gives you a sense of whether you are ahead, behind, or on 
schedule. Knowing where you are against your schedule allows you to put 
corrective plans in place if necessary. If you end up trending over your 
deadline date, you have much more flexibility if you catch the trend as early 
as possible. 
The second reason for updating the schedule is to review the remaining 
work and to verify that you still understand the work required to complete 
the project. The nature of the project can change over time, especially if it is 
a large one. Changes are added, issues are resolved, new risks are identified, 
etc. The project manager must review the remaining work on a regular basis 
and ensure it is still an accurate reflection of the expected path to the com-
pletion of the project. If it’s not, the schedule can be modified to reflect a 
better path to completion. 
The duration of Sean’s work is four months, and his schedule may not need 
the rigor of a multimillion-dollar project. However, he should still update his 
schedule every week. In fact, his schedule should have a weekly, one-hour 
activity assigned for him to update the schedule. If his schedule is not kept 
up to date, he really doesn’t know if he will hit his end date and he doesn’t 
know the work that remains to complete the project. It will be pure luck if 
his original schedule still reflects a valid path to completion. 
When you ask project managers how a project is progressing, it’s very 
common for them to give you a percentage complete. They are just trying 
to provide a sense of the amount of work completed and the amount re-
maining. There is nothing wrong with that. 

Keep Your Schedule Up to Date 
 
152  
However, project managers must understand where their project is on the 
overall schedule, as well as the activities remaining to complete the work. If 
a project starts to experience problems or starts to go over its budget and 
deadline, there may be a number of people who will suddenly become in-
terested in going over the schedule in some level of detail.  
Of course, in this case, I am one of the people interested in seeing an up-to-
date schedule. When Sean said he was 60 percent complete, it was worth 
the follow-up questions from me to verify whether the estimate was based 
on fact or based on guesswork. 
In general, not updating the schedule is simply the result of a lack of disci-
pline. Sean probably thinks he is too busy on project-related activities to 
keep up on the project management activities. This is shortsighted and will 
probably end up putting his team in a time crunch when they realize, to-
wards the end of the project, just how much work remains to be com-
pleted. Sean absolutely must update his schedule and keep it up to date. He 
may or may not end up meeting his project deadline, but the best way to 
know ahead of time is to update the schedule and ensure the remaining ac-
tivities and estimates are accurate. 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
36 
Use Issue 
Management 
to Choose the 
Best of Bad  
Alternatives 
 
Lindsay Peterson stopped by my office in the first week of September to 
talk about her project to consolidate worldwide product sales for the 
Sales Department. I was trying to remember the last time I had spoken 
to her in an official capacity. After several minutes of thinking, I remem-
bered it was the beginning of the year, shortly after the birth of her 
daughter Patricia. The Petersons lived just a few miles from Pam and I, 
and we often bumped into them at the local park or at the supermarket. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Use Issue Management to Choose the Best of Bad Alternatives 
 
154  
Lindsay was a good project manager and didn’t often ask for counsel. I 
knew something big must have happened for her to visit with me. 
“Come on in Lindsay! How is Patricia doing these days?” 
“She’s doing great. Still just as tiny and cute as can be. I still can’t be-
lieve how different things are with her around.” 
“Well, just remember not to take any of this time for granted. You know, 
Pam and I took Tim to kindergarten last week. They grow up so fast.” 
“Believe me, I know. We’re trying to take every day as it comes and 
enjoy the time as much as possible. We’re definitely giving the camera 
a workout!” 
“That’s funny,” I said as Lindsay sat down in the chair in front of my 
desk. “So let’s talk about your project. Have you encountered a hurdle?” 
“That’s why I came to see you. We’ve run into a major problem,” she 
began honestly. “A new software component that is part of our system 
doesn’t work with the version of the web browser our company uses. 
The vendor component requires the new, updated browser version. We 
were initially told by our intranet support group that our company was 
going to migrate to this newer browser, but now the upgrade has been 
put on hold for at least three months.” 
“Hmmm. What have you done so far?” 
Lindsay gave me a little history. “First of all, our testers raised this as a 
problem as soon as they realized the implications, and I notified our 
sales client right away. After initially being upset, they became engaged 
in the problem resolution process and we started looking for alterna-
tives. First, we tried to get a version of the component that would run 
with the current browser, but the vendor doesn’t have one. This is a new 
product for them, and they are not supporting older browser versions. 
Then we asked about upgrading the browser for our clients earlier than 
scheduled, but we were told we couldn’t, since many other applications 
have not been tested with the new browser release yet. Then we talked 
to the client about removing the functionality the component provided, 
but they said the currency conversion calculations wouldn’t work without 
it. We’ve looked at everything we can think of, but we must be over-
looking something. What else should we be doing?” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
155  
“Have you met with your team and your client to brainstorm other al-
ternatives and impacts?” I asked. 
Lindsay was already ahead of me. “That’s what we did first. Based on 
that meeting, we identified the alternatives that I have already men-
tioned. There are others we have looked at as well.” 
I thought for a second. “Lindsay, let me give you some bad news. The 
issues management process will help facilitate problem resolution if 
there is a good alternative to apply. However, it sounds like your re-
maining options are bad ones. At this point, you need to work with your 
client to make the best of a bad situation.” 
“In that case, let me ask you a favor,” Lindsay said with a straight face. 
“Can I borrow your magic wand for a minute? I just want to make this 
project disappear.” 
LESSON  
Issues are major problems that impede the progress of a project. They are 
different from normal problems because they can’t be resolved without out-
side help. Usually, when problems arise on a project, there are some alter-
natives that will resolve the problem or help you to implement a work-
around. In many cases, a number of viable solutions are available—you just 
need to find the best one. Sometimes the resolution will end up costing 
money and time. Sometimes a solution doesn’t cost anything but the time 
you spend resolving it.  
Applying good issues management techniques will help you to identify and 
resolve the problem. There are a number of good problem solving tech-
niques that will help you to identify the cause, alternatives, and the best so-
lution. Different techniques are used depending on the nature of the prob-
lem. Some examples of problem solving techniques include: 
 
Pareto diagrams, which help identify the 80/20 rule. These help you 
focus on identifying the 20 percent of the causes that are causing 80 
percent of the problems. This is a good technique if there are 
multiple problems with many occurrences and you are trying to de-
termine the relative impact of solving each problem.    
 
“What-if” analysis, which helps you determine the impact of solving 
certain aspects of the problem. This is a good technique for complex 
problems that need to be resolved through a variety of solutions.  

Use Issue Management to Choose the Best of Bad Alternatives 
 
156  
 
Root cause analysis, which guides you through a series of “why” 
questions until you find the actual cause of the problem. This is a 
good technique if the problem is relatively straightforward and if 
you feel there is ultimately one root cause.  
Although proactively managing issues gives you the best chance to resolve 
them in a timely manner, the process doesn’t guarantee that you will always 
find a satisfactory solution. Sometimes there is just no good alternative.  
Let’s review Lindsay’s situation. First, a team member raised a problem as 
soon as it was discovered. Lindsay realized this problem was outside her 
team’s ability to resolve, so she raised it as a formal project issue. She was 
able to get her client engaged in the problem resolution process. The en-
tire team met to look at alternatives and came up with a prioritized list of 
potential solutions. 
So far, Lindsay has done everything correctly. She has followed a good issues 
management process. However, the process has not resulted in an acceptable 
resolution. Some of the potential solutions are not possible, and some of the 
solutions are not acceptable to one or more of the major stakeholders. 
Looking back, Lindsay might have helped herself out by identifying this as a 
potential risk earlier in the project. If it was identified as a risk, Lindsay 
could have monitored it much earlier and she may have taken a different 
approach to managing the risk. However, Lindsay did receive initial assur-
ances that the Sales Division would be migrating to the newer browser on 
an earlier date, so she didn’t feel it was a major risk at the time. 
At this point, Lindsay needs to take one more look at whether there are 
any other ideas to resolve this successfully. If not, she and the client have no 
alternative but to identify the best solution causing the fewest problems. 
Perhaps the worst case scenario will be to stop (or to pause) the entire 
project until the situation is resolved. There might also be options to per-
form some work manually, or to delay some features until the browser is 
upgraded. They might also try escalating the problem to senior management 
to see if they can get the priority raised on the browser upgrade.  
In any case, the client is not going to be happy with the outcome. At this 
point, the best alternative may be the one that inflicts the least pain and 
damage. It would be nice if every problem could be resolved with a satisfac-
tory solution for everyone but sometimes it just doesn’t work out that way. 
Since this is an issue, by definition it is impacting the project’s ability to pro-
ceed. So, it has to be resolved—even if there are no perfect solutions.   

C H A P T E R 
37 
Collect Metrics 
That Can Lead 
to Fundamental 
Improvements 
 
Terri Milner and Sarah York stopped by my office to discuss their new 
project. Terri and Sarah were sorority sisters in college and had recently 
been reunited because Sarah relocated to Dickens and began working 
at Mega Manufacturing in July. Terri had been with the company five 
years in June; she was generally respected for her intelligence but 
somewhat criticized for her lack of organizational skills. They were both 
very outgoing, and I was sure they were enjoying the opportunity to 
work together, even if the project assignment was out of the ordinary.  
“So you guys were in the same sorority?” I asked when they came into 
my office. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Collect Metrics That Can Lead to Fundamental Improvements 
 
158  
“That’s right,” Terri offered. “Sarah and I were both Tri-Delts and really 
good friends. We hung out together a lot in college and took the same 
classes. It’s been great to reconnect after so many years!” 
“It’s funny because Terri and I reconnected right away. It’s like we didn’t 
even skip a beat,” Sarah said, grasping Terri’s right hand. “We’re like 
sorority sisters all over again.” 
“Maybe you guys can start a new Greek system here at Mega Manu-
facturing” I said jokingly. The two look at each other very seriously and 
nod in approval. “That would be amazing!” Terri said. After a few sec-
onds of silence, they both shouted in unison. “Not!”  
“Well, why don’t you guys bring me up to speed on your project,” I of-
fered, moving the conversation back to work. 
Terri and Sarah had been asked to put metrics in place to measure the 
overall satisfaction of Manufacturing Department users who call the IT 
help desk. Terri gave me some background about the effort while Sarah 
twirled her pen in her hand.  
“Tom, you know we just installed our manufacturing software at the 
new plant,” Terri began. “We expect there will be problems whenever a 
new package goes in. However, it’s September and there still seems to 
be an unusually large number of problems on this installation. The IT 
team has resources dedicated to getting the bugs ironed out, but we 
could be dealing with a high number of support calls for many months. 
The problems are currently all over the board, and they are not sure 
what to expect next.”  
“I see,” I replied. “It sounds as if your client wants to get more informa-
tion on the impact that these problems are having on their staff.”  
“You’re right. The plant manager is not happy with the problem resolu-
tion process,” Sarah jumped in. “Since the plant is located outside the 
corporate environment, they have difficulties getting calls logged in the 
help desk. They think they are waiting too long for return calls and they 
are also not happy with the resolution of many of the problems. They 
think the same problems are occurring over and over again.”  
“What does the help desk say?” I asked, not sure whom to direct the 
question to. 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
159  
“Actually, this gets at one of the primary reasons for setting up the met-
rics process,” Terri explained. “The help desk and the IT support group 
think they are responding in a timely manner. They say they have beefed 
up the staffing to help respond to the needs of the plant. However, no 
one knows for sure because we don’t have any quantifiable numbers.” 
When people can’t agree on what is perception and what is reality, it’s 
difficult to find the causes of problems. However, in this case, it ap-
peared that everyone was simply looking to verify the facts so that 
proper decisions could be made. The help desk, IT support team, and 
the plant manager were all supportive of this effort.  
“You were asked to define a set of metrics and how best to capture 
them.” I recapped to Terri and Sarah. “What are you proposing so 
far?” Terri gave me the initial list. “We want to collect information on 
the time that it takes to reach a live person on the help desk, on the 
time that it takes until an initial follow-up call from the support group is 
received, and on the time that it takes to resolve the problem. We also 
want to collect client survey metrics on the professionalism, knowledge, 
and courtesy of the help desk and support people.”  
“That sounds like a great start,” I agreed. “But you’re missing an addi-
tional set of metrics that are even more important.” 
LESSON  
Three major groups are collaborating on this project—the help desk, IT 
support team, and the manufacturing plant manager. All of them are inter-
ested in getting more facts about the problems coming out of the new plant 
and on the process that will help to resolve them in a timely manner. They 
are all frustrated because they don’t have a common set of perceptions. The 
IT support team and the help desk say they have increased their capabilities 
to help the plant when problems arise. The plant management and staff 
think they are not getting a timely enough response. So, they are all partner-
ing now to come up with some facts to help make decisions. 
On the surface, the metrics Terri and Sarah are proposing look fine. In fact, 
there is nothing wrong with them. The metrics they have identified so far 
provide a sense of the service level of the help desk and the IT support staff. 
The plant manager wants to be sure his people’s problems are being re-
solved in a timely manner, and the proposed metrics will certainly give him 
better information in that area. 

Collect Metrics That Can Lead to Fundamental Improvements 
 
160  
The question is whether these metrics get at the root causes of the prob-
lems the client is experiencing. Terri and Sarah are not proposing any met-
rics to provide insight into the cause or causes of the problems. They are 
only proposing to measure how fast the problems are resolved once they 
have been reported to the help desk. Of course, the client wants 
problems resolved quickly, but what he really wants is not to have prob-
lems to begin with. 
Let’s assume that if valid statistics were available today, they might show 
that the client was reporting 50 problems per week, with an average reso-
lution time of 24 hours. If the focus is only on turnaround time, you can 
imagine, in time, the average response time might be lowered to 12 hours. 
This would certainly be a better situation for the client. However, if there 
are still 50 problems reported per week, the client will continue to be dis-
satisfied. 
Likewise, if the help desk and IT support teams are courteous and profes-
sional, they would both be ranked highly in those client satisfaction metrics. 
If, however, the plant continues to report 50 problems per week, will the 
plant staff really be more satisfied? Probably not. 
From the client’s perspective, other metrics should be gathered that will 
help analyze the problems—not just the problem response. Some examples 
include: 
 
The number of problems reported per day and per week. 
 
The number of problems identical to problems previously reported. 
 
The types of problems grouped into categories, for further root 
cause or Pareto analysis. 
 
The severity of the problems (focus on eliminating major problems, 
then medium, then minor). 
 
The impact of the problems, in terms of lost hours. 
My advice to Terri and Sarah is to keep the metrics they are proposing to 
collect, but also to talk to the three groups about adding more metrics that 
get to causes and impacts. There is an old saying, “What gets measured gets 
done.” If Terri and Sarah focus exclusively on the response times, the ten-
dency will be for everyone to focus exclusively in that area. Although impor-
tant, their goal should be to reduce the number of problems, the severity of 
the problems, and the impact of the problems to the client. These goals will 
require different metrics.   
 

C H A P T E R 
38 
Evaluate All 
Risk Response 
Options in the 
Risk Plan 
 
A cold chill was starting to blow into Dickens; the fall season was start-
ing to take shape. The leaves on the oak trees outside my office window 
were beginning to turn orange and red. Short-sleeve shirts were being 
replaced by light turtlenecks and long-sleeve sweaters. The NFL was al-
ready in its third week. Pam was starting to wonder what costume to 
buy Tim for Halloween. It was just the third week of September, but 
people’s minds were starting to turn to thoughts of Thanksgiving, 
Christmas, and winter. John Santos was no exception. He asked me to 
come by his office on Wednesday afternoon around 3 p.m. to provide 
final feedback on his project charter. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Evaluate All Risk Response Options in the Risk Plan 
 
162  
“Tom, I can’t believe I saw a store putting up Christmas decorations last 
night. I tell you, Christmas comes earlier and earlier every year,” he said 
with a chuckle as I came into his office. 
I pulled out my iPad and pretended to look busy for a few moments. 
“Actually, it says here Christmas is December 25th again this year,” I 
replied with a straight face. After a few seconds I smiled and we both 
laughed. We talked for a few more minutes about gift ideas for our kids 
before discussing work. 
John’s project charter was, all in all, a pretty good document, although I 
did want to talk to him about his risk plan. He was responsible for a 
project involving a major office move at our headquarters. A couple of 
business units had recently reorganized, and the inevitable follow-up had 
people moving to different offices and floors to reflect the new organiza-
tion charts. 
“John, I see you have identified a number of risks to the project,” I 
noted. “For each risk, you have also identified a plan to try to eliminate 
it. However, the move is not for three months. Given the timeline, I 
wonder whether there might be more sensible alternatives to some of 
your risk plans.” 
“There are a number of potential risks with a project this large,” John 
replied. “The moving logistics are complex, and everything needs to 
happen in a sequence. If one move gets delayed, the entire schedule 
gets pushed back.” 
“I understand how interdependent everything is,” I sympathized. “How-
ever, let’s look at some of the risk plans. For instance, your moving 
company may end up on strike, so you are proposing engaging another 
company instead. This is a new company you have not used before.” 
“Yes,” John agreed. “If our standard moving contractor is on strike, we 
need to have an alternative in place.” 
“You are also planning for a high volume of calls from people who 
need some minor tweaking after the move,” I noted. “You plan to 
have your staff work paid overtime on nights and weekends to deal 
with this demand.” 
John spoke proudly. “This may cost us a bunch of overtime pay, but we 
are going to keep our service level up by responding to all requests 
within 48 hours.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
163  
“I see where you’re going with your risk plans,” I summed up. “How-
ever, there are a number of responses to perceived risks. You are trying 
to mitigate, or eliminate each risk. Let’s discuss some alternatives and 
see if they are applicable instead.” 
LESSON  
Since risks are generally perceived as bad, it makes sense that the first in-
stinct of a project manager would be to eliminate them. Mitigation is a risk 
response that tries to minimize the probability of a risk occurring (down to 
0 percent, which would eliminate it entirely) or to minimize the impact of 
the risk on your project (down to zero impact, which would make the risk 
irrelevant). However, there are a number of other options for responding 
to a risk, including: 
 
Leave it: This option is appropriate if you recognize the risk but 
don’t have any practical way to deal with it. This is also a good op-
tion if the cost of managing the risk is greater than the risk impact 
on your project.  
 
Monitor the risk: This is a good option if the risk event is quite a 
ways in the future. You may have enough time to monitor the risk 
to see if it will go away on its own. The project manager can create 
a risk plan later when the risk event is closer if the probability and 
impact of the risk are still too high. 
 
Avoid the risk: You may be able to isolate and avoid the condition 
causing the risk. For instance, if there is risk associated with a new 
model of equipment, you may decide to use the older equipment 
model. In this case, the entire risk was avoided by changing the na-
ture of the project. 
 
Move the risk: In some instances, the responsibility for managing a 
risk can be removed from the project by assigning the risk to an-
other entity or third party. For example, you may have risk associ-
ated with the lack of a key skill in your organization. You may out-
source this work to a third party. The risk is still there but it is now 
the responsibility of the third party. 
Notice that none of these options include ignoring the risk. Even the option 
to leave the risk is the result of a conscious decision. 

Evaluate All Risk Response Options in the Risk Plan 
 
164  
In John’s case, he is choosing to mitigate all of the identified risks. However, 
I asked him to be open to other options as well. For instance, let’s look at 
the risk of a strike at the moving contractor. John has three months until 
the move. Perhaps he should not make any major changes now, such as de-
veloping a business relationship with a new company. Perhaps the best ap-
proach is to monitor this risk for the next 30 days. If the labor contract is 
renewed, he won’t need to make any changes at all. If a strike still seems 
imminent, then he’ll still have two months to put new plans into place. 
There is also risk associated with using a new vendor on an important move 
like this. John probably doesn’t want to change moving contractors unless 
absolutely necessary. 
John is also proposing heavy overtime so his service level will not drop after 
the move is complete. This may be the best approach, but has he looked at 
alternatives? He should talk to his manager and major clients about another 
option—leaving the risk alone. After a major move, people understand 
there is going to be some disruption in service levels. He may be able to re-
set expectations for a short-term time frame. For instance, perhaps turn-
around time for problems will be five days instead of two days. This may be 
a situation the company can live with and may not require him to incur the 
expense of paid overtime. 
John’s risk plan is not wrong. In fact, these may be the best alternatives 
given what he knows today. However, a number of options are available for 
risk response. In general, risk response is based on the probability of the 
risk occurring, the impact to the project, and other factors such as the time 
frame when the risk event may occur. The project manager should look at 
all the appropriate risk response options, and the risk plan should be evalu-
ated periodically to ensure it continue to address each risk appropriately. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
39 
Manage Client 
Expectations 
 
My workload was unusually slow during the last week of September, so 
I decided to proactively check in with several project managers to see if 
I could offer any assistance. My first meeting was with Nikki Hooper; 
she was working with her client to update an application on how com-
missions were paid. Nikki was a mother of three with short blonde hair 
and green eyes. An extremely conservative woman, Nikki was active on 
her church board as well as her school’s Parent Teacher Association. 
This was my first interaction with her, and I could tell she was skeptical 
about whether I could offer any real advice or help. Like many people I 
had worked with in my role as project management advisor, she also 
appeared nervous, thinking that my true function was to assess her per-
formance and competence as a project manager and to determine 
whether she was someone worth keeping at Mega Manufacturing. I ad-
dressed this misconception first. 
“You know, Nikki, a lot of people think my job is to evaluate project 
managers,” I began. “This could not be further from the truth. I was 
brought in to help project managers like you do their job more profes-
sionally and more effectively.” 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Manage Client Expectations 
 
166  
“Thanks for saying that up front, Tom,” she replied. “I was a bit nervous 
after receiving your call because I thought perhaps you had heard some-
thing bad about my project. I actually thought my client might have 
called to complain.” 
“Not at all. But why is your client complaining? Why don’t you fill me in 
and let’s see if I can help.” 
“Well, I am really having a problem right now trying to manage client 
expectations,” she began. “Our business clients aren’t being realistic. 
They want to completely automate the commission payment process 
and allow the salespeople to view information through the Web. We 
can’t do everything they want because we are dealing with enhance-
ments to a legacy system with a lot of older technology. We would have 
to completely rewrite it if we did everything they want. I would love to 
hear your advice on how to better manage their expectations.” 
“Managing expectations can be tough,” I replied, still trying to put her 
at ease. “But the place to start is the project charter. Did you write one 
for this project?” 
“No, we didn’t,” she said. “We didn’t think we needed one for an en-
hancement.” 
“How about business requirements?” I asked. “Do you have anything 
formally approved coming out of your analysis?” 
“We met with the clients to gather their requirements, but we don’t 
have much formally documented.” 
I paused for a few seconds. “Well, you asked me for advice on how to 
better manage the expectations of your client,” I said. “The problem is 
you and your client never had an agreement on what your project was 
going to produce. You can’t manage expectations effectively unless you 
have common expectations to begin with.” 
LESSON  
Managing expectations is one of the biggest challenges facing project manag-
ers. It seems as if your client always wants more than you can deliver—for 
less cost and effort than it really takes. This mismatch of expectations is one 
of the primary reasons projects don’t end successfully. In many cases, the 
project team has one level of expectations for what the project will produce, 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
167  
but the sponsor and clients have another. The challenge for the project man-
ager is to keep the project team expectations synchronized with the major 
stakeholders. 
If you were to create a process for managing client expectations on a pro-
ject, it would look something like this: 
 
Establish an agreement: This is probably the most overlooked 
yet obvious part of the process. It is difficult or impossible to man-
age client expectations if you don’t have an agreement to begin 
with. The agreement should be with the sponsor. For instance, this 
happens with the sponsor approval of the Project Charter and busi-
ness requirements.  
 
Manage change: Once an agreement is reached, changes should 
be managed through the change management process. This ensures 
the sponsor approves all changes and helps to keep expectations in 
line. 
 
Deliver against the expectations: Again, this may seem obvious. 
However, once an agreement is reached, you need to make sure 
you deliver the work as expected. 
 
Communicate proactively: Communicate proactively through 
the status reporting process or as part of a broader Communication 
Plan. This helps the sponsor and stakeholders keep up to date on 
progress, issues, risks, etc. 
 
Periodically assess performance: The project manager needs to 
monitor the work to ensure that the client commitments are met. If 
there is a drift from the prior commitments, the project manager 
needs to do everything in his power to get back within expecta-
tions.  
 
Reset expectations if necessary: If the project manager feels the 
team is unlikely to meet the expectations, immediate steps should 
be taken to determine a new course of action and reset expecta-
tions with a modified agreement. 
 
Complete the agreement: Review the completed work with the 
client to ensure the terms of the agreement have been fully met. If 
not, negotiate what will be required to fulfill the agreement. 
It’s no wonder Nikki is having trouble keeping client expectations in line with 
hers. After all, she never had a formal agreement with the client on the defi-
nition of the work (scope, objectives, risk, deliverables, etc.) to begin with. 
Nor did she set a common expectation as to the features and functions that 

Manage Client Expectations 
 
168  
would be delivered (business requirements). It’s not surprising, then, that the 
client has “unrealistic” expectations as to what will be delivered. 
Nikki won’t be able to manage expectations effectively until she gains a 
common understanding of the work with her client. Since the project is well 
underway, it’s probably too late to go all the way back to the Project Char-
ter. However, she can go back and document the business requirements. 
Once the requirements are on the table, she can provide effort and cost es-
timates. When the sponsor sees that some of the requirements are prohibi-
tively expensive to implement, he or she should agree to concentrate on 
those areas of the project that offer reasonable and cost-effective delivery. 
Until then, Nikki will always have a hard time managing the work because 
she has no agreement on what will be delivered. 
 

C H A P T E R 
40 
Use Milestones 
to Track  
Overall  
Progress 
 
The first week of October brought cold winds and rain to Dickens—as 
well as numerous calls and e-mails for project management advice. I 
knew the next few months leading up to the end of the year would be 
busy as my calendar was filling up fast. 
I had just returned from a set of back-to-back-to-back-to-back meetings 
when I received a panicked phone call from Jerry asking me if I could 
spare 20 minutes to swing by the large conference room on the third 
floor at the end of the day. It required rescheduling a late meeting with 
Alex, but I told Jerry I could make it. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Use Milestones to Track Overall Progress 
 
170  
As I approached the conference room at 5 p.m., I saw Jerry outside the 
main door. 
“Hey, Jerry. What’s up?” I asked. 
“Tom, I know you hate surprises, but happy birthday!” 
Just then the conference room door swung open to reveal several people 
in birthday hats and a big cake on the conference table. I wasn’t sure if 
anyone knew it was my 40th birthday, but apparently the word had got-
ten out. Mega Manufacturing is a big company, so birthdays are tradi-
tionally celebrated internally by team members. Since I was really just a 
team of one, I assumed I wouldn’t be having a birthday celebration. It 
was nice to know that people remembered me. I blew out the candles 
on the cake and grabbed the first piece. 
After several minutes of socializing, I noticed Alex in the back corner 
eating a piece of cake. I went over to see him. 
“Hey Alex! I feel bad about canceling our appointment for a social func-
tion. I honestly thought Jerry was in trouble on his project.” 
“No need to explain, Tom. Jerry called me early this morning and let me 
in on the secret. If you don’t mind, perhaps we can still talk briefly 
about my project. I could use your help with something.” 
“Why don’t you update me on your project? How’s it going?” 
“Well, I think we are in pretty good shape,” he said. “We have a num-
ber of changes to make to the database environment, but the work is 
not necessarily complex. It’s just that we have a couple hundred data-
bases to upgrade and it takes time.” 
“It sounds like a challenge,” I agreed. “You said you thought you were in 
good shape. Does that mean you are on schedule or ahead of schedule?” 
“I think we are on target,” he said with a slight hesitation. “But, to be 
honest, I would have a hard time telling you precisely. We have many of 
our database administrators working on this project full time or part 
time. If one of them has some free time, they are jumping ahead to the 
next database upgrade. If other problems come up, they may not work 
on the upgrade for a number of days. So, some of them are ahead of 
schedule and some are behind. It’s hard to figure out exactly where we 
are at any single point in time.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
171  
We talked for a few minutes about how he was tracking accomplish-
ments. I didn’t have a major concern with how Alex was running the 
project, but I thought it was a problem that he was unable to note ex-
actly where he stood against his schedule. 
“Let’s talk some more about your schedule” I said to Alex. “It seems like 
you have planned the project well, and it appears you are assigning 
work effectively. I think you need to set up some schedule milestones so 
you can better judge how your project is doing against your plan.” 
LESSON  
Milestones are inserted into the schedule to signify the completion of a ma-
jor deliverable or a major set of deliverables. They have zero duration. That 
is, they do not specifically require any work or effort to complete. How-
ever, they signify that the project has completed some piece of work. 
Milestones are especially of interest to managers and sponsors because they 
can provide a high-level snapshot of how you are tracking against your pro-
ject schedule. For instance, you may add a milestone at the end of the analy-
sis phase. Your sponsor and other stakeholders can track the status of the 
project against the milestone date without needing to understand the more 
detailed activities. So if the analysis phase milestone is missed, they will 
know that the work leading up to that milestone was not completed on 
time. They don’t need to know the details. They can tell the project is 
trending behind schedule. On the other hand, if you hit your milestone date, 
the assumption is the work is on track from a schedule perspective. 
Milestones also provide the opportunity for a project management check-
point. At every milestone, project managers can do the following: 
 
Evaluate previously identified risks to ensure they are being man-
aged well. 
 
Look for new risks to the project. 
 
Verify that they have business commitment to continue. 
 
Check whether project assumptions are still valid. 
 
Double-check the budget and deadline estimates to determine if 
they are still achievable. 
After validating that the prior work is complete and the project is ready to 
proceed, you can plunge ahead with the next major part of the project. 

Use Milestones to Track Overall Progress 
 
172  
Usually when you are managing a project, many (or most) of the activities 
follow a sequential pattern. For example, major analysis is followed by de-
sign, which is typically followed by construction. In most cases, the project 
manager can insert a milestone at the end of each of these project phases. 
However, on Alex’s project, the activities are scheduled more arbitrarily 
and so don’t necessarily follow a logical pattern. The timing of the work is 
based as much on team member availability as anything else. 
In spite of the scheduling difficulty, or perhaps because of it, Alex needs 
some milestones to gauge his progress. For example, he could set up mile-
stones at the completion of the database upgrades for each business unit or 
after every 25 databases are converted. 
The funny thing about Alex’s project is that he has done a very good job of 
building his schedule and is managing it well. In spite of this, he is nervous 
about whether he really understands if he is ahead of or behind schedule. 
This is always a cause for concern because project managers should always 
know how they are trending against their schedules. If they don’t, there is 
a good chance they could be behind schedule and not realize it until too 
late. Establishing milestones will allow Alex to focus on how the work is 
progressing. 
In a simplistic sense, when a milestone arrives, Alex can see whether all the 
work up to that point is complete. If it is, he is on or ahead of schedule. If 
some work is ahead of schedule and some behind schedule (which sounds 
like what is happening on Alex’s project), he can shift available resources to 
overdue work so the project can catch up with the planned schedule. At 
that point, he can confirm that all the work required up to that milestone is 
completed. He should also have some sense of whether the project is ahead 
of or behind schedule based on knowing the date the milestone was sched-
uled to be completed, the date it actually was completed, and the amount of 
work (if any) that has been completed ahead of schedule based on the mile-
stone date. 
Establishing milestones will provide Alex with checkpoints he can use to 
validate whether his project is progressing well against the schedule or 
whether corrective action is required. 
 

C H A P T E R 
41 
Catch Errors  
as Early as 
Possible 
 
Sean Robinson scheduled another meeting with me for the second week 
of October, and I was curious to see how he was doing on his project to 
track response rates for direct mail campaigns. The last time I saw him 
was in the parking lot after work as he was heading to the gym. When I 
saw him this morning in his office, it was clear he had just come from 
the gym—his gym bag was on the floor next to his desk and he had 
that “just showered” look. I didn’t know much about Sean, but I knew 
he took his physical well-being very seriously. 
“How many times do you work out a day, Sean?” I asked in a teasing 
tone as I put my coffee mug down on the corner of his desk.  
“Usually just once—either in the morning or after work. If I’m really 
motivated, I go both times!” 
“Wow, that sounds pretty intense. I’m lucky to get in one workout every 
other day.” 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Catch Errors as Early as Possible 
 
174  
“Well, it just takes discipline, Tom. I’d be happy to meet you in the gym 
every day, either before or after work. We can work out together, and 
I’ll get you started on a diet and exercise program that will make you 
feel great!” 
I knew I was getting in over my head. “I’m not sure I can commit the 
time right now, but I’ll get back to you on it,” I replied, trying not to 
sound too uninterested. “Tell you what, let’s exercise our brains a bit 
this morning.” 
We both chuckled. We last spoke a month or two ago, so if Sean was 
on track, his project should be winding down about now. 
“We’re getting to the end,” Sean said, shifting his weight. “But the user 
acceptance testing is taking longer than expected. I guess that’s good 
and bad. It’s bad that it is taking more time than expected, but on the 
positive side, the more errors we catch in testing, the higher the quality 
of the final solution.” 
Sean’s mention of the “higher quality of the final solution” intrigued me.  
“What kind of errors are you catching?” I asked. 
“Our users are being very thorough—they are catching all kinds of er-
rors. Most are in the interfaces between the various subsystems. Some 
are programming logic errors. A couple of the worst problems were 
caused by some screw-ups in the original requirements. Those have 
taken quite a bit of time to correct.” Sean began stretching his legs. 
“It’s great that your users are catching all these errors. But did you per-
form any quality reviews or get any user signoffs on your work as it was 
originally being completed?” 
“No, we didn’t,” Sean said, chuckling. “We probably should have done 
more things like that. But it seemed like we didn’t have the time.” 
“It seems like you do have the time,” I countered. “You’re just spending 
it now instead of earlier in the project. In fact, I’ll bet you are spending 
more time fixing problems now than you would have spent avoiding 
them earlier.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
175  
LESSON  
Everyone has heard the sarcastic saying, “You don’t have time to do it 
right, but you do have time to do it twice.” This means the incremental 
time required to validate that the work is done correctly the first time is 
sacrificed, and you are then forced to spend extra time on rework and fix-
ing problems at the end of the project. In many cases, your familiarity with 
the project lifecycle has reached the point where you think you can rush 
through many activities in the project. There is a sense that you can get 
everything right the first time. Unfortunately, it doesn’t usually happen. The 
errors are discovered. It is just that they are discovered later in the project 
instead of earlier. 
There are two main philosophies behind project quality management: define 
good work processes that reduce the number of errors to begin with, and 
find leftover errors as early as possible after they are introduced.  
The first aspect of building better processes involves activities like training, 
checklists for processes, following standard policies, and process improve-
ment. These are all investments in helping the team members create deliv-
erables correctly the first time. These types of activities are known as qual-
ity assurance, and this work focuses on preventing errors in the first place. If 
you train your team, for instance, in how to apply a new technology, the 
team should be able to use the new technology correctly and with a mini-
mum of errors. 
The second aspect of finding errors as early as possible includes activities 
like inspections, signoffs, and walkthroughs. For instance, misunderstandings 
and mistakes in deliverable definitions need to be discovered in the planning 
process. One way to avoid misunderstandings is to make sure the sponsor 
signs and approves the Project Charter. Likewise, errors in business logic 
need to be caught in the business requirements phase. Design errors need 
to be caught in the design phase, and errors in constructing a solution need 
to be identified when the solution is constructed. This work is referred to 
as quality control and it requires some form of inspection to find errors in 
the solution after the fact. 
The project manager should be aware that, in almost all cases, a good qual-
ity management process requires more effort hours and cost at the begin-
ning of the project. However, these costs are more than offset by a reduc-
tion in the time needed to correct errors later in the project, or worse, 
when the solution goes live. 

Catch Errors as Early as Possible 
 
176  
The fact that Sean is catching so many errors at the end of the project is not 
a sign of a good quality solution. In fact, it may be an indicator of a lack of 
quality in the process used to build the solution. It would have been much 
less costly for Sean’s team to have spotted problems with the business re-
quirements during the analysis phase of the project, rather than having to fix 
the problems during user acceptance testing. These errors in requirements 
could have been uncovered simply by having the client formally approve the 
requirements. This is not to say the requirements would have then been 
perfect. It is always possible the client may have missed some of the impor-
tant requirements needed for the project. However, having to formally ap-
prove the requirements would have forced the client to review this infor-
mation more diligently. It would also have allowed Sean to invoke scope 
change management when new requirements came up late in the project. 
The other errors Sean mentions have to do with the testing process. The 
purpose of the client acceptance test is simply to validate that the solution 
works as expected. This is not the time to be catching interface errors and 
programming errors. Based on the fact that his users are finding these types 
of errors, it appears that both the programming process and the subsequent 
testing process had flaws. These types of errors should have been caught 
earlier and are a sign that the testing process was not rigorous enough. 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
42 
Gain Sponsor 
Approval for 
Scope Changes 
Requiring Budget 
and Deadline 
Deviation 
 
Mega Manufacturing offered its employees many great perks, but the 
one I enjoyed most was the cafeteria. The company contracted a cater-
ing firm in Chicago called Cool Eats to run the cafeteria, and the selec-
tion was stupendous. Every day you could pick items from a vast salad 
bar, deli, Chinese wok, American grill, and fruit stand. There was also an 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Gain Sponsor Approval for Scope Changes Requiring Budget and 
Deadline Deviation 
 
178  
ice cream bar, which I didn’t visit frequently—but every now and again 
it hit the spot. Usually, the pressures of work meant that I just grabbed 
a quick snack at my desk, but I would like to eat in the cafeteria more 
often. Today I was doing just that. I was having lunch with Danielle 
Bartlett. I brought my cheeseburger and fries over to a table and Dan-
ielle joined me.  
Danielle was finishing up her second project since I first met her on Val-
entine’s Day. Her latest project was to establish an intranet portal web 
site that could be used to communicate more effectively between the 
Facilities Department and its numerous vendors. 
“Looks good,” Danielle said, eyeing my burger and fries as she set her 
tray down. “Let me grab a soda and I’ll be right back.” Danielle had or-
dered a small salad and chicken soup, so I knew she must either be eat-
ing healthy or calming her stomach. 
“Danielle, your lunch suggests your stomach might be bothering you. Are 
you stressed out about something?” 
“You are very wise, Tom,” she said with a smile. She said her project 
was going over budget and past its estimated end date. Her sponsor 
had just found out and was not happy. 
“Frankly, I am a little surprised,” she began, sipping her soup. “I thought 
I was managing the project well. We developed a set of requirements 
for the installation of the estimating package, but as the project pro-
gressed, the users had new requirements they had forgotten to include 
in the initial stages of analysis. Whenever this happened, I initiated 
standard scope change management procedures.” 
“Tell me what your scope change procedures were,” I replied. “Perhaps 
they were missing some important piece.” 
Danielle described the process to me. “Whenever a scope change re-
quest was made, we documented it and created a cost estimate. Then 
we took the change to the client and verified whether the business 
benefit of the change was worth the cost and effort. If she said to go 
ahead, we proceeded. In fact, I have everything documented.” 
“You’ll need to explain to me why your sponsor is unhappy,” I said. “If 
you invoked scope change management, and the change was approved, 
the impact to the project should have been known.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
179  
“The sponsor says she didn’t approve the changes and she was not 
aware that the project was going over budget,” she replied. “I guess we 
didn’t do a good enough job of managing her expectations.” 
Now I was really confused. “I don’t understand. I thought you said the 
sponsor approved all the scope changes?” 
“No, I said the client approved the changes,” she explained. “When a 
user requested a change, we always went to their manager for ap-
proval. I thought if a manager approved the work, we should go ahead.” 
“Now I see,” I concluded. “You have made the common mistake of not 
understanding the full role of the sponsor. There may be many people 
who are users and stakeholders, but the only person who can approve a 
scope change is the sponsor.” 
“I guess that makes sense,” she said, finishing her soup. 
“You know, Danielle, my mom always used to say that ice cream is 
good for settling your stomach. How about I buy you a scoop?” 
“You read my mind again,” she replied. “My mom says that ice cream is 
good for the soul. We definitely need to heed our mothers’ advice today!” 
LESSON  
There are many people who have an interest in your project. The clients 
are the people or the organization(s) that receive the benefits delivered by 
the project. These people or organizations may also be called customers. 
The end users are the people in the client organization who will actually use 
the products produced from the project. Not all projects have end users. 
There are also many other stakeholders who have an interest in your pro-
ject but don’t specifically belong to the client organization. And, of course, 
there is the sponsor. The sponsor is the specific person that owns the pro-
ject and obtained the project funding. 
It is natural for the project team to want to please their clients. However, 
this desire to be “client focused” often leads them to forget the main client 
of the project. The team most often works with the end users and their 
managers. The end users and their managers are typically the people who 
provide requirements, answer questions, and validate that the solution is 
complete and correct. The end users are the people who will ultimately live 
with the final solution. Since these are the people the project team deals 

Gain Sponsor Approval for Scope Changes Requiring Budget and 
Deadline Deviation 
 
180  
with the most, they are often considered to be the ultimate client. How-
ever, they are really the “little c” client. 
When it comes to declaring success or failure, and when it comes to manag-
ing expectations, the sponsor matters most. And when you have to con-
sider changing the budget or delivery date, the sponsor is the person with 
the power. The sponsor is the “big C” Client.  
Danielle thought she had a good scope change management process for her 
project. She was 
1. Receiving scope change requests from end users; 
2. Documenting the requests; 
3. Estimating the impact of the changes to the project; and 
4. Taking them to the client manager for approval. 
In reality, the client manager was just verifying whether the scope change 
provided a benefit. The client manager was not in a position to decide the 
business value by comparing the benefit of the change with the impact to 
the project.  
All of this may have slipped through if the project budget and deadline had 
not been compromised. However, these lower-level managers can’t make 
decisions requiring budget and deadline changes. They don’t have authority 
to add to the project budget. In these instances, only the sponsor can make 
the decisions. Of course, the sponsor may delegate this role to another per-
son for day-to-day items. In that case, the sponsor designee would be the 
only one to make these types of decisions. 
Danielle and I had a good discussion on this point. She was trying to follow a 
good scope change process. However, she was not going to the right per-
son to make decisions that had an impact on the budget or deadline. The 
client manager may have thought the changes were important, but she didn’t 
have the authority to approve additional time or budget. The sponsor was 
the one to make those decisions. Now Danielle finds herself in an uncom-
fortable position. In her desire to be client focused, she has upset the client 
that matters most—the project sponsor. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
43 
Be Proactive  
to Accelerate 
the Project 
Schedule 
 
Lindsay Peterson stops by my office on Halloween day to discuss her 
project to consolidate worldwide sales data for the Sales Department. I 
hardly recognize her when she steps into my office. She is wearing a 
white jumpsuit, big gold glasses, and a fake wig. Mega Manufacturing 
encourages its employees to come dressed in costumes for Halloween, 
and Lindsay’s is one of the best—a female Elvis! 
“Boy, it’s tough to imagine the teenagers swooning over you,” I joke as 
she comes in and sits down. 
“Very funny, Tom. Tell me, who exactly are you supposed to be?” 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Be Proactive to Accelerate the Project Schedule 
 
182  
I am wearing a regular suit and tie, but I have an old reporter’s hat on, 
with glasses and an exaggerated part in my hair. I stand up to provide a 
clearer clue as to my identity. I have purposely left the middle buttons 
on my dress shirt undone, and I pull them aside to show Lindsay my 
blue T-shirt with a large “S” printed on it. 
“Ah, Clark Kent. Very clever.” 
“What do you mean?” I say in a deadpan voice. “I’m not wearing a cos-
tume today.” We both laugh. 
“Tell me, ‘King,’ what’s got you in Heartbreak Hotel on your project?” 
“Well, we recently came up with a workaround to replace some web 
reporting software that wouldn’t work with our browser,” Lindsay starts. 
“We are now behind schedule and I want to get some tips from you on 
things we can do to catch up.” 
“Have you tried anything so far?” I ask. 
“We have assigned a couple of new part-time people to the project,” 
Lindsay notes. “But they aren’t having much effect. At this point, we will 
probably end up missing our deadline. However, I want to prepare a 
new schedule to see how close we can get to the original date.” 
“Okay,” I agree, standing up to write on the whiteboard. “First, let’s 
verify that your new part-time resources are working on the right activi-
ties. Then let’s list a number of techniques that will help to accelerate 
the schedule.” 
LESSON  
The project manager starts off a project with a schedule. However, it seems 
that projects never behave exactly as planned and soon you need to make 
adjustments. Some activities end late and new ones come along that you 
didn’t account for. If you’re lucky, some activities complete early and there’s 
some built-in contingency to help absorb inaccurate estimates. However, if 
you are unlucky (and this seems to be the case more often than not) you 
end up in a situation where you start trending over your deadline. 
The project manager must always understand the actual progress of the 
project compared to the baseline schedule. (“Baseline” refers to the original 
approved schedule plus any approved changes.) The project manager must 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
183  
also know what still needs to be done to complete the project. This will al-
low you to catch variances, risks, and problems as early as possible. For ex-
ample, if you find you are trending four weeks behind schedule, it’s better to 
understand this with six months to go rather than with two months to go. 
The earlier you recognize the problem, the more flexibility you have to re-
solve the situation. 
If you realize you are trending past your deadline, you must try to under-
stand the cause(s). If you don’t understand the cause of the schedule prob-
lem, you may put a plan in place that fails because the problem continues to 
occur. Some project managers realize they are trending over their deadline 
date and immediately ask for more time. However, this is not the first op-
tion. If anything, this should be the last option. Instead, once you understand 
the cause of the schedule delay, you need to put a plan in place to get back 
on schedule. If you can’t meet your committed deadline, you should strive 
to complete the work as close to the original deadline as possible. 
The following list contains examples of techniques that can be applied to get 
back on schedule. This list is not in order of priority. Many of the techniques 
will be viable in certain situations. A project manager should be familiar with 
many schedule management techniques so that he can apply the best tech-
niques based on the situation and the cause of the problem. Some of these 
techniques may require additional funding, but that may be a viable option if 
the deadline date is more important than the budget. 
 
Work overtime: Everyone hates it, but one way to get back on 
schedule is overtime. If people work more hours, they can get more 
work done in the same amount of calendar time. Overtime may be 
the best option if you are close to the end of the project and just 
need a final push to get everything done on schedule (tip: consider 
giving people time off after the project is completed). If you are still 
early in the project, there are probably other options that are more 
effective. Note that there may be cost implications to this option if 
you need to have contract resources or other chargeable team 
members work overtime. 
 
Reallocate resources onto the critical path: The project man-
ager must understand the activities on the critical path. After all, if 
the project is trending over deadline, by definition the critical path is 
late. Once the critical path is understood, you should see if re-
sources can be moved from other activities to help the activities on 
the critical path. It is possible that re-allocating people within the 
team may cause their original activities to be delayed. However, 

Be Proactive to Accelerate the Project Schedule 
 
184  
since these activities are off the critical path, they will have some 
slack. Remember, the activities on the critical path are key. You may 
have the option to assign a more productive resource to the critical 
path activities, while reassigning a less-productive resource to non-
critical path activities. Be careful though—delaying some work off 
the critical path may end up changing the critical path. Always 
double-check the critical path each time you change the schedule.  
Lindsay should explore this option in more detail. She has ap-
plied two part-time resources to the project with minimal results. 
It’s possible they were assigned activities off the critical path. It is 
also possible they worked on the critical path, but as the path was 
shortened, a new critical path emerged. 
 
Double-check all dependencies: Schedule dependencies repre-
sent activities that must be executed in a certain order. Invalid de-
pendencies make it appear activities must be performed sequen-
tially, when they can really be done in parallel. For instance, if you 
are building a house, you can’t start putting up the frame until the 
foundation is poured and dried. If you are trending over your dead-
line, these dependencies should be revalidated, since it is possible 
the schedule is being lengthened by unnecessary dependencies be-
tween activities. 
 
Check time-constrained activities: Time-constrained activities 
don’t change based on the number of resources applied. For in-
stance, you may be assigning team members to a five-day class. The 
class takes five days if one person attends, and it takes five days if 20 
people attend. All of these time-constrained activities should be 
checked to verify the timeframe. Perhaps the time-constrained ac-
tivity could be shortened with a different approach.  
 
Swap resources: One cause for trending over your deadline might 
be that one or more resources are not as productive as you origi-
nally planned. In some instances, you may need to release a team 
member and bring in another person. For example, you may have 
been assigned the best team members available when your project 
started. However, later in the project other potential team mem-
bers may be available and you may want to swap a weak team 
member with one that is more productive.   
 
“Crash” the schedule: Crashing the schedule means applying addi-
tional resources to the critical path to get the biggest schedule gain 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
185  
for the least amount of incremental costs. For instance, let’s assume 
one person was assigned to complete an activity in ten days. If two 
people can complete the work in six days, you will have accelerated 
the schedule by four days at an incremental cost of two work days 
(two people for six days versus the original ten-day estimate). You 
may be able to further crash the schedule by applying three re-
sources; perhaps now the activity would take four days. Typically, 
the more resources you throw at an activity, the higher the incre-
mental cost, while you will receive less in incremental time savings. 
If you are crashing the schedule, you are willing to make this trade-
off of schedule compression versus additional project costs. 
 
Fast track: Fast track means you look at activities normally done 
in sequence and instead schedule them partially in parallel. For in-
stance, in the home building example, the house frame couldn’t be 
constructed until the foundation was dry. However, if the house is 
large enough, you may have options to fast track by starting to 
erect the frame on the side of the home where the foundation 
was poured first. The foundation will harden there first and might 
allow you to erect the frame on that side while the foundation on 
the far side of the home is still drying. Fast-tracking always in-
creases the risk of having to do some re-work later. If there was 
no risk of re-work, the activities should always have been sched-
uled with some overlap.  
 
“Zero tolerance” scope change: Many projects begin to trend 
over deadline because more work has been added than originally 
committed to. This could be a result of poor scope change man-
agement, or it could be that small changes are being added without 
proper scope change management. (These small scope changes are 
sometimes referred to as “scope creep.”) However, if you are at 
risk of missing your deadline date, you must work with the client 
and team members to ensure absolutely no unplanned work is being 
requested or worked on—even if it is just one hour—without going 
through formal scope change management processes. 
 
Improve processes: Sometimes a schedule can be accelerated by 
improving internal project work processes. You should solicit team 
member feedback and look for ways to streamline processes. For 
instance, perhaps you have a daily status meeting that doesn’t pro-
vide value and can be scaled back to once per week. You may also 

Be Proactive to Accelerate the Project Schedule 
 
186  
find there are bottlenecks with getting deliverables approved that 
can be removed through a more streamlined process. 
 
Improve morale: Sometimes poor morale causes deadline dates 
to drift. If poor morale is one of the reasons you are having sched-
ule problems, you can spend time trying to improve it. Team mem-
bers will work harder and perform better if they don’t spend time 
complaining and sulking. You can build shared purpose, increase 
camaraderie, and do some fun things to get people excited and 
happy again. 
 
Scope back the work: One of the last options to consider is to 
look at the work remaining and negotiate with the sponsor to re-
move some of it from the project. If some of the remaining work is 
not essential to the project, you could discuss eliminating it com-
pletely. You may also have some options to complete this project 
on time with less than 100 percent functionality, and then execute a 
follow-up project to complete the remaining requirements. 
It will take a discussion between Lindsay and her sponsor to determine 
which options are best for their project. If the deadline date is important, 
the worst thing a project manager can do is ignore the schedule overrun 
and just let things keep going as they are. There are many proactive tech-
niques that can be applied to accelerate the schedule. Lindsay can have an 
intelligent discussion with the sponsor to look at the alternatives, how much 
each option will accelerate the schedule, and the incremental cost to the 
project (if any). 
 

C H A P T E R 
44 
Use the Work 
Breakdown 
Structure  
to Identify All 
the Work 
 
Pam and I took Tim trick-or-treating on Halloween night until about 9:30 
p.m. He picked out his own costume this year, settling on Buzz Lightyear 
from the Toy Story movies. His pumpkin-shaped bucket was nearly full 
when we get home, but he was so tired from walking around and carry-
ing his bounty he quickly fell asleep on the couch. I recounted the story of 
our night to Marty McKnight in her office the following afternoon, and 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Use the Work Breakdown Structure to Identify All the Work 
 
188  
she laughed when I told her about Tim falling asleep right away. Appar-
ently her youngest daughter did the same thing. 
“She enjoyed getting all dressed up as a ballerina, but she didn’t par-
ticularly care for ringing doorbells and asking strangers for candy. By the 
time we got home, she could barely keep her eyes open,” she said. 
Marty was in her late 20s and had only a few years’ experience in the 
Marketing department of Mega Manufacturing. 
“I don’t know if you feel the same, but for me the best part of trick-or-
treating with Tim is all the free candy for dad!” I said with a smirk. 
“Oh that’s definitely my reward as well. My daughter Emelia loves 
Tootsie Rolls, so I immediately put all those aside for her, but then I 
admit I indulged in a few peanut butter cups. I used to love those when 
I was a kid!” 
“I like those as well. Anything with chocolate is my favorite!” I said be-
fore taking my seat around Marty’s work table. 
“Why don’t you bring me up to speed on your project, Marty?” I asked. 
“I’m an analyst in the Marketing Department,” Marty began. “As you 
know, we have been doing marketing campaigns for many years, and 
some are very successful. However, we have a new department head, 
and he wants us to revamp the traditional model we have for cam-
paigns. He wants them to be developed sooner, include a social media 
component, appeal to younger customers, and be backed up with more 
metrics that show their effectiveness. He wants more changes as well, 
but you get the picture.” 
“Loud and clear,” I said. “It sounds like he wants to reengineer your 
overall model for conducting marketing campaigns.” 
“Yes, that’s the word he used—‘reengineering,’” Marty confirmed “So, I 
figured ‘reengineering’ is an IT term, right? That’s why I asked you to 
come over today. I thought you could give me some advice for how to 
put a game plan together. I’m not really sure how to begin.” 
“Well, ‘reengineering’ is not really an IT term,” I noted, trying to sound 
competent without sounding too smart. “In fact, much of the common 
use of the term is in the context of business reengineering, which is ex-
actly what you are trying to do. I have a technique to get you started on 
a new model. It’s called a Work Breakdown Structure.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
189  
LESSON  
 What is Marty looking for? She has been asked to build a model that will 
describe how the Marketing Department will conduct campaigns in the fu-
ture. This model is basically a schedule template. The model will describe 
what things you do to start a campaign, determine the audience, work with 
vendors, analyze the market, gather metrics, etc. You can easily see that the 
result of Marty’s effort will be a schedule template describing all of the ac-
tivities required to create, launch, and track a marketing campaign. 
What’s unusual about her project is that she has been asked only to create 
the schedule model. In most cases, you build your schedule and then use it 
to execute a project. Marty is building a schedule template for other mar-
keting teams to use after her. 
One of the ways to begin building a schedule is with a technique called Work 
Breakdown Structure (WBS). The WBS technique is especially helpful when 
you are unsure what you are getting into. It is possible one person could 
create the WBS; however, that would imply one person has all the knowl-
edge, which is typically not the case. 
The place to start is to gather a group of people with knowledge and exper-
tise in this area. The meeting can be facilitated, but it doesn’t have to be. 
The session rarely starts with a blank slate. There is usually some pre-
existing information—such as goals, strategies, constraints, and standards—
that help to frame the overall solution. If you have a Project Charter, be 
sure to note the deliverables, assumptions, approach, etc. In Marty’s case, 
for instance, the group can start by listing the stated requirements from the 
sponsor, such as including the web components, appealing to younger cus-
tomers, and executing faster. 
With a WBS technique, you first determine the large chunks of work that 
must be carried out for the entire project to be completed. At this point, 
how you define the first level of work doesn’t matter. It is only important 
for all of the work to be identified at the end of the process. For instance, a 
marketing campaign might be initially broken up into major phases such as 
planning, analysis, design, build, and rollout. Another common way to start 
the WBS is by identifying the major deliverables such as television, radio, 
magazine, newspaper, social media, and point-of-sale. If this was an IT appli-
cation, the deliverables might be an online application, data warehouse, 
datamart, and user query tools. If these are large deliverables, you can break 
them down further into sub-deliverables (also called work packages). The ini-
tial high-level breakdown of work is called level 1.  

Use the Work Breakdown Structure to Identify All the Work 
 
190  
It is possible that your WBS could stop after identifying all of the deliver-
ables and work packages. This would be referred to as a deliverable-based 
WBS. However, you can also break the work down further to the activity 
level. This work goes on the WBS as well. These activities can, in turn, be 
broken down even further into smaller activities. The work can continue to 
be broken down further if it is not clear what is required to complete the 
work or if the estimate to complete the work is less than an estimating 
threshold—usually around 80 hours (this threshold could be larger for 
larger projects). This could take you down to three, four, or five levels of 
ever more detailed activities. It’s rare that you need to break the work 
down more than five levels. 
Once the WBS is complete you can estimate the effort to complete the 
lowest level of work, sequence the activities, assign resources, estimate du-
ration, and estimate costs. The end result of this process is the creation of a 
project schedule. In Marty’s case, she will have a schedule template of what 
it takes to execute a marketing campaign. The WBS is not the same as a 
schedule, but it is usually the starting point to create the schedule.    
My advice to Marty is to get a team of marketing people together and build 
a WBS that lays out the work they think should be done on future cam-
paigns. The group can estimate and sequence the work to determine the 
order and dependencies. They can assign generic roles to the work based 
on the type of person that would normally perform the activity. The generic 
roles will suffice since they are creating a schedule template, not a specific 
schedule for a specific project.  
When a marketing campaign starts in the future, the campaign manager will 
use the generic schedule as the model. The campaign manager can remove 
unnecessary activities, assign resources to the remaining activities, and esti-
mate the effort and duration of each activity. The marketing campaign plan 
can then be executed. This generic schedule template will ensure that each 
marketing campaign is carried out in a similar manner, and it will save the 
campaign manager the time of having to build the work schedule from 
scratch each time.  
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
45 
Write Your 
Status Reports 
from the 
Reader’s  
Perspective 
 
When Wayne Moretti left Mega Manufacturing, I began reporting to 
Rick Goodall, a senior vice president. Rick was a great guy who fully 
supported the idea of a project management adviser and really saw the 
value of the position. He took me to lunch the day before Wayne left, 
and we’ve had a good working relationship ever since. He invited me to 
lunch the week of Thanksgiving to discuss status reports and to catch 
up on other business. 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Write Your Status Reports from the Reader’s Perspective 
 
192  
We decided to walk to Joe’s Fishmarket, a new restaurant about two 
blocks west of Mega Manufacturing. I knew it opened a few weeks ago, 
but I didn’t know anyone who had eaten there. I ordered the fish ‘n’ 
chips special and Rick tried the flounder. We started off talking about 
nonbusiness-related matters. As our lunch arrived, though, Rick passed 
along some feedback about status reporting. 
“Tom, I’ve been hearing concerns from some of the senior managers 
about the quality of the information being reported in the project status 
reports,” Rick said between bites of his french fries. “I need you to work 
with the project managers to make these more effective.” 
“What kinds of concerns are you hearing?” I asked. 
“Some of the managers are receiving project status reports on a 
monthly basis,” Rick explained. “However, these are just a bunch of 
words. After reading the reports, they still don’t have a good under-
standing of the project status.” 
“Our company needs to move to a higher level on status reporting,” I 
agreed. “A year ago, status reports were created sporadically, and eve-
ryone used a different format. Now every project manager does status 
reporting on a monthly basis in a consistent format. However, I agree 
that the information in the reports is not always at the high-quality level 
we need it to be.” 
“Great,” Rick replied. “Let’s figure out how to get the content improved 
over the next two monthly reporting cycles. By the way, how’s your fish?” 
“You know,” I sighed. “The fish is a little stale and a little bland.” 
“Sounds like our status reports!” Rick quipped. 
We both chuckled. 
LESSON  
Is there a project manager who likes to write status reports? If so, I would 
like to shake his or her hand. It’s not uncommon for your team to accom-
plish great feats, solve perplexing problems, and strive to meet deadlines. 
Then, when the time comes to tell your managers and your clients about the 
status of the project, you spend as little time as possible providing the abso-
lute minimum amount of information required. It might be understandable 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
193  
(but still not right) if the project was in trouble. But even project teams 
doing well don’t always communicate effectively in the status report. 
Of course, let’s also agree that management stakeholders and project spon-
sors need to be more involved in a project than just spending a few minutes 
a month reading a status report. If they don’t feel that they are getting the 
information they need, they can always pick up the phone (or even talk face 
to face) to get more information from the project manager. But project 
managers need to make life easier for the stakeholders and sponsors.  
Project managers must understand that communicating status is one of 
their fundamental responsibilities. It is the minimum expectation. Commu-
nicating status is a way to manage expectations and to keep everyone in-
formed on how the project is progressing. Your managers and stakeholders 
are working on many projects at any given time. The status report is one 
way they can keep an eye on your project and know if they need to be-
come more engaged. 
The bottom line is the project manager must write the status report to 
meet the needs of the reader. The reader doesn’t want to know all of the 
details of your project. The reader also doesn’t want to read about how 
smoothly the project is progressing if, in fact, there are problems. Borrow-
ing a phrase from the legal profession, the status report should tell the 
truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. A good status report 
should include the following: 
 
Project recap: This is usually in the form of a short opening 
paragraph that gives an overall summary of how the project is 
progressing. Sometimes this recap is designed as a series of stan-
dard questions such as:  
 
Will the project be completed by its deadline date?  
 
Will the project meet budget expectations? 
 
Are there any major scope change requests? 
 
Are there significant new risks?  
 
Are issues being addressed and resolved in a timely manner?  
The answers to these types of opening questions provide a quick in-
dication to the reader of whether there are problems with the pro-
ject. If everything is going well, no further explanation is required. 
However, if there are problems, or if there are significant variations 
the reader should know about, they should be described next. For 
instance, if major change requests were approved, they should be 

Write Your Status Reports from the Reader’s Perspective 
 
194  
noted here. If the project is behind schedule, this should be noted, as 
well as what is being done to get back on schedule. This recap sec-
tion may be the most important section since it provides the over-
view of the project. You want your readers to read the entire status 
report. However, if they only read the recap section, they should 
still understand the overall status of the project. It is very common 
to include a color indicator that recaps the overall status. Green 
would indicate that everything is fine. Yellow would point out that 
caution is required and that the project is at risk of missing its dead-
line or budget. A red indicator would mean that the project is al-
ready in trouble and will miss its budget, deadline, or both.  
 
Major accomplishments: This section provides insight into the 
significant work accomplishments from the prior reporting period. 
This is where the project manager must be careful to communicate 
in a manner the reader will understand. This section can’t be too 
technical, nor should it be so high level the reader has no perspec-
tive on what the accomplishments mean. 
 
Major work planned for next period: This is similar to the prior 
section, but it gives the reader a sense for the work coming up. 
Again, communicate this in a way that the reader will understand. 
 
Other information: Other information important to the organiza-
tion may be included here; for example, this could be other sections 
or attachments, such as budget reports, a Change Log, or an Issues 
Log. It’s not easy to come up with the right combination of informa-
tion that will be of interest to all readers. In fact, you may need a 
detailed status report for the stakeholders interested in your pro-
ject as well as a higher-level summary status report for more senior 
managers interested in the project, but who don’t have enough per-
spective and context to understand the details. 
The bottom line is that project managers should take pride in their status 
reports and try to provide relevant and clear information to their readers. If 
your readers are not clear on how the project is progressing, you have not 
done an effective job. 

C H A P T E R 
46 
Update Your 
Risk Plan 
Throughout 
the Project 
 
Lauren Carter was a tall woman who had made a big name for herself 
locally playing basketball. She still ranked in the top ten for most career 
points in Illinois high school girls basketball history and was one of the 
state leaders for most rebounds. She played high school ball in Dickens 
for Thomas Jefferson High School before moving on to college ball at 
the University of Illinois. She graduated with a degree in business and 
played a little professional basketball. However, the women’s side of the 
sport was not as popular back then as it is today, and she ended up us-
ing her business degree instead of her basketball skills in the workforce. 
She was a good project manager who had gained a lot of respect at 
Mega Manufacturing from her peers. She called me Wednesday morn-
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Update Your Risk Plan Throughout the Project 
 
196  
ing and asked to meet me that same day. When I met with her, it was 
clear right away that a problem had developed. 
Lauren was managing a project to make all the hard-copy reports sup-
porting the factory floor available through the Web. The project was 
maybe two-thirds complete.  
“Sounds like there’s a problem with your project, Lauren. What’s the 
latest?” I asked.  
“Yes, we’ve got a big problem,” she said, taking a deep breath. “We 
have been using the beta release of a web reporting tool and it has 
worked pretty well. However, the vendor announced this morning they 
have been purchased by one of their competitors. The vendor is no 
longer sure they will bring this reporting tool to market, since the com-
pany purchasing them has a very similar product. This has really thrown 
a monkey wrench into our plans, and it will certainly affect our project 
end dates. First, we will have to decide on a new tool and then retest 
everything. I want to talk to you about some ideas we have to resolve 
this. Each potential solution has some positives and negatives.” 
“I’m glad you at least have a couple options for resolving the tool 
problem,” I said. “Didn’t you have a chance to see this possible out-
come occurring?”  
“When we started the project, we looked at the risk of using this ven-
dor,” Lauren replied, shaking her head. “However, the risk seemed low 
at the time. They have a good product and they were financially sound. 
So, we made an assumption they were going to work out okay. We 
didn’t see a need to include them in our risk management plan.”  
“Well, I’m sure that was the case when you started the project. But 
there has been some recent press about these two companies talking.”  
“Really?” Lauren leaned back, a little surprised. “I guess we haven’t 
been keeping up on current events like we should.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
197  
LESSON  
Risk management is one of the key project management processes 
performed in the initial project planning. The risk management process in-
cludes the following steps: 
1. Create a Risk Management Plan: Start the risk management 
process by understanding your overall approach for managing risks. 
This includes defining your risk management process, who is involved 
with the risk management process, what tools will be used, etc.   
2. Identify all potential risks: When you are defining the project, 
perform a complete assessment of project risk. The risk assessment 
is done in two parts. First, look at inherent risks. Inherent risks are 
based on the characteristics of the project—regardless of the spe-
cific deliverables being produced. Second, look for risks that are 
specific to your project. These risks normally can’t be identified on a 
checklist since they are specific to your project and may not apply 
to other projects. At this point, you are not looking for only high-
level risks—you are trying to identify potential risks. 
3. Analyze the risks using qualitative techniques: In the prior 
step, you identified all potential risks. However, not all of the risks 
need to be managed. Now you analyze the risks to see which ones 
are important enough to manage. Qualitative analysis means that 
you use subjective criteria to decide which risks are high, medium, 
and low based on the probability of occurrence and the impact to 
your project. 
4. (Optional) Utilize quantitative analysis for all high-level 
risks: If your project requires more rigor and a numerical under-
standing of the nature of risks, you can proceed to qualitative analy-
sis. The term quantitative means that the risk levels are based on a 
numerical analysis rather than on approximations such as low, me-
dium, and high.  
5. Create a response plan for each high-level risk: Create a re-
sponse plan for each high-level risk that you identified to ensure the 
risk is managed successfully. There are five major responses to a 
risk: leave it, monitor it, avoid it, move it to a third party, or miti-
gate it. You can also create a contingency plan for high-level risks 
that describes what you would do if the risk event actually occurs. 
(This is also called “Plan B.”)  

Update Your Risk Plan Throughout the Project 
 
198  
6. Move the activities associated with the risk response plans 
to the project schedule: Moving the activities to the schedule 
helps ensure that the risk plan is actually completed. 
Lauren and her team did a good job on the initial risk assessment. However, 
they did not do well on the remaining two follow-up activities. 
1. Monitor the risk response plan: Lauren needs to monitor the 
risk response plans to ensure they are being executed successfully. 
New activities should be added if it looks like the risk is not being 
managed successfully. 
2. Periodically re-evaluate risks: The initial risk management pro-
cess needs to be repeated periodically throughout the project 
based on current circumstances. New risks may arise as the pro-
ject is unfolding and some risks that were not identified earlier may 
become visible at a later date. This is also the time to validate the 
severity of known risk events. In addition, previously identified risk 
events may still be valid, but the likelihood or severity of the risk 
may have changed. This ongoing risk evaluation should be per-
formed on a regular basis, say monthly, or at the completion of ma-
jor milestones. 
Lauren, like many other project managers, performed the initial risk assess-
ment, but she did not perform the follow-up and ongoing risk management 
processes. Just as the schedule needs to be updated on an ongoing basis, so 
the risk plan needs to be double-checked throughout the project. 
Lauren’s team initially identified a risk with the software maker, but they felt 
the risk was low. Therefore, they assigned it to the level of an assumption. 
That was fine at first, but Lauren and her team did not go back and periodi-
cally update the risk plan. If they had re-evaluated the plan, they would have 
looked at this low-level vendor risk. There is a good likelihood they would 
have seen that the vendor was in acquisition talks. This knowledge would 
have allowed them to raise the risk level and focus energy on looking at al-
ternatives and contingencies. 
If Lauren had upgraded this potential event from an assumption to a risk, 
the team would have had some time to deal with the situation. Of course, it 
doesn’t mean the acquisition was more or less likely to occur. However, 
they could have considered alternatives, such as beginning to test the soft-
ware of the acquiring company or other software packages. 
Now that the event has occurred, the situation is classified as an issue and 
issues management techniques are utilized. The team may identify the same 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
199  
options for resolution as if they had done a risk plan earlier. However, if 
they had utilized a risk plan, they would have had time to prepare a plan of 
attack in case the event occurred. At this point, all they can be is reactive, 
and any resolution will probably have an impact on the timing of the project. 
 

C H A P T E R 
47 
Don’t Deliver 
More Than  
the Client  
Requested 
 
The weeks between Thanksgiving and Christmas are traditionally slow 
times of the year at Mega Manufacturing. Many people take vacation 
time at the end of the year, and even if they don’t, I find most people 
are ready for the Christmas break about two weeks before it arrives. As 
such, they very rarely schedule any new projects to start during this time 
frame, and if a project is near completion, every effort is made to wrap 
it up before the holidays. 
When I arrived at my office on Monday morning following the Thanks-
giving break, I was surprised to find a voicemail message from Sally 
White. Sally and I had been e-mailing back and forth about her team’s 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Don’t Deliver More Than the Client Requested 
 
202  
project to enhance one of our purchasing systems. When we spoke last, 
Sally was trying to implement some structured project management 
processes to ensure this effort didn’t become any larger. I decided to 
swing by her office after grabbing a cup of coffee. 
Sally was in her mid-30s and happily single. She had light brown hair 
and hazel eyes, and she was an avid reader. She had three bookcases 
in her office, and they all were full to the point of overflowing. 
“You’re going to be able to open that public library very soon,” I said af-
ter walking into her office. 
“I know, right? I ordered a third book case only three years ago. Now it 
looks like I’ll need to order a fourth.” 
“Or you could just unload some of the books you have. Have you ever 
thought about purchasing a Kindle or an iPad? I have an iPad with 
iBooks if you’d like to give that a try.” 
“I actually have a Kindle already, and I do use that for reading, espe-
cially when I travel. I don’t know, though. There’s just something about a 
physical book. I don’t think you can beat it.” 
I took a few minutes to peruse Sally’s bookcases. They were mostly filled 
with business books, although she also had some American literature 
classics and even the complete Harry Potter series. Needless to say, she 
appeared to read everything.  
“Tom, I have some good news today,” Sally began as I sat down in front 
of her desk. “We were able to formally gain agreement on the business 
requirements for this work. I think the problems I e-mailed you about 
regarding change are all in the past.” 
“That’s good news,” I replied. “As I said in one of my replies, you can’t 
manage scope effectively if you haven’t defined the scope to begin with.” 
We talked some more about the requirements. Sally was able to gain 
agreement on a minimum set of requirements from the manufacturing 
client. During the discussions, however, Sally uncovered other features 
that the client wanted. These were not included in the project for the 
sake of getting the initial work completed and implemented. 
“When does it look like you will be done?”  

Lessons in Project Management 
 
203  
“We have some more good news on that front,” Sally said excitedly. 
“We initially told the client it would take an additional six weeks to 
complete the work. But, when we got into the initial programming, we 
discovered some of the work was not nearly as complex as we first 
feared. We have about two weeks less work than we thought.” 
“Great news!” I agreed. “I’m sure your client will be happy to imple-
ment this work earlier.” 
“Well, that is one option,” Sally countered. “However, remember we 
uncovered a number of additional features the client wanted but didn’t 
include in this enhancement. Now that we have some extra time, we 
can include this additional work as well. I think the client will be very 
happy when they see the extra features we will be able to implement 
and still deliver within the deadline they have already agreed to.” 
“Has your client approved the extra features?” I asked. 
Sally looked a little puzzled. “Well, we didn’t ask them officially. We 
thought it would be a nice surprise if we delivered the extra features. 
We know they wanted them initially.” 
On the surface, this sounded great. But I knew from experience and 
training this was not the right way to go. Sally was about to get into a 
case of gold plating. 
LESSON  
During the project planning process the project team understands the na-
ture of the project in terms of deliverables, budget, duration, risk, etc. This 
information is used to set common expectations between the project team 
and the sponsor. Setting expectations is one of the reasons we ask the 
sponsor and key stakeholders to approve the Project Charter and the busi-
ness requirements. If the project manager can then deliver within those ex-
pectations, the project is typically considered a success. However, like Sally, 
you may also have heard it is good to under-promise and over-deliver. Let’s 
look at what it means to under-promise, since there is a good way and a 
bad way to do this. 
The project manager has some options when setting expectations using one 
of three scenarios—worst case, most likely, and best case. The worst-case 
option means you assume everything will go wrong. Work will take longer 
than you expect, issues will come up, potential risks will occur, etc. If you 

Don’t Deliver More Than the Client Requested 
 
204  
set expectations based on the worst-case scenario, you are not under-
promising—you are sandbagging. This means you are purposely setting very 
low expectations you know you can exceed. Sandbagging is not good be-
cause you are not presenting accurate information to the sponsor and 
therefore the sponsor does not have the right information to make the best 
business decisions. 
The best-case scenario is just the opposite. If you present the best case, you 
are assuming everything will go according to plan and everything will work 
great the first time. This is also not a good way to set expectations and for 
the same reason. The sponsor can’t make the best business decisions if in-
formation is skewed. Of course, you are also much more likely to be unsuc-
cessful in meeting your expectations and this will cause trouble all around.  
You can see that the best course of action is to set expectations based on 
events that are most likely to occur. This includes most likely estimates of 
schedule and budget, most likely risks, most likely constraints, etc.  
With that in mind, let’s look back at Sally’s desire to under-promise and 
over-deliver. She has set reasonable expectations and now is able to exceed 
those expectations. Will her sponsor be happy because Sally is able to de-
liver more than they have requested? Maybe, but maybe not. In fact, the cli-
ent may even be very upset.   
The term gold plating refers to delivering more than the client requested. It’s 
wrong for two reasons. First, the primary focus of the project should be to 
make sure you deliver what the client wants, on time and within budget. By 
adding additional work, the risk increases that the project will actually miss 
its deadline and budget. If Sally misses her deadline date, for instance, no 
one will want to hear that the date was missed because Sally added addi-
tional work to the project that the client did not ask for. Adding extra work 
adds a level of unnecessary risk.    
Second, if you can deliver more than the client expected, it’s also true that 
you could have delivered exactly what the client expected—under budget 
and earlier. In other words, you had a choice: meet expectations while fin-
ishing early and under budget, or exceed expectations while finishing on 
budget and on schedule. The decision of which option to take is not for the 
project manager to decide. This is a sponsor decision. It may well be the 
case that the sponsor would rather finish early and under budget. But if you 
don’t ask the sponsor, you won’t know.   
In this case, Sally is taking it upon herself to make a business decision on 
what is of most value to the client. There may be some good reasons why 
the additional features were not included in her initial project scope. They 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
205  
may, in fact, have had marginal value for the client. There may be more value 
in having the solution implemented two weeks earlier. The point is that this 
is a sponsor decision and not one the project manager should make. 
The bottom line is you should meet your commitments. It may also be a 
good practice to under-promise and over-deliver. However, you should 
over-deliver on schedule and budget. After you set most-likely expectations, 
there is no reason you can’t strive to finish under-budget and ahead of 
schedule. You can also over-deliver in your professionalism and level of 
service to your client. However, it should not include delivering more re-
quirements than were asked for. If you can deliver earlier or for less cost, 
let the client make the decision on what to do with this good fortune. 
 

C H A P T E R 
48 
Make One  
Person  
Responsible for 
Each Activity 
 
Several people in my section of the office were taking vacation time in 
December, and I was amazed at how quiet the hallways and corridors 
were with fewer people around. I could actually hear the Christmas mu-
sic coming from Leon Hart’s office, and he worked about six doors 
down from me. I decided to visit some project managers in their offices 
in order to escape the noise. 
My first opportunity to talk to someone came when I met with Marc 
Reynolds to discuss his project to build a customized time reporting ap-
plication for all IT contractors. Marc was an older man, probably in his 
late 50s, and didn’t ask for help on his projects. In fact, the only reason 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Make One Person Responsible for Each Activity 
 
208  
we were meeting was because his boss had called me and asked me to 
check in on him. Apparently, Marc’s project had encountered some 
trouble about a month ago, but the team was able to solve it and get 
back on schedule — at least up until two weeks ago. Now they were 
falling behind again. 
“We are getting over the hump,” Marc said in response to my ques-
tion about his project status. “But as we are getting to the end of the 
project, I’m asking the team to do quite a bit of multitasking. As a re-
sult, some team members are having difficulty completing their as-
signments on time.” 
“It’s not uncommon to have a rash of work to complete at the end of 
the project,” I agreed. “This is the time where discipline and time man-
agement skills are so valuable. Tell me more about why the work is fal-
ling behind. Does everyone know what’s expected of them?” 
“I sure hope so!” Marc exclaimed. “I’ve tried to make it simple by divid-
ing the group into two sub teams. Each sub team is responsible for 
about half the remaining work.” 
“That sounds reasonable,” I replied. “What does your team say about 
missing their deadlines now that the project is so close to completion?” 
“That’s one of the frustrating side effects of having two sub teams. I’m 
trying to give the teams maximum flexibility to complete their assigned 
work in whatever way makes the most sense. However, since I am as-
signing work to a team, I don’t really know who to hold accountable 
when deadline dates are missed.” 
I was starting to see the problem. “Marc,” I said, “you may have taken 
the team concept a little too far. Although the work is given to a team, 
you still need to assign someone to be responsible for each activity. 
When people are working on multiple activities at the same time, it is 
especially important to have someone accountable for each activity.” 
LESSON  
On a perfect team, all members would understand what is expected of 
them, and the members would all hold themselves accountable for meeting 
the expectations. There are actually some teams like this. These mature 
teams are sometimes called high-performing teams. Typically, work is assigned 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
209  
to the team and the team figures out how to do it. No project manager or 
team leader is needed. However, it may take a long time to reach this high-
performing state—and many teams never reach this level. 
In the real world, almost all teams fall short of this idealistic goal. When 
normal teams are asked to suddenly take on some of the traits of a high 
performing team, they can struggle. Sometimes the struggle can lead them 
to a higher level of performance more quickly. In most cases, however, a 
team presented with this situation will descend into confusion and chaos. 
People don’t always understand what is expected of them when they are left 
to work without proper guidance. In many cases, they overemphasize cer-
tain activities to the detriment of others. If there are problems, no one 
steps up to deal with them. In the worst case, anarchy breaks out as people 
thrash around amongst various activities without the focus needed to com-
plete any of them on time. One of the purposes of having a project manager 
is to provide that central focus for leading and managing people on the pro-
ject. On many projects, the project manager is the only person who main-
tains enough overall perspective to make the right decisions on priorities 
and resource requirements. 
Just as a project needs one project manager, so each activity needs one per-
son responsible for completing the work on time. If only one person is as-
signed to the work, the responsibility naturally falls on that one person. 
When activities are assigned to multiple team members, one person still 
needs to be responsible for ensuring the work gets done. This one person is 
responsible for providing status, escalating issues, and ensuring the work is 
completed on time. 
Marc has reorganized his project team into two sub teams that he feels re-
flects the two major components of remaining work. He has restructured 
the team in a creative attempt to complete the remaining work as efficiently 
as possible. He feels if each team focuses on one of the two remaining areas 
of work, they can complete the work much faster. 
His idea may be a good one, but there is a problem. He has opened the 
door to a potential loss of focus by not assigning one person to be primarily 
responsible for the work of each team. Since each team has a number of ac-
tivities assigned to it, team members are working on more than one thing. 
This multitasking has left a vacuum in terms of responsibility. When work is 
trending late, there is no one to prioritize the work to ensure it is com-
pleted as efficiently as possible. If problems arise, it’s not clear who is re-
sponsible for resolving them. Each team member is assigned to other activi-
ties, so there is a tendency to work where there are no problems, and let 

Make One Person Responsible for Each Activity 
 
210  
the problem areas languish. This would not happen on a mature, high-
performing team, but Marc’s sub teams are not at that level yet. 
Marc is not going to develop a high-performing team overnight. His short-
term solution is to make sure every activity has a responsible person as-
signed to it. This doesn’t have to be the same person. He can assign each of 
the members of a sub team to be responsible for specific activities. In this 
way, each activity has one person responsible for making sure that it is 
completed on time, escalating issues, providing status updates, and ensuring 
that work is progressing. This person has an interest in making sure the ac-
tivity is completed successfully. 
So it is with all activities. If multiple people are assigned to one activity, the 
project manager must be clear on who has the overall responsibility for 
completion. 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
49 
Focus on 
Deadlines to 
Keep Your  
Project from 
Wandering 
 
A week before the Christmas holiday, I paid a visit to Lauren Carter, the 
project manager responsible for moving the old shop floor batch reports 
to the Web. When I last met with her, she was only a couple weeks 
away from finishing the project. It had been six weeks, and she was still 
four weeks away from finishing. I liked going to her office because she 
had a large display of sports memorabilia including several basketballs 
from her high school days commemorating the records she had broken 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Focus on Deadlines to Keep Your Project from Wandering 
 
212  
plus several autographed balls and jerseys. My favorite was a pair of 
sneakers autographed by Michael Jordan. 
“What’s going on, Lauren?” I asked. 
“Come on in, Tom. Not much happening here, just trying to get this pro-
ject finished.” 
“Have any grand plans for the holidays?” 
“Not really, Tom. I’m going to visit my mom down in Florida, so that will 
be nice. Will be good to see the sun again and escape the cold for a 
few weeks. We’ll just have a quiet Christmas, though. Nothing too excit-
ing. How about you?” 
“Sort of the same plan although we’re staying here in Dickens. I’m sur-
prising the family with a trip to Disney World, so that will be the big 
Christmas present from Santa under the tree. We’re not leaving until 
next February, though.” 
“That’s great, Tom! Very exciting!” 
“So let’s chat for a few minutes about your project. It seems to be going 
on much longer than you had anticipated, yet I don’t see or hear any 
indication that you are behind schedule.” 
“There have been a number of changes requiring us to push the end 
date out,” Lauren said. “However, you will be glad to know I am invok-
ing change management. Our sponsor approves each change, so we 
have been getting extra funding and extensions on our deadline.” 
“That explains why no one is complaining,” I noted. “What types of 
change requests are you receiving?” 
“They are mostly for additional features and functions, and small 
changes to our current deliverables,” Lauren said, yawning. “That’s one 
reason why we have been able to accommodate most of them success-
fully. They don’t require a lot of work from our team.” 
“What does the future look like?” I asked. “Are you going to be able to 
complete the project by the end of January?” 
“It’s not clear,” Lauren replied a bit apprehensively. “Most of the shop 
floor supervisors don’t have extensive web experience. Now that they 
are getting more familiar with the technology, they are finding more and 
more things they want to incorporate.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
213  
“That’s not entirely good,” I said with some concern. “Projects are tem-
porary endeavors to produce a set of deliverables. They need to end at 
some point. I’m afraid you may be in a position where your project goes 
on and on, with minor changes bringing only incremental and marginal 
business value.” 
“You’re right,” Lauren agreed. “In fact, I think the team is starting to 
lose focus and energy. I have some concerns that we are getting a little 
sloppy in our testing and may end up missing something.” 
“Let’s talk with your sponsor about bringing the project to a close,” I 
suggested. “This doesn’t mean your clients can’t make additional 
changes. If there is business value in additional modifications, let’s con-
sider them to be enhancements after the project goes live.” 
LESSON  
On most projects, the project sponsor and project team are focused on 
completing the original work within the agreed budget and deadline. If any-
thing, the team usually struggles to get all the work done by the deadline. 
In fact, there are many times when the deadline date may slip a few days 
so that work is not too rushed, which could cause implementation prob-
lems. On most projects, completing within a few days of your deadline is 
still satisfactory. 
If the project is important enough, you typically don’t have time to wander 
too far past the deadline date. If you are at risk of missing your deadline, 
your manager and sponsor start to get nervous and put pressure on the 
team to complete the work. The team may start to work overtime or new 
people may be assigned. 
However, there are also some projects that have no specific end date. They 
may have a target end date, but there is no business driver for the date. It is 
simply the date on the schedule when the project should be completed. If 
there is no business driver for the end date, the project deadline is more 
likely to slip. The deadline date may get pushed out when change requests 
get approved. At other times, the team may not be able to get the work 
done by the original end date and the deadline gets pushed out. These de-
lays are just accepted because there is no business urgency.  
If you have a project with no firm business driver for the end date, it’s im-
portant for the project manager to maintain the sense of urgency to finish 
by the estimated end date. If the deadline date has to be extended, it’s  

Focus on Deadlines to Keep Your Project from Wandering 
 
214  
important for the project manager to refocus the team on the new date. 
Having a focused end date gives team members a sense of urgency and 
helps them understand the importance of completing their work on time 
so that the entire project can be completed on time. 
A problem arises, however, when the deadline date changes repeatedly. 
This can be caused by teams missing their first target date and then missing 
their revised target date and so on in what seems to be a never-ending cycle 
of work. This is a very bad situation from the standpoint of team morale and 
credibility. This is why it’s important to make sure your deadline dates rep-
resent your best and most likely estimates. If you miss one deadline date, 
you don’t want to miss a second deadline date.  
Another reason that deadline dates slip repeatedly is because the client or-
ganization is also unfocused. It may be hard for the project team to get cli-
ent input, gather requirements, get questions answered, etc. This, in turn, 
will drive project delays. In many cases, the sponsor knows that this is a 
problem. The sponsor still wants the project completed, but he is flexible 
on when it happens. 
Ongoing scope change requests can also be a problem. If there is no ur-
gency to complete the project, the sponsor may haphazardly approve scope 
change requests to strive for a more perfect solution. Lauren’s project is a 
great example of this. Her sponsor is lax and is approving major and minor 
change requests on an ongoing basis, even at the end of the project. This is 
not scope creep per se, since the project manager and sponsor are actively 
managing and approving the changes. However, her sponsor is also intro-
ducing risk. There is a growing risk that striving for the perfect solution will 
cause the team to get careless and unfocused, which could mean lower qual-
ity and more problems toward the end of the project.  
At this point, the best approach for Lauren is to work with the sponsor to 
freeze all changes. This allows the team to focus on final testing and imple-
mentation. New requirements are still permitted, but the team will place 
them on a prioritized backlog list. This list will be reviewed after the applica-
tion goes live and is stable. Changes will then be considered as enhance-
ments. They can be worked on by the support organization or perhaps by 
planning a new phase II project. However, this first project needs to be 
wrapped up before the lack of focus leads to new problems. 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
50 
Gain Agreement 
on Project  
Metrics Ahead 
of Time 
 
My last meeting of the year was with Heather Cruise. Heather pulled 
me aside at the annual Christmas lunch to ask if I could attend a pro-
ject conclusion meeting with her later that week.  
Heather was assigned to a project for the Finance Division after the 
previous project manager resigned. The project was already experienc-
ing some problems, which was probably a factor in the previous project 
manager leaving the country. It had been a tough spot for Heather, but 
she had done an admirable job in bringing the project to completion. 
The solution was finally implemented, but there was still some question 
as to whether the project was successful or not. I attended the project 
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Gain Agreement on Project Metrics Ahead of Time 
 
216  
conclusion meeting, and I could tell it didn’t go as Heather expected. 
She came prepared with a set of metrics to show that her team was 
somewhat successful on the project, but the business client didn’t accept 
her metrics at face value. Afterward, we talked in her office. 
“Heather, it appears there was a difference of opinion on whether the 
project was successful or not,” I began. “I first wanted to compliment you. 
You attempted to initiate a fact-based discussion to show the state of the 
project. Why do you think it didn’t work out the way you planned?” 
“There was a lot of emotion built up over the course of the project,” 
Heather replied in a serious tone, her eyes widening. “I came into the 
project late and didn’t realize the level of dissatisfaction some of the cli-
ents felt with the previous project manager. Since there was so much 
emotion involved, I tried to bring the discussion around to some fact-
based metrics.” 
“It sounded like the client was challenging the validity of some of your 
numbers and whether they were relevant,” I noted. “For instance, you 
said the project completed on schedule, but the client said the solution 
was implemented without adequate testing.” 
“That may or may not be the case,” Heather countered defensively, 
shaking her head back and forth. “We all agreed we would implement 
on the revised deadline date and fix any problems on an ongoing basis. 
Having agreed to that decision, I don’t know how they can complain 
about the project being late.” 
“Yes, but the client said they were pushed into that decision because 
they could not afford to miss this monthly financial close cycle,” I noted. 
Heather was about to respond, but I realized the current line of reason-
ing wasn’t going anywhere. Nor should it, since it wasn’t the general les-
son I was trying to teach. 
“Heather, let me stop you for a minute. You have the right idea about 
the importance of project metrics. If you measure the right characteris-
tics of your project, you will be in a much better position to improve your 
processes during the project and have a fact-based discussion about 
overall project success or failure. But your metrics seemed to be de-
signed to show the project team in a more favorable light. You also 
missed a very important part of project success metrics—you must gain 
agreement with your client ahead of time.” 

Lessons in Project Management 
 
217  
LESSON  
It has been said there are facts, lies, and then there are statistics. Statistics, 
or metrics, can be gathered on myriad combinations of project team and 
deliverable characteristics. For instance, you can collect metrics on the 
height of team members, the number of reporting errors, the daily high 
temperature in Dickens, and the cost of a project. Although there are doz-
ens (or hundreds) of metrics you can gather, some of them are obviously 
more relevant and significant to the project than others. 
One of the purposes of metrics is to objectively determine the level of pro-
ject success. However, the project manager can’t pick an arbitrary set of 
metrics to indicate success. It is the client, and specifically the sponsor, who 
ultimately determines project success. You could just ask the sponsor if the 
project was a success. However, gathering metrics gives you a more objec-
tive way to measure success rather than just relying on the perception (or 
the whim) of the sponsor. 
One of the purposes of gaining agreement on the initial project charter is 
that it provides a set of deliverables upon which success or failure can be 
measured. The project manager should be aware of these when gathering 
metrics during the project. Delivering the agreed upon deliverables could be 
the starting point for a set of project success metrics.  
Heather understood that metrics were important to try to show project 
success. She realized that without more facts, the client was going to con-
clude the project was a disaster. However, she failed to do two important 
things. First, she failed to get an agreement with the sponsor on the signifi-
cance and the interpretation of the metrics she chose. Second, she didn’t 
make sure the metrics were balanced and broad enough to represent the 
reality of the project experience. Since there was a disagreement on the 
metrics gathered and what they meant, Heather was challenged right away. 
Heather’s client was not happy with the way the project was run and was 
not happy with the system that was implemented. So, not surprisingly, they 
didn’t agree with metrics saying the project was a success or a partial suc-
cess. Heather’s metrics seemed to be a narrow set attempting to show the 
results in as favorable a light as possible. 
Heather would have been better off proposing a wider range of metrics to 
her client, including: 
 
Actual costs expended compared to the budget. 
 
Actual completion date compared to the original deadline. 

Gain Agreement on Project Metrics Ahead of Time 
 
218  
 
Quantitative metrics describing the solution’s performance, includ-
ing response time and defects. 
 
Qualitative metrics describing client satisfaction with the solution, 
including ease of use, look and feel, etc. 
 
Survey feedback describing the client’s satisfaction with how the 
project team performed, including how quickly the team responded 
to problems, how well they communicated, how well they part-
nered, etc. 
Heather should have made sure there was an agreement with the sponsor 
on the metrics to collect and how to interpret the results. Normally this is 
done at the beginning of the project. However, since Heather came to the 
project late, she should have gained agreement when she first came on 
board. Then her team could have focused on the proper success factors, 
and, when the project ended, she could have collected the metrics and had 
the fact-based discussion she was hoping for. A balanced set of project met-
rics would probably include client satisfaction, and since the client was not 
happy, the final results were still not going to indicate total success. How-
ever, a good set of metrics does give everyone the right facts with which to 
have a discussion about what went right and what could be improved. If you 
have an unapproved, arbitrary, and skewed set of metrics, you are not going 
to get anywhere in a discussion. 
 
 
 

 
Year-End  
Recap 
 
I have enjoyed my job over the past year, and I hope I was able to provide 
value to the project managers in our organization. The preceding stories 
represent only a fraction of the meetings and coaching sessions I participated 
in during the year. I tried to pick out stories that highlight some of the most 
valuable project management lessons. Of course, there are many others. 
The year has not only been fun, but it has been professionally rewarding for 
two reasons. First, I have been able to see the project managers learn and 
grow. Some were already skilled in the project management discipline, but 
others had never before received formal training or coaching and didn’t 
really know what it meant to manage a project—people like Jerry Ackerman. 
Of course, the majority of the project managers were in between—people 
like Lindsay, Sean, and Ashley. They came from various organizations but all 
had some project management skills, even a little training. However, they 
managed projects via a sense for how to organize and manage the work, 
rather than by utilizing specific project management practices. 
Second, my work this year has set the stage for the real project manage-
ment deployment initiative that is scheduled to begin next year. Our com-
pany executives feel there is much more value to be gained by managing 
projects more efficiently and consistently.  
T. Mochal et al., Lessons  in Project  Management
© Tom Mochal and Jeff Mochal 2011

Year-End Recap 
 
220  
The President’s plan for establishing the initial Project Management Office 
(PMO) has been approved. The project is being funded as a three-year ini-
tiative, after which the PMO will move from deployment mode to long-term 
support of the project environment. It promises to be challenging—culture 
change always is. However, I hope the work I have done this year has set 
the stage for this broader initiative in the years ahead. If we are successful, a 
new project-driven culture will emerge, allowing all project managers to 
successfully deliver projects faster, with higher quality, and at less cost than 
we do today. 
Wish us luck in this initiative! (Perhaps this initiative would make for a good 
book in the future.) 
 

        
I 
Index 
A, B 
Big Three documents, 41 
business requirements, 43 
project charter, 43, 44 
project schedule, 43 
Business requirements, 43 
C 
Catching errors, 177 
philosophies, 179 
quality assurance, 179 
quality control, 179 
testing process, 180 
Client expectations management, 
165, 166 
agreement establishment, 167 
change management process, 167 
complete the agreement, 167 
delivery as expected, 167 
periodically assess performance, 167 
proactive communication, 167 
reset expectations, 167 
Collecting metrics, 51 
Communication Plan, 93 
culture change plan, 95 
informational needs, 96 
mandatory options, 96 
marketing, 96 
process, 95 
Critical path, 105, 107 
float, or slack, 107 
misconceptions, 107 
schedule float, 107 
Culture Change Plan, 95. See also 
Communication Plan 
D 
Deadline dates, 15 
Earned Value Management 
techniques, 18 
estimating effort hours, 17 
Deliverable-based WBS, 190 
Diverse project team, 31 
awareness, 33 
benefits, 33 
hiring better people, 34 
making better decisions, 33–34 
running better projects, 34 
recruiting and hiring 
best candidate, 33 
standardized process, 33 
E 
End-of-Project Review Meeting, 25 
Enhancements/discretionary 
requests, 6 

Index 
 
222 
Estimating assumptions, 109 
alternatives, 113 
budget, 111 
estimating tool or spreadsheet, 112 
explicit and implied 
assumptions, 112 
less-expensive alternatives, 112 
management stakeholders, 113 
negotiate a reduction in scope, 113 
process improvements, 112 
validation, 112 
work breakdown structure, 112 
Estimating contingency, 89, 91 
budget contingency, 91 
scope change requests, 92 
Estimating process, 91 
Estimating techniques, 143, 144 
Alex’s database 
conversion categories, 146 
upgrade techniques, 147 
analogy, 145 
expert opinion, 145 
parametric modelling, 146 
prior project history, 145 
ratio, 145 
WBS approach, 146 
F 
Face-to-face communication, 115 
electronic medium, 117 
e-mail messages, 117, 118 
Jean’s IT problem, 117 
project manager 
responsibilities, 117 
status meetings and status 
reports, 117 
status reports and collaborative 
web sites, 117, 118 
G 
Gold plating, 204 
H 
High-performing teams, 221, 222 
goals, 223 
potential loss of focus, 223 
project manager, 223 
I, J, K 
Inherent risks, 131, 133 
Danielle’s project, potential 
risks, 134 
people-related problems, 133 
of project, 134 
project characteristics, 134 
vendors, 134 
Inspection (QC), 88 
Issues management, 57, 67, 83, 153, 
155. See also Risk management 
cause(s) and effect(s), 69 
consistent and ongoing 
follow-up, 59 
Jade’s project 
bank interface, 69 
response-time problem, 69 
staffing resources, 70 
Lindsay’s project 
potential risks, 156 
resolution process, 156 
Pareto diagrams, 155 
proactive communication, 59 
problem resolution, 61, 69, 70 
process, 60 
project managers, 60 
root cause analysis, 156 
special problem-solving 
techniques, 59 
what-if analysis, 155 
L 
Large scope change request, 137. See 
also Scope change request 

Index 
 
223 
M, N, O 
Metrics, 49, 50, 139, 157, 215 
causes and impacts, 160 
client’s perspective, 160 
collecting data, 141 
manual process, 142 
sponsor’s opinion, 142 
time and cost, 141 
collecting metrics, 51 
defining and collecting, 51 
gathering metrics, 217 
help desk and IT support team, 159 
plant management, 159, 160 
proposing metrics to client, 217 
purposes 
gaining agreement, 217 
project success, 217 
Milestones, 169, 171 
managers and sponsors, 
tracking, 171 
project management 
checkpoint, 171 
scheduling activities, 172 
P 
Performance feedback, 53 
project manager, 55, 56 
team members 
escalate to functional 
manager, 56 
gathering facts, 55 
giving immediate feedback, 55 
meet in person, 55–56 
Postmortems. See End-of-Project 
Review Meeting 
Prevention (QA), 88 
Proactive project management 
process. See Risk management 
Project characteristics 
common objectives, 6 
defined scope, 6 
deliverables, 6 
finite time frame, 5 
management and leadership, 5 
operations work, 5 
overhead, 5 
project manager and project 
team, 6 
set of resources, 6 
support work, 5 
uniqueness, 6 
Project charter, 43 
Project deadline, 211 
client organization unfocused, 232 
date changes repeatedly, 232 
implementation problems, 231 
no firm business driver, 231 
scope change requests, 232 
Project delivery, 209 
best-case scenario, 212 
commitments, 213 
gold plating, 212 
most likely expectation, 212 
sandbagging, 212 
setting expectations, 211 
worst-case option, 211 
Project management, 7, 19 
cancel projects, 77 
business value, 79, 80 
investment, 80 
project failure, 79 
change management, 21 
client, 9 
enhancements, 21 
formal project management, 22 
Project Charter, 21 
risk management. See Risk 
management 
sponsors, 9 
active sponsor, 9 
executive/tactical project 
sponsor, 9 
issues and changes, 9 
transitioning, 10 
Project planning, 101, 103 
project execution, 103 
project manager, 103 

Index 
 
224 
Project planning (continued) 
risks, 104 
upfront analysis work, 103 
Project quality management 
catching errors. See Catching 
errors 
Project schedule, 43, 189 
baseline, 190 
deadline, 191 
techniques, 191 
check time-constrained 
activities, 192 
crashing the schedule, 192–193 
critical path, reallocate 
resources, 191–192 
dependencies, 192 
fast track, 193 
improve morale, 194 
improve processes, 193–194 
scope back the work, 194 
swap resources, 192 
work overtime, 191 
zero tolerance scope 
change, 193 
WBS technique, 197. See also 
Work breakdown structure 
(WBS) 
Q 
Quality assurance, 71, 73, 87 
deliverables, 73 
bad process, 74 
good process, 74 
project management process, 75 
quality control, 73 
requirements, 74 
status report, 73 
Quality control, 73, 87 
Quality management, 85, 87, 121 
inspection, 87 
Jerry’s project, 88 
prevention, 87. See also Quality 
assurance 
quality plan, 87 
quality process, 87, 88 
Quality mindset, 119, 121 
catching errors, 122 
scheduled basis, 121 
testing inspections, 122 
R 
Risk management, 81, 83, 203, 205 
create a risk management 
plan, 205 
Jade’s project 
potential options, 84 
risk identification, 83 
risk plan, objectives, 83 
moving the activities to 
schedule, 206 
potential future events, 83, 84 
potential risks, 205 
process, 83 
qualitative analysis, 205 
quantitative analysis, 205 
re-evaluate risks, 206 
response plan 
high-level risk, 205 
monitoring plan, 206 
up-front planning process, 83 
Risks, 161 
avoid the risk, 163 
leave it, 163 
mitigation, 163, 164 
monitor the risk, 163 
move the risk, 163 
S, T 
Scaling process, 97 
consequences, 100 
large projects, 99 
medium-sized projects, 99 
Service Request Form, 100 
small projects, 99 
Schedule, 149 
plan the work, work the plan, 150 
project managers, 151, 152 

Index 
 
225 
updating reasons 
review and verify the work, 151 
validate and compare the 
work, 151 
Schedule float, 107 
Scope, 35, 45 
definition, 37 
high-level scope 
definition, 37 
deliverables, 37 
project boundaries, 37 
low-level scope 
Danielle’s scope statement, 38 
features (product 
requirements), 38 
functions (process 
requirements), 38 
requirements, 38 
out of scope, 38 
scope change management. See 
Scope change management 
Scope change management, 47 
project managers, conflicts, 47 
sponsor approval. See Sponsor 
approval 
sponsors decisions, 47 
Scope change request, 123, 125, 135 
investigation, 138 
potential impacts, 138 
project estimation, 137 
project impact and business 
value, 125 
rule of thumb, 137 
sponsor alternatives, 125 
batching requests, 125 
benefits, 125 
client focus, 126 
project management 
technique, 125 
project manager and client 
manager, 125 
Service Request Form, 100 
Small scope change request, 125. See 
also Scope change request 
Sponsor approval, 181 
big C client, 184 
customers, 183 
end users and managers, 183 
scope change management 
project benefits, 184 
project budget and 
deadline, 184 
Status meetings, 63, 65 
clients, 65 
meeting facilitator, 66 
problem-solving and decision 
making, 65, 66 
project status, 65 
project team members, 65 
sponsors, 65 
Status report, 11, 13, 199 
budget reports, 202 
change log, 202 
color code technique, 14 
communicating status, 201 
project recap, 201 
functional manager, 13 
functions, 13 
issues log, 202 
project managers, 201, 202 
sponsor and stakeholders, 13 
status meeting, 13 
team status, 13 
work accomplishments, 202 
work plan, 202 
U 
Up-front planning work, 25 
building a project schedule, 26 
definition, 26 
project budget allocation, 26 
project management plan, 26 
V 
Vendor project management, 131, 133 
communication, 134 
risks, 134 

Index 
 
226 
Vendor project management 
(continued) 
schedule, 134 
scope, 134 
W, X, Y, Z 
Work breakdown structure (WBS), 195 
approach, 146 
deliverable-based WBS, 198 
effort estimation, 198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
schedule template, 197 
work packages, 197 
Work packages, 197 
Workplan, 23, 27 
rule of thumb, 30 
rules of thumb, 29 
schedule management, 29, 30 
time spent, 25 
two-week rule, 30 
up-front planning work. See 
Up-front planning work 

