

LESSONS FOR NONPROFIT AND
START-UP LEADERS


LESSONS FOR NONPROFIT AND
START-UP LEADERS
Tales from a Reluctant CEO
Maxine Harris and Michael B. O’Leary
ROWMAN & LITTLEFIELD
Lanham • Boulder • New York • London

Published by Rowman & Littlefield
A wholly owned subsidiary of The Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group,
Inc.
4501 Forbes Boulevard, Suite 200, Lanham, Maryland 20706
www.rowman.com
Unit A, Whitacre Mews, 26-34 Stannary Street, London SE11 4AB
Copyright © 2017 by Rowman & Littlefield
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by
any electronic or mechanical means, including information storage and retriev-
al systems, without written permission from the publisher, except by a reviewer
who may quote passages in a review.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Information Available
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Available
ISBN: 978-1-4422-7653-6 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN: 978-1-4422-7654-3 (electronic)
TM The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of
American National Standard for Information Sciences Permanence of Paper
for Printed Library Materials, ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992.
Printed in the United States of America

For Helen


vii
CONTENTS
Introduction
ix
1
Every Organization Has a Culture of Its Own: The
Beginnings of Community Connections
1
2
How to Make an Idea Come Alive: Inspiration, Thinking It
Through, and Making It Happen
21
3
Power, Authority, and Responsibility: Who’s In Charge
Around Here?
41
4
Hiring: People to Help With the Work
61
5
Barriers to Solving Problems: There Must Be a Way Around
This
83
6
Engaging the Outside World: Is Anyone Out There?
103
7
The Importance of Self and Organizational Awareness:
Taking a Hard Look
121
8
Preparing for the Future: What’s Next?
137
Conclusion
157
Notes
165
Index
175
About the Authors
179


ix
INTRODUCTION
Every year thousands of nonprofit organizations, start-up companies,
and small businesses open their doors. Some are motivated by a big
vision, some by an altruistic mission; others have an innovative product
or a novel process for making things work better. But what almost all of
them have in common is that their founders know very little about
business or what helps new ventures succeed or, as in most cases, fail.
Despite coming from diverse worlds, they almost all confront the same
issues of organizational culture, power and authority, hiring, problem
solving, and dealing with the world outside their doors. They have to be
aware of how they are seen, how their ideas grow into products or
services, and how they will sustain themselves over time.
Consider this book the advice of someone who’s been there (some-
times reluctantly). It’s intended for all those driven, focused founders
who have to confront the struggles of starting, running, and sustaining a
business.
We begin with the story of one particular start-up behavioral health
organization, Community Connections, which opened in 1984 in Wash-
ington, D.C. Within fifteen years, Community Connections grew to
become the largest nonprofit behavioral health care organization in the
nation’s capital. Within thirty years, it was serving three thousand men,
women, and children and employing four hundred people. It currently
has an annual budget of $35 million and owns a real estate portfolio in
excess of $46 million.

INTRODUCTION
x
Just how did that happen? How did the mission and vision to pro-
vide high-quality behavioral health care and safe community living for
people whose mental illnesses had caused them to become disenfran-
chised from the rest of society turn into the organization called Com-
munity Connections?
In the early 1980s, while the founders of Community Connections
were building their organization, faculty at places like Georgetown Uni-
versity were teaching, doing research, studying successful businesses,
and writing papers. These two worlds existed in relatively parallel uni-
verses back then. Now, in this book, we try to bring together the experi-
ence and insights from the leader of an in-the-trenches behavioral
health organization and a former nonprofit consultant turned business-
school scholar/teacher.
Many books on management use a case study approach as a vehicle
for illustrating how organizations grow and thrive. Often the cases in-
volve large, well-known organizations, and it can be hard to apply the
lessons learned to smaller companies in the early stages of their devel-
opment. Sometimes books focus on one company exclusively. At other
times, shorter vignettes are combined from several organizations. While
this latter strategy may illustrate the universality of certain issues, it can
be hard for readers new to the business world. After a while, a short
vignette from one company seems to blend with other examples, and
those unfamiliar with the business world may find themselves getting
lost.
Other books, like Five Temptations of a CEO by best-selling author
Patrick Lencioni, invent a fictional business, describe how it deals with
a range of problems, and then provide commentary on the decisions
made by the imaginary company.1 As engaging as this style can be, it
runs the risk of confusing the reader who is disinclined to trust a hypo-
thetical case where all of the variables are controlled by the author to
make a point. For some, it may lack a certain authenticity.
Not everyone learns in the same way. Some of us like factual infor-
mation. We want to know what we can learn from the business or
academic world, a world in which research and data form the basis of
knowledge. For others, information comes from actual case studies of
how similar organizations coped with their challenges. “Oh, tell me
what happened. How did you deal with that problem?” A book that uses
case studies invites the reader to have a “conversation” with someone

INTRODUCTION
xi
who has had similar experiences. “How can I learn from what you did
right and what you did wrong?” Lessons for Nonprofit and Start-Up
Leaders: Tales from a Reluctant CEO uses a real organization, Commu-
nity Connections, to bring to life the actual conflicts that an organiza-
tion (particularly a founder-run midsized business) must confront and
solve if it is to survive and be successful. The book takes the reader
through the challenges of building and sustaining an organization:
whom to hire; how to solve problems; how and when to engage the
community and other external stakeholders. We have written this book
in an attempt to help readers understand that they can do it too—and
perhaps avoid some mistakes along the way by seeing how it unfolded at
Community Connections.
Some people learn best when their imaginations are engaged. It is
no surprise that every culture, from the Maori in New Zealand to the
Navajo in North America to the Danish in Western Europe, has a
tradition of fairy tales—stories of fanciful creatures and naive protago-
nists, set in an imaginary land, in a time long ago. As these stories
engage our imaginations, they teach us a moral lesson, a way to solve a
problem, or an explanation for how things work in the world. We read
them, or more often listen to them, for amusement or pleasure. But
when the story is over and we leave the world of fantasy, we look up and
realize that we have learned something.
In Lessons for Nonprofit and Start-Up Leaders, we attempt to meld
all three of these ways of knowing into a single coherent whole. The
case studies come from Community Connections, an organization
founded by Maxine Harris and Helen Bergman. Each case study illus-
trates a unique theme, with particulars drawn from several separate
incidents. The names of the people involved are invented, and the story
itself is a composite of similar events that occurred over a span of thirty
years. Of course, it must be said that case stories are always a product of
memory. No one example is recorded exactly as it happened. The fairy
tales come from our collective imagination, or, as the storyteller might
say, “They were plucked from the air.” The academic commentary is
provided by Michael O’Leary, a professor of leadership at Georgetown
University’s McDonough School of Business.
We asked ourselves, “What would happen if we started every chap-
ter with a fairy tale, a myth involving naive characters set in a place
outside of time, away from everyday existence?” The reader—especially

INTRODUCTION
xii
the reader not usually inclined to pick up a management book but one
struggling with management issues nonetheless—would become en-
gaged in a story that indirectly introduced a business dilemma and laid
out new ways to understand choices in running a company. We would
follow with a case story from the work at Community Connections and
conclude with a discussion and a perspective that would come from
current research and more theoretical formulations. A little something
for everyone.
What emerged was a structure addressing eight different issues that
Community Connections wrestled with and that are encountered by
almost every founder-run organization.
In chapter 1, “Every Organization Has a Culture of Its Own: The
Beginnings of Community Connections,” the authors discuss the
circumstances surrounding the birth and growth of Community Con-
nections and how experiences, pitfalls, struggles, and successes helped
to shape the culture of the organization. The importance of the rela-
tionship between the two founders is also highlighted as an important
factor in shaping the eventual direction that Community Connections
took.
The fable of “Two Girls” reminds the reader that curiosity and fun
are also part of starting a new business. It is not all struggles and mis-
takes. And it is often curiosity and grit that keep organizations going
during tough times.
The authors conclude the chapter with a more formal discussion of
just what constitutes culture and why culture matters. They discuss how
culture comes into being and what it means for an organization to have
a strong culture.
In chapter 2, “How to Make an Idea Come Alive: Inspiration, Think-
ing It Through, and Making It Happen,” the focus shifts to how found-
ers move from an idea or a vision to something that has real meat on the
bones. All socially driven businesses and creative endeavors start with
an idea, an inspiration that drives the decision to open up shop. But a
bright idea is not enough. Thinking and implementing are at the core of
the success of any start-up. The chapter uses examples from the history
of Community Connections to show what happens when all three are
aligned and what can go wrong when they are not.
The fable “A Tower to Reach the Sky” tells the story of a boy who
sees a glorious shooting star and then finds others who help him build a

INTRODUCTION
xiii
tower to the heavens. His vision, spectacular as it is, is not enough to
build the tower alone.
The chapter concludes with a discussion of design thinking as an
approach to innovation and applies its core concepts to Community
Connections and other similar organizations. Design thinking empha-
sizes both a deep emotional understanding on the part of the stakehold-
ers in any business venture and the value of the collaborative generation
of ideas.
Chapter 3, “Power, Authority, and Responsibility: Who’s in Charge
Around Here?” initiates a discussion of the all-important dimension of
power within an organization. When mission-driven organizations be-
gin, the last thing they think about is power. Usually there are only a
few founders and great consensus on just how things are to be done.
But as an organization grows, questions arise as to just who is in charge
and who bears responsibility for the success of the organization.
“The Magic Ring” tells the story of two brothers who begin as joint
owners of a magic ring that confers great power, but as the fable contin-
ues, the brothers struggle and only one remains in possession of the
ring. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the social science of
power and shared leadership.
Chapter 4, “Hiring: People to Help With the Work,” tackles prob-
lems that arise as organizations grow and expand. It may only take a few
people to start a business, but it takes many more to actually run it. So
how do you go about hiring new staff? Do you design the job and then
hire the best person, or do you find good people and then let them
create their own jobs? These are not simple questions as organizations
move into the more complicated stages of growth. These are also ques-
tions that begin to require a more in-depth knowledge of how organiza-
tions work.
“The Clothing in the Chest” is a fable that tells the story of a girl who
distributes clothing she has found in an old chest to a group of villagers
who are shivering in the cold winter. But her distribution is based more
on her need to feel generous and less on an assessment of what will
actually fit each villager well. It is not surprising that most of the villag-
ers are left with ill-fitting clothing and they make a pledge to be less
eager and more thoughtful the next time an opportunity presents itself.

INTRODUCTION
xiv
The chapter concludes with a discussion of talent management, a
process that moves beyond simple hiring to managing an employee’s
needs and skills over the course of a career.
In chapter 5, “Barriers to Solving Problems: There Must Be a Way
Around This,” the authors address a concern ubiquitous in all new
businesses, and in business in general: how to understand and solve
problems. Even when everyone agrees as to what the problem is and
how it might be addressed, there are still systemic and relational issues
that prevent a clean solution. It is not always the case that there is
unanimous agreement as to just what constitutes a problem. Differing
perspectives add another barrier and a further difficulty in solving prob-
lems, especially in new organizations where standard practices do not
exist.
In the fable “Crossing the Woods,” a girl decides to risk her safety
and cross a dark forest. She faces a variety of challenges on her journey
and needs to figure out how to evaluate and solve each problem and all
of the barriers she must overcome along her way.
The chapter closes with a discussion of how the way in which a
problem is framed has a decisive impact on the solutions that are at-
tempted. The authors also consider the advantages and disadvantages of
collaborative problem solving.
Organizations do not exist in isolation, so in chapter 6, “Engaging the
Outside World: Is Anyone Out There?” the authors turn their attention
to how organizations deal with the world outside of their own boundar-
ies. At some point in its evolution, an organization needs to turn its
attention outward, toward the community and the context in which it
does business. Who are its potential partners? Where is the competition
coming from? What changes in the external environment will have the
greatest impact? For an organization that has survived and even thrived
in isolation, this turning outward can bring struggles and conflict. In
chapter 6, the authors present examples of what happens when there is
too little engagement with the world outside the organization and what
happens if there is too much. An example is provided that demonstrates
the right amount of collaboration with the world outside the business.
The fable of “The Three Brothers” tells the story of three brothers
and their very different ways of dealing with the world outside of their
small homes. Each brother has a different strategy and those strategies
result in very different outcomes. The chapter identifies four different

INTRODUCTION
xv
strategies of interaction with the world outside the organization and
suggests how these strategies might benefit or harm the organization.
In chapter 7, “The Importance of Self and Organizational Aware-
ness: Taking a Hard Look,” the authors turn back to the world inside
the organization and consider what it means for an organization and its
founders to undertake a serious self-assessment. Of course, self-assess-
ment should be an ongoing part of running an organization. Continual
reflection and adjustment to feedback is critical to success, but too
much time spent looking at what you are doing, rather than doing it, can
become navel gazing and lead to failure.
In “A Face in the Mirror,” a young boy laments that he does not
know what he looks like and would not be able to recognize himself. He
embarks on a journey that takes him many places while he searches for
his one true “face.”
Making an accurate judgment about oneself is not just difficult in
business. The chapter concludes with a discussion of the discrepancies
in self-perception and perception made by others.
The final chapter before the conclusion is chapter 8, “Preparing for
the Future: What’s Next?” Questions of how to leave an organization
that one has created and what needs to be done in order to ensure that
an organization is sustained beyond the tenure of the founders are
always difficult. Even in a relatively young organization, leaders need to
have one eye to the future. What new development might be coming
along and how can we prepare for it? Many businesses have a short life
span because of a failure to plan ahead. This chapter addresses issues of
scalability, sustainability, and succession.
The fable “Little One Note” addresses the concerns of a clan mem-
ber who is always afraid of the future and the impact she has on the
larger group.
In the chapter’s conclusion, the authors pay special attention to is-
sues of sustainability and succession. Both of these have to do with
whether or not an organization will survive. Small businesses in particu-
lar have only a 50 percent chance of surviving and family-owned busi-
nesses rarely make it to the third generation of owners.
Although these eight chapters do not cover all of the issues that new
businesses might face, they do present a wide enough range to give
some guidance. We hope it increases the probability that readers’ own

INTRODUCTION
xvi
organizations are successful—whether they are nonprofits, family busi-
nesses, or small corporations.
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
It always seemed right that the word “reluctant” should be part of the
title of this book. But as we came to the end, I asked myself, “reluctant
about what?” Surely, Helen, my partner and the cofounder of Commu-
nity Connections, and I had never been reluctant about leaving a big
public hospital that had already seen its best days, and we were not
reluctant about being in charge. Helen ran a hospital ward where she
made most of the decisions and I wanted to run my own shop shortly
after I arrived at the hospital. So where was the reluctance coming
from? Not from leaving the hospital, not from running our own pro-
gram, but instead it came from the word “CEO.” Just what did it mean
to be a CEO? Having not come from a business background, we really
didn’t know, and we had only a vague sense that it was going to be
something different from everything we had been trained to do. That’s
where the reluctance came from, not that we were about to leap into
something new, but that we didn’t know what that something was going
to be.

1
1
EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE
OF ITS OWN
The Beginnings of Community Connections
I remember an interaction with one of my first employers who told me
that I should avoid putting anything personal in my office: no family
photographs, no pictures on the wall, not even books on the shelves. His
rationale was that I did not want to give away any information about
who I was. I would thus have an advantage in every interview, every
negotiation, and even every casual conversation I had.
But that employer could not have been more wrong. My empty
office said as much about who I was as an office cluttered with papers
and coffee cups would have. We can’t hide who we are no matter how
much we may try.
And just as people have identities, so do organizations. You can feel
the culture of an organization the minute you walk in the door. The
personnel, the space, the roles that people occupy, all say something
about “who” this organization is. Culture is not static; it grows and
changes over time in response to pressures from inside and outside the
organization. The fable that follows captures the origins of a relation-
ship (and a nascent organization), which are often visible only in
retrospect.

CHAPTER 1
2
A FABLE: TWO GIRLS
Once upon a time there were two little girls who loved to play in the
grass. Each day they would run to the big field that adjoined their two
homes and begin to play their favorite game. But one day the girl with
the dark curls looked up and said to her friend with the long blond hair,
“I am tired of this game. We know all the rules and we each play in just
the same way. We need a new game.”
“But a new game will be hard to find,” said the girl with the long
blond hair. “We may search and search and never find a game that we
like as much.”
“Don’t be silly,” said the girl with the curls. “Let’s run down the hill
and see what we can find.”
The girls began running so fast that they stumbled and slid until they
landed at the bottom of the hill with a thud.
“Now see what you have done,” said the girl with the blond hair.
“We have skinned our legs and ruined our pretty dresses.”
“Yes,” said her friend, “but I think we may have found a new game!”
The two friends huddled together and began to write the rules for their
new game.
Yet after a while the same thing happened: the girls grew bored with
their game. This time it was the girl with the long blond hair who said,
“I am tired of this game. It is no longer our special secret; everyone in
the whole town knows how to play.”
Once again the girls set off looking for a new game. This time they
met a big bear who began to tell them of a game he played with his cubs
(in those days bears could talk just like we do).
The girls listened and nodded their heads in unison, “Now this is a
really good game. No one will ever know how we discovered this most
remarkable game.” The girls thanked the bear, gave him a big hug
(something bears love), and set off to play their new game.
And so it went for many years, until one day one of the girls fell silent
and began to weep. “Someday there will be no new games to play.”
Then her friend turned to her with a big smile. “Now you are really
being silly. There will always be new games.” And so it was until this
very day.

EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
3
Good ideas, new ideas emerge from the lucky combination of the right
people, a creative vision, an opportunity, and plenty of hard work. And,
like the girls in the story discover, there is no shortage of new ideas. The
girls in the story refer to their efforts as a “game” they love to play.
Everyone who has founded a mission-driven business knows there is a
sense of passion and creativity and fun at the start of a new project.
Founders take on the challenge of doing something different and doing
it differently. The girls in the story are in search of ever better innova-
tions on the games they “love to play.”
THE STORY OF COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS
In the early summer of 1977, the two founders of Community Connec-
tions met while working on a ward at St. Elizabeths Hospital, a three-
thousand-bed public psychiatric hospital in the District of Columbia.
Helen Bergman was a clinical social worker and Maxine Harris was a
clinical psychologist. For both of them it was their first professional job
after graduate school. Within seven years they opened what was to
become the largest not-for-profit behavioral health care center in the
District of Columbia. A place called Community Connections.
St. Elizabeths Hospital, founded in 1855 with the help of mental
health pioneer Dorothea Dix, had once housed eight thousand patients
who were cared for by four thousand staff. During its heyday, it was a
center for research and cutting-edge care, but by the late 1970s when
Harris and Bergman arrived to begin their careers, the hospital had
fallen into disrepair. Much of the care was delivered by untrained para-
professionals, the buildings were literally crumbling, and the patients
wandered the grounds with blank stares on their faces. Diagnosed with
depression, mania, and psychosis and medicated with powerful psycho-
tropic drugs, some men and women were restrained in strait jackets,
held down with physical restraints, and thrown into small windowless
seclusion rooms in an effort to control their behaviors. The average
length of stay for patients was seven years, and many individuals spent
most of their adult lives being treated on sterile hospital wards and
wandering the almost twenty-five acres known as the “campus.”1
Wards were large and cavernous and housed up to fifty patients who
sat listlessly on chairs that encircled the main room, patients who had

CHAPTER 1
4
little to no contact with one another or with the ward staff. Even staff
passed one another without speaking and walked quickly through the
tunnel that connected the two sides of the hospital grounds. Relational
connection of any kind was absent.
And while some might argue that the hospital comprised a commu-
nity of its own—complete with fire department, large kitchen garden,
and chapel—it was completely cut off from the community outside its
walls. The outside world was not only unknown, it was frightening, and
in the words of one patient who had spent her life at St. Elizabeths,
“They kill people like me out there.”
St. Elizabeths felt more like a prison and less like a place where
people could get care and become well. The mentally ill residents of the
District of Columbia deserved better.
The story that unfolds in this chapter is the story of two women who
rejected what they saw and created a new way of treating men and
women with serious mental illness.
The Relationship
Before there was even an idea, there was a relationship between Max-
ine and Helen. In the summer of 1977, each not quite thirty years old,
the two met at St. Elizabeths Hospital. Their first months at the hospital
had been quite different. Bergman was working as a social work intern
on a ward set up to train psychiatric residents. The patients were among
the youngest treated at the hospital and considered not quite chronic.
And there was an atmosphere of learning and hopefulness. Senior
psychiatrists conducted clinical rounds and everyone knew that “B
Building” (as it was called) was not a forever place, at least not for the
staff.
In contrast, Harris, a newly minted PhD, was assigned to work on a
chronic ward known as “M Building” with patients who babbled and
screamed and chewed on cigarettes butts. Her immediate supervisor,
who worked in another building, gave her little guidance and seemed
more interested in talking about how Harris felt working at the hospital
than about how she might help her patients. Not unlike the people on
the wards, Harris felt lost and spent a good part of her first several
months escaping to the hospital library, reading old psychiatric journals,
and plotting how she might escape from St. Elizabeths.

EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
5
These two divergent experiences were important because they
formed the backdrop against which Community Connections was first
conceived.
Despite this contrast in their first experiences at the hospital, when
Harris and Bergman met they felt an almost immediate rapport. Coinci-
dentally, they had been born three days apart in 1948; they were mar-
ried one week apart in 1969; and they were both now in the process of
getting divorced—a similarity that felt somewhat uncanny, reminding
both of them of a song one of the psychotic women on the ward used to
sing when she wandered the grounds, “We’re twins! We’re identical
twins!”
Now not all new businesses start with such a similarity between the
two partners, but this sense of “knowing“ one another made it easier to
work through some of the most difficult times in the life of Community
Connections.
Over the next two years, Harris and Bergman had several conversa-
tions about both the theory and the practice of providing care for
chronic, marginalized psychiatric patients. They also became each oth-
er’s best friend, sharing a sense of mutual trust that, like the characters
Thelma and Louise in the classic movie, allowed them to hold hands
and drive off the cliff together when the right time came. But we are
getting ahead of ourselves.
Bergman had now become a senior social worker, running a ward
similar to the one on which she had trained, and Harris had transferred
to the department that trained all hospital psychologists and supported
a large program for training young psychologists from around the coun-
try. They began to formulate a plan for how to merge their two skill sets
and develop a program that would allow them to experiment with a new
way of treating patients.
From their separate vantage points, they began to observe that a
large number of patients seemed to stay on the wards for months and
even years without any noticeable change in their behavior. Patients
complained about the conditions on the wards, but when given a
chance to receive treatment in the community, they stayed out for only
a short time until they became symptomatic and returned to the hospi-
tal. This “revolving door” looked as if it would go on forever.
At the same time, Harris observed young trainees being taught vari-
ants of the “talking cure,” which, while interesting, seemed to have little

CHAPTER 1
6
impact on improving the condition of patients at St. Elizabeths. The
hospital seemed attached to the patients and the patients seemed at-
tached to the hospital. But these attachments seemed to have very little
to do with actual treatment.
During this same period, the District of Columbia was in the midst
of a class action suit (which lasted for thirty-seven years, from 1974 to
2011) filed on behalf of William Dixon and other patients that mandat-
ed community-based treatment options for patients hospitalized at St.
Elizabeths. When the city failed in its efforts, the public mental health
system was placed into receivership. One of the pro bono lawyers repre-
senting Dixon called the hospital “a crumbling, wretched institution . . .
where in no sense of the word did the city treat the folks who were
captured in the mental health system in a tolerable civilized fashion.”2
As city officials became increasingly desperate to resolve the Dixon
lawsuit, mental health administrators became more open to creative
solutions. Harris and Bergman began to see that there might be an
opportunity for real change.
The Idea
The broader mental health field was supporting a community-based
intervention called case management. Patients would have their service
needs managed by community-based clinicians who would connect
them to resources ranging from housing to primary care.
Harris and Bergman had seen that patients needed more than re-
sources, however. They needed relationships. And the connection that
many of them felt with the hospital, however minimal it might be,
would need to be replicated in the community if patients were to suc-
ceed outside of the hospital. Patients would need relational (or what
came to be called clinical) case management.
But Harris and Bergman were not quite ready to launch their new
model of clinical case management. They wanted more proof that it
would work. With the support of the chief of psychology training, and
the affirmation of clinicians with national reputations, they tested their
model on one of St. Elizabeths wards. With Bergman’s administrative
skill and Harris’s training credentials, they were able to staff the ward
with young trainees and focus their efforts on working with patients
who were involved in this cycle of the revolving door.

EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
7
The new ward was built around the following core beliefs:
1. Those who have been marginalized and disenfranchised by virtue
of psychiatric illness, violence and abuse, poverty, and race
should be afforded high quality, state of the art behavioral health
care.
2. People grow and thrive in connection to other people.
3. Integration into a “normal” community is not only a sign of re-
spect; it promotes healthy living.
Each clinician was educated in how to access local resources and each
was assigned a small group of patients whom they would get to know
and with whom they would have a chance to form relationships. Clini-
cians would focus on the strengths and goals of each patient (now re-
ferred to as a client) and would help prepare clients for life in the
community. The relationships forged in the hospital would be trans-
ferred to the community. Case management would become dynamic; it
would become clinical.
COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS IS BORN
With an idea clearly articulated and tested, Harris and Bergman were
now ready to put their program into practice outside of St. Elizabeths.
Both could see that the trends in mental health were moving away from
inpatient programs, even innovative ones. The Dixon court case would
likely mean less money was going to be spent on the big public hospital.
With a small grant from the city government, initially won on the
merits of its innovation but ultimately secured through relationships
with city officials, the founders opened Community Connections in the
summer of 1984. Located in a single townhouse, literally across the
bridge from St. Elizabeths, Community Connections began with just
three employees—Harris, Bergman, and Harris’s mother—and a com-
mitment to serve thirty-five patients who were to be released from the
hospital. Now these were not the revolving door patients for whom
Harris and Bergman had designed their model of clinical case manage-
ment, but rather a group of long-stay patients who had resided at St.
Elizabeths for several years. The city needed to outplace patients in

CHAPTER 1
8
order to comply with the Dixon mandate. Community Connections
needed a contract . . . and so began a complicated alliance.
Within a period of twelve months, Harris and Bergman needed to
find homes and supports for thirty-five men and women and make sure
they did not return to institutional care. This meant working with land-
lords, managing crises, even soothing a client in the middle of the night,
all to make sure they did not go to an emergency room and thus back to
the hospital. It also meant teaching people skills and helping them to
find the resources to live in the community. The early culture was not
only “can do” but it was “must do.” The two worked long hours and did
everything that needed to be done, including feeding clients a hot lunch
(made by Harris’s mother) to making sure they had a place to go for
Christmas. As with many start-up organizations, Harris and Bergman
worked many hours and often put Community Connections ahead of
family and other obligations.
One year passed and the partners were successful: no rehospitaliza-
tions, thirty-five people living in community homes, stories in the local
paper showing Harris and Bergman moving a young man into his first
home, carrying his clothing up the front stairs in two large plastic bags.
Now more and more contracts came their way. They no longer had
to argue that clinical case management could work. They had proof to
show that it did. With only one year of hard-won success, Harris
thought it was time to go public. Clinical case management was not only
a model for how to help clients in the District of Columbia move into
the community, it was a whole new way of thinking about how to serve
people with chronic mental illnesses. In1993, Harris and Bergman edit-
ed a book on clinical case management.3
But again, let’s not move too fast. It was one thing to find housing for
thirty-five individuals, it was quite another to find community living for
the second and third wave of clients, now totaling several hundred.
At first, Harris and Bergman contracted with a number of “mom and
pop” homes where former patients lived together as a pseudo family. It
soon became apparent that many of these homes were mini-institutions,
with strict rules, meals served at five, patients in bed by eight, and no
activity other than staring at the television. Clearly, Harris and Bergman
could do better.
Just two years after they opened Community Connections, Harris
and Bergman bought their first property designed to provide housing

EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
9
for their clients. A large building, with space for congregate living as
well as four separate supported but independent apartments, was set up
to provide housing for twelve clients. It was staffed around the clock
and was focused not only on giving people housing, but also on teaching
the skills clients would need to fully integrate into the community.
Groups focusing on training were run by staff and trained interns, the
first of whom stayed on and eventually ran the entire group living pro-
gram at Community Connections. Clinical case management had
moved into the world of residential services.
Over the next twenty-five years, Community Connections purchased
forty-six properties and provided housing for more than five hundred
people, most of whom now live in independent apartments subsidized
by the District of Columbia and the federal government. Community
Connections continues to provide clinical support to most of those resi-
dents.
But not everyone makes the transition from the hospital to the com-
munity smoothly. Some individuals became symptomatic, refused en-
gagement with their clinical case managers, and lost their housing. It
was not long after Community Connections opened its doors that the
problem of institutionalization was followed by the problem of home-
lessness. In the late 1980s, Community Connections applied for and
was awarded a grant to work with homeless women. Because of their
vulnerability to violence and abuse on the streets, these women needed
additional support services. In 1988, Harris interviewed the first twen-
ty-five women referred for homelessness services. These interviews
formed the basis of a book published in 1991 under the title Sisters of
the Shadow.4
In order to fully integrate into their communities, individuals need
more than just housing. They need meaningful activity and work. Once
again, Harris and Bergman sought outside support to help them start an
employment program. In the late 1980s the Dole Foundation funded a
project to find employment for people with psychiatric disabilities. And
while it was not until the mid-1990s that Community Connections part-
nered with research psychiatrists at Dartmouth Medical School to start
an active supported-employment program, this first effort enabled Har-
ris and Bergman and their growing staff of clinical case managers to
understand just how much planning and effort it would take to help

CHAPTER 1
10
people who had spent their days sitting on wards to become working
adults.
Clinical case management was now making its way into residential,
employment, and homelessness services, but there was a lot more to
come.
NEW IDEAS TO SOLVE NEW PROBLEMS OR ONE THING
LEADS TO ANOTHER
Given that the goal of Community Connections and the clinical case
management model was to help seriously mentally ill women and men
find a place of dignity and self-worth in the community, it made sense
that decent housing resources and job opportunities would be part of
making that goal a reality. The founders of Community Connections
were prepared for those challenges. What they were not prepared for
were the other problems that arose when people with few coping skills,
severe psychiatric symptoms, few practical resources, and fractured
interpersonal relationships tried to live on their own—even with sup-
port from Community Connections clinicians—in a community that
was often less than welcoming and sometimes downright hostile.
On some occasions, clients felt so unsafe in their new homes that
they left them for the streets. At other times, clients could not manage
the tasks of maintaining a home and were hassled by landlords or other
tenants for leaving doors open, not taking out the trash, or allowing
strangers to camp in the hallways.
When clients lived at the hospital, they had a place to stay; when
they were first placed in a community residence, they had a home. But
when they failed to manage the rigors of independent living, they had
homelessness.
Community Connections worked to address the problem of home-
lessness with aggressive outreach, finding people in parks and alley-
ways, and by designing a range of living options—group homes, shared
apartments, supported independent apartments, and single occupancy
rooming houses. Community reintegration remained the goal; we just
had to find housing that would meet the varying needs of clients.
The streets can be dangerous places and people with poor judgment
are likely to make devastating mistakes. Shortly after Community Con-

EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
11
nections opened, the District of Columbia experienced an epidemic of
crack cocaine use. Initially, crack was cheap. It was highly addictive and
mixed poorly with psychiatric medications, so once people became ad-
dicted to crack, they stopped taking their prescribed medications.
Smoking a crack pipe in the park was a way for isolated people to “make
friends.” Enter the problem of drug use and addiction.
Community Connections never intended to be a drug treatment
program, in fact, in the District of Columbia, substance abuse treat-
ment and mental health treatment were housed in and regulated by two
different branches of the Department of Health. But we found our-
selves having no choice. Either we learned how to treat our clients’
addictions or we would be helpless in accomplishing our primary mis-
sion of reintegrating them into healthy communities.
In 1991, we applied for and were awarded a federal grant to design
treatments specifically for people who suffered from both a major men-
tal illness and an addictive disorder, a problem known as a dual diagno-
sis. This new program required hiring not only additional staff, but also
staff with different skills. Community Connections partnered with aca-
demic researchers because the grant involved not just designing ser-
vices, but measuring their effectiveness. What was once a small service
organization was becoming a center for research and clinical innovation.
By the mid-1990s, Community Connections served between 450 and
600 dually diagnosed adults (addiction and mental illness), staff wrote
articles and gave presentations, both nationally and locally, and Com-
munity Connections became recognized as a leader in the treatment of
dually diagnosed individuals. This reputation led to a privately funded
five-year study of treatment for dually diagnosed individuals that in-
volved researchers from three major universities. It was at this time that
Community Connections inaugurated a department of dual diagnosis
services.
Addiction is not a stand-alone problem. Addicts get involved with
the criminal justice system and women often prostitute for drug money
and expose themselves to HIV infection. Dually diagnosed men and
women are exposed to trauma and abuse, and families where parents
struggle with addiction breed their own form of interpersonal chaos.
Between 1991 through 2015, Community Connections designed and
implemented programs to work with individuals in the criminal justice
system, women infected with HIV, women who have or are experienc-

CHAPTER 1
12
ing domestic violence and sexual and physical abuse, children with be-
havioral and psychological problems, and people with high-intensity
needs. Each of these programs was initially funded by a grant award,
each launched the start of a new clinical department, and each required
that a new treatment model be designed and then empirically tested.
An organization whose initial focus had been clinical case management
for people being deinstitutionalized had now sprouted many tentacles
reaching in multiple directions.
In the area of trauma abuse in particular, Community Connections
became a national leader in designing trauma services and developing a
model for trauma-informed care that was used across the country. Har-
ris eventually wrote three books outlining the Community Connections
trauma model and the organization set up a training department to
orchestrate presentations about the model both locally and nationally
(presenters have now given trainings in forty states).
The values that emboldened Harris and Bergman to start Commu-
nity Connections in 1984 were unchanged, but the programs designed
to operationalize those values were now many and varied. At times,
some clinical staff began to question whether the values were really
intact and they expressed their concerns that mission creep threatened
to change the very character and culture of Community Connections.
SOMETHING FUNNY HAPPENED ON THE WAY TO THE
FUTURE
Harris and Bergman knew how to design clinical programs, how to
make innovative ideas operational, and how to train clinical staff. What
they did not know, however, was how to run an organization.
Over the years, they had referred to Community Connections as a
mental health center, as an organization, as an agency, but never as a
business—until one day, one of the outside financial auditors asked,
“You do know you are a business, don’t you?”
How did a psychologist and a social worker who wanted to bring
behavioral health services to marginalized people turn into a business
with all of the issues and problems that all businesses need to solve?
That is what this book is about. Community Connections had been
born, but far from grown.

EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
13
PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
In the days before Community Connections first opened, I was predict-
ably nervous.
After all, I had left the security of a “good” government job that
came with predictability, benefits, and a secure retirement. And I had
taken on considerable professional and financial risk. I remember
friends and colleagues asking me if I was certain of my decision. I
thought I was.
Then I had a disquieting dream, one that repeated for several days.
In the dream, I was a neurosurgeon and was standing in the operating
room. I was fully attired in gown, mask, and surgical bonnet, and then,
as the nurse was putting on my gloves, I had a terrifying thought, “I was
not a neurosurgeon!” I had no training, no knowledge, and I knew
nothing of the patient on the table in front of me. I was overcome by a
feeling of panic, but then I took some deep breaths, calmed myself
down, and went ahead with the surgery. I was flying by the seat of my
pants, but I felt that I had no choice but to go forward. The recovery
community refers to this as “fake it till you make it.”
The analogy to starting Community Connections is fairly obvious. I
was scared, I didn’t know what to do, and yet I forged ahead anyway.
PUTTING THE COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS STORY AND
CULTURE IN CONTEXT
The preceding sections show how Community Connections was ani-
mated by a set of core values from its earliest days. Those values in-
cluded creativity, innovation, a willingness to challenge the status quo,
and an element of (what an earlier generation of entrepreneurs would
have called) gumption or (what the current generation of entrepreneurs
calls) bootstrapping. In this section, we highlight key aspects of the
broader literature on organizational culture. As we will discuss, cultures
must be aligned internally and externally, and must also be adaptable—
to survive and thrive in the face of growth and (often radical) changes in
the economic, regulatory, and sociopolitical environment.

CHAPTER 1
14
WHAT IS ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE?5
Organizational culture is manifested at three levels: assumptions, val-
ues, and artifacts. They are often represented as levels of a pyramid or
an iceberg, with assumptions being the largest level but also the one
that is largely invisible (i.e., below the water line).
The first level, which is least visible, least tangible, includes employ-
ees’ underlying assumptions about how humans behave and how things
work in an organization. These assumptions are usually unconscious
and so deeply embedded in an organization that they are difficult to
articulate—except for newcomers to the organization and/or unless
they are violated. Such assumptions often address things like coopera-
tion, collaboration, status, assumptions of positive intent, and so on.
The second level includes the values that are espoused in the organ-
ization. Such values often appear in recruiting and advertising material;
credos; mission, vision, and value statements; codes of conduct; and
“culture books.” Thus, they are the official representation of the organ-
ization to its employees and those outside the organization. Important-
ly, these values must be supported by policies and practices that consis-
tently reinforce them. If not, those inside and outside the organization
view them as either simply empty statements or outright hypocritical
ones. In either case, gaps between espoused and enacted values can be
especially problematic for an organization.
Into its second decade, Community Connections saw a split in es-
poused values between new employees (generally recent college gradu-
ates) and the more seasoned cohort of employees who had been there
with the founders from the very beginning. The younger staff valued
teamwork, collaboration, a welcoming work environment, and a mission
geared toward social justice. Those who had been with the organization
for a while were more focused on transforming the organization into a
successful business with a strong balance sheet. This clash between
values can, and often did, generate tensions within the organization.
The third level includes the physical, architectural, and other arti-
facts that embody key aspects of the culture. For example, an open
office floor plan in which senior leaders share space with other employ-
ees can be a physical manifestation of a culture where the free flow of
ideas and absence of hierarchy are valued. Conversely, an office with a
top-floor executive suite, separate executive elevators, and executive

EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
15
dining areas are artifacts of a very different, more traditional status-
oriented culture. In a customer service context, a wide desk or high
counter could be an artifact of culture where service is less accessible
and friendly. Other artifacts can include things like people’s dress, indi-
vidual workspaces, furniture, and so forth.
Because Community Connections inherited its office space and fur-
nishings, it was sometimes difficult for space and architectural design to
match values. The organization espoused certain values, but the space
said something very different. Dark mahogany furniture donated by law
firms didn’t exactly convey a caring, welcoming environment.
WHY SHOULD WE CARE ABOUT ORGANIZATIONAL
CULTURE?
Attention to organizational culture exploded between 1975 and 1995
with a profusion of books and articles. Why? First, it was presented as a
strongly inertial force that helped explain why so many attempts to
change organizations failed—especially the many attempted mergers
and restructurings of the 1980s and 1990s. In addition to binding peo-
ple to the old ways of doing things, it can also blind them to new ways of
doing things—limiting change by limiting people’s perspective or vision
of what’s possible or desirable. Second, and more positively, culture can
be a source of competitive advantage. When an organization’s culture is
congruent with employees’ values, it helps with recruitment, selection,
and retention, and it boosts commitment, job satisfaction, and goal
alignment.6 It also facilitates social control—providing a broader, more
effective, more self-reinforcing, and less costly mechanism than
contracts or formal controls ever can. Outside the organization, a strong
culture can enhance branding and relations with customers because
people increasingly buy into the entire culture, not just a product or
service. As Community Connections became known as an organization
that was willing to try new things, the city and federal government gave
Community Connections opportunities that might have been withheld
from organizations with a reputation for being more risk averse.
These more positive aspects of culture are the reason that Peter
Drucker is reputed to have said “Culture eats strategy for breakfast.”7
In practice, prioritizing culture over strategy, or strategy over culture, is

CHAPTER 1
16
a fool’s errand. The key is creating a culture that aligns with and mutu-
ally reinforces other aspects of an organization (e.g., structure, incen-
tives, work processes, etc.). Since the 1980s, culture and its alignment
with other aspects of organizations has emerged at the heart of leading
models of organizational design and change (e.g., McKinsey’s 7S frame-
work, Nadler and Tushman’s congruence model, and Burke and Lit-
win’s change model).8 When this alignment is in place, culture can be a
powerful positive force, which is extremely difficult to copy.
WHAT IS A “STRONG” ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE?
The strength of an organization’s culture can be measured in terms of
consensus and intensity. Consensus refers to how widely shared the
norms, values, and beliefs are. Intensity refers to how strongly people
feel about the norms, values, and beliefs. For example, an organization
could have very clear norms about how to dress at work. If you asked a
random sample of employees, everyone would be able to describe the
dress code in similar terms (even if it isn’t formally written down any-
where) and they would all agree that jeans were not acceptable attire in
their offices. However, people’s feelings about the dress code could be
very low intensity. For example, if someone wore jeans to work it would
not trigger an outcry, sanctions, or even a comment (despite there be-
ing consensus about norms regarding dress). A strong culture has high
levels of both consensus and intensity about its norms, values, and be-
liefs. At Community Connections, everyone agreed and felt very strong-
ly about reaching out and providing services to everyone regardless of
their insurance coverage. Conversely, there was passion but not consen-
sus about the role and value of performance evaluations.
IS A STRONG CULTURE DESIRABLE?
When characterized in terms of high consensus and high intensity, a
strong culture itself is not desirable. Strong cultures can bind people for
good, bad, or evil. Everyone in an organization could agree on its val-
ues, but those values could be at odds with other critical internal ele-
ments of the organization (e.g., it could be inconsistent with the organ-

EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
17
ization’s structure or reward systems); or everyone could agree on the
values, but they could be at odds with the current competitive land-
scape or moral and legal standards; or everyone could agree on the
values, but they could be inflexible.
For an organization’s culture to be a truly performance-enhancing
force—for it to be strong in the best sense of the word—it should meet
four general tests:
1. Consensus: Is there consensus (among employees, customers,
and other key stakeholders) about the organization’s core values?
2. Internal Alignment: Is the culture internally aligned (or consis-
tent) with the organization’s strategy, people, and systems? How
well do the culture-embedding practices support them?
3. External Alignment: Does the culture fit with the competitive
environment or landscape in terms of labor supply, customers,
and so forth?
4. Adaptability: To what extent can the organization change culture-
embedding practices as environments change?
It is this sense of consensus with adaptability that is the most challeng-
ing aspect of “managing” culture (especially in volatile competitive envi-
ronments). For example, IBM was well known for its strong culture in
the 1970s and 1980s and was the leader in its industry. However, when
the external environment shifted from an emphasis on large mainframe
computers, IBM’s strong culture made it very slow to adapt. The em-
phasis on large institutional clients, very standardized and formal sales
processes, and inflexible reward systems hampered IBM’s shift to the
PC—and then to Internet-oriented business. It took several CEOs and
more than a decade for IBM to reorient its business.
Like almost every start-up growing into organizational adolescence,
Community Connections has struggled with just how big it can get
without compromising its “family” culture, which many believe made it
successful. Some small personal gestures and traditions fell by the way-
side as Community Connections grew. At the same time, reimburse-
ments shifted from a casual do-it-yourself approach to one that re-
quired signoffs and forms in triplicate.
Organizations like Netflix and Zappos have tried to be very explicit
about adapting their culture to fit their evolving business models and

CHAPTER 1
18
the competitive environments in which they operate. Netflix, for exam-
ple, published (online) a 129-slide deck that describes the seven key
aspects of its culture and how it was using a wide variety of talent
management policies and processes (hiring, promotion, compensation,
vacations, etc.) to embed some nonnegotiable aspects of its culture
while retaining the ability to be nimble as it experienced rapid growth.
They noted, “The real company values, as opposed to the nice-sounding
values, are shown by who gets rewarded, promoted, or let go.”9 With an
eye toward other organizations’ tendency to become sclerotic as they
grew, CEO Reid Hastings wrote that Netflix needed “a culture that
avoids the rigidity, politics, mediocrity, and complacency that infects
most organizations as they grow.”10 There were times at Community
Connections, however, when nimble got confused with fickle and staff
began to question whether expediency had become the driving value.
The importance of adaptability is supported by salient individual
examples like IBM and Netflix, but also by large-scale studies. For
example, a recent study of public and private high-tech firms in the
United States and Europe found that firms with high consensus and
high adaptability had net income two to eight times as high as firms
with low consensus and adaptability.11
HOW DO YOU CREATE, CHANGE, OR REINFORCE A
CULTURE?
It is common for people to say things like “Before we can do anything
around here, we need to change the culture.” When an organization
seems as dysfunctional as Enron, the culture becomes an all-purpose
scapegoat for all of its failings. On one hand, this “culture first” mantra
is a useful corrective to earlier attempts at organizational change that
ignored the importance of culture (and focused entirely on structural or
political approaches). On the other hand, culture cannot be changed
directly because it is the accumulated sense of what works or what gets
rewarded (or sanctioned). Thus, changing the culture really means
changing the underlying assumptions, values, and artifacts in an organ-
ization.12
In general, there are ten “levers” that can reinforce or change an
organization’s culture. They include five primary mechanisms by which

EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
19
leaders can make change—many through their own visible behavior.
The CEO and/or other senior leaders are not the only people who can
work these levers, but leaders do have a disproportionate influence on
culture through them.
The five primary culture-embedding mechanisms are
1. What leaders pay attention to, measure, and control;
2. How leaders react to crises and other critical incidents;
3. How leaders role model, train, and mentor;
4. What gets rewarded, symbolizes status, and leads to promotion;
and,
5. What criteria are used for recruitment, selection, and socializa-
tion.
Although many people talk about culture being an inertial force and
difficult to change, leaders’ behavior—as exhibited through these pri-
mary mechanisms—has the potential to change culture quickly, espe-
cially if changes to the mechanisms are consistent and coherent (e.g.,
the things that are measured are also the things that leaders devote
their time to and are also formally rewarded and used as criteria for
recruitment and selection).
At Community Connections, how leaders role model behavior and
how they train staff, as well as how they confer status and grant rewards,
have been the most powerful of these five primary mechanisms. The
first of these—role modeling and training—are spoken about publicly
and are a source of pride for the organization. “If you come here, you
will learn from the best, with the best, how to be the best.” However,
the second (promotion) is rarely spoken about explicitly and has been a
source of paranoia and accusations of favoritism.
There are also five secondary culture-embedding mechanisms, which
have a more indirect effect on culture. They are the
1. Formal statements of philosophy, mission, vision, values;
2. Physical design of the work environments, buildings, etc.;
3. Work flow and decision-making processes;
4. Stories, myths, and slogans that describe key people and events;
and,
5. Rituals, ceremonies, and celebrations.

CHAPTER 1
20
Culture develops over time whether we like it or not. That develop-
ment can be haphazard and organic or leaders can be intentional about
creating, changing, or reinforcing their organizations’ cultures. Which
values leaders emphasize matters, but there is no one right culture or
set of values. For some organizations, it is all about creating a culture of
innovation. For others, it’s all about a culture of reliability, safety, exe-
cution, collaboration, sustainability, service excellence, and so forth.
The ten embedding mechanisms are not specific to any one culture.
SUGGESTED READINGS
For excellent book-length, but managerially oriented (i.e., nonacadem-
ic) treatments of organizational culture, see Edgar Schein, Corporate
Culture Survival Guide (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2009); Kim S.
Cameron and Robert E. Quinn, Diagnosing and Changing Organiza-
tional Culture (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2011); and Eric Flam-
holtz and Yvonne Randle, Corporate Culture: The Ultimate Strategic
Asset (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2011).
For a good case example, see J. Chatman and V. Chang, “Culture
Change at Genentech,” California Management Review 56, no. 2
(2014): 113–29. For a managerially oriented but academically sound
article, see for example, Jennifer A. Chatman, and Sandra Eunyoung
Cha, “Leading by Leveraging Culture,”
California Management Re-
view 45, no. 4 (2003): 20–34.

21
2
HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
Inspiration, Thinking It Through, and Making It Happen
All socially driven businesses and creative endeavors start with an idea,
an inspiration that drives the decision to open up shop. But a bright
idea is not enough. Thinking and implementing are essential to the
success of any start-up.
How many good ideas have never gotten beyond that all night dis-
cussion that seems like it could change the world? In the clear light of
morning, however, the idea either seems not so clever after all, or a
realization dawns of just how hard it will be to take that idea and make
it real. For many authors, how many titles for books have occurred to
them but how very few of those titles actually turn into books? You can’t
write a book without an idea; and you also can’t write a book without a
lot of hard work. The same is true for organizations. The following fable
tells the story of how one clan takes an idea and turns it into something
real.
A FABLE: A TOWER TO REACH THE SKY
One day, as the leaves were turning a golden brown and the squirrels
were busy hiding nuts for the coming winter, all the members of the clan
gathered together to talk about this and that and to enjoy the cool of the
evening. All of a sudden, one young man stood up and looked at his

CHAPTER 2
22
fellow clansmen and declared, “I am tired of all of this talking, I am
going to go off and see what I can see.” And with that, he looked up into
the sky, saw a bright star, and decided to head off in the direction of the
shining light. He walked for days and days, his eyes fixed on the glow of
the star. And then one night as the dark crept over the horizon, he saw
something rather miraculous—another star, farther in the distance, that
burned with an even brighter, almost fiery light and that shot with
forceful speed across the sky. “How wonderful,” he cried into the still
air, “a shooting star; I have seen many stars since the time when I was a
young boy, but I have never seen anything like this before!”
And then he began to think, “What if our clan could get so high in
the sky that we could see all of the stars that shoot through the Heavens.
What secrets we might discover. Then we would be the most powerful
clan in the world. Perhaps we might build a watch tower that would
soar as far as the eye could see.” With that idea racing through his
mind, he lay down and went to sleep.
The next morning the young man rushed off to tell his fellow clans-
men what he had seen. He was flushed with excitement and as he de-
scribed the magic of the shooting star, all who heard his story sat in
awe. “You have truly been touched by the Sky Gods who have granted
you such a wondrous vision,” said a wise and old clansman. “Now we
must plan on how to build this tower of which you have spoken.”
And with that declaration, all of the members of the clan fell asleep
and looked forward with anticipation to thinking of how they would
build the tower that would rise up into the sky. But when they awoke,
the young man who had inspired them to think of a plan was gone. He
had vanished with the morning sun and was on his way to find some-
thing else that might be as magical as the shooting star.
At first, the clansmen lamented his absence, “What will we do with-
out the young man who inspired us to dream of the tower that would
reach up and touch the sky?” But then a young woman who had not yet
spoken turned to the group and said, “Don’t be silly. We can surely
build the tower. Have we not designed our city and the roads that
surround it and the walls that keep us safe from those who would do us
harm? I am sure if we sit together and think hard, we will come up with
a plan to build the tower.”
And so, for many months, all of the members of the clan sat and
thought and talked about how they might build the tower. At first they

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
23
sat all together in one group, but then smaller groups split off and
thought and planned until they came up with many ideas. Each idea
was brought back to the wise ones of the clan who debated and changed
the plan before sending it back for more thinking. Some of the clan’s
people were talented thinkers and they were able to analyze the plans.
Others were good at testing out different facets of the plan and using
their experiments to make changes in the plan. After many months, and
much thinking, debating, and testing, the clan’s people shook their
heads in unison, smiled at one another, and declared: “Now, at last, we
have a plan for how to build a strong and tall tower that will reach up to
the sky.”
While they were rejoicing in their plan, one young man looked up
and said, “But wait, we are designers and thinkers and planners; we
need builders if we are really to raise the tower to the sky!” Then
someone remembered, “Many years ago as we were designing a new
wall for our city, we saw some toilers working in the fields. They seemed
to be working very hard, but we thought little of them since all they
seemed to be doing was gathering wood and stones to build their small
homes. But now they may be just what we need, since without some
people to build our tower, all we will have are scrolls and scrolls and
pages of plans.”
With that thought they set out to find the toilers and to ask them if
they would take on the task of building the tower. When they found the
workers and presented their plan, the oldest of the toilers took the pages
that held the carefully drawn plans and showed them to his fellow
builders. They studied the plans and turned the pages up and down and
then the oldest of the toilers smiled a knowing smile. “Of course we will
build your tower, because we are builders after all.”
If this story sounds remarkably similar to the process of sending a man
to the moon, that is because it is.
In May of 1961, President Kennedy shared a vision and offered a
challenge to the nation. In a speech on space travel, he said very clearly
and definitively, “I believe this nation should commit itself to landing a
man on the Moon and returning him safely to Earth before this decade
is out.”1 It was quite a lofty vision, but one that served to inspire a
nation to take on a monumental task.

CHAPTER 2
24
But Kennedy did not stop there. He asked the nation to “do the
work and bear the burdens” of making this venture a success. Scientists,
engineers, contractors, and technicians would have to work with ser-
vicemen and civil servants if this were to happen. Without the brain-
power of hundreds, maybe thousands, of people thinking, planning, and
designing, the mission would be a failure. He warned the nation that
dedication, discipline, and organization would be needed on the part of
everyone.
Kennedy spoke like a general contractor who would actually build
the spaceship; he called for no work stoppages, no inflated costs of
material and talent. He told the nation that there could be no wasteful
interagency squabbles or fighting that would impede the completion of
the project, nor did he expect massive turnover of personnel. This is
what it would take to implement his plan.
INSPIRATION
We can all remember times when we were merely sitting looking out
into the distance and something just came to us. It may have been an
insight into something we had been working on, or it may have been a
time when all the pieces of a puzzle just came together. We may have
called it a “bolt from the blue,” a flash of insight, or in more religious
terms, a “glorious realization.”
Regardless of what we call this inspiration, we can easily recognize it.
Mozart had it; Salieri did not. Michelangelo had moments of inspira-
tion; his contemporary Alessandro Allori (a relatively unknown artist of
the last part of the sixteenth century) did not. And one of Einstein’s
many moments of inspiration gave the world the theory of relativity.
What are the characteristics of inspiration? An inspiration is an ener-
gized idea, an excitement of the mind. It feels and is viewed by others as
just having burst through a barrier, a film, a wall, where something
veiled becomes clear. But inspiration is not magic. It may seem sudden,
but it is the product of a period (sometimes quite lengthy) of seeing,
ingesting, being open to experience. Einstein called imagination (what
might also be called inspiration) “the highest form of research”—not
the research done in a laboratory, but the research of being alive and
open in the world.2 More than that, an inspiration is formed by many

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
25
things we don’t even recognize and may be unable to articulate—the
world we live in, the values and worldview we hold, the forces that
surround us, the people with whom we converse and debate, the past
that has formed the ideas of others.
Inspiration comes to us when we are alone, sometimes in that state
between sleeping and waking when we are not weighed down by the
cares and obligations of the world. The novelist Saul Bellow advised,
“You never have to change anything you got up in the middle of the
night to write.”3
Inspiration often gives the appearance of being quite simple. When
we speak an inspiring thought out loud, others may slap their heads and
exclaim, “Why didn’t I think of that?” But inspiration does not always
result in agreement or praise. It may generate confusion, disapproval,
or dismissal, especially when inspiration challenges the status quo.
What happens when someone declares in the middle of a meeting fo-
cused on implementation or concerted problem solving, “Wait, I have a
new idea; something just came to me!” The response is often not shared
excitement, but rather defensiveness and opposition. Imagine Newton’s
reacting to Einstein’s theory of general relativity, “You can’t contradict
everything I have worked a lifetime developing.”
In a far, far more modest version, staff at a start-up company, com-
mitted to working on a new project, might be affronted and antagonistic
if a newcomer declared, “I just had a thought about a new way of doing
things. Something just clicked.” An instance of this occurred at Com-
munity Connections when, after many years of designing a new training
program, one of the designers herself posited that she had a new idea—
one that would overturn the work that had gone on previously. Another
woman who had been very invested in the old way of doing things
became upset, almost to the point of tears. “You have just invalidated
my entire career.” Inspiration can be threatening, just as much as it can
open new doors and introduce a new and exciting way of doing things.
Perhaps more than anything, inspiration requires an openness to
seeing and experiencing things in a different way. Some companies
have suggested giving employees blocks of time during which they have
no assignment other than to sit and think. Some employees doze off,
others get anxious and want to get back to “work,” but some let their
minds drift, not knowing where they might land. Inspiration brings

CHAPTER 2
26
everything that we perceive and remember and imagine into one inte-
grated whole.
When we breathe, we open our lungs to take in air from the outside.
It’s oxygen from the outside that keeps us alive. And once the oxygen is
inside our bodies it is transformed; we exhale something different,
something which may nurture the environment or something which
may have a toxic effect. In either case, the process of breathing is called
inspiration.
THINKING IT THROUGH
Inspiration is just the beginning of turning an idea into reality; it cer-
tainly is not the whole story. Wendell Berry, a twentieth-century writer
and activist wrote, “There are, it seems, two muses: the Muse of Inspi-
ration who gives us inarticulate visions and desires and the Muse of
Realization, who returns again and again to say ‘It is yet more difficult
than you thought.’”4
Without a period of thinking, discussing, experimenting, and then
thinking some more, an inspiration is just a shooting star, brilliant but
gone in a flash. Henry Ford had the vision to democratize the automo-
bile and Mark Zuckerberg felt inspired to “make the world more open
and connected.”5 But the big inspiration behind Ford Motor Company
and Facebook would have died if a period of thinking had not followed,
thinking that refined, operationalized, and translated the vision into
something that might be implemented. Every inspiration, if it is to
make a profound impact on the way we do things, needs to spend some
time in what one venture capitalist called an “idea incubator.”
The process of thinking through an idea can be done alone, but it is
often done in a group, several people working together debating, plan-
ning, and challenging one another. “Several people” does not mean
everyone in an organization, however. A few heads can be far more
thoughtful than one, but dozens of heads spend more time bumping
into one another than they do generating productive ideas.
The process of thinking an idea through is more than just brain-
storming. A group of people sitting around and talking about anything
and everything rarely does more than provide an interesting conversa-
tion. During the thinking through phase, ideas are not merely mulled

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
27
over, but they are tested, put out for others to see, to challenge, to
revise, and then to think through all over again.
In their book Great by Choice, authors Jim Collins and Morton
Hansen talk about firing a number of “bullets” and then seeing which
ones have an impact.6 When we think about a problem, we engage in a
lot of trial and error, and we collect data on the outcomes of those
experiments. Thinking allows us to have a greater chance of success
before we move on to implementing an idea. This is why architects and
inventors design prototypes before they commit to a big project.
However, successfully thinking through an idea is not the end of the
process. Inspiration and thinking are not sufficient for success—they
must be put into operation. In the words of Thomas Jefferson, “Do you
want to know who you are? Don’t ask. Act! Action will delineate and
define you.”7
MAKING IT HAPPEN
So how do you go about implementing a project? First, you need a plan
for how to make it happen. That means having a lead person, somewhat
like a general contractor, and a group of people who will do the day-to-
day work. But more than that, you need a plan that can be carried out in
a series of stages, with an evaluation after the completion of each stage
and an opportunity to make additions or corrections as the implementa-
tion process proceeds.
It goes without saying that for a plan to be carried out successfully,
the participants involved need the requisite skills. Too often people are
assigned to make something happen because no one else wants to do it
or because they are the first to raise their hands when the project gets
announced. But to ensure success, program directors need to specify
the skills needed to implement the project and training must be made
available to those who require it.
Imagine, for example, that someone is inspired to build an electric
car. A group of people discuss the value of such a vehicle and how it
might function and who might want to drive it and how it might be
marketed, and then another group builds a prototype and evaluates its
functionality. Everyone agrees to go forward and build electric cars. But
then the critical question arises, just who will do the building? Who is

CHAPTER 2
28
going to take these ideas and translate them into a real object? What
skills will they need and how does an organization go about finding
those people? Community Connections, as many other similar organ-
izations or businesses have done, fell into the trap of stopping the pro-
cess at the stage of having an idea and thinking through the process
while ignoring the critical importance of a strong implementation team.
Implementers are the doers and not, as they are too often called, the
“work horses” of any project, and they should receive the credit they
deserve. As Edison pointed out, “Genius is 1 percent inspiration and 99
percent perspiration.”8
Ideally Inspiration should be followed by Thinking It Through,
which is then completed with Making It Happen, but that is not always
the case. At Community Connections we have had many missteps in
which one of these three critical elements was left out, and unfortunate-
ly, far fewer where all were present and neatly aligned. It might be best
to start with one case where we got it just right.
CASE STUDY # 1: GETTING IT RIGHT
For many years, Community Connections ran treatment groups de-
signed to serve women who presented with mental health problems,
addictive disorders, and struggles raising daughters who seemed to be
going down the same path. Despite our belief that we were delivering
good services, many of the women who participated in treatment
groups continued to engage in abusive relationships, use drugs and
alcohol to soothe their distress, and experience uncontrollable emo-
tions. What were we doing wrong? And then, almost in a flash, one of
the program leaders realized what was missing. We had all of the separ-
ate spokes of the wheel, but we were missing the one critical piece—the
hub that connected them all; that hub was sexual and physical abuse. All
of these women were the survivors of violent personal trauma and all
their destructive behaviors were related to the violent personal trauma
that they had suffered.
But having that insight was just the beginning. For almost a year, a
group of more than twenty women met weekly to debate, discuss, and
at times seriously disagree about how a treatment program might be
designed. The discussions went from the theoretical to the very practi-

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
29
cal. Part of this process involved developing a detailed protocol for
service delivery, testing that protocol, and then putting it through a
series of revisions before the work group felt that the new treatment
was ready to be implemented. Without this period of collaborative
thinking, the trauma treatment program would have been nothing more
than an interesting idea.
Then came the phase of putting the intervention into practice. Sev-
eral clinicians were trained to run what came to be called “trauma
groups.” Their work was evaluated using a fidelity instrument and they
were carefully supervised. The cadre of trained clinicians grew as each
group leader trained someone else, who trained someone else, and on
and on. At the end of five years, trained clinicians were running trauma
groups across the country. The trauma treatment model that began with
close connections to client and a carefully developed idea for addressing
clients’ needs was implemented widely and became an industry stan-
dard.
But once again, all projects do not result in such a successful out-
come. Often one of the three parts of bringing something new across
the finish line is missing.
CASE STUDY #2: A MISSING INSPIRATION
At an early point in its history, several of the staff at Community Con-
nections observed that there was no plan for evaluating employee per-
formance. An evaluation tool would make it easier to make fair deci-
sions about promotion, firing, and necessary training. Because we were
beginning to think of ourselves as a business, it made sense that we, like
most businesses, should have a standard metric for judging employee
performance. But an observation that an evaluation protocol was miss-
ing was not an inspiration; it was an observation, something like: “It
makes sense that every organization should have a method for evaluat-
ing the performance of its employees. We don’t have one, so we need to
find one or design a useful tool for performance evaluation.” A plan to
evaluate employees is not an inspiration; it is a standard business prac-
tice. And an observation that something is missing is not a big bold idea.
Consider how different this process is from the following scenario. “I
don’t get why staff leave after only one year. Why do they stay for such a

CHAPTER 2
30
short time? Wait, I’ve got it. Leaving must be related to some combina-
tion of performance and skill level of the employee, mixed with employ-
ee job satisfaction. Let’s evaluate staff performance so we can answer
some of the big questions we all care about. Now that’s an idea!”
In both of the above cases, senior staff spent months thinking about
how to design an evaluation tool, but in the first case they were per-
forming a task and in the second case they were testing a hypothesis.
Both groups experimented with different options and the use of differ-
ent technologies; both discussed and refined their methodologies. But
the first group became bogged down in the tediousness of their task.
Attendance at meetings dropped off. The group was unable to sustain
the interest of their colleagues who were not working directly on the
project and their solutions seemed unimaginative and passé. Without an
idea to inspire their work, it was not uncommon to hear that dreaded
refrain, “Why are we doing this anyway?” And when it came time for
implementation, few staff actually filled out the evaluation forms that
had taken so long to generate.
The inspiration-driven group, in contrast, had a very different expe-
rience. They were looking at evaluation because they wanted to test an
interesting and novel idea. Could they learn something about employee
tenure by evaluating how frontline staff performed their jobs and how
they felt about what they were doing? They designed an evaluation tool
only after they met with the staff who were to be evaluated. What would
they want to know? How would they like their performance to be evalu-
ated? What did they expect would be done with the evaluations? These
ideas allowed for discussion, exchange of ideas, and the eventual craft-
ing of an evaluation tool. The tool was used by managers and was not
resented by employees. Both managers and employees used the evalua-
tion data not only to make decisions about promotion and firing, but
also to design training initiatives that would make employees do their
jobs better and want to stay with the organization longer.
When the process started with an inspiration, the thinking was liveli-
er and the implementation ran more smoothly.

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
31
CASE STUDY #3: NO ATTENTION TO THINKING THINGS
THROUGH
Several years ago, Community Connections senior staff received feed-
back from new supervisors that decisions at the organization were being
made by only a small group of program managers. This feedback reso-
nated with leadership who felt that they wanted to give all employees a
chance to be heard and to have a voice in guiding the organization’s
course of action and future direction. Using a model that had been
initiated at other companies, management designed a series of ongoing
meetings that allowed cohorts of staff to meet and discuss issues facing
the organization. The groups were called All Minds Matter and junior
management staff were asked to be part of individual groups. Everyone
thought we had stumbled onto a great idea.
Making the groups happen was relatively easy. Based on program
affiliation, staff were invited to attend one of several groups. Each
group met either once or twice a month and each consisted of about
fifteen members. At first we had lively, albeit unfocused discussions.
But then attendance at the groups became somewhat spotty. Conversa-
tions seemed to jump from one topic to the next with no continuity
from one session to the next. Some members began to ask “what are we
supposed to be doing/accomplishing in these meetings?”
In retrospect, we had a good idea and a way to implement that idea,
but we had jumped too quickly from the spark of inspiration to the work
of making something happen. We didn’t spend any time thinking about
what exactly we were going to do, what the format of the groups was to
be, and how we would evaluate and use some of the suggestions that
were generated. Before we began, we did not solicit feedback on
whether this was a good idea or what format such an endeavor might
take. We didn’t start with a pilot group and see how that functioned, nor
did we take the time to garner any data from other organizations who
had tried to get employee input in just this way. In essence, we had not
done our “Thinking” homework.
Using a variant of the old adage, “Look before you leap,” it is just as
important to “Think before you act.”

CHAPTER 2
32
CASE STUDY #4: INABILITY TO MAKE THINGS HAPPEN
In many instances, a project that began with great expectations ends
with great disappointment. That is because organizations are moved by
inspiration, spend time thinking through the specifics of how something
might be accomplished, but in their enthusiasm often overlook the fact
that the idea cannot be brought to fruition. And no amount of thinking
it through will make any difference. In the worst-case scenarios, a group
may believe that more and more thinking will produce a solution that
will result in a successful implementation. But sometimes the resources
required to make a good idea a reality are just not there.
Community Connections went through this difficult process for al-
most two decades as we tried to set up a clinically based housing pro-
gram for homeless mentally ill adults and families. A member of our
senior leadership team, after years of trying to find stable housing for
individuals who had been living in shelters or on the streets, had the
idea that currently available housing would not be sufficient to solve the
crisis of homelessness. As long as people had no treatment for their
mental illnesses, no support for their substance addictions, and no
meaningful work to occupy their days, they would soon lose any housing
that was subsidized and supported by city resources. The idea went
something like this: housing was not at the center of the problem, but
rather homelessness was the result of a host of other untreated prob-
lems. At the time that it was articulated, this reformulation was seen as
a novel idea!
With this idea as a starting point, a group of clinical staff designed
and piloted a housing program with built-in clinical supports. This plan
was validated by other programs in other states and by data from na-
tional research studies. The clinicians wrote up their program plan and
were ready to get started.
And then reality hit. They had an idea, they had thought it through,
but they had no sizeable stock of apartments that was necessary for
implementing the plan. The group looked for grants, sought benefac-
tors, and began small with the hope of growing as funds came in. But
the struggle was a long and frustrating one. The lesson was clear. Good
ideas and serious thinking need real resources if they are to make a
change in the status quo.

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
33
In retrospect, it is obvious: you need to start with a big idea; you
need to go through a process of thinking through the idea; and then you
need to find a way to make it all happen. Going forward without one of
these three ingredients is never a formula for success. But in the mo-
ment, it is often the case that we focus on what is most immediate at the
expense of the other elements.
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
In the 1990s I went through a period of intense creativity. I was writing
books, helping to nurture Community Connections, serving as a princi-
pal investigator on several grants, and seeing clients in a private prac-
tice—oh yes, and growing a rather big garden. There were some days
when I started at seven and didn’t really finish up till nine or ten. As a
psychologist and as a woman without children, the thought crossed my
mind that I was delivering my creative babies just as fast as I could.
Then, I just stopped—creative menopause, if you will. I continued
my role at Community Connections; I taught others what I knew about
treatment and I gave lectures designed to help others become better
clinicians, but I felt like I had nothing new to create. I didn’t have the
energy or the drive for something new. When I spoke with my literary
agent or with a close friend, I always got the same question. “What are
you working on now? When can we expect your next book?” And I
always responded in somewhat the same way, “I don’t really have any-
thing to say right now,” and I didn’t want to write something just for the
sake of writing. We all know authors who write the same book over and
over again, just changing the title as they go along.
But then something happened. I started to have new ideas, one after
the other. I knew that they would not all be implemented, but they
were starting to grow. I brought other people in on the thinking pro-
cess. This time I wasn’t going to do it alone. And this time, it didn’t
need to happen so fast.

CHAPTER 2
34
PUTTING THE INSPIRATION-TO-IMPLEMENTATION
PROCESS AT COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS IN CONTEXT
The preceding fable and case studies address concepts that are at the
heart of “design thinking”—inspiration, ideation, and implementation.
Design thinking is an approach to innovation and human-centered de-
sign, as well as something of a movement that was jumpstarted by the
award-winning design firm IDEO. Having designed hundreds of prod-
ucts that are now part of the everyday fabric of life in America (from the
computer mouse to vibrating toothbrushes to Velcro sneakers), IDEO’s
approach and design thinking more generally have become the leading
models of problem solving and innovation. Although design thinking
has its roots in product design by IDEO and other firms, its core princi-
ples have also begun to infuse the management of organizations more
generally. In this section, we provide additional background and sup-
porting research on design thinking as it applies to challenges faced by
Community Connections and organizations like it.
THE ORIGINS OF DESIGN THINKING
Initially, basic human-centered design was applied to physical products.
Over time, people began applying it to create better user and customer
experiences. In the process, it became known as “design thinking.”
Sharing some elements with the scientific method and problem-based
learning (e.g., all three efforts aim to prevent premature commitment
to ideas and active testing of those ideas), design thinking has been
extended to treat services, strategies, and systems as design challenges
too. Most recently, proponents have been applying its principles to a
“well-designed life.” Generally, it has seemed most useful in situations
with significant tensions, constraints, uncertainty, and ambiguity.
Whether applied to a computer mouse, an organization’s strategy, or
Community Connections’s treatment interventions, design thinking in-
volves two especially important elements:
• A deep, emotional, usually qualitative, almost ethnographic ap-
proach to understanding and empathizing with users, customers,

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
35
clients, and other relevant stakeholders. It is through this deep,
empathetic exploration of problems that inspiration comes.
• Collaborative generation of ideas (often using brainstorming or
brainwriting) and iterative, rapid-cycle prototyping, which in-
volves stakeholders early with “low-resolution” versions of the
product or solution so that they have a direct influence on prob-
lem framing, data analysis, and solution development. This “solu-
tion finding” or ideation builds on customer/user based inspira-
tion.
Design thinking’s approach to empathizing with users/customers/
stakeholders may involve quantitative data, but it is generally broader
than the quantitative “customer research” often resident in organiza-
tions’ marketing and IT departments and often captured in spread-
sheets and user requirements documents. Rather, design thinking tends
to use visualization and physical models, drawings, maps, or other more
tangible representations of services, processes, strategies, and so forth.
Rapid prototyping involves a commitment to active iteration and experi-
mentation, which is captured in organizational mantra’s like “Fail Early,
Fail Often” (IDEO) and “Demo or Die” (MIT Media Lab). These two
elements—through the early and ongoing involvement of stakehold-
ers—make approval of the final product, service, or strategy a formality.
Commitment has been engendered all along the way, which makes
design-thinking-based implementation far easier.
Empirical Evidence for Design Thinking
There are few scientific tests of the effectiveness of design thinking
overall,9 but this is not surprising given design thinking’s upstream or-
ientation and the challenge of “testing” an entire approach to anything.
In some ways, design thinking is akin to approaches like total quality
management (TQM) and Six Sigma in their early days—their assump-
tions and tools are clear and widely used, but testing their benefits as
end-to-end processes is empirically difficult.
However, the examples of successful design thinking and the qual-
itative evidence for it are voluminous. Its successes are manifest in the
many influential products it has created and, more recently, in organiza-
tions’ effective application of it to services and strategies in corporations

CHAPTER 2
36
like 3M, Toyota, IBM, and SAP and nonprofits like the City of Dublin,
Ireland, and Denmark’s Good Kitchen.
There is also solid evidence (from more controlled studies) support-
ing the component parts of design thinking. For example, there is clear
evidence for the benefits of user involvement (e.g., in software design)
and deep understanding of customer needs and learning from failure.
There has also been extensive comparison and scientific testing of dif-
ferent approaches to idea generation and selection. The establishment
of academic journals like Design Issues, Design Management Review,
and The Design Journal suggest that a more thorough understanding of
design thinking’s scientific underpinnings is on the way.
The Application of Design Thinking: Core Tools
The suggested readings below provide a longer list and more details
about the implementation and use of various tools to support design
thinking in organizations, but we provide synopses on five of what we
consider the most useful ones here—visualization, experience mapping,
assumption testing, rapid prototyping, and customer cocreation.10 We
describe them separately, but they are often most powerful when used
in combination.
Visualization. In many ways, visualization facilitates (or is the gener-
al form) of many other design thinking tools. Simply put, it takes any
information (about customers, products, services, etc.) and depicts it in
figures, maps, pictures, and so on. By creating visual images and moving
away from the text and numbers that tend to dominate people’s work
(and this book!), visualization does at least three critical things: (a) it
prompts us to reframe things, (b) it allows us to grasp complex informa-
tion more rapidly, and (c) it appeals to different ways of thinking. As we
discuss in chapter 5, reframing is a vitally important step in decision
making and problem solving. It ensures that we see things from more
than one perspective—and visuals (or 3D objects where possible) facili-
tate that perspective taking. When we risk drowning in data or text,
visuals are often a helpful lifeboat to conceptual clarity. Lastly, good use
of visualization appeals to some people’s need and tendencies to see
something before they can really think it through (others benefit from
doing and hearing, so leaving room for them in your process is valuable
as well).

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
37
Experience mapping. Also known as “journey mapping,” this tool
involves tracing the experience of customers, clients, or anyone else
who interacts with your organization and its products and services. It
uses a visual depiction of that experience (for the reasons noted above),
and is based on in-depth conversations and observation of the experi-
ence. By gathering and depicting the highs and lows of their satisfaction
and other emotions while they interact with the organization, experi-
ence mapping helps develop a much deeper understanding of the cus-
tomer experience. That understanding can then more effectively inform
the development or refinement of products and services that meet their
needs and fit with their existing habits and use patterns.
Assumption testing. This tool recognizes that every new product and
service is based on hypotheses about what is valued and what works.
Instead of expecting that a product or service will work, it’s essential to
test the assumptions underlying your hypothesis about why it will work.
Imagine a fast casual lunch chain where customers order and pay by
phone or iPads in the store. Shortly thereafter, their meals appear al-
most magically in cubbies for them to grab. It is a combination of online
ordering, customization, and vending machine–like delivery. They nev-
er see or interact with an employee of the chain. This restaurant’s
business model is based on the idea that people want speed and don’t
value personal contact. Before the chain can be successful, it would
need to test those assumptions. How much value do customers place on
speed? Is it sufficient to outweigh the positive aspects of personal inter-
action? Does it put low wage workers further into the background in a
way that unnerves people enough to outweigh the speed of ordering
and delivery? You can imagine the need to test similar assumptions
behind all kinds of products and services (e.g., the self-checkout process
in grocery stores).
Rapid prototyping. Prototyping is not new in manufacturing, but it
has become a staple of design thinking and valuable in more service-
oriented organizations as well. It involves the creation of rough physical
or visual versions of products and services so that organizations can
explore their viability. For physical products, it is easier to see how this
can be done. For services, it can involve stories, storyboards, “wire-
frame” mockups—or actual small-scale delivery of the service or parts
of the service. Importantly, it can often also make heavy use of visuals
and experience mapping. By developing prototypes, pilot testing them,

CHAPTER 2
38
and iterating, organizations can avoid overcommitting to one particular
approach or design and can test assumptions more directly and more
rapidly. Visualization is a 2D representation, and more helpful than text
or numbers, while a prototype is a more realistic (but still incomplete)
3D representation. Developing these less complete (and often smaller-
scale) iterations allows organizations to get feedback sooner and thus to
invest less in products or services that may be on the wrong track.
Prototypes are especially effective when they involve customers direct-
ly.
Customer cocreation. In many ways, customer cocreation is at the
heart of design thinking. As noted earlier in this chapter, design think-
ing is founded on the idea that a deep almost ethnographic understand-
ing of customers or clients is vital for the evolution of an organization’s
business. Beyond a tool like experience mapping, which draws on ob-
servation and interviews, customer cocreation actually involves the cus-
tomer in a much more active way. It blurs the lines between designer
and customer in ways that increase the success rates of the products or
services being created. Depending on the stage of the process, custom-
ers can be engaged in cocreation with visuals (like storyboards or wire
frames) that capture what a service or product will do, look like, and—
roughly—feel like. Farther along in the design process, they can involve
more tangible prototypes or pilot tests. The best customers for this kind
of cocreation are a diverse group (to anticipate the population you in-
tend to serve) who are frustrated with current products/services, but
also care about your organization. You want them to be candid and
developmental, and to have some intrinsic motivation to help (based on
their desire for a better product/service for themselves, not just the
compensation that marketers or pollsters traditionally pay focus group
participants). Unless the product or service is going to be used in
groups, engage customers in cocreation on an individual basis—so
they’re not reacting based on other customers’ reactions. After you’re
finished, and have involved multiple customers, it’s critical to circle
back and let them all know how their involvement affected your design
and development.
For more details on using these and other design thinking tools, see
especially the work of the Stanford “bootcamp” group; Jon Kolko; and
Jeanne Liedtka and colleagues as noted in the suggested readings be-
low.

HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
39
SUGGESTED READINGS
What we’ve just discussed is necessarily a summary. The good news is
that there is a tremendous amount of good work that’s been done to
make design thinking principles and tools freely accessible. There are
also numerous published examples that could be used as motivation or
partial guides to employing design thinking in your own organizations.
In terms of specific tools that are helpful in many organizations,
there are many valuable resources at www.ideo.com and http://dschool.
stanford.edu/use-our-methods/the-bootcamp-bootleg/. There are also
excellent book-length resources from Christopher Simmons, Just De-
sign: Socially Conscious Design for Critical Causes (Cincinnati, OH:
HOW Books, 2010); Colin Ware, Visual Thinking for Design (Burling-
ton, MA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2008); and Jon Kolko, Exposing the Magic
of Design: A Practitioner’s Guide to the Methods and Theory of Synthe-
sis (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015).
For more real-world examples of design thinking in action, see Tim
Brown, Change by Design (New York: Harper Business, 2009); and
Jeanne Liedtka, Andrew King, and Kevin Bennett, Solving Problems
with Design Thinking: Ten Stories of What Works (New York: Colum-
bia Business School Press, 2013).


41
3
POWER, AUTHORITY, AND
RESPONSIBILITY
Who’s In Charge Around Here?
When mission-driven organizations begin, the last thing they think
about is power. Usually there are only a few founders and great consen-
sus on just how things are to be done. But as an organization grows,
questions arise as to just who is in charge and who bears responsibility
for the success of the organization. This is especially true when the
organization grows exponentially with the addition of each new pro-
gram. Take the example of any start-up organization or business. At the
beginning, it is clear that the founder or founders are in charge. The
business was, after all, their idea. But then the business starts to grow
and new products or services are brought on line, new departments are
established, and every department has a manager, and every manager
has a team of supervisors who oversee the work.
Now imagine that something big happens: a new opportunity
presents itself, the demand for services increases, the need for expen-
sive changes to the organization’s infrastructure arises. Who makes the
final decision to go forward or to hold back? Obviously, unless the
organization functions like a dictatorship—and some do—many people
may be involved in gathering data, having discussions, and holding fo-
cus groups, but when all is said and done, one person holds the power
to decide. The following fable highlights these tensions.

CHAPTER 3
42
A FABLE: THE MAGIC RING
There once lived a king who had two fine young sons. As the boys grew
into men, they drew the praise and admiration of all of the townspeople.
Their bond to one another was so strong that it made them appear very
special indeed.
One day, they came to their father with a carefully thought out
request, “Father, we have lived under your care and guidance all of our
lives, but now we are grown men and we are ready to make our own
way in the world. We plan to leave the town we have known so well and
venture out to build a new city, one that we can rule with all of the
strength and wisdom you have taught us.”
At first the king took offense at the presumption of his sons. “How
could they believe that they might build a city as mighty as his own?”
But that was not all that the king felt. He was saddened at the thought of
losing his two brave sons, because in his heart he knew that it was right
to let them go.
“You are right to want to explore and build a bright new city that
will add to the power and breadth of our kingdom. But before you go, I
want you to take this magic ring that was given to me by my father and
by his father before him. This ring holds great power, so you must
handle it with care.”
“Father, we will humbly take your blessing and we will promise to be
righteous keepers of the ring.”
The two brothers set out on their adventure with big plans running
through their heads. They knew that there would be many things to do,
but they were convinced that together they would be able to build a
powerful new city. They worked tirelessly, performing all of the tasks
side by side.
After a while, their reputation grew and they had many others who
wanted to join their efforts. The more they had to do, however, the more
they came to realize that it was just too much to do everything together.
They would have to divide the task of ruling into two parts, with each
brother assuming authority for making decisions in his part of the new
kingdom. As a team, however, just the way they had started, they would
jointly hold themselves accountable for the growth of the city.
And so it went for a very long time. And the city prospered. The
brothers would look to one another and rejoice in their success. “What

POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
43
more could we want,” said the youngest brother. “We have all the power
and success we longed for when we left our father’s house.” But just as
the word “power” was uttered, something strange began to happen. The
brothers heard a loud rumbling coming from the hills. “Whatever could
that be?” cried the brothers in unison.
Then the brothers remembered the ring. The power of the ring had
been roused, as if by magic, by the mere mention of its name. “Why,
that sound must be coming from our ring; perhaps it is time for us to see
the ring once more. I am curious to find out what has happened to it
after so many years.” So they began climbing to the top of the mountain
where they had placed the ring so long ago.
But as they climbed, the brothers grew silent. They were no longer
laughing and planning together about their great city; each became lost
in his own thoughts of the ring and all the wonderful things he could do
with its power. Finally, they reached the spot where the ring lay. As
they opened the box that contained the ring, they both gasped at the
sparkle and glow of the magic ring. One brother reached for the ring,
only to be knocked off balance as the quick hand of his brother grabbed
the ring from its box.
“Wait,” said the first brother, “the ring is mine to hold.” “No,” cried
the other brother, “I touched the ring first; it belongs to me.” The broth-
ers no longer were merely arguing about who had touched the ring first;
they now argued over who OWNED the ring. The two brothers, once so
very close that they seemed inseparable, now battled and schemed and
fought over the ring. Once allies, now enemies. Magic rings have a way
of changing things.
Finally, with a sigh of resignation, the first brother took his hand
from the ring and conceded, “The ring is yours, my brother, for you are
stronger than I am, and you are willing to fight harder for the power of
the ring.”
The two brothers turned to one another and nodded in agreement. It
was time to return to their city; but now, only one carried the ring. Each
assumed authority over his part of the kingdom, both continued to have
responsibility for the city, but although they never spoke of it again,
both knew that the absolute power of the ring would forever and always
belong to only one of the brothers.

CHAPTER 3
44
The fable of the Magic Ring illustrates the complex role that power
plays in the evolution of any organization and raises the all-important
and somewhat sticky question of who “owns” a business. This dynamic
was on public display in the movie Steve Jobs, which tells the story of
the evolution and growth of the megacompany Apple.1 Two men, Steve
Jobs and Steve Wozniak, shared an idea and a vision that would ulti-
mately change the world of personal computing. But since they had
different talents, they granted one another authority over different
parts of the business. As the company grew, the partners had to allocate
responsibility for a variety of deliverables to several different depart-
ment heads. All seemed well until a big decision needed to be made
about the direction of the company. Wozniak offered a suggestion and
without much discussion, Jobs delivered an absolute no. In that mo-
ment he demonstrated (for good or ill) what it meant to have power!
In any system, someone needs to have the last word; someone needs
to have control over the final decision. Someone needs to believe what
Harry Truman meant when he famously said, “The buck stops here.”2
These words and the sign on his desk meant that the power to make
decisions was his and, despite consultation and discussion with advisors,
it remained his alone.
When we talk about power, we are not merely speaking of the ability
to influence decisions but about the right to make decisions. Authority
on the other hand is power that has been delegated within the bounds
of both time and space. Someone has authority to decide for a certain
amount of time within a particular context. For example, when children
are left with a babysitter, a parent may say, “You have the authority to
make decisions while I am away.” The authority is put in context; it is
only to be used in the parent’s absence and its duration is limited. And
in this case, the babysitter certainly would be clear about the limits of
his authority. After all, no one gives babysitters power to make lasting or
big decisions. But in many organizations the confusion between full,
unitary power and limited, contextual authority can be at the root of big
problems like employee dissatisfaction, claims of unfairness, and low
staff morale.
There have been times over the years when leaders at Community
Connections tried to develop, often at the suggestion of a business or
management expert, a clear organizational chart intended to map the
duties, responsibilities, and reporting structure for all staff. The word

POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
45
“power” was almost always absent from these discussions. Power seems
like a scary concept—a word that has no place in a social service agency
committed to egalitarian decision making. Power is often the elephant
in the room. This is partly a function of how people build or acquire
power.
HOW DOES SOMEONE COME TO HAVE POWER?
The most common way that people acquire power is by being present at
the beginning. Founders usually hold the power not only because they
earned it, but also because there is no one else there to challenge them
for it. It is only when others join the organization that the possession of
power gets questioned and there have clearly been messy fights in
which founders were thrown out of their own companies. But for the
most part, founders hold power because it is their company.
In family-owned businesses, power is often passed from one genera-
tion to the next; and this may be the case regardless of whether or not
the next generation has the skills and the drive necessary to make the
business work. In some founder-operated businesses, whether for profit
or nonprofit, the founder, other family members, employees, and out-
side stakeholders may all assume that they know who the next boss will
be. While such an arrangement lessens ambiguity and uncertainty, it
also may prematurely elevate someone who is not ready for the job.
During the Middle Ages, even children who were minors could assume
a kingship because they were next in line.
If you believe that you have the power regardless of what you know
or what you do, there may be little or no incentive to actually learn how
to do the job. After all, the job is yours no matter what you do. Some-
what like the proverbial baseball player who finds himself on third base
and thinks he hit a triple. Inherited power also may be demoralizing for
other employees who believe they deserve to run the company by virtue
of their skills or their seniority. When those employees know that they
are stuck in a position of lesser or secondary power, some may opt not
to give their best to the business.
At Community Connections, a study of workplace dynamics re-
vealed that the least engaged employees were those in management
who knew that the leadership of the organization was not going to pass

CHAPTER 3
46
to them. These employees accepted their positions somewhere in the
middle of the organizational chart, which would have been fine since all
organizations need people in the middle. However, for some, when
they stopped competing, they stopped striving and creating. They
adopted an attitude that many citizens, rightly or wrongly, associate
with government employees—just hanging around until it’s time to col-
lect a pension.
In contrast, a different drama unfolds when a few people, either
implicitly or explicitly, do compete for power. Knowing that only one
person will ultimately have full power to run the organization, a few
people with responsibility begin jockeying for position. This can take
the form of acquiring and hoarding information, taking on ever expand-
ing responsibilities as they become available and thereby making them-
selves indispensable, or reaching for perks and other benefits often
limited to the CEO. Such competitions, because they frequently occur
behind the scenes, may feel “sneaky” to other employees who watch
them being played out.
Overt competition is often the norm in a for-profit business, and it is
often the case that the loser of the competition leaves the organization,
depriving the business of a competent employee. In nonprofit organiza-
tions, however, the culture supports collaboration, not competition, and
such a culture promotes the notion that collaboration, and at times
prolonged discussion, leads to better performance and better outcomes.
OUR UNEASY RELATIONSHIP WITH POWER ONCE WE
HAVE IT
Many people want power. They strive for it, work for it, and even fight
for it. But paradoxically, many people don’t know what to do with it
once they have it. Of course, there are ruthless dictators and controlling
parents and tyrannical bosses, but for most people who find themselves
in the position of running a start-up or a newly founded social service
agency, managing power is something for which they were never
trained. So how do such leaders manage their power?
At times, leaders feel that they must avoid using their power until
they have more data. Power must be locked up until you have the “key”
to open it. At Community Connections, some department heads were

POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
47
always asking for more information. They feared being decisive until
they could support their decisions with hard facts. Of course, data are
rarely conclusive. And data from different sources can be in conflict and
can result in a leader drawing different conclusions. The director of one
of our largest departments is known for saying “I don’t feel comfortable
making that decision without more information.” But for him, there is
never enough information and important decisions go unmade. At
times, leaders believe that the data will make the decision for them. But
data are merely one basis for making a decision. Leaders use data, not
the other way around.
Some people feel so uneasy being in positions of power that they
hide it from themselves and from everyone around them. At Commu-
nity Connections, the focus has always been on egalitarian leadership. If
you walk in, you might well ask, “Who’s in charge here?” Everyone,
from the CEO to the receptionist, goes by their first name. No one has
a secretary and everyone gets her own coffee. The trappings of power
are conspicuously absent. In one organization similar to Community
Connections, no decision was ever made without a vote of all the em-
ployees. Someone who had been hired a month ago had the same vote
as the man who had founded the organization.
For some people, wielding power stands in contrast to their personal
values and goals. At Community Connections, employees saw them-
selves as working for the empowerment of those who have been margi-
nalized and disenfranchised. At organizations dedicated to preserving
the environment or the lives of endangered species, the goal is to make
the world better, not to garner personal power. Even many young for-
profit start-up companies want to solve problems and design technology
that will make life easier for the average person. These are lofty goals,
often at odds with embracing individual power. One does not need to
be a Fortune 500 CEO to be willing to exert power; every CEO needs
to recognize power and be willing to use it to make important decisions.
Below are some case studies of how power has been viewed, used,
and manipulated at Community Connections and—by analogy—at oth-
er young organizations.

CHAPTER 3
48
CASE STUDY #1: DENYING THAT PERSONAL POWER
EXISTS
Like the brothers in the fable, cofounders or coleaders in an organiza-
tion might prefer denying that personal power even exists. The organ-
ization grows and is sustained by the belief that no one holds absolute
power. “We are just one big happy family, right?” Until a decision needs
to be made.
In a social service organization like Community Connections, the
issue of power is especially problematic. Almost all staff come from the
nonprofit world where power is generally synonymous with greed and
tyranny.
One woman, Tony, who eventually became director of one of Com-
munity Connections’s biggest departments, started her career as a
homeless outreach worker. When she was first offered the position of
director, she insisted on making it clear that she felt uncomfortable
having power over others and making big decisions. In group meetings,
Tony, who had always been somewhat reserved, appeared almost fro-
zen. She refused to recognize, much less embrace, her power, often
qualifying her statements with offhand and somewhat self-deprecating
comments such as “Oh, what do I know anyway?” or “Don’t pay atten-
tion to what I just said; I wasn’t really concentrating.” At other times she
would look distracted and disengaged.
On one particular occasion, Tony was leading a business meeting
when Alex, her second in command, began to roll his eyes, tap his pen
on the desk, and whisper to a colleague. Rather than addressing Alex’s
behavior, Tony became quiet and somewhat withdrawn. Alex then
spoke up and took charge of the meeting. Other staff members became
a bit uncomfortable but let Alex, the self-appointed leader of the meet-
ing, have his say. After the meeting, Tony confronted Alex about his
behavior, but Alex only shrugged and replied, “Well, someone had to
take charge.” Tony was stressed and frustrated with Alex, but she was
unable to acknowledge, much less assume, the power that was rightfully
hers. She had denied her power by not using it.
Leaders cannot hide their heads and pretend that power does not
exist just because they work for a mission-driven organization or for a
young start-up founded by a group of friends. Acknowledging power is
part of doing the job. But for some people, power is just plain old scary.

POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
49
We all remember the look on George Bush’s face when he was told that
the Twin Towers in New York City had been attacked. His look of shock
was apparent, but so also was his look that appeared to be panic. Now
we don’t know for sure what went through his mind at that moment,
but the president certainly looked frightened by the enormous respon-
sibility for the nation’s safety that was being thrust upon him.
Sometimes words as well as actions can be used to deny personal
power. When asked if they would like the power to make final deci-
sions, some employees steadfastly say no. This is especially true for
women who may view their desire for power as being unseemly and
who may receive public criticism for what is seen as grasping for power.
In family-run businesses, regardless of how hard an employee works
or how well she performs her job, it may seem pointless to voice a
desire for power; after all, everyone knows who the next leader will be.
Power will be inherited by the next family member in line. The polite
answer to the question “Do you want to run this place someday?” is
“Not really, and besides I have other plans.”
CASE STUDY #2: GIVING OR TRADING POWER AWAY
Let’s face it, power can be a burden. Having to make decisions, juggle
multiple responsibilities, and take care of hundreds of employees can
exhaust even the most stalwart CEO. Leaders are encouraged to master
the art of self-care, work with coaches, and delegate responsibilities so
that they don’t develop “power fatigue” and do harm to the business as
well as to themselves. When Shakespeare’s Henry IV laments, “Uneasy
lies the head that wears a crown,” he is speaking of the weight of the
throne.3 In a less poetic voice, he might just as easily have been refer-
ring to the strain that comes with having the power of being the CEO.
Shortly after the sudden death of my partner, friend, and cofounder
of Community Connections, I felt not only the pain of personal grief,
but also the exhaustion of running the company on my own. My partner
had skills that I did not possess just as I had talents that were not hers.
We used to joke that together we made one whole CEO—like the
Roman god Janus, with two faces looking in different directions at the
same time. It was hard to imagine how either of us would go forward
without our “other half.”

CHAPTER 3
50
In this weakened position, power seemed too heavy a weight and I
sought someone who might either share the load or carry it herself. I
was, more than likely, looking for a replacement for Helen. And some-
one came to the rescue, or so I thought.
Cassie was an affable woman in her late thirties who was well re-
spected by most in the organization. Seeing that I was rudderless and
likely to make impulsive and perhaps rash decisions, she offered to take
over a number of my responsibilities and some of my power. In group
meetings, she would often glance in my direction, trying to read my
intent. I saw her eager gaze as a desire to make sure that I was not
feeling overly burdened, but in fact, to paraphrase Shakespeare once
again, “Yon Cassie had a lean and hungry look.”4
Over the course of several months, Cassie garnered more and more
power within the organization. But as I became increasingly rejuvenat-
ed, I realized that I wanted my power back. Once traded away, howev-
er, most things are difficult to retrieve, and power is especially so. I
began to see Cassie as a competitor, not as an ally, and I found myself
acting like a fussy child, throwing tantrums, contradicting Cassie’s ideas,
and slowly withdrawing her authority. I could see myself and my agency
spinning out of control. Fortunately, a coach with whom I was working
encouraged me to gain a more removed and dispassionate perspective
(what he called a view from the balcony) on the organizational dynamic
and slowly to take more and more of my power back. Some of it was
done in a planned and graceful way and, if I am being honest, some of it
was not. The “power” struggle between me and Cassie, even though it
ended with my successfully reasserting myself, was costly for me per-
sonally and for Community Connections. Relationships were tattered, I
lost much personal capital, employees were uncomfortable, and the
business floundered for several months. Whenever you give power
away, you had better be careful of why you are giving it away, under
what circumstances, for how long, and most importantly, to whom.
There is one caveat, however. Sometimes program directors give
power away in advance of a planned departure. But planning to give
power away can be tricky. Some managers do it too quickly, having the
equivalent of a “power yard sale.” They leave behind a power vacuum
that can easily cause squabbling and temporary dysfunction for the
organization. On the other side, it is possible to move too slowly. There
is a reason why there are only a few months between an election and

POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
51
the time when a new president takes office. Too long of a transition
leaves everyone wondering who really holds the power, the new leader
or the person with years of experience. The last thing a new leader
wants is to have his predecessor telling him how things used to be.
Somewhat more difficult to discern than the giving away of power is
the trading away of power, but you need go no further than the Old
Testament to discover an example of trading away power. As the eldest
son of Isaac, Esau was poised to inherit the wealth and power possessed
by his family. But after a day of strenuous hunting, Esau was exhausted
and hungry. When offered the chance, he willingly and without really
thinking traded his birthright to his younger brother for a bowl of por-
ridge. As twenty-first-century readers of the Bible, we may find this
trade hardly seems like an astute move, but at Community Connections
and at many other small or medium-sized nonprofit businesses, trading
away power happens more often than one might think.
Women, for example, may find themselves inclined to trade power
for friendship or some semblance of friendship. Hard research and
qualitative studies, for example, suggest that women are more relational
than men.5 They want to feel liked and accepted by the people they
work with. At Community Connections, leadership made a point of
using first names to address one another. Even during a job interview,
the interviewer, a member of the leadership team, frequently made a
conscious effort to level the playing field by saying to the applicant,
“Please call me Mark. If I am going to use your first name you can
certainly use mine.” A message that says “We are equals, we will be
colleagues, maybe we will even be friends.” While such casual interac-
tion is in sync with the friendly ethos of the organization, its primary
purpose may be to satisfy the relational needs of its leaders.
In this effort to be friendly, Community Connections went further
than just using first names. The co-CEOs baked cookies, handed out
prizes for good performance, and sent birthday cards and occasionally
even flowers to employees, implying a personal relationship. All of this
behavior made employees believe that Community Connections was a
friendly place to work and that its leaders were nurturing and caring.
What it also did, however, was result in the leaders trading away some
of their power.
When leaders adhere to policies and procedures, rather than break-
ing rules for “their friends,” they can be seen as mean and uncaring.

CHAPTER 3
52
Chatting casually about personal struggles and making hard choices can
cause others to see leaders as weak and vulnerable. At Community
Connections, for example, where the co-CEOs acted like “good old
Helen and that’s just Maxine,” they were treated with disrespect. They
learned that once power is traded away, it is very hard to get it back.
Staff can end up feeling confused, duped, and even betrayed. Once the
toothpaste is squeezed out of the tube, only a magician can get it back
in.
Bosses can be friendly, they can express concern and make employ-
ees feel cared about, but in the end they are bosses who have the final
say in decisions. They should not be seduced into trading away their
legitimate power.
CASE STUDY #3: TAKING ADVANTAGE OF PERSONAL
POWER
Power can be intoxicating and, like a strong drink, it can make us dizzy,
causing us to feel that we are bigger and stronger than we actually are.
Regrettably, at Community Connections and other similar organiza-
tions, the overuse of power often takes the form of bullying. Young
leaders in particular have little experience in being in positions of power
and think that the only way to manifest power is to flex their muscles
publically. Abraham Lincoln wisely cautioned that if you wanted to
measure someone’s character, “See what they do when you give them
power.”6
Early in our history, I recall asking a young staff person for a favor.
He looked at me, tilted his head and looked startled, and then dismissed
my request. My first response was to be dumbfounded, but my second
response was to get angry. “Doesn’t he realize who he is talking to?
After all, I am the BOSS.” I barked some critical and shaming words in
his direction and stormed off to my office. And I did this within hearing
range of some other staff who were milling around near the conference
room. I was badly shaken as I entered my office in another part of the
building.
I learned an important lesson that day. Power does not give you the
right to disrespect another person. It does not condone shaming an-
other person. Real power does not require a battering ram. My actions

POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
53
had several consequences. I felt embarrassed by my behavior and of-
fered an apology, which was only perfunctorily accepted. I had clearly
crossed a line. The young employee felt beaten up and subsequently
left the organization, and I had revealed a particularly ugly part of
myself. Others had heard my outburst and now looked at me with a
certain measure of fear and distrust. Shaming another person is not
power; it is what one can get away with when one has power. Margaret
Thatcher, the former prime minister of England, wisely said, “Being
powerful is like being a lady. If you have to tell people you are, you
aren’t.”7
CASE STUDY #4: CONFUSING POWER WITH AUTHORITY
When people are given authority, they often mistakenly believe that
they have absolute power. Take the example of Roxanna, a talented
clinician who had worked at Community Connections for almost six
years, since the start of her career. She seemed like a natural choice
when the agency decided to open a new program for troubled youth.
The CEO gave Roxanna the authority to design the residential program
and to hire the staff who would be responsible for the daily operations.
Roxanna, however, did not have the power to increase the program’s
budget or to decide how its success would be judged. Those big deci-
sions would be made elsewhere. The CEO was clear that Roxanna’s
authority was limited, both in time and in scope.
That was where the first mistakes were made and where the confu-
sion between authority and power began. Roxanna, her staff, and the
children in the program were all unclear as to who was in charge. When
there were big decisions to be made or a crisis that needed to be
resolved, people asked to see the boss.
Even though she and her staff and other employees in the organiza-
tion had been told that she was in charge of the program, she felt as if
that was not really the case. She had authority, but no power (and in
that perception, she was correct). Roxanna felt the eye of management
looking over her shoulder. She saw what she believed to be her power
slipping away. But Roxanna had never been told the difference between
power and authority. Those with power had delegated authority to her.
She had not lost her power; she never had any to begin with. The story

CHAPTER 3
54
had a very sad ending. Roxanna felt that she had been used and duped
by senior management. The leaders felt that Roxanna had not per-
formed her job well and the youth in the program felt unprotected and
many of them left treatment prematurely.
Before concluding, there are two other concepts that need attention
because they are often used when talking about power and authority:
responsibility and accountability. Whether it is in a business or in one’s
everyday personal life, things need to get done. Responsibility is like
having a job description (the activities, tasks, behaviors that a person is
charged with accomplishing). Someone needs to be responsible for
“making the trains run on time.” Unfortunately, this level of responsibil-
ity, although vital for running any operation, is limited and can be easily
disrespected. That is because the responsibility of action is rarely cou-
pled with either authority or power.
At Community Connections, and other similar nonprofit organiza-
tions, most of the direct services are performed by entry-level clinicians.
Their day-to-day activities are spelled out in a job description with little
room for variation. They are the actors who deliver the services for
which Community Connections is known, and they and their supervis-
ors are responsible for making sure those services are delivered compe-
tently and according to protocol. When giving people responsibilities,
though, managers also need to give them the training and the resources
to do the job. Frontline workers often complain that they are being
asked to “make bricks without straw”—to assume more responsibilities
with fewer resources and little or no recognition.
Finally, accountability hovers over power, authority, and responsibil-
ity. We look to the accountable person when we want to know “Whose
bright idea was this anyway?” Who gets the credit? Who deserves the
blame? When someone makes a serious clinical or financial error at
Community Connections, they may feel remorseful or apologetic. They
may try to remedy the mistake, but ultimately, I am accountable for the
consequences of their actions. As I have been heard to say, “Be careful
what you do, because I’ll be the one getting sued!”
In first-generation founder-run businesses, the founder is literally
the owner. If things are not run correctly and the business fails, the
founder will be held accountable. As a result, founders may be reluctant
to delegate important tasks, may not trust the advice of team members,
and may have difficulty devising a clear plan for succession. As a

POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
55
founder of Community Connections, I have been accused of doing
more than a little looking over the shoulders of my employees, making
sure that everything is done just right. Too much pressure to hold one
person ultimately accountable can be bad for your health, but it can also
be bad for the health of your business.
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
Only recently have I seen the CEO title applied to directors of nonprof-
it agencies like Community Connections. It took me several years, in
fact until after the death of my partner, to have the letters CEO printed
on my business card. My doorplate still bears my professional degree,
Maxine Harris PhD, and when asked what position I hold at Commu-
nity Connections, I merely say that I am the director. Now some of this
may be my personal discomfort, some of it may be that in the practice/
professional world, we are more comfortable displaying our academic
credentials, but I think discomfort at being thought of as the boss also
plays into the mix.
Shortly after Community Connections opened, a young employee
gave me a coffee mug with the logo “She Who Must Be Obeyed”
printed prominently on the side. As she handed me the mug, the young
woman was tentative and somewhat intimidated, clearly unsure as to
how I might receive her gift. I felt flattered, seeing the inscription as a
compliment. A male colleague sitting across the room began to laugh.
Three different reactions; three different perspectives; all commentar-
ies on power. I knew that the moniker “She Who Must Be Obeyed” was
used by Rumpole of the Bailey in reference to his wife, but I suspect
that was not the real origin of the phrase. 8
I discovered that in 1887, the writer H. Rider Haggard published the
fantasy novel She. One of the protagonists in the story is Ayesha (“She
Who Must Be Obeyed”).9 Ayesha is a sorceress from an ancient and
otherworldly kingdom who wields enormous and almost unimaginable
power: the power to heal, to raise the dead, to know the minds of her
subjects, and of course, the power of immortality. In the end of the
novel, however, the sorceress steps into the flame of immortality one
time too many, losing all of her life preserving power as she crumples to
the ground, an ancient and shriveled hag, no longer “She Who Must Be

CHAPTER 3
56
Obeyed.” She is a frightening and ominous tale, which might just cap-
ture some of the struggles and dangers that go with having and using
power.
PUTTING LEADERSHIP, POWER, AND RELATED
CONCEPTS AT COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS IN
CONTEXT
As noted earlier in the chapter, the word “power” often carries many
negative connotations—power grabbing, power struggle, power trip,
power play, and of course, Lord Acton’s “power tends to corrupt and
absolute power corrupts absolutely.”10 Dating back three centuries, so-
ciety has also had an uneasy relationship with ambition or the desire for
advancement and power. As Jeffrey Pfeffer has written, people like to
believe that the world is just and fair, so ambitious striving for power is
unnecessary if not outright unseemly.11 Part of the negativity is a func-
tion of language and the word itself. Before addressing the dynamics of
shared leadership, which were central for Community Connections, we
address the language of power and other concepts related to leadership
and leading.
Leadership or leading is a process of social influence to guide, struc-
ture, and facilitate behaviors, activities, and relationships toward the
achievement of shared goals through cooperation and free will, not
force. It may be exerted by those in formal positions of authority, or
those without it. When exerted by those without formal authority, lead-
ership is generally based on moral, social, intellectual, informational, or
other forms of power. Leadership is most effective when it rests not
solely on formal authority but also on some combination of other forms
of power.
As the definition above indicates, influence, power, authority, re-
sponsibility, and accountability are all central to leadership, decision
making, and control. They are also often equated or conflated, which is
problematic because a lack of clarity regarding these terms often por-
tends a lack of clear roles and “rules of engagement.”
Influence is a process by which we change circumstances or behav-
ior. For example, parents can (try to) influence their children’s behavior

POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
57
and supervisors can try to influence the staff in their unit to follow
procedures more closely.
In contrast, power is the potential or capacity to influence other
people, groups, or events. Power can be conferred or based on one’s
position (in which case it’s called “authority”), or it can be based on
other factors, including personal characteristics (e.g., charisma), social
connections, status, information, expertise, resources (i.e., “power of
the purse”), and so on. In either case, power rests on differences—
differences in position, differences in status, differences in access to
resources, differences in respect. For example, if I am the youngest
person on a team, my power might be based mainly on my technical
expertise. I would have limited connections in the organization, I might
not be especially charismatic, and I wouldn’t have any budget.
As noted earlier in the chapter, authority is power that is formally
conferred. Authority is the formal, legitimate (usually position based,
institutionalized, and/or legal) right to make decisions, direct people’s
actions, commit resources, and so forth. Authority is generally delegat-
ed formally or conferred based on one’s position. It comes with a re-
sponsibility for your actions and the actions and resources that you
direct (or fail to direct). It is a subset of power.
For example, we may have some power over our children, but that
power changes as they age, and we may or may not be successful in our
attempts to use it. Until they reach age eighteen, we have both informal
power and formal power (or authority) over them. After they turn eight-
een, we no longer have formal power or authority over them. Fortu-
nately or unfortunately, society still sees those children as partially my
responsibility. If children go off the rails and get in trouble, even if
they’re twenty-five, the community (or society more broadly) will view
the parents as (at least partially) responsible.
Responsibility is the duty (to followers, peers, superiors, and/or soci-
ety) to carry out a task satisfactorily. It comes with consequences (for-
mal or informal) for failure to complete that task. Responsibility can be
assigned by others or assumed based on one’s own promises or circum-
stances. For example, we’re responsible for our children’s welfare. We
can delegate that responsibility to others for short periods of time, but
we’re responsible (and ultimately accountable) for their welfare.
Accountability is a sense of obligation when people must answer for
their actions (or inactions) and accept the positive or negative conse-

CHAPTER 3
58
quences. Those consequences can be legal or social/informal. Account-
ability is generally something that cannot be delegated. If we’re ac-
countable, we must account for our activities, accept responsibility for
them, and disclose the results in a transparent manner. We are all
ultimately accountable for our own actions, though others may some-
times be implicated for influencing those actions.
For example, former Volkswagen CEO Martin Winterkorn may not
have been directly responsible for the emissions control systems scandal
with VW’s diesel engines, but he was accountable for the actions of VW
employees. When it became clear that VW had cheated to pass emis-
sions tests, Winterkorn was quickly held accountable in the court of
public opinion, and he resigned. Ultimately, he may also be held ac-
countable in courts of law.
POWER, DECISION MAKING, AND SHARED LEADERSHIP
Power and shared leadership featured prominently in the Community
Connections story. They also feature prominently in many (if not most)
new organizations. Founders of organizations face three core types of
dilemmas—about roles, relationships, and rewards.12 Role dilemmas
are fundamentally about power and decision making, and they are con-
siderably more difficult when the cofounders have relatively similar
skills.
Early on—during the days when there is more work than arms, legs,
and brains to do it—many cofounders occupy overlapping roles. Over
time, a clearer division of labor can support better accountability and a
more careful match between strengths and roles. Ideally, founders and
founding team members build deliberate consideration about (and flex-
ibility into) their roles so that they can evolve thoughtfully and inten-
tionally as the organization evolves.
Whether founding teams are explicit about decision-making struc-
tures and processes, there is nearly always some tension between being
democratic, inclusive, and consensus driven or being clear, direct, and
more autocratic. The latter generally includes a single person who is
accountable for making the final decisions—and is usually a faster ap-
proach to decision making. In dynamic environments, although consid-
eration of multiple points of view is important, research suggests that

POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
59
centralized decision making (under relatively dominant CEOs) is asso-
ciated with decreases in firm performance.13 More egalitarian ap-
proaches are more common when founders have similar skill sets and
when neither carries the official CEO title—either by design or because
they’ve avoided the sticky question of titles altogether. There is a ten-
dency among many founders to just “punt” on difficult conversations
regarding roles and titles (not to mention relationships and rewards).
Co-CEOs occur occasionally—as with Oracle, Whole Foods, Chipo-
tle, and RIM, the company behind Blackberry phones. Unfortunately,
they do not have a particularly good track record. As one study put the
conundrum of such shared leadership models: is it dual or duel?14 The
approach has only been studied in a handful of social service agencies,
where it seems to be adopted more frequently by female leaders, but
there is a deeper base of knowledge based on co-CEOs of corporations.
For example, a 2014 study by Krause et al., of seventy-one co-CEO
pairs of publicly traded U.S. companies, showed that firm performance
increased as the power gap between the co-CEOs increased.15 In other
words, performance improved as the leadership structure moved away
from a “shared command” approach to a “unity of command” approach.
This was true except when the gap between the two co-CEOs’ power
was extremely large. Co-CEOs also seem to be associated with a less
independent board structure and fewer advising directors.16 If done
well, this can be balanced by the co-CEOs’ mutual monitoring of each
other, but for large organizations it is a significant risk.
The paradox is that most leaders conclude that the CEO role is best
held by one person, but they also begin their organizations with rela-
tively egalitarian and loosely specified roles that often include a sub-
stantial dose of shared leadership. This was true in the early days of
Community Connections, until roles and responsibilities at the top be-
came more clearly defined and divided. With that clearer division
comes the potential to make decisions more rapidly.
In its early days, Community Connections operated with a shared
approach to leadership. Formally, there were two directors, not initially
referred to as CEOs. Over time, although those titles remained in ef-
fect, specific responsibilities and accountability for aspects of Commu-
nity Connections’s operations diverged. Reflecting the two founders’
strengths and preferences, Maxine assumed responsibility for clinical
operations and Helen assumed responsibility for administrative opera-

CHAPTER 3
60
tions. As they assumed these roles, it became clearer within the organ-
ization who was accountable for what, but not everyone was open to the
coleadership approach. In fact, titles were not formalized until a grantor
required that they be listed on a grant proposal. The initial submission
named co-CEOs, but it was sent back with the request that a single
CEO be listed, which caused considerable upheaval.
The generally positive effects of more clearly defined roles at Com-
munity Connections are consistent with the research indicating that
organizational performance is generally enhanced when there is some
distinction in the power held by cofounders or coleaders. With the
exception of parenting, having two leaders with equally shared power,
responsibility, and accountability is often a recipe for inefficiency and
conflict. At the end of the day, for an organization’s sake, knowing
“where the buck stops” on any given issue helps staff move forward.
SUGGESTED READINGS
For more on the dynamics and performance implications of different
forms of shared leadership and our often uncomfortable relationship
with power, see Craig L. Pearce and Jay A. Conger, Shared Leadership:
Framing the Hows and Whys of Leadership (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, 2002); Jeffrey Pfeffer, Power (New York: Harper Busi-
ness, 2010), and—especially in start-up contexts—Noam Wasserman,
The Founder’s Dilemmas (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
2012).

61
4
HIRING
People to Help With the Work
One of the most important, even essential, tasks for any business is
hiring and retaining talented employees. This can prove especially diffi-
cult for nonprofit businesses that are mission driven to the point of
caring far more about new hires’ passion and commitment than their
skill and training. The dilemma becomes even more powerful in
founder-run, nonprofit businesses (often staffed initially with friends
and family) where issues of mission and commitment are confounded
by relational concerns and a strong desire to “make everyone happy.”
It may only take a few people to start an organization, but it takes
many more to actually run it. So how do you go about the process of
hiring new staff? Do you design the job and then hire the best person,
or do you find good people and then let them create their own job?
These were not questions with simple answers as Community Connec-
tions moved into its second stage of growth.
A FABLE: THE CLOTHING IN THE CHEST
It had been a very cold winter. Many of the villagers were unused to the
freezing temperatures and did not have any clothing to keep them warm
when the winds howled and blew circles in the fallen snow. “Oh, how
cold I am!” cried one of the older and most respected of those who were

CHAPTER 4
62
huddled together in the center of town. “I would take any clothing that
would keep me warm, ANY clothing at all.” The other villagers nodded
their heads in agreement, but no one had any idea as to how they might
find garments to keep them warm throughout the remainder of the long
winter.
At the same time, the daughter of a wealthy merchant was sitting in
front of a warm fire in her large house. You would have thought that she
would be quite content to be so cozy and snug, but this young girl was
quite bored. “What shall I do?” she asked out loud to no one in particu-
lar. “I will be quite frustrated if I cannot find anything to do on all of
these cold afternoons.” In search of something to hold her attention, she
wandered throughout the many rooms of her large house. Just when she
thought she had seen all there was to see, she stumbled upon a hidden
staircase that led to an attic that she had never been to before. In the
center of the attic room she spied a very old chest that had been covered
with all sorts of beautiful blankets. “I must open this chest,” she de-
clared. “I know I will find something wonderful inside to keep me busy
for all the long days of this cold winter.”
And sure enough, she was right. The chest contained all sorts of
clothing. Clothing for women and girls, clothing for men and boys.
There were coats and sweaters, leggings and dresses, and all varieties of
gloves and mittens and well knitted hats. “What a treasure,” the girl
exclaimed, “I will take all of these lovely things and sort them into
orderly piles, then those who are in need of warm clothing can come
and take their pick.” She worked for days and many long hours, but
finally, she was done with her task. She went to the center of town and
found the respected elder and told him what she had found and what
she had done. At first he looked at her with some skepticism. “Was this
rich young girl playing a cruel joke on all of the huddled and freezing
villagers?” But after a while he was convinced of her sincerity and
turned to the waiting crowd. “We have been blessed with great good
fortune. The daughter from the big house has found warm clothing for
us all.”
Just as they heard the elder’s words, the villagers began to scream
and holler and push, racing each other to the front of the big house. The
elder’s cries to wait and to choose wisely from the piles of warm clothing
went unheard or unheeded. Every man, woman, and child began grab-

HIRING
63
bing and pulling at the stacks of clothing that had once been organized
into neat and carefully sized piles.
One tall woman grabbed a very small dress and pulled it over her
head with much tugging and straining. Another husky fellow found a
pair of slim pants and a fitted shirt and squeezed himself into both, and
still another very small girl, who was shivering in the cold, found the
biggest dress she could see and stepped right into the large opening
intended for her head.
When all of the villagers had chosen new clothing and had dressed
themselves for the cold winter, they turned and thanked the young girl
and began to run and hurry back to their own homes. But as they made
their way, many of them noticed something strange. The big woman
with the small dress could only take very small steps because her legs
felt bound together. And the man with the tight shirt and pants had to
hold his arms and legs out as if he were a scarecrow. The young girl
with the big dress fell down again and again, tripping over the long hem
of her new dress.
When the villagers finally arrived at the center of the town, they
were greeted by the wise elder who looked at them all and shook his
head. “My dear friends,” he intoned, “it’s not enough to have some
clothing, you only stay comfortable if you have the right clothing.” The
villagers had learned a hard lesson, and next time they would choose
more wisely.
The fable of the “Clothing in the Chest” suggests why hiring is such a
complicated process. Both the employer and the employee need to
know exactly what they want and what they are looking for. The villag-
ers just want to be warm; they really don’t seem to care what clothing
they put on to get them to that goal. Similarly, some prospective hires
just want a job, any job, just so long as they get a paycheck to help them
pay the rent.
The girl in the story isn’t really invested in the goal of keeping the
villagers warm. She is just occupying herself by giving the clothing
away. Her satisfaction comes from knowing that she has emptied the
chest, not from making good matches for individual villagers. In the
same way, naive or inexperienced employers can fill a position just so
they can say that it has been filled, not because a good match between a
job and an employee has been made.

CHAPTER 4
64
Over the years, Community Connections has had to hire several
thousand (taking turnover into account) employees. This is a sizeable
number for a clinical organization that began with only three people.
Although we have made a large number of “right” choices, we have also
made more than our share of mistakes. Like the villagers in the fable,
we have placed the wrong people in jobs that did not fit and we have
placed the right people in jobs that kept them too tightly constrained.
At our worst, like the apocryphal tale about the emperor with no
clothes, we placed people in jobs that really did not exist at all.
THE PROCESS OF HIRING
The process of hiring should begin with a series of careful assessments.
Like most things, success demands that you know what you want, how
to get it, and how to tell if you’ve gotten what you set out to find in the
first place.
Assessing the Organization
What is often missing in a start-up nonprofit business is an organization-
al chart. While this may be unthinkable in a large, established business,
it is usually the routine in a start-up; after all, what is the need for an
organizational chart when the business consists of two or three partners
who find themselves doing a little bit of everything?
But first, what is an organizational chart and why should it play an
important role in hiring decisions? A chart lays out the employment
structure of the business. Going down vertically, the chart lays out a
hierarchical structure. Quite simply, “who reports to whom?” Just who
is my boss? As the business grows, the chart gets bigger and longer.
There are directors and departments and supervisors and line staff, to
say nothing of relationships on the horizontal axis across departments
between directors and others. If you are now totally confused, you are
feeling just what founders of growing nonprofit organizations feel. At
one point, the chart at Community Connections grew so big that we had
to lay it out on the conference room floor, expanding across several
pieces of paper.

HIRING
65
This confusing jumble occurs because nonprofit start-ups begin with
people, not with charts. As a nonprofit begins to embrace its identity as
a business, it makes sense to draw an organizational chart to determine
who should be hired next, to fill what function, and to whom they will
report. But the old culture dies hard, and the pull to “just hire” people
when you need more staff is strong. Like so many founders (including
those at Community Connections), it is very easy to take that organiza-
tional chart, crumple it into a ball, and toss it into the trash can.
But before going to that extreme, it is wise to acknowledge the
critical function of an organizational chart, namely, that it provides
much needed structure to the organization and to the hiring process.
Defining the Job
A job description outlines just what constitutes the activities of the job,
what skills are required, and what qualifications are needed. Just as
importantly, a job description places the job within the organizational
chart. It tells an employee where he or she fits. Do you report to the
CEO, to one of the directors, or to someone who operates as part of the
support staff? These placements on the organizational chart define an
individual’s decision-making role, her power, and her connection to the
mission of the organization.
For most people, a clear and well-defined job description is essential
for good performance. Some may even feel quite anxious when they do
not know just what they are supposed to do. But for others, too much
specificity feels constricting and is viewed as a limit to innovation. In
fact, some businesses are experimenting with giving some employees a
“sand box” in which to innovate and try out new ideas—just the oppo-
site of a tight job description. So we need job descriptions, but we also
need the power to go outside them when it makes sense.
Assessing the Individual
Understanding the job and what it requires is the first step toward
making a good hiring match. But assessing the individual is equally
important. The girl in the fable needed to make a careful assessment of
the clothing that was in the chest, but she also needed to assess the
villagers. Who was tall? Who was big and who was small? Who was

CHAPTER 4
66
young? And all the other variables that allow us to make distinctions
among people. The field of human resources provides a number of ways
of evaluating individuals—from testing their skills and looking at their
work history and past performances, to having them be interviewed by
supervisors and peers, or placing them in a work situation and seeing
how they perform.
The problem, however, is that most beginning nonprofits rarely use
these strategies. Too much process seems too expensive, organizations
are too small to have a full-fledged Human Resources (HR) depart-
ment, and quite honestly, most start-up nonprofits don’t trust standard-
ized tests. So what do they do? They “trust their gut,” which means
overvaluing likability—the “would you like to have a beer with this
person” test. It also means falling victim to the “is this person similar to
me” fallacy. Is this person the same age as me? Did they go to the same
college? Are they from the same background, race, or ethnicity? Are
they the same gender? Since none of these variables has anything to do
with the ability to perform a job well, it is no wonder that so many
young nonprofits suffer from high turnover rates.
There is yet another stumbling block that makes assessing the pros-
pective employee difficult, and that is our pursuit of a fantasy, an elu-
sive “it” that we think will allow one candidate to rise above others. This
quality can be something we call passion, or curiosity, or creativity. The
problem with all of these is that they are difficult to measure because
they are nearly impossible to define. If I ask, “What is passion?” and all
you can reply is “I know it when I see it,” then we don’t have real
criteria for assessing whom to hire.
Evaluating the Choice
Now you understand your organization; you have defined the job and
assessed the individual. How do you know if you have made the right
choice? This puts us in the world of performance assessment.
There are hundreds of performance assessment tools that measure a
range of outcomes. It seems obvious that performance should be tied to
goals, but the smaller the organization, the vaguer the goals may be. For
many small nonprofits the goal is merely to survive. As time passes and
an organization meets goal number one, larger goals get set and goals

HIRING
67
are assigned to particular individuals. And the more quantifiable the
goal, the easier it is to measure.
All of this sounds quite rational and makes good sense, but the more
procedures start to sound like what happens in a business, the harder
they are to implement in a mission-driven nonprofit organization. You
hear the complaints again and again, “We’re here to help people, or
solve problems, or create new ways of doing things, not to fill out
personnel assessments.” Try telling someone who joined the organiza-
tion to help homeless veterans that she has to spend time filling out
evaluation forms!
But evaluation of employees is essential to making sure the job gets
done and the mission is accomplished. Evaluations help with making
other decisions such as promotions and bonuses and lateral moves to
new departments. They also help with decisions about firing people.
In nonprofits, especially human service organizations, the word
“fire” is almost a dirty word. Rather than reflecting a mismatch between
employee and job or employee and organization, it is seen as a failure,
on the part of the supervisor, the team, and more specifically, the em-
ployee. And since supervisors do not want to seem unfair, the decision
to fire an employee often drags out far longer than it should, with a
string of employee improvement plans and coaching sessions. It is
clearly a stretch for many people who run nonprofit businesses to view
firing as a normal and healthy part of the hiring process. Like the
villagers in the fable, however, sometimes you just need to take the ill-
fitting clothes off and wait for another opportunity.
Understanding some of the factors that should be considered when
hiring employees goes a long way toward making the right hiring deci-
sion. But we all know that even the best knowledge is not enough to
prevent mistakes. Here are some of the misguided ways in which all-
important hiring decisions got made at Community Connections.
CASE STUDY #1: HIRING FROM THE OUTSIDE
Hiring had always posed a problem for Community Connections. Once
you get past hiring your friends, you need a method for hiring new staff.
Over the years a rather byzantine process evolved for hiring at Commu-
nity Connections. An ad was posted; a resume came in and it was vetted

CHAPTER 4
68
first by a clinical supervisor, then by the CEO. Acceptable resumes
were then sent to a clinical department where a second vetting process
took place. The candidate would ultimately have a personal meeting
with the CEO where a final decision to hire or not to hire was made.
The whole process could take as long as three weeks; during which time
clients who were slated to become part of the new hire’s caseload had to
wait to be served, some very good applicants took jobs with other organ-
izations, and many of the involved parties found it difficult to track
where we were in the hiring process.
It was clear that we had a problem with the way we hired new
frontline clinical staff, but we seemed stuck when it came to fixing the
problem.
Part of the reason that such an awkward process persisted was that
each of the interviewers along the way had an interest in keeping things
just the way they were. Responsibility for hiring carried a certain status
within the organization—interviewers got to know all the new hires and
form relationships. Being left out might give others the impression that
the supervisor was just a cog in the wheel and not an important part of
the hiring process.
Changing the process might also mean turning authority for hiring
over to the HR department; yet people were skeptical that since the
HR department was not made up of staff with clinical backgrounds,
they would not know how to evaluate clinicians. The fear was that HR
would end up hiring candidates with good resumes but without the
heart to be caring clinicians. This was one of those gut beliefs that
persisted despite the absence of any empirical evidence. It took years to
alter the hiring process and senior supervisors clung to the belief that
the old way, cumbersome as it was, must be the right way to do things
since “it had always been done that way.”
CASE STUDY #2: HASTY HIRING
For Community Connections, the decision to hire additional staff was
often in response to an immediate and sometimes unanticipated need.
In the mid-1990s, the organization applied for and was awarded a large
federal grant. Before the funders had announced the grant awards,
leaders were reluctant to hire the fifteen new staff who would need to

HIRING
69
begin delivering the services. There was a feeling of hope, without any
certainty. So we waited, knowing that when the awards were an-
nounced, and if we were successful, we would have to scramble to hire
the necessary staff quickly.
Once Community Connections was granted one of the awards, the
process of hiring began. Yet, after several weeks, with internal and
external pressure mounting, Community Connections was still short
several clinicians. At that point, consideration turned to some less
skilled applicants.
Brandy was one of those individuals and so she was hired for a
position for which she was only somewhat qualified. On the plus side,
she did have the necessary education for the position, and she was also
very willing to learn. Most important, she was a positive person who
brought a sense of optimism that everything would work out well on the
new project.
However, she also had several deficits, some of which were obvious
at the time of hiring, others which emerged as she began the job.
Although she had taken the right courses in college and graduate
school, she had very few clinical skills and almost no experience work-
ing with a very challenging group of homeless, traumatized, and ad-
dicted women. When Brandy felt overwhelmed by a clinical problem,
she felt too intimidated to ask for help from a supervisor and instead
withdrew into her office. She would also substitute social conversations
with her colleagues for actually spending time engaging with the clients.
Her positive personality, which had been one of the reasons for hiring
her in the first place, now became a cover for not doing the work.
In addition to her overall deficits, Brandy was poorly suited for the
particular job for which she was hired. Because the job was part of a
federal grant, the tasks to be performed were quite specific. Clinicians
needed to meet with clients a certain number of times per week, they
needed to learn how to run clinical groups, and they needed to log a
certain number of hours each week doing outreach to noncompliant
clients. Such a job required someone with clinical savvy, creative think-
ing, and a willingness to reach out to supervisors for help. None of these
was a strong asset for this employee.
After well over a year of trying to help Brandy fit into the job for
which she was hired, the head of the HR department, Brandy’s super-
visor, and Brandy herself made a decision for Brandy to transfer to

CHAPTER 4
70
another department within the organization. Her skills were no better
matched to the new job, but at least it was a chance for a new begin-
ning. Eager to make a good impression and to experience a measure of
professional success, Brandy began her new job with the same sense of
optimism and good spirit that she had demonstrated when she had
begun the first position. But once again, her performance fell to a
marginal level. Paradoxically, she never did well, but she never did
quite poorly enough to actually be fired. One improvement plan fol-
lowed another and Brandy managed to improve just enough to meet the
minimum standard. Through all of this, she managed to maintain a
friendly attitude and continued to be liked, at least superficially, by her
colleagues.
After one more equally unsuccessful transfer to yet another depart-
ment, the supervisor, having decided that it was time for Brandy to
move on, resolved to try a different strategy. Instead of resorting to the
previous option of improvement plans and meetings with HR, the
supervisor began to counsel Brandy that her own professional needs
were not being well served by continuing to work at Community Con-
nections. She had not received any promotions, she had failed to pass
an exam for professional licensure, and many of her old colleagues had
moved on. What the supervisor did not tell her was that she was no
longer seen as a friendly colleague. Her colleagues felt resentful that
while they had to work hard, she seemed to be getting a pass. The
supervisor himself was frustrated since her poor performance pulled
down the productivity scores for his entire department.
It was clearly time for her to move on, but in the absence of a
fireable offense, the supervisor spent almost eighteen months cajoling
Brandy into submitting her resignation. There was a clear feeling of
relief when she finally did. She was given a warm good-bye party and
was quickly hired by another organization where the job requirements
were much lower. Her current position at Community Connections was
then filled with someone who had the clinical qualifications for the job
and the right education, as well as the positive personality that had been
seen as Brandy’s greatest asset. Brandy had been hired for all the wrong
reasons. We needed someone who could fill the position quickly. Eve-
ryone liked Brandy. And we mistakenly thought that with the right
training, we could give Brandy the skills she needed.

HIRING
71
CASE STUDY #3: INCORRECT INTERNAL MATCH
In the early 1990s, about ten years after we began our business, we
found ourselves with the good fortune of having several strong young
employees. One woman, Judy, had worked as a lead clinician on a
government-funded demonstration and evaluation project and had
shown outstanding clinical skills. She engaged well with her clients and
formed lasting relationships, and she worked effectively and collabora-
tively within the context of a clinical team. As well, Judy was comfort-
able with the slow and incremental rate of change that characterizes
work with seriously mentally ill, impoverished, and sometimes homeless
individuals. Her paperwork was adequate but she had trouble complet-
ing it on time, in part because she much preferred spending time with
clients.
After five years of doing this work, however, she felt ready for a new
challenge—an opportunity for professional development. Since we did
not want to lose her, we looked around the agency for other job oppor-
tunities. At around this same time, our intake and assessment depart-
ment was under pressure to expand its capacity. Every new client
needed an initial intake, done according to a specified format. Individu-
als also required a reassessment every three to six months. Adding al-
most eighty new clients per month meant that we needed a highly
trained cadre of licensed professionals who could perform these tasks.
The intake/assessment job required that the professional meet peo-
ple quickly, get all the relevant information in only two hours, and after
writing the report, hand off the client to another clinician who would
begin the actual clinical intervention. Three to six months later, an
assessment needed to be written on all clients and the intake/assess-
ment workers would be responsible for doing and writing those assess-
ments, again using a specified template. We assumed that since Judy
had been an outstanding clinician herself, she would understand the
clinical issues and be able to perform the job well.
The intake/assessment job, however, required a very different set of
skills. Intake workers had to meet people quickly, form a superficial
relationship, and begin asking questions. Since the billing codes only
allowed for a two-hour meeting, the worker would have to wrap up the
meeting and complete the report within that time frame. Each member
of the intake staff worked independently and only called on her col-

CHAPTER 4
72
leagues if she needed someone to see extra clients waiting for an ap-
pointment. The work had to be done quickly and the paperwork needed
to be done according to protocol with no room for creativity.
After some coaxing, Judy transferred from her position as lead clini-
cian to one as intake clinician. It should also be noted that the intake
position came with a higher salary, allowed the staff person to work
more regular hours so that she could leave to pick up her young child,
and had no line authority over others that might require writing person-
nel evaluations, nor were there hiring and firing responsibilities.
Not surprisingly, this particular transfer proved to be a disaster.
After almost a year, Judy admitted defeat and left Community Connec-
tions. She felt demoralized and far less self-confident than when she
had accepted the new position. The department suffered because of a
backlog of new referrals, decreased billings, and depressed morale. No
one likes to work alongside an unhappy colleague.
As we did a postmortem on just what had happened, we were able to
see and articulate a series of highly operative but unspoken, or worse
yet, unknown assumptions. First, we assumed that any good employee
could be trained to do any job. We assumed that a job merely consisted
of a collection of tasks that required a set of skills to be successfully
completed. In the case of Judy, she was a bright woman and surely she
would be able to learn the tasks that were necessary for completing the
intake form, meeting the client, asking a set of questions, and writing
those answers into a predesigned template.
We assumed the tasks required certain skills: the ability to write
clearly, knowledge of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, the ability
to complete a task in a timely manner, and the ability to set and follow a
schedule for completing the tasks. We also thought that both skills and
tasks could be taught. And on that front we were correct. Judy learned
the tasks quickly and was instructed and coached to develop the needed
skills. Where we made our mistake, however, was in assuming that
mastering tasks and skills was all there was to performing a job. We
neglected to take into account temperament and preference. Judy just
wasn’t cut out to be an intake/assessment worker. She thrived on inter-
action; she was, in the vernacular, a people person. She was curious
about people and wanted to take time to really get to know another
person. A simple intake assessment did not answer all of her questions.
She preferred to spend time getting to know the person who lived

HIRING
73
underneath the symptoms. And so she chafed at having to stick to an
externally imposed timeline; she liked setting her own schedule and
working at her own pace.
We made a second mistake when we assumed that Judy’s main rea-
son for taking the new job is that she believed that she would love the
work. But love of the work is not the only reason, or in some cases the
main reason, why people accept jobs. Judy was motivated by wanting a
promotion, the monetary reward, a predictable schedule, and avoiding
supervisory responsibility. Again and again we overlooked the multitude
of non-work-related reasons for accepting a job: the need for profes-
sional development, the desire to be close to a spouse who is going to
school or working in DC, money to pay off student loans, and the list
goes on.
Perhaps the most amusing example of this occurred when a young
man came into my office for a job interview. He lounged on my couch,
seemed to daydream when I asked him questions, and acted as if he
could not wait for the interview to end. When I asked him why he was
here since he did not seem to want the job, he replied quite candidly. “I
just graduated from college and my mother says she’ll kill me if I don’t
look for a job.” It is no wonder that some employees are not a good fit
for the job they seem to be seeking. After all, they were never accepting
the job; they were accepting the perks that went along with that job.
CASE STUDY #4: CREATING A JOB
Over the years, as Community Connections grew, there were many
employees who had reached the top of the career ladder in their partic-
ular department. Miso, in particular, had been an excellent manager of
a small division. She would be a logical choice to head up her depart-
ment, but the existing head had no intention of vacating his position.
Conversations with the current head about his other job opportunities
proved fruitless. He felt comfortable in his current level of responsibil-
ity, did a good job running his department, and had no intention of
leaving.
This left Miso with no obvious place to go. There were no other
positions in other departments and no prospects of any vacancies any
time soon. She was doing an excellent job in her current position, but

CHAPTER 4
74
Miso felt bored, wanted a new challenge, and longed for a promotion.
The only option seemed to be for her to leave Community Connections
and work for another organization. Because we did not want to lose her
or her talents, we made her a rather unusual offer. The agency’s growth
presented so many opportunities and while we did not have a specific
job for her, we gave her the opportunity to create her own job.
At first, Miso was tremendously enthusiastic. What an opportunity!
There were no constraints on the job except her own imagination. For a
while, she spent her time surveying other departments, asking ques-
tions, and thinking about what she could do. Her informal investigation
had the unanticipated effect of making other employees nervous. Was
she there as an evaluator? Was she there to take their jobs? Why was
she being given this special opportunity? Rumors began to fly and Miso,
once friendly and well liked, found herself being avoided and excluded.
But that was not the worst of the experiment. Miso struggled to
construct a project for herself. She floundered and became depressed
at her inability to construct a job that either she or the organization
would find useful. Finally she came up with a proposal, but the position
she envisioned was neither creative nor expansive. It was a small admin-
istrative task not worthy of the salary she was receiving. After several
months, with both the employee and the organization questioning the
wisdom of this plan to allow Miso to create her job with total indepen-
dence, Miso resigned. She left feeling demoralized, questioning her
own skills and her professional competence. Somewhat surprising, sen-
ior management felt relieved and somewhat chagrined by her depar-
ture. What had started as a chance to create something new and excit-
ing for the organization and something rewarding and self-esteem
boosting for Miso ended in failure.
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
As I thought more about this daunting task of finding and hiring the
right person for a job, I was reminded of my very first job as a profes-
sional. I arrived at the job eager for my first assignment, but my em-
ployer had no assignment for me. He merely told me to go to one of the
hospital wards and see what I might do. I wandered onto the ward, and
introduced myself to the nursing staff who grumbled in my direction

HIRING
75
before they got on with their duties. I attempted to talk with a few
clients, but most of them were either overmedicated or psychotic and
could not or would not engage in conversation. A few even told me to
“Get the hell off the ward!” and find something useful to do. That
experience was enough to send me running to the library. I read, and
hid, and plotted my next move to find another job. After about three or
four months of this routine, I relaxed enough to start thinking. Sure
enough I did have ideas, things I could do that might not have been
tried before, and I began to envision a new way of thinking about
psychiatric problems that might shift the focus of my practice and that
of others. I came very close to feeling both the anxiety and the fear of
chaos. If I had succumbed, there would be no Community Connec-
tions.
PUTTING HIRING AT COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS IN
CONTEXT
Talent management has become a huge object of organizations’ effort
and an industry unto itself—with companies providing preentry screen-
ing to exit and alumni services. Along the way, a substantial body of
research and management advice has emerged to address each stage in
the process. In the best talent management programs, these stages are
well integrated with each other and carefully connected to the organiza-
tion’s goals, strategy, structure, and culture. In this chapter, we explore
the selection or hiring stage (recognizing that good selection cannot be
done in isolation from the steps that come before or after it).
In this chapter we focus on external hires, recognizing that internal
promotions are extremely important as well.1 In chapter 8, near the
other end of the talent management process, we address succession
planning.
A VERY BRIEF AND NECESSARILY PARTIAL HISTORY OF
HIRING
Systematic testing of potential employees dates back to at least the
seventh-century Chinese Civil Service exams.2 Over the course of the

CHAPTER 4
76
last 150 years, hiring has evolved from early unscientific methods (gra-
phology, physiognomy, phrenology, astrology, etc.) to a more rigorous
and scientifically studied range of approaches (including testing for fac-
tors such as personality, integrity, cognitive ability, intelligence/s, work
styles; using assessment centers, situational judgment tests, and other
approaches of simulated work; biographical data; references and rec-
ommendations; interviews; and trial periods). The last fifty years of
research regarding these approaches has developed in parallel with le-
gal challenges to hiring, promotion, and compensation practices; pres-
sure from rapidly growing and globalizing organizations, as well as rap-
idly changing technology; a periodic undersupply of qualified employ-
ees (and the associated “wars for talent”); and the steady development
of more powerful, less costly statistical techniques.
Over the last half century, strategic human resource management
and industrial-organizational psychology have also emerged as signifi-
cant subfields in management and psychology, with their own profes-
sional organizations (SHRM and SIOP), codes of conduct, and publica-
tions. Modern, systematic, and evidence-based approaches to hiring
have been tested and refined largely by members of those two organiza-
tions and the affiliated Academy of Management. When surveyed about
what aspects of human resources research all practicing managers
should know, the members of the field’s leading editorial boards listed
selection-related items as four of the top six.3
WHAT ARE WE HIRING FOR?
Assessing the effectiveness of any approach to hiring requires specifying
criteria. Hiring could be oriented toward time to hire, cost of hiring,
recruits’ perceptions of the process, the employee’s subsequent perfor-
mance, retention, adaptability, leadership potential, organizational citi-
zenship behavior (scholar-speak for “going above and beyond”), team-
and unit-level outcomes (not just individual ones), service excellence, or
many other desired outcomes.4 For example, in the service sector (an
organization like Community Connections would be an apt example)
and in other areas where customer service is critically important, reten-
tion might be an especially important criterion by which to design a
hiring system. Effective hiring also has broad and extremely valuable

HIRING
77
follow-on effects, with excellent recruiting associated with three and a
half times more revenue growth and two times more profit margin than
for other employers.5
REMEMBER WHO’S SELECTING WHOM
The hiring process is fundamentally bidirectional and involves both
selection and sales—that is, the potential employee selling the employ-
er on their talent, appropriateness for the position, and fit with the
organization. In addition, the employer also needs to be selling the
potential employee on the desirability of the position and organization.
As mentioned in chapter 1, selection is one place where a strong culture
can play a valuable role—by sending important signals to potential em-
ployees about what it’s like to work there. For employees who don’t
perceive a fit, the strong culture triggers valuable self-selection of the
process. For employees who like the culture, a strong one can begin
binding them to the organization before they are even offered a job.6
Because Community Connections, for example, is in a metropolitan
area where there are several strong academic programs, new graduates
have several job opportunities and the process of selling applicants on
the organization often takes center stage.
TOP FIVE EVIDENCE-BASED BEST PRACTICES FOR
HIRING
Of all areas of human resources or talent management, hiring is the one
with the greatest potential for research to further affect practice. The
research is strong and a manager’s tendency to follow that research lags
other areas (like training or compensation practices). In general, less
than 40 percent of managers agree with staffing-related research find-
ings, despite the robustness of those findings. Whereas there are know-
ing-doing gaps in some areas of management and organizational behav-
ior, there appears to be a believing gap when it comes to evidence-
based staffing practices. For example, approximately 85 percent of
managers falsely believe that conscientiousness predicts job perfor-
mance better than intelligence.7 At Community Connections issues of

CHAPTER 4
78
loyalty to the organization and passion for the work often trumped more
objective measures.
Despite seeming intuitive, the following five best practices are wide-
ly underutilized. Organizations that defy the norm can expect more
success in their hiring.
1. Evaluate candidates based on samples of their work. Although
they can be costly to develop and implement, there is no better way to
screen candidates than by assessing samples of their work—be it actual
work done for the company (done during internships or probationary
periods) or simulations of actual work. Large employers like Google are
increasingly assessing how well applicants can do tasks that mimic the
ones they would have to do on the job (coding or solving problems)—
and relying less on interviews.8 Work samples rated by trained raters
with clear rating guides explain roughly 29 percent of variance in per-
formance. At Community Connections applicants were often rated on
their performance in the last job rather on the skills they would need to
do the next job.
2. Select for intelligence and conscientiousness. This may sound like
an insanely obvious piece of advice, but it is one that has generally been
dismissed by practicing HR managers. This dismissal is partly due to
concerns about how to test fairly and effectively for intelligence without
triggering lawsuits. It is also due to a series of deeply entrenched nega-
tive stereotypes about intelligence (e.g., intelligent people are impracti-
cal, arrogant, socially inept). However, “intelligence is virtually uncorre-
lated with such personality traits as conscientiousness, agreeableness,
and emotional stability.”9 For lower-level jobs, intelligence (or general
mental ability, GMA) and conscientiousness are approximately equal in
terms of how well they predict future performance. For higher-level,
more complex jobs, intelligence explains roughly 25 percent of variance
in performance, while conscientiousness explains 9 percent. Unlike
more expensive work samples or structured interviews, there are low-
cost, well-validated tests of intelligence and conscientiousness that are
not off-putting to applicants. In situations where adverse impact on
certain demographic groups is a particular concern, simulation inter-
views (rather than tests) can be also used to gauge intelligence. Com-
munity Connections often confused scholastic degree with intelligence
and focused almost exclusively on analytical rather than emotional intel-

HIRING
79
ligence. Mistakes were made when very smart people lacked the can-do
spirit necessary to working with very disabled individuals.
3. Use structured interview programs. Again, many may see this as
another obvious practice, but research clearly shows that people prefer
to rely on gut instinct and perceptions of chemistry with potential em-
ployees, despite the clear evidence that structured selection processes
are more effective. This was particularly true at Community Connec-
tions where so many of the people hired for new positions were staff
who had been with the organization for a long time. They were consid-
ered “part of the family” and structured interviews seemed superfluous.
Structured interviews use a standard set of questions—ideally asked by
multiple interviewers—and behavioral anchors for their responses.
They can be used to gauge a variety of cognitive and interpersonal skills,
abilities, leadership styles, and other factors of interest to many employ-
ers. Although more costly to develop and implement than tests, they
also explain roughly 25 percent of the variance in future performance.10
The challenge to acting on this best practice is the general preference
for free-wheeling interviews that interviewers believe are better at as-
sessing fit, interpersonal skills, general likability, and so on, but struc-
tured interviews are approximately three times more effective than un-
structured interviews.11 The preference for unstructured interviews is
especially strong at organizations like Community Connections where
senior staff believe themselves to have strong people skills.
4. Provide candidates with realistic job previews. This simple prac-
tice helps candidates assess their fit in the organization and is one of the
best predictors of retention. Employers should level with applicants
about the job and organization—warts and all. At Community Connec-
tions, interviewers have been clear that the work is not done in the
office but out in the field, and they add the phrase, “It’s down and dirty
out there.”
5. Obsess over details and first impressions. Especially for in-de-
mand candidates who may have other options, impressions formed
about the organization early in the recruitment process are especially
important. So is recruiter warmth. Those who have contact with appli-
cants should be honest about the position and organization, but their
interpersonal skills have a large positive impact on applicants’ job
choices.12

CHAPTER 4
80
THE FUTURE IS HERE
The future of hiring will undoubtedly involve greater reliance on tech-
nology (for outreach, recruiting, screening, and every other step in the
process) and more in-depth use of people analytics to connect the hir-
ing process to performance measures. Firms like Google, Facebook,
and LinkedIn have already changed the field in dramatic ways—and
will likely continue to do so. But for founder-run organizations like
Community Connections, the move into the future poses to be a prob-
lem.
This simple list of questions will help you audit your hiring process
and assess the extent to which it follows evidence-based best prac-
tices.13
1. Are we considering combinations of tools to achieve the highest
validity and lowest adverse impact?
2. Have we considered how our ordering of tools affects validity and
adverse impact?
3. Are we clear on the criteria we are using to assess our process
(job performance, retention, etc.)?
4. Are we providing applicants with the specific information they
desire?
5. Have we selected recruiters who are warm and friendly?
6. Is appropriate attention being given to early recruitment activ-
ities?
7. Do we solicit feedback from applicants on their satisfaction with
the process, including those to whom we made offers and those
we didn’t?
8. Do we have evidence that selection procedures are job related?
9. Is the selection process consistently administered?
10. Does the process allow for some two-way communication?
SUGGESTED READINGS
For two accessibly written treatments of selection and talent manage-
ment more broadly, see Claudio Fernández-Aráoz’s two excellent
books, It’s Not the How or the What But the Who: Succeed by Sur-

HIRING
81
rounding Yourself with the Best (Boston, MA: Harvard Business Re-
view Press, 2014) and Great People Decisions: Why They Matter So
Much, Why They Are So Hard, and How You Can Master Them (Ho-
boken, NJ: Wiley, 2007). Also see James Breaugh, Recruiting and At-
tracting Talent (Alexandria, VA: SHRM, 2016); and A. M. Ryan and N.
T. Tippins’s excellent review, “Attracting and Selecting: What Psycho-
logical Research Tells Us,” Human Resource Management 43 (2004):
305–18.


83
5
BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
There Must Be a Way Around This
Any business needs to have a series of goals in order to move forward
with accomplishing its mission. And anything that gets in the way of
reaching those goals is considered a problem. Since internal circum-
stances and external context are both fluid and constantly changing, it is
not surprising that most organizations must contend with all shapes and
sizes of problems.
There is no such thing as a problem-free business. Some problems
are a natural and expected part of growth. Others arise at choice points
when pros and cons need to be weighed and decisions need to be made.
Some are driven by changes in the world outside of the business. And
some are the result of a faulty solution to a prior problem. Regardless of
how a problem arises, an organization that cannot solve the many prob-
lems it inevitably must face cannot survive.
But organizations, especially new ones, do not come with an easy-to-
read manual for solving problems, or a magic wand that wipes problems
away in an instant. The process of identifying and solving problems is
complicated and often difficult and there are many barriers that one
encounters on the way to a successful solution. Remember the board
games we all played as children. There were wrong turns, cards that
told you to go back to Go and start all over again, and even landing spots
where you were ordered to go directly to jail. All were barriers to
reaching the ultimate goal of winning the game.

CHAPTER 5
84
In the following fables, we tell two tales about problem solving. The
first deals with the array of problems you might encounter on the way to
a solution. The second addresses how your perspective affects how you
see, define, and frame problems.
FABLE #1: CROSSING THE WOODS
For many years, the town of York had been known as the safest town for
miles around. There was no fighting or stealing and the children could
play without anyone worrying that there would be a problem. In fact,
the children did not even hear the word “problem” until they reached
the age of thirteen. And when that special age arrived, each child, who
was now considered a young man or a young woman, would meet with
the elders of York in a tent on the edge of town.
“You have enjoyed the safety of our town for all the years of your life,
but now we must tell you something very important. Safety ends at the
edge of town. If you choose to enter the darkness of the forest, we cannot
promise that you will not encounter all manner of problems.”
When they heard this warning, all of the children sat up straight and
nodded their heads, for they had no desire to risk the safety they had
enjoyed all of their lives—except for one rebellious and very curious
young woman. Although she nodded her head like all the others, she
secretly thought, “This forest sounds quite interesting, perhaps the eld-
ers are just trying to hoard its treasures for themselves. I will wait a
while and then I will explore the forest for myself.”
The young woman waited for several days, until she could control
her curiosity no longer. “I will slip into the forest after dark; I am sure I
will be able to overcome any problems I might encounter since I am
brave and clever and strong.” So she packed a small bag and walked to
the edge of town.
As she stepped into the darkness of the forest, she saw what looked
like a small pond, but when she got closer, she realized that it was no
more than a puddle of rainwater left from last week’s storm. “I hope this
is not the problem the elders were talking about, because I can cross this
pond quite easily.” And so she did, without making even a single splash.
Confident that she could now manage any problem she might en-
counter, the young woman continued on her way, until she stumbled on

BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
85
a big tree trunk that had fallen right in the middle of the path. “Oh,
dear, this problem seems far more difficult to solve than the last one. I
must sit and think for a while. And so she did. While she was pondering
what to do, she saw a narrow trail that wrapped around the far end of
the fallen tree. As she poked her nose around the back of the tree, she
saw that she could get around the trunk with very little trouble at all.
“Whew,” she said, as she let out a great sigh of relief. “I didn’t really
want to crawl over that tree trunk. I might have scraped my knee or
even broken a bone, but now I don’t have to find a way over at all!”
As she proceeded deeper into the forest, the young woman encoun-
tered many more obstacles to overcome, but because she was indeed
brave and clever and strong, she found a way to handle each of them.
“I am not sure what the elders were talking about,” she said to
herself. “There have surely been problems to solve and obstacles to
overcome, but none has been so difficult that I have been unable to
make my way, and at times my journey has been quite fun. I think my
adventure through the forest is almost done.” But although the young
woman was just about done with the forest, the forest was not quite
done with her.
Up ahead, she could see where three small trails branched off the
main path: one led to a beautiful field of flowers; the second led to a
sunlit waterfall; and the third led to a meadow of tall grasses that
swayed in the breeze. As she pondered whether she should go exploring
along one of these paths, she heard a stern but clear voice calling from
the forest behind her, “You are not here to pick flowers or to see water-
falls or to sit in the tall grasses. You are here to conquer the difficulties
that have made it hard for others to cross the forest.”
She thought to herself, “I am not sure where it came from, but I am
glad I could hear the sounds of warning. I might have made a great
mistake if I had let myself be distracted by the small trails. I must be
careful to walk with determination down the main path.”
But as she continued to walk, her step was more tentative and cau-
tious than before. She had to admit that she could not have solved the
last problem on her own. She had needed help from the voice of the
forest. What if the next problem (for surely there would be a next prob-
lem) was just too hard for her to solve at all?

CHAPTER 5
86
Solving problems is one of the primary responsibilities of any CEO and
senior leadership team. First, problems must be identified and accu-
rately labeled. The girl in the story realizes that she can cross the water
when she accurately labels it as a puddle and not as a pond. Misdiagnos-
ing the problem might have led to a wrong solution and perhaps time-
consuming and frustrating effort. Imagine if she had continued to see
the puddle as a pond, she might have spent hours or even days building
a boat to help her cross to the other side.
But solving problems requires more than making a decision and
acting quickly. It also requires stopping, thinking, and weighing options.
This more deliberate process helps the girl solve her second problem of
passing the big tree on the path.
As she proceeds, the young woman sees the value of taking advice
and avoiding or limiting distractions, but she comes to the realization
that there will always be problems to solve. It is just the nature of
crossing the forest, or in this case, building a business.
When Edmund Wilson, one of the most renowned literary critics of
the twentieth century, wrote, “No two persons ever read the same
book,” he was not referring to the obvious fact that there are millions of
books in the world.1 Rather, he was echoing the voices of many who
maintain that whether it is a book, a painting, or a problem, we are only
capable of seeing things through the lens of our own perspective. Natu-
rally, when two people look at a problem, they see it through very
different lenses.
Perspective not only reflects who we are and where we sit in relation
to others, it also goes to the core of determining what we see. Abraham
Lincoln said, “We can complain because rose bushes have thorns, or
rejoice because thorn bushes have roses.”2 It all depends on your per-
spective and it is impossible to solve a problem without a perspective of
your own. Oscar Wilde wasn’t just being witty when he declared, “The
man who sees both sides of a question is the man who sees absolutely
nothing at all.”3 The following fable highlights the role of perspective in
problem solving.

BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
87
FABLE #2: THE TIGER AND THE VEGETABLE POT
One summer day, while a group of children were playing on the edge of
the village green, they spotted a tiger lying in the deep grass. Periodical-
ly, the tiger would lift his head, shake it from side to side, and begin
pacing from one end of the green grass to the other. The children
watched the tiger for a while and then one young boy said, “That tiger
must be very hungry; he has not eaten in all the time we have seen him.”
“You are right!” cried a very small girl who needed to stand on her
tiptoes just to see the tiger. He looks very skinny and I am sure he would
cross the field if he were not so weak.”
“Yes, I see what you mean,” said the young boy. “We must find some
way to feed him.”
Then the oldest girl in the group said in a very knowing voice, “We
will make him a pot of our very best soup. We will use all the vegetables
from this year’s harvest and we will flavor it with herbs and spices to
make it ever so good. And when the tiger has eaten it all, he will feel
very full and strong.”
“Yes! Yes!” cried all of the children at once. “We must make our soup
right now!”
While the children were chopping and making their soup, the tiger
gazed longingly across the village green. “Oh, how I wish I could see my
wife and our little cubs. If it were not for these children making soup
right in the middle of the green, I would have an easy path across the
village. I have been hunting and climbing trees and running in the
fields, but now I am ready to return to my family. What ever can I do?”
he moaned in a low voice that sounded almost like a faint growl. As he
contemplated his dilemma, the tiger rolled over, twitched his ears, and
thought some more about how he might get home. Then he stood on his
hind legs, pawed the air, and thrust himself into the air and across the
green, knocking the pot of soup as he ran.
The children looked at their wonderful soup, now spilled and making
the grass all wet and soppy. “The tiger must have been so wild with
hunger that he could not wait for us to finish our soup,” they lamented.
“We must be faster the next time we see a hungry tiger.” The tiger
meanwhile was home in his den but feeling somewhat exhausted from
his long run. “The next time I am returning home from a long journey, I

CHAPTER 5
88
must be careful to avoid silly children who know nothing about the
ways of tigers.”
The problem seen by the children is quite different from the one per-
ceived by the tiger. They bring their own knowledge and past experi-
ence to the task of solving the problem of “the hungry tiger.” It should
not be surprising that they arrive at different solutions because they are
perceiving and then solving different problems. The children want to
feed what they perceive to be a hungry tiger and the tiger wants to get
past the children so that he can make his way home. What we see
determines what we call a problem and therefore what we arrive at as a
solution.
Operating from different points of view is not the only difficulty that
leaders of organizations encounter when things seem to be stalled and
problems seem to be blocking the way of progress. There are other less
obvious factors that present barriers to successful problem solving. The
following case studies highlight some of the most prominent ones.
CASE STUDY #1: NOT FRAMING THE PROBLEM WELL
Like many social service agencies that engage clients with serious men-
tal health issues, people with addictions, individuals who have been
homeless and possibly incarcerated, the safety of staff was a predictable
concern at Community Connections. For some time, staff and clients at
Community Connections complained and expressed concern that the
environment in which they worked was not safe. One woman reported
that her mother drove by the organization’s offices to “check out the
neighborhood” before she gave her daughter the green light to accept a
job. Examples like these caused us to conclude that people were con-
cerned with their physical safety. And framing the problem in this way,
we set out to put a number of safety measures in place.
We gave all employees identification badges with a magnetic chip to
help them get through locked doors. We rearranged our waiting room
where large crowds and hidden spaces had been a cause for concern;
we hired two security guards to patrol the main building and we even
considered installing a metal detector, an option that went against one
of our core values of being an open, community-based organization.

BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
89
And yet the belief persisted that Community Connections was not a
safe place to work (despite the fact that we had experienced no robber-
ies, assaults of staff, or break-ins in twenty years).
Then something changed. One of our senior managers suggested
that perhaps it was not physical safety that was the concern, but rather
the problem was that people did not feel safe. Once you frame the
problem as deriving from a feeling of unsafety, a whole different set of
solutions emerges. People feel safer when they are part of a caring
community, when they have the sense that they know and trust their
coworkers and that those coworkers have their backs. To that end, we
planned a number of “meet and greet” events. We had ice cream so-
cials, went to baseball games together, and generally got to know one
another not just as colleagues but as people. By increasing the sense of
belonging that individuals felt toward the organization, we also in-
creased their feelings of safety.
Additionally, we did one other thing: we instituted monthly safety
rounds, meetings in which staff members could share events during
which they had felt unsafe. In these meetings they could get support,
feedback, and suggestions from senior staff. The perception that man-
agement actually cared about their well-being made staff feel safer.
By changing the frame from physical safety to emotional or per-
ceived safety, we were able to solve the problem of “Community Con-
nections is not a safe place to work.”
CASE STUDY #2: SEEING ONLY YOUR PART OF THE
ELEPHANT
As it approached its fourth decade, Community Connections experi-
enced a revenue shortfall. Quite simply, we were spending more money
than we were bringing in. At one point, the shortfall required using a
line of credit slightly more than 10 percent of the organization’s annual
budget. This was clearly a problem that needed to be solved quickly,
but different groups of staff members held different points of view
about how the problem should be tackled. Those differing perspectives
seem to have grown from the ways in which Community Connections
had been paid over the years. One department had been supported by
grant funding, another by fee-for-service billing, and a third by capitat-

CHAPTER 5
90
ed payments. Each focused on their part of the elephant; and as a
result, each group had a different solution for how to solve the financial
shortfall.
Grant Funding
Over the years, Community Connections has received grants for many
things—serving homeless women, delivering testing and psychiatric
support to women with HIV, and designing a treatment model for men
and women suffering from the aftermath of abuse. Grants typically
bring revenue into the organization for three to five years, but you can’t
count on them to make up for a revenue shortfall because the money
can, and often does, go away.
When confronted with the revenue shortfall, the department heads
who were supported by grant money had a targeted and somewhat
simplistic perspective: solve the problem by getting more grants and
focus on grants that had the highest dollar value. Unfortunately, this
strategy had a few downsides. It took time and energy to find and apply
for appropriate funding. Some of the grants incurred additional costs
such as hiring a head researcher to evaluate outcomes and some of the
opportunities stretched the limits of our competencies. Unfortunately,
grants could contribute to a solution, but they were rarely big enough to
solve more than a small portion of the problem.
Fee-for-Service Funding
Those who brought money into Community Connections by billing for
every discrete service they provided had a very different perspective on
the revenue shortfall problem. From their point of view, the solution
was also very simple: bill more services. Even though this perspective
was consistent with the strategy used by many legal, medical, and finan-
cial practitioners, it was not well aligned with the mission of the organ-
ization.
Most nonprofit organizations see themselves as driven by an altruis-
tic cause. People in such organizations are motivated more by how
much good they do than by how many services they bill. Yet increasing
the number of services was a perspective that needed to be given extra
weight. After all, since fee-for-service billing was the primary way in

BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
91
which Community Connections made its money, it was seen as the
biggest part of the elephant. Increasing the units of service billed
seemed like an obvious way to fix the revenue problem.
The first thing that needed to be done was to explain the rationale
for this perspective to the staff who would need to increase their bill-
able services. Because so many staff were trained to work in human
services and not in finance, it wasn’t easy for them to understand the
connection between the work they did and the money it generated.
Most felt that if they worked hard, they were doing their share to keep
the organization solvent. When only billable hours were considered to
be “productive hours,” many young staff began to believe that the or-
ganization didn’t value all of the extra services they provided—services
that were not paid for by insurance companies.
All frontline clinicians were asked to generate five hours of billable
service per day. Some staff worked extra hard in order to make sure that
they did not fall short of the needed number of hours, while others
grumbled that the work was just too hard and began to look elsewhere
for another job. In either case, employees reported that “stress over
productivity” was the number one cause for dissatisfaction with the job.
Still seeing the revenue problem through the fee-for-service lens,
senior management came up with several methods by which productiv-
ity numbers could be increased: rewarding highly productive staff, pro-
viding extra training for all staff on how to do their work more effective-
ly and efficiently, warning underperformers, and then, if necessary,
terminating staff who could not meet productivity standards.
Capitated Funding
In a capitated system, providers get paid for the number of people they
see, not for the number of services they provide. The organization gets
paid the capitated rate even if the client is only seen once a month. For
those who look at the revenue problem from the perspective of per
person payments, the answer to increasing revenues is again quite sim-
ple: see more clients.
Community Connections received a precalculated reimbursement
rate per client (much like a managed care organization) and was then
responsible for providing all necessary behavioral health care services
(except those delivered at a hospital). Thus, there was a financial incen-

CHAPTER 5
92
tive to provide enough service, but not to provide too much service.
Because of savings from economies of scale, it was to our advantage to
take as many clients as we could manage. Caseloads went up consider-
ably without a corresponding increase in administrative overhead.
This seemed positive on the surface but posed a dilemma for clinical
service providers. The insurance provider paid equally for a client
whether he or she was seen as little as once a month or as much as five
times a week. The rate did not increase because of more service. The
incentive was to limit service while increasing head count. Some staff
questioned whether this model actually had the effect of compromising
care and they protested that it gave them the feeling that they were
working in a “Medicaid mill.”
A capitated system works best when at least some of the clients in
the pool really need only minimal service, but Community Connections
generally serves people who are heavy users of care. Low users go
elsewhere. Our youngest clinicians in particular—those who were the
most idealistic and committed to the work—resented having to moni-
tor, and probably limit, the amount of care they delivered. Of all the
payment systems, we found that this one required the greatest shift in
perspective by supervisors and managers. Big caseloads and limited
service seemed antithetical to the role of caregiver. It required a major
change in perspective to help senior practitioners understand that good
care might actually mean less care.
Each of the three parts of the elephant (and in the end there were
more than three) represented a different perspective on how to under-
stand and address the problem of a revenue shortfall. Some depart-
ments advocated for spending resources on getting more grants, others
argued for finding ways to generate more services, and still others
wanted to expand the client base. In the end, the CEO and the CFO
had to decide how energy and resources should been spent, but this left
some employees feeling ignored and ultimately less invested in solving
the problem. Multiple perspectives can add new ideas and energies to
solving problems, but when there are limited resources, multiple per-
spectives can pose a barrier to actually getting the problem resolved.

BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
93
CASE STUDY #3: NOT REALLY WANTING TO SOLVE THE
PROBLEM
As strange as it may seem, there are some problems that we really don’t
want to solve. Some of the reasons are obvious and others are much
more obscure. To start, fixing a problem often means disrupting a pro-
cess that has been in place for a very long time or it may cause interper-
sonal headaches that become problematic in themselves. Some prob-
lems may remain unsolved because they disrupt the underground life of
the organization.
Case managers at Community Connections often have to drive sev-
eral miles a day in order to see clients who live in different parts of the
city. The problem of how to reimburse staff members for their mileage
expenses became increasingly complicated as the organization grew. At
first, the method was rather simple. A case manager would tell his
supervisor how far he had driven and receive reimbursement, often
without mileage receipts and often from petty cash. Obviously this
method was sloppy, subject to fraud, and impossible to track at the time
of an audit.
A new method was devised by the accounting department that in-
volved filling out a paper form, attaching actual receipts, getting the
approval of a supervisor, and then receiving a check at the end of the
month. Once again, this method eventually became more and more
difficult to maintain. Receipts were lost, time required by accounting
staff to administer the program grew, and delays in processing the reim-
bursement meant that some people had to wait for several payroll cy-
cles before they received their reimbursement. It would seem obvious
that this process needed to be streamlined and changed. But even after
we purchased new software that would automate the process, staff re-
sisted change. They complained about the old way, but no one really
wanted to change it. People feared that the new method would end up
being slower, accounting staff did not want to give up their role/power
in controlling reimbursements, and supervisory staff wanted to be able
to use the mileage reimbursement system to track just where their
employees were going.
Despite the years of complaints about the system, no one seemed
eager to cooperate in changing the system they “hated.” Better the devil
you know than the one you don’t. After almost three years, the new

CHAPTER 5
94
process was put in place and management took away the pens and
paper and required that everyone switch over to the new system. And of
course everyone asked why we had not done this sooner!
Some problems don’t get solved, not because of process but because
of people. In a number of instances, team leaders worry that solving a
problem will hurt someone’s feelings. In a larger, more impersonal
business this may sound silly, but in a founder-run business where many
folks have worked there for a long time it factors into solving problems.
In the early 1990s, after almost ten years of rapid growth, Community
Connections needed to make some hard choices about where to put its
energies. In other words, which departments should get support and
which should be allowed to wind down?
There were several times over the years when Community Connec-
tions had to face the problem of how to manage a dysfunctional depart-
ment. In some cases, the department was in financial trouble, other
cases involved a department that had too many employees, but in most
instances the department was not performing its intended functions. In
each case, the organization had to face the human cost of solving the
problem. People were dependent on having a paycheck, or they had a
child to take care of, or they were facing a serious illness. Solving organ-
izational problems would mean that individual employees would experi-
ence personal problems, so management avoided taking action. Prob-
lems with interpersonal consequences were problems the organization
did not want to solve.
Finally, there are problems that organizations do not want to resolve
for reasons that are less immediately apparent. Most departments in an
organization perform the functions they are designated and designed to
perform. The IT department is the IT department and it provides IT
services. But that is not always the case. In the covert life of an organ-
ization, there are some departments that perform a function other than
the one for which they were designed.
At Community Connections, the HR department served the func-
tion of being the organization’s all-purpose scapegoat. Most times,
when there was a problem, whether it had to do with finances or quality
improvement or some other management issue, someone in the leader-
ship group would comment, “Well, you know that’s HR’s fault.” Now it
was true that the HR department did have problems: it was under-
staffed and had a poorly defined mission, but it was not responsible for

BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
95
most of the problems the organization experienced. Many knew that if
the problems with HR were fixed, there would be no one to blame
when things went wrong. Other people would have to look at their
departments and figure out how they contributed to organizational
problems. It was much easier to keep HR in its place and use the all-
purpose explanation, “The dog ate my homework.”
In some ways this section has been counterintuitive. On the surface
it seems reasonable and logical that people who run businesses should
want to solve problems that get in the way of reaching goals. But as we
all know, that isn’t always the case. And issues of precedent, interper-
sonal strife, and covert missions all pose barriers to really getting prob-
lems solved.
CASE STUDY #4: BEING AFRAID OF MAKING A MISTAKE
Mistakes are all around us. Little ones like forgetting to bring an um-
brella on a rainy day; big ones like accepting the wrong job; and catas-
trophic ones like failing to douse a fire in a dry forest. Regardless of the
magnitude, it is impossible to avoid making mistakes. Yet many non-
profit organizations are so risk averse that they seem frozen in place.
Sometimes the fear of making a mistake is in direct proportion to the
cost of getting it wrong, but other times, often reflecting the fears of
leaders, mistakes are to be avoided even if the downside is relatively
minor. Yet in start-up nonprofits, growth only comes from the willing-
ness to innovate, to try new things, and perhaps to throw caution to the
wind. But first, what are some of the mistakes that businesses might be
extra cautious about making?
Financial Mistakes
The impact of making a financial mistake can be far-reaching for an
organization that starts with a very small budget. It goes without saying
that an organization must pay its employees. But what about pay in-
creases? Giving too high of an increase might turn into a big financial
mistake, but giving little or no increase might result in good people
leaving the organization.

CHAPTER 5
96
Another financial concern involves the acquisition and distribution
of resources. Because Community Connections has always been in a
phase of expansion, the question of office space is one that arises fre-
quently. The problem to be solved concerns how many resources
should we put into acquiring new space. Should we buy space, rent it,
increase the number of square feet we need? While we are waiting to
make a decision, do we squeeze people into a small space or do we
delay starting a new program? For an organization committed to service
delivery, advocacy, or community development, decisions about space
may seem overly bureaucratic, but they are essential to getting the work
done. A wise mentor once said to me, “When space opens up, see it,
grab it, and don’t let it go.”
Legal Mistakes
A young organization cannot afford to be sued. Lawsuits cost money,
absorb time, and diminish morale. When you are afraid of being sued,
you are not free to make needed clinical, personnel, and strategic deci-
sions. All of a sudden “what’s good for the business” gets replaced by
“what’s going to get us in trouble.”
Especially at the beginning of an organization’s life, before policies
and procedures have been put in place, the possibility of making mis-
takes can be great. The fear of committing an error, however, goes
against the entrepreneurial spirit that inspired the organization to begin
with. Balancing risk taking with caution can be a good formula for
creating a steady, careful business. It is probably not the hallmark of a
very innovative one.
Political Mistakes
Political mistakes are not necessarily relevant to all organizations. These
are the mistakes that involve dealing with an outside regulatory board—
often a board whose approval or disapproval can determine the success
and even the viability of the company. Consider medical device start-
ups that may need FDA approval, or health clinics that might require
certification and licensure, or technology ventures that will need to
secure outside capital.

BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
97
Community Connections has frequently had to respond to outside
licensing boards and insurance vendors. There is often a concern that if
these relationships are not managed well that there will be serious con-
sequences. At one point, the organization had to negotiate with a ven-
dor about a payment schedule for money owed to us. We were so
concerned that if we made a mistake our payments would be delayed,
or worse still, denied, that it took us over a month to write a simple e-
mail laying out our case for payment.
It is often difficult for start-ups, who see themselves as nimble, inno-
vative ventures, to acknowledge that fear may play a part in the difficul-
ty they have solving problems.
CASE STUDY #5: LACKING THE NECESSARY SKILLS
It seems obvious that any business, whether a start-up or a more estab-
lished organization, should not take on projects for which it does not
have the necessary skills. So why then does this happen all the time? At
the beginning, new companies are eager for business and so they take
on projects for which they are only minimally qualified.
New organizations want the business. Several years ago, a senior
manager at Community Connections was notified that a large grant to
deliver addictions services was being posted. No staff had any expertise
in this area, but we thought, “How hard can it be, after all, we provide
mental health services to hundreds of clients?” What we learned after
we were awarded the grant was that treating people with mental illness
was very different from treating people with severe addictions. Not only
were we lacking the professional skills, but we also did not have the
security and the medical resources that were necessary. We were so
eager for new business, a situation very common for young start-ups,
that we failed to ask if we actually had the needed skills to take on the
project.
In some cases, the lack of skills is easy to admit. The missing skills
are in an area far afield from the organization’s core business. Take for
example, a social service business that has to manage IT support. Staff
members might complain, somewhat naively, that “the computers are
not working.” But that is as far as they can go. They don’t know what
they don’t know; somewhat like taking a car to the dealership because it

CHAPTER 5
98
is making a funny noise. Once you get to the station your ability to
describe the problem ceases.
With a poorly functioning IT system, Community Connections was
forced to get outside help to solve the problem. But once again ignor-
ance got in the way. If you can’t really understand a problem, how do
you know if an outside operator can solve it? That’s where getting a
second opinion makes sense.
Bringing in outside expertise, however, is much more difficult when
the missing skills involve an organization’s or a department’s core busi-
ness. For years, Community Connections struggled with how to manage
the accounting department. The leaders within the department were all
certified accountants, so every time a problem was identified the in-
house staff asserted that they could fix it. Asking for help when you are
“supposed” to have the needed skills requires a level of self-awareness
that is often difficult to achieve.
And finally, organizations lack the skills to perform well because they
just don’t have the right staff. There is often an inclination, especially in
“do-good” nonprofits, to try to make it work with every employee. But
at the end of the day, organizations need to have employees with the
right skills to do the job and that might just mean having to let someone
go.
Solving problems is challenging enough, but we always make it more
difficult by getting in our own way. Certainly we can’t solve a problem
we don’t see or don’t understand, but we also can’t solve problems
when our own fear or uncertainty or lack of motivation gets in the way.
It would be nice to believe that there are problems we can solve with-
out having to contend with barriers big and small, but in truth, barriers
go with problem solving as a natural part of things.
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
It has always been the case that once I think I have figured out how to
solve a problem, I move quickly to action. Sometimes, I may spend
more time arguing with myself (or more than likely, with others) about
my solution, but often I am willing to accept the consequences of mov-
ing fast rather than slowing the pace down.

BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
99
There were many times over the years when Community Connec-
tions was presented with a problem that needed solving. Sometimes
when I was meeting with a group of people, someone would challenge
my reasoning and say, “We can’t do that.” If I was alone or with just one
person and needed to make a decision, I would go with my gut and
make the decision that seemed right. My partner Helen would fre-
quently take me aside and asked me what I had come up with. It’s not
that she thought I was wrong, but rather, as she often said, “I want to
know what you promised, just in case someone asks me!” My mantra
had become, “Say you are going to fix the problem first and then figure
out if you can make it happen.”
There were clearly times when I made mistakes and needed to come
up with new solutions to the same problem. My style was “See it, say it,
do it.” Some of my solutions worked because I was so certain that they
would. And I wasn’t faking it; once I thought I had the right answer, I
moved ahead quickly. My husband has said about me, jokingly (I think),
“sometimes wrong, but never in doubt.”
PUTTING PROBLEM SOLVING AT COMMUNITY
CONNECTIONS IN CONTEXT
Collaborative problem solving is one of the most critical skills in con-
temporary workplaces. Why? Largely because there are fewer and few-
er routine, individual tasks. Repetition, rote, and routine have given way
to more sophisticated, interactive tasks. With technological change con-
tinuing its steady march, and robots further infiltrating many aspects of
our lives, the need for individuals, teams, and organizations to solve
complex problems has grown dramatically.
As the preceding section indicated, Community Connections is no
exception. There has been a steady (but unpredictable) diet of signifi-
cant changes in insurance and other funding streams, federal and local
regulations, and the nature of trauma and its treatments. These changes
have required Community Connections to overcome barriers of under-
standing, framing, diagnosis, prioritization, will, and skill. In this chap-
ter’s final section, we reflect on those barriers and what social science
has to say about hurdling them.

CHAPTER 5
100
In today’s increasingly diverse workplace, especially in cities like
Washington, D.C., where Community Connections operates, solving
problems requires collaboration across age, gender, ethnicity, as well as
educational, functional, occupational, and other boundaries. While po-
tentially advantageous for solving complex problems, this diversity is
also a potential liability. People with different backgrounds can “see” or
frame the same problem differently, and have divergent views about
how to solve it.
Changes in how organizations think about hiring and training have
the potential to improve problem solving by changing the skill sets of
new employees. For example, individuals with a higher tolerance for
ambiguity are likely to be more successful solving problems in nonrou-
tine environments. Individuals who are agile learners (and have varied
backgrounds) are also likely to be more effective in workplaces where
problem solving is a necessity.4 However, hiring those likely to be bet-
ter problem solvers is difficult and must be paired with process-based
approaches to tackle problems more effectively.
Traditional approaches to problem solving include Six Sigma and
quality management. They tend to be quite linear and data driven.
More recently, as discussed in chapter 2, design thinking has emerged
as an approach to both creative and problem-solving tasks. It is still
fundamentally data driven (with empathy and user-driven stories
among the most important types of data), but it also involves a different
approach to problem solving—an approach rooted in careful framing
and reframing before rushing to solutions.
Pushing people and teams to think about how they’re framing prob-
lems, and then support them through various rounds of reframing is
one of the most important ways to improve problem solving. For exam-
ple, the property manager for a high-rise office building was besieged
by complaints about how slow the elevators were. The manager en-
gaged three consultants to develop solutions that would speed up the
elevators. The cost would be high, but they told him they could cut wait
times in half with some changes to the elevators’ computer operating
system. The day before he was poised to sign a million-dollar contract to
fix the elevators, the property manager was sitting in a barbershop wait-
ing for a haircut. He was surrounded by mirrors and watching a football
game on wall-mounted TVs over the barbers’ chairs. After fifteen min-
utes, he realized he hadn’t balked at the delay and asked himself, “Why

BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
101
am I about to spend a million dollars to shorten a sixty-second wait?”
The next morning, he assembled his team and suggested they reframe
the elevator wait time problem as a boredom and predictability prob-
lem. Once they did, and once he told his barbershop story, they stood
the problem on its head.
How could they make the elevators’ arrival more predictable and
how could they make the wait less boring? For less than one-tenth of
the planned computer fix, they installed mirrors on the doors of the
elevators (figuring that people would welcome the opportunity to check
their clothes and hair before heading up to the office). They also hung
flat-panel TVs between the elevators so that people could watch the
morning Market Watch and celebrity gossip shows depending on where
they stood. Finally, they realized that the manager’s fifteen-minute bar-
bershop wait was tolerable for patrons partly because they could see
who was in front of them in line (and make continuously updated men-
tal estimates of how long before it would be their turn in the chair). In
response, they replaced the simple LED display telling you what floor
the elevator was on, with a countdown timer showing people how long
before the elevator arrived. Once they reframed the problem from wait
times to boredom and predictability, they unlocked a whole range of
low-cost solutions that dramatically reduced complaints about slow ele-
vators.
More frames, different frames, frames based on metaphors for the
underlying problem, and analogical thinking can all help push teams
before they even get to the point of solving the problem. In the elevator
example, the rush to solution development nearly cost them hundreds
of thousands of dollars. A late-breaking reminder to be sure they were
solving the right problem ended up saving money and improving satis-
faction.
SUGGESTED READINGS
For more on problem solving, see the chapter titled “Nudge, Test, and
Escalate Gradually: Problem-Solving Strategies for Quiet Leaders” in
Joe Badaracco, Leading Quietly (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Press, 2008); Sara L. Beckman and Michael Barry, “Framing and Re-
Framing: Core Skills for a Complex World,” Harvard Business Review,

CHAPTER 5
102
January 1, 2015; and Dwayne Spradlin, “Are You Solving the Right
Problem?” Harvard Business Review, September 2012. Michael Kal-
let’s Think Smarter: Critical Thinking to Improve Problem-Solving and
Decision-Making Skills (New York: Wiley, 2014) is also a good starting
point.
The type of problem you’re facing should also guide your reading.
For example, many problems are fundamentally about decision making
or creativity, in which case books on those topics would be especially
helpful (if not framed specifically as books about problem solving). For
example, see Leigh Thompson’s excellent Creative Conspiracy: The
New Rules of Breakthrough Collaboration (Boston, MA: Harvard Busi-
ness School Press, 2013) or Chip and Dan Heath’s Decisive: How to
Make Better Choices in Life and Work (New York: Crown, 2013).

103
6
ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
Is Anyone Out There?
Just like a butterfly develops in a cocoon, most founder-run organiza-
tions begin in a safe, small space. One person, maybe a few friends or
colleagues, start talking and thinking and expanding on an idea. Maybe
they reach a point where they want to bring others in to help take the
idea to the next stage. Eventually their world starts to expand. Others,
however, keep their private space private for a very long time, believing
that their best thinking takes place inside, not outside, the box.
At some point, however, even the most insular organizations need to
turn their attention outward, toward the community and the context in
which it does business. Who are its potential partners and possible
allies? Where is the competition coming from? What changes in the
external environment will have the greatest impact? For an organization
that has survived and even thrived in isolation, this turning outward can
bring struggles, conflict, but best of all, it can lead to unexpected oppor-
tunities. Remember, butterflies that stay in the cocoon eventually with-
er and die. The following fable tells the tale of three brothers with
dramatically different approaches to dealing with the world beyond
their own small, narrow spaces.

CHAPTER 6
104
A FABLE: THE THREE BROTHERS
Once there were three brothers who lived side by side in identical cab-
ins in the center of town. Early each morning, they would step outside
of their cabins and greet one another with a hearty hello. After doing a
few chores, each would retreat into the comfort of his own cabin, only to
emerge again the next morning when the sun rose.
But something different would happen to each of the brothers once
they were inside their cabins. The first brother would walk to the big
window at the front of the cabin and pull the shutters closed. He would
then place the big iron latch across the shutters so that no light could
come in. “How safe I am inside my cabin,” he would say to himself, “no
one can see in and I don’t have to be bothered by all the noise outside.”
Then he would sit down in his favorite chair, light a candle, and proceed
to read until it was time to go to sleep and wait for morning to come.
The second brother would also walk to the big window at the front of
his cabin, but he would only pull the curtain closed. He would leave the
big shutters open so that light could enter the cabin, and every once and
a while he would walk to the window and open the curtains just enough
so that he could peer outside. He always made sure, however, that he
hunched down low so that no one could see him looking out.
Finally, the third brother would also walk to the big window at the
front of his cabin, but he would fling the shutters wide open and pull the
curtain back and sit in front of the window all day. He would wave to
his neighbors and watch all the activity going on outside in the street.
He kept his window open and sometimes a neighbor would walk up to
the window and offer him some vegetables from the garden, tell him the
latest piece of gossip, or just stop so they could enjoy the fresh air
together. And sometimes the third brother would walk outside his front
door and wander to the end of the street. It was not long, however,
before he returned to the comfort of his cottage; but now, he would sit
by his window and think about what he had seen.
Occasionally when the brothers met in the morning they would
argue over who had found the best way to treat the world outside of his
cabin, but in the end, each would go back inside, feeling quite satisfied
with how he had chosen to live.
That is not quite the whole story, however; once there were actually
four brothers, but when the fourth brother went inside his cabin, he had

ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
105
a habit of throwing the shutters open and pulling the curtains back as
far as he could and flinging his door wide open. He would keep the door
open for many days on end. And he lived like that for several days at a
time, until one day when a gang of thieves stormed into his cabin and
tore it all to shreds.
Organizations, new businesses, and established founder-run organiza-
tions all exist in a social/professional context. While they may start in a
creative cocoon, incubating and growing, gaining their nourishment
from the inside, eventually they need to emerge into the more complex
world outside.
So how do you decide how much to engage with the world outside
your own organization? In the fairy tale of “The Three Brothers,” the
first brother stays in a safe but limited world. He would have no idea if a
ferocious tornado were barreling down on the village. The second
brother would know enough to be prepared for a disaster, but certainly
not enough to take advantage of a new opportunity. But the third broth-
er would experience enough contact to know what was going on in the
world outside his cottage, engage in enough friendly discourse so that
he made as few enemies as possible, and gather enough information so
that he could sit and think and decide on the right strategy to bring him
the greatest benefit. He could also hear the latest gossip so that he
would know when a new opportunity was about to present itself. The
fourth brother, because he let himself be seduced by the outside world,
could not see danger and was ultimately destroyed.
If Community Connections had followed the strategy of the fourth
brother, the story would end right here. But throughout its history,
Community Connections dealt with the outside world like one of the
first three brothers: either too little contact, too much engagement, or
contact that feels just right.
CASE STUDY #1: TOO LITTLE ENGAGEMENT
At the very beginning of its development, Community Connections’s
founders made the conscious decision to fly below the radar screen.
What this meant practically was that the organization would keep its
plans and its activities out of the public spotlight. While this may sound

CHAPTER 6
106
a bit paranoid, and part of it certainly was, it grew out of a careful read
of the business landscape and an assessment of the founders’ combined
skills.
In 1984, the idea of downsizing large residential mental health insti-
tutions and finding ways for patients to live successfully in community
settings was already part of the conversation about how to provide hu-
mane and affordable care. But in Washington, D.C., despite a lawsuit
filed in 1975 and an optimistic start, a major effort to empty St. Eliza-
beths hospital had not yet begun.1 Community Connections was funded
as somewhat of a pilot program to see if community treatment was in
fact doable. As a result, some of the strategies employed by Community
Connections were untested (as is the case with many companies trying
out new models), and while supporters wanted to see successful out-
comes, there were others who had tangible resources to lose if commu-
nity treatment was to go forward on a large scale. Community Connec-
tions’s founders decided to keep their heads down, work hard, and wait
for the results to come in.
Like the first brother in the fairy tale, the founders closed the shut-
ters to the cabin and instead of thinking that there is “no such thing as
bad publicity,”2 the founders feared that at this early stage in the devel-
opment of Community Connections any speculation of failure might
mean trouble. This began a pattern of acting like a phantom company as
far as the media was concerned. The founders refused to be part of
news stories about the progress of deinstitutionalization and on the few
occasions when they did talk to a local reporter, they gave vague an-
swers or hid behind the veil of client confidentiality. Internally there
were discussions about how to handle the press and efforts were made
to direct all conversations with the broader community to one of the
cofounders. Managing the outside world kept Community Connections
safe, but it also cost opportunities.
In addition to its low media profile, Community Connections’s
founders avoided city politics. The city council had several hearings that
raised issues regarding mental health policy, and Community Connec-
tions was often not at the table. Giving the rationale that the meetings
were often unproductive, the founders failed to make contacts that
might have been useful when they wanted to advocate for particular
positions. It should be noted that this avoidance of becoming involved

ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
107
in the outside world was born not only out of caution, but also of
naiveté, competitiveness, and arrogance.
Having no background in business, the founders did not recognize a
big part of how business gets done. They believed that if they just did
their jobs, and did them well, then political and local connections would
be irrelevant. Not realizing that relationships are a critical part of col-
laboration and negotiating and compromise—all necessary for a busi-
ness to survive—the founders failed to make important connections.
Competitiveness also contributed to the decision to keep a low pro-
file. Like the second brother, Community Connections’s leadership oc-
casionally peeked through the curtains, but did not go much further.
Staff were jokingly cautioned, “If you go to a meeting, listen a lot, steal
what you can, and give away nothing.” As city resources shrank and
more organizations with the same mission came on the scene, it seemed
more and more important to keep quiet about plans and strategies. At
one point, one of the cofounders got involved in a local advocacy group,
but when she did, it was not to participate as a coequal member, but
rather to take control of the group. In that way she could be part of the
outside world but do it on her own terms.
Finally, leadership at Community Connections stayed away from the
outside world out of a sense of arrogance. Believing that they could do
the job better than anyone else, they minimized what they could learn
from others. This arrogance resulted in others saying or thinking, “Just
because they are big, they think they are better than everyone else.”
This reputation occasionally deprived Community Connections from
obtaining new opportunities, and it also led to other organizations just
waiting for Community Connections to take a fall.
Despite some early indications that the strategy of flying low was
having negative consequences, Community Connections’s leadership
continued to believe that low visibility was an advantage. That belief
manifested itself in three other ways: the selection of a board of direc-
tors, decisions about fundraising, and the use of social media.
Like many founder-run organizations, Community Connections be-
gan with a friendly, small, and family-dominated board of directors.
Most of the power was vested in the two founders and their spouses.
Additional members joined the board over the years, most serving for
long periods of time. Members were chosen for their trust, their friend-
ship, and their loyalty to Community Connections. Rarely were mem-

CHAPTER 6
108
bers chosen for the expertise they might bring to the board (but luckily
all of them brought talents and opinions that were helpful in moving the
organization forward). In those early years, before the death of one of
the cofounders, what was most important was that board members
would give the founders free rein to do as they chose.
Board members were never asked to be involved in fundraising or
other tangibly supportive activities since the founders considered their
participation on the board primarily an act of friendship. The failure to
be involved in fundraising went beyond the board, however. Fundrais-
ing would mean becoming a more public business. Community Con-
nections was the equivalent of a privately held company. We issued
yearly financial statements as was required, but we continued to keep
our shutters tightly closed. Other organizations spent time planning
fundraising galas, and while these events netted very little income, what
they did do was raise an organization’s profile. For some organizations,
one thing led to another and fundraising turned into more publicity,
which turned into more grants, which then led to more income to start
new projects. At one point, Community Connections borrowed the phi-
losophy of the investment firm Smith Barney, “They make money the
old-fashioned way. They earn it.”3
After several years of remaining insulated and isolated behind the
curtains, Community Connections began to see the downside of hiding
safely in its own little cottage. In addition to the missed opportunities
already mentioned, we failed to see the growth of a whole new way of
communicating—the power of social media. Community Connections
had built a rudimentary website (initially without any outside profes-
sional help) and it read like a page out of an academic journal. The
website was rarely accessed, provided little important information,
failed to highlight some of Community Connections’s accomplishments,
and told the world that we had not kept up with the changing ways of
communicating. It was not until the communications mantle was passed
to a younger generation of leaders that we began to use media to open
our doors, but in a way where we had much more control than we ever
imagined. Although there are reasons for keeping the contact with the
outside world small in the early stages of organizational growth, it be-
comes less and less wise as the organization progresses.

ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
109
CASE STUDY #2: TOO MUCH ENGAGEMENT
As is so often the case with engagement, the pendulum can swing too
far. As both Community Connections and the care system grew, it be-
came increasingly difficult to stay in our own little world. We made a
conscious decision to engage with city planners, other agencies occupy-
ing our same business space, community leaders, and local politicians.
But because we had little experience engaging with our community, we
found ourselves to be novices in the world of networking. And like most
novices, we had a steep learning curve and we made mistakes.
It might sound a little extreme to say that the cofounders were naive
since they obviously had experience negotiating and reading the risks
and opportunities of the business environment, but they had often done
so at a distance. Opening the door to the outside world means getting
your hands dirty.
Several members of Community Connections staff began going to
city planning meetings and contributing their ideas to the city’s strategic
plan for delivering mental health services. But since several staff mem-
bers were going to a variety of meetings and we had no centralized way
for sharing information internally, we often found ourselves needing an
interpreter to manage the flow of information. We went from closing
the shutters to flinging the door wide open when it might have been
wise to spend just a little time peering around the curtains.
One consequence of being out there was that no one internally or
externally knew who spoke for Community Connections. Staff won-
dered if they were just connecting to other agencies in order to listen
and learn, or did they have the authority to establish strategic partner-
ships. As an organization, we kept asking ourselves, “Why are we out
there anyway?” And networking takes time. At one point we conducted
a survey designed to assess the satisfaction of line staff and one of the
big complaints was that supervisors were so busy going to meetings that
they had no time to do their “real” jobs. Engaging with the outside
community is somewhat like taking a trip. You don’t have to plan every
moment of the vacation, but it does help to have a destination.
Since Community Connections was the biggest nonprofit behavioral
health organization in the city and had been in operation longer than
most others, it was naturally the case that Community Connections staff
knew people across other organizations. In fact, many Community Con-

CHAPTER 6
110
nections staff transferred to other similar organizations over the years.
Many management staff found themselves wondering, “What is the
difference between building relationships, forging collaborations, and
gossiping or sharing internal plans that might compromise Community
Connections’s competitive advantage?” Individuals and the organiza-
tion as a whole needed to learn the differences and to understand that
growing networks is fundamentally about building relationships.
Perhaps the biggest mistake that Community Connections made
when it opened its doors wide was giving away valuable intellectual
property. For years, staff at Community Connections had worked to
develop a model for delivering services to individuals who had suffered
abuse in childhood or adulthood. The model was refined, piloted, and
used with several hundred clients. It had also been turned into a formal
manual for use by a wide range of providers, tested for reliability and
fidelity, and then judged to be an evidence-based practice (giving it
high status in a health care world increasingly valuing outcomes and
model fidelity). The principles of the trauma approach were then scaled
up to apply to whole systems of care.
The model, known as Trauma Recovery and Empowerment, re-
ceived federal and local accolades.4 Then the designers made a big
decision. They decided to open source the model. Their decision would
give universal, free access to the product. This was certainly a generous
act and was founded on the belief that “if we have something good and
it has the potential of helping a large number of people, why not share
it?” We were not asking people to help us design the product; we were
merely making an already developed product available.
But there were a number of unanticipated consequences. First, peo-
ple did not use the model as it had been designed, tested, and validated.
Individual providers made their own alterations so that after a while,
the model as it was being implemented was a poorly rendered copy of
the original. Once you fling the door open, you have no real control
over who comes in.
Second, there was a less noble consequence: the designers of the
model wanted credit or acknowledgment for what they had created.
Initially, public credit came in abundance, but over time, the industry
seemed to forget just whose model this was anyway. Other programs,
especially those that had made modifications in the model, began pre-
senting it at conferences and industry meetings. A few began charging

ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
111
to consult to smaller organizations on how to implement the model and
the funding sources began mandating that the systemwide version of
the model be included in all behavioral health applications for funding.
Wow! People like our ideas, but wait a minute, what about us? In
response, Community Connections began a nationwide training pro-
gram and began charging mental health systems for providing protocols
on how to implement the model. Trainers at Community Connections
developed their own modification of the model, which they put into a
separate manual and marketed to interested providers. To some extent,
we were trying to put the toothpaste back in the tube. Leadership knew
that they had to let the outside world in. They needed to share informa-
tion, to learn what others were doing, and to build coalitions. But unlike
the fourth brother in the fairy tale, they needed to approach the outside
in a far more intentional way.
CASE STUDY # 3: CONTACT THAT FEELS JUST RIGHT
In their book Great by Choice, Jim Collins and Morton T. Hansen talk
about charting a steady course of growth—not slowing down in good
times or speeding up in bad times, but maintaining the same consistent
pace.5 That paradigm can be applied equally to an organization’s rela-
tionship to the outside world—a constant state of engagement. Over the
years, we have found a number of ways of getting it just right.
A good connection with the world outside of Community Connec-
tions meant developing good relationships. Connection is not like read-
ing the newspaper and learning what’s going on out there. It is funda-
mentally about building relationships, and relationships take time.
At the beginning of our growth, we waited until we needed some-
thing before we engaged with those beyond our doors. For example, we
only met with the area neighborhood council when we wanted to ad-
dress a complaint about one of our clients, or we needed a permit to
hold an event on city property. Not surprisingly, since we were un-
known to those in the neighborhood, our interactions were stilted,
anonymous, and at times, downright hostile.
Over the years, we began to let ourselves become part of the com-
munity before we needed something. We cultivated relationships that
were friendly and collaborative. People came to know us, what we did,

CHAPTER 6
112
why we did it, and on a personal level, who we were. When we had
events for National Recovery Month in the park across from our offices,
not only were neighbors agreeable, but they actively participated in
making the event a success.6
Networking was no longer seen as a chore or a necessary evil. Mov-
ing beyond our obvious narrow business interests allowed us to invite
collaboration and be included in new opportunities. One community
member introduced us to local developers who were looking for part-
ners to help manage difficult tenants living in their buildings. A new
partnership grew from that contact.
Dealing with the world outside means both going out and letting
others in. But this back and forth traffic is not the equivalent of a
reconnaissance mission. It entails more than learning information; it
involves building partnerships and sharing information and being will-
ing to take the next step toward a legitimate collaboration. We have all
heard the saying, “two heads are better than one.” Well, sometimes two
sets of ideas, two differing perspectives, or two sets of experiences are
better than one.
More than just building relationships with outside players, Commu-
nity Connections began acknowledging outside partners for the contri-
butions they made in helping Community Connections become a better
organization. Postings on social media thanked and acknowledged those
outside the organization who had done something special to help consu-
mers, to enhance the organization’s mission, or to share new technolo-
gies. This was a very tangible way of demonstrating that in the course of
doing business, the door swings both ways, and that we care about our
partners not just as sources of information but as people we can trust.
In 2016, as part of a branding campaign, Community Connections
came up with the phrase “Sharing Caring.” We are an organization that
cares about others and we wanted to share our caring spirit with others
in our community. But then a young staff member pointed out that the
phrase could just as well read in the other direction, “Caring Sharing,”
because we genuinely care about our partners who work with us to
bring services to an impoverished community. Caring about others
leads to sharing with one another. We don’t just exchange information
with the outside world, but we also build relationships.
For those who were a bit reserved about reaching out, we began to
embrace some of the technology that allows an organization to engage

ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
113
with the outside world. Webinars and other computer-based learning
opportunities allow an organization to open the door, engage with oth-
ers, but to do so in the comfort of their own offices. It is possible to have
as much interaction as you want or need and no more. Like one of the
brothers in the fairy tale, organizations can have a peek outside the
window, draw the curtains back, and then pull them shut again.
When applying for grants and outside funding, technology opened
us up to long distance conversations with other organizations that
shared our interests. All participants got to ask questions and hear the
same answers. Even though grantees from different cities may never
meet, they feel as if they know one another. In the early 1990s, Com-
munity Connections went through such a process when applying for a
large federal grant. Long after the grant was over, staff members from
one organization felt as if they knew and could share information with
people from across the country. They were invited into one another’s
worlds without ever having shaken hands.
As part of getting our relationship with the outside world right, lead-
ers at Community Connections began sharing the responsibility of mak-
ing connections. When Community Connections was in its early years,
there were only a few people and many jobs that needed attention. One
staff member was assigned the responsibility of making outside connec-
tions. Gloria, who enjoyed connecting with colleagues outside the or-
ganization, frequently spoke up at citywide meetings. She became
known to policymakers, competitors, and local and federal grantors who
came to believe that she spoke for the organization and they began to
treat her as a private practitioner who worked for herself, not for Com-
munity Connections. When Gloria unexpectedly fell ill and was forced
to retire, Community Connections’s relationships with the outside
world retired as well. The organization found itself having to start all
over again.
As we started to think of ourselves as a team, we realized that engag-
ing with the outside world was a team sport rather than a solo one.
When opportunities arose to engage with outside groups or even com-
petitor organizations, we involved more than one person. Internally this
gave the message that we were all part of Community Connections, all
working toward the same mission. But it also sent the message to out-
side groups that single individuals were not operating alone. Sending
and exposing more than one person also let people know any network-

CHAPTER 6
114
ing connections that were initiated were for the benefit of the organiza-
tion, not for the benefit of the individual.
Early in our development, we found ourselves needing to negotiate a
new contract for an expansion of services that we were asked to provide.
We initially sent a single representative who conducted the negotiation
from start to finish. But on one occasion, this person was out sick and
was unable to go, so a second staff member took her place. When the
two compared notes, it was startling that each had heard different mes-
sages and each had interpreted what she heard differently. So we
changed our procedures and now no one goes to a negotiation alone.
Sending two people is almost like having a built-in fact checker. And, of
course, there is the additional benefit of having more than one person
who gets a chance to engage with the outside world.
When we felt at a loss as to how to take the first step in evaluating
and restructuring our organization, we began to hire consultants who
would serve as guides. These folks were professional networkers and
they introduced us to contacts and possibilities that we would never
have found on our own. Consultants have the potential of paving the
way into the outside world and they tend to have a much broader view
of what’s out there beyond your universe.
We do have one word of warning about the world of consultants,
however. Over the years, Community Connections has engaged the
help of many outside consultants. In the early years, our request was
simply, “We are floundering; please help us get back on track.” With
such a vague mandate, it is no wonder that the consultations failed. In
one instance we sought the help of an individual who was known as an
expert in helping small businesses develop strategic plans and form
healthy networks. When we first approached him, we had no idea what
a strategic plan was, much less why we needed one. We had several
sessions, focusing primarily, at his initiation, on race relations in our city
and why we needed a more diverse board of directors. Now, remember,
neither big city politics, issues of social justice, or board composition
had anything to do with the reason for engaging the consultation.
After completing the sessions that we had paid for in advance, we
bid our consultant good-bye. In the absence of a well-articulated agen-
da of our own, the consultant filled the time with his own particular
interests. In a quote often attributed to Mark Twain, but actually initial-
ly said by J. Vernon Magee, “An expert is just an ordinary fellow from

ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
115
another town.”7 When you don’t know what you want, the chances are
all you’ll get is an ordinary guy.
In selecting a consultant, you need to have a well-articulated prob-
lem or question you want help solving or answering. The goals and
format of the consultation, as well as the process by which it will be
carried out, both need to be clear. Once the consultation is completed,
you don’t have to accept all of the recommendations. After all, they are
just recommendations.
At times, Community Connections leadership felt anxious about
making a difficult decision. They felt concerned about the potential
fallout from staff. One of our more savvy consultants suggested that we
let him be the fall guy. If our recommendations were questioned, then
all we had to do was say, “Well, the consultant said . . . .” In this way, we
could present our decision without having to assume any responsibility!
Engaging a consultant does not necessarily mean that you are
obliged to take her advice. Just because you let the salesman in the door
doesn’t mean that you have to buy the product. On the other hand,
don’t engage a consultant if you have no intention of listening to what
they have to say. At one point, Community Connections was experi-
menting with implementing a new business model with a group of new
partners. An expert in the field was engaged to help with the process,
and within a few days she made some very cogent observations and gave
some clear recommendations, recommendations that leadership pro-
ceeded to ignore. The organization had invested heavily in the new
model and really just wanted someone to give it the seal of approval.
Expert consultants should be invited in for only a limited amount of
time to advise on a specific problem. And while the analogy might be a
bit overstated, Benjamin Franklin’s famous statement, “Guests, like
fish, begin to smell after three days” might just as easily be applied to
consultants.8
Finally, we began to realize that venturing out of the world of Com-
munity Connections and the domain of mental health provided certain
opportunities. We already knew many of the struggles and opportu-
nities that our own world held, so we began to introduce ourselves to
people in adjacent businesses: people who worked for the schools, the
police department, and in parks and recreation, among others. We
found, and continue to find, that new contacts lead to new relationships
and potentially to new partnerships. We started to follow this piece of

CHAPTER 6
116
wisdom about innovation: “If you talk only to yourself, you stay the way
you are. If you talk only to others in health care, you move with the
pack. It’s only if you talk with others outside of your domain that you
can leap boundaries.”9
No one doubts that it can be difficult to move beyond one’s comfort
zone and engage the outside, but it is possible and the benefits can be
huge. The “us against the world” mentality has to be replaced with an
“us with the world” vision. There is no choice if an organization is to
grow and thrive. Almost four hundred years ago, in 1624, the poet John
Donne wrote these famous lines, “No man is an island, entire of itself,
every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main.”10
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
I have always thought of myself as a shy person, the kind who hangs
back at parties, gets nervous giving public talks and meeting new peo-
ple. In fact, I have successfully gone to parties, given talks, and met
scores of new people. When I tell people I feel shy, they look at me as if
I am putting them on, or as if I completely lack self-awareness. But
what matters is how I feel, not, in this case, how others see me.
This self-perception has resulted in my being the inside person at
Community Connections. It has always been someone else, at first my
partner and then any one of a number of senior staff, who has gone out
to engage the world. When some of our young staff would attend a local
meeting or negotiate a new relationship with an outside vendor, I would
always send them off with a caution, “Learn what you can, give away
nothing, and do as much snooping while still being polite.” This was a
somewhat paranoid message, rendered by someone who saw herself as
too shy or reluctant to do the engaging herself.
The more I nurtured my invisible persona, the less people came to
expect that they would see me at professional gatherings. On one occa-
sion, a city spokesperson turned to my partner and said half-jokingly, “I
bet Maxine doesn’t even exist. You just invented her so you’ll have some
cover if things go wrong!”

ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
117
PUTTING ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD AT
COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS IN CONTEXT
As “The Three Brothers” fable and case studies in this chapter high-
light, it doesn’t always come naturally for organizations to look beyond
their own windows and doors. Sometimes we deliberately remain in-
wardly oriented—because of concerns about sharing critical informa-
tion and worries about competitors taking advantage of any openings in
our armor. Sometimes we do it unintentionally—just because we get so
heads down and busy that we forget to engage with the outside world as
often as we should. This heads-down busyness is especially common for
new ventures when the founding team members are scrambling to get
and keep their endeavor running. Before long, it can become habitual.
In this commentary section, we describe how such behavior is typical,
how it’s grounded in a well-known (and evolutionarily rational) se-
quence of behaviors called the threat-rigidity effect, and how organiza-
tions can strike the right balance in terms of engaging with key stake-
holders outside their doors.
At all levels of life—organism, individual, group, and organization—
scholars Barry Staw, Lloyd Sandelands, and Jane Dutton have shown
that perceived threats trigger a very predictable response.11 At the or-
ganism level, threats trigger a flight, flee, or freeze response. At the
individual, team, or organizational level, when we feel threatened, we
restrict the flow of information, tighten controls, and revert to our com-
fort zones. We become less adaptive, more rigid in our thoughts and
behaviors, and often add more rules and regulations. This generally
involves focusing on the thing that the individual, team, or organization
does best—its core product or service—and not doing other things
including engaging with the external environment.
Based on complementary research by team scholars Deborah Anco-
na and Henrik Bresman, as well as Connie Gersick and Richard Hack-
man, we know that project teams tend to be extremely inwardly orient-
ed for at least half of their life cycles. Left to its own devices, the
average team won’t look outside its own team boundaries until it gets
halfway to its deadline. We also know that this internal orientation can
be extremely counterproductive for teams. When teams are explicit
about having members play externally oriented roles, they tend to per-
form better.

CHAPTER 6
118
As Ancona, Bresman, and Katrin Käufer have noted, “The current
environment demands a new brand of team—one that emphasizes out-
reach to stakeholders and adapts easily to flatter organizational struc-
tures, changing information and increasing complexity.”12 They have
identified four key externally oriented roles, including scouts, guards,
ambassadors, and coordinators. It is easy to think of comparable behav-
iors at the individual level or comparable roles at the organizational
level (performed by one or more people).
As their name suggests, scouts gather information about what lies
ahead and around—both within the organization and in the environ-
ment more broadly. They help find relevant knowledge and expertise.
They also assess markets, technologies, and service delivery modes/
models. In addition, they keep an eye out for potential partners and
competitors (recognizing that a competitor might become a partner or
vice versa). When the environment is especially volatile and competi-
tive, scouts must remain particularly vigilant—always scanning beyond
their boundaries. This scouting activity helps ensure that an outside
view becomes part of forecasting and strategic decision-making pro-
cesses, which Nobel prize–winner Daniel Kahneman notes can often be
led astray by a tendency for an inwardly focused orientation.13
Community Connections had a general sense of its environment, but
it didn’t actively scout (or assign people to do so) until later in its life. As
noted earlier, this insularity is common but can also be costly. Competi-
tors can emerge unseen. Potential partnerships can be overlooked. In-
sularity is often the result of concerns about sharing intellectual proper-
ty. This was true for Community Connections after its treatment model
was adopted and adapted by other organizations in ways that Commu-
nity Connections’s staff perceived as inappropriate. However, given the
pace of change today, organizations must learn to compete based on
execution as well as intellectual property, which—despite contracts,
laws, and lawyers—is increasingly difficult to protect. Especially in ser-
vice-oriented businesses, success depends on implementation and rela-
tionships as much as it does on any particular delivery model.
Ambassadors play a second and key externally oriented role. They
manage up and out beyond a team’s or an organization’s borders. This
can involve helping to protect and promote the organization’s reputa-
tion with external constituents, lobbying for resources, and—along with
scouts—keeping in contact with potential allies, partners, and competi-

ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
119
tors. Ambassadors for a team help ensure that the team’s work is
aligned with the organization’s priorities and gets the resources it needs
from senior management. Ambassadors for an organization help ensure
that its efforts fit well with changes in the environmental, regulatory,
and competitive context.
Coordinators play a more task-oriented role than scouts and ensure
that connections (especially lateral ones) are tight with other teams or
organizations. They focus on negotiation, trading, and feedback, seek-
ing to ensure that their group’s work dovetails with the work of others.
They also help ensure that their group is speaking a common language
with the groups around it. In a classic example of the failure to coordi-
nate, two groups building the Mars Climate Orbiter operated using
different measurement systems until their respective parts of the rover
failed, resulting in the loss of billions of dollars and thousands of hours
of work. More active coordinators alone might not have saved the orbit-
er, but they can help fight against the tendency to become siloed and
help ensure that highly interdependent work gets done smoothly.
The fourth externally oriented role is that of guard. It is most rele-
vant for teams, where guards help protect members’ time. They buffer
the team against competing demands to ensure that members can focus
on the work at hand. In flat, flexible, team-based structures, people’s
time can easily be “borrowed” by or shifted to other projects in ways
that undermine the focal project’s progress. Guards help ensure that
critical resources are protected.
Is a tendency toward rigid responses always high and are these four
roles always necessary to help defend against that tendency? Not al-
ways, but they are increasingly important given general trends in the
environments for teams’ and organizations’ work. When that work re-
quires entrepreneurship (or intrapreneurship), carefully formed alli-
ances, buy-in and shared resources, and complex, dispersed informa-
tion, keeping one’s doors and windows open (albeit with “a guard on
duty”) is vital. CEOs are critical for ensuring that their teams and or-
ganizations don’t become so heads down that they lose track of custom-
ers, clients, collaborators, and competitors. CEOs and other senior
leaders can play these four roles themselves or they can assign others to
play them. Either way, being carefully and continually attuned to the
external environment is one of the greatest challenges (given our innate

CHAPTER 6
120
threat-rigid tendencies) and opportunities (given our increasingly inter-
connected and interdependent world).
SUGGESTED READINGS
Deborah Ancona and Henrik Bresman’s work on teams’ external orien-
tation is central on this topic and includes, with David Caldwell, “The
X-Factor: Six Steps to Leading High-Performing X-Teams,” Organiza-
tional Dynamics 38, no. 3 (2009): 217–24; with Katrin Käufer, “The
Comparative Advantage of X-Teams,” MIT Sloan Management Review
43, no. 3 (2002); and X-Teams: How to Build Teams that Lead, Inno-
vate, and Succeed (Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2008).
They, in turn, draw on Connie Gersick and Richard Hackman’s work
about groups’ tendency toward inwardly focused habitual routines.14
On the inward versus outward orientation, as well as many other
topics relevant to organizations’ growth and leadership, see Daniel Kah-
neman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Doubleday, 2011). For a
sample model for how organizations can develop a more external per-
spective, see Catherine Bailey and David Butcher, “External Perspec-
tive—An Under-Utilised Strategic Leadership Capability,” in Leader-
ship Learning: Knowledge into Action, ed. Kim Turnbull James and
James Collins, 35–55 (New York: Palgrave, 2008).
The original model and description of threat-rigidity effects for indi-
viduals, teams, and organizations is from Barry M. Staw, Lloyd Sande-
lands, and Jane E. Dutton, “Threat Rigidity Effects in Organizational
Behavior: A Multilevel Analysis,” Administrative Science Quarterly 26,
no. 4 (1981): 501–24.

121
7
THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF AND
ORGANIZATIONAL AWARENESS
Taking a Hard Look
Philosophies, both Eastern and Western, place great emphasis on self-
awareness. At some point in its growth, an organization and its leaders
need to assess where they have come from and where they are headed.
Organizations may make new mistakes, but unless they engage in a
process of self-awareness, they will be doomed to make the same mis-
takes over and over again.
We are all urged to understand just who we are. What are our
strengths and how do we identify our weaknesses? How do we appear
to those who see us? Much writing in philosophy, fiction, and religion,
among others, stresses the importance of self-knowledge. We are
warned that only the fool goes through life not knowing who he is. For
some, the struggle to know oneself is the main task of their existence.
We have all heard the line from Shakespeare, “To thine own self be
true.”1
But this is not a book about self-realization, or personal analysis, or
individual fulfillment, so we have to ask, “What relevance does self-
awareness have for running a business like Community Connections?”

CHAPTER 7
122
A FABLE: A FACE IN THE MIRROR
“What do I look like?” asked the young boy as he and his parents were
sitting in their home one evening.
“Whatever do you mean?” asked his mother with a confused look on
her face. “I have never heard such a silly question.”
“No, Mother, I am quite serious” he insisted with an intensity his
parents had not seen before. “What do I look like?”
“Why, you look like you,” said his father in a gentle voice designed to
soothe his son’s growing agitation.
“That is not enough,” said the boy. “I have seen the face of a bear
when he opens his mouth and growls and I have seen his big black
tongue as he swats the bees on the way to the hive that drips with
honey. I can describe the feathered birds who drink from the pond and
peck for grubs on the bark of the old tree. I can describe each of these
and more, but I cannot describe my own face!” The boy held his face in
his hands and looked quite sad indeed.
Then he heard the voice of the old man who lived in the hills. “Your
face hides in the depths of the forest and by the side of the flowing river
and in the reflections that come from the sky. If you truly want to find
your face, you must travel on your own for many months. And only then
will you know that the face you have found will belong only to you. It
will be your true face.”
Even though the task seemed daunting and the time seemed long, the
boy felt a sense of excitement, and with that, he packed a bag, said good-
bye to his parents, and started on his way.
As he walked into the forest with the light shining behind him, he
suddenly saw something on the road ahead. As he approached the dark
image, he felt a surge of excitement. “That must be my face on the forest
floor. He quickly bent over to grab the image, but every time he moved
forward, the image of his face disappeared. “This is some trick,” he
cried. “I am sure that the image on the forest floor is my true face, but
every time I reach over to touch it, it disappears. I know my face is here
somewhere, but perhaps I must travel further before I can see it clear-
ly.”
With that thought, he headed down a path in the forest to a stream
nearby. As he looked down into the water, he saw a bright, clear face
looking back at him. “Wait,” he cried, “that must be my face down there

THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF AND ORGANIZATIONAL AWARENESS
123
in the water.” But just as he stood back to admire the face, the wind
began to blow and a big cloud hovered above the stream. The face
disappeared as a swirl of ripples churned the water, and though he
waited for a long while, the face failed to reappear.
“I fear that I will never find my face,” he lamented as he sat down on
a shiny rock to contemplate his fate. Just as he was ready to give up his
quest and return home, he looked down again and on the flat surface of
the rock he saw a face staring back at him. This time the wind did not
blow and the face did not disappear. “What a handsome face,” he cried.
But just as he was admiring the face on the rock, he heard a deep
growling sound and when he looked up, he saw a big black bear, stand-
ing on his hind legs and letting out the most ferocious growl.
The boy began running until he collapsed on the forest bed. “The
forces in the forest are too powerful for me. I cannot best the shadows
and the clouds, or the water and the wind or the powerful voice of the
big black bear; I must leave this place quickly and accept that I will
never find my face.”
When the boy arrived home after days of walking, his parents could
see the forlorn look on his face. He tried to tell them what had hap-
pened, but he found himself choking back tears. “I have looked hard,
dear parents, but I have been unable to find my true face.”
Then he heard the voice of the old man in the hills. “Look into the
eyes of your parents, my boy.”
“But why?” asked the boy, who feared that this would be just one
more disappointment.
“No,” said the voice, “turn your eyes and look deeply.” And there, in
the eyes of his parents, was a reflection, a reflection of his own true face.
“There you are,” laughed the voice from the hills. “Sometimes you can
find your face where you least expect it!”
The boy in the fable is searching for his “one” true face, but in any
business the leaders need to wear many different faces as they deal in a
multitude of circumstances. The face in the mirror may not always be
the same. Remember going into the fun house as a child? One mirror
makes you tall, another makes you fat, and yet another stretches out
your face so that you look like you have the widest smile ever. It’s a
relief when you walk out of the tent and recognize your good old face.
But some experiences, events, or relationships change who we are for-

CHAPTER 7
124
ever. Shakespeare encouraged us to remember that “A man, in his time,
plays many parts.”2
In any organization the term “self-awareness” applies in at least two
places: the personal awareness of the leader or leaders and the more
abstract awareness of the organization itself. It may seem a little odd to
talk about the self-awareness of an organization, but organizations have
identities too. They are identities based on their mission, their values,
and how they operate in the world.
At a personal level, a leader needs to be aware of her strengths, her
weaknesses, and her impact on others. And she must also acknowledge
that every strength holds a kernel of weakness and every weakness
carries a ray of strength. At an organizational level, there needs to be an
awareness of where the organization has been and where it is headed.
The organization needs to know its values and how its operations are
viewed by others. Awareness at each level allows an organization to
make good decisions about what projects to undertake, who to hire, and
where it wants to be in two, three, or five years down the road.
CASE STUDY #1: AWARENESS OF INDIVIDUAL
STRENGTHS
It is not surprising that this has been the hardest chapter to write.
Taking an honest and deep look at ourselves is one of the most difficult
things any of us has to do, yet it is necessary for running a successful
business. Our choices, our decisions, our judgment are all a reflection of
who we are. How we use or compensate for our core character has an
enormous impact on the success or failure of the enterprise we run.
We draw our personal awareness from several places: what we have
done (past); what we are doing (present); what we aspire to do (future);
how we feel about what we are doing (internal); and how others see us
(external).
I have always been a big picture thinker. I like to come up with new
ideas. And from the beginning of my career I have always fancied my-
self somewhat of an intellectual. Over the years, I have written books,
treatment manuals, articles, and grants, and I have presented at large
local and national conferences. This litany is not meant to toot my own
horn, but rather to describe how I thought and think of myself. Because

THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF AND ORGANIZATIONAL AWARENESS
125
of this awareness of my skills, a perception shared by others, I was given
many opportunities to do what I liked and what I did well—sponsor
journal clubs, run case consultations, and teach entry level clinicians. I
approached many organizational concerns as problems to be solved.
This strength brought many opportunities and accolades in its wake.
But behaving solely as a “big thinker” does not translate into being a
good business person. It also has the unintended consequence of pre-
senting oneself as a teacher. Some love to be in a learning environment,
but for others it raises all the anxieties they hoped to escape when they
got a “real” job. For others, it gave the impression that I was avoiding
doing the hard work of treating clients by indulging my academic inter-
ests.
But I was also aware that I had another set of quite different
strengths. I loved being a clinician and I was thought to have exception-
al skills; as a result, I did something that most CEOs of health care
organizations never do. I saw clients. This gave me the advantage of
being able to evaluate our services firsthand. I was also seen as a hands-
on leader, and clinicians knew that I was not asking them to do anything
that I did not do myself. I frequently got hugs from clients as they
walked into the organization and this gave the message to staff that we
took our mission of providing care seriously.
CASE STUDY #2: AWARENESS OF INDIVIDUAL
WEAKNESSES
These strengths, however, were coupled with a significant weakness.
Even though I had a business partner whose talents I trusted, I felt
great responsibility, as do many founder CEOs, for the success of Com-
munity Connections. That sense of responsibility caused me to rely too
heavily on myself when making decisions and to be a bad collaborator.
There were many times when I felt a sense of urgency, often false
urgency, to make a decision. Taking time for long discussions, respect-
ing the opinion of others, and arriving at consensus all seemed like
luxuries we could not afford. In leadership meetings, senior staff grew
increasingly silent, believing that at the end of the day the decision
would ultimately be mine. The correctness of the decision became irrel-
evant. Even if I was correct, the noncollaborative process resulted in a

CHAPTER 7
126
decrease in staff morale, but more important, a number of senior staff
became less invested in the success of Community Connections.
But becoming aware that my style ran counter to my goal of running
a successful business was difficult to accomplish. I resisted feedback
and vigorously insisted that the only thing that mattered was getting it
right. Only when some valued staff decided to take their talents else-
where was I forced to take a look at what was my greatest weakness. I
had to learn how to collaborate with others if I wanted Community
Connections to survive and grow. I began soliciting advice from others
and actually listening to the advice I received. I encouraged other sen-
ior staff to take charge of meetings and to assume authority for impor-
tant parts of the business. Now there were definitely times when I had
to bite my tongue, but the commitment to engaging the talents of oth-
ers overrode my need to be in control. Awareness of one’s weaknesses
in particular needs to lead to behavior change. Otherwise, awareness
can devolve into a “take it or leave it” attitude that is certainly not good
for the longevity of any business.
CASE STUDY #3: AWARENESS OF ONE’S IMPACT ON
OTHERS
Being aware of one’s personal strengths and weaknesses is only one part
of the process of gaining and sustaining awareness. The second level is
to be aware of how your behavior impacts the behavior of others. For
years, Community Connections held a big gala at Christmastime. Staff
had a chance to dress up and go dancing at an upscale venue. Over the
years, as the size of the staff grew, the cost of the event also escalated.
The leaders decided to suspend the event and to give each team a
budget for a much smaller and more intimate affair of their own. We
were unaware of how important the event had become for many staff.
In fact, when new employees were hired, some of their colleagues
would say, “Just wait till Christmas, the organization has a really great
party.” All the leaders could see was the cost of the event—not what it
meant to staff. The lack of awareness caused staff to feel that leadership
was unfeeling and too cheap to treat them to a Christmas celebration.

THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF AND ORGANIZATIONAL AWARENESS
127
Understanding your own behavior is only half of the equation.
Understanding how your behavior will impact others explains much of
what happens in organizations.
CASE STUDY # 4: THE PRISON OF THE PERSONA
Self-awareness and an awareness of the expectations of others can actu-
ally feel like a prison at times. People expect certain behaviors of lead-
ers, and the need to conform to those expectations can be stifling. The
situation can be doubly burdensome when the expectations match ex-
pectations leaders have of themselves. In its early years, leaders at
Community Connections held an end of the year appreciation event.
At the event, the cofounders would personally distribute bonuses to
staff who were part of the senior team as a way of both rewarding them
for a year of hard work and honoring their contribution to the organiza-
tion’s success. The bonuses, which were quite substantial and were
given in cash (a practice that was abandoned when the tax implications
became clear), made the employees feel valued but also contributed to
the persona, shared by the cofounders about themselves, of the leaders
as powerful and generous.
One year, one of the cofounders broke her leg before the event,
making her unable to participate with the same flair that had been her
style. Rather than skipping the event, or allowing her partner to handle
the gift-giving alone, the founder in question insisted that she be
wheeled around the room in a borrowed wheelchair! She felt bound to
maintain her image as a strong leader, needing to show her staff that
nothing could stop her, not even a broken leg. She was aware of her
persona and of how others viewed her, so she felt bound to stay in her
role regardless of how she felt in the moment.
Organizational Awareness
Organizations are not people, but they do have identities. Some busi-
nesses may be viewed as cutthroat by the competition; others might be
seen as collaborative or more cautious in their decision-making style.
Organizations that are viewed as cutthroat may turn off mild-mannered
albeit competent potential employees; orgaizations seen as sluggish and

CHAPTER 7
128
slow to react may invite aggressive action from competitors. In a slightly
different vein, an organization’s internal awareness of its culture may
impact the opportunities it opts to pursue and the applicants it chooses
to hire and promote.
Organizational identity derives from both its values and its history.
Values may be articulated explicitly in a mission statement, but they
may also be reflected in how the company does business. Organizations,
like people, go through a series of developmental changes. Awareness
of those changes and how they impact the ongoing success of a business
contributes to its identity.
CASE STUDY #5: ORGANIZATIONAL VALUES
Community Connection has always identified itself as a mission-driven
organization. We serve the mental and behavioral health needs of mar-
ginalized individuals who live with social, emotional, and physical dis-
abilities. Yet beyond the commitment to delivering quality care, most of
our values involved style rather than content. We were firm that we
believed in respect and equality for both clients and staff, and we strove
to demonstrate integrity in all that we did.
Several years after we first opened, we had a chance to look back
over these values and we were surprised. We looked like the solid “good
guy” organization, but we could have been delivering any service. We
could have been a school or a legal aid society or any of a number of
socially minded organizations. Our core purpose seemed eclipsed by a
focus on style, on process rather than content.
At one point, we were asked by one of our funders to reassess the
clinical needs of a group of clients and to discharge those who no longer
met the criteria of medical necessity. When we looked at our treatment
philosophy this made sense. We believed in teaching people skills and
moving them to greater independence. We even designed treatments to
help people overcome disabling symptoms. What if a client did not
want to be discharged? How could we hold to our value of respecting
client wishes while at the same time delivering recovery-focused treat-
ment?
We eventually realized that in defining ourselves we had gotten con-
fused as to what was the figure and what was the ground. Our mission

THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF AND ORGANIZATIONAL AWARENESS
129
of delivering quality services was our foreground and our values formed
the background, but, as in figure ground puzzles, if you look at them a
certain way the foreground and background begin to reverse. At one
point Community Connections spent more time and gave more weight
to being a respectful organization than it did to being an organization
that delivered behavioral health services. This reversal is not uncom-
mon in many social service agencies where “good guy” values can come
to trump core mission.
CASE STUDY #6: PAST, PRESENT, AND FUTURE
Who we are depends on where we have been, what we have accom-
plished, and how we see our future. In the beginning, Community
Connections saw itself and was seen by others as “the little engine that
could.” With few resources and a small staff, the organization took on
projects that others, even the local government, found daunting. Unfor-
tunately, there were times when the organization bought its own public-
ity and reached for opportunities that were just too big for it to handle.
At one point Community Connections bid for and was awarded a large
federal grant that involved enrolling hundreds of clients over a short
span of time. We did not have adequate staff, prior experience, nor had
we done a careful assessment of just who the clients were. Our venture
failed and we ultimately needed to pull out of the project and return the
funding. We were aware of the positive side of our can-do attitude, but
we were not aware of all that we needed to learn.
Some years later, in our development as a behavioral treatment cen-
ter, we recognized that many of our clients were in need of very practi-
cal resources: safe housing, secure employment, enough money for
food and basic necessities. In addition to offering traditional behavioral
health care, we began providing a full range of housing and employ-
ment services. For a time this created somewhat of an identity crisis.
We would get calls asking if we had low-cost housing available or if we
could help someone find a job. We became aware that our desire to
provide a full range of recovery services had caused people outside of
the organization to mistake who we were. A number of arguments and
complaints resulted as we attempted to clarify our core mission.

CHAPTER 7
130
Using our past experiences, we continue the ongoing process of
restating and clarifying just who we are and what we do. We are clear
that we see ourselves as a full service behavioral health organization,
but we have returned to putting “behavioral” health back in the center
of our identity. It is true that we want to serve people with respect and
dignity. And we continue to strive to provide all the services that indi-
viduals need in order to survive in a multifaceted community. But we
do all of these in the context of a strengths-based behavioral health
recovery model.
Recently we have been judged by funders on how well we can de-
scribe what we do. A number of young clinicians put activities like
finding housing and getting people to appointments at the center of
how they describe their activities. While these are valuable services,
they are not behavioral health services. We have needed to remind our
staff and ourselves of just what our core mission is. Our clear awareness
that we are a behavioral health organization has helped us satisfy our
funders and make better choices about what new opportunities we want
to pursue.
As we look to the future, we are aware that our identity will need to
change once again. Health care is changing and we need to keep pace
with those changes. We need to integrate behavioral health care with
primary health care services. We now see some of our relationship
building efforts as ways to help people better manage their physical
health. This does not mean that we are changing our core mission or
betraying our values. What it does reflect, however, is that organization-
al awareness has to include an awareness of the context in which the
business exists. This broader awareness will help us make better choices
and clearer decisions as we go forward.
Knowing who you are at both a personal and organizational level is
essential for success. It guides the choices you make, the partners you
seek, and the challenges you assume. Almost every mistake we have
made at Community Connections grew out of our lack of awareness
about what talents and capacities we had. Sometimes we took on too
much and at other times we did not stretch ourselves far enough.
Knowing who we are also helps us to understand our impact on
others. How we are seen has a great impact on the kind of deal we can
negotiate. When we operate from a position of power, we are likely to
come away with a different resolution than when we are seen as fearful

THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF AND ORGANIZATIONAL AWARENESS
131
or damaged. But we are in an even better position when we know how
we are seen and we know how much this matches with our own aware-
ness of who we are. The Trojan horse was seen by the Trojans as a big
wooden structure, a trophy of their triumph over the Greeks. That
mistaken awareness resulted in their pulling the horse inside the gates.
The Greeks inside the horse knew that they would have the advantage if
the horse was pulled inside. As it turned out, the awareness of the
Trojans was mistaken. The Greeks were not only aware of their own
prowess, they were aware of the mistake the Trojans had made and thus
of their own ability to fool the enemy and emerge victorious. To para-
phrase Plato, “the unexamined life” may not only be unworthy of living,
it may also get you into a lot of trouble!3
Despite this justifiable praise for the value of self-awareness, there
is, however, one caveat. It is possible to be too aware. If David had been
aware that his chances of victory were slim, he might not have chal-
lenged the mighty Goliath. It was only his lack of self-awareness that
allowed him to take up his slingshot. There are some risks we might
refuse to take, risks with a high upside, if we were fully aware of the
odds. In the words of the singer-songwriter Bob Seger, “I wish I didn’t
know now what I didn’t know then.”4
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
At one point I decided to give staff a chance to think out loud about
Community Connections and its values. I held a series of meetings in
which I remained silent and let young staff do the talking. The events
were a disaster. Just because I liked to talk and think out loud, I as-
sumed that others would feel the same. I ignored the fact that there was
a great power differential between me and the staff I invited. They were
naturally afraid to voice their thoughts to the boss. And to make matters
worse, I failed to set an agenda for the meeting, thinking that an open-
ended format would be best.
My lack of awareness regarding the potential impact of my behavior
led to a series of tense meetings. Participants left feeling inadequate,
demeaned, and used. They wondered if I had a secret agenda, perhaps
to evaluate their performance. My failure to understand the impact of
my seemingly well-meaning behavior led to months of distrust and the

CHAPTER 7
132
lingering feeling on the part of some that Community Connections was
a hostile organization. One woman in particular was so upset that she
chose to write me a letter after she left Community Connections and
took another job. In the letter she lambasted me for being a smug,
insensitive boss. She said I set the tone for an uncaring and harsh
organization. She was so afraid that I might retaliate that she signed her
letter Anonymous and gave her address as Yankee Stadium. I felt so
ashamed that I have never forgotten that letter.
PUTTING SELF-AWARENESS AT COMMUNITY
CONNECTIONS IN CONTEXT
The fable and preceding case examples address the importance of self-
awareness—both in terms of one’s strengths and one’s weaknesses. In
this final section of the chapter, we highlight the best and latest social
science regarding self-awareness, which is one of the core components
of emotional intelligence. Because people are not generally very accu-
rate in their self-awareness, it limits their likelihood of getting (or ac-
cepting) helpful feedback or of making good choices in terms of their
own learning and development.
There are many ways in which our own well-meaning brains trip us
up when we try to gauge our own skills, abilities, and character. Gener-
ally, there is only a meager to modest correlation between our self-
assessments and others’ assessments of us.5 It is statistically impossible
for the average person to be “above average,” but that its what the
average person believes he or she is. This tendency is quite broad and
general, with applications in health care, education, business, and every
other context.
It has come to be known as the Kruger-Dunning effect—named
after the psychologists credited with the early and most influential work
on it.6 In some of their studies, for example, Kruger and Dunning found
that those in the 12th percentile (on tests of things as varied as humor,
grammar, and logic) estimated that they’d be in the 62nd percentile.7
This basic finding, that poor performers grossly overestimate their per-
formance, has been replicated and extended now numerous times—in
the real world and even with explicit incentives for people to be accu-
rate.

THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF AND ORGANIZATIONAL AWARENESS
133
The challenge of accurate self-assessment seems especially signifi-
cant for those with low ability in a given domain, but the challenge
applies to health professionals and others who would generally be con-
sidered high ability. For example, dozens of studies show that physi-
cians have a limited ability to accurately self-assess. In studies of other
professions (including law, engineering, counseling, and psychology),
the average correlation between self- and external assessments was
0.39. College professors aren’t immune either—94 percent think
they’re above average!8
Correlations between our self-assessments and others’ assessments
of us vary, but are all within a very low band for a wide variety of
outcomes. Across numerous studies and multiple domains, the average
correlation between self-perception and objective measures is less than
0.30.9 In specific domains, the correlations vary but are still quite low.
The exceptions tend to be domains like sports where there is frequent,
more objective feedback. For example, typical correlations between
self- and others’ assessments are shown below:
• .04 for self vs. supervisor ratings of performance on managerial
competence;
• .17 for self vs. supervisor ratings of interpersonal skills;
• .20 for self vs. supervisor performance on complex workplace
tasks;
• .30 for self-assessments vs. tests of intelligence;
• .35 for first year students’ vs. professors’ ratings of their academic
abilities; and,
• .47 for self vs. other ratings in athletic performance.10
Relatively inexperienced peers’ and supervisors’ ratings are better
than students’ own predictions of their performance on medical ex-
ams.11 Peer ratings are better than naval officers’ ratings at predicting
their selection for promotion to leadership roles.12 Somewhat frighten-
ing, even strangers can do nearly as well at predicting our intelligence
(based on only ninety-second video clips of us reading weather reports)
as we can at predicting our own intelligence.13 Taken together, these
statistics are sobering—perhaps triggering an ironic tendency to under-
estimate our tendency to overestimate.

CHAPTER 7
134
Across those studies, the tendency toward poor self-assessment was
not linked to training levels, specialties, or domains of self-assessment.
It also appears to be problematic in retrospect (How accurately do I
judge my past performance?), in the moment (How well can I identify
my current needs or performance deficits?), and in a predictive way
(How well do I predict my future performance?). Poor self-assessment
(and especially overconfidence) is a fundamental barrier to improve-
ment—for individuals, teams, and organizations. If we can’t accurately
assess our strengths and weaknesses, we cannot address them effective-
ly. Before noting ways to defend against these tendencies, we summar-
ize what’s known about their sources.
SOURCES OF THE GAPS IN OUR SELF-ASSESSMENT
Why do others know us better than we know ourselves? Fundamentally,
the gaps in our self-assessment are a function of a lack of information or
our tendency to neglect available information. We lack situational de-
tails and overemphasize our own specific experience (essentially re-
sponding more to our own case example than to the broader statistical
probabilities). We also neglect alternative scenarios, concrete details,
background circumstances, and the lessons of experience.14 Important-
ly for our understanding of life in organizations, these information defi-
cits are the result of workplace feedback that is often infrequent, poorly
timed, threatening, and less than candid. In addition, in many fields, it
is difficult to define competence. The more specific the trait, the better
our self-assessments tend to be.15
WAYS TO ENHANCE THE QUALITY OF OUR SELF-
ASSESSMENTS
It is not easy to overcome our inability to self-assess well, but there are
ways to improve the probability that we size ourselves up in ways that
are more consistent with objective evidence and others’ judgments of
us. Changes in feedback content and processes are the primary means
by which we can improve our self-assessments. First, when we get
feedback closer in time to the behavior that triggered the feedback, it

THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF AND ORGANIZATIONAL AWARENESS
135
has a stronger effect on our self-assessments (and our future behavior).
This recognition has been a factor in large companies’ recent shifts
toward “micro” feedback—given on a daily, weekly, or task basis—
rather than annual or semiannual reviews, when the feedback comes so
long after the behavior that people struggle to incorporate it into their
future actions. Second, the more personalized feedback is, the greater
the effect on people’s self-assessments. For example, when clients re-
ceive data on their individual risk profiles, they tend to be more realistic
about the probability of having a stroke than if they just receive infor-
mation about the general risk factors.16 Third, our self-assessments are
likely to improve when we get feedback from people who are somewhat
removed—and thus more objective—about our work. Pushing people
to pay attention to and give greater weight to environmental signals in
general improves their self-assessments.
Getting useful feedback can be a dyadic undertaking—between the
feedback seeker and the feedback provider—but it can also be some-
thing that is ingrained in the culture of the organization. It can be done
in a way that doesn’t just involve more reviews. Creating 360 degree
review processes have become monsters that consume more time and
energy than their potential benefits warrant. The more that feedback is
done on a small, regular basis, the less cumbersome it is—and the more
likely people will actually give and receive it well. If feedback is only
something that happens in response to major problems, or only hap-
pens on an annual basis, it is less likely that people will give good,
candid feedback, and less likely that people will be able to act on it. The
more that giving and receiving regular feedback (regardless of rank or
status) is part of everyone’s normal expectations—that is, that we ask for
and receive good feedback—and the less we have to formally schedule
it, the more useful it becomes. As with all feedback, the closer in time
that it comes to the work, the more valuable it is for people and groups
who want to improve that work. In addition, the more psychologically
safe the team or organization is, the more likely people will be able to
give, receive, and act on feedback effectively.
When feedback becomes a normal part of the culture, it also helps
the organization stay more generally aware of its environment. See
chapter 6 for a more detailed discussion of environmental awareness.

CHAPTER 7
136
SUGGESTED READINGS
Self-awareness is a topic with fuzzy boundaries and many fields that
shed light on it. Camille Sweeney and Josh Gosfield’s book The Art of
Doing: How Superachievers Do What They Do and How They Do It So
Well (New York: Penguin, 2013) provides an interesting look at people
who got to the top of their fields in part because they did the hard work
of striving to be self-aware. Another good, reflective starting point is the
chapter titled “Self-Awareness,” by former Novartis CEO Daniel Vasel-
la in Gary Burnison’s No Fear of Failure: Real Stories of How Leaders
Deal with Risk and Change (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2011).
Other chapters in that book are instructive as well.
There are many books and articles about how to give and receive
feedback effectively. Doug Stone’s Thanks for the Feedback: The Sci-
ence and Art of Receiving Feedback Well (New York: Penguin, 2015) is
an excellent starting point on the receiving side. Kerry Patterson and
Joseph Grenny’s Crucial Conversations: Tools for Talking When Stakes
Are High (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2012) addresses how to create a
safe environment for effective feedback; so do chapters 5 and 6 in Amy
Edmondson’s excellent Teaming: How Organizations Learn, Innovate,
and Compete in the Knowledge Economy (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass, 2012).

137
8
PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
What’s Next?
Even in a relatively young organization, leaders need to have one eye to
the future. To some it may seem premature, or even downright silly, to
plan for sustaining an organization that has not been fully developed.
But so many founder-run organizations fail to survive into the next
generation. While a full-fledged plan may be unnecessary, understand-
ing what lies ahead is not.
A FABLE: LITTLE ONE NOTE
For years, the clan had lived safely in the valley behind the tall trees of
the forest. There was plenty of space for each family to have its own
lodge and the forest was filled with enough game so that hunting was
easy and a full pot brimmed with stew over every fireplace. There was
never any fighting, because there was more than enough for everyone.
But after a while, as is the case with families, the number of children
multiplied and the space in the valley had to be shared with more and
more people. Families squabbled with one another, mothers grew angry
with their children, and hunters began to question whether neighbors
were poaching deer and rabbits from their part of the forest.
After many years, as the problem grew worse, the chief of the clan
spoke in a loud voice. “Our beloved valley is now too small to hold all of

CHAPTER 8
138
our people. If we are once again to live in peace, we must move to a
larger valley with more plentiful forests. There is such a valley across
the hills, but we will need to walk very far and it will take many days.”
“No! No!” cried the families. “We cannot leave behind all that we
have known and everything that we have built and nurtured. We will
stay here.” But despite their efforts and their attempts to make do, the
problems only grew worse. So once again the chief called his people
together and told them that they must move. This time, some of the
younger clansmen saw the wisdom of his words.
“If we move, we will see new things and face new challenges. We will
become a bigger and stronger clan.”
“Yes! Yes!” others cried. “We will follow our chief and move to the
valley over the hills.” And with that, the members of the clan began to
pack up their belongings and prepare to move. But there was not
enough room on the caravans and wagons; some things would need to
be left behind.
As the families started sorting, and saving and discarding, they also
began remembering all of the ceremonies and joys, all the rituals and
tragedies that had been part of their lives in the valley.
In the midst of all the activity, however, one little girl (who was
known as “Little One Note”) could be heard whimpering. Little One
Note (who was called this because she was always the one to sound the
note of caution whenever a decision needed to be made) came to her
mother with a handful of her dolls and her clothing and the lucky stones
she had collected from the riverbed. “How can I leave without all of my
treasures? It has taken me my whole life to collect them and now I must
leave some behind. Things will never be the same. I just know it!”
Despite Little One Note’s fears and worries, the clan began its pas-
sage from one valley to the next. The journey took longer and was far
harder than anyone had expected, and some valued items were indeed
lost along the way. But when the families began settling into their new
home, they could all see the wisdom of the old chief. All except for Little
One Note, who continued to believe that it would have been better to
stay in the old valley.
For many, many years, the members of the clan lived peacefully,
with much space and plenty of game to hunt. Of course, things were not
exactly as they had been. More space meant that clan members were
more spread out, and it took more effort for children to play with old

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
139
friends and for mothers to share in the chores and the daily gossip. They
also needed more rules, for after all, so many people cannot live together
without rules to keep them safe.
While most of the clan members were happy with life in the bigger
valley, some longed for the simpler life they had known and so they split
off to find a smaller clan where they might return to the old ways. Little
One Note, who was now a grown woman with children of her own,
continued to worry that the clan had made a big mistake.
It is funny how growth seems to lead to more growth, for after many
years, the clan had grown too big for the valley over the hills. When the
same chief, who was now very, very old and who had seen many things,
called his people together, everyone expected him to offer the same
solution as he had before, that the clan must move to yet a bigger valley.
But no . . .
“My people, we have surely grown to be such a large and powerful
clan that we can no longer all live in this valley together. We do not need
to move as one, but we will need to split off a group of our bravest
families and have them build a new village close to the one we already
have. They will become our worthy neighbors and we will trade with
them and join with them to celebrate the coming of each new moon.”
As you might expect, Little One Note fell back with fear and worry.
“I knew it. The chief has made a plan that will destroy our clan. We
have flourished and lived well in this valley. We have learned to trust
and respect one another and now the chief will ruin everything that we
have accomplished.” (Of course Little One Note had completely forgot-
ten that she was the one who had objected to the move to the bigger
valley in the first place.)
It took much planning and discussion, but finally the move of the
chosen families began. Even though they were going only a small dis-
tance away, there were many good-byes to be said and many promises
to be made. They all knew that distance would change things.
Little One Note sat alone with a worried look on her face until her
young daughter came to her side and took her hand, “Why are you
always so fearful and concerned that change will bring tragedy? I do
not understand, dear mother.”
At which point Little One Note broke into a big smile (something she
did not often do). “I will tell you a secret, which you must never repeat.
For generations upon generations, our clan has always had a ‘Little One

CHAPTER 8
140
Note,’ someone to be the voice of caution and warning. Just as singing
and dancing and harvesting and cooking have been our ways, so too is
the voice of ‘Little One Note.’ So hush now and go to sleep, and remem-
ber, it is a secret.”
Organizations need to grow and move and change if they are to survive.
While there are always some, like Little One Note in the fable, who are
afraid of moving on, most of the clan can see the necessity, and even the
adventure, of trying something new. But something new does not mean
that old rituals and values get left behind. The trick to growth and
longevity is to find ways to get bigger, to sustain the organization that
you have, and to plan for a healthy future.
CASE STUDY #1: SCALABILITY
Scalability is the capacity of an organization to expand its core business.
Several factors allowed Community Connections to grow its clinical
services and therefore its revenue from a small three-person operation
into the biggest not-for-profit behavioral health care organization in the
nation’s capital. This scaling up happened in several ways.
We took our core business, providing community-based mental
health services for marginalized individuals, and we just did more of it.
At the beginning we had three employees, thirty-five clients, and one
clinical team. As business increased, we created a second team, and
then a third, and so on until by our thirtieth anniversary, we had upward
of ten teams. But now, the teams consisted of ten case managers and
three hundred clients. In order to maintain the flow of clients, we
streamlined our intake process, adding a specialized department whose
sole responsibility was to make sure that clients could enter our system
easily. We also set up a grievance process so that unhappy clients could
have their concerns addressed, making it likely that they would contin-
ue to receive their services at Community Connections.
But scaling up meant more than just increasing the size of our core
business; the more we worked with individuals, the more we could see
that their needs extended beyond mental health services. They also
needed treatment for addictions, homelessness, chronic unemploy-
ment, the social and behavioral impact of HIV, the long-term effects of

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
141
domestic violence and childhood trauma, and repeated criminal justice
involvement. Our recognition of these additional needs also corre-
sponded to local and national mandates to provide problem-specific
services.
Growth meant adding several new service components that both
overlapped and rivaled our core business. New treatments also meant
new and different clients. We were able to reach out to people being
diverted from the criminal justice system, men and women living in
homeless shelters, and displaced families, among others. The business
grew as we grew our initial mission to serve mental and behavioral
health needs.
As we added new services and became adept at new clinical inter-
ventions, we also recognized that our services need not be limited to
adults. With some modifications, we began providing care to families
and children, and we began to grow as we addressed their special prob-
lems, teenage pregnancy, foster care, the reliance on insufficient enti-
tlement programs, and substandard housing. Without much shift in our
core model, we were in a position to scale up when the opportunity
presented itself.
In order to be in a position to increase our business, we rid our-
selves, or prepared to rid ourselves, of costly administrative services that
we were providing in-house. For example, as residential services be-
came an increasingly large part of our portfolio, we found ourselves
owning almost forty homes and apartment buildings that needed man-
aging. At first we opted to manage these properties in-house, creating a
housing management department that needed staff and access to
equipment and specialized craftsmen and assumed the risk for property
damage. When we purchased a new property, the management depart-
ment had to learn the ins and outs of how to manage the new building.
They had to assess the repairs needed and the amenities required, as
well as the permits necessary to occupy the building. There were times
when this process took months. By divesting ourselves of the task of
managing property, we were able to move much more nimbly when we
wanted to add new properties to our existing portfolio.
The ability to scale up quickly also meant that we needed partners,
collaborators who would bring new capacities and new funding streams
into our organization. For the most part, those partners were univer-
sities or other public clinics. We partnered with Dartmouth University

CHAPTER 8
142
to design a program for adults dually diagnosed with a mental illness
and a substance abuse disorder, and together we applied for and were
awarded federal grant money that ranged from $500,000 to $2.5 million
over several years. It was amazing how quickly we could grow our
business with new money and a new level of expertise, and money
seemed to breed more money. Over time, we became known as an
organization that could ramp up services quickly and deliver a quality
product.
Two other variables that may seem less related to our clinical ser-
vices facilitated our ability to grow quickly: the use of space and the use
of personnel. When Community Connections first opened, clinicians
worked in individual, separate offices whenever possible. That meant
having one office for every clinician hired. As time went on, offices
were shared by two clinicians, but in essence adding services meant
adding clinicians and adding clinicians meant adding office space,
which is a very costly way to grow. It became obvious that this model
was unsustainable. We could never afford all the space we would need.
At the suggestion of an architect, we moved away from individual of-
fices. Clinicians shared open space with computers and cubicles placed
on moveable workstations. Adding staff frequently required the addi-
tion of no new space at all, and staff were encouraged to share informal
conversations, which meant that many clinicians had information that
would allow them to serve the same client. Services could take place
even when the primary clinician was out of the office, making overall
practice more efficient.
Changing who we hired also made it easier for us to scale up quickly.
Initially, Community Connections only hired licensed clinicians: social
workers, psychologists, and counselors. These practitioners were expen-
sive, at times difficult to find, and sometimes frustrated with the tedi-
ousness of the work. A closer look at some of our contracts suggested
that we could easily provide the services with less highly trained staff.
This did not mean that we would sacrifice quality; what it did mean,
however, was that we would hire young staff, often recent college grad-
uates, who were eager to learn and passionate about serving people who
had multiple needs. We would still hire some more trained, licensed
staff, but only for those positions that required specialized skills. This
shift in hiring philosophy meant that we always had a large pool of

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
143
applicants from which to choose and could therefore start new pro-
grams quickly.
And finally, Community Connections was able to grow quickly be-
cause it got lucky. It just so happened to open its doors during a time of
little competition. There were very few other organizations interested
in working with the same group of clients. When new opportunities
arose, Community Connections was often the only organization ready
to take them on.
CASE STUDY #2: SUSTAINABILITY
It is one thing to be able to grow quickly, but it is quite another to be
able to sustain that growth into the future. Several different variables
contributed to Community Connections’s longevity.
Responding to the “Winds of Change”
In every business environment, there are forces outside of the business
that bring about sweeping change. For Community Connections,
change came every time an election brought in a new municipal admin-
istration that held the power to change behavioral health priorities.
Over the course of several years, the emphasis shifted from working
with chronically mentally ill individuals, to finding supportive housing
for homeless men and women, to working with families and children,
and then back again. An organization needed to understand the chang-
ing priorities and be ready to provide new services quickly. This did not
mean that we abandoned old priorities, but it did mean that we ac-
cepted, and at times even embraced, change.
The environment also changed as new competitors came into the
market. We could no longer assume that all the business would come
our way. By forging relationships, joining in partnerships with other
providers, and quite frankly listening to gossip, we were able to adapt to
a changing environment before new priorities made our business obso-
lete.

CHAPTER 8
144
Expanding the Focus of Care
When it first opened, Community Connections’s services were focused
on single adults. The first wave of clients were coming out of institu-
tions where they had been accustomed to receiving full service care—
psychiatric and physical care all in one place. Community Connections,
however, was only mandated to provide behavioral and mental health
services in order to help people live independently and better cope with
stressful circumstances. The focus was on single individuals and on
psychiatric symptoms. Any attention to physical health was pushed into
the background. It was as if the client had been split into two halves, a
mental self and a physical self.
By the mid to late 1990s, the focus within the health care system
began to shift and practitioners were beginning to see the client as a
whole person.1 Community Connections had been a pioneer in seeing
people as having multiple issues in multiple domains simultaneously—a
trauma survivor with an addiction, someone with depression who was
also homeless, and a variety of other comorbidities, but we, like many
behavioral health care providers, kept mental and physical health separ-
ate.
The explosion of the AIDS epidemic eventually pushed many pro-
viders to see that physical health had serious mental health conse-
quences. Community Connections applied for grants that specifically
targeted people with mental and behavioral health problems who were
also living with HIV or AIDS. But Community Connections went much
further and adopted a more whole person approach to client care. Ef-
forts were made to provide primary health care onsite for Community
Connections clients and to open a pharmacy in the organization’s main
building. Relationships were forged with primary care providers and
eventually a coordinated service model emerged. Community Connec-
tions’s ability to recognize that the focus of care was moving toward an
integrated model allowed it to grow and expand at a time when some of
its competitors were contracting. As local and national mandates began
to focus on integrating care, Community Connections was poised to
scale its operations up because it had already seen and been prepared
for a shift in focus from strict mental health services to whole person
services.

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
145
Building a Strong Bench
In order to survive, any organization needs to have a farm system,
people at different levels with emerging skills who are ready to assume
leadership. This move into positions of greater authority may happen
quickly, as when someone leaves unexpectedly, or gradually, as an exist-
ing supervisor assumes a new position at the organization. Community
Connections nurtured its bench in two different ways. First, we created
a junior leadership position on all of the teams that served high need
clients. The junior leader spent up to a year learning the activities of the
job and preparing to assume full leadership. When a junior leader was
promoted, another clinician was selected to take their place, so at any
one time there was a pipeline of trained people who could became
supervisors.
The organization also selected twenty people who seemed to have
the skills to assume greater programmatic and organizational respon-
sibility and sent them to a three-month certificate program at George-
town University that focused on executive leadership. Each of the twen-
ty staff had a chance to learn and practice the skills they would need to
be supervisors, managers, and leaders at Community Connections. In
order to sustain the organization long after founders and original direc-
tors retired, Community Connections put effort into ensuring that it
would have the necessary talent to go forward and meet new challenges.
Investing in the Next Best Thing
An organization cannot sustain itself by doing the same thing over and
over again. While Community Connections devoted time and energy to
establishing its brand, providing local and national training, and devel-
oping marketable products, it probably did more for its long-term vi-
ability by being able to discern the next best thing—the innovation that
would open up the market to new businesses. There were several times
when this happened—recognizing the value of peer-delivered services,
seeing the impact that trauma and violence had across generations, and
embracing the movement to integrate primary and behavioral health
care.
In each case, the organization took the risk of investing personnel,
space, and resources into a business that was not yet generating money.

CHAPTER 8
146
In the case of integrated care, we were so sure that health care was
headed in that direction that we invested in a program that went a year
without reaching profitability. Obviously, you have to know when you
have made a poor investment and when it is time to pull resources out
of a venture that is not succeeding, but taking risks, betting on the
future, is one way in which Community Connections has been able to
sustain its growth.
Staying True to the Organization’s Core Mission and Values
With the change in reimbursement model, leadership struggled with
how to reconcile our core mission of providing care to marginalized
individuals with the necessity to make enough money to fund our ef-
forts. The phrase “No margin, no mission” has been repeated so many
times that its origin with Sister Irene Kraus of the Daughters of Charity
and eventual chairperson of the American Hospital Association Board
of Trustees has probably been forgotten.2 But the phrase was intended
to show how smart business practices did not mean sacrificing one’s
mission; in fact, mission could not exist without good fiscal manage-
ment.
It took quite an effort to convince staff at Community Connections
that we could remain true to our identity while still paying attention to
making money. Eventually top leadership came up with a paradigm that
connected clinical thinking with good care and with practical applica-
tion. Called Think (T) Clinically (C) Act (A) Practically (P), TCAP
helped young, idealistic staff see how direct care could be viewed as a
billable clinical activity. Teaching clinicians how to operate within a
TCAP framework became part of staff orientation and eventually part
of the culture of Community Connections. Senior leadership also
brought in a financial consultant to help managers understand how
balanced budgets were critical to being able to deliver and sustain qual-
ity care.
It would be misleading to say that all staff bought into the TCAP
model and the focus on maintaining billable hours. Some left, believing
that Community Connections had lost its way. But most embraced the
idea that our mission remained constant and that without a solid fiscal
foundation our mission would soon disappear like a cloud on a windy
day.

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
147
CASE STUDY #3: SUCCESSION
When Harris and Bergman opened Community Connections in 1984,
succession was the last thing on their minds. They were in their mid-
thirties, had an organization to run, and just assumed that Community
Connections would go on and then one day it wouldn’t. Bergman used
to joke that one day she would just sneak out the back door, leaving her
good-bye cake on the conference room table, and that would be the end
of that.
The board consisted of family and two close friends and their collec-
tive goal was to help the founders be successful, not to help them plan
for what would happen when they stepped down. After the sudden
death of Bergman in the summer of 2011, it became obvious that a
more active board with subcommittees to deal with finance and hiring
were essential. New board members were added, bringing specialized
expertise to help guide the remaining CEO in making better decisions
for the organization. Attorneys were also engaged to establish policies
and procedures for board functioning.
Senior leadership also received guidance and rewrote policies and
procedures detailing how the organization should be run. Policy manu-
als were written and standard practices were established in the human
resources and quality assurance departments. The goal was to ensure
that Community Connections would have a solid structure that would
allow it to survive regardless of who was running the organization.
Two of the things that were most difficult involved establishing an
organizational chart for the organization and writing a clear job descrip-
tion for the CEO. In founder-run businesses, there is a laissez-faire
attitude that almost borders on sloppiness. Who reports to whom may
vary frequently, with little rationale for why things have changed. At
one point, Community Connections had a chart that stretched out over
a fourth of the CEO’s office. The number of horizontal and vertical
lines made it hard to understand just how departments were organized.
Only with the help of outside coaches did the senior management de-
vise a true organizational chart, but even then the resistance was palpa-
ble. An organizational chart is essential for CEO succession planning,
and it may be best to get outside help for accomplishing the task. Only
someone who can stand at a fifty foot altitude may be able to see what is
really going on.

CHAPTER 8
148
What is even more difficult perhaps is writing a job description for
the CEO. Founders often run by the seat of their pants. They do a little
bit of everything and like to know what is going on in all sectors of the
organization. At Community Connections, we had set up a structure
that would be hard to replicate. The two founders divided the functions
of running the organization between themselves. The division was
based on who could do certain tasks better and who liked to do certain
things more. A real assessment of the skills involved in running differ-
ent aspects of the business was never done. It was a model that would
have been hard to replicate.
Serious CEO succession planning requires a clear job description, a
delineation of necessary skills, a method for evaluating those skills, and
a procedure for actual hiring. There is a reason why the U.S. govern-
ment has a reliable and predictable plan for succession should some-
thing happen to the president. Within a matter of minutes, the vice
president is sworn in. No one needs to fear anarchy and chaos. Even
though the political analogy may seem a bit hyperbolic, the truth is,
planning and structure prevent the populace (employees) from panick-
ing.
These words may sound a bit frightening, but every founder-run
organization needs a “drop dead” plan. What happens if, as it did at
Community Connections, a founder dies suddenly? There is no time to
train or interview a new candidate for the position of CEO. Someone
needs to be identified who will step in to run the organization while a
new person is hired. This did not mean that we would have several
CEOs-in-waiting, but it did mean that many people would have a good
understanding of how the organization and its many parts fit together
and people at every level would have input into how the organization
should run.
The senior management began to share knowledge. As new policies
were put into place within the city and important decisions about health
care were being made, it was essential that more of Community Con-
nections key staff be involved. Never again would important informa-
tion be held by just a few.
Community Connections began to operate with more of a senior
leadership team. Several staff, at all levels of the organization, were
involved in decision making. Discussion forums known as “All Minds
Matter” were held weekly with membership set up outside of team

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
149
boundaries so that more people got to know one another. These groups
were designed to solicit ideas from multiple staff members.
All staff would be introduced to the administrative personnel who
operated behind the scenes to keep Community Connections running
smoothly. For example, a member of the IT team collaborated with a
member of the addictions program to facilitate a better practice for
reporting services. And a staff member from the day services program
met with the head of quality assurance to design a program that would
reduce risk at the organization. As hard as it is to believe, these depart-
ments had rarely talked with one another before.
Fortunately for Community Connections, a new spirit began to
emerge. It was very similar to the can-do optimism that characterized
Community Connections in its infancy. We rediscovered the power of
why we had started Community Connections in the first place. The
mission that infused the start of Community Connections was passed to
a new generation of leaders with the hope that they had the tools to pass
it forward after their time of leadership was done.
Like the two girls in the story, Community Connections’s success
has come from acknowledging the complexity in the growing organiza-
tion itself, appreciating the changes in the outside world, and adapting
to both. As the girls in the fable from chapter 1 say, “There will always
be new games to play” and new challenges to overcome.
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
At the time of his son’s death in the spring of 2016, then vice president
Joe Biden commented that success was when your children turn out
better than you.3 I guess if Community Connections exceeded the early
expectations that Helen and I set out for it, we could consider the
organization and ourselves as having achieved success. But for many
years we did not feel that way. We individually and together did not
want Community Connections to be better after we had gone than it
was when we were running things.
When Helen would talk about slipping out the back door as we
retired, she also remarked that the place would slip into a comfortable
mediocrity without us. I don’t think that this is what she wanted or what

CHAPTER 8
150
I hoped for; she just assumed that would be the reality—an era would
come to an end and that would be okay.
It took a while after Helen’s death for me to realize that mediocrity
was not what I wanted to leave behind. Biden was right; my success
would indeed be measured by how creative and forward thinking the
organization was after I left. It was with that realization that I set out to
nurture a core of new leaders who would take the organization in new
directions—directions that were called for by a new future. Their suc-
cess would ultimately be the best success that I could ask for.
PUTTING SCALABILITY, SUSTAINABILITY, AND
SUCCESSION AT COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS IN
CONTEXT
The fable and cases in the preceding sections address three fundamen-
tal issues: scalability, sustainability, and succession. In this section, we
put those three issues in their broader context—highlighting some of
the latest research on each. Note that sustainability in this sense refers
to the long-run survival of the organization, not its environmental prac-
tices.
Scalability
In addition to succession and sustainability, this chapter’s fable and first
case study address the issue of scaling and scalability of organizations.
In short, this refers to the process and ability of organizations to expand
their existing model to serve a broader audience of clients or customers.
In the process, the model may need to change some, but our focus here
is on taking a basic model and extending its reach, rather than develop-
ing new models for new audiences.
Whereas success early in an organization’s life is often based on the
talents of a charismatic leader and/or visionary entrepreneur, growing
beyond early success is a function of organizational infrastructure and
financial resources. Organizationally, teamwork, focus, and metrics are
crucial. Financially, the organization must be generating enough capital
to grow, or must be stable enough to convince others to invest their
capital to support its growth.

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
151
Of the organizational and financial keys to scaling success identified
by Bob Sutton, Huggy Rao, and others, several are especially relevant to
organizations like Community Connections.4 First, doing more means
doing less. Adding resources is not the only recipe for growth. This
paradox is central to growing any organization. In order to scale, organ-
izations have to focus and—sometimes—trim. Giving up traditions built
during the early days and cutting ties with early employees, customers,
and other constituents can be extremely difficult, but it’s also necessary.
For leadership teams, being able to say “We need to do more of X”
requires being able to say “And we will make that possible partly by
doing less of Y.”
Second, create a sense of ownership and being owned. If early em-
ployees feel like they are owners, buy into the founding mindset, and
hold themselves and others accountable to clear goals and metrics (in-
cluding ones that reinforce core organizational values), the resulting
culture can scale. As noted in chapter 1, a strong but flexible culture is
the graphene of organizational success. In order to be successful, an
ownership mindset needs to permeate the organization and its culture.
Third, remember that as fantastic as an organization’s founding vi-
sion might be, “what got you here won’t get you there” (to paraphrase
management coach and author Marshall Goldsmith).5 In the Commu-
nity Connections case, the initial approach to service delivery was a
quantum leap over what was available elsewhere, but competitors and
other models emerged. Only with the addition of a more holistic ap-
proach to service delivery (and other changes along the way) could
Community Connections survive. As great as those ideas were when
first implemented, they would be the 35mm film of photography to-
day—functional but not competitive in the open market.
Sustainability
Most entrepreneurs define sustainability in months or years; some de-
fine it in terms of getting to a buy-out of their IPO. Beyond that early-
stage, short-term perspective, it is a long way to the centurion status of
companies that have been in business for at least a hundred years.6
Such firms have been the subject of competing business bestsellers,
such as Built to Last: Successful Habits of Visionary Companies (Jim
Collins and Jerry Porras, 1998)7 and Creative Destruction: Why Com-

CHAPTER 8
152
panies That Are Built to Last Underperform the Market—And How to
Successfully Transform Them (Richard Foster and Sarah Kaplan, 2000).
Data suggest that destruction is “winning.” As noted by various analy-
ses, fewer than one-fifth of Fortune 500 companies in business in 1955
were still running fifty-five to sixty years later.8 Furthermore, as the
BBC News’s Kim Gittelson has noted, the average lifespan of S&P 500
companies dropped from sixty-seven years in the 1920s to fifteen years
in 2012.9
According to the Small Business Administration, small businesses
also tend to be short-lived with only one-third surviving ten years or
more.10 However, small to medium size and tight ownership (often
family based) are two characteristics of long-lived organizations. Fur-
thermore, small businesses seem to survive for different reasons than
large ones. Large firms need to grow to survive; small firms sustain
themselves by careful attention to local resources and demand.11
In between the star bursts, flameouts, and the centurions are what
David Whorton has called “evergreens.” They are organizations that
“are led by purpose-driven leaders with the grit and resourcefulness to
build and scale private, profitable, enduring, and market-leading busi-
nesses that make a dent in the universe.”12 Technology company Ever-
note and its CEO Phil Libin are a good example. He “had this idea of
trying to make a hundred-year startup. We decided to take it seriously
[which] basically means that there is no short-term.”13
Although the “evergreen movement” has focused on for-profit en-
trepreneurial ventures, Community Connections fits squarely in the
evergreen category. Research on such firms is scarce, but Whorton
characterizes them as having strong doses of seven Ps:
1. Purpose—passionately driven by a compelling vision and mission
2. Perseverance—the ambition and the resilience to overcome ob-
stacles
3. People First—comprised of a talented team motivated by mis-
sion, culture, and compensation, which takes care of the business,
customers, suppliers, and community
4. Private—enabling a longer-term view and more operating flex-
ibility
5. Profit—the measuring of success that is the most accurate gauge
of customer value

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
153
6. Paced Growth—focused on long-term strategy and steady, con-
sistent growth
7. Pragmatic Innovation—continuous improvement based on calcu-
lated risks
Although it is a nonprofit and has not always had a long-term strate-
gy, Community Connections has had purpose, perseverance, people,
and pragmatism as central, defining attributes since its early days. Being
private has facilitated that—both in terms of its separation from govern-
ment and from the markets.
The fields of strategy, business history, and organizational ecology
are all concerned with sustainability and firm longevity. There is no one
explanation or answer to the question of why some organizations sur-
vive and others don’t. There also isn’t a consensus about whether lon-
gevity is a good thing per se. Being old as an organization isn’t necessar-
ily associated with performing well or being “fit”—it might just mean
being conservative, small, and staying off competitors’ radar.
Recognizing that lack of consensus, some of the most recent re-
search focuses on how plant and animal models can be applied to busi-
nesses—given that animal and plant species and human organizations
both are inherently complex adaptive systems. Drawing on work in
biology, there appear to be three structural principles, which have to do
with the design of systems, and three managerial principles, which have
to do with the application of intelligence.14
As with most things in complex organizations, the principles are
somewhat in tension, with managers needing to make complex trade-
offs among them. The structural principles include diversity (to ensure
sufficient diversity of people, ideas, and innovations), redundancy, and
modularity (to buffer against shocks and prevent shocks in one part of
the system from crippling the whole). The managerial principles in-
clude prudence (to reduce risk), embeddedness (to foster trust and reci-
procity), and adaptation (to monitor and adjust to the changing envi-
ronment). These principles overlap to a considerable degree with oth-
ers based on analyses of large companies’ survival.15
As noted earlier, Community Connections’s longevity is attributable
in part to its ability to adapt to new municipal governments, new com-
petitors, and new business models. Its focus on developing a strong
bench is a good example of the diversity and redundancy principles in

CHAPTER 8
154
practice. Prudence and embeddedness are manifest in Community
Connections’s sound, mission-driven financial management and close
ties to its community (enshrined in the organization’s name itself). Jim
Dewald and Brett Wilson would boil these six principles down to a
single one—a perennially entrepreneurial mindset.16 To the extent that
they are correct, Community Connections has tried to stay one step
ahead in terms of treatment models, holistic approaches to care, and
the integration of services throughout its life.
Succession
For organizations to be sustainable across an evergreen (if not centu-
rion) time horizon, they must think about the transition of responsibility
from founder/s to others and about succession planning more generally.
As noted above, the survival rates are low for small and large firms alike,
and family-run businesses (with which Community Connections shares
some key characteristics) rarely survive past the third generation of
leadership. Research shows that succession planning is one approach to
countering these statistics, but there is often resistance to succession
planning especially by first-generation family firm leaders and, by ex-
tension, founders of other firms.17 There is also evidence that the bene-
fits of succession planning are greater in the first generation/founder
stage of firms’ growth than in the second or third generations. At Com-
munity Connections, the need to focus on succession planning became
painfully clear with the unexpected death of one of its founders.
The advice literature about succession planning/management is ex-
tensive. The research regarding succession (especially of CEOs) is ex-
tensive too, but the core findings are somewhat limited and often equiv-
ocal.18 The practice of succession planning has generally taken the form
of a relay, where the baton gets handed to a specified heir, or a horse-
race, where multiple heirs compete. In more complicated processes, at
organizations like General Electric and Proctor & Gamble, senior exec-
utives maintain ranked lists of potential successors and regularly revisit
them and their performance.19 Ultimately, succession planning needs to
be the joint responsibility of both the CEO and the board. Without
such planning and board involvement in it, organizations risk losing
stability, direction, staff focus, retention of current (and potential fu-
ture) leaders, as well as generating conflict. In contrast, despite resis-

PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
155
tance to it, succession planning can foster collaboration and minimize
power struggles. In fact, one study of succession notes that “leaders who
are willing to contemplate their retirement and engage in succession
planning may be most motivated to grow a firm that is worthy of succes-
sion”—an effect referred to as the “shadow of succession.’”20
Although there are many approaches to succession planning, four
practices are consistently cited as critical across sectors: (1) leadership
development and retention, (2) organizational assessment, (3) clarifica-
tion of organization direction, and (4) alignment between strategy and
goals.21 Among other tactics that leaders can use is a time-limited leave
of absence (e.g., three months) well before their scheduled transition.
Such a leave can allow the outgoing leader and current management to
test their readiness for the handoff.22
SUGGESTED READINGS
There are many good resources regarding succession, but several of the
best include Kelin E. Gersick, John A. Davis, Marion McCollom
Hampton, and Ivan Lansberg, Generation to Generation: Life Cycles of
the Family Business (Boston, MA: HBS Press, 1997); Noel Tichy, Suc-
cession: Mastering the Make-or-Break Process of Leadership Transition
(New York: Portfolio, 2014); David Whorton, “The Evergreen Move-
ment: An Emerging Model for Purpose-Driven Entrepreneurs,” Sep-
tember 2, 2015, https://www.tugboatinstitute.com/the-evergreen-move-
ment/; and Tim Wolfred, Building Leaderful Organizations: Succession
Planning for Nonprofits (Annie E. Casey Foundation Executive Transi-
tion Monograph Series, 6, 2008).
For a solid summary of the literature on organizational sustainability,
see Jim Dewald and W. Brett Wilson, Achieving Longevity: How Great
Firms Prosper through Entrepreneurial Thinking (Toronto: Rotman-
UTP Publishing, 2016); Arie De Geus, The Living Company: Habits for
Survival in a Turbulent Business World (Boston, MA: HBS Press,
1997); Danny Miller and Isabelle Le Breton-Miller, Managing for the
Long Run: Lessons in Competitive Advantage from Great Family Busi-
nesses (Cambridge, MA: HBS Press, 2005); and Christian Stadler, En-
during Success: What We Can Learn from the History of Outstanding
Corporations (Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press, 2011).

CHAPTER 8
156
For two more extended treatments of how to scale nonprofits and
for-profits, respectively, see Kathleen Kelly Janus, Breakthrough: How
the Best Social Startups Scale Up to Change the World (forthcoming);
and Bob Sutton and Huggy Rao, Scaling Up Excellence: Getting to
More Without Settling for Less (New York: Crown, 2014).

157
CONCLUSION
Just as every story has an ending, so too does every book. In Lessons for
Nonprofit and Start-Up Leaders: Tales from a Reluctant CEO, we have
tried to tell the story of one organization, Community Connections, and
to outline its journey from small start-up to successful social services
organization. But we could never have shared all the lessons that were
learned over more than three decades, nor could we have articulated all
of the issues that any growing organization might face.
Nonprofit organizations like Community Connections are sustained
by a shared desire to make the world a better place, whether that is by
finding permanent shelter for people living without a stable home, or by
working to make the air we breathe cleaner and safer, or by helping
endangered animals survive for another generation and beyond. These
organizations start with an idea, a mission, but they must learn how to
become a business if they are to survive.
The lessons in this book take new CEOs from idea and inspiration,
through very pragmatic processes like hiring and interacting with the
world outside the organization. And they remind those who start with a
sense of their own uniqueness that others have studied and researched
and observed organizations like theirs. Remember the first time that
you fell in love and you could not imagine that anyone in the whole
world had ever felt the way you did—well, just as it wasn’t so then, it
isn’t so now. Others have been there and there is much to learn from
their experiences.

CONCLUSION
158
The lessons in this book are not only relevant for those in the non-
profit world, they apply just as well to inventors, or contractors, or store
owners. Everyone has to struggle with who’s in charge, whom to hire,
and how to plan for the future. For some small companies, the future is
a buyout by a bigger company, but for many, there is a desire to grow
into an ever more sustainable and successful organization or business,
to create something that will survive beyond those who were there at
the beginning.
So we take the lessons learned and conclude this book with a fable
that just might lead the way into the future.
A FINAL FABLE: WE ARE THE LITTLE BOWLS
In a small village, set between two rivers, the villagers never needed to
worry about the supply of water. Each river flowed freely and each
supplied the needs of those who lived on its banks. One day, however, a
curious event occurred. One of the two rivers began to run dry. What
had once been a flowing stream of fresh water was now a hardened
riverbed with dry cracks and brown banks that only served to remind
villagers of what they had lost.
At first the people on what became known as the dry side of town
merely lamented the loss of their beautiful river, but soon they became
aware that their supply of water was running dangerously low. No
longer were the children seen jumping happily in puddles, nor were the
women hanging freshly washed clothing on the lines that hung limp in
their yards. The villagers began to worry that there might not be enough
water to drink. Without water, there would soon be no life on the dry
side of town.
In their desperation, the elders of the dry side turned to their coun-
trymen and women who lived on what become known as the flowing
side of town. Since the two groups had once been part of the same big
family, they maintained a spirit of cooperation and friendship. Together
they thought and thought about what might be done. Finally the leader
of the flowing side offered a plan. She would take a very large bowl, one
that had been used in clan ceremonies for many years, and dip it into
the healthy flowing river that still nourished her side of town. Once the
bowl was filled, she would carry it across the whole town—from river-

CONCLUSION
159
bank to riverbank—to a large well on the other side. When the well was
full, it would supply all the needs of the villagers on the dry side.
With eagerness and a light step, the leader began her long trek from
one side of the village to the other. When she was halfway through her
journey, she noticed something odd. The large bowl now contained half
as much water as when she started. She put the bowl down and looked
carefully around, and then she noticed it, a very small hole on one side
of the bowl. “Well that solves that,” she thought, “I will just walk twice
as fast and then I will get to the other side before all the water has
leaked out.”
But no matter how fast she walked, the water was faster than she
was, and each time she arrived at the dry side of town with no water at
all left in her bowl.
She put her bowl down and sat by the side of the road and thought
and thought. “Perhaps I am just too old and slow to make the trip. If I
just found someone younger and faster, she might be able to cross the
village with a full bowl of water.” She looked at all the young women
and girls in the village and found the fastest and strongest to take up the
task.
The young woman was confident that she could do what the old
leader could not; after all, she was strong and swift. She filled the bowl
to the very top and began her run. The faster she went, the more confi-
dent she became, but she went so fast that she did not see a rock jutting
out from the ground. As she tripped and fell, she was forced to watch as
all the cool water splashed over her shiny boots.
“Let me try again,” she demanded, but this time she felt herself being
pushed back by the force of a strong wind. She fell, crumpled and
breathless, to the ground. Everyone knows that it is impossible to fight
against the power of the wind. Yet she insisted on trying one more time.
But once more she failed to carry the water to the other side of town.
The young woman saw the disappointment and fear on the faces of the
villagers and then she cast the bowl aside. “This must be a trick,” she
shouted, “no one can reach the other side with water still in the bowl, no
one.”
The villagers looked at one another and began to despair that the
task was, in fact, just too hard. The young woman was right and the
people on the dry side would either have to move or surely die of thirst.

CONCLUSION
160
Then the leader heard a small voice, at first so indistinct that it
sounded like no more than the wind whistling in the tree branches. But
the voice persisted, “Come, dear sister, and I will tell you what you must
do. First, you must put the big bowl down. Even though it has the most
beautiful colors and a perfect round shape, it was never intended for
carrying water all the way across town.” The voice that was once soft
and muted now spoke with force and authority, commanding the old
woman to reach over and pick up a small object resting by her side.
“Here, see this little bowl; it is firm and dry and solid. If you fill this
bowl with water, you will be able to carry it to the other side without
losing a single drop.”
Although she was not accustomed to listening to voices that came
from outside of her own heart, the old woman had to confess that all of
her own ideas had failed. So, with a growing sense of doubt, she filled
the little bowl and walked carefully to the other side of town. And to her
delight and to the cheers of the villagers, when she arrived her bowl was
still filled with water. She poured the water into the big well and before
she could even catch her breath, she turned around and began to make
the trip again and again and again. By the end of the evening, she had
made great progress and the well was almost half full. But the woman
was quite exhausted and she thought to herself, “I have done a good job
and I have helped to save my brothers and sisters, but I cannot make
this trip every day. It is just too hard for me.”
Then she heard the voice once again, “You have heard my voice and
taken my advice, but you have mistaken my meaning. Of course you are
tired. It is much too hard for any one person to satisfy the needs of all
the villagers; many will need to help.” Just then, the old woman saw a
pile of little bowls and she had an idea. She gave one little bowl to each
of the waiting villagers, and one by one she filled each of their little
bowls with cool water. Together they walked across the town, and with
just one trip they filled the entire well to the top.
As they finished pouring the water, they began to shout and dance,
“We are the little bowls, we are the little bowls!” And everyone on both
sides of town was happy for a very long time.

CONCLUSION
161
A PERSONAL NOTE FROM MAXINE
Over the years, as a therapist and a student of individual development,
I, like many others, have thought about the stages of life. In the early
1990s I wrote a book, Down from the Pedestal, on the stages of a
woman’s life and chronicled how women moved through at least three
distinct phases in their adult lives. In her late teens and twenties, a
woman bursts with boundless energy. She has been referred to by some
mythologists as a “lady of free and untamed nature.” For the young
woman, everything seems possible and no challenge seems too big.
That was just how Helen and I felt as we embarked on the project that
came to be known as Community Connections. If we had realized all
that we might face, we might well have turned back, but it was that
young woman’s naive enthusiasm that propelled us forward.
As a woman reaches the middle of her life, the themes and the
challenges change. And so it was with Helen and me. We had birthed a
new organization, and now we had to help it grow. I know the analogies
with motherhood are obvious, but that is the way it is and it would have
been the same if we had been two men. Founding an organization is not
the end of the story. You have to tend it, nourish it, and help it sustain
itself through hard times. We learned over more than thirty years what
we needed to do to make things right and all the ways we could make
things go wrong. It is often said that we learn our best lessons from the
mistakes we make and that was certainly true for Helen and me.
Helen and I would fantasize that when we retired, we would sit on
the porch in two matching rocking chairs and remember all that we had
been through. We would have laughed, and sighed, and shaken our
heads. Helen never made it to that porch, but rocking and remember-
ing and putting things in perspective are the challenges that men and
women face as they look back on their accomplishments. As Commu-
nity Connections moved into its fourth decade, the time came to look
back, not to stop looking forward, but to look back and understand what
had been created and what could be left behind.
I could have told this story myself, as somewhat of a personal me-
moir, but Michael has helped to make it so much more. My story is not
solely mine. It exists in the context of other similar stories. Helen and I
painted our picture, but Michael reminds us that there are only so many
colors on the palette.

CONCLUSION
162
WHERE IS COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS NOW?
As it enters its fourth decade, some things about Community Connec-
tions are the same as they were when it opened its doors in 1984. It still
provides behavioral and mental health services, and still provides hous-
ing for the homeless and recovery programs for people with addictions.
Community Connections continues to do research and test out new
models of care, and it addresses the mental health needs of children
and families. But it has not remained static; it has added new programs:
primary health care and pharmacy services; testing and counseling for
people with HIV; and supported employment for transitioning youth,
people leaving the criminal justice system, and those who have never
been employed.
Perhaps the most obvious change is that Community Connections is
bigger. It serves one hundred times more people, employs over a hun-
dred times more staff, and occupies much more space. It has spread to
all parts of the District of Columbia, including, in 2016, to the poorest
ward, “the ward across the bridge.”
However, something far more important has changed, and that is
how the organization sees itself when it looks in the mirror. The name
“Community Connections” embodied the idea that helping people con-
nect to existing communities was its primary mission, and that is still
true. But there is a new realization that Community Connections has
become its own community, shifting wherever possible to referring to
the people who receive services as “people,” rather than as “patients” or
“clients.” Language has a powerful impact and words that emphasize
similarity rather than difference say loud and clear that we are all part
of the same community. As the song says, “We Are the World.”
Community Connections has been a leader in including peers (peo-
ple who have been through similar experiences themselves) in the work
of recovery. For years, the addictions movement has looked within its
own ranks for healing. Community Connections now employs peers in
every aspect of its programming. Families help families; abused women
reach out to one another; people in crisis learn from others who have
gone through the same struggles. Health care is not only delivered by
professionals but is also supported by peers who work toward building a
community of healthy people. In 1972, songwriter Bill Withers wrote
the classic “Lean on Me.” We will all need someone to lean on at some

CONCLUSION
163
time in our lives, so we should reach out and offer a hand to those who
are in need now, and peers do that best.
Just as Community Connections is a community, it also belongs to a
community. Community is connection. Programs to reach out to local
neighbors and businesses, to partner with developers and community
organizers, to reach out to the courts and the schools and the local
police department all speak to the recognition that we only thrive when
we realize that we are all in this together. And as Community Connec-
tions has reached out to neighbors and local businesses, they have
reached back, bringing opportunity for collaboration and acceptance
with them. Even campaign and corporate slogans in 2016 argued for
connection. The Democrats appealed for us to be stronger together,
and Apple celebrated Christmas with a television ad showing people in
a quaint town welcoming a Frankenstein character with an appeal to
open our hearts to everyone. Even the energy giant Koch Industries
initiated a campaign to “end the divide” that separated people.
A growing commitment to community has opened the organization
to understanding the role that social justice plays in furthering the core
business. Community Connections recognizes that poverty and discrim-
ination and stigma have all made recovery from psychiatric and behav-
ioral problems more difficult. And it now raises money for school sup-
plies and school uniforms for disadvantaged children, obtains govern-
ment subsidies for housing homeless people, provides training opportu-
nities and jobs for peers who want to move into the mental health field,
supports mothers who receive welfare benefits, and provides food for
the holidays to those in need. The organization works within the crimi-
nal justice system to provide behavioral health services as an alternative
to incarceration, especially for young offenders.
Community Connections has moved beyond solely providing behav-
ioral and mental health services. When you drop a pebble in the lake,
the ripples spread out in concentric circles. Community Connections’s
world has spread beyond the small circle of the individual to the larger
ring of the family and then to the limits of its own boundaries, until
finally it has joined the ripple of the entire community. It has grown in
size, but also in vision.


165
NOTES
INTRODUCTION
1. Patrick Lencioni, Five Temptations of a CEO (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 2008).
1. EVERY ORGANIZATION HAS A CULTURE OF ITS OWN
1. Wikipedia, s.v. “St. Elizabeths Hospital,” accessed December 27, 2016,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St._Elizabeths_Hospital.
2. Mike DeBonis, “D.C. Near Settlement in Mental Health Case,” Wash-
ington Post, September 20, 2011, accessed December 25, 2016, https://www.
washingtonpost.com/local/dc-politics/dc-near-settlement-in-mental-health-
case/2011/09/12/gIQA9nq4NK_story.html?utm_term=.1809e9498011.
3. Maxine Harris and Helen Bergman, eds., Case Management for Mental-
ly Ill Patients (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1993).
4. Maxine Harris, Sisters of the Shadow (Norman: University of Oklahoma
Press, 1991).
5. This section draws heavily on the work of Ed Schein, one of the fore-
most scholars of organizational culture. Kim Cameron and Robert Quinn’s
Competing Values Framework is the other, most widely used model of culture.
Note also that this chapter focuses on organizational culture, not national cul-
ture, about which there is a vast but mostly separate literature.
6. On such relationships with culture, see for example, Jesper B. Sorensen,
“The Strength of Corporate Culture and the Reliability of Firm Performance,”
Administrative Science Quarterly 47 (2002): 70–91; and Anthony S. Boyce et

NOTES
166
al., “Which Comes First, Organizational Culture or Performance? A Longitu-
dinal Study of Causal Priority with Automobile Dealerships,” Journal of Or-
ganizational Behavior 36, no. 3 (2015): 339–59.
7. Although Drucker certainly would have agreed in spirit, a close search
of his writings suggests that he didn’t actually say this, despite how many
attribute it to him.
8. Robert H. Waterman, Thomas J. Peters, and Julien R. Phillips, “Struc-
ture Is Not Organization,” Business Horizons 23, no. 3 (1980): 14–26; David A.
Nadler and Michael L. Tushman, “A Model for Diagnosing Organizational
Behavior,” Organizational Dynamics 9, no. 2 (1980): 35–51; W. Warner
Burke and George H. Litwin, “A Causal Model of Organizational Performance
and Change,” Journal of Management 18, no. 3 (1992): 523–45.
9. Reid Hastings, Netflix, “Reference Guide on Culture,” 2009, slide 8,
accessed February 13, 2017, https://www.slideshare.net/reed2001/culture-
2009/8-The_real_company_values_as.
10. Hastings, “Reference Guide on Culture,” slide 127, https://www.
slideshare.net/reed2001/culture-2009/127-Need_a_culture_that_avoids.
11. Jennifer A. Chatman et al., “Parsing Organizational Culture: How the
Norm for Adaptability Influences the Relationship between Culture Consen-
sus and Financial Performance in High-Technology Firms,” Journal of Organ-
izational Behavior 35, no. 6 (2014): 785–808.
12. For a recent discussion of this tendency to blame or start with culture,
see Jay Lorsch and Emily McTague, “Culture Is Not the Culprit,” Harvard
Business Review, April 2016, 2–11.
2. HOW TO MAKE AN IDEA COME ALIVE
1. John F. Kennedy, Address to Congress on Urgent National Needs, May
25, 1961, accessed December 24, 2016, https://www.jfklibrary.org/JFK/JFK-
Legacy/NASA-Moon-Landing.aspx.
2. Goodreads.com, s.v. “Albert Einstein,” accessed December 24, 2016,
http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/139925-imagination-is-the-highest-form-of-
research.
3. BrainyQuote.com, s.v. “Saul Bellow,” accessed December 24, 2016,
https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/s/saulbellow136446.html.
4. Goodreads.com, s.v. “Wendell Berry,” accessed December 24, 2016,
http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/24729-there-are-it-seems-two-muses-the-
muse-of-inspiration.
5. “Mark Zuckerberg’s Letter to Investors,” Wired, February 1, 2012,
https://www.wired.com/2012/02/zuck-letter/, accessed September 24, 2016.

NOTES
167
6. Jim Collins and Morton Hansen, Great by Choice (New York: Harper
Business, 2011).
7. BrainyQuote.com, s.v. “Thomas Jefferson,” accessed December 24,
2016, https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/t/thomasjeff120901.html.
8. BrainyQuote.com, s.v. “Thomas A. Edison,” accessed December 24,
2016, https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/t/thomasaed109928.html.
9. Jeanne Liedtka’s work (see the following note) has begun to push for
more explicit and scientific understanding of design thinking’s effects.
10. See especially Jeanne Liedtka, Andrew King, and Kevin Bennett, Solv-
ing Problems with Design Thinking: Ten Stories of What Works (New York:
Columbia Business School Press, 2013) and Jeanne Liedtka, “Perspective:
Linking Design Thinking with Innovation Outcomes through Cognitive Bias
Reduction,” Journal of Product Innovation Management 32 (2015): 925–38.
3. POWER, AUTHORITY, AND RESPONSIBILITY
1. Steve Jobs, directed by Danny Boyle, Universal Pictures, 2015.
2. Harry S. Truman Library and Museum, “The Buck Stops Here” desk
sign, accessed December 24, 2016, https://www.trumanlibrary.org/buckstop.
htm.
3. William Shakespeare, King Henry IV, Part 2 (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 2006), act 3, scene 1.
4. William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar (New York: Simon and Shuster,
2004), act 1, scene 2.
5. Carol Gilligan, In a Different Voice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1982).
6. BrainyQuote.com, s.v. “Abraham Lincoln,” accessed December 24,
2016, https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/a/abrahamlin101343.html.
7. BrainyQuote.com, s.v. “Margaret Thatcher,” accessed December 24,
2016, https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/m/margaretth109592.html.
8. Wikipedia, s.v. “Rumpole of the Bailey,” accessed December 24, 2016,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rumpole_of_the_Bailey.
9. Wikipedia, s.v. “She: A History of Adventure,” accessed December 24,
2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/She:_A_History_of_Adventure.
10. Brainyquote.com, s.v. “Lord Acton,” accessed December 24, 2016,
https://www.brainyquote.com/search_results?q=lord%20acton.
11. Jeffrey Pfeffer, Power: Why Some People Have It—And Others Don’t
(New York: HarperCollins, 2010).

NOTES
168
12. Noam Wasserman, The Founder’s Dilemmas: Anticipating and Avoiding
the Pitfalls That Can Sink a Startup (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2012).
13. K. M. Eisenhardt and L. J. Bourgeois, “Politics of Strategic Decision
Making in High-Velocity Environments: Toward a Midrange Theory,” Acade-
my of Management Journal 31 (1988): 737–70; and J. Haleblian and S. Finkel-
stein, “Top Management Team Size, CEO Dominance, and Firm Perfor-
mance: The Moderating Roles of Environmental Turbulence and Discretion,”
Academy of Management Journal 36 (1999): 844–63.
14. S. A. Dennis, D. Ramsey, and C. Turner, “Dual or Duel: Co-CEOs and
Firm Performance,” Journal of Business and Economic Studies 15 (2009):1–25.
15. R. Krause, R. Priem, and L. Love, “Who’s In Charge Here? Co-CEOs,
Power Gaps, and Firm Performance,” Strategic Management Journal 36
(2015): 2099–110.
16. Matteo P. Arena, Stephen P. Ferris, and Emre Unlu, “It Takes Two:
The Incidence and Effectiveness of Co-CEOs,” Financial Review 46 (2011):
385–412.
4. HIRING
1. For example, see M. Bidwell and J. R. Keller, “Within or Without? How
Firms Combine Internal and External Labor Markets to Fill Jobs,” Academy of
Management Journal 57 (2014): 1035–55; and M. Bidwell and E. Mollick,
“Shifts and Ladders: Comparing the Role of Internal and External Mobility in
Managerial Careers,” Organization Science 26 (2015): 1629–45.
2. Rui Wang, The Chinese Imperial Examination System: An Annotated
Bibliography (Toronto: Scarecrow Press, 2013).
3. S. L. Rynes, et al., “The Very Separate Worlds of Academic and Practi-
tioner Periodicals in Human Resource Management: Implications for Evi-
dence-Based Management,” Academy of Management Journal 50 (2007):
987–1008.
4. T. Minton-Eversole, “Quality Measurement: Key to Best-in-Class Tal-
ent Acquisition,” HR Magazine (2009): 64–65.
5. J. A. Breaugh, Recruiting and Attracting Talent (Alexandria, VA:
SHRM, 2016).
6. A. M. Ryan and N. T. Tippins, “Not Much More Than Platitudes: A
Critical Look at the Utility of Applicant Reactions Research,” Human Re-
sources Management Review 18 (2008): 119–32.

NOTES
169
7. A. E. Colbert, S. L. Rynes, and K. G. Brown, “Understanding Managers’
Agreement with Human Resource Research Findings,” Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science 41 (2007): 304–25.
8. “Shhhh! Companies Would Benefit from Helping Introverts to Thrive,”
The Economist, September 9, 2016, 59.
9. S. L. Rynes, K. G. Brown, and A. E. Colbert, “Seven Common Miscon-
ceptions about Human Resource Practices: Research Findings versus Practi-
tioner Beliefs,” Academy of Management Executive 16 (2002): 92–103.
10. A. M. Ryan and N. T. Tippins, “Attracting and Selecting: What Psycho-
logical Research Tells Us,” Human Resource Management 43 (2004): 305–18.
11. Ryan and Tippins, “Attracting and Selecting.”
12. Ryan and Tippins, “Attracting and Selecting.”
13. Adapted and abridged from Ryan and Tippins, “Attracting and Select-
ing.”
5. BARRIERS TO SOLVING PROBLEMS
1. BrainyQuote.com, s.v. “Edmund Wilson,” https://www.brainyquote.
com/quotes/quotes/e/edmundwils110105.html, accessed December 25, 2016.
2. Goodreads.com, s.v. “Abraham Lincoln,” http://www.goodreads.com/
quotes/67318-we-can-complain-because-rose-bushes-have-thorns-or-rejoice,
accessed December 25, 2016.
3. Poemhunter.com, s.v. “Oscar Wilde,” http://www.poemhunter.com/
quotations/famous.asp?people=Oscar%20Wilde&p=21, accessed December
25, 2016.
4. N. Dries, T. Vantilborgh, and R. Pepermans, “The Role of Learning
Agility and Career Variety in the Identification and Development of High
Potential Employees,” Personnel Review, 41 (2012): 340–58.
6. ENGAGING THE OUTSIDE WORLD
1. Dixon v. Weinberger, District of Columbia District Court, Case No. 74-
285 docket://gov.uscourts.dcd.74-285, accessed December 25, 2016, http://
www.plainsite.org/dockets/1zjkb13yx/district-of-columbia-district-court/dixon-
v-weinberger/.
2. Although this expression is often attributed to Phineas T. Barnum, this
has not been substantiated.

NOTES
170
3. Brad Tuttle, “5 Awesome Old-School TV Ads for Financial Service
Companies,” Money, accessed December 25, 2016, http://time.com/money/
3751765/ef-hutton-old-financial-service-ads/.
4. Maxine Harris, Trauma Recovery and Empowerment (New York: The
Free Press, 1998).
5. Jim Collins and Morton T. Hansen, Great by Choice (New York: Harper
Business, 2011).
6. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, “About
Recovery Month,” accessed December 25, 2016, https://recoverymonth.gov/
about.
7. AZ Quotes, s.v. “J. Vernon Magee,” accessed December 25, 2016, http://
www.azquotes.com/quote/1394172.
8. BrainyQuote.com, s.v. “Benjamin Franklin,” accessed December 25,
2016, https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/b/benjaminfr151622.html.
9. Mark Smith, interview by Travis Good, The Healthcare Innovators Pod-
cast, Catalyze, April 26, 2016, accessed December 26, 2016, https://catalyze.io/
innovation/mark-smith-md.
10. John Donne, “No Man Is an Island,” accessed December 25, 2016,
http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/no-man-is-an-island/.
11. Barry M. Staw, Lloyd Sandelands, and Jane E. Dutton, “Threat Rigidity
Effects in Organizational Behavior: A Multilevel Analysis,” Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly 26, no. 4 (1981): 501–24.
12. Deborah Ancona, Henrik Bresman, and Katrin Käufer, “The Compara-
tive Advantage of X-Teams,” MIT Sloan Management Review 43, no. 3 (2002):
33.
13. Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New York: Doubleday,
2011).
14. C. J. Gersick and J. R. Hackman, “Habitual Routines in Task-Perform-
ing Groups,” Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 47
(1990): 65–97.
7. THE IMPORTANCE OF SELF AND ORGANIZATIONAL
AWARENESS
1. William Shakespeare, Hamlet, Folger Library Shakespeare (New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1992), act 2, scene 7.
2. William Shakespeare, As You Like It, Folger Library Shakespeare (New
York: Simon & Schuster, 2004), act 1, scene 3.
3. Plato, Apology, accessed December 26, 2016, https://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/The_unexamined_life_is_not_worth_living.

NOTES
171
4. BrainyQuote.com, s.v. “Bob Seger,” accessed December 26, 2016,
https://www.brainyquote.com/quotes/quotes/b/bobseger106054.html.
5. D. Dunning, C. Heath, and J. M. Suls, “Flawed Self-Assessment Impli-
cations for Health, Education, and the Workplace,” Psychological Science in
the Public Interest 5 (2004): 69–106.
6. Their work actually refers to two effects: (1) The tendency for low-
ability people to overestimate their ability (e.g., bad drivers think they’re good
drivers), and (2) The tendency for high-ability people to underestimate their
relative competence and assume that tasks that are easy for them are also easy
for others.
7. J. Kruger and D. Dunning, “Unskilled and Unaware of It: How Difficul-
ties in Recognizing One’s Own Incompetence Lead to Inflated Self-Assess-
ments,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77 (1999): 1121–34.
8. D. A. Davis, P. E. Mazmanian, M. Fordis, R. Van Harrison, K. E.
Thorpe, and L. Perrier, “Accuracy of Physician Self-Assessment Compared
with Observed Measures of Competence: A Systematic Review,” JAMA 296,
no. 9 (2006):1094–102; K. P. Cross,“Not Can, But Will College Teaching Be
Improved?” New Directions for Higher Education 17 (1977): 1–15;, N. Falchi-
kov and D. Boud, “Student Self-Assessment in Higher Education: A Meta-
Analysis,” Review of Educational Research 594 (1989): 395–430.
9. P. A. Mabe and S. G. West, “Validity of Self-Evaluation of Ability: A
Review and Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Applied Psychology 67 (1982): 280–96.
10. D. Dunning, C. Heath, and J. M. Suls, “Flawed Self-Assessment Impli-
cations for Health, Education, and the Workplace,” Psychological Science in
the Public Interest 5 (2004): 69–106.
11. D. A. Risucci, A. J. Tortolani, and R. J. Ward, “Ratings of Surgical
Residents by Self, Supervisors and Peers,” Surgery, Gynecology & Obstetrics
169 (1989): 519–26.
12. B. M. Bass and F. J. Yammarino, “Congruence of Self and Others’
Leadership Ratings of Naval Officers for Understanding Successful Perfor-
mance,” Applied Psychology 40 (1991): 437–54.
13. N. Epley and D. Dunning, “The Mixed Blessings of Self-Knowledge in
Behavioral Prediction,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 32, no. 5
(2006): 641–55. http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/
0146167205284007?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_
dat=cr_pub%3dpubmed.
14. D. Dunning, Self-insight: Roadblocks and Detours on the Path to Know-
ing Thyself (New York: Psychology Press, 2012).
15. Dunning, Heath, and Suls, “Flawed Self-Assessment.”
16. R. Amler, D. Moriarty, and E. Hutchins, Healthier People (Decatur,
GA: Carter Center of Emory University Health Risk Appraisal Program, 1989).

NOTES
172
8. PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
1. National Academies Collection, “Coordinating Care for Better Mental,
Substance-Use, and General Health,” in Improving the Quality of Health Care
for Mental and Substance Abuse Conditions (Washington, DC: National Acad-
emies Press) accessed December 26, 2016, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
books/NBK19833/.
2. “Sister Irene Kraus Remembered for Vision, Leadership 08/25/98,”
Florida Times Union, August 25, 1998, accessed December 25, 2016, http://
jacksonville.com/tu-online/stories/082598/met_2a1Siste.html.
3. Tanya Somanader, “In Memory of Beau Biden: ‘Quite Simply, the Fin-
est Man Any of Us Have Ever Known,’” The White House of President Barack
Obama blog, accessed January 26, 2017, https://obamawhitehouse.archives.
gov/blog/2015/05/30/memory-beau-biden-quite-simply-finest-man-any-us-
have-ever-known.
4. Bob Sutton and Huggy Rao, Scaling Up Excellence: Getting to More
Without Settling for Less (New York: Crown, 2014).
5. Marshall Goldsmith and Mark Reiter, What Got You Here Won’t Get
You There (New York: Hachette Book Group, 2007).
6. Note that longevity varies widely by country. In the United States, a
century has generally been considered an extremely long run for a company,
but in Japan and Europe, older companies are more common. In Japan,
France, and the UK, they have their own societies: Shinise (100+ years), Les
Henokiens (200+ years), and the Tercentenarians (300+ years).
7. Other general audience books in this tradition include A. de Geus, The
Living Company: Habits for Survival in a Turbulent Business World (Boston,
MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 1997); D. Miller and I. Le Breton-Miller,
Managing for the Long Run: Lessons in Competitive Advantage from Great
Family Businesses (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2005);
and C. Stadler, Enduring Success: What We Can Learn from the History of
Outstanding Corporations (Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press,
2011).
8. M. J. Perry, “Fortune 500 firms in 1955 vs. 2014,” AEIdeas, August 18,
2014, accessed October 10, 2016, https://www.aei.org/publication/fortune-500-
firms-in-1955-vs-2014–89-are-gone-and-were-all-better-off-because-of-that-
dynamic-creative-destruction/.
9. Kim Gittelson, “Can a Company Live Forever?” BBC News, January 19,
2012, accessed February 13, 2017, http://www.bbc.com/news/business-
16611040.
10. Small Business Administration, “FAQs about Small Businesses,” Sep-
tember 2012, https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/FAQ_Sept_2012.pdf.

NOTES
173
11. M. R. Napolitano, V. Marino, A. Riviezzo, and A. Garofano, “Moving
Forward or Running to Stand Still? The Relationship between Family Firms’
Strategic Posture and Longevity.” Paper presented at the AIDEA Bicentenary
Conference, Lecce, 2013.
12. David Whorton, “The Evergreen Movement: An Emerging Model for
Purpose-Driven Entrepreneurs,” September 2, 2015, https://www.
tugboatinstitute.com/the-evergreen-movement/.
13. P. Libin, “Evernote’s Quest to Become a 100-Year-Old Startup,” Fast-
Company, June 13, 2013, https://www.fastcompany.com/3012870/dialed/
evernotes-quest-to-become-a-100-year-old-startup.
14. M. Reeves, S. Levin, and D. Ueda, 2016. “The Biology of Corporate
Survival,” Harvard Business Review (January-February 2016): 47–55.
15. C. Stadler, “The Four Principles of Enduring Success,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review 85 (2007): 62–72; and C. Stadler Enduring Success: What We Can
Learn from the History of Outstanding Corporations (Redwood City, CA:
Stanford University Press, 2011). Stadler focuses on four principles—diversity
(in suppliers and customers); a willingness to remember, discuss, and learn
from mistakes; a tendency to exploit before exploring; and a general conserva-
tism regarding change.
16. Jim Dewald and W. Brett Wilson, Achieving Longevity: How Great
Firms Prosper through Entrepreneurial Thinking (Toronto: Rotman-UTP
Publishing, 2016).
17. K. A. Eddleston, F. W. Kellermanns, S. W. Floyd, V. L. Crittenden, and
W. F. Crittenden, “Planning for Growth: Life Stage Differences in Family
Firms,” Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice 37 (2013): 1177–1202.
18. K. Froelich, G. McKee, and R. Rathge, “Succession Planning in Non-
profit Organizations,” Nonprofit Management and Leadership 22 (2011): 3–20.
19. A. G. Lafley and N. M. Tichy, “The Art and Science of Finding the
Right CEO,” Harvard Business Review, October 2011, 3–10.
20. Eddleston et al., “Planning for Growth.”
21. S. Gothard and M. J. Austin, “Leadership Succession Planning: Implica-
tions for Non-profit Human Service Organizations,” Administration in Social
Work 37, no. 3 (2013): 272–85.
22. Tim Wolfred, Building Leaderful Organizations: Succession Planning
for Nonprofits (Annie E. Casey Foundation Executive Transition Monograph
Series, 6, 2008).


175
INDEX
3M, 36
adaptation, 153
addictions, 10–11, 32, 140, 162
AIDS. See HIV
All Minds Matter, 31, 148
Allori, Allessandro, 24
American Hospital Association, 146
Ancona, Deborah, 117, 118
Apple, 44, 163
Bellow, Saul, 25
Bergman, Helen, xi, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12, 49, 51,
59, 147, 149–150, 161
Berry, Wendell, 26
Biden, Joe, 149, 150
board (of directors), 147, 154
Bresman,Henrik, 117, 118
Built to Last: Successful Habits of
Visionary Companies , 151, 152
Bush, George, 49
case management. See clinical case
management
CEO, xvi
Chinese Civil Service, 75
Chipotle, 59
clinical case management, 7, 8;
homelessness and, 9, 10; residential
services and, 8; supported
employment and, 9
co-CEOs, 51, 59
Collins, Jim, 27, 111, 151
complex adaptive systems, 153
Community Connections, history of, ix,
3–14
Consultants, 114–115
criminal justice system, 141, 162, 163
culture. See organizational culture
Daughters of Charity, 146
decision making. See power and
leadership
design thinking, 33–38, 100; and empathy,
34; assumption testing, 37; cocreation
by customers, 38; empirical evidence
for, 35–36; experience mapping, 37;
iteration in, 35, 37; journals about, 36;
rapid prototyping, 37; visualization in,
36
Design Issues, 36
The Design Journal , 36
Design Management Review , 36
Dewald, Jim, 154
diversity, 153
Dixon court case, 6, 7–8
Dole Foundation, 9
domestic violence, 12, 141. See also
trauma and abuse
Donne, John, 116
Down from the Pedestal , 161
dual diagnosis, 11. See also addictions

INDEX
176
Dublin, city of, 36
Dutton, Jane, 117
Edison, Thomas, 28
Einstein, Albert, 24, 25
employment: supported, 9, 162. See also
unemployment
embeddedness, 153
engaging the outside world: too little,
105–108; too much, 109–111
Enron, 18
evergreen companies, 152; characteristics
of, 152–153
Evernote, 152
externally oriented roles, 118–119;
ambassadors, 118; coordinators, 118,
119; guards, 118, 119; scouts, 118
fables: The Clothing in the Chest, xiii,
61–63; Crossing the Woods, xiv,
84–85; A Face in the Mirror, xv,
122–123; Little One Note, xv,
137–140; The Magic Ring, xiii, 42–43;
The Three Brothers, xiv, 104; The
Tiger and the Vegetable Pot, 87; A
Tower to Reach the Sky, xii, 21–23;
Two Girls, xii, 2; We Are the Little
Bowels, 158–160
Facebook, 80
family-run businesses, 154
feedback, 134–135
Five Temptations of a CEO , x
Ford, Henry, 26
Fortune 500, 47, 152
foster care, 141
Foster, Richard, 152
founder-run businesses, 45, 147, 148, 154
framing. See problem-solving
Franklin, Benjamin, 115
General Electric, 154
Gersick, Connie, 117
Gittelson, Kim, 152
Goldsmith, Marshall, 151
Good Kitchen, Denmark, 35
Google, 78, 80
Great by Choice , 27
Hackman, Richard, 117
Haggard, H. Rider, 55
Hansen, Morton T., 27, 111
Hastings, Reid, 18
Henry IV, 49
hiring: best practices, 77–79; criteria for,
76, 142; history of, 75–76; intelligence
versus conscientiousness, 78; process
of, 67–68, 80; role of culture, 77;
structured interviews, 79. See also job
description; human resources;
organizational chart
HIV, 11, 140, 144
homelessness, 9, 32, 140. See also housing
housing, 8–9, 32, 141, 162
human resources, 66, 68, 94
ideation, 26, 27, 28, 31, 34, 35. See also
design thinking
IBM, 17, 18, 36
IDEO, 34, 35
implementation, 27–28, 34
inspiration, 24–26, 28, 34
integration of services, 154
Jefferson, Thomas, 27
job description, 65, 147–148
Jobs, Steve, 44, 80
Kahneman, Daniel, 118
Kaplan, Sarah, 151
Kaufer, Katrin, 118
Kennedy, John F., 23–24
Koch Industries, 163
Kolko, Jon, 38
Kraus, Sister Irene, 146
Kruger-Dunning effect, 132
Leoncioni, Patrick, x
leadership: definition of, 56; shared,
58–60
Ledtka, Jeanne, 38
Libin, Phil, 152
Lincoln, Abraham, 52
LinkedIn, 80
Lord Acton, 56
Magee, J. Vernon, 115
making it happen. See implementation
Michelangelo, 24

INDEX
177
MIT Media Lab, 35
modularity, 153
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 24
Netflix, 17–18
Newton, Isaac, 25
Oracle, 59
office space, 142
organizational awareness, 127–128
organizational chart, 46, 64–65, 147
organizational culture, 14–15, 151;
artifacts, 14–15; assumptions
underlying, 14; levers of change, 2–3;
strength, attributes of, 16–17; values
exposed, 14
peer-delivered services, 145, 162
Pfeffer, Jeffrey, 56
physical abuse. See trauma and abuse
Porras, Jerry, 151
Power,: abuse of, 52; accountability and,
54, 57; acquisition of, 45; authority
versus, 44, 53, 57; denial of, 48–49;
definition,; difficulty using, 46–47;
generational passage, 45, 49; giving
away, 49–51; in social service agencies,
48; influence and, 56–57; leadership
and, 56; responsibility and, 54, 57;
struggles involving, 154; women and,
51
problem-solving: framing, 88–89,
100–101; perspective and, 86, 89–92
Proctor & Gamble, 154
prudence, 153
Rao, Huggy, 151
redundancy, 153
RIM, 59
Rumpole of the Bailey, 55
Salieri, Antonio, 24
Sandelands, Lloyd, 117
SAP, 35
Seger, Bob, 131
seven Ps. See evergreen companies
sexual abuse. See trauma and abuse
scalability, 140–142, 150–153
self-assessment. See self-awareness
self-awareness, 124, 134; accuracy of,
132–134; enhancing quality. See
feedback
Shakespeare, William, 121, 124
She Who Must Be Obeyed, 55
Sisters of the Shadow, 9
Smith Barney, 108
social justice, 163
St. Elizabeths Hospital, 3–4, 4, 7, 106;
history of, 3; relationship to the outside
world, 4
Staw, Barry, 117
succession planning, 50, 147–149,
154–155; drop dead plan, 148
sustainability, 151–154
Sutton, Bob, 151
TCAP, 146
teenage pregnancy, 141
thinking it through. See ideation
Toyota, 36
training staff, 145
trauma and abuse, 12, 28, 145; groups, 29
Trauma Recovery and Empowerment
model, 110–111
treatment models, 154
Truman, Harry, 44
Twain, Mark, 114
unemployment, 32, 140
Volkswagon, 58
Whole Foods, 59
Whorton, David, 152
Wilde, Oscar, 86
Wilson, Brett, 154
Wilson, Edmund, 86
Winterkorn, Martin, 58
Withers, Bill, 162
Wozniak, Steve, 44
Zappos, 17
Zuckerberg, Mark, 26


179
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Maxine Harris, PhD, is the cofounder and current CEO of Commu-
nity Connections, a large behavioral health care organization located in
the nation’s capital. She has been operating Community Connections
(in conjunction with her now-deceased partner Helen Bergman) for
more than thirty years.
Dr. Harris is a national expert in clinical practices for treating per-
sons with serious mental illness, substance addiction, homelessness,
trauma, domestic violence, and early traumatic loss. She has authored
or edited nine books and ten training manuals on these topics and has
served as keynote speaker at several national conferences. Her most
successful book, The Loss That Is Forever: The Lifelong Impact of the
Early Death of a Mother or Father, was published in 1995 and is still in
print after more than twenty years.
Dr. Harris is the recipient of the first HOPE award, granted by the
federal Center for Mental Health Services for her “pioneering work and
innovation in the field of trauma-informed care.” She has also served as
the principal investigator on federal grants studying homelessness, trau-
ma, addiction, HIV infection, and residential services.
Michael B. O’Leary, PhD, is professor at Georgetown’s McDonough
School of Business and was previously a faculty member at Boston
College, a policy analyst for Pelavin Associates, and a management con-
sultant at C&L. In addition to undergraduate, master’s, and doctoral
students, he has taught executive programs for a wide variety of domes-
tic and international organizations. He is the co-designer and lead aca-

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
180
demic advisor of the Presidential Leadership Scholars Program, which
is sponsored jointly by the foundations and libraries of Presidents Bush
(41 and 43), Clinton, and Johnson.
Prior to his academic career, he worked on large-scale reorganiza-
tions, technology implementations, and process redesigns. His clients
included universities, major medical centers, large nonprofits, and
government agencies.
His research focuses on high-performing teams (especially virtual
ones), multitasking, multiteaming, and teams facing resource con-
straints.

