 

HOW  TO  GET THE  TRUTH 
IN   5 MINUTES  OR   LESS 
IN  ANY  CONVERSATION   OR  
SITUATION 
DAVID J.LIEBERMAN, PH.D. 
ST. MARTIN'S GRIFFIN  NEW YORK

A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S  
I would like to thank Jennifer Enderlin, my editor at St. 
Martin's. She is an exceptional talent whose ability is 
matched only by her boundless passion for her work. 
And to those who have worked tirelessly, my warmest 
thanks to the publicity, marketing, advertising, and sales 
departments at St. Martin's for their intense efforts and 
commitment: Alison Lazarus, John Cunningham, Steve 
Kasdin, John Murphy, Jamie Brickhouse, Mike Storrings, 
Janet Wagner, Mark Kohut, and James Wehrle, and to the 
entire Broadway Sales Department for their continued ef-
forts on behalf of this book. A special thanks to St. Martin's 
publisher, Sally Richardson, for her vast enthusiasm and 
belief in this project. 
A thousand thanks to David Stanford Burr, production ed-
itor, and Nancy Inglis, copy editor, for their outstanding 
work on the manuscript. Their hard work and diligence is 
evident throughout this entire book. 

I would like to thank my agents, Michael Larsen and Eliz-
abeth Pomada. The success of their agency is a clear reflec-
tion of their professionalism and dedication. In an industry 
of giants, they stand without equals. 
My infinite appreciation and gratitude to Barbara and Wil-
liam O'Rourke, who gave me the two things every writer 
needs: tranquility and computer help. And my thanks to 
Laurie Rosin, one of the nation's leading freelance editors, 
for invaluable input and suggestions. 
While much of information in this book is based on newly 
developed and leading-edge research and technologies, I 
would be remiss if I did not acknowledge the evolution of 
the process and contributions of those giants in the fields of 
human behaviour, linguistics, and hypnosis: Milton 
Erickson, Robert Cialdini, Paul Ekman, Fred Bootle, Elliot 
Aronson, Judson Mills, Stephen Worchel, Jack Brehm, 
Stanley Milgram, and Ray Birdwhistell. 

A    N O T E     TO    R E A D E R S  
To those in law enforcement: make sure that you check ap-
propriate federal and state laws regarding both interviewing 
and interrogation. Those in the private sector must use judg-
ment and common sense when using this system. Caution 
is always advised when you are dealing with individuals 
suspected of illegal acts or illicit activities. 
There will be those who will try to use this information 
to manipulate others and exploit situations. But do you hold 
back information that can help people because of a fear that 
there will be those who will abuse it? To live in a world 
where information is distributed based upon the damage 
that can be caused by the lowest common denominator is 
to spiral away from progress and away from hope. 
It is with high hope and expectation that the techniques 
in this book will be used appropriately, with benevolence, 
and with the purposes for which they were intended. 

INTRODUCTION  
T H E  P R O C E S S  A N D  T H E  P O W E R  
Honesty is at the cornerstone of every relationship, whether 
it's business or personal. Being aware of someone else's true 
intentions is undeniably valuable, often saving you time, 
money, energy, and heartache. When you know a person's 
true intent, you have the power to control the situation, or 
at the very least not be taken advantage of. 
There is no greater ability than consistently and con-
stantly making the right decisions in life. Remember, 
though, your decisions are only as solid and right as the 
facts that you base them on. You will learn how to get at 
the message beneath the words, how to know what people 
are thinking when they don't say what's really on their 
mind. A former client of mine put it best when she said, 
"It's like having a man inside their camp—an outpost in 
their head." 
In an ideal society there would be no need for lies or for 
this book. But we live in a world of deception. And whether 
you want to play or not, you're in the game. The question 
is, do you want to win? In romance you need never play the 
fool again. In business you'll get the upper hand. Wherever 
and whenever you deal with people, you'll have the tools to 
come out a winner. 
W H A T ' S  I N  T H I S  B O O K  A N D  H O W  T O  U S E  I T  
I'm what is affectionately referred to as a hired gun, a spe-
cialist in the field of human behaviour. As a board-certified 
hypnotherapist with a Ph.D. in psychology, I represent cor-
porations as well as private individuals, and offer a type of 
leverage that many high-paid attorneys, top-notch account-
ants, and seasoned executives cannot. 
Too often we miss the meaning behind the message. As 
you know, people don't always say what they mean or mean 
what they say. This book focuses on the truth and how to 
get at it. 
To be an effective negotiator, you must use many 
strategies and techniques, all of them relying upon the 
accuracy of the information you're given. The answers 
you get from the world's most powerful supercomputer 
are worthless if the numbers you give it to work with are 
wrong. 
 

We often forget how easily facts can get lost in a conver-
sation, negotiation, or interrogation. Abraham Lincoln is 
said to have posed the following question: "How many legs 
would a sheep have if you called its tail a leg?" "Four," 
explained Lincoln. "Because calling its tail a leg doesn't 
make it one." 
While people lie for many different reasons, their lying 
rarely benefits the person lied to. And there's that one un-
deniable truth about lying. Everybody does it, but nobody 
likes it when it's done to them. 
It takes at least two people for a lie to be effective—one 
to offer the lie and one to believe it. And while we certainly 
can't stop people from trying to lie to us, we can keep them 
from being successful. 
This book is divided into eight parts, each of which ex-
plores a facet of lying. The innovative techniques in this 
book will help you figure out if you're being lied to. If you 
are the victim of a deception, they will assist you in getting 
at the truth and in gaining control over the situation. Many 
of the examples in this book are drawn from personal re-
lationships and business situations; certainly most of us can 
identify with these scenarios. 
PART   1 
S I G N S   OF   D E C E P T I O N  
This book picks up where others leave off, going well be-
yond observing body language clues. The first part offers a 
catalogue of forty-six clues to deception, divided into seven 
sections. Some of the clues involve the fundamentals of body 
language, while others use more advanced techniques and 
processes such as psycholinguistic emphasis and neural lin-
guistic choice perception. Each section concludes with a 
summary for easy reference. 

PART   2 
B E C O M I N G   A   H U M A N   L I E   D E T E C T O R  
"We often fly blind into verbal combat." That is to say, we 
usually think of the questions we should have asked two 
days after the battle is over. This section offers a specific 
game plan to detect deceit, detailing exactly what to say and 
when to say it. This sophisticated system involves choosing 
from a variety of scripted sequences, each from a different 
psychological angle. Each script includes a primer, an at-
tack sequence, and silver bullets. 
P A R T    3 
T A C T I C S  F O R  D E T E C T I N G  D E C E I T  A N D  
G A T H E R I N G   I N F O R M A T I O N   IN 
C A S U A L   C O N V E R S A T I O N S  
Now what about those times in casual conversation when you 
think someone might be lying to you, but a full-fledged inter-
rogation is out of the question? This section provides phe-
nomenal techniques for gathering more information without 
being obvious. You will also learn how to steer a conversation 
in any direction that you choose in order to get the informa-
tion that you want. This section also covers those times when 
different tactics are necessary for getting to the truth, in-
stances where you may not have the leverage you need. The 
psychological process is different than if you were coming 
from a position of strength. 
PART   4 
M I N D   G A M E S  
"Mind Games" includes two simple techniques that provide 
extraordinary results. When you use the first, almost no one 
will be able to lie to you. When you employ the second, 
you will be able to discern anybody's true intentions and 
motivation in any situation. 

 
PART   5 
A D V A N C E D   T E C H N I Q U E S  
This section presents the most advanced and groundbreak-
ing techniques for getting at the truth. Using a blend of 
hypnosis and a system I have developed called Trance-
Scripts, you'll be able to give commands directly to people's 
unconscious minds—all in conversation and without their 
awareness. Through this process you can persuade others to 
tell the truth. 
P A R T    6 
P S Y C H O L O G Y   ON  Y O U R   S I D E  
This part explores the ten fundamental laws of human 
behaviour, the principles that govern our thinking. Once 
you learn these laws, you'll know how to get the truth out 
of anyone. With an understanding of how the brain 
processes information, you will be able to easily influence 
other people's decisions. 
P A R T     7 
I N T E R N A L  T R U T H   B L O C K E R S  
Here's the biggest truth in a book about lying: we lie loudest 
when we lie to ourselves. We all know someone who abso-
lutely refuses to believe that his or her spouse is unfaithful, 
despite all the warning signs. This section shows you how 
to become aware of and eliminate those internal blockers 
that keep you from seeing what's really going on. 

P A R T     8 
E X T E R N A L  T R U T H   B L O C K E R S  
This section lets us in on the psychological secrets of the 
experts. You will discover how the pros—from professional 
poker players to master negotiators—keep you from per-
ceiving the facts in an objective fashion, even affect your 
ability to evaluate information. The influence of the pros is 
enormous; they can have a powerful impact on your per-
ception of reality—unless, of course, you've read this book 
and can outthink them. 
Note to readers: Throughout all of the examples in this book the pro-
nouns he and she are used alternately. This was done to make the language 
less sexist, not to indicate that one sex is more likely to lie in given situ-
ations than the other. 

P A R T  
1 
S I G N S  OF D E C E P T I O N  
"He that has eyes to see and ears to hear may convince 
himself that no mortal can keep a secret. If his lips are 
silent, he chatters with his fingertips; betrayal oozes out of 
him at every pore." 
—SIGMUND FREUD 

This part contains a catalogue of forty-six clues to 
deception, divided into seven sections. The clues can be 
used independently or in conjunction with one another. 
While some are excellent indicators by themselves, all 
clues should be viewed within the context of the situation 
at hand; they are not absolutes. 
Some of these are so subtle that they can easily be missed 
unless you pay close attention. Others may be glaringly ob-
vious. In some instances you'll be looking for lies of omis-
sion—what's missing that should be there. Other times 
you'll be dealing with lies of commission—things said or 
done that are inconsistent with the rest of the message. 
Occasionally you won't have access to all these clues: you 
might be on the telephone, for instance, and not be able to 
see the body of the person you are talking to. It's not nec-
essary to memorize these clues, for in time they will become 
second nature: you will gradually become more familiar 
with what to look for, what to listen for, and what to ask 
for, to get to the truth. 
Certain variables such as gender, ethnicity, and cultural 
background can influence how we interpret various clues— 
the use of gestures and personal space, for example. For the 
most part, though, these factors are negligible and can be 
ignored. 
Some of the clues draw on traditional psychological dis-
ciplines such as body language and psycholinguistics. These 
are used to detect discrepancies between the verbal and the 
nonverbal message. You will also be using more sophisti-
cated methods developed as a result of my research in the 
field of human behaviour. One such tool, psycholinguistic 
emphasis (PLE), involves the words that people choose to 
reflect their current psychological state. 
Once you realize that you're being lied to, should you 
confront the liar immediately? Usually not. The best ap-
proach is to note the fact in your mind and continue with 
the conversation, trying to extract more information. Once 
you confront someone who has lied to you, the tone of the 
conversation changes and gathering additional facts be-
comes difficult. Therefore, wait until you have all the evi-
dence you want and then decide whether to confront the 
person at that time or hold off to figure how you can best 
use this insight to your advantage. 

 
S E C T I O N     1 
B O D Y   L A N G U A G E  
Our fingers, hands, arms, and legs and their movements 
offer a fascinating insight into our true feelings. Most people 
aren't aware that their body speaks a language all its own; 
try as they will to deceive you with their words, the truth 
can be always silently observed. 
You may already have read or heard about some of these 
clues, but they are only a small portion of the tactics that 
you will learn. 
C L U E     1 
The Language of the Eyes 
No or little direct eye contact is a classic sign of deception. 
A person who is lying to you will do everything to avoid 
making eye contact. Unconsciously he feels you will be able 
to see through him—via his eyes. And feeling guilty, he 
doesn't want to face you. Instead he will glance down or his 
eyes may dart from side to side. Conversely, when we tell 
the truth or we're offended by a false accusation, we tend 
to give our full focus and have fixed concentration. We lock 
eyes with our accuser as if to say "You're not getting away 
until we get to the bottom of this." 
C L U E     2 
The Body Never Lies 
Lacking Animation 
The hands and arms are excellent indicators of deceit be-
cause they are used to gesture with and are more easily vis-
ible than our feet and legs. But hands, arms, legs, and feet 
can all give us information if we're watching carefully. 
When someone is lying or keeping something in, he tends to 
be less expressive with his hands or arms. He may keep them 
on his lap if he's sitting, or at his side if he's standing; he 
may stuff his hands in his pockets or clench them. Fingers 
may be folded into the hands; full extension of the fingers is 
usually a gesture of openness. 
Have you ever noticed that when you're passionate about 
what you're saying, your hands and arms wave all about, 
emphasizing your point and conveying your enthusiasm? 
And have you ever realized that when you don't believe in 

what you're saying, your body language echoes these feel-
ings and becomes inexpressive? 
Additionally, if you ask someone a question and her 
hands clench or go palm down, this is a sign of defensiveness 
and withdrawal. If she is genuinely confused at the accu-
sations or the line of questioning, her hands turn palm-up 
as if to say "Give me more information; I do not under-
stand" or "I have nothing to hide." 
Keeping Something In 
When a person sits with his legs and arms close to his body, 
perhaps crossed but not outstretched, he is evincing the 
thought I'm keeping something in. His arms and legs may 
be crossed because he feels he must defend himself. When 
we feel comfortable and confident we tend to stretch out— 
claim our space, as it were. When we feel less secure, we 
take up less physical space and fold our arms and legs into 
our body, into what is almost a foetal position. 
Displaying Artificial Movements 
Arm movements and gestures seem stiff and almost me-
chanical. This behaviour can be readily observed by 
watching unpolished actors and politicians. They try to use 
gestures to convince us that they're impassioned about their 
beliefs, but there's no fluidity to their movements. The 
movements are contrived, not natural. 
C L U E     3 
The Unconscious Cover-up 
If her hand goes straight to her face while she is responding 
to a question or when she is making a statement, this is often 
an indication of deceit. Her hand may cover her mouth 
while she is speaking; indicating that she really doesn't be-
lieve what she is saying to be true; it acts as a screen, an 
unconscious attempt to hide her words. 
When she is listening she covers or touches her face as an 
unconscious manifestation of the thought / really don % want 
to be listening to this. Touching the nose is also considered 
to be a sign of deception, as well as scratching behind or on 
the side of the ear or rubbing the eyes. 
This should not be confused with the posture associated 
with deep thought, which usually conveys concentration 
and attention. 

C L U E     4 
The Partial Shrug 
The shrugging of one's shoulders is a gesture that usually in-
dicates ignorance or indifference: "I don't know" or "I don't 
care." If a person makes this gesture he or she usually means 
to communicate that very message. However, if this gesture 
is fleeting—if you catch only a glimpse of it—it's a sign of 
something else. This person is trying to demonstrate that she 
is casual and relaxed about her answer, when in fact she re-
ally isn't. Because what she feels isn't a true emotion, she 
doesn't really shrug. 
This situation is similar to that of someone who is em-
barrassed by a joke but wants to pretend that she thinks it's 
funny. What you see is a "lips only" smile, not a big grin 
encompassing her entire face. 
SUMMARY 
• 
The person will make little or no eye contact. 
• 
Physical expression will be limited, with few 
arm and hand movements. What arm and hand 
movements are present will seem stiff, and 
mechanical. Hands, arms, and legs pull in toward 
the body; the individual takes up less space. 
• 
His hand(s) may go up to his face or throat. But 
contact with his body is limited to these areas. He 
is also unlikely to touch his chest with an open 
hand gesture. 
• 
If he is trying to appear casual and relaxed 
about his answer, he may shrug a little. 
S E C T I O N     2 
E M O T I O N A L  S T A T E S :  
C O N S I S T E N C Y  A N D   C O N T R A D I C T I O N  
Individual gestures need to be looked at by themselves 
and in relation to what is being said. In this section we're 
going to look at the relationship between words and the 
corresponding gestures. Besides obvious inconsistencies 
such as shaking your head from side to side while saying 
yes, more subtle but equally revealing signs of deception 
exist. These take place at both the conscious and the un-
conscious level. 

Then there are times when we make a conscious effort to 
emphasize our point, but because the gesture is forced it 
lacks spontaneity and the timing is off. When you know 
what to look for, this is readily apparent. 
Inconsistencies between gestures, words, and emotions 
are also great indicators, in that you're presented with a 
dual message. One example is a person who grins while she 
expresses sorrow to a friend whose spouse has left her. 
Watch for what is known as the initial reaction expression 
(IRE). This is an initial expression of true feelings that may 
last for less than a second, just until the person you are 
observing has a chance to mask them. Even if you can't read 
the fleeting expression, the fact that it has changed is reason 
enough to suspect that the emotion you are currently seeing 
is false. 
C L U E     5 
Timing Is Everything 
If the person's head begins to shake in a confirming direc-
tion before or as the words come out, this is a good indi-
cation that he is telling the truth. However, if he shakes his 
head after the point is made, he may be trying to demon-
strate conviction, but because it's a contrived movement-
one not based on emotion—the timing is off. 
Also look for hand and arm movements that punctuate a 
point after it's been made. The gesture looks like an after-
thought because that's what it is. He wants to get his words 
out fast but realizes that maybe he should look really mad 
and play the part. Additionally, hand and arm movements 
will not only start late but will seem mechanical and won't 
coincide with verbal punctuation. 
If you wanted to convince someone that you were angry 
when you really weren't, you would want to play the part 
and look angry. But there's more to it than that. The timing 
of that angry facial expression matters. If the facial expres-
sion comes after the verbal statement ("I am so angry with 
you right now" . . . pause . . . and then the angry expres-
sion), it looks false. Showing the expression before the "I'm 
so angry" line wouldn't indicate deceptiveness. It would 
only suggest that you are thinking about what you are 
saying or are having some difficulty in deciding how to 
express your anger. 
Also, someone who believes in his words will be inclined 
to move his head on important syllables to drive home a 
point. Whether up and down or side to side, the head move-
ment is supposed to punctuate particular points and ideas. 

A mechanical nodding without regard to emphasis indicates 
a conscious movement. These conscious movements are in-
tended to show emphasis, but when a person is lying such 
movements are not part of the natural rhythm of the mes-
sage. 
C L U E     6 
Contradiction and Consistency 
Not only is the timing important, but we need to pay atten-
tion to the type of gesture. The woman who frowns as she 
says she loves you is sending a contradictory message. An 
obvious incongruence between gestures and speech indi-
cates that the speaker is lying. A good example is the man 
who tries to tell his girlfriend he loves her while shaking his 
fist in the air. Similarly, hands tightly clenched and a state-
ment of pleasure are not in synch with each other. Make 
sure that the gesture fits the speech. 
 
C L U E     7 
The Emotion Commotion 
The timing of emotions is something that's difficult to fake. 
Watch closely and you probably won't be fooled. A response 
that's not genuine is not spontaneous; therefore, there is a 
slight delay in the onset of false emotion. The duration of 
the emotion is also off: The response goes on longer than it 
would in the case of genuine emotion. The fade-out—how 
the emotion ends—is abrupt. So the emotion is delayed 
coming on, stays longer than it should, and fades out 
abruptly. 
The emotion of surprise is a great example. Surprise 
comes and goes quickly, so if it is prolonged it is most likely 
false. But when we are feigning surprise, most of us keep a 
look of awe plastered on our faces; this look won't really 
fool an aware observer. 

C L U E     8 
The Expression Zone: Beware the Smile 
That Doesn't Seem Happy 
Deception expressions are often confined to the mouth area. 
A smile that's genuine lights up the whole face. When a 
smile is forced, the person's mouth is closed and tight and 
there's no movement in the eyes or forehead. A smile that 
does not involve the whole face is a sign of deception. 
While we're on this subject, be aware that the smile is the 
most common mask for emotion because it best conceals the 
appearance in the lower face of anger, disgust, sadness, or 
fear. In other words, a person who doesn't want her true 
feelings to be revealed may "put on a happy face." But re-
member, if the smile does not reflect a true emotion—hap-
piness, for example—it will not encompass her entire face. 
SUMMARY 
• 
The timing is off between gestures and words. 
• 
The head moves in a mechanical fashion. 
• 
Gestures don't match the verbal message. 
• 
The timing and duration of emotional gestures 
will seem off. 
• 
Expression will be limited to the mouth area 
when the person is feigning certain emotions—
happiness, surprise, awe, and so on. 
S E C T I O N     3 
I N T E R P E R S O N A L  I N T E R A C T I O N S  
You want to be aware of a person's posture in and of itself 
and in relation to his surroundings. How the person carries 
himself and behaves in relation to what he says is an excel-
lent indication of his comfort level. 
It's widely believed that when we are wrongfully accused 
we become defensive. In fact, generally speaking, only a 
guilty person gets defensive. Someone who is innocent will 
usually go on the offensive. If Mary and John are arguing 
and Mary accuses John of something, John doesn't auto-
matically assume a defensive posture. If he is innocent and 
objects to what Mary is saying, he will go on the offensive. 

The following clues look at the distinctions between these 
two states of mind. 
CLUE    9 
The Head Shift 
If someone is uttering or listening to a message that makes 
her uncomfortable, her head may shift away from the one 
she is talking to. This is an attempt to distance herself from 
the source of the discomfort. If she is comfortable with her 
position and secure in her actions, she will move her head 
toward the other person in an attempt to get closer to the 
source of information. Watch for an immediate and pro-
nounced jerking of the head or a slow deliberate withdrawal. 
Either may happen. 
This action is very different from—and should not be 
confused with—a slight tilt of the head to the side. This 
occurs when we hear something of interest. It's considered 
to be a vulnerable pose and would not be adopted by a 
person with something to hide. 

C L U E     10 
The Posture of a Liar 
When a person feels confident about a situation and con-
versation, he stands erect or sits up straight. This behaviour 
also indicates how people feel about themselves in general. 
Those who are secure and confident stand tall, with shoul-
ders back. Those who are insecure or unsure of themselves 
often stand hunched over, with their hands in their pockets. 
Studies have shown that the best way to avoid being 
mugged is to walk briskly, with your head up and your arms 
moving. Such a style of moving conveys confidence. A con-
versation that produces feelings of confidence or those of 
insecurity will produce the concomitant physical posture. 
C L U E     11 
If She's Headed for the Door . . . 
Just as we move away from someone who threatens us phys-
ically, the person who feels at a psychological disadvantage 
will shift or move away from her accuser. When we feel 
passionate about our ideas, in an attempt to persuade the 
other person, we move toward him. The liar is reluctant to 
move toward or even face the source of the threat. She turns 
sideways or completely away and rarely stands squared off. 
The face-to-face demeanour is reserved for the person 
who seeks to refute a slanderous statement. This is not the 
case when there's deceit. 

Also look for a movement in the direction of the exit. 
Feeling uncomfortable, she may angle her body or actually 
move toward the exit. While standing she may position her 
back to the wall. Her psychological exposure causes her to 
seek physical refuge. Feeling verbally ambushed, she wants 
to make sure that she can see what's coming next. Those 
who are confident and comfortable don't mind taking centre 
stage. 
C L U E    12 
If He's Not Touchin', He's Probably Bluffin' 
The person who is being deceitful will have little or no phys-
ical contact with the one he is talking to. This is an excellent 
and quite reliable indicator. While making a false statement, 
or during a conversation containing one, the liar will rarely 
touch the other person. He's unconsciously reducing the level 
of intimacy to help alleviate his guilt. Touch indicates psy-
chological connection; it's used when we believe strongly in 
what we're saying. 
C L U E    13 
The Finger That Never Points 
Someone who is lying or hiding something rarely points a 
finger, either at others or straight up in the air. Finger point-
ing indicates conviction and authority as well as emphasis 
of a point. Someone who's not standing on solid ground 
probably won't be able to muster this nonverbal cue of dis-
dain. 
C L U E     14 
Roadblocks, Barriers, and Obstacles 
See if he uses inanimate objects—a pillow, a drinking glass, 
anything—to form a barrier between you and him. Just as 
you would shield yourself from physical harm, so, too, does 
he protect himself from a verbal assault. How comfortable 
someone is with a particular topic can be readily seen in how 
open he is to discussing it. Placing a physical barrier be-
tween you and him is the verbal equivalent of "I don't want 
to talk about it," indicating deception or a covert intention. 
Since he can't get up and leave, his displeasure manifests 

itself in the formation of physical barriers between him and 
the source of the discomfort. 
Jim, a colleague of mine, told me an interesting story 
about his former boss, who was president of a large man-
ufacturing company. Whenever Jim was in the boss's office 
and brought up employee problems, product flaws, or any-
thing that made the president uncomfortable, his boss 
would place his coffee mug on the desk in front of him, 
between them both. Then he would casually and quite un-
consciously line up all of the desk accessories, forming a 
clear barrier between himself and his employee. 
 
SUMMARY 
• 
There's movement away from his accuser, 
possibly in the direction of the exit. 
• 
He is reluctant to face his accuser and may turn 
his head or shift his body away. 
• 
The person who is lying will probably slouch; 
he is unlikely to stand tall with his arms out or 
outstretched. There will be little or no physical 
contact during his attempt to convince you. 
• 
He will not point his finger at the person he is 
trying to convince. 
• 
He may place physical objects between himself 
and his accuser. 
S E C T I O N     4 
W H A T  IS S A I D :  A C T U A L  V E R B A L  C O N T E N T  
"The cruellest lies are often told in silence." 
—ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON 
The words we choose to express ourselves provide a window 
to our true feelings. When we wish to deceive, we choose cer-
tain words, phrases, and syntax that we think will convey 
truth in our message. Think of the many ways you can com-
municate the word yes, from the verbal to the nonverbal. 
How we choose to express ourselves indicates how strongly 
we believe what we say. 
There are subtle differences between what the truth 
sounds like and what a lie dressed up to sound truth-
ful sounds like. The words we choose to convey a message 
are much more reflective of our true feelings than you might 
suspect. 

C L U E    15 
Using Your Words to Make His Point 
Have you ever noticed how you respond to social gestures 
of courtesy when you're preoccupied? In the morning, when 
you walk into your office and someone says "Good morn-
ing" to you, you respond with "Good morning." If you're 
greeted with "Hello," you answer "Hello." You're just not 
interested in making the effort to think. 
In this clue, though, the person accused doesn't have time 
to think, so he reflects back the statement of his accuser out 
of fear. Because he is caught off guard, he replies using the 
other person's words, but in the negative. Making a positive 
statement negative is the fastest way to get the words out. 
For example, an aggrieved spouse asks, "Did you cheat on 
me?" The liar answers, "No, I didn't cheat on you." "Did 
you ever cheat on me?" draws the response "No, I never 
cheated on you." Did you becomes didn't and ever becomes 
never. Remember, above all else, the guilty wants to get his 
answer out fast. Any delay makes him feel like he appears 
more guilty. And to the guilty every second that passes 
seems like an eternity. 
Skilled interviewers and interrogators know the following 
rule concerning contractions. When a suspect uses a con-
traction—"It wasn't me" instead of "It was not me"—sta-
tistically speaking, there is a 60 percent chance he's being 
truthful. Sometimes the guilty, in an attempt to sound em-
phatic, don't want to use a contraction in their statement of 
innocence; they want to emphasize the not. 
C L U E     16 
The More He Tries, the More 
You Should Worry 
It's often been said that the best people to sell to are those 
who have signs posted saying NO SALESMAN OR SOLICITORS. 
These people know that they can be sold anything, so they 
attempt to deflect salespeople from trying. 
A person speaking the truth is not concerned about 
whether you misunderstand him; he is always willing to 
clarify. The liar wants to be sure that you understand his 
point immediately so that he can change the subject and no 
further questions will be asked. When his evidence is fragile, 
the words he uses are bold and solid, to compensate. For 
example, asked if he ever cheated on a test in law school, 
Peter might respond with "I'm pretty sure I never did." If 
he had and wanted to convince someone to the contrary, his 
response is likely to be more definitive: "No, I would never 

cheat on a test." Of course someone who never has cheated 
might give the same answer, so this statement needs to be 
considered in the context of the conversation and in con-
junction with other clues. 
Sometimes people who adamantly assert an opinion or 
view don't even hold it themselves. If they were confident 
in their thinking, they would not feel a need to compensate. 
If someone says right up front that he positively won't 
budge, it means one thing: He knows he can be swayed. He 
needs to tell you this so you won't ask, because he knows 
he'll cave in. 
Ironically, the confident person will use phrases like "I'm 
sorry, this is pretty much the best we can do" or "I'm afraid 
there's not a whole lot of room for negotiation here." This 
person's words provide comfort for his opponent, not a 
shield for himself. 
C L U E     17 
The Good Old Freudian Slip 
Sometimes we say one thing when we mean to say another. 
This is referred to as a Freudian slip, a subconscious leak 
when a person's misspoken words reflect and reveal his true 
feelings, thoughts, or intentions. For example, someone who 
means to say, "We worked really hard on the project; it took 
us all night to complete it," might slip and say, "We worked 
really hard on the project; it took us all night to copy it." 
There's a great joke about these unconscious slip-ups. A 
man confessed to his friend that he had made a Freudian 
slip during a recent dinner with his parents. He said, "I 
meant to say 'Could you please pass the salt?' to my mother. 
Instead it came out as 'I had a terrible childhood and you've 
ruined my life, you wicked woman.' ' 
C L U E     18 
I'm Above That Sort of Thing 
When a person is asked a question, if he responds with an 
answer that depersonalizes and globalizes the question, be 
aware. Let's say you ask someone, "Were you honest with 
me about our conversation yesterday?" Watch out if you 
get a reply like "Of course I was. I would never lie to you. 
You know how I feel about lying." Or when someone is 
asked, "Did you ever steal from your last job?" he responds 
with, "No, I think stealing from one's job is the worst thing 

you can do." Or "Did you ever cheat on me?" And you hear, 
"You know I'm against that sort of thing. I think it morally 
reprehensible." To sound more emphatic, a liar offers ab-
stract assurances as evidence of his innocence in a specific 
instance. In his mind the evidence doesn't weigh 
favourably for him, so he brings in his fictitious belief 
system to back him up. 
 
C L U E     19 
Silence Is Gold-Plated 
Have you ever experienced a first date where a lapse in con-
versation caused uneasiness or anxiety? When you're 
uncomfortable, silence adds to your discomfort. Conversely, 
some married couples can be comfortable in each other's 
presence for hours without a single word being exchanged. 
The guilty are uncomfortable with silence. 
When someone is asked a question, take notice if he con-
tinues to add more information without being prodded. A 
typical scenario would go like this: You ask Jack where he 
was Friday night. He responds with "I was out with my 
friends." You don't acknowledge his answer. Jack gets ner-
vous because in his mind he hasn't sold you. So he goes on: 
"We went to the movies." He'll continue adding new facts 
until you respond, thus letting him know that he's convinced 
you. 
This should not be confused with the person who says it 
all right away. The guilty tells his story in dribs and drabs 
until he gets a verbal confirmation to stop. He speaks to fill 
the gap left by the silence. 
C L U E     20 
An Implied Answer Is No Answer 
Often when a person doesn't want to respond to a question 
he will imply an answer. For example, Ralph is speaking on 
the telephone with a girl he has never met before. He says 
jokingly, "So, are you gorgeous?" She proceeds to tell him 
that she works out three times a week, takes an aerobics 
class every other day, and has dated several male models. 
This is a non-answer. She is attempting to circumvent the 
question altogether by implying that she is attractive. 
The following exchange is from a press conference be-
tween reporter Helen Thomas and President Nixon's press 
secretary, Ronald Ziegler, during the Watergate scandal. 

THOMAS: Has the President asked for any resignations so far 
and have any been submitted or on his desk? 
ZlEGLER: I have repeatedly stated, Helen, that there is no 
change in the status of the White House staff. 
THOMAS: But that was not the question. Has he asked for 
any resignations? 
ZlEGLER: I understand the question, and I heard it the first 
time. Let me go through my answer. As I have said, there 
is no change in the status of the White House staff. There 
have been no resignations submitted. 
The question "Has the President asked for any resigna-
tions?" was not answered either directly or indirectly. Zie-
gler tried to imply that he was giving an answer to the 
question, but he never did answer it. 
 
SUMMARY 
• 
He will use your words to make his point. 
• 
He will keep adding more information until he's 
sure that he has sold you on his story. 
• 
He may stonewall, giving the impression that his 
mind is made up. This is often an attempt to limit 
your challenges to his position. 
• 
Watch out for the good old Freudian slip. 
• 
He depersonalizes his answer by offering his 
belief on the subject instead of answering 
directly. 
• 
He may imply an answer but never state it 
directly. 
S E C T I O N     5 
H O W   S O M E T H I N G   IS  S A I D  
"What is the use of lying when the truth, well distributed, 
serves the same purpose." 
—W.E. FORSTER 
I know a hair stylist who would go into the woman's purse 
for his tip after the haircut. No one ever got upset with him 
because he did it in such an innocent way that you just had 
to laugh. It's how he did it that made all the difference. 
Two salespeople can read all the manuals on selling and 
learn all the sales pitches there are, and one will still sell far 
more than the other. While the two speak the same words, 

these words convey completely different messages. How 
something is said is often just as important as what is said. 
Emphasis on different parts of a sentence can covey com-
pletely different meanings. Notice the different ways the 
phrase "Michelle was caught stealing from her boss" can be 
interpreted depending upon where the emphasis is placed. 
Michelle / was / caught / stealing / from her / boss 
a
b
e
d
 
e 
f 
a. By emphasizing the name Michelle, you're conveying the 
significance of who stole. 
b. Emphasis on was draws attention to the fact that it has 
already happened. 
c. Emphasis on caught indicates that the fact that she got 
caught is unusual. 
d. Stress on stealing lets us know that stealing is out of char-
acter for her. 
e. If from her is emphasized, the fact that she stole from her 
own boss is unusual. 
f. Emphasis on boss shows that it was unusual for her to 
steal from a boss—any boss. 
This section explores the subtleties of communication. 
You will see how the speaker's hidden thoughts are always 
hinged to the expression of his words. 
 
C L U E     21 
Speedy Gonzales 
There's a rule of thumb about the speed at which an indi-
vidual answers. It is most germane when you ask about in-
tangibles—attitudes or beliefs—instead of facts. A well 
known restaurant chain uses a timed test response in their 
hiring process. They will ask the interviewee if she has any 
prejudices against other ethnic groups or if she feels uncom-
fortable working with or serving certain people. The longer 
it takes her to answer no, the lower her score. This question 
concerns a belief and requires internal processing. Someone 
who holds no such prejudice answers quickly. A person who 
is prejudiced takes longer to evaluate the question and for-
mulate her answer. The prejudiced person tries to come up 
with the "right" answer, which takes more time than merely 
giving an honest answer. 
Another element to consider is pacing. How fast does the 
rest of the sentence follow the initial one-word response? In 
truthful statements a fast no or yes is followed quickly by 
an explanation. If the person is being deceitful the rest of 
the sentence may come more slowly because she gets that 
no or yes out quickly but then needs time to think up an 
explanation. 

C L U E     22 
Compensation 
Be suspicious of someone whose reaction is all out of pro-
portion to the question or comment. This person is attempt-
ing to accomplish a variety of objectives. She wants to 
appear outraged by the accusation, but she is not. So she 
exaggerates her displeasure, often ending up going a little 
overboard. She tries to convince you because the evidence 
doesn't. As Shakespeare said, "The lady doth protest too 
much." Also beware of diatribes where she repeats points 
that she has already made. 
Sometimes a person may claim to be indignant about a 
cause or belief because he is trying to convince himself along 
with his accuser. This reaction, interestingly enough, takes 
place at the unconscious level. The man who claims to be 
adamantly against prostitution may be covering up his true 
feelings, which are the exact opposite. Not wanting to be-
come consciously aware of what he really believes, he re-
inforces his overt attitude by expressing it aggressively. Of 
course, though, the person could just be passionate about 
his cause, so this statement needs to be viewed within the 
context of the conversation. 
This person is also reluctant to use words that convey 
attachment and ownership. For example, while lying about 
his car having been stolen, he may refer to it as "the car" 
or "that car" and not "my car" or "our car." When lying 
about a relationship or actions toward a person, he may use 
such phrases as "that child," or "the relationship," instead 
of "my child" or "our relationship." 
 
C L U E     23 
Emphasis Makes the Meaning 
The pronouns /, we1 and us are underused or absent. The 
liar doesn't want to own his words. When a person is making 
a truthful statement, he emphasizes the pronoun as much 
as or more than the rest of the sentence. Instead of saying, 
"Yes, I am," a person who is lying may respond with a 
simple yes. 
Words of expression are not emphasized. For example, 
"We had a greeeat time!" conveys ownership of his words. 
Now say quickly, "It went great"—bland and noncommittal. 
When a person is speaking truthfully, the initial one-or 
two-word agreement or denial may be elongated for em-
phasis—"Nooo," "Yeeesss," or "Of courrrse." This type of 
emphasis is usually absent in deception. This elongation oc-
curs because the person is comfortable with his position and 
doesn't mind "playing" with his answer. A friend of mine 
who is an acting coach tells me that unpolished actors often 

speak all the words in their lines with equal emphasis, a 
dead giveaway that they are novices. The simple practice of 
elongating key words often makes for much more believable 
performances. 
Additionally, there will probably be no highs or lows, just 
in-betweens. Not only is the voice higher—like any other 
muscle, the vocal cords tighten under stress—but varied 
voice inflection may be missing. We generally use inflection 
for emphasis when we are making a point. A deceitful state-
ment often is delivered in a flat voice devoid of any real 
nuances. 
 
C L U E     24 
The Mumbler 
The words themselves may not be clear; they seem forced. 
This person is inclined to mumble and speak more softly 
than if he were passionate about his statement. Out of fear, 
however, it's possible that his voice may become higher and 
his rate of speech accelerated. Grammar and syntax may be 
off as well, with poor sentence structure and misspoken 
words likely to occur. 
When Sarah professed her love for her fiance, she would 
tell him how much she cared for him. And he would reply 
in a barely audible voice, simply repeating her words back 
to her. This didn't seem like a big deal until she started 
putting a few other things together. Instinctively we know 
that when a person responds like Sarah's ex, something is 
missing. And that something is often the truth. 
C L U E     25 
Questions and Statements Shouldn't 
Sound Alike 
Asking a question and making a statement have two distinct 
speaking styles. When a person asks a question—"What are 
you doing?"—his head comes up at the end—on the ing in 
doing. The eyes, too, will open wider at the last part of a 
question. 
How is this useful? Suppose you get an answer that is 
worded like a statement but styled like a question. This 
indicates that the person is unsure of his statement and is 
looking for confirmation from you. If you ask someone a 
question and he says with all certainty, "XYZ," but his 
voice, head, and eyes lift at the end of their statement, 
then his conviction is not as strong as he is leading you 
to believe. 

SUMMARY 
• 
Deceitful responses to questions regarding beliefs 
and attitudes take longer to think up. 
• 
Watch out for reactions that are all out of 
proportion to the question. 
• 
The person who is lying may leave out 
pronouns and speak in a monotonous and 
inexpressive voice. Words may be garbled, and 
syntax and grammar may be off. In other words, 
his sentences will likely be muddled.  
• 
Statements sound an awful lot like questions, 
indicating that he's seeking reassurance. 
S E C T I O N     6 
P S Y C H O L O G I C A L   P R O F I L E  
These clues concern how a liar thinks and what elements 
are usually missing from a story that's fictitious. 
 
 
C L U E     26 
He's Got Cheating on His Mind 
How people see the world is often a reflection of how they 
see themselves. If they think that the world is just a cesspool 
of lies and deceit, then they themselves may be full of lies 
and deceit. Watch out for those people who are always tell-
ing you just how corrupt the rest of the world is. As the 
saying goes, "It takes one to know one." 
More specifically, if someone out of the blue with no real 
evidence accuses you of lying, ask yourself, "Why is he so 
paranoid?" In psychological terms this is what is referred 
to as projection. That's why the con artist is the first one to 
accuse another of cheating. If you're constantly being ques-
tioned about your motives or activities, this should send off 
bells in your mind. How often do we hear of a jealous boy-
friend who constantly accuses his girlfriend of cheating on 
him only to have her find out later that he's guilty of every-
thing he's been accusing her of doing? 
Also, if he is always asking you if you believe him, then 
beware. Just as the clinically paranoid person feels that 
everyone can see right through him, this person questions 
the integrity of his facade. If your response gives no real 
indication of your thoughts, someone who is deceitful may 
respond with something like "You don't believe me, do 
you?"  Here's a good rule of thumb: most people who tell 
the truth expect to be believed. 

C L U E    27 
The Single Guy 
Is the focus of the individual whose veracity you're trying 
to assess internal or external? Let's say a single man walks 
into a bar hoping to meet a woman. If he considers himself 
to be attractive and a good catch, then his focus would be 
on what the women in the bar look like. If he considers 
himself to be unattractive, then he would be more concerned 
with how he appears to them. In other words, his focus shifts 
depending upon his level of confidence. 
When a person has confidence in his words, he's more 
interested in your understanding him and less interested in 
how he appears to you. This is a subtle clue, but we can see 
examples of this in everyday life. When you're interested 
simply in making a point, you want to make sure the other 
person understands you. When you're deceitful or trying to 
cover up, your focus is internal—on how you sound and 
appear as you're relating the "facts." You're conscious of 
your every word and movement. You try to act in a certain 
way so you will be perceived as you want to be. Subtle dif-
ference, but a big distinction. 
C L U E     28 
Another Dimension in Lying 
Here's a clear indication of a story that doesn't ring true. As 
careful as he may be in relating the details of an event, the 
liar often leaves out one crucial element—the point of view 
or the opinion of someone else. This is because it adds an-
other dimension or layer to his thinking that the liar is usu-
ally not clever enough to come up with. While other people 
may be included in his story, another person's thoughts are 
not. Suppose you ask your girlfriend where she was last 
night. She tells you she had to work late. But you're not 
convinced that's true. So you press for more information 
and ask what she had for dinner. Here are two possible 
answers she might give: 
1. "Oh, I wasn't really hungry, so I just came home and 
watched TV with my roommate. She made pasta but I 
passed on it." 
2. "Oh, I wasn't really hungry, so I just came home and 
watched TV. My roommate was so shocked that I would 
actually skip a meal, especially her famous pasta dish." 
Both answers contain pretty much the same information, 
but the second adds another layer of thought—the room-

ate's point of view. Our gut instinct might tell us that this 
answer is more believable and more likely to be true than 
the first one. Not including another's point of view in an 
answer doesn't immediately disqualify it. The inclusion of 
another's point of view, though, will often indicate that 
you're being told the truth. 
 
 
CLUE    29 
Everything Went Perfectly! 
One thing is almost always missing from a story that's not 
true—what went wrong. Events that are made up rarely 
include any negative details. A person who is lying is con-
cerned with getting her story straight, and her thoughts are 
essentially one-dimensional. This means only primary 
thoughts—which are positive. Negation is not a primary 
emotion. In much the same way that if I said "Don't think 
of an elephant," you couldn't do it. In order to process the 
information, you need to first think of an elephant. Ask a 
friend to tell you about her last vacation. She'll cover all of 
the bases, both positive and negative—maybe the food was 
good, maybe the flight was delayed. Then ask someone to 
make up a story about a vacation that she never went on. 
You'll notice that the elements are usually all positive. The 
luggage never gets lost on a made-up voyage. 
One caveat to this clue: if the story is used as an expla-
nation as to why he was delayed or had to cancel plans, then 
obviously you can expect negatives. In that case this clue 
would not be helpful. 
CLUE    30 
Is There Anything You Would Like to Know? 
A good liar may be practiced at answering questions so that 
she sounds truthful. But even the best will give themselves 
away by not asking the right questions. The reason for this 
is that the conversation is not real for the liar. After all, 
she's not interested in learning anything. She only wants to 
convince you that she is being truthful. For example, during 
their first intimate encounter, Randy asks his new girlfriend 
if she's ever been tested for AIDS. She responds with "Oh, 
yes, certainly," and continues on a bit about annual 
checkups, giving blood, etc. And then nothing! If she was 
concerned about her health, as her answer implied, then 
she would have asked him the same question. The liar is 
often unaware that coming across as truthful means both 
answering and asking questions. 

SUMMARY 
• 
We often see the world as a reflection of 
ourselves. If you're being accused of something, 
check your accuser's veracity. 
• 
Look at whether his focus is internal or 
external. When a person is confident about 
what he's saying, he's more interested in your 
understanding him and less interested in how he 
appears to you. 
• 
The point of view of a third party is likely to 
be absent from a liar's story. 
• 
In relating a story, a liar often leaves out the 
negative aspects. 
• 
A liar willingly answers your questions but asks 
none of his own. 

S E C T I O N     7 
G E N E R A L   I N D I C A T I O N S   OF  D E C E I T  
The following is a mixed bag of clues that indicate 
deception. They can be used with great reliability by 
themselves or in conjunction with other clues. 
C L U E     31 
Whew, I'm Sure Glad That's Over 
Watch and listen carefully during a conversation 
when the subject is changed. Does he become 
happier? Does he seem more relaxed? He may even 
offer a smile or nervous laugh. Notice his posture. 
Does it become more relaxed and less defensive? The 
giveaway here is how fast and dramatically his mood 
changes, indicating his discomfort with the previous 
subject matter. Test him to see if he's quick to change 
the subject. If he has been accused of something 
abominable and is innocent, he will resent the 
accusations and will insist that the topic be explored 
further, either now or at some future date. 
Remember, the guilty wants the subject changed; 
the innocent always wants a further exchange of 
information. 
C L U E     32 
How Dare You Accuse Me? 
If he is accused of something harsh and is not 
indignant and offended that his honour has been 
questioned, this is a highly reliable sign that he's been 
caught off guard. It's been said that during the 
preliminary stages of the 0. J. Simpson investigation, 
detectives thought it curious that Simpson did not 
appear to be outraged by the accusation that he had 
murdered his ex-wife and her friend Ron Goldman. 
While he is being accused the liar will remain 
fairly expressionless, like a student being admonished 
by his principal. A look as if to say "What?!" will not 
be present. The liar is more concerned with how he is 
going to respond than he is with the accusation itself. 

 
C L U E     33 
Never Believe Anyone Who Says This 
Have you ever met someone who insisted on starting 
statements with phrases such as "To be perfectly 
honest," "To be frank," or "To tell you the truth"? 
Someone who is telling the truth doesn't need to 
convince you before he gets his words out. Some 
people habitually use these phrases. Such expressions 
mean literally that everything that came before them 
is a lie, everything that will come after will be a lie, 
but for now he's decided to pause to tell you the 
truth. If these phrases are not part of a person's 
usual verbal repertoire, watch out! If someone's 
going to tell you the truth, it's unlikely that he would 
start off by saying just that. If he feels the need to tell 
you that he's being honest and that you're about to 
receive the whole truth, you can be pretty sure you're 
not getting it. 
Also included in this clue is the ever-pervasive and 
always annoying phrase "Why would I lie to you?" If 
you receive this response to an accusation you've 
made, be suspicious. If he's being accused of 
something, he probably has an excellent reason to lie. 
I cannot tell a lie. Or can I? The phrase "I never 
lie" should always be received with caution. Anyone 
who needs to declare his virtuous nature does so 
because there is no other way for you to find out. 
Some people will say just about anything to sound 
believable, even lie straight to your face. One's 
honour should speak for itself. When a person tells 
you that he is the most honest person that you will ever 
meet, don't walk away—run. 
C L U E     34 
I've Got My Answer Down Pat 
If his answer sounds pat and well rehearsed, there's a 
fair chance that he was expecting the question and 
took the time to get his story straight. Having facts 
and details at your fingertips that should not be easily 
recalled is a good indication that you have prepared. 
For instance, suppose Samantha, when asked where 

she was on a particular day two months ago, responds 
with, "I went to work, left at five-thirty, had dinner at 
Caracella's until seven forty-five, and then went 
straight home." 
Law enforcement officers are aware of and use this 
clue with great results. Suppose a police detective 
questions a suspect. If the suspect is able to recall what 
he did and where he was on a given date two years 
earlier, something is very wrong. Most of us can't 
remember what we had for breakfast yesterday 
morning! 
Rehearsed answers also provide a person with a 
way of giving you information that you never asked 
for, information that they want known. Politicians are 
famous for answering questions that were never 
asked. They have an agenda that will come out 
regardless of the questions put to them. Sometimes 
they don't even bother to rework the question; they 
just take off in their own direction. During the 
William Kennedy Smith rape trial, Smith's uncle Ted 
Kennedy was called as a defence witness to testify 
about to his knowledge of the day. In just minutes 
the courtroom was treated to Kennedy's taking us 
through the history of his family, the death of his 
brothers, and the trials and tribulations of his life. 
The courtroom was mesmerized. This was done to 
evoke the Kennedy aura and charm for the benefit of 
William Kennedy Smith. Whether it had a direct 
impact or not is hard to say, but Smith was found 
not guilty. 
 
C L U E     35 
Can You Repeat the Question, Please? 
Instead of hemming and hawing, he may resort to 
one of the following statements to buy himself some 
time, to review the best course of action, to prepare 
his answer, or to shift the topic entirely. They are all 
designed to delay his answer. For example, you ask 
someone hold old he is and he responds with "How 
old do you think I am?" It's obvious that your answer 
may influence his. Here are some of the more popular 
ones. 
1. "Could you repeat the question?" 
2. "It depends on how you look at it." 
3. "What's your point exactly?" 
4. "Why would you ask something like that?" 
5. "Where did you hear that?" 
6. "Where is this coming from?" 

7. "Could you be more specific?" 
8. "How dare you ask me something like that?" 
9. "I think we both know the answer to that." 
 
10. "Well, it's not so simple as yes or no." 
11. "That's   an   excellent   question.   It   deserves   
some 
thought." 
12. "Can you keep a secret? Great. So can I." 
13. "I'm not sure this is the best place to discuss 
this." 
14. The person repeats your question back to you, 
an attempt at sounding incredulous. For example, 
"Did I sell you a puppy with a heart condition? Is 
that what you're asking me?" 
 
C L U E     36 
Sleight of Mouth 
You've heard the old saying "If it sounds too 
good to be true, then it probably is." During the 0. 
J. Simpson trial, Detective Mark Fuhrman said on 
the witness stand and under oath that he had never 
in the past ten years used a specific racial epithet. 
Almost no one—including the jury—believed that 
this was true. He would have been deemed as much 
more credible had he admitted to using racial 
epithets on occasion and with regret. But saying he 
never used them in any context seemed highly 
implausible. And indeed, the evidence later proved 
him to be a liar, forcing him to assert his Fifth 
Amendment privilege to avoid self-incrimination. If 
something sounds implausible, investigate further—
no matter how convincing the person is. 
C L U E     37 
Tricky Dicky 
There is also such a thing as a lie through 
implication instead of expression. During the 1960 
presidential campaign, Richard Nixon sought to 
remind Americans that his opponent John F. 
Kennedy was Catholic, not Protestant. We had 
never had a Catholic president before, and Nixon 
thought the fact that Kennedy was Catholic might 
make the American people uneasy. Blatantly 
reminding the public of his opponent's religion 
would make him look bad. So, in keeping with his 
reputation and according to the wisdom of politics, 

Nixon said the following: "I don't want anyone not 
to vote for John Kennedy because he is a Catholic." 
The intent was obviously different from the 
message, but he got his point across nicely. 
Although as history later proved, his effort was 
futile. 
Whenever someone makes a point of telling you 
what they're not doing, you can be sure it's exactly 
what they are doing. The preamble is what they really 
mean. After a blind date, Jim was informed by the 
woman he went out with that she's very busy for the 
next few weeks but that she doesn't want him to think 
she's blowing him off. If that was not her intention, 
then it wouldn't have occurred to her to say that. 
When you hear, "Not to hurt your feelings, but. . ." 
you can be sure that this person doesn't mind hurting 
your feelings. 
Another clever way of lying through implying 
comes in the form of a denial. It works like this. 
Let's say that an agent is attempting to convince a 
casting director to cast his client, John Jones, instead 
of another actor, Sam Smith. The agent casually 
mentions to the casting director that Sam was at the 
Betty Ford Clinic last month, but heard it was only 
to see a friend. Now the casting director wonders if 
Sam has an alcohol or drug problem. Had the agent 
simply said that Sam was there to get treatment, the 
casting director would have been suspicious of his 
intentions in mentioning it. By stating it in the form of 
a denial, he implants the suggestion without 
suspicion. 
Let's look at another example. You hear, "He's 
having marital problems, but it has nothing to do 
with his wife's new job." What's the first thing you 
ask? "What does his wife do?" Suddenly you're in the 
exact conversation that is "supposed" to have no 
bearing on the facts. Clever, isn't it? Don't be misled. 
CLUE    38 
Don't Be Ridiculous 
Beware of the person who uses humour and sarcasm to 
defuse your concerns. For instance, you ask one of your 
salespeople if she met with the competition and she 
replies, "Sure did. We meet every day in a secret 
warehouse. You can get in only if you know the 
special knock. It's there where we discuss the eventual 

downfall of your business empire." This makes you 
feel foolish about inquiring further. And she knows 
it. When you ask a serious question, you should ex-
pect a direct response. 
C L U E     39 
We're Out of Stock 
Have you ever had the salesman tell you that the item 
you were looking for is inferior to another one? And 
as it turns out, the one that you want happens to 
be out of stock. 
Clearly, he would have been much more believable if 
he had said he did have what you wanted but 
preferred to show you something even better. So 
before you accept someone at his word that he has 
something better to offer, first see whether he has 
what you originally asked for. If he doesn't, there's a 
better than even chance that you shouldn't believe 
him. 
C L U E     40 
The Number Zone 
There's an old saying that goes, "If you always tell the 
truth, then you'll never have to remember anything." 
When a liar speaks, in an attempt to appear fluid, he 
will often fall into the number zone. This is when all 
of the numbers he mentions are the same or multiples 
of one another. This happens because he is thinking 
fast and is trying to remember what he's saying. A 
typical exchange during a job interview might go as 
follows: 
Ms. SMITH: SO, Mark, how many years' experience 
do you 
have in restaurant management?  
MARK: At the three places I've worked, I've had 
about six years experience in total.  
Ms. SMITH: Tell me a little bit about your experience at 
these 
places.  
MARK: Well, I would put in sixty-hour weeks. And I 
was in 
charge of a crew of about twelve . . . 

 
Watch out when facts, figures, and information 
have unusual similarities. 
C L U E     41 
Nervous Nellie 
While we can control some gestures, the following 
are involuntary responses that we have little or no 
control over: 
The fight-or-flight syndrome: A person's face 
may become flushed or, with extreme fear, can turn 
white. Look for signs of rapid breathing and increased 
perspiration. Additionally, take note if he is trying to 
control his breathing to calm himself. This will 
appear as deep, audible inhaling and exhaling. 
Trembling or shaking in voice and body: His 
hands may tremble. If he is hiding his hands, it might 
be an attempt to hide uncontrollable shaking. His 
voice may crack and seem inconsistent. 
This is hard to swallow: Swallowing becomes 
difficult, so look for a hard swallow. Television or 
movie actors who wish to express fear or sadness 
often use this behaviour— hence the expression "all 
choked up." Also indicative is a clearing of the throat. 
Due to anxiety, mucus forms in the throat. A public 
speaker who is nervous often clears his throat before 
speaking. 
 
A choir boy, he's not! Vocal chords, like all 
muscles, tighten when a person is stressed. This will 
produce a higher sound, octave, and/or pitch. 
I'm sorry, you said what? When we're under 
stress, our ability to focus on something is often 
diminished. Have you ever met someone at a party 
and forgotten his name right after you're introduced? 
Look for signs of distraction and an inability to pay 
attention to what's going on. 
The whistler: Whistling seems to be a universal 
action to relax oneself when one is frightened or 
anxious, and is an unconscious attempt to build up 
courage or confidence. Most people have little tells-

—gestures used when they are nervous. They may rub 
an ear for reassurance or plaster on a fake smile to 
boost their confidence. 
C L U E     42 
Oh So Clever 
The ancient sport of Judo has a fundamental 
philosophy: do not confront force with force; instead 
use your opponent's strength and turn it against him. 
The purveyors of this clue never get defensive or 
argue, they simply use your own words to support 
their claim. 
Let's say that a guard is standing watch over a 
restricted area. It's his job to check ID s of those who 
enter. "I'm not sure you have, authorization," he says 
to a man attempting 
access. "I'm not surprised," answered the man, "only a 
few people are aware of my clearance level. My work 
here is not supposed to be known by everyone." 
Do you see how quickly the man verbally 
disarmed the guard? Had he started to argue and 
insist that he had clearance and that the guard was a 
fool for not knowing, he would have met with a wall 
of resistance. Rather, he agrees with the guard, and 
explains that the reason why the guard thought he 
didn't have authorization is the very reason why he 
does have authorization. 
A certain bagel company overcame an obvious 
marketing problem by using this same practice. The 
company sells frozen bagels, yet it wanted to project 
an image of freshness, a characteristic that to most of 
us is the opposite of frozen. Their solution? The 
slogan "They taste best because they're frozen." 
Watch out when someone tries to use an obvious fact 
to support a questionable assertion. 
C L U E     43 
The Moral Assumption 
This clue is so clever and pervasive that once you hear 
about it, you'll probably realize that it has already 
been used on you many times. The genesis of this clue 
comes courtesy of human nature. We all have an 

inherent need for order, for continuity and 
consistency. 
The purveyor of deceit demonstrates characteristics 
with a specific moral bent so that other of his actions 
will be seen 
in that light. An example will clarify. Let's say that 
Joe, the financial officer of a large corporation, thinks 
that you may be on to his embezzlement scheme. He 
knows that you have no real proof, but he wants to 
throw you off the track. What might he do? In your 
presence, he may openly chastise another employee 
for "borrowing" some office supplies for her personal 
use at home. Your impression is that Joe is a moral 
person who objects to something as minor as stealing 
office supplies. Certainly he cannot be responsible for a 
large-scale embezzlement scheme. 
A wife who is concerned that her husband 
suspects her of having a brief affair (which she did 
indeed have) might say something like this: "Honey, 
do you remember Harvey, Sally's husband? Well, 
Jill told me that they're having problems because 
Harvey kissed a co-worker at the Christmas party. If 
you ask me, she should leave that no-good piece of 
garbage. Who knows what else he's done? Even if 
that was it, what is going through his mind? What an 
idiot!" 
This is going to put serious doubts in the 
mind of this woman's husband that she would ever 
be unfaithful to him. 

C L U E     44 
Oh, by the Way 
Beware if she casually tells you something that 
should deserve more attention. For example, she 
says, "Oh, by the 
way, I've got to go out of town next weekend on 
business." If she doesn't usually travel for work on 
the weekends, then you would expect her to make a 
point of how unusual the trip is. Her downplaying 
the trip makes it suspicious. 
When something out of the ordinary happens and 
the person doesn't draw attention to it, it means that 
she is trying to draw attention away from it. And for 
this there is usually a reason. Another tactic is 
running off a long list of items in the hope that one 
will remain unnoticed. Magicians, who are experts 
at slight-of-hand, know that their effectiveness lies 
in their ability to draw your attention where they 
want it to go. When your attention is being 
directed one way, check to see what lies the other 
way. 
CLUE    45 
Lots of Lies 
If you catch a person in one lie, it makes good sense 
to question everything else that person has said. 
Let's say you're buying a car and the salesman says 
that you must act quickly because two other people 
have looked at this car and it's the last one in stock. 
Say something like "I hear that this model retains its 
value better than most others, isn't that true?" Or "I 
heard that they're going to raise the prices on next 
year's model substantially." These are statements an 
honest salesperson will question if he or she hasn't 
heard 
any such thing. However, if your salesperson is 
quick to agree with you, it means that he would say 
almost anything to make the sale—which also 
means that he probably doesn't have anyone else 
interested in the car, even though he's claimed 
otherwise. If you can, try to find out if this person 
has a reputation for being deceitful. Honesty is a 

function of character, and character is not 
something that is easily changed. 
C L U E     46 
Wild, Wild, Wild 
"You're not going to believe what happened to me!" 
How many times have we heard that phrase? Common 
sense dictates that if we want someone to believe us, 
we should make our story or explanation as believable 
as possible. This is usually true, but not always. 
Sometimes the more outrageous a story is, the more 
believable it becomes. Why? Because we think to 
ourselves, If this person wanted to lie to me, he'd 
probably have come up with something a little less 
far-fetched. So in this clever deception the liar 
embellishes his story and simply offers the phrase 
"Don't you think that if I was going to lie to you, I'd 
come up something a little more believable? You just 
can't make this stuff up." When in fact that's exactly 
what he's done. 
 
SUMMARY 
• 
When the subject is changed, he's in a better, 
more relaxed mood. 
• 
He does not become indignant when falsely 
accused.  
• 
He uses such phrases as "To tell you the 
truth," "To be perfectly honest," and "Why 
would I lie to you?"  
• 
He has an answer to your question down pat.  
• 
He stalls by asking you to repeat the 
question or by answering your question with 
a question.  
• 
What he's saying sounds implausible.  
• 
He offers a preamble to his statement 
starting with "I don't want you to think 
that . .."  Often that's exactly what he wants 
you to think. 
• 
She uses humour or sarcasm to defuse your 
concerns. 
• 
He offers you a "better" alternative to your 
request when he is unable to give you what 
you originally asked for. 
• 
All of his facts relating to numbers are the 
same or multiples of one another. 

• 
There is evidence of involuntary responses 
that are anxiety based. 
• 
He uses an obvious fact to support a dubious 
action. She casually tells you something that 
deserves more attention. 
• 
He exclaims his displeasure at the actions of 
another who has done something similar so 
that you will not suspect him. 
• 
If he lies about one thing, everything he says is 
questionable. 
• 
His story is so wild that you almost don't 
believe it. But you do, because if he wanted 
to lie, you think that he would have come up 
with something more plausible. 
 

P A R T  
2 
B E C O M I N G  A H U M A N  L I E  
D E T E C T O R  
"Deceit, feeding on ignorance, weaves carelessly around the 
truth, twisting its prey down a path 
to destined regret." —
DAVID J. LIEBERMAN 

This part contains a sophisticated and comprehensive sys-
tem of questioning that will get the truth out of any person. 
We often go into verbal combat unprepared to do battle. 
Because we're unable to think clearly and effectively com-
municate our thoughts, we think of what we should have 
said two days later. 
The clues to deception can be used with great reliability 
in everyday situations and conversations. However, if you 
must know the truth in a given situation, this part provides 
you with a sequence of questions that virtually guarantees 
that you will know (a) if you're being lied to and (b) what 
the truth is if it's not obvious from the lie. This procedure 
was developed as a result of my research in human 
behaviour. When used in order, all three phases offer you 
the greatest opportunity to get at the truth. 
OUTLINE 
Phase One. Three Attack-Sequence Primers 
Sometimes this technique in and of itself will reveal a per-
son's guilt, but if it doesn't, you haven't lost any leverage 
and can proceed to phase two. The primers are used to test 
a person's vulnerability and to gauge his or her level of con-
cern over a particular subject. 
 
Phase Two. Eleven Attack Sequences 
This phase consists of one direct sequence and ten other 
possible sequences. Use whichever one best fits the situation. 
These carefully scripted sequences put you in the best pos-
sible position to get at the truth. You will see that the phras-
ing of your request—what precedes the request and what 
follows it—is essential. Context is everything! 
Phase Three. Eleven Silver Bullets 
Fire these off if you're still not satisfied. Perhaps the person 
hasn't yet confessed but you know he isn't being truthful. 
If you feel you've been lied to, but a full confession isn't 
forthcoming, this phase takes you through an additional 
process to get to the truth. Though these bullets can be fired 
in any order you want, some will rule out others. So choose 
ahead of time which are most appropriate for the situation. 

HOW TO PROCEED 
Lay the groundwork by starting with phase one. Then 
choose one of the eleven attack sequences from phase two. 
If you haven't gotten a full confession after you try an attack 
sequence, fire your silver bullets one by one. The results will 
be truly astonishing. 
If terms like arsenal, weapons, and bullets seem warlike, 
it's understandable. But they're thoroughly appropriate 
considering the situation. A lie can be very injurious. Pro-
tecting yourself is the objective. You need to see the process 
of detecting deceit for what it really is—a verbal battle. And 
from now on, when you enter this battle, you will be very 
well armed. 
P H A S E     1 
T H R E E  A T T A C K - S E Q U E N C E  P R I M E R S  
Most of us are familiar with the Rorschach test, developed 
in 1921 by Hermann Rorschach. The test consists of ten 
bilaterally symmetrical inkblots, each on an individual card. 
These abstract shapes, which have no particular meaning 
or form, are shown one at a time to the subject. Put simply, 
the theory behind the test is that a person's interpretation 
of the shapes will reveal his or her unconscious or subli-
mated thoughts. 
For the sequence primers, we use the same psychological 
principles but employ them in a whole new way: you find 
out what's on a person's mind by giving him a verbal ab-
stract test. A person's true intentions will surface in his com-
ments and/or gestures. 
 
P R I M E R     1 
Don't Accuse—Allude 
Asking a person outright, "Have you been cheating on me? " 
will put him on the defensive. The objective here is to ask 
a question that does not accuse the person of anything but 
alludes to the person's possible behaviour. 
If he doesn't realize you're implying anything, then he's 
probably not guilty. But if he gets defensive, then he knows 
what you're getting at. The only way he could know is if he 
is guilty of the accusation. The point is, an innocent person 
shouldn't have a clue about what you're alluding to. 

You don't want the question to be accusatory or too 
broad. For example, if you suspect someone of murder, you 
wouldn't say, "Kill anyone last weekend?" And asking, 
"How was your day?" is clearly too broad. 
You want the question to be framed in such a way that 
he will get suspicious of your asking only if he is guilty. He 
won't react unusually if he isn't, but as if it were an out-of -
the-ordinary question. If you asked your neighbour 
whether space aliens had landed on her front lawn, you 
wouldn't expect her to respond seriously at all. She may 
answer jokingly or just laugh it off entirely. And you 
certainly wouldn't expect, "Why do you ask? Did someone 
say something to you?" This response is curious for a 
question that should be taken as absurd. 
When you ask the question, be matter-of-fact. Don't 
square off. You don't want him defensive unless he has a 
reason to be. Beware of all the clues to deceit, particularly 
the one about a guilty person continuing to add more in-
formation as he thinks of it and without your prompting. 
Now, whatever is on the person's mind will reveal itself 
in the conversation that ensues. If he's innocent of what you 
suspect him of, then he'll answer casually and leave it at 
that. However, if he's guilty he will want to know what 
you're thinking because he's not sure why you're asking the 
question. So he'll question you about your question. 
Examples of Phrasing Perimeters 
The key is to phrase a question that sounds perfectly in-
nocent to an innocent person, but like an accusation to the 
guilty. 
SUSPICION: YOU think that your employee was fired from his 
last job because he stole from his previous employer. 
QUESTION: "DO you still keep in contact with your old 
boss?"  
SUSPICION: YOU feel that your boyfriend or girlfriend was 
unfaithful the night before. 
QUESTION: "Anything interesting happen last night?" 
SUSPICION: YOU think a co-worker told your secretary 
that you have a crush on her.  
QUESTION: "Heard any good gossip recently?" 
Any answers such as "Why do you ask?" or "Where did 
you hear that?" indicate concern on the person's part. He 
should not be seeking information from you if he does not 
think that your question is leading. He should also not be 
interested in why you're asking the question unless he thinks 
that you may know what he doesn't want you to. 

P R I M E R     2 
Similar Scenario 
This primer works by introducing a scenario similar to what 
you suspect is going on. There are two ways to do this— 
specific and general. This primer deals with specifics, while 
Primer 3 takes the general approach. This works well be-
cause you're able to bring up the topic without being ac-
cusatory. 
SUSPICION: YOU suspect one of your salespeople has lied to 
a customer in order to make the sale. 
QUESTION: "Jim, I'm wondering if you could help me with 
something. It's come to my attention that someone in the 
sales department has been misrepresenting our products 
to customers. How do you think we can clear this up?" 
If he's innocent of the charges he's likely to offer his ad-
vice and be pleased that you sought out his opinion. If he's 
guilty he'll seem uncomfortable and will assure you that he 
would never do anything like that. Either way, this opens 
the door to probe further. 
SUSPICION: A hospital administrator suspects that a doctor 
was drinking while on duty. 
QUESTION: "Dr. Marcus, I'd like to get your advice on some-
thing. A colleague of mine at another hospital has a prob-
lem with one of her doctors. She feels he may be drinking 
while on call. Do you have any suggestions on how she 
can approach the doctor about this problem?" 
Again, if he's guilty he'll seem very uncomfortable. If he's 
not drinking on duty, then he will be pleased that you sought 
his advice and offer it. 
PR I M ER   3 
It's Amazing, Isn't It? 
With this primer, you still bring up the subject, but in a 
general way. Casually broaching the subject in this manner 
provides great insight into the person's innocence or guilt. 

SUSPICION: You think a student has cheated on her exam. 
QUESTION: "Isn't it amazing how someone can cheat on a 
test and not realize that I was standing behind her the 
entire time?"  
SUSPICION: YOU suspect a co-worker of bad-mouthing you to 
your boss.  
QUESTION: "It's amazing all the backstabbing that goes on 
around here, isn't it? And these people doing it think that 
it won't get back to the person involved." 
SUSPICION: YOU think that your girlfriend may be two-
timing you. 
QUESTION: "It's amazing how someone can be unfaithful 
and expect not to get caught." 
Again, any answers that prompt a response such as "Why 
do you ask?" Or "Where did you hear that?" show that 
your question concerns him. 
Sometimes there's no need to confront someone who we 
feel has lied. We just want to know for ourselves. In in-
stances like these, it's not necessary to finish the attack se-
quence. Just use the primers to satisfy your own curiosity, 
or use the techniques in Part 3, which allow you to discreetly 
gather information. 
Note: Two other responses are possible for primers 2 and 3. The per-
son may begin to talk generically about the subject or change it com-
pletely. A change in subject is highly indicative of guilt. However, if he 
finds your question interesting and he's innocent, he might begin a con-
versation about it. This is a strong indication of his innocence, because 
he's unafraid to discuss the subject and hasn't probed why you have even 
brought it up. 

PHASE 2 
E L E V E N  A T T A C K  S E Q U E N C E S  
It's 8:00 A.M. on a Sunday morning. You're resting in bed 
when the doorbell rings. Mumbling incoherently, you get 
up, put on your robe, and stagger to the door. Upon open-
ing it you're greeted by a smiling, energetic young women 
waving a glossy pamphlet in your face and asking for thirty 
seconds of your time. Ten minutes later you close the door, 
stumble back to bed, and ask yourself, "Why did I give 
that woman ten dollars to save the red-spotted frog from 
extinction? I don't even like frogs." Obviously there was 
something involved that made you exchange something 
you like-—your money—for something you don't particu-
larly care about—frogs. You can see from this transaction 
that sometimes it's the context of a request, not the request 
itself, that determines a person's willingness to cooperate or 
resist. 
ATTACK    S E Q U E N C E     1 
Direct Questioning 
Sometimes the direct approach is best. The only drawback 
to asking a question outright is that you then can't use any 
of the other sequences unless you let a considerable amount 
of time pass. 
Stage 1. Ask your question directly. When you talk with 
the person you want to get information from, to maximize 
the amount you learn, follow these six guidelines. 
1. Give no advance warning of the subject you're about 
to bring up or of any feelings of mistrust you may have. 
Unsolicited questions are the toughest for him to answer, so 
if he brings up the subject, make sure that you ask your 
question after any statements that he may make. His deceit 
will be harder to detect if: 
• He has responded to the same statement before. When 
you ask your question, phrase it in a new way. Don't keep 
asking the same question over and over again. He gets 
entrenched in his position and good at convincing you. 
By varying how you ask your question, you have more 
opportunities to detect deceit. 
• He knows that he will be asked the question. Give no 
warning of what's on your mind. 
• He knows what he's going to say, like an actor reading 
his lines. You know they are not his words; he's just 

following a script. Give him some time and you'll be 
crying and laughing along with him. No matter how 
trained he is, once he gets beyond the script, he's 
unrehearsed and unprepared, and that's right where you 
want him. 
• He thinks he's justified in lying. This removes all guilt- 
oriented clues. When people believe in what they are say-
ing—even if they  don't believe it—they say it with 
conviction. 
• He feels there's little or nothing at stake, so he probably 
won't appear nervous, which means you can't use those 
clues as an indicator. Most of the other clues will still be 
available for you to observe. 
• He has a severe mental disorder. Such a person does not 
have a concept of right and wrong. 
2. Never reveal what you know first.  Ask questions 
to gather information to see if it's consistent with what 
you already know. During World War II, England had 
cracked Enigma, the secret code used by the Germans. 
England learned of an impending attack by the Germans 
on the town of Coventry. However, if Churchill evacuated 
the people, the Germans would know that England had 
broken the code and would change it. This left Churchill 
with an obvious conundrum. Weighing the lives of those 
who lived in Coventry against the enormous possible fu-
ture gain of being privy to all Germany's war plans, Chur 
chill decided not to tell the townspeople, and hundreds 
died. With any luck you'll never be in such a predicament, 
but you can see that sometimes it's better not to reveal 
your position—even if it means suffering great short-term 
losses. 
The greater objective must be kept in mind. This makes 
it possible for him to slip up and reveal information you 
know to be contradictory to the truth. If he knows what 
you know, then he can tailor his story to be consistent with 
the information that you already know. 
3. 
The way you present yourself can greatly influence 
the attitude of the other person. Simple things such as 
unbuttoning your coat or uncrossing your arms can 
make the other person feel less defensive. When you have 
a rapport with someone, he is much more likely to feel 
comfortable and open up. Rapport creates trust, allowing 
you to build a psychological bridge to the person. The 
conversation is likely to be more positive and you will be 
much 
more 
persuasive. 
Three 
powerful 
tips 
for 
establishing and building rapport are: 

• Matching posture and movements: If he has one hand in 
his pocket, you put your hand in yours. If he makes a 
gesture with his hand, after a moment, you casually make 
the same gesture. 
• Matching speech: Try to match his rate of speech. If he's 
speaking in a slow, relaxed tone, you do the same. If 
he's speaking quickly, then you speak quickly. 
• Matching key words: If she is prone to using certain words 
or phrases, employ them when you speak. For instance, 
if she says, "The offer is designed for incredible gain for 
both parties," later in the conversation you might say 
something like, "I like that the offer is designed to offer 
incredible gain . . ." Make sure that you don't seem to be 
mimicking her. Obvious copying of another's movements 
is unproductive. A simple reflection of aspects of the per 
son's behaviour or speech is enough. This can be a 
very powerful skill for you, once you become good at it. 
Later in the questioning you'll move to stage four. This 
will make your target person nervous, enabling you to shift 
strategies. But initially you don't want to make him nervous. 
You want to create an environment in which the only reason 
he has to be nervous is if he's done something wrong. This 
way any anxiety-based responses or actions are the product 
of his deceit, not his environment. 
4. Lie detectors use what is called a baseline, which cor-
responds to the person's normal level of anxiety. It's a good 
idea, if possible, to do something similar. Ask a question 
that you know will produce a response similar to how you 
expect him to react. You need to know whether certain pat 
terns of behaviour are part of this person's usual 
repertoire. 
You want to establish how he responds to a question that 
can be answered easily and use that as a benchmark if you 
don't know the person well. In other words, if he waves his 
arms around no matter what he's talking about, you want 
to know this. 
5. Although your posture should be relaxed and non- 
threatening, see if you can square off so that you're facing 
each other. This allows you to use several of the detection 
clues having to do with body language (see part 1, section 
1 and 2). 
6. Never, ever interrupt. You can't learn anything new 
while you're talking. Also ask open-ended questions. This 
gives you the opportunity to hear longer answers. 

 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 2. Silence. First, don't respond at all. This will 
usually make him continue talking. The guilty abhor si-
lence. It makes them uncomfortable. It also gives you a 
chance to observe other clues such as changes of subject, 
uncomfortable laughter, nervousness, etc. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 3. Really? At the end of his answer respond with 
"Really?" This one simple word gives you two shots at as-
sessing the same answer. He doesn't know how you feel 
about his answer yet, so it doesn't tip your hand. But it 
forces him to repeat his response. Here, you'll look for clues 
such as if his voice goes up at the end of the sentence (see 
clue 25), indicating he may be unconsciously looking for 
confirmation. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 4. Sudden death. Follow with "Is there anything 
you want to get off your chest?" This puts him on the de-
fensive. Now you can watch for those clues that come out 
when the person is more nervous than before you chal-
lenged his credibility. This question really confuses people 
because the answer is going to be no, regardless. But now 
that you've changed the tone of the conversation, he's 
thrown for a loop. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
 
A T T A C K    S E Q U E N C E     2 
Lead and Confine 
Stage 1. Ask a leading question. Ask a question that 
restricts his answer to something he feels is positive, a ques-
tion he doesn't mind answering truthfully. This technique 
is called lead and confine. For example, if you want to know 
if your boyfriend went out last night, an outright question 
might make him lie if he feels you will be upset. Instead, 
your question is "You were back by two A.M. last night, 
weren't you?" If he didn't go out, he would be free to tell 
you. But if he did, he feels comfortable agreeing with you 
because you make it sound okay. Whether he was or wasn't 
back by two A.M. isn't the point. You've got the answer to 
your real question. 

Let's take another example. If you want know if your 
fiancé ever cheated on you, the question you would ask is 
"You were only with other people before we got engaged, 
right?" Again, she feels that she's comforting you by an-
swering the way you've indicated is okay. Even though she 
answers yes, she still could have cheated on you after you 
got engaged as well. So if you want to know that, too, make 
that the focus of your next attack. After some time has 
passed, you might ask, "I know that you've had to get some 
things out of your system, but when we get married, I want 
to know that I can trust you. You will give up these ways 
once we're married, won't you?" 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
 
Stage 2. Reverse course: You've got be kidding! Now 
you throw her completely off balance, putting her in a sit-
uation where she won't know how she should answer. Here 
you sound disappointed that she answered that way. This 
forces her to rethink her answer and become comfortable 
telling you the truth. You would say something like "I was 
hoping you did, so you would have gotten it out of your 
system. Please tell me that you've done it, so I know that 
it's over with." 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 3. This is not going to work. This is where you 
let her know that everything you've ever thought about her 
may be wrong. The only way she can show you that she is 
the person you thought she was is to confess. "I thought you 
were somebody who had a sense of adventure. Someone who 
knows how to live a little." 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
A T T A C K    S E Q U E N C E     3 
Time Line Distortion 
This sequence combines several psychological principles 
and produces truly remarkable results. To explain, we'll use 
the following example. Let's say that your wife calls you up 
at work and informs you that your fifteen-year-old son took 
the family car for a joy ride and was just brought back by 
the police. You might be understandably upset. However, 
let's take the same set of circumstances, except for one 
thing. In a different conversation, your wife casually men-

tions that this mischievous deed was done by your now 
twenty-five-year-old son ten years earlier. Your reaction is 
likely to be considerably more mild. Why? Because time has 
passed. 
Let's look at the flip side of this example. If a couple's 
son borrowed their car without permission ten years earlier, 
he would probably feel that he could mention it with full 
impunity—it might even be amusing at this point—and he 
certainly doesn't have to worry about being punished. It's 
doubtful, though, that he would feel so comfortable telling 
his parents if he had taken the car the night before. 
Time is a powerful psychological tool that can shift our 
perspective dramatically. The two factors affecting time are 
when the event occurred and when you became aware of it. 
If either or both of these factors are moved into the past, 
the event is no longer timely. This greatly reduces its per-
ceived significance. 
Scenario A 
 In this example, you suspect your spouse of having an affair. 
Stage 1. Setting the scene. Let the conversation turn 
casually to the topic of cheating. Then very nonchalantly 
joke about the affair that you suspect him of having had. 
This will prompt him to ask what you're talking about. 
 
Stage 2. It's no big deal. Looking fairly shocked that he 
seems concerned, you reply with "Oh, I've always known 
about that. Do you want to know how I found out?" This 
question completely shifts the weight of the conversation. 
He feels that he's totally in the clear and will now seek to 
satisfy his curiosity. He's thinking that the relationship has 
been fine for all this time, even though you "knew" of his 
affair for some time. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 3.1 appreciate what you've done. If he still denies 
it, tell him, "I thought that you knew I knew but were pro-
tecting my feelings, knowing that I'd understand it was just 
an accident and that I really wouldn't want to talk about it." 
Now it's even more tempting to confess because by doing so, 
he actually thinks that he's a good guy. And that all this time 
he was doing something nice and didn't even know it. 

Scenario B 
Let's take an example in which you suspect several em-
ployees in your store of stealing money. 
Stage I. Setting the scene. With one of the employees 
let the conversation turn casually to stealing and say, "Oh, 
I knew right from the start what was going on." 
Stage 2. It's no big deal. "You had to know I knew. 
How else do you think you could have gotten away with it 
for so long? I hope you don't think I'm a complete idiot." 
(That's a great phrase because he doesn't want to risk of-
fending you on top of everything else.) 
Stage 3. I appreciate what you've done. "I know that 
you were just going along with it because you were scared 
of what the others would do. It's really okay. I know you're 
not that kind of person." Do you see how nicely this works? 
By confessing he feels that he's being a good person, the 
kind of person his boss thinks he is. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
ATTACK    S E Q U E N C E     4 
Direct Assumption/Shot in the Dark 
Stage 1. Set the scene. This sequence is used when you 
have a gut feeling that something isn't right, but you're not 
quite sure what it is and you don't have any evidence to 
support your thinking. In this sequence he is forced to talk 
about whatever he feels are his misdeeds. You will be 
amazed at what comes out of his mouth. Remember to hold 
your ground and not settle until you hear a confession of 
value. We've all done things we're not proud of. This ques-
tioning sequence really opens the mental floodgates. You 
have the leverage because you're in control of the conver-
sation—you're holding all the cards. It's his job to figure out 
what he's done wrong and how to make it all right. First set 
the scene: be somewhat curt and standoffish, as if something 
heavy-duty is bothering you. This will cause his mind to 
race to find ways to explain the "error of his ways." 

Stage 2. I’m hurt. Say, "I've just found something out 
and I'm really hurt [shocked/surprised]. I know you're go-
ing to lie to me and try to deny it, but I just wanted you to 
know that I know." This is different from saying, "Don't lie 
to me." By saying "I know you're going to lie," you establish 
that (a) he's guilty of something and (b) you know what it 
is. Now it's merely a question of whether or not he comes 
clean. Notice that you're not asking for anything. Saying 
"Please don't lie to me" establishes that you don't know 
what the truth is, putting you in a weaker position. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 3. Holding your ground. Say, "I think we both 
know what I'm talking about. We need to clear the air, and 
we can start by your talking." 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 4. Continue to hold your ground. Repeat phrases 
such as "I'm sure it will come to you" and "The longer I 
wait, the madder I'm getting." 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
 
Stage 5. Apply social pressure. Now is the time to add 
a little social pressure. This re-establishes that your 
assertion is a fact, not a suspicion. "We were all talking 
about it. Everybody knows." Now he begins to get curious 
about who knows and how they found out. As soon as he 
tries to find out this information, you'll know that he's 
guilty. 
If you don't get the answer you 're looking, for continue 
to phase three. 
ATTACK    S E Q U E N C E     5 
Who, Me? 
Stage 1. Setting the scene. This sequence works well 
when you don't have any real proof that someone has 
wronged you but you believe that you are right in your as-
sumption of guilt. For example, let's say Winston's house 
had been broken into. He was convinced that his ex-
girlfriend, whom he had recently broken up with, was the 
culprit. But he wasn't sure. She had his key, and the only 
thing that was missing was some expensive jewellery that 

was well hidden. But the housekeeper or the electrician who 
had just finished some work could have done it or it might 
have been simply a random burglary. Just calling his ex-
girlfriend and accusing her of this crime would have been 
futile. She would deny all knowledge of the event, and he 
would be left with no evidence and no confession. Instead, 
he proceeded as follows. 
 
He phoned to let her know in a very non-accusatory way 
that there had been a break-in and some items were missing. 
In an attempt to sound surprised, she asked what happened. 
The following is a short example of the type of conversation 
that would ensue. 
WINSTON: The police are going to want to talk to everyone 
who had access to the house. Since you still have a key, 
they're going to want to speak with you. Just routine 
stuff, I'm sure. Of course you're not a suspect. 
Ex-GlRLFRIEND: But I don't know anything about it. 
WINSTON: Oh, I know. Just policy, I guess. Anyway, one of 
my neighbors said that she got a partial license-plate 
number on a car that was by my house that day. 
Ex-GIRLFRIEND: {After a long pause) Well, I was driving 
around your neighbourhood that day. I stopped by to 
see if you were home. But when you weren't, I just left. 
So far she has effectively explained her presence there 
that day. But in doing so she has established either an un-
canny coincidence or her guilt. Had she been innocent, she 
would have had no reason to pursue this line of conversa-
tion. He then introduces more evidence. 
WINSTON: Oh, really? Well, they did a fingerprint test too. 
That should show something. Ex: What 
test? WINSTON: Oh, they dusted for prints and 
… 
 
At this point she said that the police might 
pick up her prints, since she had been there 
previously. Although by now he knew she 
was involved, it wasn't until about ten minutes 
later that she broke down and confessed—at 
first to just being in the house and then later to 
taking the jewellery. 

Stage 2. Inform non-accusatorily. Casually inform 
your suspect of the situation. 
Stage 3. Introduce evidence to be rebutted. As you in-
troduce the evidence, look to see if every one of your state-
ments are met by explanations from him as to how the 
evidence could be misunderstood. For example, let's say 
that you suspect that your co-worker had shredded some of 
your files in hopes of beating you out for a promotion. You 
would first set the stage by letting him know that you can't 
find some important files. And then you say something like, 
"Well, it's a good thing my new secretary noticed someone 
by the shredder the other day. She said she recognized his 
face but didn't know his name." At this point see if he offers 
up a reason as to why he would be mistaken for the "real 
culprit." He might tell you that he was there shredding some 
of his own documents. An innocent person would not feel 
the need to explain in order to avert the possibility that he 
might be wrongly accused. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
 
Stage 4. Continue. Continue with more facts that the 
person can try to explain away. But in actuality, as soon as 
he starts to talk about why the situation might "look that 
way," you know you have him. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
ATTACK    S E Q U E N C E     6 
Outrageous Accusations 
In this sequence you accuse the person of everything and 
anything under the sun. By accusing him of doing every 
possible thing wrong, you will get a confession concerning 
what he has really done—which to him at this point is no 
big deal, considering all that you're accusing him of. 
Stage 1. Accuse him of everything. In a very fed-up 
manner accuse him of doing every imaginable dishonest and 
disloyal act. 
Stage 2. Introduce the suspicion. Now you introduce 
the one thing that you feel he really has done, and in an 
attempt to clear himself of the other charges, he will offer 
an explanation for his one slip-up. He will of course natu-
rally profess total innocence of the other accusations. 

Phrase it as such: "I mean, it's not like you just [whatever 
you suspect him of doing], that would be fine. But all these 
other things are unspeakable." 
You might get a response like "No, I just stole that one 
file because of the pressure to get the job done, but I 
would never sell trade secrets!" The only way to prove 
his innocence to all of your outrageous accusations is to 
explain why he did what you really suspect him of 
doing. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
Stage 3. Step in closer. This increases anxiety in the 
guilty. The movement makes him feel he's being closed in 
on. If you don't get the answer you want, go back to stage 
1 and ask again. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
A T T A C K     S E Q U E N C E     7 
Is There a Reason? 
Stage 1. Introduce a fact. In this sequence the person 
must answer your question with information, not a simple 
denial. For example, if you want to know if your secretary 
went out last night when she said she was sick, your question 
might be "I drove by your house on the way home. Is there a 
reason your car wasn't in the driveway?" If you simply ask, 
"Did you go out last night?" she can deny that she did. But 
by introducing a plausible fact, you force her to answer. If 
she was out, she will try to explain the missing car. When she 
does, you will have verified what you suspect to be true— 
that she was not at home sick. Do you see how this works? If 
she lied about having to stay home because she was sick, 
then she has to explain where the car was. She might say 
that a friend borrowed it or that she ran out to get cold med-
icine, etc. Had she been home sick, she would simply tell you 
that you were wrong—the car was in the driveway. 
Stage 2. One more shot. You want to give her one more 
shot at coming clean or at coming up with a reasonable 
explanation to explain your "fact." Say, "Oh, that's odd, I 
called your house and I got your machine." To which she 
might reply, "Oh, I turned my machine on to get some rest." 
Remember, if she is guilty she will look for any way to make 
her story fit your facts. If she does this, she's probably lying. 
Now it's possible that a friend did borrow the car and that 

she did turn her machine off. However, at some point these 
"explanations" are going to start sounding manufactured. 
Additionally, because she is forced to tell new lies to pro-
tect previous ones, you now have several statements you can 
look at for signs of deceit. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 3. Stare. Staring is an underused yet formidable 
weapon. It produces different results depending upon par-
ticular situations. Staring makes someone who is on the de-
fensive feel closed in; your glare is infringing on her personal 
space, inducing a mental claustrophobia. To escape she 
needs only tell you the truth. Lock eyes with her and ask 
again. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
ATTACK    S E Q U E N C E     8 
Third-Party Confirmation 
This sequence is one of the more powerful ones, provided 
you have the cooperation of a third party. You gain maxi-
mum credibility, because it removes just about any doubt 
that there is deception on your part. 
Scenario 
You suspect one of your employees is having someone else 
punch out on the time clock for him. 
Stage 1. Accuse outright. After gaining the assistance of 
a friend or co-worker, you have this person make the accu-
sation for you. Such as "Mel, 1 was talking to Cindy, and 
she told me she's getting pretty tired of your having someone 
else punch out for you so you can leave work early." 
At this point Mel is concerned only with Cindy's disap-
proval of his actions. Your friend is thoroughly believable 
because we rarely think to question this type of third-party 
setup. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 

Stage 2. Are you kidding? If he still won't confess, switch 
the focus with "Are you kidding? It's common knowledge, 
but I think I know how you can smooth things over with 
her." See if he takes the bait. A person who's innocent would 
not be interested in smoothing things over with someone else 
for something that he hasn't done. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 3. Last call. "Okay. But are you sure?" At this 
point any hesitation is likely to be sign of guilt because he's 
quickly trying to weigh his options. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
A T T A C K     S E Q U E N C E     9 
The Chain Reaction 
In this sequence you create a chain reaction that originates 
in the person's own deceitful actions. In other words, the 
only way he can take advantage of a new opportunity pre-
sented to him is to admit his previous actions. The sequence 
is based on the assumption that the wrongdoing took place 
and brings the conversation past that. Whenever you want 
a confession, you're far better off moving the conversation 
past his actions. Otherwise he's likely to lie or become de-
fensive. Both reactions do you little good. However, if the 
focus of your discussion is not on what he has already done, 
then you're likely to get him to admit to his actions, as he 
assumes that you already have proof of them. 
Scenario 
You suspect several employees in your store of stealing 
money. 
Stage 1. Setting the scene. In a one-on-one meeting with 
the employee, let him know that you're looking for someone 
to be in charge of a new internal theft program for the en-
tire company. 
Stage 2. The irony is . . . "We're looking for someone 
who knows how it's done. Now don't worry, you're not going 
to get in trouble. As a matter of fact we've known about it for 
some time. We were more interested in seeing how efficient 
you were. Quite impressive. Anyway, we feel that since you 

know how it's done, you'll know how to prevent it. Granted, 
it's pretty unusual, but this is an unusual instance." 
He now feels comfortable with his previous actions. His 
new position is even dependent upon his misdeeds. Denying 
what he's done will cost him his big promotion. If you tell 
your story convincingly, he will even boast about his mis-
deeds. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to the next stage. 
Stage 3. I told them so. "You know, I told them that 
you would be too afraid to have an open discussion about 
this. [Notice how disarming the phrase "open discussion" 
is; it's much better than "confess" or "stop lying."] They 
were wrong, I was right." 
This works because he now feels that whoever "they" are, 
they're on his side. He's going to be hesitant about letting 
"them" down. Look for hesitation on his part. If he's guilty 
he will be weighing his options. This takes time. An innocent 
person has nothing to think about. Only the guilty have the 
option of confessing or not. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
ATTACK   S E Q U E N C E    10 
The Missing Link 
This sequence is used when you have some idea about 
what's going on, but you don't have the full story. You offer 
the information you do have so that he believes the rest of 
what you say. This is also used with one magic key phrase, 
and if he takes the bait, he's guilty. 
Scenario 
You think that your mother-in-law may have hired a private 
investigator to follow you around. 
Stage 1. List facts. Tell her something that you know to 
be true. "I know you're not very fond of me, and that you 
objected to the wedding, but this time you've gone too far." 
 
Stage 2. State your assumption. "I know all about the 
investigator. Why did you think that was necessary?" 
Stage 3. The magic phrase. "You know what, I'm too 
upset to talk about this now." 

If she becomes quiet she's probably guilty. If she has no 
idea what you're talking about, you can be sure that she 
doesn't care if you're too upset to talk about it—because 
you have no reason to be upset. 
The guilty person will honour your request because she 
won't want to anger you further. An innocent person will 
be mad at you for accusing her of something that she hasn't 
done and will want to discuss it now. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue 
to phase three. 
A T T A C K     S E Q U E N C E    11 
Condemn or Concern 
Stage I. I'm just letting you know. The key with this 
sequence is not to accuse, just to inform. The response of 
your suspect will let you know if he's innocent or guilty. 
This sequence explores a person's frame of mind when he 
or she is presented with new information. Pamela has a 
routine physical, and when her doctor gets the blood test 
results, he calls to inform her that she has contracted the 
herpes virus. Thinking back over her recent sexual partners, 
she is convinced that it must have been either Mike or Steven 
who gave her the disease. Merely asking her two "suspects" 
if they knowingly gave her herpes would probably prove 
futile, as a denial by both would be likely. Fortunately Pa-
mela is skilled in the art of detecting deceit and decides on 
a different course of action. 
She calls both guys up and casually informs them that 
she just found out that she has herpes. The responses she 
got led her straight to the culprit. After hearing the news 
the two men responded as follows: 
MlKE: Well, don't look at me. I didn't give it to you! I'm 
clean.  
STEVEN: You what! How long have you had it for? You 
might have given it to me! I can't believe this. Are you 
sure? 
Which one is likely to be the guilty party? If you guessed 
Mike, you're right. On hearing that his previous sexual part-
ner has an incurable, easily transmissible disease, he goes 
on the defensive—assuming that he is being accused of giv-
ing it to her. He is unconcerned about his own health be-
cause he already knows he is infected. Steven, in contrast, 
assumes that the call is to inform him that she might have 
infected him. Thus, he gets angry because he is concerned 

about his health. Mike simply wants to make Pamela believe 
he is not guilty. 
Here's another example. Let's say that you're working in 
the customer service department of a computer store. A cus-
tomer brings back a nonworking printer for an exchange, 
claiming that he bought it just few days before. He has the 
all-important receipt and the printer is packed neatly in the 
original box. Upon inspecting the contents you find that a 
necessary, expensive, and easily removable component of 
the machine is missing, a clear indication of why the ma-
chine was not functioning properly. Here are two possible 
responses you might get after informing the customer of 
your discovery. 
Response 1. "I didn't take it out. That's how it was 
when I bought it." (Defensive)  
Response 2.  "What? You sold me a printer that has a 
missing part? I wasted two hours trying to get that 
thing to work. " (Offensive) 
Do you see how effective this is? The person who utters 
Response 2 has every right to be annoyed; it never crosses 
his mind that he's being accused of anything. The person 
who gives Response 1 knows he never even tried to get the 
printer to work because he took the part out. It doesn't occur 
to him to become angry. He assumes that he's being accused 
of removing the part and becomes defensive when you in-
form him the part is missing. 
If you don't get the answer you're looking for, continue to 
phase three. 
 
P H A S E     3 
E L E V E N   S I L V E R   B U L L E T S :   H O W  TO  G E T  
T H E  T R U T H   W I T H O U T  B E A T I N G   IT 
O U T   O F  T H E M  
The following eleven bullets can be used independently or 
in order, one after another, until you get the answer you're 
looking for. They are designed to get the person to confess. 
While the bullets can be fired in any order, some of them 
negate subsequent ones, so see which ones are appropriate 
for your particular situation and then arrange them in the 
appropriate sequence. 
You want to convey enthusiasm and truthfulness when 
you use these bullets. They are most effective when you con-
vey complete honesty in what you're saying. So don't "give 
yourself away" by making the same mistakes revealed in 
the clues. You see, the clues to deceit work in reverse as 
well. If you do not commit any of them, the person you are 

speaking to will at both the conscious and the unconscious 
level perceive you as truthful. Don't forget that this person 
must believe what you're saying is true. If you threaten to 
do something, it has to be a believable threat or he won't 
take the bait. To convey honesty and truthfulness in your 
message, use the following techniques: 
• Look the person directly in the eyes. 
• Use hand movements to emphasize your message. 
• Use animated gestures that are fluid and consistent with 
the conversation. 
 
Stand or sit upright—no slouching. Don't start 
off with any statements such as "To tell you 
the truth . . ."or "To be perfectly honest with 
you . . . "  Face the person straight on. Don't 
back away. 
A N D  D O N ' T  F O R G E T  T H E  C A R R O T !  
"And there goes Lucky . . ." This is the announcer's famil-
iar line at the dog track at the start of the race. Lucky refers 
to a stuffed rabbit that moves around the track just in front 
of the lead dog, an incentive that keeps all the dogs running 
faster. Liars are a lot like dogs. They need an incentive to 
confess. And an incentive is much more powerful if it's of-
fered in a specific way. The payoff for confessing needs to 
be immediate, clear, specific, and compelling. You can't just 
tell a person what he'll gain by being truthful or lose by 
continuing to lie; you must make it real for him—so real, 
in fact, that he can feel, taste, touch, see, and hear it. Make 
it his reality. Let him experience fully the pleasure of being 
honest and the pain of continuing the lie. Involve as many 
of the senses as you can, particularly visual, auditory, and 
kinaesthetic. Create images for the person to see, sounds for 
him to hear, and sensations that he can almost feel. You 
want to make this experience as real as possible. 
The best way to do it is to first state the positives, then 
state the negatives, and then present the choice. You want 
to use this type of imagery with the silver bullets. 
For example, suppose you are a boss investigating the 
possibility that your employee is embezzling money from 
the company. Here's how you might talk to him: "Bill, you 
need to tell me the whole story* so we can put this behind 
us. Look, I've got big plans for you. You know that corner 
office with the green marble floors and mirrored bar? Well, 
pretty soon you'll be sitting behind that solid oak desk and 

running your own division. Of course you'll have your own 
assistant—probably Cathy. And when you drive to work 
each morning you'll be able to park in one of the reserved 
spaces. The monthly executive dinner meetings as well as 
use of the company vacation home in Hawaii will be yours 
as well." 
Do you see how imagery helped Bill imagine himself in 
his new position? His "logical" promotion has been trans-
formed into an emotional experience. 
Now you, as Bill's boss, pause, sigh, and in your best 
parental tone finish your statement. "Unfortunately, none 
of this will ever be possible if we don't clear the air about 
the missing money. Taking it is one thing—we all make 
mistakes. I have, you have, we all have. But I can't have a 
liar working here. If you wait for accounting to tell me, as 
tough as it will be for me to do, you'll be out of here real 
fast. And unfortunately you know how these things can get 
around. Getting another job will be very difficult for you. 
As you pound the pavement each day looking for work 
you'll find one door after another slamming shut in front 
of you. I sure wouldn't want to face your wife every night 
when you tell her that you had no luck finding a new job. 
So what's it going to be? The corner office and the bright 
future, or the disgrace and pain of losing everything?" 
 
*The phrase "whole story" is more effective than asking someone to 
confess or tell the truth. By asking for the whole story you're not implying 
that he's been lying to you and you're giving him credit for being partially 
honest. Now he just has to go a little further and be completely honest. 
Asking someone to tell the truth is asking him to reverse his original po-
sition, the lie. And this is more difficult to bring about. 
 
Above all, be consistent 
Keep your message consistent. Remember that we all com-
municate on two levels: verbal and nonverbal. For instance, 
when you give an ultimatum, make sure that your nonver-
bal communication is consistent with your words. If you tell 
someone that you have "had enough and are through being 
lied to" only to remain where you are, you're not going to 
be very convincing. In this instance you would need to get 
up and walk toward the exit. You can always come back 
with another strategy later. Your behaviour must always re-
flect the intensity and passion of your message. 
Quick Tip: Always use the person's name when you're speaking. People tend 
to listen more closely and respond more compliantly when they hear their 
name. 

S I L V E R     B U L L E T    1 
If You Think That's Bad, 
Wait Until You Hear This! 
This bullet works well because it forces the liar into thinking 
emotionally instead of logically. It alleviates his guilt by 
making him feel that he's not alone, and it throws him off 
by creating a little anger and/or curiosity. Plus he thinks 
that you and he are exchanging information, instead of his 
giving you something for nothing. 
Sample question formation: "The reason I'm asking you 
these questions is that I've done some things that I'm 
not too proud of, either. I can understand why you might 
have . . .  In a way I'm almost relieved. Now I don't feel too 
bad." At this point he will ask you to get more specific about 
your actions. But insist that he tell you first. Hold out and 
he'll come clean. 
S I L V E R     B U L L E T    2 
It Was an Accident. Really! 
This is a great strategy because it makes him feel that it 
would be a good thing to have you know exactly what hap-
pened. He did something wrong, true, but that is no longer 
your concern. You shift the focus of your concern to his 
intentions, not his actions. This makes it easy for him to 
confess to his behaviour and "make it okay" with the 
explanation that it was unintentional. He feels that you 
care about his motivation. In other words, you let him 
know that the source of your concern is not what he's 
done, but why he's done it. 
Sample question formation: "I can understand that 
maybe you didn't plan on its happening. Things just got out 
of control and you acted without thinking. I'm fine with 
that—an accident, right? But if you did this on purpose, I 
don't think that I could ever forgive you. You need to tell 
me that you didn't do it intentionally. Please." 

S I L V E R     B U L L E T     3 
The Boomerang 
Firing this bullet really throws a psychological curveball. 
With this example you tell him that he did something good, 
not bad. He's completely thrown off by this. 
Scenario A 
You suspect that Richard is stealing from the company. You 
want to find out if this is true, and if so, how long it's been 
going on. 
Sample question formation: "Hey, Richard, I think you 
and I can become very wealthy partners. It seems that 
you've been cutting in on my action a little bit. But that's 
okay. We can work together, you old devil." You want to 
seem glad that you know what he's doing. 
Scenario B  
You suspect that your spouse may be having an affair. 
Sample question formation: "You know, John, while 
I'm not thrilled about what was going on behind my back 
[this phrase is said to gain credibility; starting off with an 
honest statement makes what follows more believable], you 
should have said something. I could have saved you a lot of 
sneaking around. Maybe all three of us could get together. 
It might be fun. All this sneaking around is silly." 
Wow, he's blown away. He has an incentive for telling 
the truth that's better than what he was doing on the sly. In 
other words, he thinks that by coming clean, he'll have more 
fun doing what he's been doing. If he's not cheating on you, 
he'll think you're nuts, but you will nonetheless have the 
truth. 

Scenario C  
You want to see if your interviewee has lied on her resume. 
Sample question formation: "As we both know, every-
body pads his resume just a bit. Personally, I think it shows 
guts. It tells me that the person isn't afraid to take on new 
responsibilities. Which parts were you most creative with on 
this resume?" 
 
S I L V E R     B U L L E T    4 
Truth or Consequences 
With this bullet you force your antagonist to work with you 
or you both end up with nothing. This is the exact opposite 
of the boomerang. Here the person has nothing unless 
he cooperates with you. Since you have nothing anyway 
(meaning you don't have the truth), it's a good trade-off for 
you. The following parable illustrates this point nicely. 
A greedy and evil watermelon farmer realizes that some-
one has been stealing one watermelon from him each night. 
Try as he might, he cannot catch the thief. Frustrated and 
annoyed, one afternoon he goes into his vast watermelon 
patch and injects one of the melons with a lethal poison. Not 
to be totally cruel, he posts a sign that reads, "To the person 
who is stealing from me: I have poisoned one of the water-
melons. Steal from me, and you will be risking your life." 
The next morning he goes out, and while he is pleased to 
see that the thief has not struck, he finds a note left for him. 
"Dear Farmer: Tonight I too have poisoned one of your wa-
termelons. Now we can either work together or they will all 
rot." 
Scenario A  
You suspect that your housekeeper has stolen from you. 
Sample question formation: "I'd rather hear it from you 
first. I can live with what you did/what happened, but not 
with your lying to me about it. If you don't tell me, then it's 
over. If you tell me the truth, things can go back to how 
they were. But if you don't, then we have no chance here, 
and you'll have nothing." 
You can't let the person benefit from his action unless he 
tells you about it. Now the only way he can set things 
straight is by confessing and cooperating with you. 

This bullet allows him to confess to his wrongdoing with 
less anxiety. You want to convey that anything that he's 
done pales in comparison to his lying to about it: "Doing 
what you did is one thing—we can get past that—but lying 
about it is something that I cannot deal with. Just be honest 
and we'll be able to put this whole thing behind us. Until 
you come clean, it won't be possible for you to continue 
here." 
S I L V E R     B U L L E T    5 
Speak Now or Forever Hold Your Peace 
Plumbers know that the time to negotiate a price is when 
the basement is flooded. Obviously, the motivation for the 
homeowner to act is highest when the problem is most in-
tense. And when might the pilots' union go on strike? Right 
before holidays, the peak days of the year for airline travel. 
The name of the game is leverage. 
Deadlines produce results. How fast do you think you 
would get your taxes in if there was no deadline? Or if 
there was a deadline but no penalty was attached to it? How 
fast would you get a project done at work if your boss told 
you that the results had to be on his desk before you retired? 
Would you ever get around to using those coupons if they 
had no expiration date? We have deadlines with penalties 
attached in almost every area of our life. 
Human beings place a premium on that which is scarce. 
Simply put, rare equals good. You can dramatically increase 
your leverage by conveying that this is the only time that 
you will discuss this. Let him know that (a) this is his last 
chance he'll have for explaining himself, and (b) you can 
get what you need from someone else. Try increasing the 
rate of your speech as well. The faster you speak, the less 
time he has to process the information, and it conveys a 
stronger sense of urgency. 
Give a deadline with a penalty for not meeting it. Dead-
lines force action. If the guilty party thinks that he can al-
ways come clean, then he will take a wait-and-see approach 
before tipping his hand. Let the person know that you al-
ready know and have proof of his action. And admitting his 
sins now will give him the opportunity to explain his side. 
Sample question formation I: "I want to hear it from 
you now. After tomorrow, anything you say won't make a 
difference to me." 

Sample question formation II: "I know what happened/ 
what you did. I was hoping I would hear it from you first. 
It would mean a lot to me to hear your side of it. I know 
there are two sides to every story, and before I decide what 
to do, I want to hear yours." 
Hearing this gives him the feeling he still has a chance if 
he confesses. After all, what really happened can't be as bad 
as what you heard. Confessing now is a way of cutting his 
losses. 
S I L V E R     B U L L E T    6 
Reverse Course 
This sequence provides the person with an unforeseen and 
unexpected incentive to tell the truth. You convey to him 
that what happened or what he did was a good thing insofar 
as it allows you and he to establish an even better relation-
ship—personal or professional. You give him an opportu-
nity to explain why he took that choice. You also blame 
yourself. Here's how it works. 
Sample question formation: "I understand why you 
would have done that. Clearly you wouldn't have unless 
you had a good reason. You were probably treated unfairly 
or something was lacking. What can I do to help so that it 
doesn't happen again?" This is an assumptive question— 
you take for granted you are right in your assertion that he 
acted in this way. When he begins to tell you his griev-
ances, it paves the way for him to justify his previous ac-
tions—his misdeeds—to you. Keep interjecting the 
following phrases: "I take full responsibility for your ac-
tions. Let's work together to see how we can avoid this 
happening again. I understand completely. You were right 
to do what you did." 
 
 
S I L V E R     B U L L E T    7 
I Hate to Do This But You 
Leave me No Choice 
This is the only strategy that involves threat. The other bul-
lets make it comfortable for the person to reveal his true 
self. This one turns up the heat a little. You let him become 
aware that there are going to be greater ramifications and 
repercussions than just lying to you—things that he never 
thought about. 
In this bullet you up the ante, but you rely on his imag-
ination to set the terms of the damage that you can inflict. 

His mind will race through every possible scenario as his 
own fears turn against him. You create a larger problem 
and then offer a solution. The deceiver made his choice to 
deceive based upon a gain/loss ratio that he deemed to be 
to his benefit. Letting him know that the ramifications are 
much greater than he ever considered helps to re-establish 
the risk/reward ratio in your favour. 
Sample question formation I: "I didn't want to have to 
do this, but you leave me no choice." This will inevitably 
propel him to respond: "Do what?" At this point he's wait-
ing to see what the trade-off will be. But do not commit your-
self to an action. Let him create in his own mind scenarios 
of what you will do unless he confesses. 
Sample question formation II: "You know what I can 
do, and I'll do it. If you don't want to tell me now, don't. 
I'll just do what I have to do." 
After this statement pay close attention to his response. 
If he focuses on what you will do to him, the odds lean more 
toward guilty. However, if he reasserts that he's done noth-
ing, he may in fact be innocent of your accusation. This is 
because the guilty person needs to know the penalty to de-
termine if it makes sense for him to stick to his story. Only 
the guilty have the option of confessing. They are the ones 
who have to make a decision. The innocent has no such 
choice to make, and therefore nothing to consider. 
S I L V E R     B U L L E T    8 
I Guess You're Not Allowed 
Never underestimate the power of appealing to a person's 
ego. Sometimes you want to inflate it, and other times you 
want to attack it. And as you may have guessed, this bullet 
is for attacking. 
It's truly saddening how fragile some people's egos are— 
but for these people this bullet works very well. It really gets 
under their skin. A friend of mine who is a police detective 
loves this technique. The following is a generic example of 
how it is used. 
"We picked up this guy for beating up on a couple of 
homeless guys. We were getting absolutely nowhere with 
him. Finally, after half an hour, we were thinking we had 
to let him walk. We had no case because one of the homeless 
men disappeared and the other was too afraid. So I looked 
at this jackass and said, 'Oh, okay, I get it. You're afraid 

that Niko [a drug runner he has worked with before] is 
gonna kick the crap out of you. That's it, isn't it? You can't 
go to court over this because he owns you. You're his little 
slave." After the suspect hurled a few expletives he shouted, 
"Nobody owns me." He became indignant. And to prove his 
point, he did what he had to: he confessed, proudly. 
Sample question formation I: "I think I know what it 
is—you're not allowed to tell me. Somebody else is pulling 
the strings and you'll get in trouble." 
Sample question formation II: "Okay, I think I know 
what it is. You'd tell me the truth if you could, but you don't 
have the power to. You're not able to and you probably feel 
as bad as I do about it." 
S I L V E R     B U L L E T    9 
Higher Authority 
If the situation is right, this bullet will work exceptionally 
well. An acquaintance of mine who works in the human 
resources department of a large financial firm loves this one. 
She tells me that it's her greatest tool for weeding out un-
desirable candidates for employment. 
As long as the person believes that you are on his side, 
he'll take the bait. All you have to do is let him know that 
anything he's lied about can now be cleared up in seconds. 
However, if anyone else finds out about it later, it's too late. 
Scenario A  
You think an interviewee has lied on his resume. 
Sample question formation: "I'm going to do something 
nice for you because I think you'd be great for this job. 
They're going to want to verify everything on the resume. 
Even the slightest exaggeration will prevent you from being 
hired. So let's clean it up now. What specifically needs to be 
revised so that it's perfectly accurate?" 
Scenario B 
You want to know if your secretary leaves early when you're 
out of the office. 
Sample question formation: "The vice president from 
corporate is coming in today. He's asked about your hours, 
so I'm going to tell him that you come in early on the days 

that you leave early. Do you remember what days last 
month you finished up early and took off?" 
Do you see how disarming this is? You're not yelling at 
her or demanding answers. It's us against them, and you're 
here to help. Plus the phrase "finished up early" implies 
that she's done all her work—and efficiently at that. You're 
on her side, and you're going to work together to smooth 
things over. 
 
S I L V E R     B U L L E T    10 
The Great Unknown 
For most people it is next to impossible to see anything or 
understand any concept by itself. This means that when a 
new situation arises we have an inherent need to compare 
and contrast it with something familiar. But what if there 
was no category for it fall into? This can be a very fright-
ening experience. 
If you want the truth and the penalty for lying is clear, 
then the suspect knows the up side and the down side for 
confessing and he can weigh his options. It stands to reason 
that in instances where the penalty for lying is not severe 
enough, you will have difficulty getting the truth. So you 
need to remove the penalty from the known and put it where 
it's uncomfortable: the unknown. 
You can obtain maximum leverage by explaining how the 
ramifications of his deceit will be something that the suspect 
has never known before. Even if he believes that you are 
limited in what you can do to him and in what the penalty 
will be, the severity of the penalty can be manipulated in 
two major ways to make it appear much more severe. The 
two factors are time and impact. 
Time: Give no indication of when the penalty will occur. 
When things happen unexpectedly, the degree of anguish is 
more potent. If he knows he won't get a chance to mentally 
prepare and brace himself, the anxiety is greatly heightened. 
Impact: Convey that his entire life will be disrupted and 
drastically altered for the worse. He needs to see that this 
event is not isolated and will instead have a ripple effect. 
When bad things happen we are often comforted in knowing 
that it will soon be over and the rest of our life will remain 
intact and unaffected. But if these things are not assured, 
we become increasingly fearful and concerned. 

Scenario 
You suspect an employee of stealing. You can threaten to 
fire him, in which case he may weigh his options and decide 
that you may never find out the truth. However, if you 
said . . . 
Sample question formation: "Smith, at any time should 
I discover that you've been lying to me about this, I will 
have your desk cleaned out and security escort you to your 
car. There will be no good-byes. I'll march you right out of 
here in the middle of the day. And this is a small business 
community—try getting a job with this hanging over your 
head. You'll be completely through." 
You then ask him to come clean now and offer him the 
option of a transfer to another part of the company so you 
can both put this behind you. This last sentence is called an 
easy-out clause and is talked about more in part 6. 
 
S I L V E R     BULLET   11 
I Couldn't Care Less 
A primary law governing human nature is that we all have 
a need to feel significant. Nobody wants to be thought of as 
unimportant, or feel that his ideas and thinking is irrelevant. 
Take away a person's belief that he has value and he'll do 
just about anything to reassert his sense of importance. If 
he feels that you don't care that he's lying to you, he will 
want to know—better, he needs to know—why you're so 
cavalier and dispassionate. Did you expect something like 
this from him? Do you know something that he doesn't? 
Are you uninterested in his opinion or feelings for you? Do 
you plan on seeking retribution or revenge? When you show 
emotion, you show that you care. Your apathy toward the 
situation will unnerve him immensely. He will begin to 
crave recognition and acceptance, in any form. He needs to 
know you care what happens, and if talking about his mis-
deeds is the only way he can find out, he will. Some exam-
ples of what you can say are as follows: 
Sample question formation A: "I know and I just don't 
care. This is not for me." 
Sample question formation B: "I've got other things to 
think about. Maybe we'll talk some other time." 
Sample question formation C: "You do what you have 
to do, that's fine with me." 

When you ignore a person you usually do not make 
eye contact. However, in this situation, you want to 
make an instant impact, and engaging him in direct eye 
contact does this best. To make this even more 
powerful, stare at him. In our culture, as in most, 
staring is often dehumanizing. We stare at things that 
are on display, such as caged animals. When you stare 
at someone he often feels less significant and will seek 
to reassert his value. 
These attack sequences should do the job quite nicely. 
However, if you're still not getting the answers you 
want, it's time for the advanced techniques in part 5. 
Remember to read this section through carefully before 
using any of these techniques. 
 

P A R T  
3 
T A C T I C S  F O R  D E T E C T I N G  
D E C E I T  A N D  G A T H E R I N G  
I N F O R M A T I O N  IN C A S U A L  
C O N V E R S A T I O N S  
"Truth is the first casualty of civil discourse." —
DAVID J. LIEBERMAN 

Now what about those times when you're not quite sure if 
someone is lying to you, but a full-fledged interrogation is 
out of the question? Here are some excellent ways to gather 
more information without being obvious. 
GENERAL  CONVERSATIONS 
1 .  A s k - a - F a c t  
During the conversation simply ask general, clear questions 
pertaining to your suspicion. This causes the person you are 
questioning to recall information. If he spoke the truth, then 
he will answer you quickly and effortlessly. If he was lying, 
your clues to deceit will let you know. Most important, note 
how long it takes him to call up the information. If he's 
lying, he'll take a while to answer because he first has to 
check his response mentally to be sure it makes sense. Made-
up stories do not have details because they never happened! 
Ask questions that will give you an objective, not a sub-
jective, response. For instance, if you think an employee was 
home when he said he would be away on vacation, don't 
ask him how he enjoyed the weather in Florida. People gen-
erally take longer to respond to these type of questions. In-
stead, ask one such as "Did you rent a car?" Casually ask 
more questions in the same vein. Once he answers yes to 
any question, ask for more detail. If he's lying, he'll try to 
keep the facts straight and will take his time answering fur 
ther questions. People love to talk about themselves. The 
only way that someone would want to change the subject 
is if he's uncomfortable with the questions. If you're 
asking simple, innocuous questions you should expect that 
he would want to extend the conversation, not end it. 
Most people will love to go on endlessly about the new res-
taurant they went to, the trip they took or the job they 
turned down . . . unless of course they're lying and you keep 
asking questions. 
2. Add-a-False Fact 
In this sequence you add a fact and ask the person to com-
ment on it. This fact is one that you've made up, but one 
that sounds perfectly reasonable. For instance, let's say that 
while you are at a party someone proclaims that he has just 
returned from an East African safari. You could tell him 
that you heard that East Africa had had record hot tem-
peratures. This is a fact that he might be able to confirm or 
deny regardless of whether he had actually been there. Fur-
thermore, he could just plead ignorance of the fact and pro-
claim that it was very, very hot. Either way you're unable 
to detect deceit. 

Here's how you can detect it. You can mention that your 
uncle who works as a customs officer at the Nairobi airport 
told you that everyone going to Africa was given special 
instructions on how to avoid malaria. As soon as he validates 
your claim in an attempt to back up his assertion that he 
has gone to Africa, you know that his story is untrue. Oth-
erwise he would simply say that he doesn't know what your 
uncle is talking about. 
 
Here are the criteria: 
a. Your statement has to be untrue. If he merely confirms 
something that's actually true, you haven't learned anything 
new. 
b. It has to sound reasonable. Otherwise the person you 
are questioning might think it's a joke. 
c. Your assertion has to be something that would directly 
affect the person, so he would have firsthand knowledge of 
this "fact." In other words, in the above scenario you 
wouldn't say you heard that the tilt of the earth's axis made 
for exceptional viewing of the night sky. 
3. Support-a-Fact 
In this sequence you take what the person says and request 
proof, but in a very non-threatening manner. For example, 
in the case of the person who claimed he had gone on safari, 
you might let him know that you would love to see pictures 
of the trip. If he offers up a reason why you can't see the 
pictures—didn't take any, didn't come out right, left lens 
cap on—then this should arouse some suspicion. 
Let's say you're a talk-show producer and you want to 
check the credibility of a guest. You might say, "Your story 
about this government conspiracy is fascinating. Since you 
worked in the building, it would be great if you would show 
us your security access card." 
4. Expand-a-Fact 
Use this clue to determine how far someone is willing to go 
to get what she wants. All you do is expand on a fact that 
she has already offered. If she just goes on without 
correcting you, then you know that she may be lying 
about what she's said so far and/or is willing to lie to get 
you to see her point. Let's say that you and your friend are 
deciding on what movie to see. You suggest Lost in 
Paradise, but your friend, who doesn't want to see this, 
offers as evidence a co-worker who has already seen it 
and didn't like it. You then say, "Oh, well, if no one in your 
office liked it, I guess it's probably no good." If she lets it 
go at that—not correcting your false assertion—then you 
know that she either lied initially about her co-worker or 

will lie in this situation. Let's take another example. Your 
secretary asks you for the rest of the day off because she's 
not feeling well. You might say, "Oh, of course, if you've 
got a fever and a bad headache, by all means take off." She 
never claimed to have these symptoms. You merely 
expanded on her statement. Again, if she does not correct 
you, she is clearly either lying about being ill or willing to 
agree to anything to go home. Of course she may simply be 
sick and eager to get home. However, her not correcting 
your statement indicates that she does not mind being 
deceitful to get what she wants. 
S PE C I A L   OCCASIONS 
These strategies are used when a person is reluctant to 
reveal information for unselfish reasons. Or the situa-
tion is such that you have to be very delicate in your 
approach. These people are coming from a different psy-
chological position,  so the situation must be addressed 
uniquely. The strategies usually fall into one of the following 
ten categories. 
Third-Party Protection 
This tactic is a little different in that it is used if someone is 
reluctant to tell you something that involves another per-
son. You have to appeal to his ego and let him forget that 
he's telling tales out of school. 
Scenario A 
Your attorney is telling you about a case that a fellow at-
torney screwed up on. Simply asking, "What did he do 
wrong?" would probably get you nowhere. However, by 
turning it around you create an incentive for him to tell you. 
Sample question formation: "Had you handled the case, 
what would you have done differently?" This magic phrase 
opens the floodgates of conversation. 

Scenario B 
While chatting with Brad, one of your salespeople, you 
would like to find out why Susan's sales figures are low. But 
simply asking him why she's not doing well might prove 
fruitless. Out of loyalty to her, he may be reluctant to say 
anything. So you turn the question around and he becomes 
completely forthcoming. 
Sample question formation: "What areas do you think 
Susan can improve in?" 
In both of these scenarios the conversation is positive. 
The other person feels as if he's doing a good thing by an-
swering your question. And in fact he is. Had you asked it 
the other way around, you would likely have met with great 
reluctance to speak. 
2 
The Power Play 
Sometimes the person reluctant to tell the truth is in a po-
sition of power. In these situations it's usually inappropriate 
and futile to become argumentative. In these instances you 
want to bring the conversation to a personal level. Here are 
two examples of how this is done. 
Scenario A 
You're trying to sell to a buyer who doesn't want to buy and 
is not giving you a reason that you truly believe. Your ob-
jective will be to get to the real objection. 
Sample question formation: "I do this for a living. My 
family relies on me to support them. Clearly we have a fine 
product and you're a reasonable man. Would you mind tell-
ing me what I did to offend you?" 
Now your buyer is caught off guard and will undoubtedly 
follow with "Oh, you didn't offend me. It's just that. . ." 
Offend is a powerful word. Now you'll get the real objec-
tion because he figures that telling you the truth is the only 
way to show you that you haven't offended him. 

Scenario B 
Your boss is reluctant to tell you exactly why you were 
passed up for the promotion. 
Sample question formation: "Ms. Smith, I understand 
where you're coming from, and I respect your thoughts. 
Someday I hope to be as successful in this company as you 
are today. Let me ask you one question, if I may? If you 
were me, sitting in this chair now, do you think that you 
would have a better chance of moving up in the company if 
you were aware of your shortcomings?" 
3 
Hurt Feelings 
In this situation someone is lying to you to protect your 
feelings—perhaps one of those little white lies. You're in-
terested in getting at the truth. A touch of guilt makes the 
other person re-evaluate his approach. 
 
Scenario 
You feel that the truth is being withheld from you for your 
own benefit. 
Sample question formation I: "I know you don't want 
to offend me, but you're hurting me more by not being per-
fectly honest." Using the word perfectly here serves a pur-
pose. It gives the person credit for being partially honest 
with you. 
Sample question formation II: "If you don't tell me, no 
one else will. If I can't count on you for this, I don't know 
what I would do. " 
It's a Matter of Opinion 
Trying to detect deceit in a person's opinion is hard. You 
can't exactly call someone a liar, arguing that she doesn't 
really believe what she is saying to be the truth. The follow-
ing is an excellent method for revealing a person's true feel-
ings in any situation. 

Scenario A 
You're not sure if your boss really likes your idea for a new 
advertising campaign, even though she says she does. 
Sample question sequence I: 
"Do you like the concept for my new idea?" 
"Sure. It's very original." 
"Well, what would it take for you to love the idea?" 
In this example your boss has committed to liking the 
idea. You don't argue with her or press her on it. The words 
you use in your response indicate that you know there is 
room for improvement. She feels comfortable offering crit-
icism because she feels that you expect her to do so. 
Scenario B 
You want to know if your son is looking forward to going 
to camp this summer. 
Sample question sequence II: 
"Are you excited about camp next month?" 
"Yeah. It'll be fun." 
"What would it take for you to be really excited 
about going?" 
Again, he feels comfortable answering honestly because 
your questions to him make it obvious that you know that 
everything's not perfect. 
 
5 
I Don't Know 
Most people don't like to be wrong. Furthermore, most peo-
ple don't like to be put in a situation where they feel they 
have to defend themselves. As a result, oftentimes when you 
ask someone what she is thinking or how she feels, she re-
plies, "I don't know." This response can stall a conversation 
and leave you searching for answers. Sometimes it's just 
easier to say UI don't know," which is often why we say it 
in the first place. Either way, when you hear "I don't know," 
try some of the following responses: 
1. "Okay, then why don't you tell me how you've come to 
think the way you do?" 
2. "I know you don't know, but if you were to guess, what 
do you think it might be?" 
3. "Can you tell me what part of this you're okay with?" 
4. "In what past situations have you felt similar to this 
one?" 
5. "What emotion best describes what you're thinking right 

now?" 
6. "Can you think of just one reason?" 
7. "What one word comes closest to describing what you're 
thinking?" 
In all of these responses, you're taking the pressure off. 
You acknowledge the person's difficulty in answering. You 
then seem to be asking her to provide something else, when 
in reality your new question is aimed at getting your initial 
question answered. 
"I don't know" could also mean that the person feels guilty 
or foolish about her actions. In this case you want to relieve 
her of the responsibility. This is done in the following way: 
Sample question formation: "I know you're not sure 
about why you did that, so can you think of any unconscious 
motivations that may have been at work?" This works well 
because she doesn't have to feel responsible for her actions. 
It was not her "intention" to do what she did. Her 
behaviour was not consciously motivated. 
I'm Simply Embarrassed 
In this encounter someone is unwilling to tell you the truth 
or may lie to you out of embarrassment. The usual tactics 
don't work here because the person probably isn't obligated 
to tell you and more than likely will have nothing to gain 
by doing so. Therefore you need to create an incentive for 
telling the truth in an environment that makes him feel com-
fortable. 
Scenario A 
Your son doesn't want to tell you about the bully who took 
his lunch money. 
Sample question formation: "It's okay if you don't want 
to talk about it. [This is a key phrase because it instantly 
disarms the other person. It lets them know that he's not 
going to get verbally beaten up.] When I was your age the 
same thing happened to me. And after I learned what to say 
to him, he never bothered me again. Would you like to hear 
what you can do?" 

Scenario B 
As a physician you're speaking with a patient who is reluc-
tant to discuss her previous sexual relationships. 
Sample question formation: "I understand your hesi-
tancy, and if you would prefer not to discuss it, then we 
won't. Whenever I have a patient who feels uncomfortable 
I do it this way and it's much easier and quicker. I'm going 
to ask you simple yes-or-no questions and you respond ac-
cordingly." 
This works well because the patient knows that there 
won't be an embarrassing discussion or elaboration of any-
thing she says. The yes-or-no format can be used with just 
about anyone in any situation that makes one uncomfort-
able revealing personal information. 
Scenario C 
You want to find out if the foreman of your construction 
crew has been thinking of leaving your company. 
Sample question formation: "Mike, on a scale from one 
to ten, where one means you've only thought about looking 
for other work and ten means you're very interested in going 
with another company, where might you fit in?" 
Three important criteria need to be kept in mind. First, 
notice that you don't say "where do you fall?" as it is typ-
ically phrased. The word fall is downward and negative. It 
puts his focus lower on the number line. "Fit in" directs his 
thinking between two numbers and is positive. Second, the 
word might is used to cushion his association to his answer, 
helping him to feel less attached to it. 
Finally, notice too, that you don't say on a scale from one 
to ten where one is no interest. You allowed him to answer 
with the "easiest option" offered. If, in fact, he had no in-
terest whatsoever, then he would go outside the parameters 
of your question and be free to tell you just that. 
Scenario D 
You think the new intern mixed up two piles of papers 
and shredded the documents that were supposed to be 
copied. 

Sample question formation: "Nelson, if you're the one 
who did this, it's all right. I remember when I first started 
here. What I'm going to tell you is between you and me, 
okay? Good. I once made copies of a confidential memo 
instead of the lunch menu and placed a copy in each per-
son's mailbox." 
The best way to get someone to confide in you is for 
you to confide in him. This instantly puts the other person 
at ease. It shows that you trust him, and he also feels 
obligated to share with you something he's done that he feels 
uncomfortable with. 
Divide and Conquer 
This is a situation where there are two or more people from 
whom you can get the truth. The mistake that most of us 
make is to say something like "Come on, guys. Somebody 
tell me what's going on here!" We find ourselves sounding 
a lot like M*A*S*Hs Frank Burns—looking for cooperation 
everywhere and finding it nowhere. This plea is often in-
effective because of a psychological phenomenon known as 
social responsibility. 
Have you ever heard somebody scream from an apart-
ment window? While most of us have been in such a situ-
ation, we don't feel any strong inclination to do anything 
about it. It's not because we're cold and uncaring. It's be-
cause the social responsibility to act is divided among many 
people. Everyone assumes that if it's an emergency, some-
body else has already called the police. There have been 
countless stories of a person's having a heart attack on a 
crowded street while people just walked by. Nobody does 
anything because they assume somebody else will; alterna-
tively, they think that since nobody else is doing anything, 
the person must be okay. 
When there is a diffusion of responsibility, the impetus 
to act just isn't there. If you want answers or if you want 
somebody to do something, you have to increase his re-
sponsibility. This is best accomplished by appealing to one 
person at a time. If you get nowhere with the first person, 
go to the next and appeal to him. 

Scenario A 
Several of your sorority sisters pulled a practical joke and 
you want to find out who is responsible. 
Sample question formation I: "Eileen, I'm coming 
to you for one reason and one reason only. I know I can 
trust you to tell me the truth. You can trust me like I 
can trust you. You're not like they are. I know I can count 
on you to do the right thing." If you don't get anywhere 
with her, go to the next person with the same speech. Some 
body will crack. 
 
Sample question formation II: "Jennifer, who did this 
is not important. I don't even cafe. What is, is our friend-
ship. I want to know that I can trust you. I think I can, but 
I need for you to speak honestly with me. It's not that I'm 
so concerned with who did it—only that you are truthful 
with me about it." If you don't get anywhere with her, go 
to someone else with the same speech. 
 
8 
Professional Reliance 
From attorneys and plumbers to mechanics and teachers, 
we rely on professionals to be honest and fair. And while 
most are, there are a few who are not. 
These situations can be tough because you don't have the 
specific knowledge and expertise to ask the right questions. 
Unfortunately the less-than-reputable professional is all too 
aware of this. And while your clues to deception will let you 
know what kind of person you're dealing with, the following 
strategy will prove useful in these situations. 
1. Always, if possible, get a second opinion. It's easy to do 
and can save you a lot of heartache. 
2. Make sure the person is licensed, insured, and registered 
to do the actual work. 
3. Have your agreement drawn up in writing. Oral contracts 
aren't worth the paper they're written on. 
4. Ask for referrals or testimonials. 
If he balks at any one of these points, you might want to 
take your business elsewhere. The con artist operates best 
when you're in the dark. 
Finally, the following strategy should give you an accu-
rate insight into the person's intentions. The key is to ask 
for the opposite of what you really want. 

Scenario A 
Let's say that your travel agent suggests the Five-Day Cruise 
Getaway vacation package for you. You're looking to really 
let loose; you want a trip that will be non-stop fun. But 
you're not sure if she's pushing this package for the 
commission or if she really believes that it's a great deal. 
Sample question formation: "The brochure looks great, 
Sandy. I just want to make sure that this is not one of those 
party boats. I'm looking for some rest and relaxation. Is this 
that kind of trip?" 
By asking your question this way, you will know the in-
tentions of your travel agent and the answer to your ques-
tion. If she answers yes, than you know that the cruise is 
not for you or she is lying to get your business. Either way 
you are not going to book this cruise through her. Only by 
telling you what she thinks you don't want to hear will she 
establish herself as honest, and you'll have confirmed that 
this is the cruise you want to go on. 
Scenario B 
You asked your waiter for decaffeinated coffee and five 
minutes later the busboy comes by with a filled cup of coffee. 
Sample question formation: "This is regular coffee, 
right?" If he confirms that it is, either he doesn't care 
enough to know for sure or it really is regular. Again, either 
way, you now know that you may not be getting what 
you asked for. However, should he tell you that it is decaf-
feinated—something he thinks you don't want—then you 
can be pretty sure that you're getting what you originally 
asked for. 
9 
I Don't Know and I Don't Care 
Few things are more frustrating than dealing with someone 
who just doesn't give a damn. Why? Because you don't have 
a whole lot to work with. You've got zero leverage. He's got 
nothing at risk, so you've got little bargaining power. Here's 
how to get some. You simply have to change the equation 
so he's got something at stake. This technique is the ultimate 
apathy buster. 

Scenario A 
You take your car to the mechanic and he tells you it will 
be fixed by Friday. But you just know that something's 
going to come up and it will be sitting in his garage 
all weekend. 
Sample question formation: "Okay, Joe. Tomorrow's 
fine. Just so you know, my wife is pregnant and she's due 
any day. That's our only car, so if you can think of any 
reason why it may not be ready by Friday, you've got to let 
me know now." 
Scenario B 
You ask the waiter if there is MSG, an additive that some 
people are allergic to, in the salad and he tells you there 
isn't. He doesn't seems terribly convincing and you just 
want to make sure. 
Sample question formation: "Okay, Albert, that's great. 
Just so you know I'm deathly allergic to MSG. One forkful 
and it's off to the hospital I go." After hearing this, do you 
think Albert may want to double-check with the chef? 
Notice that the equation changes in these two scenarios. 
Initially neither the mechanic nor the waiter is terribly con-
cerned about your schedule or what you're eating. However, 
their apathy quickly gives way to concern because now 
they're dealing with more than just an inconvenience. Sim-
ply change the stakes and the leverage is yours. 
10  
I Just 
Heard 
Most people who lie usually confide in at least one other 
person. Getting the truth from this person can be done eas-
ily, if it's done right. It's important to let this person believe 
that you already know the truth and then add your emo-
tional reaction to it. Adding an emotion makes you appear 
genuine because the fact that you know the truth is 
overshadowed by your reaction to it. Simply use an emotion 
that best fits the situation, such as sympathy, surprise, fear, 
joy, concern, humour, and so on. 
Let's take a look at a couple of general statements that 
would be said to the person whom you believe knows the 
truth: 

 
1. Sympathy: "I can't believe what Sam did. I am truly very, 
very sorry. If there's anything I can do for you or what 
ever, please just let me know, okay?" 
2. Concern: "I just found out; how dare they do that to Kim? 
I've got a good mind to go down there myself and give 
them hell. How are you holding up through all this?" 
3. Humour: "Mary, is Joe a magnet for odd things or 
what? 
He just told me and I still can't believe it." 
Make sure you act as if your suspicion is true and let this 
person assume that you already have knowledge of it. Then 
offer the appropriate emotional response and you have max-
imum credibility. 
D I R E C T I N G   T H E   C O N V E R S A T I O N  
You can steer a conversation in any direction that you 
choose. Take this example. Let's say that while you are at 
a friend's house, she shows you her brand-new dining room 
table. If you want to know if it was really expensive, would 
asking directly be your best bet? Usually not, because she 
may get a little defensive. But if you said to your friend 
that it's the most gorgeous table you have ever seen, what 
might she respond with? You guessed it—how expensive 
it was! If you said, "This looks like it cost a fortune. How 
could you spend so much on a table?" what response 
might you get? She would tell you about its quality and 
the craftsmanship that went into it. When you say it's 
expensive, she'll talk about the quality. If you say that it 
looks beautiful, she'll tell you about the cost. By asking the 
right questions you can steer the conversation in any 
direction you want and elicit the information that you 
need. 
You can also control the mode of the response as well. 
Have you ever noticed the ritual that takes place when you 
pass someone in the hall or on the elevator? You smile, she 
smiles. You smile and nod, she smiles and nods. You give a 
hello, and then she will usually speak as well.  

The one who responds to the situation first is the one 
who controls the mode of the exchange. 
The same goes for the pace of a conversation. Try this 
on your own. Ask someone an open-ended question—a 
question that cannot be answered with a simple yes or no— 
slowly and deliberately. Watch how the other person takes 
his time to respond. Then ask a question speaking quickly, 
and the answer is sure to be paced at a similar rate. 
In order to best detect deceit you may want to guide the 
conversation in a particular direction. You can do this 
very efficiently with just a few well-chosen words. After he 
makes a statement, you can use the following key words 
to direct the flow of information in any way that you 
choose. They can be used to extract information from any 
conversation. 
1. Meaning . . . Saying this word after he speaks directs 
his thinking and the conversation toward the larger pic-
ture, giving you a better look at his overall position. He 
will offer the reason for the position he's taken. 
Example I 
"I'm the highest-paid person at this institution." 
"Meaning?" 
"That I'm the only one with the experience and edu-
cation to do this job. I've worked my way up the ladder 
over a fifteen-year period." 
Example II 
"I'm in charge of the entire operation." 
"Meaning?" 
"That the boss put me in charge when he left. If you've 
got any problems, you'll have to deal with me." 
2. And . . . This one-word response gives you more lateral 
information. You'll be able to gather additional facts related 
to his position. 

Example I 
"I'm sorry, but that's the best we can do." 
"And . . ." 
"The offer is as it stands. We've looked at the pricing 
schedule and delivery options three times."  
Example II "I'm in charge of the entire operation." 
"And . . ." 
"That means everything—inventory, scheduling, and 
employee relations." 
3. So . . . This response makes him get more specific, 
giving you the details of his position. 
Example I 
"I offer the best level of medical care you can get." 
"So . . ." 
"If you came to me, I'd give you a full blood workup and 
x-rays as just part of the standard check-up." 
Example II 
"Our company guarantees you job security." 
"So . . ." 
"If you ever had to take a leave of absence, your job would 
be here for you." 
4. Now . . . This response makes him translate his position 
into a specific action. He will proceed to tell you 
exactly what he means and how it applies to you. 
Example I 
"Our policy is to stand behind our shareholders." 
"Now ..." 
"You can either follow us or go out on your own. It's up to 
you." 
Example II 
"We offer the best guarantee in the business." 
"Now . . ." 
"You can sign here, and we'll get the paperwork going." 
 
G E T T I N G  S P E C I F I C  
Sometimes you'll get an answer, but it doesn't do you much 
good. Here are some great ways for narrowing a vague re-
sponse to give you a more direct, truthful answer. The two 
main areas regard thoughts and actions. The following re-
sponses show how to draw out a specific answer. 

I. In Response to an Opinion or Belief 
Example I 
'I don't think the meeting went very well. " 
"How come?" (broad response)  
"I just don't, all right?!" 
Some responses will produce a more productive response: 
"Compared with what?" "How poorly did it go?" 
If you ask for clarification, the person feels more obli-
gated to respond. Asking a broad question in response to a 
general statement just produces more of the same. 
II. In Response to a Reluctance to Commit 
Example A  
"I don't know f I could." 
"What  do you   mean,  you   don't  know?"  (broad 
response) 
     “I just don’t know, all right?” 
Example B 
"I don't know if I could." 
"Why can't you?" (broad response) 
"I don't know. I just can't. " 
Some responses will produce a more productive response: 
"What, specifically^, prevents you?" "What would have 
to happen for you to be able to?" "What would change 
if you did?" 
Do you see how specific responses narrow the answer? 
Use this technique whenever you want to clarify a broad or 
ambiguous answer. 

LET THE TRUTH BE TOLD 
What simple words work better than any others? These 
three do: 
Because: We're programmed to accept an explanation as 
valid if it follows this word. 
Let's: This word generates a group atmosphere and ini-
tiates the bandwagon effect. It's a positive word that creates 
action. 
Try: This little word is a powerful motivator because it 
implies that you will be unsuccessful, so it instils a "what's 
the harm" mentality. We all love to try things. The 
following sentence uses all three words in a construction 
that makes absolutely no sense, yet seems like it should. 
"Let's give it a try because if it doesn't work we can al-
ways go back to the way it was. " 
Clearly you haven't introduced any reason for the per-
son to take action. Yet it seems to make sense just the same. 
A person will get defensive only if he feels he's under 
attack, so why attack? Let's look at the benefits of using 
these words to get to the truth. 
"Did you take five dollars from petty cash?"  
"Why did you take five dollars from petty cash?"  
"Stop taking money from petty cash!" 
What do all these phrases have in common? They're all 
accusatory and likely to produce an automatic "I didn't do 
it" response. If you wanted to know if he took the money, 
simply say, "The money that we take from petty cash? Let's 
try to keep it fewer than ten dollars at a time, because it 
works out better that way." Do you see how kind this state-
ment is? It's easier to get to the truth because no one feels 
like he has to defend himself. 
Use these words—because, let's, and try—whenever you 
want to gain information without sounding accusatory or 
demanding. 

TAKING CONTROL 
Now you're fully equipped to get the truth from any situa-
tion or conversation. But you can't operate if you can't get 
a word in edgewise. If you're in a situation where you are 
unable to speak because the person keeps talking or inter-
rupting, the following are some great ways to get the floor. 
These seventeen zingers will stun them into silence. Use 
whichever one(s) you feel are most appropriate for the sit-
uation. They play on two susceptible angles of human na-
ture—ego and curiosity. 
1. "You're a smart person; let me ask you a question." 
2. "Let me get your opinion on something." 
3. "May I be the first person in your presence to finish a 
sentence?" 
4. "Don't show your ignorance by interrupting." 
5. "I'm sorry if the facts conflict with your opinion, but I 
would like to know ..." 
6. "Maybe you can help me with something." 
7. "I know that you would want me to ask you this." 
8. "You're the only person who would know the answer to 
this." 
9. "I hope this news doesn't upset you." 
 
10. "Before you say anything else, answer this question." 
11. "I want to give my full attention to what you're saying, 
so let me just get this out of the way." 
12. "I hope this doesn't offend you, but..." 
13. "I don't want you to miss this." 
14. "This is the last time you'll hear this." 
15. "Do you have a good memory? Great, then you won't 
forget this." 
16. "I'm sorry if the middle of my sentence ran into the 
beginning of yours." 
17. "Along those lines . . ." It's easy to change the conver-
sation when you begin with the other person's last 
thoughts. 

P A R T  
4 
M I N D  G A M E S  
'I am different from Washington, I have a higher, grander 
standard of principle. Washington could not tell a lie. 
I can lie, but I won't." 
—MARK TWAIN 

This section gives you two very powerful tools. The 
first shows you how to avoid being lied to in the first 
place. In the second, you will learn how to find out a 
person's true intention in any situation. 
A  S T R O N G  D E F E N C E :  A V O I D I N G  T H E  L I E  
As the saying goes, the best defence is a good 
offence. Once you've been lied to, you can easily get 
to the truth with the techniques that you've learned. 
However, the best time to deal with a lie is before it 
turns into one. Confused? This may help. The 
following is a technique for cutting a suspicion off at 
the pass before it turns into deception. 
Method 1 
This is the method you use when you want the truth as 
it relates to a person's previous behaviour. Here is a 
possible scenario: a parent suspects that her twelve-
year-old son is smoking cigarettes. The following 
approaches are listed in order from worst to best. 
a. "Have you been smoking cigarettes? I'm gonna 
kill you if I find out you have." This approach is awful, 
but unfortunately it is the most common. In her anger, 
the boy's 
mother links confessing to the truth with punishment. 
This destroys any incentive to confess. She is likely to 
be lied to. 
b. "You've been smoking, haven't you?" This 
approach 
is a little better because the mother indicates that she 
has 
some type of proof or evidence. Such an approach will 
work 
sometimes. The child may not want to add lying to his 
al 
ready reprehensible act of smoking. 
c. "I want to speak to you about your smoking." 
This is 
what I call a forward assumptive approach. The child 
feels 
that the parent already knows he is smoking. The 
focus of 
the request is on discussing it. The parent may get a 
response such as "I don't want to talk about it." 

However, 
the truth is revealed in that statement. 
d. "I know all about the smoking and the 
sneaking 
around. You know I'm not happy about that, but I just 
want 
you to promise me that you won't drink alcohol until 
you're 
twenty-one." 
This is by far the finest approach because it works 
on so many levels. First, it takes a forward assumptive 
stance— the parent "knows all about the smoking." 
Second, it uses two truisms (see part 5). The phrases 
"sneaking around" and "you know I'm not happy 
about that" set the tone for honesty. The child hears 
two things that he knows to be true: He was sneaking 
around and his mother is unhappy about his smoking. 
He is therefore willing to accept at face value what 
follows. Third, the mother gives her son an easy out. 
All he has to do is promise not to drink and he's home 
free. There's no threat or punishment, just honest 
statements followed by a deal that he believes to be 
true as well. 
The guidelines to keep in mind for this procedure 
are as 
follows: 
1. Assume your suspicion as fact. 
2. State at least two truisms (facts that you both 
know to 
be true). 
3. Switch the focus from a threat to a request. 
4. The request should be easy for him to accept and 
sound 
reasonable. 
Method 2 
This method is used when you want the truth as it 
relates to a new decision. It is a simple but highly 
effective strategy to avoid being deceived. Oftentimes 
someone wants to tell us the truth, but it's easier to tell 
a lie instead. The person knows the answer you want 
to hear and will give it to you whether he believes it or 
not. 
However, if he doesn't know what you want, then 
he won't be able to deceive you. Read the following 
examples and notice how well the second phrasing 
masks your true question. 

• "We're restructuring some positions. How would you 
like 
to work directly under me in finance?" Or "We're 
moving 
some people around. Would you prefer to get more 
experience in finance or marketing?" 
• "Would you like me to cook for you tonight?" Or 
"Do 
you feel like eating in or out tonight?" 
•   "I'm thinking of asking Rhonda out. What do you 
think of her?" Or "What do you think of Rhonda?" 
To use this technique, just make sure that when you 
phrase the question you mask your preference, and the 
respondent will give you an honest answer. 

K N O W  T H Y  E N E M Y :  K N O W I N G  T H E  
L I A R  A N D  H I S  I N T E N T I O N S  
The following example illustrates a process that is 
becoming very popular in employee screening tests. The 
questions below are asked the prospective employee to 
determine if he is an honest person. If you really 
wanted the job, how would you answer these questions 
? 
Have you ever stolen anything in your life? 
Have you ever run a red light? Do you have a 
friend who has ever shoplifted? Have you ever 
had thoughts of killing someone? 
Many of us would have to answer yes to most of these 
questions. And that is precisely the answer a 
prospective employer is looking for. Why? Because 
the honest answer is yes for most of us—saints 
excluded. The employer's task is finding those who are 
honest about it. Stealing a pack of gum when you were 
twelve years old doesn't make you a bad person or an 
undesirable employee. 
The goal of this procedure is not to determine what 
the 
person is guilty of, but rather if he or she is honest 
about it. At least then you can deal with the situation 
with trust. Let's say that Martha's teenage son, who has 
been away from home and living on the streets for the 
past two years, wants to come home. Knowing that her 
son is addicted to cocaine, she is worried about 
whether he can actually clean up his act. She could tell 
him that he can move back in only if he enrolls in a 
drug rehabilitation program. He will probably agree to 
this, whether he plans to do it or not. If he's sincere he'll 
say yes, and if he's lying he will also agree to her terms. 
This does not give Martha a true indication of her 
son's intentions. But Martha has read this book and 
instead tells her son that he can move back in if he 
quits cold turkey— never doing another drug 
whatsoever. 
Her 
son's 
answer 
will 
reveal 
his 
commitment to getting well, which is the real concern. 
Obviously her son can hardly get rid of his addiction 
instantly. So if he indicates that he can, she knows that 
he's lying about his intention to get well. However, if 
he says that he can't but will make strides toward 

getting better, she will know that he is sincere in his 
pursuit of wellness. 

Quick Tip: People generally need a reason to lie. If there's no 
reason— no motivation—then you'll likely get the truth. 
Therefore, you want to ask for the truth before he has a reason to lie 
to you. Your greatest leverage always comes from knowing what kind 
of person you're dealing with. The time to ask the salesman about the 
quality of the product is not after you tell him that you're interested 
in buying it. Why? Because he may feel that it's in his best interest 
to lie to you. However, had you asked him this—casually, of 
course—before you expressed an interest, there's no real incentive 
for him not to tell the truth. 
 
When you seek to gauge a person's honesty and 
commitment, propose a solution that you know is too 
difficult. If he acknowledges the difficulty of your 
solution, he is earnest in his desire to reach the specific 
objective or outcome. If he readily agrees to it, he has 
ulterior motives and is not being truthful. 
 

P A R T  
5 
A D V A N C E D  T E C H N I Q U E S  
F O R  G E T T I N G  T H E  T R U T H  
"Enough white lies add up to manipulation." 
—DAVID J. LIEBERMAN 

This section offers the most advanced techniques for getting 
at the truth. Using a blend of hypnosis and a system I 
developed called Trance-Scripts, you'll be able to give 
commands directly to a person's unconscious mind—in 
conversation and without their awareness. Through this 
process you will be able to persuade others to tell the truth 
with maximum effectiveness. These techniques are extraor-
dinary, so use them with judgment and caution! 
EMBEDDED COMMANDS 
This technique is used to implant suggestions directly into 
the unconscious. Embedded commands are just that—com-
mands embedded in a sentence. 
These can be used in conjunction with both the attack 
sequences and the silver bullets. To illustrate, the embedded 
commands are italicized in the sentence below. 
If you want to tell the truth or not tell the truth, that's 
entirely up to you. 
This sentence is received by the conscious mind in its 
entirety. The command—-tell the truth—goes directly to 
the unconscious. This technique is very simple and has 
only two criteria. First, for maximum effectiveness the com-
mand should start with an action verb, because you're tell-
ing the mind to do something. Second, the entire command 
should be separated from the rest of the sentence using what 
is called an analogue marker. You set the command 
portion off by one of the following: (1) Lower or raise the 
volume of your voice slightly while speaking the command. 
(2) Insert a short pause right before and then right after 
the command. For instance, "Sometimes we just . . . 
become fascinated . . . with what we're reading." (3) 
Gesturing with your hand while you are giving the 
command momentarily distracts the conscious mind, and 
the embedded statement is received by the unconscious 
mind as a command. You don't want a flagrant gesture or 
too long a pause. This will only confuse the person and 
make him question what you're doing. The objective is to 
be casual and relaxed. 
The following is a generic example of how these would 
be used. The embedded commands are in italics. 
I don't want you to tell me unless you want to. Now if you 
think to yourself on the inside / want to tell you., then just say 
it. When you realize this is the right decision you'll tell me 
the truth anyway. So we might as well clear the air now. 

4 - 3 - 2 - 1 
This technique is phenomenal. It works because when the 
brain receives several messages that it registers as truthful, 
then it expects what follows—the suggestion—to be truth-
ful. As long as the suggestion is not blatantly false, the brain 
will accept it as true. 
The process is simple. You make four truthful statements 
followed by one suggestion, then three truthful statements 
followed by two suggestions, then two truthful statement 
followed by three suggestions, and finally, one truthful 
statement followed by four suggestions. The truthful 
statements can be about anything—the room you're in, 
the weather, anything that the brain can't argue with. The 
suggestions should be about what you want him or her to do. 
By integrating externally verifiable statements with a 
specific suggestion, you're leading your subject to accept 
your suggestion. 
Scenario 
A police detective is seeking a confession from a suspect. 
The underscored phrases are the truthful statements and the 
italicized words are the suggestions. You can also combine 
this technique with embedded commands, which are set off 
in parentheses. 
As you're sitting in the chair, wondering what you should 
do, you're probably weighing your options. You want to do 
what's best for you and that would be to {tell me what hap-
pened). 
We know about your past arrest for robbery. And that 
you got off with probation. I know that you're probably 
scared and / want you to (know I'm on your side) and I 
want you to (see the benefits of telling the truth). 
Look, you want to get out of here. And you know that I 
don't have the time to sit with you all day. Getting this off 
your chest may make you feel better. You 'II be saving your-
self a lot of heartache and you 'II be able to (get on with your 
life when this thing is over). 
I know you've been around the street most of your life. 
This is your chance for afresh start. (Think about the pos-
sibilities) for yourself if you were to (go straight). You'll be 
able to (get a respectable job) and (take better care of your 
family). 

U N C O N S C I O U S   C R E A T I O N S  
This technique uses embedded commands in an entirely 
new way. You will be able to give a suggestion that 
creates a perceivable action so you can observe the signs of 
deceit without continuing to question him. Watch for the 
behaviours that you embed in the sentences. They will 
usually occur at some point during your conversation. 
Examples 
"I'm not saying that you should stiffen up your body if 
you're lying." 
"I don't know if you're lying. Unless you feel like blinking 
your eyes fast if you are.'" 
"If you . . . like what you're reading . . . you may . . 
. smile . . . now.7" 
With this technique, you're embedding a command that 
you can readily observe. Offer as many as you want. Just 
be sure to follow the same procedure as with the 
embedded commands. 
 
DISASSOCIATION 
This process helps the person become more comfortable 
with telling the truth. It works by dividing him into two 
separate people. No, not with a chain saw! You're actually 
dividing the psyche—setting two parts of the person against 
each other. 
It's the old person who would lie versus the new person 
who would never hurt you. This process greatly alleviates 
the person's guilt because he no longer feels obligated to 
justify the actions that his "old self" was responsible for. 
The process of disassociation is used with great success to 
treat phobias. 
In your conversation, continue to repeat phrases like the 
ones below. Make sure that they contrast the old him and 
the new him. 

"Perhaps the old you was capable of this. But I know you 
would never do that now. "  
"You're a different person than you used to be. I'm sure 
that you 're even more upset with the old you than I 
am. But you're not that person anymore."  
"You're only responsible for who you are today. You are 
someone who is honest and trustworthy. " 
These simple phrases begin to wear down his defences. 
Sometimes they will work right away; other times it may 
take a little while. But if he keeps hearing such phrases over 
and over again he will break, and you will get the truth. 
 
E Y E - A C C E S S I N G  C U E S 
This technique works on the following principle. When 
a person thinks, he accesses different parts of his brain 
depending upon the information that is being accessed. This 
process can be observed by watching his eyes. 
For right-handed people visual memories are accessed by 
the eyes going up and to the left. For a left-handed person, 
it's the reverse: the eyes go up and to the right. When a 
right-handed person seeks to create an image or fact, his 
eyes go up and to the right. And the reverse is true for the 
left-handed person. 
Why don't you try this? Do you recall what colour your 
first car was? If you had to think about it, there's a good 
chance that if you're right-handed, your eyes went up and 
to the left. Your eyes went up and to the right if you're left-
handed. 
When a certain government official testified before Con-
gress, his eyes went up and to the left each and every time 
he was recalling information—clearly a sign that he was 
relaying the facts as he remembered them, not fabricating 
any stories. I thought this until I happened to see a picture 
of him in Time magazine, holding a pen in his left hand. 
You can use this technique in any conversation to deter-
mine if the person is creating or recalling information. Sim-
ply watch his eyes and you'll know whether he's recalling 
an event that's already occurred or making up a story about 
something that has never happened. 

A N C H O R I N G  T H E  T R U T H  
Do you recall Pavlov's famous dogs? During 
his experiments, he would put food powder 
in a dog's mouth and measure the drops of 
saliva produced as a result by way of a tube 
surgically inserted into the dog's mouth. But 
during the course of his work, Pavlov noticed 
that the dogs began to salivate when he 
merely walked into the room. This salivation 
could not be a reflex since it did not occur the 
first few times Pavlov walked in; it occurred 
only when the dog had learned that Pavlov's 
appearance signalled food. That is, Pavlov's 
appearance become associated with a future 
event: food. He called this a psychic reflex or a 
conditioned reflex. It has come to be called, 
through 
mistranslation, 
a 
conditioned 
response. 
We can see examples of conditioned 
reflexes in our own lives. Perhaps the smell of 
vodka makes you sick because you had a bad 
experience with it several years ago. Or a 
certain song comes on the radio and you recall 
a friend you haven't thought about in years. 
These are all anchors. An anchor is an 
association between a specific set of feelings 
or an emotional state and some unique 
stimulus—an image, sound, name, taste. 
We're going to use the same principle but 
employ it in an entirely new way. In poker 
there's something called a tell. That's when 
another player makes an unconscious gesture 
during a specific situation. Whenever he's 
nervous, for example, he may blink, look 
down, or move in a certain way. 
Professional card players learn to pick up on 
these tells, providing them with an insight 
into the person's hand. 
What you're going to do is to install a truth 
tell in others so you'll know when they're 
lying in any instance—now or in the future. 
Here's how it's done. Ask a series of 
questions that the person can answer 
truthfully and easily. When he answers, 
anchor it with a specific movement. Then 
when you ask a question you don't know the 
answer to, fire off your truth anchor as you 

ask the question. He'll unconsciously feel 
compelled to be truthful just as Pavlov's dogs 
knew it was time to eat when Pavlov entered 
the room. 
You don't want to be obvious in your 
choice of anchors or in your choice of 
questions. Make sure the questions you ask 
will be answered truthfully. And the anchor 
should not be so common that it will become 
diluted by inadvertent use. The questions 
don't have to be asked all at Once, and there 
is no set number of questions you need to 
anchor. 

For example, while your husband is eating 
his favourite food, you might ask, "Are you 
enjoying your dinner?" Fire off the anchor as 
you ask the question; you might tilt your head 
slightly to one side or touch your hand to 
your nose. Then ask a series of questions—
maybe four or five—while continuing to fire 
off the same anchor every time you ask your 
question. Every so often reinforce the anchor 
by doing this process—a question/anchor 
sequence. The learned response will soon be 
so ingrained that any time you want the truth 
in response to a question, just ask your 
question and fire the anchor. 
 
H E A V E N  A N D  H E L L  
This technique should be used as a last resort. 
It is with high hope and expectation that this 
and all of the other processes be practiced 
with judgment, common sense, and decency. 
Hypnosis can be used to treat phobias, 
anxiety disorders, and panic attacks. This 
technique reverses the process to instil a 
phobia 
in 
which 
dishonesty 
creates 
overwhelming anxiety. If pain is linked to 
deceit and pleasure to the truth, confessing 
becomes the only way to reduce the pain. 
We use a process similar to anchoring the 
truth, except whenever something painful or 
negative happens to this person—he bangs 
his foot, he gets into argument with a 
neighbour—you anchor it. Whenever he feels 
disappointed or becomes upset, anchor it. 
Then ask your question and if it's not the 
response you want—if you feel he's lying—
fire off the pain anchor. He'll quickly associate 
lying to you with pain. The only way to 
alleviate this pain will be to tell the truth. To 
further increase the association, contrast it by 
using a different anchor linked to pleasant 
experiences—sexual arousal, eating, relaxing, 
etc. 
THE B R I D G E  

In part 2 we touched briefly on the 
importance of rapport. When we are in 
synch with another person our communi- 
cation flows effortlessly. When we consciously 
seek to get in rapport with someone—to align 
ourselves psychologically— we align 
ourselves physically. Examples of this are 
matching a person's gestures, posture, or rate 
of speech. This is called pacing. Once you've 
done this, you switch to what's called leading. 
This can be extremely effective when done in 
the following way: 
After establishing rapport with the other 
person, you feed him everything that he may 
be thinking about the conversation. These 
statements accurately reflect his thinking. 
This aligns you psychologically. Then you 
lead his thinking by explaining why the truth 
is the best route for him to take. And if this 
process is done right, he will follow. 
Example 
"I know that you think you're not ready to tell 
me the truth. I'm sure that you wish this entire 
conversation wasn't taking place right now, 
and that it could just be over with. I'm sure 
that you think I'm going to be upset with you 
and that we're going to get into a fight over it. 
You may be thinking that there's no reason to 
tell me. Maybe I'm making a bigger deal out 
of it than it really warrants. I understand. We 
all make mistakes, and this is one that you 
wish would just go away. I'm sure I would 
feel exactly as you do if I were in your 
position. But since I'm not, / can only tell you 
what it feels like to be in mine. [This phrase 
begins the lead.] 
"It's all okay. It really is. Let's have an 
honest discussion. You tell me exactly what 
happened and you'll know that it's the right 
thing to do. I'd be happy, and I know you 
will 
too, to be able to put this behind us. That we 
can move on. Let's do that because it makes 
sense for both of us." 

A D V A N C E D  C O N V E R S A T I O N  
STOPPERS: 
T R A N C E  P H R A S E S  
These conversation stoppers use phrases 
that are mild trance inducers. In other words, 
they 
cause 
the 
listener 
to 
zone 
out 
temporarily while his brain tries to process the 
information. Use them when you need to gain 
control of the conversation or to regroup. 
They give you some time to collect your 
thoughts while others lose their train of 
thought. You may have to read them several 
times yourself because of the "huh" effect. 
1. "Why are you asking me what you 
don't know for 
sure?" 
2. "Do you really believe what you thought 
you knew?" 
3. "Could you give me . . .  an example . . . 
would be helpful." 
4. "You can pretend anything and master 
it." 
5. "I  understand  what  you're . . . saying 
. . .  it doesn't 
make it true." 
6. "If you expected me to believe that, you 
wouldn't have 
said it." 
7. "Your question is what you knew it 
would be, isn't it?" 
8. "Your response says what you're 
unaware of." 
9. "Do you believe that you knew what you 
thought?" 
10. "How do you stop a thought once you 
get it?" 
11. "Why would you believe something 
that's not true?" 
12. "Why axe you agreeing with what you 
already know?" 
13. "What happens when you get a 
thought?" 
14. "The less you try the more you'll agree 
..." 
15. "Are you unaware of what you forgot?" 

S E E  F O R  Y O U R S E L F  
The power of expectation and suggestion can 
be used with tremendous results. While you 
could be relentless in your pursuit to get the 
truth from someone, his mind may be ready 
to defend the assault. But when his own mind 
turns against itself, he will do the work for 
you. 
Have you ever noticed what happens when 
you buy a new car? Suddenly it seems like 
everyone on the road is driving that same car. 
Or if you're on a diet, everywhere you turn 
is a bakery or ice-cream store. Reality has not 
changed, only your perception of it has. When 
you can't change someone's reality to get to 
the truth, alter how he sees it instead. This 
can be just as effective. 
If you were to tell a neighbour that there 
has been a rash of break-ins in the 
neighbourhood, over the next few days she'll 
notice the garbage cans seem out of order; the 
mailbox looks "funny"; the car across the 
street looks suspicious. At night, she'll hear 
every creek and noise in the house. Maybe 
she's heard them a thousand times before, 
but now she's listening to them. Now they 
may mean something. 
The key to using this technique is to 
implant an artificial 
suggestion and let it manifest inside the 
person's mind. This technique gets the person 
to rethink her behaviour with or without your 
confronting her directly. Please note that this 
technique may induce a temporary state of 
mild paranoia, especially if two or more 
people make the same suggestion. 

Scenario  
You think that a co-worker has been stealing 
office supplies. 
Sample question formation I: "Samantha, 
have you noticed that people seem to be 
looking at you a little funny?" You can be 
sure Samantha will "see" everyone looking at 
her, and it will consume her attention until 
she stops. 
Sample 
question 
formation 
II: 
"Samantha, I think the whole office knows 
about the office supplies—have you ever 
noticed how they stare at you sometimes?" 
This 
formation 
is 
more 
direct 
and 
confrontational. 
 
You'll notice that if Samantha is in fact 
stealing office supplies, she will soon believe 
that everyone is "on to her" because she will 
see everyone staring at her. 
 

P A R T  
6 
P S Y C H O L O G Y  ON 
Y O U R  S I D E  
'Men stumble over the truth from time to time, but most 
pick themselves up and hurry off 
as if nothing has happened." 
—WINSTON CHURCHILL 

In order to get to the truth you need to know how 
to take control of a situation, command authority, 
and above all, predict someone else's response. 
These ten commandments of human behaviour will 
help you to navigate the sometimes turbulent 
waters of conversation and her twin sister, debate. 
By understanding how the brain processes 
information, you will be able to easily influence 
anyone to tell the truth. 
TEN COMMANDMENTS OF HUMAN 
B E H A V I O U R  
1. Ninety percent of the decisions we make are 
based on emotion. We then use logic to justify our 
actions. If you appeal to someone on a strictly 
logical basis, you will have little chance of 
persuading him. If you're not getting the truth, 
phrases such as "Honesty is the best policy " or 
"Lies just hurt everyone" won't sway anybody. You 
need to translate logic and sensible thinking into an 
emotion-based 
statement—and 
give 
direct 
benefits for that person to come clean. 
For instance, a mother speaking to her child 
might try, "When you lie, it hurts me. I want to be 
able to trust you. Trusting you means that you'll 
have more responsibility— you'll be able to do 
more fun things like have sleepovers and go to the 
petting zoo with your friends." 
You should offer specific benefits that appeal to 
the per- 
sons emotions. The attack sequences and silver 
bullets are all emotionally charged. 
2. How we deal with good and bad news 
depends on how 
it is internalized. When a person becomes 
unusually de 
pressed about an event in her life, it's often because 
of three 
mental distortions: (1) she feels that the situation 
is permanent; (2) she feels that it is critical, 
meaning that it's 
more significant than it really is; and (3) that 
it is all- 
consuming, that it will invade and pervade other 
areas of 

her life. When any or all of these beliefs are 
present and 
elevated, it will dramatically increase her anxiety 
and despondency. 
Conversely, when we think of a problem as 
temporary, isolated, and insignificant, it doesn't 
concern us at all. By artificially inflating or 
deflating these factors in the mind of another, you 
can instantly alter their attitude toward any 
situation, be it positive or negative. 

3. 
When a person becomes adamant about 
his 
position, 
change 
the 
one 
thing 
that 
you 
can—his 
physiology. 
A 
per 
son's emotional state is directly related to his 
physical 
state. 
If he gets locked into a position of denial or refusal, 
get 
him 
to move his body. This prevents what is called 
mind-lock 
and makes it easier for him to change his 
psychological position. If he's sitting down, have 
him 
get 
up 
and 
walk 
around 
the room. If he's standing, try to get him to sit 
down. 
When 
our body is in a fixed position, our mind can 
become similarly frozen. 
4. Don't ask someone to change his mind 
without giving 
him additional information. Remember that 
while you're 
talking to the person he listens with his ego—and 
you must 
accommodate it. Many people see changing their 
mind as a 
sign of weakness. He's given up and you've won. 
So instead of asking him to change his 
mind, allow him to make a new decision based 
on additional information. Politicians have a 
penchant for this because they never want to 
appear wishy-washy. They rarely say that they've 
changed their mind on an issue—rather, they say 
their "position has evolved," as it were. 
For example, you might say, "I can see why you 
said that then, but in light of the fact that [a new 
bit of information to justify him changing his 
mind], I think you owe me an explanation." 
However, the way in which this new 
information is introduced is crucial. The more 
recent the information is, or appears to be, the 
more effective you will be. If you bring up a fact 
that occurred some time ago, a fact that he was 
simply unaware of, he may not want to look foolish 
for not having known about it. Therefore the more 
timely the information, the more comfortable he 
will feel in re-evaluating his thinking. 
5. Sometimes you need to amplify the problem 
in order 

to reach a solution. Some time ago I was over at a 
friend's 
house when his six-year-old announced that he 
was angry 
because he couldn't have ice cream for breakfast. 
With my 
friend's consent, I said the following to his son: 
"You're 
right, Stuart, you are too upset to do anything but 
be angry. You'll probably need to sit there for two 
whole hours until it passes." Needless to say, 
Stuart got over his anger fast. 

A friend of mine had a secretary who was 
constantly straightening up his office. He would 
ask her not to, but she insisted that it should be 
kept clean and organized. She had been with him 
for over fifteen years and he wasn't about to 
dismiss her over this. Nonetheless, this habit 
became very annoying. The solution? He went out 
of his way to make a mess. Every morning the 
office looked like a disaster area. Finally his 
secretary mentioned that she thought he was taking 
advantage of her good nature by being such a slob. 
She stopped tidying up soon afterward. 
When arguing becomes futile, stop. Go the 
other direction, reversing your position entirely. 
Give the other person an exaggerated version of 
what he wants. This will often cause him to retreat 
to more neutral ground. 
6. People do what you expect them to do. If you 
say something ten times, you clearly don't expect 
them to listen to you. Notice the way people in 
authority—police, for example—take control of a 
situation. They don't scream, yell, or carry on. A 
wave of their hand, and the traffic stops. They say 
things once, and directly. 
If you're taken to the hospital with a broken leg, 
the doctor tells you what needs to be done. You 
aren't given options. There's no deliberation or 
argument, and you're not asked for your opinion. 
If you're told that you need x-rays and a cast, then 
you get x-rays and a cast. Could you imagine if 
your doctor said, "You know, I think your leg is 
broken. What do you think?" You expect him to 
tell you what the situation is and what needs to be 
done. 
Do the same in conversation. When you give an 
order, expect people to follow it and they will. 
When you shout, you send the message "I'm 
shouting so you'll listen to me." The best way to 
get a person's attention is to speak softly and 
directly. 
Not only will people often do what you expect 
them to do, but they often feel how you suggest 
they should feel. Take a look at three distinct 
examples of this influence at work in our 
everyday life. 
A. When a small child falls, if his parent makes a 
big deal 

out of it, he will likely cry and become more 
upset. The 
child's thoughts are, "Mom knows best, and if 
she thinks 
I hurt myself I must have." 
B. The well-known placebo effect can induce 
physiological 
changes such as lowering blood pressure or 
controlling 
cholesterol levels. With no more than a sugar 
pill, a patient's body may react as if it were 
given the actual medication. 
C. Someone says you look tired and your whole 
disposition 
changes. Try this on a co-worker and you'll 
notice a complete change of body language. If 
you want to be nice, 
try the converse and tell someone she looks 
great. Watch 
a smile appear and her eyes widen. While she 
may deny 
the compliment, watch her face to she how she 
really feels 
about it. 
7. When we ask a favour of someone, common 
sense dictates that we might want that person to be 
in a good mood. 
The thinking is, if he's relaxed and feeling good 
he's more likely to give us what we ask for. This is 
usually true, but it doesn't always work when you 
ask for the truth. When you want someone to 
come clean with the facts, you're asking for more 
than a favour. You have to assume that it-—the 
truth—is something that he doesn't want to give. 
Thus the more comfortable things are, the less his 
incentive is. The best time to seek your confession 
is when he's tired, hungry, thirsty, whatever. He 
won't be thinking clearly and will be looking to 
end the conversation as soon as possible. Of 
course he's going to be more agitated and grumpy. 
Nonetheless, if the only way he can become more 
comfortable is to tell you what you want, then he 
will. 
8. You must be able to walk away. If your 
opponent senses desperation, you're sunk. You're 
only as strong as your alternatives, and the more 
attractive your alternatives, the more power you 

have. When you're desperate, the facts look grossly 
out of proportion. When this happens, you'll be apt 
to do what you never should do: make a decision 
out of fear. When your options are limited, your 
perspective 
is 
distorted; 
your 
thinking 
is 
emotional, not logical. This is true for all of us. If 
you perceive your power to be nonexistent you are 
likely to give in without good cause. By increasing 
your alternatives and narrowing the other person's 
options, you gain considerable leverage. The 
equation that determines the balance of leverage is 
simple. It comes down to who needs who more. 
There's a saying that the person who cares less, 
wins. One way to increase your power is to 
demonstrate that what your opponent has to 
offer—in this 
case, the truth—can be obtained through other 
means—in this case, other people. This decreases 
his power, and hence his leverage. 

9. It's important to know how human beings 
process 
 
information.  
When it comes to doing what we like, we do 
what's called single-tasking. When we think 
about 
things 
we don't want to do, we do what's called 
multitasking. 
What 
does this all mean? Well, if you have to pay your 
bills 
but 
never feel like doing it, what's the thought 
process 
you 
might go through? You think, I've got to get all of 
the 
bills 
together and organize them into different piles; 
get 
out 
my 
chekbook,  stamps,  and envelopes; address each 
letter; 
write out the check; balance the checkbook; 
and 
so 
on. 
When it comes to doing something you enjoy 
doing, 
you 
internalize the steps in larger groups. For 
example, 
if 
you 
enjoy cooking, the steps might be, go the store 
and 
come 
home and make dinner. If you hated to cook, 
everything 
from waiting on line at the supermarket to 
cleaning 
the 
dishes afterwards would enter into the equation. 
Fine, but what's the practical use of this? Well, 
if you want to give someone a motive to do 
something, you're going to show him that it's 
simple and easy. If you want to discourage a 
behaviour, you need only stretch out the number of 
steps into a long, boring, and arduous process. 
Same event, but depending upon how it's 
internalized, you'll generate a completely different 
feeling toward it. 
10. Every action human beings take is 
motivated either 
out of a need to avoid pain or the desire to gain 
pleasure—or 
a combination of the two. What you link pleasure 
and pain to determines how a person will respond. 

If you want to influence a person's behaviour, 
you need to attach pain to the direction you don't 
want him to move in and pleasure to the direction 
you want him to move toward. Too often out of 
anger or ignorance we lose sight of this powerful 
motivating tool. If someone's not being truthful 
with you, do you want to shout, "You're a no-
good liar! I knew you'd only cause me misery. 
Tell me the damn truth and then get the hell out of 
my life!" This is not an effective strategy. It's a 
simple equation: if the benefit of being truthful 
outweighs the benefit of lying, you will get the 
truth. However, a crucial criterion needs to be met. 
The benefit should provide for an easy out. This is 
something that most people don't take into 
consideration. The liar above all else wants to 
change the conversation, move on, and put this 
behind him. When you outline the benefits make 
sure to include, if you can, that the subject will 
never again be brought up, it will be forgotten 
about, and you both will be able to put this in the 
past. You could offer him the greatest incentive for 
being truthful, but if he thinks a lengthy con-
versation and constant reminders will follow, he's 
not going to budge. The silver bullets are good 
examples of how to phrase your request for the 
truth using the pleasure/pain principle. 
 

P A R T  
7 
 
I N T E R N A L  T R U T H  
B L O C K E R S :  WE L I E  
L O U D E S T  W H E N  WE L I E  
TO O U R S E L V E S  
"Once he finds out who he is, what can console him? 
. . . for on Earth 
Everyone who lives, lives in a dream." —
CALDERON DE LA BARCA 

You have all the tools necessary to spot deceit and 
to ferret out the truth. However, several factors 
can interfere with and even completely block your 
ability to detect deceit. The good news is that 
being aware of these factors neutralizes their 
power and leaves you free to examine the facts 
as they are. 
SELF-DECEPTION 
The easiest person to lie to is someone who wants 
to be deceived. While several factors can get in the 
way of our getting to the truth, the worst 
offenders are usually ourselves. If you don't want 
to see the truth, you often will not. We all have a 
friend whose boyfriend comes home late every night 
from work. He's seen around town with women 
half his age, smells like perfume, and is constantly 
taking business trips on the weekend. Yet despite 
all of the evidence she refuses to see the truth. 
She accepts him at his word, and that is that. 
When we don't want to see the truth we'll lie to 
ourselves. These lies are the toughest to spot 
because they are our own. There's no objectivity to 
give us perspective. 
People spend millions calling 900 numbers to 
hear a recording of their lucky lottery numbers. 
We would like to believe that we could make a 
thousand dollars an hour in 
our spare time working at home from the 
kitchen table. Our desire to believe strongly 
influences what we see as our reality, from miracle 
wrinkle creams to guaranteed weight-loss pills. 
And our desire not to see filters out vital infor-
mation that would often give us clues to 
discovering the truth. 
Only the exceptional person is willing to look at 
what he doesn't want to see, listen to what he 
doesn't want to hear, and believe that which he 
wishes would not exist. 
When you go into a meeting wanting it to work 
out, you'll overlook too many things that may 
make it a bad deal. You must try to remain as 
objective as possible—^as if you were reviewing the 
information for someone else. Wishful thinking, 
desire, and hope cannot allow you to lose sight 
of reality. 

The secret lies in learning how to suspend your 
interests. And yes, there is an easy way to do this 
usually difficult task. Watch out for the three Cs. 
They 
are 
compliments, 
confirmation, 
and 
confrontation. If you're listening with any of these 
preconceptions in mind, the information is likely to 
be distorted.  

In other words, if you're looking for praise, 
looking to confirm that which you already know, or 
looking for an argument, you will miss the true 
meaning behind the message. 
O P I N I O N S ,  A T T I T U D E S ,  AND 
B E L I E F S  
In the previous paragraphs, we saw how our desire 
to see or not to see colours our perception of 
reality. What we believe to be true also distorts our 
perception. All of our prejudices, beliefs, 
attitudes, and opinions filter out the truth. 
If you grew up to respect and revere authority 
and were taught never to question an authority 
figure, this belief will greatly inhibit your ability to 
be objective about information that comes from 
someone in such a position. Similarly, if you 
believe that all salesmen are thieves or that all 
police are corrupt, it becomes impossible to see 
what is there. Instead you see a projection of your 
own ideals, beliefs, and prejudices. 
Sometimes we need to generalize about our 
world; with literally thousands of decisions to 
make each day, we can't look at everything as if 
we were seeing it for the first time. There are 
times, however, when it's vitally important to 
suspend your beliefs. Then and only then can you 
see things as they are, not how you believe them 
to be. 
D O N ' T  L E T  Y O U R  
E M O T I O N S  G E T  T H E  
B E T T E R  O F  Y O U  
Strong emotions cloud our perception of reality. 
Over two thousand years ago, Aristotle had this to 
say about emotion and distortion: "Under the 
influence of strong feeling we are easily deceived. 
The coward under the influence of fear and the 
lover under that of love have such illusions that the 
coward owing to a trifling resemblance thinks he 
sees an enemy and the lover his beloved." 
Emotional   states   are   either   self-induced,   
externally 

brought on, or arise from a combination of the 
two. Some of the more powerful ones are: guilt, 
intimidation, appeal to ego, fear, curiosity, our 
desire to be liked, and love. If you're operating in 
any of these states, your judgment is likely to be 
impaired.  

Furthermore, anyone who uses any of these is 
attempting to move you from logic to emotion—to 
a playing field that's not so level. In the process 
the truth gets lost because you're not operating 
logically and can't effectively see the evidence 
before you, let alone weigh it. Some generic 
examples of how these manipulations sound are as 
follows: 
Guilt: "How can you even say that? I'm hurt 
that you wouldn't trust me. I just don't know who 
you are anymore." 
Fear: "You know, you might just lose this entire 
deal. I don't think that's going to make your boss 
very happy. I sure hope you know what you're 
doing. I'm telling you that you won't get a better 
deal anywhere else. You're a fool if you think 
otherwise." 
Appeal to ego: "I can see that you're a smart 
person. I wouldn't try to put anything past you. 
How could I? You'd be on to me in a second." 
Curiosity: "Look, you only live once. Try it. 
You can always go back to how things were 
before. It might be fun, exciting—a real 
adventure." 
Desire to be liked: "I thought you were a real 
player. So did everybody else. This is going to be a 
real disappointment if you don't come through for 
us." 
Love: "If you loved me you wouldn't question 
me. Of course I have only your best interest at 
heart. I wouldn't lie to you. You know that deep 
down inside, don't you?" 
 
Look and listen objectively—not only at the 
words but at the message. These internal truth 
blockers interfere with your ability to digest the 
facts. When these emotions creep into your 
thinking, temporarily suspend your feelings and 
look in front of you, not inside yourself. 
 

P A R T  
8 
E X T E R N A L  T R U T H  
B L O C K
K S  OF 
E R S :  T R I C
THE T R A D E  
"The truth is the same from every angle. A lie always 
needs to be facing forward." 
—DAVID J. LIEBERMAN 

Unlike internal truth blockers, which we bring on ourselves, 
these truth blockers are done to us. These are the psycho-
logical secrets of the experts, the tricks of the trade—factors 
that can affect your judgment in objectively evaluating in-
formation. 
No matter what area of life we're in, we're always selling 
something. In business you're selling a product or service. 
In your personal life you're selling yourself and your ideas. 
Regardless of the situation, the reason you don't succeed is 
always going to be the same: the person doesn't believe what 
you're saying is true. 
Let's say you're a real estate broker. Someone who is not 
investing with you may say "I have to think about it" or "I 
have to talk to my wife." But really it all comes down to one 
thing. If your prospect believed what you were saying was 
true—-that you would make him money—then he would in-
vest with you, wouldn't he? Establishing credibility is the 
key to influencing the behaviour of others. When credibility 
can't be gained through the facts, distortion of the truth is 
what often follows. 
These techniques can be difficult to escape because 
they're based on psychological principles of human nature. 
The good news is that these tactics are a lot like a magic 
trick. Once you know how the trick is done, you can't be 
fooled. 
R U L E    1 
Wow! You're Just Like Me 
We all tend to like, trust, and subsequently be influenced 
by people like ourselves. We feel a sense of connection and 
understanding. If you've been to a casino recently, you may 
have noticed something interesting on every employee's 
name tag. It looks a lot like this: 
Jim Smith 
V. P., Marketing 
Atlanta, GA 
The employee's hometown is right on the tag. Why? 
Because it helps to create a bond with anyone who has 
lived there or maybe has a relative in that area. It invari-
ably starts a conversation and the gambler begins to feel 
connected with this person. Something as innocuous as a 
name tag has created instant rapport and possibly a loyal 
customer. 

You may be thinking that this seems harmless enough, 
and you'd be right. What's the big deal, anyway? Well, if 
all that was affected by this psychological trait was name 
tags, then we wouldn't have to worry. But it's not. It's 
much more pervasive and far-reaching than you could 
ever imagine. 
Listing all the situations in which this rule could be used 
on you would fill a book on its own. Therefore, here are the 
three most popular ways that it infiltrates our lives. 
1. Watch out when you're asked about your hobbies, 
hometown, values, favourite foods, etc., only to be 
followed with the obligatory "Me too, what a 
coincidence." 
2. Another aspect of this rule is that if someone is nice 
to us, we not only like him more but are more likely to agree 
with him. Don't you know this to be true in your own life? 
If he's agreeing to everything you say, whether or not it 
makes sense, watch out. The phrase "flattery will get you 
nowhere" couldn't be further from the truth. 
A great little fable by Aesop illustrates this nicely. It's 
called "The Fox and the Crow." 
A fox spied a crow sitting on a branch of a tall tree with 
a golden piece of cheese in her beak. The fox, who was both 
clever and hungry, quickly thought of a plan to get the 
cheese away from the crow. 
Pretending to notice the crow for the first time, the fox 
exclaimed, "My, what a beautiful bird! I must say that is 
the most elegant black plumage I have ever seen. Look how 
it shines in the sun. Simply magnificent!" 
The crow was flattered by all this talk about her feathers. 
She listened to every sugary word that the fox spoke. The 
fox continued: "I must say that this is the most beautiful 
bird in the world. But I wonder, can such a stunning bird 
have an equally splendid voice? That," said the cunning 
fox, "would be too much to ask." The crow, believing the 
fox's words, opened her beak to let out an ear-piercing caw\ 
As she did so, the cheese tumbled out of her mouth and was 
gobbled up instantly by the fox. The moral: never trust a 
flatterer. 

Does this mean that you should be wary of every single 
compliment and always assume the one who compliments 
you has an ulterior motive? Of course not. Just be alert to 
praise that drips with insincerity. 
3. Finally, remember our discussion about rapport in 
part 2? Well, it can just as easily be used on you. Rapport 
creates trust. It allows the other to build a psychological 
bridge to you. You feel more comfortable and your gulli-
bility increases. Take note if your movements, rate of 
speech, or tone are echoed by another. 
R U L E     2 
Beware the Stranger Bearing Gifts 
Ever wonder why religious groups offer a flower or some 
other gift in the airport? They know that most people will 
feel compelled to give them a small donation. We know we 
don't have to, but we can become uncomfortable, even 
though we didn't ask for the gift in the first place. 
When someone gives us something, we often feel indebted 
to him. When you are presented with a request, make sure 
that you're not acting out of a sense of obligation. This rule 
can take many forms—it's not limited to gifts. You could 
be offered information, a concession, or even someone's 
time. Don't think that salespeople don't know that if they 
invest a lot of time with you, showing you a product, dem-
onstrating how it works, you will feel somewhat obligated 
to buy it, even if you're not sure that you really want it. The 
key is to decide what's right independent of the other per-
son's interest in your decision. 
R U L E     3 
It's Half Price! But Half of What? 
This principle states that facts are likely to be interpreted 
differently based upon the order in which they're presented. 
In other words, we compare and contrast. In an electronics 
store the salesperson might show you accessories to go with 
your stereo system after you've agreed to buy it. Somehow 
the fifty-dollar carrying case and a thirty-dollar warranty 
doesn't seem that much in the wake of an eight-hundred-
dollar system. Because he has shown you the costlier items 
first, your perspective shifts and the items seen afterwards 
are deemed more reasonable. 

A less-than-reputable used car salesman might show you 
several cars that are priced 20 to 30 percent higher than 
they should be. Then he'll show you a car that's priced fairly 
and you'll think it's a great deal. To you, it feels as if you're 
getting more car for the money—what a bargain! When 
really you only think that because you're comparing it to 
the other cars. 
Other examples of this principle are price markdowns. 
An item that's been reduced from $500 to $200 certainly 
seems like a better bargain than something that sells for 
$150. The contrast on the sale item makes it more attrac-
tive, even if it's not as nice as the item that sells for less. "I 
know it's expensive, but look at what it used to sell for" is 
the familiar retort. 
In some of the finer restaurants, guests are treated to 
sorbet between courses. This is done to clear the palate. 
Flavours from previous dishes won't mix with others, so 
that each dish may be enjoyed completely. When you have, 
a decision to make, why not clear your mental palate? To 
do this you need only consider each decision by itself. This 
can best be accomplished by letting time pass between de-
cisions and by independently determining the value of the 
object. 
R U L E     4 
Just Do This One Little Thing for Me? 
Know when to stick to your guns and when not to. Most of 
us have a strong tendency to act in a manner consistent with 
our previous actions—even if it's not a good idea. It's just 
human nature. We are compelled to be consistent in our 
words, thought, beliefs, and actions. 
It has to do with the ability to make a decision indepen-
dent of previous decisions. And the higher a person's self-
esteem, the greater the chance that he or she will make 
independent decisions. The following, which is from my 
book Instant Analysis, deals with this phenomenon. If you 
have a low or negative self-image, then you feel more com-
pelled to justify your previous actions so you can be "right." 
You will eat food that you don't want because you ordered 
it. You will watch a video that you really don't want to see 
because you went "all the way to the video store in the 
rain to get it." You continually try to "make things right," 
justifying old actions with consistent behaviour. In other 
words, watching the video that you went to get makes get-
ting the video the smart thing to do, even if you no longer 
feel like watching it.  

Your primary concern is with being right, even if it 
means compromising present judgment in order to 
satisfy and justify past behaviours. This is done in the 
hope that you can turn things around so that you can be 
right. 
The ultimate example of this behaviour is the process of 
cult recruiting. You may wonder how an intelligent and 
aware person could ever get involved in a cult—where the 
members give up family, friends, possessions, and in some 
very sad instances, their lives. The higher a person's self-
esteem, the less likely he or she will be to fall prey to a 
cult—primarily because a person with a positive self-image 
can admit to himself, and to others, that he's done some-
thing stupid. Those who lack self-worth cannot afford to 
question their judgment, worth, or intelligence. The method 
employed in cult recruitment is to involve the person slowly 
over a period of time. Each new step of involvement forces 
the person to justify his or her previous behaviour. This is 
why cultists don't just walk up to someone and say, "Hey, 
do you want to join our cult and give up all of your posses-
sions?" 
This rule can greatly influence your decision-making 
process. Essentially, by getting you to agree to small, seem-
ingly innocuous requests, the person sets you up for 
something larger. By agreeing to the small requests, you 
justify your behaviour by realigning your thinking as 
follows: "I must really care about this person or I wouldn't 
be helping him" and "I must really care about this cause or 
I wouldn't be doing any of this." 
To avoid others using this rule on you, beware if you are 
asked to commit to something, even in a small way. This 
request is usually followed by a slightly greater request, and 
over time your sense of commitment is built up to the point 
where you feel locked into your decision. 
When you make decisions, notice if your best interests 
are being served or if you're simply trying to "make right" 
a previous behaviour. 
R U L E     5 
The Bandwagon Effect 
This principle states that we have a tendency to see an action 
as appropriate if other people are doing it. This psycholog-
ical trait invades many areas of our life. Laugh tracks for 
television comedy shows come courtesy of this principle 
as well.  

Do we think that something is funnier if others are 
laughing? Absolutely. Your neighbour, whom you never 
looked at twice, suddenly appears more attractive when 
you're told that every woman is dying to date him. Cherry 
red—the colour that the car salesman told you is the hottest 
seller of the season—suddenly becomes a must-have. The 
key to avoiding the influence of this rule is to separate your 
level of interest from other people's desire. Just because 
you're told that something is the latest, best, hottest, or big-
gest seller doesn't make it right for you. 
R U L E     6 
A White Lab Coat Doesn't Make 
Anyone an Expert 
Of all the psychological tools, this is by far the most used 
and abused by retailers. We all remain to some degree quite 
susceptible to our earlier conditioning regarding authority— 
mainly, it is to be respected. This is fine, except that the 
abuses of our vulnerability are flagrant and rampant. Have 
you ever noticed what cosmetic salespeople in department 
stores wear? Lab coats! Does this not seem odd? Why do 
they wear them? Because it makes them look like experts. 
And we are more likely to believe what they have to say 
because they are perceived as more credible. 
Recently my friend had told me that he had rented the 
absolute worst movie he had ever seen in his life. When I 
asked what possessed him to rent it, he replied, "The guy 
behind the counter told me I would like it." As soon as he 
said this, he realized how silly he had been. What on earth 
does the guy behind the counter know about my friend or 
his taste in movies? Just because someone's behind a 
counter, wearing a lab coat, or holding a clipboard, that 
doesn't make him an expert. 
 
R U L E     7 
Rare Doesn't Always Mean Valuable 
This principle states that the harder something is to acquire, 
the greater the value we place on its attainment. In essence, 
we want what we can't have and want what is hard to obtain 
even more. 
"We're probably out of stock on that item. It's a huge 
seller. But if I did have one available, you would want it, 
right?" There's a better chance you would say yes when the 
possibility of attainment is at its lowest. 

Compare the above sentence with the following one and 
see if you would be as apt to agree to the purchase: "We 
have a warehouse full of them. Should I write up the order 
now?" The impetus to act just isn't there this time. No ur-
gency, no scarcity, and no desire. The key to avoid this rule 
being used on you is to ask yourself this question: would I 
still want it if there were a million just like it and no one 
wanted any of them? 
R U L E     8 
A Colour Pie Chart Doesn't Make It True 
Benjamin Disraeli put it best when he said, "There are three 
kinds of lies: lies, damned lies and statistics." It never ceases 
to amaze me just how easily swayed we become by some-
thing that "looks" official. Just because someone points to 
a colour graph as "proof" doesn't make everything he's 
saying true. Don't be swayed by the mode of the 
message— rather, focus on the message itself. How many 
of us listen to a salesman's pitch, only to be presented with 
a nice colour brochure outlining everything that's just 
been said? At what point did we come to believe that the 
printing press doesn't lie? 
There's an old saying that goes "Nobody ever sells a horse 
because it's a bad horse. They sell it for tax purposes." Often 
we don't stop and ask ourselves, "Does this make sense?" 
A dash of common sense can go a long, long way. 
R U L E     9 
I'm on Your Side 
This technique is used to gain credibility. When it is done 
effectively, you would swear that you've just made a new 
best friend who has only your best interest at heart. For this 
rule, he manufactures a scenario to gain your trust, then 
uses this trust in a real-life situation. 
For example, let's say that you're in a mattress store and 
considering buying the Super Deluxe—a firm, top-of-the-
line bed. The salesman tells you that if you want it he'll 
order it for you, but he feels you should know something 
first. He proceeds to tell you that while the consumer would 
never realize it, this manufacturer sometimes uses recycled 
materials on the inside. 

What has he accomplished by this? He has gained your 
complete confidence. He's risking a sale to tell you 
something that you'd never find out otherwise. Now you'll 
be inclined to trust anything he says. At this point he 
shows you the Supreme Deluxe. It's priced slightly higher 
than your first choice, but has no used materials inside. 
R U L E    10 
Look at What You're Getting, 
Not What You're Promised 
To avoid being deceived, evaluate a person's integrity based 
upon what is being presented, not what is promised. Henry 
was an older man who went store to store selling pocket 
watches. To those in the store, salespeople and shoppers 
alike, he was a peddler. And he retired a millionaire. He did 
nothing that was illegal per se. How did he become so 
wealthy selling pocket watches? Mainly because he never 
sold the watch. What he sold was the story. 
Henry would walk into the shop and ask if anyone would 
like to buy a beautiful handcrafted crystal lamp. The cost 
was only thirty-five dollars, hundreds less than what one 
would expect to pay. 
He made the lamps himself and enjoyed "giving them 
away." Since he had only one sample he would need to take 
orders. He diligently took down the names and addresses of 
each eager person and refused to accept any sort of deposit. 
"You'll pay when you get it and when you're happy with 
it," he would say, smiling. Henry had now established him-
self as a trusting person and one who had a beautiful 
product at a fantastic price. He has their trust and their 
confidence. 
Henry also carried a large box with a handle. And invar-
iably someone at some point would ask what was in the box. 
This is when Henry went to work. He opened the box, re-
vealing beautiful sterling silver pocket watches individually 
wrapped and protected. He told his eager audience just 
about anything he wanted to about the watches. They had 
no reason to doubt him or their value. After all, look at 
everything he had "done" for them so far. Henry would sell 
the pocket watches to most of the nice folks who placed 
orders for his lamp. Nobody ever did get a lamp—just an 
overpriced pocket watch, sold to them by a kind old man. 
Remember Henry the next time you make a decision 
based upon something that has been promised, but not de-
livered. 

R U L E     II 
Well, Can You at Least Do This? 
If you're asked to do a rather large favour for someone only 
to decline his request for help, beware. A smaller favour, 
the one he really wants you to do, may follow. We are 
more likely to agree to a smaller request if we're first 
presented with a larger one. There are three psychological 
motivations at work: 
1. You feel that in contrast to the first request, the 
smaller one is no big deal.  
2. You feel bad for not coining through on his original 
favour, and this seems like a fair compromise 
3. You don't want to be perceived as unreasonable. 
Refusing the large request is one thing. And this small 
favour is not going to kill you. 
R U L E    12 
I'll Show You 
Nobody wants to be prejudged or negatively evaluated. That 
is to say, people dislike being thought of as lesser, in any 
way, shape, or form. Here's how those who understand this 
rule can use it against you. You walk into a clothing store 
and ask to see a certain designer sweater. The salesman 
shows you where it is and adds, "It may be a little pricey 
for you, we have some less expensive ones over there." "I'll 
show that jerk," you think to yourself. "I'll buy this sweater 
and prove that I can afford it." You leave mad with an 
expensive purchase, head held high, of course. The sales-
man? He's smiling all the way to the bank. This rule uses 
what is commonly referred to as reverse psychology. By im-
plying what he "thought" you could afford, he forced your 
ego to prove to him wrong. 

CONCLUSION 
Whether it's business or personal matters—from casual conversations to in-depth 
negotiations—the techniques that you have learned will significantly change the way you re-
late to the rest of the world. Now that you've gained that extra edge, you'll enjoy an 
unprecedented opportunity to use the most important secrets governing human behaviour 
for enhancing and advancing your business and personal relationships. 
There will probably never be a way to stop people from trying to lie to you, but now you'll 
be ready for them. And with each new encounter, in any situation, you will never be lied to 
again. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

