Life: Sustainable, 
Programmable, 
Bottom-Up 
Manufacturing
Andrew Hessel

“The future has a funny way of 
sneaking up on you. You don’t 
notice it until you’re soaking in it. 
That was the feeling 
at O’Reilly’s Solid 
Conference.”
 — Wired
The traditional boundaries between hardware and software are falling. It’s a perfect storm of 
opportunity for a software-enhanced, networked physical world. The new products and services 
created from the melding of software, hardware, and data are built by people who work across 
disciplines and industries. A vibrant new community is emerging, made up of business and 
industry leaders, software developers, hardware engineers, designers, investors, startup founders, 
academics, artists, and policy makers—many of whom have never come together before. They 
gather at Solid to be inspired, to make connections and launch conversations, and to plug into 
the future for a few days. Will you be a part of it?
Find out more at solidcon.com
THE O’REILLY INTERNET OF THINGS CONFERENCE

Andrew Hessel
Life: Sustainable,
Programmable, Bottom-Up
Manufacturing

978-1-491-93134-9
[LSI]
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-Up Manufacturing
by Andrew Hessel
Copyright © 2015 O’Reilly Media, Inc. Based on the presentation Life: Sustainable,
Programmable, Bottom-Up Manufacturing, © 2014 Andrew Hessel, made by Andrew
Hessel at O’Reilly Media, Inc.’s Solid Conference 2014, San Francisco, CA. All rights
reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Adapted by: Troy Mott
Editor: Brian Sawyer
Production Editor: Kristen Brown
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Ellie Volckhausen
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
May 2015:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2015-05-13: First Release
 
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Life: Sustainable,
Programmable, Bottom-Up Manufacturing and related trade dress are trademarks of
O’Reilly Media, Inc. Cover image courtesy of Cambrian Genomics.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing. . . . . .  1
A Little Factory on Your Desk                                                           2
Molecular Fabrication                                                                         4
The Molecular Programming Language                                          6
The Genetic Engineering Laboratory                                               7
Engineering Living Things                                                                 8
DNA Printers                                                                                      11
Engineering Cells                                                                               12
Bioprinting Cells                                                                                15
Bioengineering and Biosynthesis                                                    17
Smart Cities and Beyond                                                                  19
iii


Life: Sustainable, Programmable,
Bottom-up Manufacturing
The following document is adapted from the keynote address by
Andrew Hessel, on Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Man‐
ufacturing, given at the Solid 2014 conference.
Highlights
• Little robots make things
• Fabrication at the micron size
• Eukaryotic cells are key
• Using DNA and bioprinters
• Understanding biotech, biomimicry, and generative design
• Building smart cities and exploring the galaxy
I’m the first genetic engineer that Autodesk ever hired, and perhaps
the last. Here is a candid shot of me (Figure 1-1). It has a little bit of
everything: my laptop computer, a glass of wine, and a cup of coffee.
I try to keep things balanced. And there is also a book on business
strategy, because I have no idea how to do that stuff.
1

Figure 1-1. Andrew Hessel keeps things balanced
A Little Factory on Your Desk
Let me provide you with some background: “Tea, Earl Grey, Hot.” To
me, this is the pinnacle of manufacturing, and of course I get it from
Star Trek: The Next Generation.
Because the idea of having a matter assembler (Figure 1-2) really,
really works for me. This is how I would love to make everything in
the world. Unfortunately, that’s not how we do it. We make it
through a lot of human effort in factories that seem to get larger and
larger.
2 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

Figure 1-2. The matter assembler would be a great way to make every‐
thing in the world
Today, thankfully, we have robots. And this whole conference is a
testament to robotic technologies that are coming online more and
more. We also have these little robots that are starting to allow us to
make things (Figure 1-3).
Figure 1-3. The little factory on a desk
A Little Factory on Your Desk 
| 
3

I can speak from experience that this is changing the culture in
places, like AutoDesk, that make design software. Because now
everyone essentially has a little factory they can put on their desk.
And, of course, we’re learning how to work at smaller and smaller
scales as some of these robotic equipment and manufacturing sys‐
tems allow us to print smaller and smaller things, sometimes with
very high precision.
Molecular Fabrication
I’ve been tracking a lot of the 3D printing space, and it’s really quite
remarkable how small some of the microfabrication is getting today,
even down to about 150 microns. To give you a better idea,
Figure 1-4 shows a model car the size of about five bacteria laid out
from end to end.
Figure 1-4. Microfabrication at 150 microns
So, molecular manufacturing in three dimensions is already starting
to happen, but these are crude technologies. You need to go out into
the world to see what is really good at manufacturing. The software
and hardware you see everywhere is based on this eukaryotic cell
(Figure 1-5). You and I are made up of about 38 trillion of these little
critters. And these are some of the most sophisticated manufactur‐
ing plants on the planet.
4 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

Figure 1-5. A view of the eukaryotic cell
Figure 1-6 shows a peek at the gross circuit diagram of a cell, not
even a eukaryotic cell. And it can make thousands of highly precise
and robust compounds, with just the right proportions to make
more of these little living creatures.
Figure 1-6. The gross circuit diagram of a cell
Cells are highly robust information processors that are aware of
their environment. They are also responsive to their surroundings
Molecular Fabrication 
| 
5

and regulate their own metabolism, which is essentially information
processing. They can even create more of themselves.
The Molecular Programming Language
Our bodies are, in fact, networks of these little computing devices
(Figure 1-7). Since we’ve gotten better with computing, we are start‐
ing to see biology through a new lens. Whether these devices are
evolved or engineered, they have the same abstractions and the
same architectures. They are single components that get made into
larger circuits, are more sophisticated modules, and are ultimately
free living computing devices that we call cells. They make up net‐
works of tissues, organs, and ultimately organisms.
Figure 1-7. The human network
We are starting to witness a meeting of the minds when it comes to
life science and engineering. And the cool part is that it comes with
a programming language. Of course, today there are hundreds, if
not thousands, of different programming languages in computing.
There’s really only one in DNA, but if you are really up to speed,
there are maybe two. The second is due to the genetic code being
rewritten last week with a couple of new bases: x and y.
6 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

But this molecular programming language is really versatile. It’s
been stable for about four billion years, and it allows you to reach in
and program the metabolism of every living creature and compo‐
nent. So, I’m pretty much hooked on genetics.
The cool thing about working with these little squishy manufactur‐
ing systems with this digital programming language is that it’s all
natural. It’s non-toxic (unless you are making toxins), and they can
work with very raw materials such as base elements. They build
from the bottom up, and are infinitely recyclable. This has been pro‐
ven by the four billion years in which materials have been evolved
from star dust.
The Genetic Engineering Laboratory
Unfortunately, it was never easy to do genetic engineering or
become a coder. Figure 1-8 shows a typical genetic laboratory.
Figure 1-8. A genetic engineering lab
Walk into UCSF or a biotech company, and you will essentially see
this type of sophisticated kitchen. If you aren’t familiar with the
tools, don’t have the reagents, or don’t know how to cook (which
takes PhD-level skills), you won’t be able to make much.
The Genetic Engineering Laboratory 
| 
7

This is how I started, but frankly, I got tired of it. Today, the device
shown in Figure 1-9 is changing the world. This is an electrode-
array DNA synthesizer that uses little chips, and allows you to make
12,000 strands of DNA on a single chip. The particular device
shown here can load in eight chips.
Figure 1-9. A DNA synthesizer
You can make massive amounts of DNA, specific to the base pair, on
a machine that is about the size of a desktop printer. It’s a pretty cool
piece of equipment. This is essentially a 3D printer that works at the
nano scale, and there’s nothing else like it in the world of molecular
systems right now.
Engineering Living Things
Of course, O’Reilly has figured out that something is happening in
biology (Figure 1-10). They are realizing that biology is a program‐
ming language, and that cells, those squishy little information sys‐
tems, are kind of the ultimate cloud computing system.
8 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

Figure 1-10. O’Reilly’s BioCoder journal
All around the world, they are seeing a crossover between the pro‐
gramming community, the design community, and the engineering
community coming into life science now that it is being digitized.
We are at the start of a revolution that will transform our lives as
radically as the computer revolution. It will reach into everything we
do in the world.
That’s why I joined Autodesk, a company that makes design soft‐
ware. They aren’t a life science or a biopharma company. They do art
and design and engineering. Their tools allow some of the most
sophisticated design work to be done relatively easily. And they
make almost everything that’s not already alive in the world. I joined
them because I want to start engineering living things. I want to
start being able to engineer things at the nano school, and we need a
better toolset to do it.
For the last two years, we’ve been working with scientists and our
own in-house team on a project that we call Project Cyborg
(Android was already taken). Project Cyborg is all about the fusing
of the nonliving and the living (Figure 1-11) and building bridges to
make something better.
Engineering Living Things 
| 
9

Figure 1-11. Fusing of the nonliving and the living
Figure 1-12 shows another screenshot of the Project Cyborg plat‐
form, illustrating why Autodesk is known for its visualization, its
simulation, and its engineering capabilities.
Figure 1-12. Autodesk’s Project Cyborg platform is an easy tool to use
We’ve been building what we think is a pretty good platform for
people to start developing their tools on. Right now, there are a lot
of tools in the life science space, but most of them were made as
10 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

one-offs or part of a grad thesis, and there’s not a lot of rationaliza‐
tion in them since they are hard to use. We can make it easier, but it
is about more than just the tools. I’m not a coder anymore, but I
want to make sure that we can cook the software into printers,
because the printers are ultimately the limiting factor.
DNA Printers
With 2D printers, you need to worry about lots of paper, but I’m try‐
ing to get rid of them. 3D printers can already be used for many life
science applications, such as rebuilding skulls and making prosthet‐
ics. The DNA printers are the newest and most powerful. There’s
also the bioprinter, which actually prints living cells. One company
that I work with a lot is called Gen9 (Figure 1-13). It uses a device to
print a lot of DNA and assemble it into longer strings. It’s a high-
throughput DNA synthesis company.
Figure 1-13. Gen9 is a high-throughput DNA synthesis company
With design tools and a company like Gen9, you can actually reach
into the entire evolution of living species, which is creating a new
branch off that tree that we call synthetica. These are all the synthetic
organisms that we’ve made from scratch, as well as a few that we’ve
tweaked and modified. This has been growing now for about ten
years, since the first synthetic genome was made.
We are also learning how to build robust circuits. There’s a whole
community of researchers now that are taking inspiration from elec‐
tronics and are learning how to build switches, signaling systems,
DNA Printers 
| 
11

and other controllers that are robust, powerful, and reproducible.
This is being applied to things like gene therapy that only turns on
after you get the mutation, or gut microbes that respond if you have
eaten bad food (Figure 1-14).
Figure 1-14. Examples of gene therapy
There are smart plants that can turn on the genetic constructs only
when they are needed, such as when there is a drought. These are
really interesting controllers that are widely applicable across the
genetic engineering space.
Engineering Cells
The particular work that I’ve been doing is on the genetic engineer‐
ing of viruses. One example is a harmless virus called Phi X 174
(Figure 1-15). It only infects E. coli, but it can be used as an antibi‐
otic.
Its genome is 5,386 bits (bits of information), which has just become
within reach of routine DNA synthesis. So today, you can become a
genetic engineer by using the right tools at a relatively low cost, to
make something as powerful as a gene therapy, an antibiotic, or a
drug that hunts down cancer cells.
12 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

Figure 1-15. The Phi X 174 virus
But there is a lot more to this. On the very forward edge of this tech‐
nology is a man named Craig Venter (Figure 1-16). He still holds the
world record for the largest published genome: just over a million
base pairs. Over four years ago, he booted up the first synthetic bac‐
terium. He built the whole bacterial chromosome.
Figure 1-16. Craig Venter published the world’s largest genome
Engineering Cells 
| 
13

In March 2014, Jef Boeke (Figure 1-17) and a team of international
scientists that were all contributing to a project, wrote the first chro‐
mosome of yeast.
Figure 1-17. Jef Boeke and his team wrote the first chromosome of
yeast
It was everyday baker’s yeast that you buy at your local food store.
This shows that not only have we progressed beyond just being able
to build a bacterial chromosome, but that now we can build one as
complex as our own chromosomes. Even though it wasn’t larger, we
have shown that we can engineer it to the base pair with precision in
a very complex structure, package it, and put it in a eukaryotic cell
very like our own. And it works perfectly.
This is pretty interesting. And I should also note that it is going to
make for some very interesting beers in the future (Figure 1-18).
You can port just about any single compound from any other plant,
animal, or bacteria to a yeast pretty easily. So, go Colorado.
14 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

Figure 1-18. Chromosome building of yeast makes for great beer
Bioprinting Cells
Once you can engineer cells, you don’t have to go and reverse engi‐
neer all of that development. Remember, we start off as a single cell
before growing to 38 trillion cells. That is a dance we can’t reverse
engineer anytime soon, because it is too complex. But this is where
the bioprinter comes in (Figure 1-19).
Figure 1-19. The bioprinter uses actual cells
Bioprinting Cells 
| 
15

This uses bioinks, which is a fancy way of saying cells. And it prints
the cells in three dimensions and allows those cells to grow together
to make tissues.
A company called Organovo is at the forefront of the field. They are
printing synthetic liver splices that are already being gobbled up by
pharmaceutical companies in order to check for liver toxicity earlier
and faster. This is not being done on animals or animal tissues, but
on synthetic human tissues. This is really cool, and it can be done in
a high-throughput format.
As the costs fall, you can start to play a little more. Some of the
founders of Organovo went on and created a company called
Modern Meadow. Modern Meadow’s job is to make leathers and
synthetic meats, because now you don’t have to sell to the high-end
pharmaceutical companies. In fact, leathers and synthetic meats
touch the everyday consumer pretty much all of the time. My shoes
are leather and I eat hamburgers.
And actually, the first synthetic hamburger has already been made
(Figure 1-20). It grabbed headlines for the cost of making it: it was
really expensive. And the taste was not bad, according to the
reviewer. But there is still a long way to go.
Figure 1-20. The first synthetic hamburger was expensive to make
16 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

The thing is, if you can start printing cells, and if you can start mov‐
ing particular cells around, you can start to really imagine what you
might create. Perhaps you will create little flying robots the size of
house flies, with carbon fiber skeletons and tiny chips inside of
them. Things may get weird, maybe even with your next created pet.
But the learning is bidirectional.
Bioengineering and Biosynthesis
Yes, we are learning some of the secrets of living cells, how to
manipulate them, and how to program them. Remember, this isn’t
just giant companies. This is also happening in very small groups
today. In fact, in 2014, Y Combinator (which is typically known for
software startups) started to allow biotech companies to join their
incubator, because biology is starting to become another tool, and
another robot, and another programming language.
We are learning that biology may actually end up powering most of
your computing devices. It may not be in the next generation of
chips, and maybe not even the generation after that, but certainly as
we get down to the three- or four-nanometer scale, there is no pro‐
cess in the world today that can manipulate matter precisely enough
to build chips at that resolution. Our chips will literally need to be
grown, and the semiconductor industry is starting to make the
appropriate investments to understand and harness these processes,
because they have to think 15 to 20 years out.
Biomimicry takes some of the really cool stuff that nature has
already figured out, which is encapsulated in genomic code. The
gecko’s foot is an example (Figure 1-21). Actually, hydrogen bonding
of the very microfine hairs on the gecko’s foot that allow it to crawl
up any surface is an example. We can take inspiration from these
systems, if not the actual code, and put them into different creatures
to build different tools.
Bioengineering and Biosynthesis 
| 
17

Figure 1-21. Using biomimicry to create climbing abilities
And, of course, there is generative design. When you think about it,
nature has been so successful because it doesn’t start off with the
design concept. It just looks at the environment, or anywhere there
is an energetic niche, which is a really complicated problem. The
problem could be predators, scarce energy sources, waste streams,
or even variables like temperature. Life solves those problems in
every environment. And now we are learning how to do similar
work inside the computers.
If you need to design a chair or a car, just create it generatively
(Figure 1-22). The computer will fill out the space with millions of
designs. Then you write other programs that essentially act as the
Grim Reaper, filtering away the bad designs that don’t quite cut it.
This is all done in a kind of computational selection process.
This is one of the most powerful new areas of design. It is unbiased
and leads to some really elegant new creations. And they meet all of
the constraints of the manufacturing process or the financiers, and
as many constraints as you can imagine at the start of the design
process.
18 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

Figure 1-22. The generative design process is powerful
Smart Cities and Beyond
So, where does this take us? Well, it is going to make for smarter cit‐
ies and smarter materials (Figure 1-23), because we are going to add
three billion more people to this planet by 2015.
Figure 1-23. Building smart cities is a must
Smart Cities and Beyond 
| 
19

We can’t just keep paving over everything to do it. We have to start
making living systems that actually meet the needs of humanity, or
we are going to run into trouble. That is why I love bioengineering
and biosynthesis. They are also going to help us get off this rock and
explore other places (Figure 1-24).
Figure 1-24. We need smart exploration
And I’m not talking about big giant spacecraft, or going to colonize
other galaxies. I’m saying if you want people to live up in a space‐
craft for a year, you have to think about how you recycle, how you
synthesize, how you make food, and how you clean up waste. Space
has been such a good system for learning about ecosystems and sus‐
tainability. These are lessons that we can learn for our entire planet.
Maybe it will even resculpt us, because of some people like Dmitry
Itskov (Figure 1-25), who believe that we are going to be making
cyborgs sooner than we cure most diseases.
20 
| 
Life: Sustainable, Programmable, Bottom-up Manufacturing

Figure 1-25. Dmitry Itskov is pushing the cyborg field forward
And you know what? Given the rate of robot evolution, he may be
right. I just know this: the future is going to be grown (Figure 1-26).
Figure 1-26. Humanity’s needs will be met by biocoding and from
growing what we require
Yes, we’ll keep manufacturing, and yes, we’ll do it smarter. We’ll do it
more efficiently, but more and more things that meet humanity’s
needs will come from biocoding and from growing what we require.
Smart Cities and Beyond 
| 
21

About the Author
Andrew Hessel is a Distinguished Researcher with Autodesk Inc.’s
new Bio/Nano Programmable Matter group, which is developing
tools for designing living and nanoscale systems. He is also the
cofounder of the Pink Army Cooperative, the world’s first coopera‐
tive biotechnology company, which is aiming to make open source
viral therapies for cancer. Trained in microbiology and genetics,
Andrew has continually worked at the forefront of life science. He
believes that synthetic biology—genetic engineering supported by
digital design tools and DNA synthesizers—is revolutionary and
could rival electronic computing as an economic engine and driver
of societal change.

