
Lighting Design
By reading this book, you will develop the skills to perceive a space and its contents in
light, and be able to devise a layout of luminaires that will provide that lit appearance.
Written by renowned lighting expert Christopher (Kit) Cuttle, the book:
explains the difference between vision and perception, which is the distinction
between providing lighting to make things visible, and providing it to influence the
appearance of everything that is visible;
demonstrates how lighting patterns generated by three-dimensional objects
interacting with directional lighting are strongly influential upon how the visual
perception process enables us to recognise object attributes, such as lightness,
colourfulness, texture and gloss;
reveals how a designer who understands the role of these lighting patterns in the
perceptual process may employ them either to reveal, or to subdue, or to enhance the
appearance of selected object attributes by creating appropriate spatial distributions of
light;
carefully explains calculational techniques and provides easy-to-use spreadsheets, so
that layouts of lamps and luminaires are derived that can be relied upon to achieve
the required illumination distributions.
Practical lighting design involves devising three-dimensional light fields that create
luminous hierarchies related to the visual significance of each element within a scene. By
providing you with everything you need to develop a design concept – from the
understanding of how lighting influences human perceptions of surroundings, through to
engineering efficient and effective lighting solutions – Kit Cuttle instils in his readers a
new-found confidence in lighting design.
Christopher ‘Kit’ Cuttle, MA, FCIBSE, FIESANZ, FIESNA, FSLL, is visiting lecturer in
Advanced Lighting Design at the Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane,
Australia, and is author of two books on lighting (Lighting by Design, 2nd edition,
Architectural Press, 2008; and Light for Art’s Sake, Butterworth Heinemann, 2007).
His previous positions include Head of Graduate Education in Lighting at the Lighting
Research Center, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York; Senior Lecturer at the
Schools of Architecture at the University of Auckland and the Victoria University of
Wellington, both in New Zealand; Section Leader in the Daylight Advisory Service,

Pilkington Glass; and Lighting Designer with Derek Phillips Associates, both in the UK. His
recent awards include the Society of Light and Lighting’s Leon Gaster 2013 Award for his
LR&T paper ‘A New Direction for General Lighting Practice’, and the Lifetime
Achievement Award presented at the 2013 Professional Lighting Design Conference in
Copenhagen.

Publisher’s Note:
To download the spreadsheets that are used to facilitate the calculations in this book, go to
the e-resources link shown on the back cover of the book and click on
eResource/Downloads.

Lighting Design
A perception-based approach
Christopher Cuttle

First published 2015
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2015 Christopher Cuttle
The right of Christopher Cuttle to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with
sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Cuttle, Christopher.
Lighting design : a perception-based approach / Christopher Cuttle.
pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-415-73196-6 (hardback : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-0-415-73197-3
(pbk. : alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-315-75688-2 (ebook) 1. Lighting,
Architectural and decorative—Design. 2. Visual perception. I. Title.
NK2115.5.L5C88 2015
747’.92—dc23
2014009980
ISBN: 978-0-415-73196-6 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-73197-3 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-75688-2 (ebk)
Typeset in Bembo
by Saxon Graphics Ltd, Derby

Contents
List of figures
List of tables
Acknowledgements
Introduction
1 The role of visual perception
2 Ambient illumination
3 Illumination hierarchies
4 Spectral illumination distributions
5 Spatial illumination distributions
6 Delivering the lumens
7 Designing for perception-based lighting concepts
Appendix
Index

Figures
1.1 The Checker Shadow Illusion. Squares A and B are identical
1.2 A white sheet has been drawn over the Checker Shadow Illusion, with cut-outs for
squares A and B, and now they appear to be identical
1.3 Previously the cylindrical object appeared to be uniformly green
1.4 The object attributes of this building are clearly recognisable (Chartres Cathedral,
France)
1.5 Chartres Cathedral, France but a vastly different appearance
2.1 To start the thought experiment, imagine a room for which the sum of ceiling, walls,
and floor area is 100m2
2.2 To the room is added a luminaire
2.3 All room surfaces are given a neutral grey finish so that ρrs = 0.5
2.4 Room surface reflectance is increased so that ρrs = 0.8
2.5 Room surface reflectance is reduced to zero, so ρrs = 0
2.6 The final stage of the thought experiment
2.7 Reflectance plotted against Munsell Value
2.8 Using an internally blackened tube mounted onto a light meter to obtain a
measurement of surface reflectance
2.9 The value of the reflectance/absorptance ratio is proportional to mean room surface
exitance, MRSE
3.1 Demonstration set-up for gaining assessments of noticeable, distinct, strong and
emphatic illumination differences
3.2 Flowchart for achieving mean room surface exitance, MRSE, and task/ambient
illumination, TAIR, design values
4.1 Relative sensitivity functions for V(λ), and the three cone types; long-, medium- and
short-wavelength; L(λ), M(λ) and S(λ)
4.2 The VB3(λ) spectral sensitivity of brightness function for daytime light levels

4.3 The V(λ) and V′(λ) relative luminous efficiency functions relate to photopic and
scotopic adaptation respectively
4.4 Rea’s proposed VC(λ) function for the relative circadian response
4.5 The black-body locus (solid line) plotted on the CIE 1931 (x,y) chromaticity chart
4.6 The reciprocal mega Kelvin scale (MK−1) compared with the Kelvin (K) scale
4.7 Contours of perceived level of tint
4.8 Kruithof’s chart relating correlated colour temperature (TC) and illuminance (E) to
colour appearance
4.9 Output from CIE13 3W.exe computer program to calculate CRIs, for a Warm White
halophosphate fluorescent lamp
4.10 Colour-mismatch vector data for a halophosphate Cool White colour 33 fluorescent
lamp
4.11 Gamut areas for some familiar light sources plotted on the CIE 1976 UCS (uniform
chromaticity scale) diagram
4.12 The GretagMacbeth ColorChecker colour rendition chart being examined under
daylight
5.1 The triple object lighting patterns device
5.2 For the three lighting conditions described in the text
5.3 The striking first view of the interior of the QELA boutique, Doha
5.4 QELA – The display lighting in the central area has strong downward ‘flow’, with
‘sharpness’ creating crisp shadow and highlight patterns
5.5 QELA – In this display area, which is adjacent to the central area, the lower mean room
surface exitance (MRSE) level has the effect of strengthening the shading patterns
5.6 QELA – In this display area, the mannequin appears isolated by the strong shading
pattern generated by the selective lighting
5.7 QELA – On the upper floor, the ‘fire’ on the right matches the warm white illumination
used throughout the boutique
5.8 The point P is located at the intersection of the x, y and z orthogonal axes
5.9 The three-dimensional illumination distribution about point P
5.10 The illumination solid is now the sum of component solids due to sources S1 and S2
5.11 The illumination solid at a point in a space where light arrives from every direction
5.12 The magnitude and direction of (EA – EB)max defines the illumination vector, which is
depicted as an arrow acting towards the point

5.13 This is the symmetric solid
5.14 In (a), a small source S projects luminous flux of F lm onto a disc of radius r, producing
a surface illuminance E = F/(π.r2). In (b), the disc is replaced by a sphere of radius r,
giving a surface illuminance E = F/(4π.r2)
5.15 (a): Vertical section through P showing illumination vector altitude angle α, and (b):
Horizontal section through P showing azimuth angle φ of the horizontal vector
component
5.16 The point P is on a surface, and is illuminated by a disc-shaped source that is normal
to the surface and of angular subtence α
5.17 This comparison surface has two mounted samples that respond differently to the disc
source
5.18 As the subtence of a large disc source is reduced, the source luminance required to
maintain an illuminance value of 100 lux increases rapidly as subtence falls below 30
degrees
5.19 For small sources, the increase in luminance required to maintain 100 lux increases
dramatically for subtence angles less than 3 degrees
5.20 Highlight contrast potential HLC for three values of target reflectance
5.21 Light sources of smaller subtence angle produce less penumbra, increasing the
’sharpness’ of the lighting
6.1 Measuring surface reflectance, using an internally blackened cardboard tube fitted over
an illuminance meter
6.2 Application of the point-to-point formula
6.3 Determining the illuminance at point P on a vertical plane
6.4 The point P is illuminated by two alternative sources
6.5 The correction factor C(D/r) to be applied to point source illumination formulae
6.6 The Cubic Illumination concept
6.7 The location of source S relative to a three-dimensional object is defined in terms of X,
Y, and Z dimensions
6.8 Assessment of likely prospects for various roles for fenestration in buildings
6.9 A simple way of making an approximate measurement of MRSE using a conventional
light meter
6.10 A six-photocell cubic illumination meter
6.11 The measurement cube is tilted so that a long axis is coincident with the z axis, and

three facets face upwards and three downwards
6.12 A vertical section through the tilted cube on the u axis, which lies in the same vertical
plane as the y axis, against which it is tilted through the angle a
6.13 A photocell head mounted on a right-angle bracket, onto a photographic tripod
6.14 The photocell tilted to +35 degrees relative to the horizontal plane
7.1 A lighting design flowchart
7.2 TAIR values for the horizontal working plane, when it is the target
7.3 The influence of room surface reflection properties.

Tables
2.1 Perceived brightness or dimness of ambient illumination
2.2 Perceived differences of exitance or illuminance
4.1 The 14 CIE TCS (Test colour samples). TCS 1–8 comprise the original set of moderately
saturated colours representing the whole hue circle, and these are the only samples used
for determining CRI. The other six have been added for additional information, and
comprise four saturated colours, TCS 9–12, and two surfaces of particular interest.
Regrettably, details of colour shifts for these TCS are seldom made available
5.1 Vector/scalar ratio and the perceived ‘flow’ of light
7.1 Values of target/ambient illuminance ratio, TAIR, against room index where the
horizontal working plane, HWP, is the target surface and all direct flux is incident on the
HWP. Light surface reflectances are assumed

Acknowledgements
The contents of this book have grown from the Advanced Lighting Design course that I
have taught every year since 2005 at the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane,
Australia, for which I thank the programme coordinator, Professor Ian Cowling, and also
the succession of lively and enquiring CPD (continuing professional development) students
who have caused me to keep the curriculum in a state of continual revision.
While many people have contributed to the development of the ideas contained in this
book, whether they realised it at the time or not, three former colleagues with whom I have
maintained email contact have responded to specific issues that I encountered in preparing
the text. They are, in no particular order, Joe Lynes and Professors Mark Rea and Peter
Boyce. My thanks to each of them.
Those who have given permission for me to reproduce figures are acknowledged in the
captions, but I want to make particular mention of Edward Adelson, Professor of Vision
Science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who not only permitted me to
reproduce his Checker Shadow Illusion (Figure 1.1), but also two of my own modified
versions of his brilliant figure.

Introduction
The aim of this book is to enable people who are familiar with the fundamentals of lighting
technology to extend their activities into the field of lighting design. While the text is
addressed primarily to students, it is relevant to professionals working in the fields of
building services, interior design and architecture.
The premise of this book is that the key to lighting design is the skill to visualise the
distribution of light within the volume of a space in terms of how it affects people’s
perceptions of the space and the objects (including the people) within it. The aim is not to
produce lighting that will be noticed, but rather, to provide an envisioned balance of
brightness that sets the appearance of individual objects into an overall design concept.
This is different from current notions of ‘good lighting practice’, which aim to provide
for visibility, whereby ‘visual tasks’ may be performed efficiently and without promoting
fatigue or discomfort. It is also quite different from some lighting design practice, where
spectacular effects are achieved by treating the architecture as a backdrop onto which
patterns of coloured light, or even brilliant images, are projected.
Several perception-based lighting concepts are introduced to enable distributions of
illumination to be described in terms of how they may influence the appearance of a lit
space. These descriptions involve perceived attributes of illumination, such as illumination
that brings out ‘colourfulness’, or has a perceived ‘flow’, or perhaps ‘sharpness’. It is shown
that the three-dimensional distributions of illumination that underlie this understanding of
lighting can be analysed in quantitative terms, enabling their characteristics to be
measured and predicted. The principles governing these distributions are explained, and
spreadsheets are used to automatically perform the calculations that relate perceived
attributes to photometric quantities.
The objective is to enable a lighting designer to discuss lighting with clients and other
professionals in terms of how illumination may influence the appearance of spaces and
objects. When agreement is reached, the designer is then able to apply procedures that lead
to layouts of luminaires and strategies for their control, and to do this with confidence that
the envisioned appearance will be achieved.

1
The Role of Visual Perception

Chapter summary
The Checker Shadow Illusion demonstrates a clear distinction between the processes of
vision and perception, where vision is concerned with discrimination of detail and
perception involves recognition of surface and object attributes. The role of lighting in this
recognition process involves the formation of lighting patterns created by interactions
between objects and the surrounding light field. Confident recognition comprises clear
perception of both object attributes and the light field. Three types of object lighting
patterns are identified, being the shading, highlight, and shadow patterns, and it is by
creating light fields that produce controlled balances of these three-dimensional lighting
patterns that designers gain opportunities to influence how room surface and object
attributes are likely to be perceived.

The evidence of your eyes
Figure 1.1 shows the Checker Shadow Illusion, and at first sight, the question has to be,
where is the illusion? Everything looks quite normal. The answer lies in squares A and B:
they are identical. That is to say, they are the same shade of grey and they have the same
lightness, or to be more technical, they have the same reflectance (and thereby luminance)
and the same chromaticity.
Do you find this credible? They certainly do not look the same. Now look at Figure 1.2,
which shows a white sheet drawn over the figure with cut-outs for the two squares. Seen
in this way they do look the same, and if you take a piece of card and punch a hole in it,
you can slide it over the previous figure and convince yourself that the two squares are in
fact identical and as shown in Figure 1.2.
This raises a question: how is it that, when the images of these two identical squares are
simultaneously focussed onto the retina, in one case (Figure 1.2) they appear identical and
in the other (Figure 1.1) they appear distinctly different?
Figure 1.1 The Checker Shadow Illusion. Squares A and B are identical. They are presented here as related colours, that is
to say, they appear related to their surroundings. The lighting patterns that appear superimposed over the surrounding
surfaces cause a viewer to perceive a ‘flow’ of light within the volume of this space, and which leads to the matching
luminances of A and B being perceived quite differently.
(Source: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Checker_shadow_illusion.html, downloaded January 2013)

Figure 1.2 A white sheet has been drawn over the Checker Shadow Illusion, with cut-outs for squares A and B, and now
they appear to be identical. In this case they are presented as unrelated colours.

Related and unrelated colours
The essential difference is that in Figure 1.1 the two squares are presented as related
colours, that is to say, colours are perceived to belong to surfaces or objects seen in
relation to other colours, and in Figure 1.2, they are shown as unrelated colours, meaning
they are seen in isolation from other colours (Fairchild, 2005). As unrelated colours (grey is
a colour), they are perceived to comprise nothing more than rectangular coloured shapes
on a plain white background, but when they are set into the context of Figure 1.1, they are
perceived as solid elements in a three-dimensional scene that have recognisable object
attributes. It is this change in the way they are perceived that causes them to appear
differently.
So what are the components of the surrounding scene that make this illusion so
effective? Ask yourself, why is the cylindrical object there? Does it contribute something?
In fact, it is a vital component of the illusion. So, what colour is it? Obviously, green. Is it
uniformly green? Well, yes … but look more carefully at the image of the object and you
will see that both its greenness and its lightness vary hugely. The image is far from
uniform, so how did you suppose the object to be uniformly green? The answer is that you
perceived a distinctive lighting pattern superimposed over the uniformly green object. In
Figure 1.3, the area enclosed by the object outline is shown as uniformly green and it
appears as nothing more than a formless blob.
The solid, three-dimensional object perceived in Figure 1.1 is observed to be interacting
with a directional ‘flow’ of light, which causes a shading pattern to be generated, and
this appears superimposed over the green object surface. Note also that the cylinder’s
surface is not perfectly matt, and there is just a hint of a highlight pattern due to a
specular component of reflection that is apparent at the rounded rim of the cylinder’s top
edge. These lighting patterns inform you about the object’s attributes (Cuttle, 2008).

Figure 1.3 Previously the cylindrical object appeared to be uniformly green. Now it is uniformly green, but it does not
look like a cylinder. That is because it is now lacking the lighting pattern due to interaction with the ‘flow’ of light.
Now look at the checker board surface. Again we have a pattern due to the lighting, but
in this case it is a shadow pattern, which has a different appearance from the shading and
highlight patterns, but nonetheless is quite consistent with our perception of the overall
‘flow’ of light within the volume of the space. It will be obvious to you that if two surfaces
have the same lightness (which also means they have the same reflectance) and one occurs
within the shadow pattern and one outside it, they will have different luminance values.
The creator of this brilliant illusion, Edward H. Adelson, Professor of Vision Science at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has carefully set it up so that squares A and B have
the same luminance value, which means of course, that their images on your retina are
identical. However, the function of the visual process is to provide information to the visual
cortex of the brain, and here your perceptual process is telling you that, although these two
squares match for luminance, they cannot have the same lightness. The one in the shadow
must be lighter, that is to say, it must have higher reflectance, than the one in full light. You
hold this innate understanding of lighting in your brain, and you cannot apply your
conscious mind to overrule it.
In this way, it can be seen that the image focussed onto the retina is simply an optical
projection of the visual scene that corresponds directly with the luminance and
chromaticity values of the elements within the external scene. Since its inception, the study
of lighting has concentrated on the visual process and how illumination may be applied to
provide for visibility, later defined in terms of visual performance, but the role of vision is
to serve the process of perception, and this occurs not at the retina, but in the visual cortex

of the brain. What we perceive is not a pattern of brightness and colour, but a gestalt, this
being a psychological term that describes the holistic entity that enables us to recognise all
the forms and objects that make up our surroundings (Purves and Beau Lotto, 2003).
Consciously, we are aware of three-dimensional spaces defined by surfaces and containing
objects, but in order to make this much sense of the flow of information arriving through
the optic nerve, we have to be subconsciously aware of a light field that fills the volume of
the space. This is how we make sense of squares A and B. Seen in this way, it becomes
obvious why attempts to analyse scenes in terms of luminance and chromaticity were
bound to lead to frustration.

The role of ambient illumination
For most of the time, we live in a world of related colours. We are surrounded by surfaces
and objects which, providing the entire scene is adequately illuminated, our perceptual
faculties reliably recognise and make us aware of, sometimes so that we can cope with
everyday life, and sometimes to elevate our senses to higher levels of appreciation, as when
we encounter artworks or beauties of nature. Recognition involves identifying object
attributes associated with all of the things that make up our surrounding environments,
and our innate skill in doing this is truly impressive. Scientists working on artificial
intelligence have tried to program super computers to perform in this way, but so far their
best efforts fall far short of what human perception achieves every moment throughout our
waking hours.
Provided that ambient illumination is sufficient, we are able to enter unfamiliar
environments, orientate ourselves, and go about our business without hesitating to
question the reliability of the perceptions we form of the surrounding environment. It is
clear that substantial processing has to occur, very rapidly, between the retinal image and
formation of the perception of the environment. There is no good reason why our
perceptions of elements of the scene should show in-step correspondence with their
photometric characteristics. Visual perception may be thought of as the process of making
sense of the flow of sensory input through the optic nerve to the brain, where the purpose
is to recognise surfaces and objects, rather than to record their images. Colours are
perceived as related to object attributes, and effects of illumination are perceived as
lighting patterns superimposed over them. As we recognised the cylinder in Figure 1.1 to
be uniformly green with a superimposed shading pattern, so we also recognised the
identical squares to differ in lightness because of the superimposed shadow pattern.
There will, however, be situations where we are confronted with elements seen in
isolation from each other, and this is particularly likely to occur in conditions of low
ambient illumination. When we find ourselves confronted by dark surroundings, reliance
upon related colours and identification of object attributes may give way to perception of
unrelated colours, and when this occurs, our perceptions do not distinguish lightness and
illuminance separately, and luminance patterns dominate. That is to say, the appearances of
individual objects within the scene relate to their brightness and chromaticity values,
rather than upon recognition of their intrinsic attributes.
Figures 1.4 and 1.5 show two views of the same building. In Figure 1.4, we see a view of
this magnificent cathedral in its setting, and we readily form a sense of its substantial mass
and the materials from which it is constructed. Also, even if we are not conscious of it, we
perceive the entire light field that generates this appearance. In Figure 1.5, our perception
of this building is quite different. We have no notion of a natural light field, and the
building seems to float, unattached to the ground. It is revealed by a glowing light pattern

that does not distinguish between materials, and actually makes the building appear self-
luminous. The building’s appearance is dominated by brightness, and object attributes are
not discernible. These two views show clearly the difference between related colours, in the
daylight view, and unrelated colours in the night-time view. They also give us due
appreciation of the role that lighting may play in bringing about fundamental differences
in our perceptions.
Under normal daytime lighting, two-way interactions occur that enable our perceptual
processes to make sense of the varied patterns of light and colour that are continuously
being focussed onto our retinas. Working in one direction, there is the process of
recognising object attributes that are revealed by the lighting patterns, while at the same
time, and working in the opposite direction, it is the appearance of these lighting patterns
that provides for the viewer’s understanding of the light field that occupies the entire
space.
Figure 1.4 The object attributes of this building are clearly recognisable, and the ambient illumination provides amply for
all elements to appear as related colours. (Chartres Cathedral, France.)

Figure 1.5 The same building, but a vastly different appearance. Low ambient illumination provides a dark backdrop
against which the cathedral glows with brightness. Object attributes are unrecognisable in this example of unrelated
colours.

Perception as a basis for lighting design
From a design point of view, lighting practice may be seen to fall into two basic categories.
On one hand, for illumination conditions ranging from outdoor daylight to indoor lighting
where the ambient level is sufficient to avoid any appearance of gloom, we live in a world
of related colours in which we distinguish readily between aspects of appearance that
relate to the visible attributes of surfaces and objects, and aspects which relate to the
lighting patterns that appear superimposed upon them.
On the other hand, in conditions of low ambient illumination, where we have a sense of
darkness or even gloom, whether indoors or, most notably, outdoors at night, we typically
experience unrelated colours and this may lead to the appearances of objects and
surroundings dominated by brightness patterns that may offer no distinction between
object lightness and surface illuminance.
The implications of this dichotomy for lighting design are profound. Outdoor night-time
lighting practice, such as floodlighting and highway illumination, is based on creating
brightness patterns that may bear little or no relationship to surface or object properties.
Alternatively, for situations where ambient illumination is at least sufficient to maintain an
appearance of adequacy (apart from outdoor daylight, this may be taken to include all
indoor spaces where the illumination complies with current standards for general lighting
practice) we take in entire visual scenes including object attributes, and involving instant
recognition of familiar objects and scrutiny of unfamiliar or otherwise interesting objects.
The identification of object attributes may become a matter of keen interest, as when
admiring an art object or seeking to detect a flaw in a manufactured product, and we
depend upon the lighting patterns to enable us to discriminate and to respond to
differences of object attributes.
Between these two sets of conditions is a range in which some uncertainty prevails. We
have, for example, all experienced ‘tricks of the light’ that can occur at twilight, and
generally, recommendations for good lighting practice aim to avoid such conditions.
Perhaps surprisingly, it is within this range that lighting designers achieve some of their
most spectacular display effects. By isolating specific objects from their backgrounds and
illuminating them from concealed light sources, lighting can be applied to alter the
appearance of selected object attributes, such as making selected objects appear more
textured, or colourful, or glossy. All of this thinking will be developed in following
chapters.
Before we close this chapter, ask yourself, why do we call Figure 1.1 an illusion? If the
page is evenly illuminated, squares A and B will have the same luminance and so they
stimulate their corresponding areas of our retinas to the same level. The fact that these
equal stimuli do not correspond to equal sensations of brightness is cited as an illusion. The
point needs to be made that vision serves the process of perception, and perception is not

concerned with assessing or responding to luminance. Its role is to continually seek to
recognise object attributes from the flow of data arriving from the eyes. When we are
confronted with Figure 1.1 in a condition of adequate illumination, our perception process
performs its task to perfection. A is correctly recognised as a dark checker board square,
and B as a light square. Rather than labelling Figure 1.1 as an illusion, perhaps we should
refer to it as an insight into the workings of the visual perception process.
However, the real purpose for examining this image has been to show how perception
depends upon and is influenced by the lighting patterns that objects and surfaces generate
through interactions with their surrounding light fields. These lighting patterns may have
the effects of revealing, subduing, or enhancing selected object attributes, and it is through
control of light field distributions that lighting designers influence people’s perceptions of
object attributes. Skill in exercising this control, particularly for indoor lighting, is the
essence of lighting design and the central theme of this book.

References
Cuttle, C. (2008). Lighting by Design, Second Edition. Oxford: Architectural Press.
Fairchild, M.D. (2005). Color Appearance Models, Second Edition. Chichester: Wiley.
Purves, D. and R. Beau Lotto (2003). Why we see what we do: An empirical theory of
vision. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.

2
Ambient Illumination

Chapter summary
The perception of ambient illumination concerns whether a space appears to be brightly lit,
dimly lit, or something in between. At first this might seem a rather superficial observation
until we consider all of the associations that we have with ‘bright light’ and ‘dim light’, at
which point ambient illumination becomes a key lighting design concept. It provides a
basis for planning lighting based on the perceived difference of illumination between
adjacent areas, or spaces seen in sequence as when passing through a building. A thought
experiment is introduced which leads to the conclusion that mean room surface exitance
(MRSE) provides a useful indicator of ambient illumination, where MRSE is a measure of
inter-reflected light from surrounding room surfaces, excluding direct light from windows
or luminaires. The Ambient Illumination spreadsheet facilitates application of this concept.

The amount of light
An important decision in lighting design is, ‘What appearance of overall brightness (or
dimness) is this space to have?’ General lighting practice gives emphasis to the issue of
how much light must be provided to enable people to perform the visual tasks associated
with whatever activity occurs within the space and, of course, this must always be kept in
mind. In a banking hall, for example, we need to ensure that the counters are lit to an
illuminance that is sufficient to enable the tellers to perform their work throughout the
working day without suffering strain. While that aspect of illumination must not be
overlooked, there is an overarching design decision to be made, which is whether the
overall appearance of the space is to be a bright, lively and stimulating environment, or
whether a more dim overall appearance is wanted. The aim of a dim appearance may be to
present a subdued, and perhaps sombre, appearance, or alternatively, to create a setting in
which illumination can be directed onto selected targets to present them in high contrast
relative to their surroundings. Of course, the surroundings cannot be made too dim as
illumination must always be sufficient for safe movement, but there is substantial scope for
a designer to choose whether, in a particular situation, the overall impression is to be of a
bright space, or of a dim space, or of something in between. Clearly, the impressions that
visitors would form of the space will be substantially affected by the designer’s decision.
This raises a question. If we are not lighting a visual task plane for visibility, but are
instead illuminating a space for a certain appearance of overall brightness, how do we
specify the level of illumination that will achieve this objective? All around the world,
lighting standards, codes, and recommended practice documents specify illumination levels
for various indoor activities in terms of illuminance (lux) and a uniformity factor. If
someone states that ‘This is a 400 lux installation’, that means that illuminance values
measured on the horizontal working plane, usually specified as being 700mm above floor
level and extending from wall to wall within the space, should average at least 400 lux, and
furthermore, at no point should illuminance drop to less than 80 per cent of that average
value.
The reasons for this are historical. It was in the late nineteenth century that the practice
of measuring illumination emerged, and for indoor lighting, the prime purpose was to
enable working people to remain productive for the full duration of the working day,
despite daylight fluctuations. While the recommended illuminance levels have increased
more than tenfold since those days, the measurement procedures are essentially unchanged
even though light meters have undergone substantial development. The two specified
measures, an average illuminance and the uniformity factor, are the means by which
lighting quantity is specified, and more than that, they govern how people think about
illumination quantity. Perhaps the worst feature of these specifications is that they have the
effect of inhibiting exploration of different ways in which the light might be distributed in

a space, and how lighting may be applied to create a lit appearance that relates to a space
and the objects it contains. For lighting designers, these aspects of appearance are all-
important, and in fact, it may be said that they form the very basis of what lighting design
is all about. To be obliged to ensure that all lighting is ‘code compliant’ is nothing short of a
denial to pursue the most fundamental lighting design objectives.

A thought experiment
We are going to conduct a thought experiment as a first step to exploring how lighting
does more than simply make things visible, and in fact, we are going to explore how
lighting affects the appearance of everything we see. To start, you need to get yourself into
an experimental mindset. The first requirement is to forget everything you know. Then,
imagine an indoor space where the sum total of ceiling, wall and floor areas add up to
100m2, as shown in Figure 2.1.
Then, into this space is added a luminaire that emits a total a luminous flux, F, of 5000
lumens (Figure 2.2).
How brightly lit will the space appear? This might seem to be a difficult question to
answer, which is as it should be because a vital piece of information is lacking. Until the
room surface reflectance values are specified, you have no way of knowing how much
light there is in this space.
Figure 2.1 To start the thought experiment, imagine a room for which the sum of ceiling, walls, and floor area is 100m2.

Figure 2.2 To the room is added a luminaire with a total flux output F = 5000 lumens.
To keep life simple, we will specify that all room surfaces have a reflectance value, ρrs, of
0.5, that is to say, 50 per cent of incident lumens are absorbed and 50 per cent are reflected
(Figure 2.3). Now we can work out how many lumens there are in the space.

How much light do we have?
addition
total
Initial flux (F)
5000
5000
First reflection
2500
7500
Second reflection
1250
8750
Third reflection and so on …
625
9375
Figure 2.3 All room surfaces are given a neutral grey finish so that ρrs = 0.5.
All of the initial 5000 lumens from the luminaire are incident on room surfaces that
reflect 50 per cent back into the space, so the first reflection adds 2500 lm, bringing the
total luminous flux in the space up to 7500 lm. These reflected lumens are again incident
on room surfaces, and the second reflection adds another 1250 lumens to the total. The
process repeats, so that you could go on adding reflected components of the initial flux
until they become insignificantly small. Alternatively, the effect of an infinite number of
reflections is given by dividing the initial flux by (1 – ρ), so that:
An interesting point emerges here. We have surrounded the luminaire with surfaces that
reflect 50 per cent of the light back into the space, and this has doubled the number of
lumens. Keep this point in mind. Now we divide the total flux by the total room surface
area to get the average room surface illuminance:
At last we have a measure we can understand. This would be enough light for us to see our

way around the space, but not enough to make the room appear brightly lit. Let’s suppose
that we want a reasonably bright appearance. Well, we could fit a bigger lamp in the
luminaire, but before we take that easy option, let’s think a bit more about the effect of
room surface reflectance. We have seen that it can have a quite surprising effect on the
overall amount of light in the space.
What would be the effect of increasing ρrs to 0.8, as shown in Figure 2.4? Combining the
expressions we used before, it follows that the mean room surface illuminance:
This deserves some careful attention. We increased ρrs from 0.5 to 0.8, which is a 60 per
cent increase, and the total flux increased two-and-a-half times! How can this be so? Think
about it this way. It is conventional to refer to surface reflectance values, but try thinking
instead of surface absorptance values, where α = (1 – ρ). What we have done has been to
reduce αrs from 0.5 to 0.2, and that is where the 2.5 factor comes from.
Figure 2.4 Room surface reflectance is increased so that ρrs = 0.8.
As this is a thought experiment, think about what would happen if we could reduce αrs
to zero. Well, the lumens would just keep bouncing around inside the room. When you
switched on the luminaire, the total flux would keep on increasing. If you did not switch
off in time, the room probably would explode! If you did switch off in time, the light level
would remain constant. You could come back a month later and it would be undiminished,
until you open the door and in a flash all the lumens pour out and the room would be in

darkness. Thought experiments really can be fun. Now think about going in the opposite
direction.
What would be the effect of reducing ρrs to zero? How brightly lit would the room
appear? The question is of course meaningless. The only thing visible would be the
luminaire, as shown in Figure 2.5. If you were sufficiently adventurous, you could feel your
way around the room and you could use a light meter to confirm the value of the mean
room surface illuminance:
The meter would respond to those 50 lux, but your eye would not. Here is another
important point. The direct flux from the luminaire has no effect on the appearance of the
room. It is not until the flux has undergone at least one reflection that it makes any
contribution towards our impression of how brightly, or dimly, lit the room appears. To
have a useful measure of how the ambient illumination affects the appearance of a room,
we need to ignore direct light and take account only of reflected light.
Figure 2.5 Room surface reflectance is reduced to zero, so ρrs = 0.
Let’s think now about a general expression for ambient illumination as it may affect our
impression of the brightness of an enclosed space. The luminaire is to be ignored, and so in
Figure 2.6, it is shown black. Admittedly, a black luminaire emitting 5000 lm is rather more
demanding of the imagination, but bear with the idea. To take account of only light

reflected from room surfaces, we need an expression for mean room surface exitance,
MRSE, where exitance expresses the average density of luminous flux exiting, or emerging
from, a surface in lumens per square metre, lm/m2.
Figure 2.6 The final stage of the thought experiment. A black luminaire emits F lm in a room of area A and uniform
surface reflectance ρ, and mean room surface exitance, MRSE, is predictable from Formulae 2.1 and 2.2.
The upper line of Formula 2.2 is the first reflected flux FRF, which is the initial flux after
it has undergone its first reflection. This is the energy that initiates the inter-reflection
process that makes the spaces we live in luminous. More descriptively, it is sometimes
referred to as the ‘first bounce’ lumens.
The bottom line is the room absorption, Aα. One square metre of perfectly black
surface would comprise 1.0m2 of room absorption; alternatively, it may comprise 2.0m2 of a
material for which α = 0.5, or again, 4.0m2 if α = 0.25. It is a fact that when you walk into a
room, the ambient illumination reduces because you have increased the room absorption.
You could minimise that effect by wearing white clothing, but that is unlikely to catch on
among lighting designers. My own observation is that if lighting designers can be said to
have a uniform, it is black. It seems we aspire to be perfect light absorbers!

The MRSE concept
Of course, real rooms do not have uniform reflectance values, but this can be coped with
without undue complication.
On the top line of Formula 2.1, Fρ is the First Reflected Flux, FRF, which is the sum of
‘first bounce’ lumens from all of the room surfaces, such as ceiling, walls, partitions and
any other substantial objects in the room. It is obtained by summing the products of:
direct illuminance of each surface Es(d)
surface area As
surface reflectance ρs
So, in a room having n surface elements:
On the bottom line of Formula 2.1, A(1 – ρ) is the Room Absorption, indicated by the
symbol Aα, and it is a measure of the room’s capacity to absorb light. As it is conventional
to describe surfaces in terms of reflectance rather than absorptance;
The general expression for mean room surface exitance, Formula 2.2, may be summarised
as:
The mean room surface exitance equals the first bounce lumens divided by the room absorption.
MRSE has three valuable uses:
1 The MRSE value provides an indication of the perceived brightness or dimness of
ambient illumination. Table 2.1 gives an approximate guide for the two decades
of ambient illumination that cover the range of indoor general lighting practice.
These values are based on various studies conducted by the author and reported by
other researchers, and it should be noted that ambient illumination relates to a
perceived effect, while MRSE is a measurable illumination quantity, like
illuminance, but not to be confused with working plane illuminance.
Table 2.1 Perceived brightness or dimness of ambient illumination
Mean room surface exitance (MRSE,
lm/m2)
Perceived brightness or dimness of ambient
illumination

10
Lowest level for reasonable colour discrimination
30
Dim appearance
100
Lowest level for ‘acceptably bright’ appearance
300
Bright appearance
1000
Distinctly bright appearance
2 The MRSE ratio for adjacent spaces provides an index of the perceived difference
of illumination. Table 2.2 gives an approximate guide for this perceived difference
as one moves from space to space within a building, or to the appearance of
differently
Table 2.2 Perceived differences of exitance or illuminance
Exitance or illuminance ratio
Perceived difference
1.5:1
Noticeable
3:1
Distinct
10:1
Strong
40:1
Emphatic
    illuminated surfaces or objects within a space. There is more about this perceived
difference effect in the following chapter.
3 It may provide an acceptable measure of the total indirect illuminance received by
an object or surface within the space, so that for a surface S, the total surface
illuminance may be approximately estimated by the formula:
where Es(d) is the direct illuminance of surface S. Procedures for predicting direct
illumination are explained in Chapter 6.
Before we examine how MRSE may be applied in the design process, I am conscious that
some readers may be finding the exitance term unfamiliar, as it often is customary to refer
to illuminance as the metric for incident light, and luminance for reflected light. To see
where exitance fits in, take a step back. Illuminance is a simple concept. It refers to the
density of luminous flux incident on a surface, either at a point or over an area, in lux,
where 1 lux equals 1 lumen per square metre (lm/m2). Exitance is also a simple concept. It
refers to the density of flux exiting, or emerging from, a surface in lm/m2. (It should be
noted that the lux unit is defined as the unit of illuminance, and so should not be used for
exitance. Actually, keeping these units distinct for incident and exiting flux helps to avoid
confusion.) Now consider luminance. This is not a simple concept. As simply as I can
express it, it is the luminous flux due to a small element in a given direction, relative to the

area of the element projected in that direction and the solid angle subtending the flux,
measured in candelas per square metre (cd/m2). It needs to be recognised that there are
times when it is necessary to use the luminance metric, as for visual task analysis where
the contrast of the critical detail has to be defined, but to refer to the average luminance of
a wall or a ceiling really is meaningless without a defined view point. After all, what is the
average projected area of one of these elements? Readers who are not familiar with the
exitance term are strongly advised to make themselves acquainted with it. Not only is it a
much more simple concept than luminance, but when we are concerned how illumination
affects the appearance of room surfaces, it is the correct term to use. Seen in this way,
MRSE is the measure of the overall density of inter-reflected light within the volume of an
enclosed space.

Applying the ambient illumination concept in design
Room surface reflectances are so influential upon both the appearance of indoor spaces and
the distribution of illumination within them that, in an ideal world, lighting designers
would take control of them. The reality is that generally someone else will make those
decisions, but lighting designers must persist in making these decision makers aware of the
influence they exert over ambient illumination and the overall appearance of the
illuminated space.
The creativity of a lighting designer is largely determined by the ability to perceive a
space and its objects in light, and as we have seen, the perceived light is reflected (not
direct) light. A room in which high reflectance surfaces face other high reflectance surfaces
is one in which inter-reflected flux persists, and it is this inter-reflected flux that provides
for our sense of how brightly or dimly lit the space appears.
To initiate this inter-reflected flux, direct light, which travels from source to receiving
surface without visible effect, has to be applied. The essential skill of a lighting designer
may be seen as the ability to devise an invisible distribution of direct flux that will
generate an envisaged distribution of reflected flux.
Large, high reflectance surfaces enable the direct light to be applied efficiently and
unobtrusively, and where high MRSE levels are to be provided, the availability of large,
light-coloured surfaces that can be washed with light becomes an important consideration
for both appearance and energy efficiency. Conversely, where the aim is to keep MRSE low,
perhaps to provide high contrasts for display lighting, dark-coloured room surfaces
reinforce the visual effect by absorbing both spill light (display lighting that misses the
display) and ‘first bounce lumens’ reflected from the displays.

Figure 2.7 Reflectance plotted against Munsell Value, where a surface of MV0 would be assessed as a perfect black and
MV10 as a perfect white. Perceptually MV5 is mid-way between these extremes and might be expected to have a
reflectance of 0.5, but actually, it has a reflectance of approximately 0.2.
Estimating surface reflectance values is not straightforward. The Munsell Value (MV)
scale orders surface colours on a 10-step scale according to lightness assessments, where
MV0 appears to be a perfect black, and MV10 a perfect white. Unlike reflectance, lightness
is a subjective scale, and while it relates to reflectance, the relationship is far from linear. A
value of MV5 is perceptually mid-way between black and white and so it might be
expected to have a reflectance around 0.5, but as Figure 2.7 shows, its actual value is
approximately 0.2. Furthermore, it can be seen that a surface having a reflectance of 0.5 has
a MV of approximately 7.5, and that puts it perceptually three-quarters of the way towards
perfect white. The practical implication of this pronounced non-linearity is that
inexperienced designers are inclined to substantially overestimate reflectance values. A
reasonably reliable procedure is to fit an internally blackened tube over an illuminance
meter as shown in Figure 2.8 and to take two readings, one for the surface, RS and one for a
sheet of good quality white paper which has been slid over the surface, RP. It is reasonable
to assume that the paper has a reflectance of 0.9, so that for a measure of surface
reflectance, ρS = 0.9 RS/RP. Patterned as well as plain surfaces can be dealt with in this way,
but care needs to be taken to avoid specular reflections, particularly for glossy surfaces.
Also, it should not be assumed that shiny surfaces have high reflectance. These surfaces

simply reflect without diffusion, so that if the meter is exposed to specular reflection, what
is being measured is an image of a light source rather than the overall reflection of light
from the surface.
Figure 2.8 Using an internally blackened tube mounted onto a light meter to obtain a measurement of surface reflectance.
Two measurements are made without moving the meter, one of the surface as shown, and a comparison reading with a
sheet of white paper in the measurement zone.
The effects of this tendency to overestimate reflectance values are compounded by the
impact of surface reflectance values on MRSE. It can be seen from Formula 2.1 that MRSE
is proportional to the ratio of room surface reflectance to absorptance, ρ/α. Figure 2.9 plots
the value of this ratio relative to reflectance, and again it can be seen that the impact of
room surface reflectance increases exponentially with reflectance, and could lead to grossly
inflated MRSE values being predicted where reflectance values have been overestimated.
We can see here the effects of reflectance that were observed in the thought experiment,
and while these effects are real, they will not be realized unless reflectance values have
been accurately assessed.
These considerations suggest an initial sequence for applying these concepts:
1. Decide upon the level of MRSE, taking account of design considerations
concerning the perceived brightness or dimness of ambient illumination, and
referring to Table 2.1 and the discussion in the section entitled ‘The amount of

light’.
2. Calculate the room absorption, Aα, referring to Formula 2.4.
3. Determine the level of first reflected flux, turning Formula 2.2 around to FRF =
MRSE × Aα
4. Determine a distribution of direct flux to provide the FRF value. At this point, we
come to a central design issue: how to distribute the direct flux, Fs(d), or in other
words, how to choose the surfaces onto which flux will be directed. To explain
this issue we will consider two cases.
Figure 2.9 The value of the reflectance/absorptance ratio is proportional to mean room surface exitance, MRSE. Note how
values increase exponentially at higher reflectance values.
Throughout this book we will be making use of spreadsheets to facilitate calculations,
and their outputs are shown in the Boxes alongside the text. Readers are strongly
encouraged to follow the instructions for downloading the spreadsheets so they can then
follow the applications described. Boxes 2.1 and 2.2 show two outputs of the Ambient
Illumination Spreadsheet, but the real benefit of doing calculations in this way is not that it
all happens so quickly and easily (although that undoubtedly is a benefit) but that, once a
situation has been set up, the user is able to explore alternative solutions with instant
feedback. Readers are strongly encouraged to follow these examples, and then to go beyond
them by asking, ‘What if …?’

Box 2.1
Ambient Illumination
140117
Project
Case 1
MRSE
150 lm/m2
Room Dimensions
Length
Width
Height
12
9
3 m
Room absorption Aα
160.2 m2
First reflected flux (FRF)
24030 lm
Total luminaire flux (F)
32583 lm
Key
Notes
Enter data only in cells shown in red – all other data are calculated automatically.

Direct Flux (%) is the direct flux incident on S as a percentage of total luminous flux.
Envisage an indoor space measuring 12m long, 9m wide, and 3m high. To keep life
simple, we will not get too specific about the function of this room. For Case 1 we will
work on the basis that the aim is to provide a fairly bright overall appearance, where
everything appears adequately lit but no objects are to be selected for particular attention,
and what is called for is a well-diffused, overall illumination. Decisions have been made for
surface finishes, and it has been agreed that ceiling reflectance, ρclg, is to be 0.85, ρwall to
have a value of 0.5, and ρflr will be 0.25, and Box 2.1 shows the dimensions and the
reflectances entered on the Ambient Illumination Spreadsheet.
After giving due consideration to the points discussed in ‘The amount of light’, we
decide upon a MRSE level of 150 lm/m2. This value is entered on the spreadsheet, noting
that data are to be entered only into cells marked in red. To fully understand the procedure,
the reader is advised to check the calculation on paper using the aforementioned formulae.
The FRF value shown in Box 2.1 is the number of lumens reflected from all of the room
surfaces required to provide the moderately bright overall appearance that we have set as
our goal. Now we address the first really important design issue: how to distribute the
direct flux? The aim is to achieve a well-diffused illumination, and to do this without
creating distinctly bright zones suggests a lighting installation that distributes illumination
evenly over large surfaces. The only remaining red values are in the Direct Flux (%)
column, and this is the column where the designer experiments with direct flux
distributions. Two values have been entered: 15 per cent of total luminaire output is to be
directed onto the walls, and 10 per cent onto the floor. As no objects have been entered,
that leaves 75 per cent onto the ceiling. The next column, Fs(d), shows the number of
lumens of direct flux required on each room surface; next, the Es column shows the
illuminance (including indirect flux) on each surface; and in the final column, the ratios of
surface illuminance to ambient illuminance, Es/MRSE. Below these columns are the values
of Aα, FRF and the total luminous flux, F, to be emitted by the luminaires.
Ways of predicting luminaire layouts for direct light distributions are explained in
Chapter 6, but before that, this spreadsheet gives the designer opportunity to explore the
implications of flux distribution. To experience this, download the Ambient Illumination
spreadsheet and click the Box 2.1 tag. Try changing the walls and floor flux percentages,
and if you like, you can add a few objects, such as furniture items. You will see that every
time you add more room absorption or direct more flux onto surfaces of lower reflectance,
up goes the luminaire flux. For optimum energy efficiency, set the walls and floor direct
flux percentages to zero so that the direct ceiling flux becomes 100 per cent, and you will
see the luminaire flux drop to just over 28,000 lm. This would be the most energy efficient
solution for achieving the MRSE target in this location, but when this happens, the value of
Es/MRSE climbs to 2.7, and this may be a cause for concern.

If the aim is to achieve the ambient illumination without any surface appearing
noticeably more strongly lit than any other surface, then as indicated in Table 2.2, the aim
should be to keep values of Es/MRSE below 1.5. A value of 2.7 for the ceiling indicates that
this surface will appear distinctly more strongly lit than any other surface or object in this
space, and in fact, for the case shown in Box 2.1, where some flux is directed onto the walls
and floor, the Es/MRSE value is only slightly reduced to 2.5, so the appearance of the direct
illumination onto the ceiling would certainly be ‘noticeable’, even if not ‘distinct’. We could
try adjusting the percentage values on the spreadsheet to achieve a less pronounced effect,
but watch the value of the total luminaire flux, F. As more luminaire flux is directed onto
lower reflectance surfaces, so the flux required to provide the MRSE value goes up. It
should not pass notice that this flies in the face of conventional practice. All around the
world, lighting standards for illumination sufficiency for indoor activities are specified in
terms of illuminance applied onto the horizontal working plane, from which it follows that
‘efficient’ lighting takes the form of a grid layout of luminaires that directs its output
directly onto that plane. While it is widely acknowledged that indirect ceiling lighting
installations can achieve pleasant effects, the way the standards are specified causes them
to be classified as inefficient. When a designer is satisfied that a satisfactory distribution of
direct flux has been achieved, a copy of the spreadsheet would be saved onto the design
project file.
Now turn attention to Case 2, for which we have a quite different aim. Again, we will
not get too specific about the situation, but this time the aim is that a few selected objects
are to be presented for display, and these are to become the ‘targets’ for the lighting with
the intention that they will catch attention by appearing brightly lit in a dim setting. The
revised output for the Ambient Illumination spreadsheet is shown in Box 2.2, and it shows
that most of the direct flux is to be directed onto these targets. Even so, this is a space that
people would need to be able to find their way through, so a background of inky blackness
would not be acceptable. This brings us face-to-face with a tricky design decision. On one
hand we aim to achieve a luminous environment that is dark enough to provide for
effective display contrasts, while on the other hand it needs to be light enough for people
to find their way through safely, and, at least as important, we need to create an entry to
the space that people find welcoming. We should keep in mind that in order to attract
people to enter this dim space, at least part of the displayed material should be positioned
so that it is visible to someone approaching the entrance to the space.
As shown in Box 2.2, we have opted for a MRSE level of 10 lm/m2, and at this stage we
enter into discussion with the design team. It is agreed that both ρclg and ρflr are to be kept
down to a level of 0.15, although to provide a slightly lighter background to the displays, a
wall finish with a reflectance value of 0.25 is chosen. The displayed objects have a total
surface area of 20m2 with an average reflectance of 0.35, but it would be unrealistic to
suppose that we will be able to direct 100 per cent of the luminaire flux onto them. It has
been assumed that there will be 10 per cent spill light, half of it onto the walls and half

onto the floor, and based on all these inputs, the spreadsheet shows that we need a total
luminaire flux of 8690 lumens. That luminous flux, appropriately directed, will provide a
display illuminance of 401 lux, and, referring again to Table 2.2, the visual effect will be
‘emphatic’, as it will provide a Es/MRSE value of 40. Note that in order to achieve this
dramatic effect we did not start by setting the target illuminance, but rather, we set the
ambient illuminance and then determined the flux distribution. To provide a higher level of
target illuminance would have the effect of raising the ambient illumination above the
design value without adding to the Es/MRSE ratio.
From these two cases it can be seen that in order for lighting to exert its potential for
influencing the appearance of everything we see, control over room surface reflectance
values is as important as being able to control direct flux distributions. Between these two
quite extreme cases, many options exist for designers to control ambient illumination level
to support chosen lighting design objectives. The Ambient Illumination Spreadsheet is a
useful tool for achieving this control.
Box 2.2
Ambient Illumination Spreadsheet
140117
Project
Case 2
MRSE
10 lm/m2
Room Dimensions
Length
Width
Height
12
9
3 m
Room absorption Aα
291.1 m2
First reflected flux (FRF)
2911 lm
Total luminaire flux (F)
8690 lm

Key
Notes
Enter data only in cells shown in red – all other data are calculated automatically.
Direct Flux (%) is the direct flux incident on S as a percentage of total luminous flux.

3
Illumination Hierarchies

Chapter summary
Where ambient illumination is sufficient for illuminance and lightness (which is related to
reflectance) to be perceived separately, as typically occurs for conventional indoor lighting
practice, lighting may be planned in terms of illuminance (rather than luminance)
distributions. Local concentrations of illumination can be applied to direct attention, to
give emphasis and identify objects that the designer deems to be visually significant. The
notion of ordered distributions of illumination leads to the concept of illumination
hierarchy, whereby illumination distributions are structured as a principal means by which
the designer may express his or her design intentions. Such distributions are planned as
changing balances of direct and indirect illumination, and are achieved by specifying
target/ambient illuminance ratio (TAIR) values. The Illumination Hierarchy
spreadsheet facilitates application of this concept.

Ordered illumination distributions
Most forms of life are attracted towards light, and humans are no exception. Phototropism
is the process by which attention is drawn toward the brightest part of the field of view. It
can be detrimental, as when a glare source creates a conflict between itself and what a
person wants to see, and in general lighting practice much attention is given to avoiding
such effects. However, for lighting designers it is a powerful tool, enabling us to draw
attention to what we want people to notice and away from things of secondary or tertiary
significance. An ordered illumination distribution is the underpinning basis for structuring
a lighting design concept.
It is important to spend some time looking carefully at how our perceptions of space and
objects are influenced by selective illumination. It was noted in Chapter 1 that colours that
make up an overall scene are generally perceived as related colours, and as long as
illumination is sufficient to ensure photopic adaptation, we have no difficulty in
recognising all the surrounding surfaces and objects that make up our environments. The
process of recognising the multitude of ‘things’ that may, at any time, comprise our
surroundings falls within the topic of perceptual psychology, but without getting involved
in that field of learning it is sufficient here to acknowledge that this recognition process
involves discriminating differences of object attributes such as lightness, hue and
saturation, from which we form perceptions of spaces, people, and objects. We achieve this
without conscious effort throughout our waking hours over a very wide range of
‘adequate’ lighting conditions. In this context, the onset of dimness may be thought of as
the borderline of reliable recognition of object attributes.
However, with ordered illumination distributions we can go beyond simply providing for
object recognition. Retailers long ago worked out that if an object that is small in relation
to its surroundings receives selective illumination, particularly without the source of light
being evident, people’s perceptions of that object’s attributes can be significantly affected.
Whether or not it appears more brightly lit, it is likely to appear more colourful, and
perhaps more textured or more glossy, than it would appear without selective illumination.
Lighting designers have at their disposal the means to establish hierarchies of visual
significance in illuminated scenes, and means for achieving this in an ordered manner is
the content of this chapter.

Illuminance ratios
When we place an attractive object, such as a vase of flowers, beside a window to ‘catch
the light’, we are exploiting the potential for a pool of local illumination to identify this
object as having been selected for special attention. Similarly, electric lighting can provide
a planned gradation of illumination that expresses the designer’s concept of layers of
difference. Hard-edged contrasts can give emphasis to such effects, but alternatively, a
different but equally striking effect may be achieved by a build-up of illuminance that
leads the eye progressively towards the designer’s objective. High drama requires that
surroundings are cast into gloom, but in architectural situations, safety requirements
generally require surroundings to remain visible, although perhaps distinctly dim, at all
times. Planning such distributions is more than simply selecting a few objects for
spotlighting. It involves devising an ordered distribution of lighting to achieve an
illumination hierarchy.
The concept of a structured illumination distribution was pioneered by J.M. Waldram
(1954). Working from a perspective sketch of the location, he would assign an ‘apparent
brightness’ value to each significant element of the view, and then he would convert those
subjective values into luminance values so that he could apply illumination engineering
procedures to determine a suitable flux distribution. Waldram’s notion of creating an
ordered brightness distribution related to luminance would seem to be valid for low
adaptation situations, such as occur in outdoor lighting, but not for situations where
surface lightness is readily recognised, such as in adequately illuminated indoor scenes. As
has been noted, for these situations our perceptions distinguish illumination differences
more or less independently of surface reflectance values.
J.A. Lynes (1987) has proposed a design approach based on Waldram’s method with the
difference that the designer develops a structured distribution of surface illuminance
values. Lynes introduces his students to the topic through an exercise in perceived
difference of illumination, and his simple procedure is illustrated in Figure 3.1. He stands in
front of his class with a spotlight shining onto a white screen. Point 0 is the brightest spot,
and from this point a numbered scale extends across the screen. Each student completes a
score card, and starts by indicating the scale value that, in his or her assessment,
corresponds to the point along the scale at which a ‘noticeable difference of brightness’
occurs. This is the student’s ‘N’ value, and would be followed by a ‘D’ value for a distinct
difference, an ‘S’ value for a strong difference and an ‘E’ value for an emphatic difference.
The cards are then gathered, average values calculated and consensus values for N, D, S
and E are marked on the screen. After that, Lynes measures the illuminance level at each
point, from which illuminance ratios are calculated for each perceived difference.
The author has conducted this exercise with students on numerous occasions. Perhaps
the first surprise is to find how easy it is to obtain consensus, and the second is how well

the results are repeated year after year. The data presented in Table 2.2 is typical, and while
this simple procedure may not qualify as ‘good science’, it is well worth going through the
procedure. It calls for thoughtful observation, and, perhaps surprisingly, it provides useful
guidance for lighting design. Not only students, but anyone interested in designing lighting
should go through the process of making these illumination difference assessments at least
once during their lifetime.
Figure 3.1 Demonstration set-up for gaining assessments of noticeable, distinct, strong and emphatic illumination
differences.
Whereas in Chapter 2 we discussed how initial responses to a space may be influenced
by ambient illumination, now we turn attention to the perceived effects that can be created
by controlling the distribution of illumination within a space. From Table 2.2 it can be seen
that where the aim is to achieve a difference that is sufficient to be noticed, you can forget
about 10 or 20 per cent differences. Unless a difference of at least 1.5:1 is provided, people
will not notice the illumination to be anything different from uniform. To achieve
differences that are likely to be described as ‘distinct’ or ‘strong’, it is necessary for the
designer to be purposeful and deliberate in how they achieve such pronounced visual
effects. Illumination distributions will have to be carefully controlled and, preferably,
surrounding reflectances kept low. An ‘emphatic’ difference is quite difficult to achieve
other than in a theatre or similar setting, and as was noted towards the end of Chapter 2,
raising the target illumination unavoidably raises the ambient illumination. Where the aim

is to achieve high illuminance differences, target objects need to be small in relation to
their surrounding space, or more specifically, to the room absorption of the surrounding
space.
We will return to this last point, but before moving on, let it be repeated that making
assessments of the appearance of illumination differences is a revealing exercise in
observation. Actually doing it, and measuring one’s own assessments of perceived
difference, is instructive. Then following up with observation and measurement in real
locations is enormously valuable. The meter tells you nothing useful until you have related
its readings to your own experience. The data in Table 2.2 is typical, but a designer needs to
be able to visualise these illuminance ratios. It is by having in mind the perceived effect of
illuminance ratios that a designer is able to specify values that reflect observation-based
experience.

Target/ambient illuminance ratios
While the perceived adequacy of illumination (PAI) criterion is concerned with ensuring
adequate inter-reflected flux (MRSE) within a space, the illumination hierarchy criterion
is concerned with how the direct flux from the luminaires may be distributed to create an
ordered pattern of illumination that supports selected lighting design objectives, which
may range from directing attention to the functional activities of the space to creating
aesthetic or artistic effects. For all of this, we make use of the target/ambient
illuminance ratio, TAIR, where target illuminance is the sum of direct and indirect
components, and TAIR relates target illuminance to the ambient illumination level. The
designer selects target surfaces and designates values according to the level of perceived
difference of illumination brightness to be achieved both between room surfaces, and
between objects and the surroundings against which they are seen. As the point has been
made that illumination is not visible until it has undergone its first reflection, it may be
wondered why we are now dealing with incident target illumination, which comprises
both direct and indirect illumination. The answer is that as both components undergo
reflection at the same surface, it makes no difference whether we take the ratio of the
incident or reflected values.
MRSE provides the measure of ambient illumination within a space, and except where
there are obvious reasons to the contrary, it is reasonable to assume that the incident
illumination on each target surface tgt will be the sum of direct illuminance and MRSE, so
the total illuminance on a target surface:
and the target/ambient illuminance ratio:
The TAIR concept provides a basis for planning a distribution of direct flux from the
luminaires that will achieve an envisioned illumination distribution within a space. It
follows that for any chosen target surface, the direct illuminance:
Designing an illumination hierarchy involves designating TAIR values for selected surfaces
or objects to signal noticeable, distinct, or strong perceived differences of illumination,
again referring back to Table 2.2, and there really is no limit to the situations for which this
procedure may be applied. A designer may choose to target a substantial proportion of the
total room surface area, and examples of this would include lighting a mural covering a
whole wall, or an architectural icon, or a library reading area, or perhaps, the horizontal
work plane of an industrial assembly shop. Alternatively, the target area may be a single
object that comprises a small proportion of the total surface area, such as a solitary

sculpture, or a featured retail display, or the preacher in his pulpit; or it may comprise a
number of even smaller items, such as display of coins, or individually lit items of
glassware. Whatever the situation, the designer first needs to decide upon the MRSE level
to achieve the required ambient illumination for the space, and then to decide upon the
TAIR for each target surface for the differences of illumination brightness. This enables
Formula 3.3 to be applied to draw up the distribution of direct target illuminance values.
This puts the designer in the position of being able to determine the distribution of direct
light to be applied throughout the space in order to achieve the envisioned distribution of
reflected light. The total indirect flux provided by first reflections from all surfaces
receiving selective target lighting:
Note that the suffix tgt indicates an individual target surface, and ts refers to all target
surfaces within the space. This value of Fts(i) indicates the extent to which all of the
selective target lighting will contribute towards the first reflected flux required to achieve
the ambient illumination MRSE. The usefulness of this formula becomes apparent in the
following section.
It may be noted in passing that, unlike MRSE, TAIR is not proposed as a suitable metric
for lighting standards. TAIR is a tool that enables pursuit of chosen lighting design
objectives, which may range from very simple through to distinctly complex in nature, and
its application involves objectives that are beyond the scope of standards, whether advisory
or mandatory.

Illumination hierarchy design procedure
Without wishing to give the impression that creative lighting design can be achieved by
following a step-by-step procedure, the concepts previously described imply a sequence for
logical decision making. The flowchart shown in Figure 3.2 should be referred to while
following this procedure.
Figure 3.2 Flowchart for achieving mean room surface exitance, MRSE, and task/ambient illumination, TAIR, design
values.
1. For a design location, consider a level of MRSE that would provide for an
appropriate appearance of overall brightness or dimness. Codes or standards
specified in task plane illuminance are unlikely to be helpful. Should there be a
published MRSE value relevant to the location, it probably relates to the perceived
adequacy of illumination (PAI) criterion and specifies the minimum value of
MRSE to be provided. Consider whether a higher level to give a brighter
appearance would be appropriate, referring to Table 2.1 for guidance, and taking
into account the immediately previous brightness experience of a person entering
this space. Consider whether it is to appear brighter or dimmer than the previous
space, and if so, by how much, this time referring to Table 2.2 for guidance. Where

no minimum levels are specified, designing for an appearance of dimness becomes
an option providing safety concerns are kept in mind.
2. Decide upon the design value of MRSE, this being the overall density of inter-
reflected flux to be provided within the volume of the space, and enter this value
into the Illumination Hierarchy spreadsheet (see Box 3.1, and use your own
downloaded copy of the spreadsheet).
3. Estimate the area and reflectance value for each significant surface S within the
room, making sure to include any surfaces or objects that you might decide to
highlight with selective lighting, and enter these onto the spreadsheet. The
spreadsheet calculates the room absorption value, Aα(rs), and the total first
reflected flux, FRFrs, required to provide the MRSE value.
4. Consider the illumination hierarchy that the light distribution is to create in this
space. Think about which objects or surface areas you want to highlight with
selective lighting, and by how much. You will provide direct light onto these target
surfaces, while surrounding areas will be lit mainly, or perhaps entirely, by
reflected light.
5. Enter your design value of TAIR for each target area, taking account of how the
appearance of the selected objects or surfaces will be affected by localised direct
illumination. This listing of TAIR in Column 5 of the spreadsheet becomes the
record of your illumination hierarchy for the space.
6. The spreadsheet completes the calculations, giving the first reflected flux to be
provided by light reflected from the targets, FRFts, and the difference between this
value and the total FRF required to provide the MRSE value, FRFrs – FRFts.
Then:
If the first reflected flux from the targets is less than the total first reflected flux
required, that is to say, if FRFts < FRFrs, then in addition to the light directed onto
the target areas, the surrounding room surfaces will need some direct illumination
to make up for the difference, FRFrs – FRFts. This is needed to ensure that the
MRSE design value will be achieved. The direct illumination onto the room surfaces
does not need to be applied uniformly, and often the most effective way will be to
spread light over large, high-reflectance surrounding surfaces such as ceiling and
walls. Concentrating this light onto small areas may cause them to compete
visually with the target areas, as has been discussed in Chapter 2. There is plenty of
scope for ingenuity in devising ways of raising the overall illumination brightness
without detracting from the selected targets.
If FRFts ≈ FRFrs, the target illumination alone will provide for the design values for
both MRSE and TAIR. This is because reflected light from the target surfaces will
both provide the design level of ambient illumination and achieve the intended
balance of target/ambient levels. A serendipitous outcome.

If FRFts > FRFrs, the proposed balance of MRSE and TAIR values cannot be
achieved in this situation. The reason is that if the direct target illuminance is
applied, the reflected flux will raise MRSE above the design level, and reduce TAIR
values below the design levels. Usually the most effective remedial action will be to
reduce the total target area, such as by concentrating the objects to receive direct
light into more restricted areas. Otherwise, it will be necessary to reduce either, or
both, ρts and ρrs, but unfortunately, lighting designers seldom have much influence
over reflectance values. A compromise may be inevitable, but at least the outcome
will not come as an unwelcome surprise.

Example: a banking premises
Box 3.1 shows a worksheet from the Illumination Hierarchy spreadsheet, and again, readers
are strongly recommended to experience the use of these design tools. Room surface data
have been entered for a banking premises, so take a moment to familiarise yourself with
the location.
A bright and business-like appearance is wanted, and a MRSE level of 200 lm/m2 is
proposed. This value has been entered, and as previously, data shown in red are input by
the user and all other values are calculated automatically. Column 4 gives the computed
room absorption values, and the bottom line shows that 39,096 lumens of first reflected
flux from the room surfaces is required to provide the MRSE level. Next the designer enters
a TAIR value for selected target surfaces. This is the vital component of this stage of the
design process, and Column 5 forms the statement of the designer’s initial intent for
illumination hierarchy. At the bottom of the final column it is shown that 20,899 lm of the
required FRF will be provided from the target surfaces, so that the difference of 18,197 lm
will need to be made up by applying additional direct light onto room surfaces.
This is the information that the designer needs to determine the balance of direct and
indirect illumination. Various options for providing the deficit FRF may come to mind, but
a simple and efficient solution would be uplighting. The required direct ceiling illuminance
is:
This direct illuminance added to the MRSE value of 200 lm/m2 would give a total ceiling
illuminance Eclg of 414 lux, giving a TAIR value of just over two. Table 2.2 indicates that
this would correspond to a perceived difference that would appear somewhere between
noticeable and distinct, and so would create a visible effect that might compete with the
planned distribution of TAIR values. This effect could be reduced by applying less
illumination onto the ceiling and making up for the deficiency by adding some direct light
onto other surfaces, particularly the walls.
Box 3.1
Illumination Hierarchy Spreadsheet
Date: 140119

Symbols
It is at this point that the attraction of using the spreadsheet becomes evident. By
treating selected room surfaces as targets, alternative strategies may be readily examined.
As the wall surfaces have lower reflectance values than the ceiling, it will take more direct
lumens to bring the FRFrs value up to the required level, but the light-coloured blinds in
walls 3 and 4 could receive selective wallwashing, and this might create an attractive
appearance. However, the effectiveness of this solution would depend upon the staff
pulling down the blinds during hours of darkness. It would be necessary to enquire

whether this could be relied upon, and after all, this is the way that lighting design
happens. It is part of the reason why no two designers would come up with identical
schemes.
Box 3.2
Illumination Hierarchy Spreadsheet
Date: 140119
Symbols

Box 3.2 shows a design proposal. The TAIR values in Column 5 have been adjusted to
provide various levels of unnoticeable, noticeable, distinct and strong perceived differences,
and by adding more target surfaces in this way, the FRFrs – FRFts difference has been
reduced to a negligible value. This means that the first reflected flux from the targets will
provide the required 200 lm/m2 of mean room surface exitance, and with the exception of
the blinds, the visible effect of this additional illumination will not be bright enough to be
noticed. In this way, the original design intent will be maintained. It can be seen not all
surfaces are to receive direct light.
Column 6 shows the direct illuminance to be provided onto each target surface. All that
is left now is to apply some straightforward illumination engineering, and procedures for
determining luminaire layouts to distribute direct flux to achieve specific illuminance
values are explained in Chapter 6.

References
Lynes, J.A. (1987). Patterns of light and shade. Lighting in Australia, 7(4): 16–20.
Waldram, J.M. (1954). Studies in interior lighting. Transactions of the Illuminating
Engineering Society (London); 19: 95–133.

4
Spectral Illumination Distributions

Chapter summary
Various ways in which human perception of a lit space is influenced by the spectral power
distribution (SPD) of illumination are reviewed. Distinction is made between assessment of
light for visibility and for brightness, and alternative response functions for indoor spaces
are examined. The effects of SPD upon the perception of illumination colour (colour
appearance) and coloured materials (colour rendering) are examined, along with various
proposals for identifying how both SPD and illumination level influence the appearance of
lit spaces. These include perceived attributes of illumination, such as the whiteness,
naturalness and colourfulness of illumination, as well as some non-visual effects. It is
concluded that people have different daytime and night time expectations and needs for
lighting.

Luminous sensitivity functions
Before 1924, the only way of measuring light was to make comparisons with a familiar
light source, which led to metrics such as the candle power and the foot candle, but in that
year the CIE (International Commission on Illumination) introduced the V(λ) luminous
sensitivity function which defines the relative visual response, V, as a function of the
wavelength of radiant power, λ, as shown in Figure 4.1. This was a significant
breakthrough that required innovative research, and it enabled luminous flux, F, to be
defined in terms of lumens from a measurement of spectral power distribution:
where:
P(λ) = spectral power, in watts, of the source at the wavelength λ
V(λ) = photopic luminous efficiency function value at λ
Δλ = interval over which the values of spectral power were measured
It can be seen from Figure 4.1 that V(λ) has its maximum value of 1.0 at 555nm, and so the
luminous efficiency of radiant flux at this wavelength is equal to the value of the constant
in Formula 4.1, 683 lm/W. At 610nm, where the value of V(λ) is approximately 0.5, the
luminous efficiency reduces to half that value.
So by defining the V(λ) function, the CIE made it possible for the output of a light source
to be specified in terms of the lumen, while at the same time enabling light itself to be
defined in terms of radiant power within the waveband 380–780 nanometres (nm). To this
day, lighting standards and recommended practice documents, as well as the calibration of
all light meters, are based on V(λ), and in fact, it continues to be quite appropriate for
measuring illumination in situations where photopically-adapted viewers are fixating upon
visual tasks. Examples range from a library reading room to a hospital operating theatre,
and for these, as well as for most task-based applications in between, this luminous
sensitivity function continues to serve us well. There is, however, more to human response
to light than this, and for designers to be able to apply lighting knowingly and effectively
in the range of situations encountered in general lighting practice, we could benefit from
metrics that take account of a wider range of human interactions with radiant flux.

Figure 4.1 Relative sensitivity functions for V(λ), and the three cone types; long-, medium- and short-wavelength; L(λ),
M(λ) and S(λ). It can be seen how closely V(λ) represents the responses of the L and M cones, and ignores the S cone
response.
Formula 4.1 assumes a human observer operating within the range of photopic vision,
and this means that error is incurred whenever V(λ) is applied for mesopic or scotopic
conditions. Also, the researchers who established the V(λ) function had their subjects
observing a quite small luminous patch that subtended just 2 degrees at the eye, so that it
was illuminating only the foveal regions of the subjects’ retinas. The photoreceptors in
these central regions are only long- and medium-wavelength responsive cones, which are
often (but inaccurately) referred to as the red and green cones, and their luminous
sensitivity functions are shown in Figure 4.1 as L(λ) and M(λ) respectively. It should be
noted how similar are the responses of these two cones, particularly when it is borne in
mind that it is the difference in response of this pair of two cone types that enables colour
discrimination on the red–green axis, and also, how closely similar they are to V(λ). The
responses of the short-wavelength (blue) cones, shown as the S(λ) function, as well as all of
the rods, are simply not taken into account by the V(λ) function.
For a photopically-adapted viewer, the S(λ) function does not affect acuity for a fixated
task, but it does affect assessments of the brightness of the surrounding field, and this
occurs to an extent that changes with field luminance. The Bezold-Brücke hue shift
describes the effect of perceived colour differences on the blue–yellow axis increasing
relative to those on the red–green axis with increasing luminance, and this affects
brightness assessments. Rea et al. (2011) have proposed a luminous sensitivity function for
brightness:

where the value of g is related to field luminance. In this way, a variable allowance for the
response of the short-wavelength cones can be added to the long- and medium-wavelength
cones dominated V(λ), and Mark Rea has tentatively suggested that for the range of
luminous environments discussed in this book, for which 10 <MRSE <1000 lm/m2, a g value
of 3.0 would be appropriate. The resulting luminous sensitivity function, indicated as
VB3(λ), is shown in Figure 4.2. It is proposed that applying this function for predicting or
measuring MRSE would give more reliable results, in terms of better matching metrics to
assessments, than using conventional lumen-based metrics.
Meanwhile the CIE has given attention to other deficiencies of V(λ) by defining
additional luminous sensitivity functions, the most notable being the V′(λ) function
introduced in 1951, which defines the relative response of the rod photoreceptors, and so
relates to scotopically-adapted vision (Figure 4.3). This function shows substantially greater
sensitivity for shorter wavelength (blue) radiant flux, but while research scientists are able
to recalculate luminous flux according to the viewing conditions, this does not happen in
general lighting practice. The notion that the lumen output of a lamp might depend on the
circumstances of its use is a complication that the lighting industry would not welcome,
and so the 1924 V(λ) function persists. Until lighting practice comes to terms with this
discrepancy, some level of mismatch between measured or predicted lighting performance
and human response is inevitable. For designers, it becomes a matter of how we balance
simplicity and convenience against actually providing what we have promised.
It may be noted that the visual field has to become distinctly dark, with adaptation
luminance less than 0.001 cd/m2, for vision to become entirely due to the rod photosensors.
When this occurs, scotopic conditions prevail and the V′(λ) luminous sensitivity function
applies, so that scotopic luminous flux:

Figure 4.2 The VB3(λ) spectral sensitivity of brightness function for daytime light levels, where the contribution of the S
cones relative to V(λ) is high (g = 3). After Rea (2013).
Figure 4.3 The V(λ) and V′(λ) relative luminous efficiency functions relate to photopic and scotopic adaptation
respectively.
In this way, while the photopic luminous flux, F, for a given source is determined by
application of Formula 4.1, its scotopic lumens, F′, could be determined by application of
Formula 4.3. Note the increased value of the constant in this formula to reflect the high
sensitivity of dark-adapted rods. It follows that if the value of F′/F, referred to as the S/P

(scotopic/photopic) ratio, is high, then at low light levels, where the rods are active, the
visual response will be underrated. Sources rich at shorter wavelengths, such as metal
halide lamps, will, for the same lumens, generate stronger visual responses than lamps rich
at longer wavelengths, such as sodium lamps.

Some other visual and non-visual responses
While it would seem quite straightforward that F′ should be used as the measure for
luminous flux for scotopic conditions, these conditions are in fact so dim that nobody
actually provides illumination to achieve them. Lighting practice for outdoor spaces, such
as car parks, roadways and airport runways, aims to provide conditions in the mesopic
range, which extends from 0.001 cd/m2 up to the lower limit of the photopic range, at 3
cd/m2. Within this substantial adaptation luminance range, spectral sensitivity undergoes
transition between scotopic and photopic adaptation, and where we are concerned with
brightness assessments, this means transition between the very dissimilar V′(λ) and VB3(λ)
functions, which makes accurate assessment of the likely visual response problematic (Rea,
2013). This is a real issue for providing illumination at outdoor lighting levels.
For indoor lighting at photopic levels, there are some different issues that concern
researchers. It has been established that, at the same luminance levels, pupil size is smaller
for higher S/P illumination, and this led to the assumption that pupil size is determined by
the response of the rod photoreceptors, even at photopic levels. Berman et al. (1993)
conducted a series of laboratory studies for tasks close to the visual threshold (the point at
which there is a 50/50 probability of accurate detection) and showed that performance was
better for higher S/P sources. It might seem odd that reduced pupil size, which must reduce
the amount of light reaching the retina, should give increased performance, but the
explanation offered was that reducing the lens aperture would improve the quality of the
retinal image. As with a camera, smaller lens aperture gives increased depth of field, which
is an advantage for anyone whose refractive correction is less than perfect. It also occurs
that rays passing through the peripheral zones of the eye’s lens tend to undergo
aberrations, as the lens of the eye is, in fact, of no more than moderate optical quality, so
that reducing observers’ pupil sizes is likely to cause them to experience improved image
resolution. It was claimed that these advantages would more than compensate for the
reduced retinal illuminance.
Application of the S/P findings to lighting practice has recently been the subject of both
research and debate. The notion that visual performance could be maintained at lower
illuminance levels offers opportunities for significant energy savings, and this certainly has
aroused interest, but it has been pointed out that the higher performance demonstrated for
threshold visual tasks would be unlikely to apply for the much more usual condition of
suprathreshold tasks. General lighting practice aims to ensure that tasks are performed
with high rates of accuracy, meaning that they are to be illuminated to well above their
threshold levels, so that advantages that may occur in an experiment where the probability
of error is high probably would not occur in practical situations (Boyce, 2003). A recent
field study by Wei et al. (2014) of office workers found not only that any advantages
attributable to high S/P sources were too small to be worthwhile, but also that the people

working in those conditions disliked the high S/P lighting. Among the research community
there now seems to be a lack of interest in pursuing this topic, but that has not stopped
some unscrupulous suppliers from making claims that are exaggerated, and even
downright false, for high S/P lamps. It may be noted in passing that since the original
investigations, researchers have become aware that pupil size response is more complex
than simply responding to the level of rod cells stimulation, and seems to involve the
recently discovered ipRGC response (see following paragraph).
Humans exhibit various non-visual responses to light, and the most important, at least
from our point of view, is the circadian response, being the 24-hour cycle that we
experience along with most living things on this planet. With the onset of circadian night,
a hormone named melatonin is released from the pineal gland into the bloodstream, and
this is associated with the sleep/wake cycle that is said to be regulated by a hypothetical
biological clock that each one of us carries inside us. Researchers had noted that the
melatonin response to light exposure displays a spectral sensitivity that does not match
that of any of the retinal photoreceptors, but it was not until 2002 that the mystery was
solved. The answer lies in the complex pattern of connections within the retina that link
the photoreceptors to the optic nerve for communication to the brain. Retinal ganglion cells
were known to play major roles in this process, but what had not been suspected was that
some of these cells actually contain a photopigment, which has been named melanopsin,
and the light response of these intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs)
connects not to the visual cortex, but to the endocrine gland, and on to the pineal gland.
The peak sensitivity of these cells due to the melanopsin photopigment occurs at 460 nm,
which is substantially shorter than the peak responses of any of the retinal photocells.
Figure 4.4 Rea’s proposed VC(λ) function for the relative circadian response (After Rea, 2013).

Rea (2013) has proposed a spectral sensitivity function, VC(λ), for the human circadian
response, which is shown in Figure 4.4. This is rather different from the other functions
discussed so far in that it is not the response of a cell, but of a system. A large part of the
response is additive, meaning that light at these wavelengths will have the effect of
dispersing melatonin from the blood, and part is subadditive, which means that for a
broad-spectrum source, energy at these wavelengths will have a negative effect, but if the
total sum for the whole spectrum is negative, the response should be assumed to be zero.
Taking account of this function calls for a quite different way of thinking about the
impact of light exposure. Before the invention of electric lighting, illumination after sunset
was either absent, or it was of low intensity and biased toward longer wavelengths, so that
circadian cycles were largely undisturbed by after-dusk light exposure. While we all
applaud the benefits of electric lighting, a consequence has been a substantial growth in
nocturnal light exposure, and while many find this lifestyle choice attractive, health studies
of people who engage in it over long periods, such as shift workers and airline staff, are a
cause for concern. There is reason to suppose that daytime exposure to illumination that
scores highly on the circadian spectral sensitivity function, followed by night time
exposure to reduced levels of low scoring illumination, would be conducive to long-term
health.
While these human responses to light represent concerns that lighting designers can
never ignore, there are two principal concerns for the spectral distribution of illumination
that must always be at the forefront of a lighting designer’s mind. These are how the
colour appearance of the illumination relates to the design concept of the space, and how
the colours of illuminated objects within the space will be rendered by the illumination.

Colour appearance of illumination
It is common experience that some materials can be heated to the point where they become
incandescent, starting from a dull red, increasing with temperature through bright crimson
to brilliant white-hot. Most materials would melt or evaporate if the temperature was to be
further increased, but the theoretical ‘black-body’ does not have this limitation and its
temperature can be raised until it becomes ‘blue-hot’.
When lamp makers discovered how to step beyond the restrictions of producing light by
incandescence, that opened up opportunities to produce light with different spectra,
including light that was not far removed from white but which was distinctly different
from the warm, yellowish light emitted by a hot metal filament. In fact, it became possible
to produce light that matched the appearance of different phases of daylight illumination,
but this raised the question of how to describe these variation of ‘white’ light in a way that
would make sense to people choosing, or specifying, these new-fangled discharge and
fluorescent lamps.
The answer they came up with was to define the colour appearance of all types of
nominally ‘white’ light sources in terms of correlated colour temperature (CCT), this being
the temperature of a black-body, specified in degrees Kelvin, that most closely matched the
appearance of the source in question. In Figure 4.5, the ‘black-body locus’ defines the
change in chromaticity of emitted light from the black-body as its temperature is varied,
and it can be seen that this corresponds to the commonly experienced change of colour of
emitted light when materials are heated. The invention of the halogen cycle enabled
incandescent filaments to be maintained at temperatures of up 3300K, and CCT described
the appearance of the emitted light quite reliably. However, the real need for being able to
indicate the colour appearance of illumination was the developing market for fluorescent
lamps, where spectral distribution has nothing to do with temperature. There was demand
for light sources that could provide ‘white hot’, and even ‘blue-hot’, illumination colours, as
well as the colours of daylight illumination, and fluorescent lamps made all of this possible.
Figure 4.6 shows CCT values for some familiar lamp types related to colour appearance.
The confusing ways in which the CCT scale associates low colour temperatures with warm
colour appearance and high colour temperatures with cool colour appearance, and that
intervals on this scale are quite out of step with perceived differences, are both neatly
overcome by the reciprocal mega Kelvin scale (MK-1). While lamp makers have recognised
the usefulness of this scale, it has not come into general use and, in any case, it has the
disadvantage that it associates the chromaticity of a black-body with whiteness, and this
has had unfortunate consequences that have been shown up by recent research.

Figure 4.5 The black-body locus (solid line) plotted on the CIE 1931 (x,y) chromaticity chart with intersecting lines of
constant correlated colour temperature indicated in degrees Kelvin. Also shown are the chromaticity coordinates of CIE
Standard Illuminants, A, C, and D65 (from IESNA 2000).
Rea and Freyssinier (2013) have reported a study in which subjects described the
appearance of different lighting chromaticities, and it was found that there is an extended
range of chromaticities that may appear ‘white’, or with minimum perceived ‘tint’, and
importantly, these chromaticities do not follow the line of the black-body locus. Figure 4.7
shows a section of the black-body locus crossed by lines of constant colour

Figure 4.6 The reciprocal mega Kelvin scale (MK-1) compared with the Kelvin (K) scale, and with typical assessments of
colour appearance and CCTs of some familiar light sources.
Figure 4.7 Contours of perceived level of tint. The solid line is the black-body locus plotted on the CIE 1931 chromaticity
chart. The line of 0% tint is the contour of source chromaticities perceived to have minimum tint at that colour
temperature, and these are referred to as ‘white’ sources, with other lines showing increasing levels of perceived tint. See

text for more explanation (from Rea, 2013).
temperature (see Figure 4.5), and superimposed over these are lines of perceived level of
tint. The 0% line is the experimentally-derived contour of ‘white’ sources. This does not
mean that source chromaticities on this contour appear identical, but rather that at a given
colour temperature, any source chromaticity on this contour is perceived to be with
minimum tint. While sources A, B, and C all have the same colour temperature of 4100K,
they will be perceived quite differently. In fact, source C will appear more similar to source
1 than to either A or B, as both C and 1 appear to be with minimum tint. Departures above
(+ive) or below (-ive) this contour incur increasing perceived tint, where for different points
along this contour, positive tint may appear slightly yellow, chartreuse or green, and
negative may appear slightly pink, purple or blue (Rea, 2013). It should be noted that this
‘white’ source locus departs significantly from the black-body contour, being above it for
CCTs above 4000K, and below it for CCTs below 4000K.
Seen in this way, it becomes obvious why conventional light sources around 4000K have
been described as ‘white’, and lower colour temperature light sources are perceived to be
yellowish-white and are said to appear ‘warm’, and higher colour temperature sources are
perceived to be bluish-white and are said to appear ‘cool’. The notion of the ‘black-body’
being the standard reference source is ingrained to the point that as the lighting industry
has developed newer technologies, such as compact fluorescent lamps and now LED
sources, repeatedly their aim is to match the characteristics of traditional sources. At the
time of writing, examples are occurring of lighting companies advertising new LED sources
by claiming that the illumination is indistinguishable from halogen lighting. There is,
however, at least one LED manufacturer that is promoting its product as departing from
the black-body locus, but even so, it may be some while before we have opportunities to
experience tint-free ‘white’ illumination of different colour temperatures in spaces that
enable us to properly assess their appearance.
Illuminance and illumination colour preference
It was way back in 1941 that A.A. Kruithof, a lamp development engineer with Philips
Lighting in the Netherlands, wrote an article describing the fluorescent lamp. This lamp
had been introduced in the USA only three years earlier, and despite the turmoil of the
Second World War, it was finding its way into Europe. Among the many unfamiliar aspects
of this new technology that Kruithof described was that it would be possible to select the
CCT of lighting. This had not been possible previously, and to provide guidance on how to
do this, he included the diagram reproduced in Figure 4.8. This figure is possibly the most
reproduced diagram in the history of lighting. The white zone indicates acceptable
combinations of illuminance and CCT, and within the lower shaded zone, which includes
combinations of low illuminance and high CCT, Kruithof described the effect as ‘cold and

harsh’, while in the upper shaded zone, which includes combinations of high illuminance
and low CCT, he described the effect as ‘unnatural’ (Kruithof 1941).
The article gives little information on how this diagram was derived, but Kruithof has
told the author that it was a ‘pilot study’ based entirely on the observations by himself and
his assistant. For low colour temperatures, incandescent lamps were switched from series to
parallel, but as the halogen lamp had not been invented, those conditions would have been
limited to 2800K. For higher CCTs, they used some ‘special fluorescent lamps’ that were
currently under development, but even with the resources of the Philips research
laboratories at that time, the range of phosphors available would have been restricting. For
some parts of the diagram, Kruithof relied on a common sense approach. It is obvious that
outdoor daylight with a CCT of 5000K at an illuminance of 50,000 lux is very acceptable, so
he extrapolated to that point. It was in this way that the diagram of the ‘Kruithof effect’
was put together.
Figure 4.8 Kruithof’s chart relating correlated colour temperature (TC) and illuminance (E) to colour appearance. The
white zone is described as ‘preferred’, while the lower shaded zone appears ‘cold and harsh’ and the upper zone appears
‘unnatural’ (from Kruithof, 1941).
Since that time, several researchers have sought to apply scientific method to defining a
sound basis for this phenomenon, but this has proved an elusive goal. However, the
‘Kruithof effect’ lives on. Lighting designers continue to refer to it with reverence, and
perhaps more convincingly, you are unlikely to find opportunities to carry out observations
of lighting installation that occur in the shaded areas of the diagram. You will find that the

higher lighting levels provided in commercial and industrial locations, whether by
fluorescent or high intensity discharge lamps, tend to make use of CCTs corresponding to
the intermediate or cool ranges shown in Figure 4.6. Even where CCTs higher than 5000K
are used, if the illuminance also is high (say more than 1500 lux), the effect is more inclined
towards a bright and colourful appearance reminiscent of daylight, rather than a noticeably
‘cool’ effect. Conversely, where lighting is deliberately dim, the low CCTs of incandescent
lamps, or even candles, are likely to be the chosen light sources. If you practise observation
coupled with measurement, you are likely to find ample confirmation of the Kruithof
effect.
Illumination colour and ‘flow’ of light
There is an interesting dimension of colour contrast that has been routinely exploited by
stage lighting designers, and which has the potential to be influential in architectural
lighting design. People are sometimes surprised by the appearance of colour photographs
taken outdoors in sunny conditions. Areas in sunlight appear to have a yellow cast, and
particularly for snow scenes, shadows appear noticeably blue. While our visual response
tends to obscure this naturally occurring colour difference, if you look for it you can see it,
and many artists, particularly the impressionists, have recorded their observations of this
‘sun and sky’ lighting effect.
Stanley McCandless incorporated the effect into his method for stage lighting
(McCandless 1958). An essential feature of his approach is that all objects on stage are to be
illuminated from opposite sides, with the light from one side having lower CCT to give a
sunlight effect, and the light from the other side having higher CCT, perhaps of lower
intensity, to give a skylight effect. In this way, a distinct and coherent ‘flow’ of light is
achieved without strong shadows being cast. This means that an actor can remain clearly
visible while having his face in the shadow.
When you are aware of this ‘sun and sky’ lighting effect, it is surprising how often you
can find examples of it in retail display lighting. Car showrooms can achieve very effective
displays by flooding the space with diffuse light using relatively efficient ‘daylight’ lamps
which might have a CCT of more than 5000K, while providing highlighting from spotlights
having CCT close to 3000K. Clothing stores often use lower CCT spotlights to strongly
highlight selected items that are arranged as vertical eye-catching displays, while relying
on the cooler appearance of general fluorescent lighting to reveal the daylight colours of
the merchandise that the customers handle. Blue is a frequently used colour for the internal
surfaces of display cabinets that have internal spotlights, and of course, it gives the sky
effect to the shadows. Everybody sees ‘flow’ of light effects of this sort, but it takes a
lighting designer to observe the visual effect and to understand how it can be provided.

Colour rendering of illumination
Among the more spectacular developments within the lighting industry during the past
half century has been progressive improvement in colour rendering, being the influence
that lighting has on the perceived colours of objects and materials. In fact, for most
everyday lighting applications, colour rendering really has ceased to be a problem. Users
have a choice of light sources that are quite satisfactory for industrial and office lighting
applications, as well as for general lighting for retail, recreational, and social activities. It
has not always been so, and when the Colour Rendering Index (usually abbreviated to CRI,
but note also the use of scientific symbol Ra below) was introduced in 1965, it was a useful
tool for sorting out the good, the indifferent and the plain ugly.
CRI continues to appear in codes, standards and specifications, where statements such as
‘CRI shall be not less than 85’ is a simple formula for avoiding lamp types that would cause
unsatisfactory user responses. However, for the applications where colour rendering is an
important factor, CRI fails to provide reliable guidance. Art gallery and museum directors
have learned the hard way that simply specifying a high CRI value does not ensure
excellent, or even acceptable, appearance of displays.
There have been several proposals over the years to make CRI more useful, or to replace
it with something better. The following sections review some of these proposals and offers
guidance on coming to terms with colour rendering.
The CIE Colour Rendering Index
The International Commission on Illumination (CIE) defines colour rendering as the ‘effect
of an illuminant on the colour appearance of objects by conscious or subconscious
comparison with their colour appearance under a reference illuminant’ (CIE, 1987).
The supposition here is that the observer is fully adapted to the same lighting that
illuminates the objects, and that the colour appearance of the objects would be natural, and
therefore optimal, if the lighting was provided by a reference source. The concept of a
reference source is central to any discussion of colour rendering as it provides the basis for
the comparison that is contained in the definition. It is an inherent assumption that the
perceived colours of objects lit by the appropriate reference source would appear entirely
acceptable, and that any departure from this appearance would be detrimental.
As the brightness and the colour of the ambient illumination in our environment
changes, the response of our visual system adapts to the ambient condition. CRI assumes
photopic adaptation and makes no adjustment for brightness, while the observer’s state of
chromatic adaptation is assumed to be determined by the chromaticity of the actual light
source. The corresponding reference source is accorded a colour temperature that matches

the correlated colour temperature (CCT) of the light source. For CCTs less than 5000K the
reference source is the black-body, and for 5000K and above it is a CIE standard daylight
distribution defined by its CCT. Getting these assumptions in mind is essential for
understanding CRI.
The CRI values for a test source are determined by the Test Colour Method (CIE, 1994).
Fourteen test colour samples (TCS), listed in Table 4.1, are defined by individual spectral
reflectance curves. For each TCS, u,v chromaticity coordinates on the 1960 UCS (Uniform
Chromaticity Scale) chart are calculated for both the test source and its reference source,
and a colour adaptation transform is applied to allow for chromatic adaptation differences
between the two sources. After that, colour differences in UCS space are calculated for
each TCS under both sources. Each difference is defined by a vector that specifies the
colour shift for viewing the TCS alternatively under the reference source and under the test
source, allowing for adaptation to each source. The magnitude of each vector ΔEi enables
the Special Colour Rendering Index Ri for each TCS to be calculated:
From only the first eight TCS values, the General Colour Rendering Index Ra is calculated:
This may seem complicated, but the CIE documentation includes a computer program that
performs the task effortlessly. While this takes away the pain for the lamp manufacturer, it
is necessary for us to understand what is being done so we can see how it might be done
better. The program output for a standard Warm White halophosphate fluorescent lamp is
shown in Figure 4.9.
Table 4.1 The 14 CIE TCS (Test colour samples). TCS 1–8 comprise the original set of moderately saturated colours
representing the whole hue circle, and these are the only samples used for determining CRI. The other six have been
added for additional information, and comprise four saturated colours, TCS 9–12, and two surfaces of particular interest.
Regrettably, details of colour shifts for these TCS are seldom made available

There is plenty to ponder here. The lamp is, of course, an old-fashioned fluorescent
lamp, and it is sobering to realise that when CRI was introduced in 1965, this was the
standard lamp for general lighting practice. The program gives the x,y chromaticity
coordinates, the CCT (Tc), and a measure of how far the chromaticity is off the black-body
locus (dC). The CRI (Ra) is the average of Ri values for TCS 1–8, and it can be seen that
these vary substantially. Referring to Table 4.1, colour shifts are relatively small for the
yellow-green and violet TCSs, but become large in other zones. Then look at the strong
colours, particularly the strong red, represented as TCS 9, for which the chromaticity shift
is massive, but the value for this TCS was not, and still is not, taken into account by CRI.
Human complexion (TCS 13) has a poor score, so it is no wonder that everybody was
pleased to see the back of this lamp, and really, that has been the foremost achievement of
CRI. Nobody would now dream of lighting an indoor space in which the appearance of
people might be of some consequence with such an utterly dismal lamp.

Figure 4.9 Output from CIE13 3W.exe computer program to calculate CRIs, for a Warm White halophosphate fluorescent
lamp. While this is an old-fashioned lamp, this example illustrates well the colour rendering issues that CRI was devised
to cope with.
Problems with CRI
Despite this level of success, CRI has several problems, some of which may be evident from
the previous section. The CIE specifies 14 TCSs, and calculates CRI from just eight of them,
ignoring the other six. The reason for this is that originally only TCS 1–8 were specified,
and they are all medium saturation colours, but people had noted that lamps that might
perform reasonably well for these colours could fail badly for rendering strong colours.
Also, the appearances of human complexion and foliage have special significance as people
have clear notions of how they should appear, and so it was decided that these too should
be added. This led to the addition of six more TCSs, but then, rather than change CRI, it
was decided that they should be listed separately to provide users with additional
information. However, while the program output gives these values, most users are
completely unaware of them. Manufacturers claim that people would be confused by the
additional data, but nonetheless, it needs to be recognised that colour rendering is too
complicated an issue to be adequately defined by a single number.
To illustrate this point, if data for the additional six TCSs were to be provided, what

interpretation should be placed upon them? A low value of Ri indicates that the appearance
of this TCS will be distinctly different under the test and reference sources, but no
indication is given of the nature of that difference. For example, the negative Ri value noted
for the strong red TCS might indicate that the test source shifts it towards yellow, giving an
orange tint, or towards blue, giving a mauve tint. Alternatively, it might appear less
saturated, giving a pink tint, or it might appear more saturated, appearing as a vivid red.
Not only does CRI give no indication of which of these differences occurs, but it treats all
of them as being equally detrimental. There is good evidence to indicate that, within
reason, people like lamps that make their surroundings appear more colourful, that is to
say, which cause increased saturation. This challenges the central notion that a reference
source provides optimal colour rendering.
Another issue is that it has for some while been acknowledged that the 1960 UCS chart is
far from uniform in its spacing of chromaticity values, and since then there have been
several proposals for more uniform definitions of colour space. To change the colour space
would affect CRI values, so this has not been done, with the result that CRI continues to be
calculated using a procedure that is known to evaluate colour differences unequally.
There are other problems. The CRI scale causes confusion, some users supposing it to be
a percentage scale, so the fact that some lamps are shown to have negative values comes as
a surprise. Also, because CRI has been so widely used by specifiers, manufacturers have
developed lamps to achieve high CRI values, so that they have incorporated the
shortcomings of CRI into their new products. It has become increasingly apparent that this
approach has led to lamps being promoted for good colour rendering but which have
distinctly less than optimal performance. These shortcomings of CRI became clearly
evident with the development of tri-phosphor fluorescent lamps in the 1970s, and they are
now seen to be a substantial hindrance to progress by companies working on development
of white LED sources. It is high time for changes to be made to CRI.
What is being done about CRI?
There has been no shortage of suggestions over the years, with past proposals for a Colour
Discrimination Index, and even a Flattery Index. While these may have attracted attention
at the times when they were proposed, the CIE has set up a Technical Committee to revise
CRI and this project has gained support from the US National Institute for Science and
Technology. It has led to the development of the Colour Quality Scale (CQS) (Davis and
Ohno, 2004), which is a substantial revision of CRI and involves a new set of 15 test colour
samples of high chromatic saturation spanning the entire hue circle, and it makes the
switch to 1976 CIELAB colour space, which assesses different types of colour difference
more closely to how they appear. Shifts of hue or shifts to lower saturation are treated as
being equally detrimental, but shifts to higher saturation incur no penalty. A weighting is

placed on CCT, so that for CCTs less than 3500K or more than 6500K, scores are modified
by a scaled multiplication factor. This would have the effect, for example, of reducing the
domestic incandescent lamp’s rating from 100 to 97. The scale itself is modified to eliminate
negative values, with the effect that all of the very poorly performing lamps will have
ratings between 0 and 20.
The single rating indicator with a maximum value of 100 is retained, and the overall
weighting of CQS between 20 and 100 is not too different from CRI, although ratings for
some lamp types do undergo significant changes. In particular, it may be expected that
lamps with multiple narrow waveband emissions, such as LED combinations, will achieve
more favourable CQS ratings than the ratings they gain under CRI. Finally, to overcome
the effect of averaging, by which a lamp may gain a moderately high score while one or
two test colours show large colour differences, individual scores are calculated as root
mean square (RMS) values.
The retention of a single scale indicator of colour rendering suits specifiers, who would
continue to be able to prescribe a minimum value for a given application, and while it
should reduce anomalies, it will not provide lighting designers with guidance on how the
colour appearance of illuminated objects will be affected by the light source. So while CQS
falls short of providing lighting designers with all the information they need, it does go a
long way towards overcoming the anomalies incorporated into CRI. It is, however,
important to appreciate that while CQS has been published and discussion invited, at the
time of writing it had not been endorsed by the CIE.
What is the current state of knowledge on colour rendering?
Researchers in the colour science field have achieved remarkable success during the past
decade, which has led to the development of colour appearance models (CAMs). Two
scientists had independently developed models for predicting how a typical observer
perceives colours in the environment, each taking account of a range of variables and
known visual phenomena. Dr R.W.G. Hunt, with the Kodak Corporation in the UK, had
spent a lifetime working on coloured images and Dr Y. Nayatani of Japan developed his
model to address concerns in illumination engineering and colour rendering. In 1997, the
two models were merged to produce a single Colour Appearance Model, CIECAM97s. This
was taken up with enthusiasm in a range of industries where colour is a critical aspect of
quality control, particularly where imaging is involved, and soon the CIE Technical
Committee concerned had available a wealth of feedback gained from practical application.
This led to CIECAM02, which was actually published in 2004, and is considered likely to
remain unaltered for some while as it is believed to be as good a model as can be produced
from current knowledge. For a review of CIECAM02, see Fairchild (2004).
The input data required to apply CIECAM02 to predict the colour appearance of an

element in the field of view include colorimetric data for the object (stimulus) and the light
source (adapting stimulus), the absolute luminance and colorimetric data of the proximal
field, including the background and surround to the stimulus. The success of this model lies
in the variety of potentially influential factors that may be taken into account. In Chapter 1
we noted how the colour appearance of an object can be affected by whether colours are
perceived as related or unrelated, and in CIECAM02, the effect of surrounding surfaces
upon the perception of surface colours is predictable. This is just one of a range of colour
appearance phenomena that have been observed and reported over the years, and which
have subsequently been researched and quantified, and now have been combined into a
single comprehensive model.
The spectral power distribution of the light source is one of the input variables, and so
aspects such as how bright and colourful a specific object will appear in a given setting
could be examined for alternative lamps. In terms of applied scientific knowledge, this
undoubtedly would be a leap forward. However, we cannot use CIECAM02 in the way that
we use CRI, that is to say, we cannot use it to describe the colour properties of a lamp, as it
has to be applied to a specific viewing situation. Perhaps this will become possible one day.
The spectacular advances in computer visualisation software that have occurred during the
past decade might enable us to model the effect of different light sources upon colour
appearance of a real or simulated scene, but meanwhile, we need to think about what the
information is that would be useful to us now.
What do we want to know about colour rendering?
When we get down to meeting actual needs for presenting coloured objects for critical
examination and assessment, it becomes apparent that those who put such objects on
display have learned a lot about people’s preferences for colour appearance. For
confirmation of this, you need look no further than your local supermarket. The fresh
produce displays use different lamp types for the meat, fish, fruit and vegetables, as well as
for the ‘deli’ displays, all of which have been chosen for how they render the colours of
that particular type of merchandise, and quite obviously, those choices have been made
without reference to CRI. The way in which colour rendering is understood by the CIE
experts is clearly indicated by the definition given at the beginning of this section, but it is
apparent that the preferences shown by people making visual selections of fresh produce
have nothing to do with making comparisons, conscious or subconscious, with appearance
under a reference source.
It can be seen that the lamp type chosen for each of the fresh produce applications
imparts a particular type of colour shift, and the store operators have made themselves
aware of which type of colour shift suits each type of merchandise. For the lighting
designer who encounters a situation that calls for a certain type of colour shift, the

available lamp data fail to provide the necessary guidance. Manufacturers give the CCT
and CRI values, and also they may show the spectral power distribution curve, but nobody
should assume that there is a simple relationship between this curve and colour rendering
properties. Even for an experienced lighting designer, an SPD curve comprising a
combination of line spectra and broad-band emissions gives little or no useful guidance on
colour rendering.
What is needed is a straightforward way of showing what a lamp will do to the colour
appearance of the objects that it illuminates. A lighting designer does not need to be told
what is good and what is bad. The information that the designer needs is to enable an
informed decision on which lamp type will best suit his or her purpose for a particular
application. This leads us to the colour-mismatch vector.
The colour-mismatch vector (CMV) method
In 1988, two lamp engineers at Philips Lighting in the Netherlands proposed a novel way of
presenting colour rendering information (van Kemanade and van der Burgt, 1988). Figure
4.10(a) shows the chromaticity shifts for a set of 215 colours more or less equally spaced
over the chromaticity chart, when illuminated by a reference source and then by a test
source. The individual colour-mismatch vectors are plotted onto the CIELAB chart, and in
this case, the test lamp is a halophosphate fluorescent lamp not very different from the one
represented in Figure 4.9. Each vector indicates the extent and direction of the mismatch
between the reference source and the test lamp. A vector pointing towards the centre of the
chart indicates a chroma reduction, and a radial direction indicates a hue shift. It should be
noted that the vectors are not randomly scattered but show a distinct flow pattern, and it
should not come as a surprise that mismatches increase for higher chroma, that is to say,
for TCS points further from the centre.
The main features of the flow pattern are expressed in Figure 4.10(b) and (c). The hue
angle on these graphs is measured from a* anticlockwise, so relationship to the unique
hues can be read from Figure 4.10(a). It is clear to see whereabouts on the hue circle a test
lamp introduces hue shifts or changes in chroma. The authors included more charts for
fluorescent lamps with different colour rendering properties, and an interesting comparison
of white SON and metal halide.
At first this type of chart may appear intimidating, but with a little practice, the wealth
of information that it provides is easily extracted. There is still the comparison with a
reference source, but instead of the system deciding what is good or bad, it is for the
lighting designer to choose the colour rendering characteristics that will suit a particular
application. Quite apart from those fresh produce supermarket displays, how else does a
designer select the most suitable lamp for an indoor swimming pool, or a make-up mirror,
or an orchid display, or an exhibition of antique manuscripts, or an ice-cold vodka bar? The

CMV method enables designers to make informed lamp selections based on colour
rendering characteristics. Unfortunately, lamp manufacturers are showing themselves to be
reluctant to provide this information, particularly for the newer generation of light sources.
Colour gamut area
It might seem that an ideal light source would produce a CMV diagram in which every
vector radiates outwards from the central point, creating a colourful world in which all
colours appear more saturated, and there is evidence to indicate that people do prefer light
sources that tend to increase colour saturation, at least to some extent.
A colour gamut is the polygon formed when the eight TCSs, illuminated by a given light
source, are plotted onto the CIE UCS diagram. Equal distances between points on this
diagram correspond approximately to equal perceived colour differences, so that the
relative areas of the polygons formed by connecting the TCS points for a given source
provide an indication of the ‘colourfulness’ associated with that source. Figure 4.11 shows
the colour gamuts for a range of widely used light sources, and the general trend of
Figure 4.10 Colour-mismatch vector data for a halophosphate Cool White colour 33 fluorescent lamp (From van
Kemenade and van der Burgt, 1988).

A) CMVs on the CIELAB chart for Opstelten’s set of 215 test colour samples.
B) Hue component of CMV, where +ive ΔHue indicates shift to higher hue angles.
C) Relative chroma content of CMV, where ΔC*=Δchroma/chroma, and +ive ΔC* indicates increase in saturation with
respect to reference source.
increasing gamut areas with increasing CCT is clearly evident. Note the large area of the
Daylight source, actually the CIE D65 daylight standard, and it becomes evident why this
source is often regarded as the light source against which all others should be judged.
Figure 4.11 Gamut areas for some familiar light sources plotted on the CIE 1976 UCS (uniform chromaticity scale)
diagram. Gamut area relates to the perceived ‘colourfulness’ associated with a light source (from Boyce, 2014).
Boyce (2003) has noted a correspondence between gamut areas and findings from
research studies into the phenomenon of ‘visual clarity’ (Bellchambers and Godby, 1972).
Although this concept has never been precisely defined, a variety of studies have found
that when subjects compare adjacent scenes and are instructed to adjust the light level in
one ‘so that the overall clarity of the scene is the same’ as in the other, a lower illuminance
is set in the scene with greater colour gamut area. Boyce’s formula for predicting the
illuminance ratio for matching appearance from the gamut area ratio is:
where E1 and E2 are the illuminance values and G1 and G2 are the gamut areas for the two
light sources.

Quite separately, Rea (2013) has reported that CRI does not reliably predict people’s
colour preferences for fruit, vegetables, skin and other often-encountered natural objects,
and has proposed that light source gamut areas should also be taken into account. The
gamut areas calculated from the u’, v’ values of the UCS diagram produce very small
values, leading him to propose a gamut area index:
where GS is the gamut area of light source S, and Gees is the gamut area for an equal
energy source, for which the value has been calculated to be 0.007354. The value of GAI
may be more or less than 100 according to the gamut area of S, and Rea advises that for
preferred appearance of natural objects, which, of course, includes other people, light
sources should be ‘high in CRI and high (but not too high) in GAI’. This leads to his
proposal for ‘Class A’ colour for general illumination light sources, for which the
chromaticity should lie on the ‘white’ source locus (Figure 4.7), and CRI should be equal to
or more than 80, and GAI should be between 80 and 100 (Rea, 2013). For specification
writers, a statement along the lines of ‘All light sources shall be of Class A colour’ could be
expected to improve reliability.

Source spectrum and human response
At first sight, this review of how the spectral properties of illumination may influence
people’s responses to a lit scene might seem to comprise a bewildering array of
disconnected factors, some of which have backgrounds of intensive research while others
are based on not much more than casual observation. However, some introspection
suggests an underlying pattern that gives some insight into how these factors are
connected.
It is clear that when we are concerned with a brightness response rather than visibility,
V(λ) tends to underrate sources that are rich in the shorter visible wavelengths, that is to
say, sources that are high in S/P ratio and CCT. While it has long been recognised that this
occurs for scotopic conditions, the B(λ) function (Formula 4.2) applies for photopic
conditions as well. The VB3(λ) function (Figure 4.2) has been proposed as the appropriate
illumination metric for indoor general lighting practice, but has yet to gain acceptance.
Illumination that has high luminous efficiency on the B3 metric would also provide well
for circadian response, measured on the VC(λ) function (Figure 4.4), making it an
appropriate source for daytime illumination. Light sources with CCT values around 4000K
are commonly described as ‘white’ light sources, and it may be noted that this is the CCT
value at which the ‘white’ source locus crosses the black-body locus (Figure 4.7), suggesting
that higher CCT sources with chromaticities on the ‘white’ source locus might not attract
the negative assessments accorded to the high S/P sources used in recent research studies.
The usefulness of the high retinal image resolution associated with high S/P sources has
been questioned, but it would seem reasonable to suppose that ‘white’ high S/P sources
would gain any such advantages without incurring negative assessments for appearance.
McCandless’ notion of ‘sunlight and skylight’ suggests options for attractive effects by
adding low S/P highlights to overall high S/P illumination, and the Kruithof effect points to
high S/P (or CCT) illumination gaining preference at high illuminance levels, in other
words, high CCTs for daytime and low CCTs for night time. All of this fits in with
providing illumination to coincide with the circadian cycle.
Rea’s proposal that, for general lighting practice, the shortcomings of CRI may be largely
overcome by specifying ‘Class A’ colour defines a basis for generally preferred colour
rendering. Figure 4.11 shows clearly how, for high CRI sources, gamut area (related to
colourfulness) tends to increase with CCT. While CRI relates to the ‘naturalness’ of colour
appearance, Rea’s proposal adds a new notion of ‘whiteness’, and, through including GAI
in the criteria, the appearance of ‘colourfulness’. This may, in turn, be seen to be consistent
with the ‘visual clarity’ concept, and furthermore, with the other more anecdotal concepts
observed by McCandless and Kruithof. In this way, the range of factors reviewed in this
chapter may be seen as contributing towards a reasonable and consistent understanding of
human response to light source spectrum.

Even so, a designer who wishes to have control over the appearance of a space, or
selected targets within the space, is left in a difficult situation. He or she cannot avoid
feeling poorly supported by the information currently available from the lighting industry,
and it is perhaps ironic that efforts to improve this situation tend to be resisted by the
industry on the grounds that such changes would cause confusion.
Figure 4.12 The GretagMacbeth ColorChecker colour rendition chart being examined under daylight. A viewer who
forms a clear memory image of the chart in this situation can then make comparisons with its appearance under other
sources of illumination.
My own approach has been to equip myself with a GretagMacbeth ColorChecker, and
to use this to make objective assessments of the colour characteristics of light sources. The
ColorChecker comprises 24 matt-surfaced colour samples mounted on a stiff board, and
some time needs to be spent examining it under mid-day daylight, as shown in Figure 4.12.
The bottom row is a grey scale, from full-white to full-black, and in this viewing condition
all the samples appear neutral (no hint of hue), and the steps between them appear equally
spaced. The next row up comprises primary colours, with the additive primaries to the left
and the subtractive primaries to the right, and all of them appear as fully saturated, clear
colours. The two rows above are moderate colours, some with special significance. For
example, starting from the left-hand end of the top row, the samples represent dark skin,
light skin, blue sky, foliage and so on. Explanations are given on the reverse side.
Start by gaining experience of the appearance of the ColorChecker under daylight. This
gives you a tool that enables you to objectively assess the colour characteristics of other
light sources and illumination conditions, whether you are evaluating a sample of new type

of light source or visiting a recent lighting installation. The appearance of the
ColorChecker will quickly reveal to you how your perception of colours is influenced by
the illumination. It is worth noting that under low light levels, all the colours will appear
dull and the intervals between the grey samples will appear compressed towards the darker
end. Providing that illumination is sufficient to ensure photopic adaptation, the appearance
of the primaries can be particularly revealing. While you will be accustomed to all of these
samples appearing saturated, certain light sources can cause some of them to appear
unexpectedly bright. To understand this, think back to the discussion of lamps used to
enhance the appearance of various types of food displays. More generally, look carefully at
the appearances of the moderate colours, noting that people are particularly sensitive about
skin colours. When people complain about colour rendering, the most commonly occurring
comments are of the ‘They make you look awful!’ type.
It is in this way that a lighting designer may select lamp types for various applications
with confidence that the effect on the appearances of coloured room surfaces and objects
will be in accord with the overall design objectives. From the foregoing discussion, it is
clear that people have different expectations for daytime and night time illumination, and
where the aim is to satisfy those expectations, the designer should provide for coincidence
with the circadian cycle. Of course, circumstances will occur where the intention is to
achieve alertness and visual stimulation when people would naturally be inclined to
restfulness, and for these applications the intensity and duration of bright light exposure
needs to be given consideration. Meanwhile it is to be expected that developments in light
source technology will provide designers with increased options, and it is to be hoped that
the lighting industry will respond with more useful product information. In particular, that
it will recognise that while the needs of specifiers may be best met by familiar, single figure
values, designers’ needs are more complex. They need information that addresses the
foregoing issues, and this is not met by catalogue pages presenting brightly coloured
spectral power distribution curves.

References
Bellchambers, H.E. and A.C. Godby (1972). Illumination, colour rendering and visual
clarity. Lighting Research and Technology, 4: 104–106.
Berman, S.M., G. Fein, D.I. Jewett and F. Ashford (1993). Luminance-controlled pupil size
affects Landolt C task performance. Journal of the Illuminating Engineering
Society, 22: 150–165.
Boyce, P.R. (2014). Human Factors in Lighting, Third edition. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press.
Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage (CIE) (1987). International Lighting
Vocabulary, item 845-02-59, CIE 17.4-1987.
—— (1994). Method of Measuring and Specifying Colour Rendering, CIE 13.3-1994.
Davis, W. and Y. Ohno (2004). Towards an improved color rendering metric. Proceedings
of the 5th International Conference on Solid State Lighting, SPIE 5941.
Fairchild, M.D. (2004). Color Appearance Models, Second edition. Chichester: John
Wiley & Sons.
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) (2000). The IESNA Lighting
Handbook, Ninth Edition.
Kruithof, A.A. (1941). Tubular luminescence lamps for general illumination. Philips
Technical Review, 6(2): 65–73.
McCandless, S.R. (1958). A Method of Lighting for the Stage (4th edn). New York:
Theatre Art Books.
Rea, M.S. (2013). Value Metrics for Better Lighting. Bellingham, WA: SPIE Press.
Rea, M.S. and J.P. Freyssinier (2013). White lighting for residential applications. Lighting
Research and Technology, 45(3): 331–344.
Rea, M.S., L.C. Radetsky and J.D. Bullough (2011). Towards a model of outdoor scene
brightness. Lighting Research and Technology, 43(1): 7–30.
Van Kemanade, J.T.C. and P.J.M. van der Burgt (1988). Light sources and colour rendering:
Additional information to the Ra index. Proceedings of the CIBSE National Lighting
Conference, Cambridge, UK, pp. 133–143.
Wei, M., K.W. Houser, B. Orland, D.H. Lang, N. Ram, M.J. Sliwinski and M. Bose (2014).
Field study of office worker responses to fluorescent lighting of different CCT
and lumen output. J. Environ. Psychol., http://dx.doi.org/10.1016//j.envp,2014.04.009

5
Spatial Illumination Distributions

Chapter summary
The appearances of three-dimensional objects are influenced by the lighting patterns that
are generated through interactions between the objects and the spatial distribution of
illumination. As noted in Chapter 1, there are three types of these object lighting patterns;
shading, highlight and shadow patterns; and they appear superimposed over each object’s
surface in response to the optical characteristics of the objects and the photometric
characteristics of the surrounding light field. The light field is also examined in terms of
perceived characteristics, and the concepts of the ‘flow’ and the ‘sharpness’ of
illumination are discussed. These characteristics may have the effects of revealing, or
enhancing or subduing the appearance of selected object attributes. The perceived strength
of the ‘flow’ of light relates to the vector/scalar ratio (VSR) and its perceived direction
corresponds with the vector direction. The highlight contrast potential (HCP) gives an
indication of the extent to which lighting may provide for perceived ‘sharpness’.

Three-dimensional distributions of illumination
In Chapter 1, we noted that the green cylinder interacted with the illumination distribution
to produce lighting patterns that appeared superimposed onto the surface of the cylinder
and the checker board (Figure 1.1), and these patterns not only affected the cylinder’s
appearance, but they influenced our whole understanding of the surrounding light field
and the objects within it. In this chapter we are going to look closely at these lighting
patterns, and we are going to identify the three-dimensional characteristics of illumination
that cause them.

The three object lighting patterns
The three objects shown in Figure 5.1 are all interacting with the same surrounding light
field, but the object lighting patterns produced by those interactions are strikingly
different. The matt white sphere has formed a graded shading pattern of varying surface
illuminance related to surface orientation, and in this respect, the pattern follows from the
cosine law of illumination. Completely different in appearance is the highlight pattern
generated by the glossy black sphere, which is formed by specular images of the higher
luminance elements in this space that are also the sources of illumination. Different again
is the shadow pattern produced by the peg-on-a-disc, where the shadow cast by the peg is
clearly revealed on the disc’s surface (Cuttle, 1971).
Figure 5.1 The triple object lighting patterns device. This device separates as far as possible the three object lighting
patterns. The matt white sphere shows the shading pattern; the glossy black sphere shows the highlight pattern; and the
peg-on-a-disc shows the shadow pattern.
Each of these lighting patterns tells us something different about the three-dimensional
light field surrounding these objects. Look carefully at the matt white sphere. No part of its
surface is unlit, but there is a distinct bias. If I could hand you a small arrow, you would be
able to place it on the image to coincide with your perception of the direction of the ‘flow’

of light. It would not matter how many sources of illumination are present, always you
would perceive just one ‘flow’ direction. You might also describe the apparent strength of
the ‘flow’ as being distinct, but not strong. Now turn to the glossy black sphere. Its
appearance is dominated by a single ‘highlight’ image, and if you look carefully you will be
able to make out the shape of this light source’s outline and recognise that it is a window.
No other light source is bright enough to register a noticeable ‘highlight’, and so you may
conclude that the window is the sole source of direct illumination. Finally, look at the
shadow pattern formed on the peg-on-a-disc. Its direction coincides with the appearance of
the ‘flow’ direction, and like the shading pattern, it is only moderately strong. Also, it is
quite softy defined, as this lighting lacks ‘sharpness’.
You will have worked out by now that you have been looking at lighting patterns
generated by the light field in a small, or moderately sized, room with fairly light
(reflective) room surfaces, lit by a single side-window. This is a pretty detailed description
of the location and the light field within it. What would be the effect if we leave the triple-
object in its present position but change the lighting?
Figure 5.1 reappears as Figure 5.2(a), and below it, you see the effect of blanking off the
window and introducing a spotlight in Figure 5.2(b), and then turning off the spotlight and
adding six small display lights in Figure 5.2(c). The two columns of photos across to the
right show the effects of these lighting conditions on the appearance of two groups of
objects. The first column shows a group of familiar domestic items, and we should
appreciate that, even for objects that we are unlikely to select for display treatment, their
appearance can be substantially affected by lighting. In fact, the appearance of everything
that we see, pick up and make use of is affected by the object lighting patterns formed by
its surrounding light field. Figure 5.2(d) shows the garlic pot and two capsicums in the
daylight situation, which has a distinct ‘flow’ of light without ‘sharpness’. The effect of the
single spotlight in Figure 5.2(e) is to reproduce quite closely the ‘flow’ direction while
somewhat increasing the ‘flow’ strength, but the really noticeable change is the presence of
‘sharpness’, revealed by the highlight (even more noticeable in real life than it appears in
this image) and shading patterns. In Figure 5.2(f), the ‘flow’ revealed by the shading
pattern on the garlic pot has almost vanished, but the effect of ‘sharpness’ due to the
lighting is still highly evident.
The second column of photos shows some objects that we might put on display to attract
interest, and here the object attributes include transparency, iridescence, and dichromatic
colours. These three figures, 5.2(g), (h) and (i), call for careful attention. How would you
approach the task of providing display lighting for this group of objects? At first it might
seem that almost anything could work, but it should be noted that the three object lighting
patterns, being the shading, highlight and shadow patterns, are separately identifiable and
it is the different balances of these patterns that determine the spatial lighting effects.
Careful observation of these images shows how the attributes of any one of these objects
may be revealed, enhanced or subdued by the balance of object lighting patterns created by

their interactions with the light field.
To summarise, we have identified three object lighting patterns:
The Shading Pattern: Due to the interaction of an object’s three-dimensional form with a ‘flow’ of light. The pattern
is a variation of surface illuminance due to changing incidence of light with surface orientation which influences the
appearance of object form and texture. The lighting metrics that relate to the ‘flow’ are the vector/scalar

Figure 5.2 For the three lighting conditions described in the text; the first column of photos shows the lighting patterns
formed on the triple lighting patterns device, and the next two columns show the lighting patterns on a group of domestic
objects and a group of display objects.
ratio (VSR), which corresponds with the perceived strength of ‘flow’, and the vector direction, which corresponds
with the perceived direction of ‘flow’.
The Highlight Pattern: Due to specular reflections of relatively high luminance objects, particularly light sources,
that appear superimposed on an object’s surface. There has to be some level of surface gloss for a highlight pattern to
be evident, and either polished metals or shiny, dark coloured surfaces give maximum effect. This pattern influences
the appearance of gloss, sheen or lustre, and may be described as an aspect of the ‘sharpness’ of lighting. The metric
that relates to these effects is the highlight contrast potential (HCP).
The Shadow Pattern: Due to a shadow caster projecting a shadow onto a receiving surface in a directional light field.
The appearance of this lighting pattern may be described in terms of both the strength and ‘sharpness’ of cast
shadows, and it may influence the perception of object form, texture and/or location. Perceived shadow strength is
associated with the VSR, and ‘sharpness’ with the HCP.

The concept of object lighting patterns is readily understood by non-lighting people and
can form a useful basis for discussion when lighting designers are talking about how their
proposals will affect the appearance of the various objects that will form significant
components of the design. Designers are usually able to communicate their ideas using
these concepts without going into details, such as explaining the precise difference between
a shading pattern and a shadow pattern. However, while non-lighting people will perceive
the lighting patterns entirely as a visual effect, for designers, there is a deeper insight.
Every lighting pattern is recognised to be a three-dimensional interaction between a
particular type of surface and a particular type of incident light. The understanding that
there are just three types of object lighting patterns – shading, highlight and shadow – and
two lighting characteristics of concern – ‘flow’ and ‘sharpness’ – provides powerful
concepts for devising distributions of light that respond to space, form and material.
To appreciate how these concepts might be applied in the real world, we will take a look
at the lighting for an up-market retail store. QELA offers high couture fashion in the
setting of an exclusive art gallery, and is located in Doha, on the Pearl, which is a man-
made archipelago off the coast of Qatar. The entrance from a shopping mall gives no view
to the interior, giving a sense of entering into a private zone. The initial view of the central
atrium, shown in Figure 5.3, with its freestanding staircase connecting the two floors, has
been designed to create a strong visual impact. Here, selected displays of beautiful
accessories are presented within the setting of an art gallery, and all of this contained by
the curved forms of the architecture and the overarching domed ceiling.
The design brief had stated that “merchandise was to stand out from the ambient effect
with highly controlled accent lighting”. The lighting designers, Gary Campbell and
Tommaso Gimigliano of dpa lighting design, proceeded to devise separate lighting
solutions specifically for each aspect of the overall design. In the interests of controllability
and energy efficiency, it was decided that lighting throughout the store was to be LED-
based and dimmable, although some exceptions were made for the jewellery displays and
decorative fittings.

Figure 5.3 The striking first view of the interior of the QELA boutique, Doha, where high quality accessories are
presented in the setting of an art gallery, calling for a variety of lighting characteristics. Interior design by UXUS Design,
Amsterdam; Photography by Adrian Haddad; Lighting by dpa lighting design.
The immediate impression is one of a bright and lively space. A MRSE level of at least 300
lm/m2 is required to give this sense of a distinctly bright space, and it can be seen that
while there are areas of white or near-white surfaces, overall reflectance values are varied
and include some quite dark surfaces. Note particularly the floor, which although highly
polished, is nonetheless highly absorptive, which will have the effect of increasing the
perceived strength of the downward ‘flow’ of light. However, the high MRSE value
requires a high level of first reflected flux (FRF), and to achieve this without wasting light
calls for luminaire flux to be directed onto high reflectance (low absorptance) surfaces.
Taking a closer look at the central area, Figure 5.4 shows how direct flux is strongly
concentrated onto the displays. This central zone is lit from the ceiling above the atrium,
and this involves throws of nine or ten metres. The ‘flow’ of light is strongly downwards
and its ‘sharpness’ creates glittering highlight patterns on the polished metals and richly
glossy surfaces of the luxury goods on display, as well as crisp, sharply defined shadow
patterns. These lighting patterns are set into contrast by the display podiums, which lack
any surface features that respond to ‘sharpness’. Their smooth, matt surfaces reveal
shading patterns, but not highlight patterns.
A quite different lighting distribution is provided for the background to these displays,
which is formed by the perimeter walls and the artworks supported on them. These are
washed by angled overhead lighting, which delivers much of the FRF for the space. As for

the domed ceiling, these are surfaces for which distinct lighting patterns are not wanted.
Moving into the smaller surrounding areas, even more strongly accentuated display
lighting effects are achieved on the mannequins as a result of the much reduced ambient
illumination, as shown in Figures 5.5 and 5.6. ‘Flow’ directions are still vertically
downwards, and this lighting creates particularly strong shading and highlight patterns.
Figure 5.4 QELA – The display lighting in the central area has strong downward ‘flow’, with ‘sharpness’ creating crisp
shadow and highlight patterns, set against a background of artwork displays. Interior design by UXUS Design,
Amsterdam; Photography by Adrian Haddad; Lighting by dpa lighting design.
Some subtle changes are revealed upon ascending the staircase to the upper level. Warm
white illumination is used throughout the store, and, as shown in Figure 5.7, this sense of
warmth is reinforced by the flames of simulated open fire. To the left of this view, the
jewellery displays receive special treatment. The freestanding podiums include integrated
fibre optic downlights in the slim polished chrome ring at the top, and these are powered
by metal halide projectors adjustable for both intensity and colour. ‘Sharpness’ is essential
for the strong highlight patterns that give jewellery its sparkle, and cool white illumination
is best for viewing silver and diamond pieces.
LED sources, ceiling recessed and track mounted, are used extensively, and all may be
dimmed by remote devices. In addition, staff can adjust display luminaires for direction,
both pan and tilt, as well as for intensity, from an iPad, giving them free rein to achieve
creative lighting effects.

Clearly the ability to envisage lighting in three dimensions is crucial to understanding
how to evolve design proposals to create light fields to interact with the surfaces and
objects that make up our surroundings. The three lighting patterns provide a useful basis
not only for describing visual effects that a proposed lighting distribution will achieve, but
also for thinking through the characteristic of lighting that will do the job. For those
proposals to be effective, they need to have photometric validity.
Figure 5.5 QELA – In this display area, which is adjacent to the central area, the lower mean room surface exitance
(MRSE) level has the effect of strengthening the shading patterns. Interior design by UXUS Design, Amsterdam;
Photography by Adrian Haddad; Lighting by dpa lighting design.

Figure 5.6 QELA – In this display area, the mannequin appears isolated by the strong shading pattern generated by the
selective lighting. Interior design by UXUS Design, Amsterdam; Photography by Adrian Haddad; Lighting by dpa lighting
design.

Figure 5.7 QELA – On the upper floor, the ‘fire’ on the right matches the warm white illumination used throughout the
boutique, except for the jewellery display area on the left, where the colour temperature as well as the intensity of the
display lighting can be adjusted to suit the items on display. Interior design by UXUS Design, Amsterdam; Photography
by Adrian Haddad; Lighting by dpa lighting design.

Three-dimensional illumination distributions
There are distinct differences between measuring illumination at a point on a surface and
at a point in space. The CIE (International Commission on Illumination) defines
illuminance in terms of incidence at a point on a surface, and the familiar cosine-corrected
illumination meter is designed specifically for measuring that quantity. The CIE definition
simplifies illumination into a two-dimensional concept, but this has not been achieved
without consequence.
It is conventional for illumination to be measured, calculated and specified in terms of
illuminance on two-dimensional planes, such as visual task planes and wall-to-wall
horizontal working planes, and this is severely limiting for design options (Lam, 1977).
Conversely, the ‘flow’ of light is a three-dimensional concept, and it involves quite
different thinking about lighting. Instead of planes, think of the volume of a space
comprising a light field that fully occupies the space, and three-dimensional objects within
the space interacting with the light field to generate object lighting patterns that appear
superimposed on their surfaces. The appearance of ‘flow’ is made evident by shading
patterns and by the strength of shadow patterns, and may be perceived to vary in both
strength and direction throughout the space. Leaving aside ‘sharpness’ for the moment, we
need to be able to measure the spatial distribution of illumination at any chosen point
within the space in order to examine this effect.
Consider the point P as a point in space with its location defined by the three mutually
perpendicular axes, x, y, and z, as shown in Figure 5.8. Figure 5.9 shows a section through P
in the plane of the z axis and the point source S1, which is the sole source of illumination at
P. A solid plane passing through P is rotated for maximum illuminance on surface A, and
for this condition, the distance shown at P to the perimeter of the illumination solid is
proportional to EA(max). Rotation of the plane from this direction causes EA to reduce in
proportion to the cosine of the rotation angle, so that when the angle exceeds 90º, EA = 0.
In this way, the circular form in Figure 5.9 can be envisaged as an illumination solid that
forms a three-dimensional representation of the distribution of EA, and for this special case
of the illumination distribution due to a single point source, the illumination solid is a
three-dimensional cosine distribution, represented by a sphere whose surface passes
through the reference point, and for which a diameter from the reference point coincides
with the direction of the source. It can be seen that the illumination distribution about P is
totally asymmetric, so that if a small three-dimensional object is placed at P, one side will
be illuminated and the other side will be in total darkness. This illumination difference on
opposite sides of an object is of interest. If, instead of recording the distribution of EA, we
record the distribution of (EA – EB), that is to say, the difference on opposite sides of the
plane, the solid would be unchanged because when surface A is facing away from S1, (EA –
EB) would have a negative value.

Figure 5.8 The point P is located at the intersection of the x, y and z orthogonal axes. The x and y axes are in the
horizontal plane, and the z axis is vertical. Unless otherwise specified, it is convenient to assume a direction of view from
the y-direction (‘eye’ direction), so that x is ‘a-cross’. While any other view direction may be possible, this simple
convention tends to avoid errors.
Figure 5.9 The three-dimensional illumination distribution about point P due to the small source S1 is defined by a

spherical illumination solid, where the length of EA(max) is proportional to the illuminance on surface A when normal to
the direction of S1.
Figure 5.10 shows the effect of adding a second point source S2. In this case, the blue
contours show parts of the illumination solids for the individual sources, but where the
solids coincide, the value of (EA – EB) is shown by the red contour. The values of EA max
and for S1 and S2 are shown as vectors, and the value of the resultant vector, (EA – EB)max,
is given by completing the vector parallelogram. It can be seen that the red contour is
similar to the illumination solid for the single point source, meaning that the distribution of
illuminance difference on opposite sides of the plane is identical to that produced by a
point source. If this happens when we add a second source, it will happen when we add a
third, or fourth … or an infinite number of sources. We have established the point that at
any illuminated point in space, the distribution of illuminance difference in opposite
directions (EA – EB) may be represented as an illumination vector. This concept is
attributed to Professor A.A. Gershun, whose book, The Light Field, was published (in
Russian) in 1936.
In Figure 5.11, we move from hypothetical situations to a real situation. The blue contour
is typical of an illumination solid that might occur in an indoor location illuminated
predominantly from overhead, but with a sideways bias as might occur near a dark
coloured wall. The contour is smooth because it is the sum of spherical solids due to every
luminous element surrounding the measurement point. Illumination solid contours cannot
display sharp peaks or troughs. The red contour is the distribution of (EA – EB), and the
plane passing through P has been rotated as previously, but this time the aim has been to
find the direction that gives maximum illuminance difference on opposite sides of the

Figure 5.10 The illumination solid is now the sum of component solids due to sources S1 and S2, but the distribution of
EA – EB is a spherical solid, identical in form, but not magnitude or direction, to the illumination solid due to S1 alone.
Figure 5.11 The illumination solid at a point in a space where light arrives from every direction, but predominately from
overhead although with a sideways bias. Despite the irregularity of the illumination solid, the distribution EA – EB is

defined by a spherical solid identical in form to the illumination solid produced previously by S1.
plane, which may not coincide with the maximum value of the illumination solid contour.
Rotation of the plane from this direction would cause (EA – EB) to reduce in proportion to
the cosine of the rotation angle, so that when the rotation angle equals 90º, EA = EB. The
distribution of (EA – EB) is a three-dimensional cosine distribution identical in form to the
illumination solid due to a single point source. As shown in Figure 5.8, the x, y axis lies in
the horizontal plane, and the z axis is vertical.
We are now in a position to analyse the illumination distribution about a point in space
into its two components. In Figure 5.12 the maximum value of (EA – EB) and the direction
in which this value occurs define the illumination vector E. For any plane passing through
P, the illuminance difference on opposite surfaces equals the vector component on the axis
normal to the plane. For the horizontal plane through P, E(z) = E(z+) – E(z-), and similarly, for
a vertical plane through P normal to the x axis, the magnitude of the illumination vector
component is E(x). Note that the symbol for a vector is shown in bold type, and while this
distinction is clearly indicated in print, in manuscript it is made by a small arrow over the
E. Note that a vector is defined in terms of both magnitude and direction. The distribution
of the vector component is defined by the three-dimensional vector solid, which, as we
have noted, is always a spherical cosine distribution with its surface passing through P and
its diameter equal to the vector magnitude.

Figure 5.12 The magnitude and direction of (EA – EB)max defines the illumination vector, which is depicted as an arrow
acting towards the point. The vector in turn is defined by its components on the x, y, and z axes. The vector solid accounts
entirely for the asymmetry of the illumination solid.
In Figure 5.13, the vector solid has been subtracted from the illumination solid and what
remains is a three-dimensional solid that is divided by the axis normal to the vector
direction. This solid has point symmetry about P, that is to say, for any axis through P, the
distance to the contour of this solid in one direction equals the distance in the opposite
direction. This is the symmetric solid, and while it may depart from uniformity, the
illuminance due to the symmetric solid ~E in any direction from P is equal to ~E in the
opposite direction. If a plane passing through P is rotated, for every orientation, the
illuminance values on opposite sides of the plane due to the symmetric solid will be equal.
In other words, it is the solid for which EA – EB = 0 for every orientation.
Figure 5.13 If the vector solid is subtracted from the illumination solid, what is left is a solid that is symmetrical in every
direction about the point. This is the symmetric solid.
In this way, we arrive at the following conclusions:
1. That at any illuminated point in space, the three-dimensional distribution of
illuminance may be defined by an illumination solid.
2. The illumination solid is the sum of two component solids: the vector solid and
the symmetric solid.
3. The vector solid is a spherical cosine distribution, and is defined by the magnitude

and direction of the illumination vector E. The illuminance distribution at the
reference point P represented by the vector solid is identical to the distribution
that would be produced by a single compact source located in the vector direction.
4. The symmetric solid has the property that, for any plane passing through P, it
produces equal illuminance ~E on opposite sides.
5. The visible characteristics of the illuminance distribution over the unobstructed
surface of a three-dimensional object that is small in relation to the surrounding
light field may be analysed as the sum of distributions due to the vector and
symmetric components, one being entirely asymmetrical about the measurement
point, and the other entirely symmetrical.
6. Two special cases may be noted:
For a single point source, the illumination solid is coincident with the
vector solid, and the symmetric component ~E = 0.
For an integrating sphere, the illumination solid is coincident with the
symmetric solid, comprising ideally a spherical distribution centred at P,
and the illumination vector E = 0.
To all of the above, I wish to add a personal observation. The concept that the spatial
distribution of illumination at any illuminated point in space comprises two components –
one of which is entirely asymmetric about the point and could be produced by a compact
source in the direction of the vector, while the other is entirely symmetric about the point –
is not intuitive. It emerges from a mathematical analysis, and is, in my opinion, the most
remarkable finding to emerge from the study of illumination engineering. It provides a
unique design insight, and if you look for it, you can see it.

Illumination solids and the ‘flow’ of light
Look back to Figure 5.2, and note particularly the changing appearance of the matt white
sphere in the three lighting conditions. This object forms a different shading pattern with
each variation of the light field and, every time, the appearance of the shading pattern can
be described in terms of the apparent strength and direction of the ‘flow’ of light. Equally,
it may be described in terms of different relationships of the asymmetric and symmetric
components of the illumination solid. We have here the basis of a means for assessing
lighting according to its potential to influence the appearance of three-dimensional objects
through the creation of shading patterns, which in turn, may be described in terms of the
‘flow’ of light.
If an object is small enough in relation to its surrounding environment for us to be able
to examine its illumination by considering the illumination distribution at a point, then we
can think of every element visible from the point to be contributing its own mini-vector at
the point. We have two alternative ways of summing these mini-vectors. If we sum them
individually, we have the illumination solid. If we sum their opposite differences, the sum
of these individual vectors is always a single vector that defines the magnitude and
direction of the (asymmetric) vector solid. The difference between the illumination solid
and the vector solid is the symmetric solid. It should be apparent that if the vector solid is
large in relation to the symmetric solid, then the ‘flow’ of light will appear to be strong. It
might seem, therefore, that the ratio of asymmetric to symmetric solids would provide a
useful index of this effect, but it would have a range from zero to infinity, which is
inconvenient. In mathematics, a vector quantity is one that has both magnitude and
direction, while a quantity that has magnitude only is termed a scalar. It was with this in
mind that J.A. Lynes proposed the concept of scalar illuminance, which is defined in terms
of the average illuminance over the whole surface of a small sphere centred at a reference
point (Lynes et al., 1966). It follows that for any illumination solid, the scalar illuminance
will be the sum of contributions from the vector and symmetric solids. The contribution
from the symmetric solid will be equal to the symmetric illuminance ~E, and from Figure
5.14 is can be seen that the asymmetric solid will contribute one-quarter of the vector
magnitude, so that scalar illuminance:
This enables us to specify the apparent strength of the ‘flow’ of light in terms of the
vector/scalar ratio:
VSR has a scale from zero (the integrating sphere condition) to four (the point source in a
black environment). Research studies in a face-to-face situation indicated preference for

VSR within the range 1.2 to 1.8 (Cuttle et al., 1967) and this finding has more recently been
corroborated by Protzman and Houser (2005). Table 5.1 gives an approximate indication of
how assessments of the perceived strength of ‘flow’ are likely to vary with the VSR.
Figure 5.14 In (a), a small source S projects luminous flux of F lm onto a disc of radius r, producing a surface illuminance
E = F/(π.r2). In (b), the disc is replaced by a sphere of radius r, giving a surface illuminance E = F/(4π.r2).
Regardless of the number of light sources present, the asymmetric component resolves
into a cosine distribution defined by the illumination vector, and providing that the VSR is
sufficient for the ‘flow’ direction to be apparent, its direction coincides with the vector
direction. There are two alternative ways of defining the vector direction. One is to specify
vector altitude (α) and azimuth (φ) angles, where Figure 5.15(a) shows:
There is more than one way of specifying the azimuth angle, and Figure 5.15(b) shows φ
measured anticlockwise from the y-axis, as this is often taken to represent the direction of
view. Care needs to be taken to cope with the full 360 degrees of rotation.
Table 5.1 Vector/scalar ratio and the perceived ‘flow’ of light

Figure 5.15 (a): Vertical section through P showing illumination vector altitude angle α, and (b): Horizontal section
through P showing azimuth angle φ of the horizontal vector component.
Another way is to specify the vector direction in terms of a unit vector, which assumes
the vector to have unity value and expresses the direction in the form (e(x), e(y), e(z)), where
the unit vector component on the x axis:
and similarly for e(y) and e(z). It can be seen that each of these unit vector values does in
fact specify the cosine of the angle that the vector forms with the axis. While care needs to
be taken over the signs of the unit vector components, this concise form of notation is
recommended as largely avoiding the confusions that are likely to occur when dealing with
angles greater than 2π.
The previously cited research into preferences for face-to-face viewing (Cuttle et al.,
1967) found distinct preference for vector altitudes in the range 15 to 45 degrees, or 0.25 <
e(z) < 0.7. Even more distinct was the identification of a downward ‘flow’ of light as the
least preferred condition, for which α = 90 degrees and e = (0,0,1). For face-to-face viewing
situations where overhead lighting is unavoidable, VSR should be kept to a low value.
In this way, the characteristics of a three-dimensional distribution of illumination, as it
may affect the perceived strength and direction of the ‘flow’ of light, can be specified in
terms of simple photometric quantities. Procedures for predicting and measuring these
quantities are described in the following chapter.

The ‘sharpness’ of illumination
While ‘flow’ relates to the appearance of the shading patterns and the density of the
shadow patterns, ‘sharpness’ relates to the appearance of the highlight patterns and the
crispness of the shadow patterns. Look back to Figure 5.2, and appreciate how differently
these two lighting concepts appear.
A thought experiment
Once again, you must clear your mind of what you expect to experience and let your
imagination take control. In Figure 5.16, a surface is illuminated by a diffusing disc light
source. The illuminance at P is given by the disc source formula (Simons and Bean, 2001):
The subtence angle of the source, α, may have any value from a degree or two, for which
the source would be close to the hypothetical point source, up to 180 degrees, at which
point the source becomes a uniform diffusing hemisphere. At the point P, we place the
comparison panel shown in Figure 5.17, which compares two materials, a sample of black
glass and a matt white surface. This panel was originally proposed by J.A. Worthy (1990) to
explain his own research into this aspect of lighting.
Imagine that as we vary α, the source luminance adjusts to maintain the illuminance EP
at a constant value of 100 lux. The appearance of the matt white surface will not change
while we make this variation because its luminance remains constant, but the appearance
of the black glass sample will undergo radical changes. If we start from the luminous
hemisphere condition (α = 180 degrees), the glass appears to have a grey cast over it. As α
is reduced, this cast shrinks to become an image of the disc source, and around the image
we see the blackness of the glass. As the image continues to shrink, it increases in
brightness until it becomes an intensely bright, small dot that appears sharply defined
against the blackness of the glass. The lighting now has ‘sharpness’, and this is revealed by
the appearance of the glass, not the white disc. This effect is similar to the highlight
patterns on the white and black spheres shown in Figure 5.2(a) to (c).

Figure 5.16 The point P is on a surface, and is illuminated by a disc-shaped source that is normal to the surface and of
angular subtence α.
Figure 5.17 This comparison surface has two mounted samples that respond differently to the disc source. After Worthy
(1990).
If we rearrange the disc source formula to 
, Figure 5.18 shows how the value of
LS has to be varied to maintain EP = 100 lx. It can be seen that a relatively low luminance
value satisfies over a substantial angular range, but as the source becomes smaller than
about 30 degrees, its luminance has to be increased quite sharply. However, it is when we
get down to the really small sources that the source luminance has to escalate in order to
provide the required illuminance, as shown in Figure 5.19.
It can be seen that when α = 180 degrees, LS = 100/π, or approximately 31 cd/m2.
Reducing α to 90 degrees requires LS to be doubled, but this is still a large source. When α
comes down to 30 degrees, LS has to be increased to 475 cd/m2, and at 10 degrees it has to
be over 4000 cd/m2. However, it is when we get to a source subtending less than 10 degrees

that the luminance value really climbs. A source subtending just 1.0 degree has to have a
luminance of nearly half a million cd/m2 to deliver just 100 lux.
Figure 5.18 As the subtence of a large disc source is reduced, the source luminance required to maintain an illuminance
value of 100 lux increases rapidly as subtence falls below 30 degrees.
Figure 5.19 For small sources, the increase in luminance required to maintain 100 lux increases dramatically for subtence
angles less than 3 degrees.
Imagine now that you want to deliver a given illuminance Etgt onto a three-dimensional
target, and you have selected a location for the luminaire at distance D. The required

source luminous intensity IS = Etgt × D2 cd (for a two-dimensional target you will need to
take account of the angle of incidence), so you scroll through the luminaire manufacturers’
websites looking for a spotlight with suitable performance. While most manufacturers will
give you intensity data, they are unlikely to give source luminance values, but clearly this
will affect substantially the perceived ‘sharpness’, so you will need to check this for
yourself. From the source dimensions, work out the luminous area AS projected towards
the object, and then the source luminance LS = IS/AS cd/m2. This is your first step towards
assessing the potential for ‘sharpness’.

Highlight contrast potential (HCP)
Generally, smooth dielectric (non-electroconducting) materials have specular components
of their total reflectance of around 4 per cent (although for electroconducting materials,
such as polished metals, it can be much higher). Typically then, the luminance of the
reflected highlight seen on a glossy surface Lhl = 0.04 LS, where LS is the source luminance.
The visibility of the highlight depends primarily on the luminance contrast of the highlight
against the background on which it is seen.
The highlight contrast potential (HCP) is a measure of the extent to which a light source
may provide a visible highlight. For this we ignore light that may be reflected from the
surrounding environment (the highest possible highlight contrast will occur in a black
environment where S is the only source of light) and consider a dielectric target surface tgt
that has a reflectance ρtgt (which includes the 0.04 specular component) illuminated by
source S, then the highlight luminance:
Lhl = 0.04LS
And the luminance of the target surface:
Applying the disc source formula as previously,
So,
Then Highlight Contrast Potential:
Note that although LS does not appear in this formula, the source subtence angle is in there.

If there are no other sources of light, then the only other factor determining HCP is target
reflectance. In reality, other sources of light will be present and they will have the effect of
reducing the highlight contrast, so that for a given light source, this is an expression for its
maximum potential to provide highlight contrast. Figure 5.20 shows how the
conspicuousness of highlights is dependent on low diffuse reflectance, such as the black
glass sample in the comparison panel, as well as small angular size of the light source.
Figure 5.20 Highlight contrast potential HLC for three values of target reflectance, representing low, medium and high
surface lightness, and a range of source angular subtence angles.
General lighting practice seeks to avoid specular reflections, identifying them as ‘veiling
reflections’, but designers should distinguish between highlights and veiling reflections.
When we considered the appearance of the comparison panel (Figure 5.17) in the thought
exercise, the effect of the large source was to create a grey cast over the glossy black
surface, reducing its blackness but giving no hint of its glossiness. This was a veiling
reflection. However, when the source subtence was reduced, the specular reflection became
a highlight pattern, seen in contrast against the undiminished blackness of the glass. If it
had the effect of reducing the visibility of surface detail, this could easily be avoided by
head movement, and meanwhile, the smooth, shiny surface of the glass would be given
visual emphasis. The ability to create highlight patterns when and where required is an
important skill in the lighting designer’s toolkit. Again, mathematical analysis of a readily
observed characteristic of lighting gives insight into its occurrence that is not intuitive.
That we have an expression for HCP does not mean that target values should be set, or

that we have another factor to be calculated and measured. What matters is that we are
able to identify the physical parameters on which HCP depends, and this enables designers
to exercise control over the aspects of lighting that are influential. In the section entitled
‘The three object lighting patterns’ (page 66) it was noted how the appearance of some
objects can be brought alive by highlight patterns, while others benefit from their complete
absence. The usefulness of HCP lies in enabling design decisions to be guided by
understanding of the conditions that govern the ‘sharpness’ of lighting.

The appearance of shadow patterns
Shadow patterns might seem to be the simplest of the three types of lighting patterns to
come to terms with, but this is not so. While the perceived strength and direction of a
shadow pattern relates to the VSR and the vector direction, its ‘sharpness’ relates to the
HCP. In this way, the appearance of the shadow patterns within a space vary with both the
overall impression of the ‘flow’ of light and the perceived ‘sharpness’ of the illumination.
Look once more at Figure 5.2, and note the role of ‘sharp’ shadow patterns, both those
cast onto objects and those cast onto the background, in creating the appearance of depth
and a sense of ‘crispness’ within the overall scene. As has been discussed, achieving these
effects may support design objectives, as in Figure 5.4, or the situation may call for their
avoidance, as in Figure 5.7. It is all a matter of being able to visualise the space and its
objects in light, and being able to control lighting patterns to reveal, or to subdue or to
emphasise surface attributes.
Figure 5.21 shows the formation of the penumbra, the extent of which is inversely
related to the perceived ‘sharpness’ of a shadow pattern. Meanwhile, the apparent density
of the umbra is determined by the VSR, and in this way we can see how the concepts of the
three object lighting patterns – the shading, highlight and shadow patterns – are concepts
that can readily be visualised and discussed with clients and other design professionals. On
the other hand, the concepts of ‘flow’ and ‘sharpness’ of illumination provide means for
describing illumination in terms of its potential to create object lighting patterns, and as
such, they can enable members of a design team to build a shared understanding of three-
dimensional light fields that fill spaces and influence appearances of everything within it.
That both of these concepts – ‘flow’ and ‘sharpness’ – can be specified in terms of
photometric concepts – vector/scalar ratio, vector direction, and highlight contrast
potential – enables them to be described with confidence that they will be provided. The
means for doing this are described in the next chapter.

Figure 5.21 Light sources of smaller subtence angle produce less penumbra, increasing the ‘sharpness’ of the lighting. The
perceived density of the umbra is determined by the strength of the ‘flow’ of light.

References
Cuttle, C. (1971). Lighting patterns and the flow of light. Lighting Research and
Technology, 3(3): 171–189.
Cuttle, C., W.B. Valentine, J.A. Lynes and W. Burt (1967). Beyond the working plane.
Proceedings of the 16th Session of the CIE. Washington DC, Paper P67–12.
Gershun, A.A. (1939). The light field. (Translation by Moon P. G. Timoshenko.) Journal of
Maths and Physics, 18: 51–151.
Lam, W.M.C. (1977). Perception and Lighting as Formgivers for Architecture. New
York: McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Lynes, J.A., W. Burt, G.K. Jackson and C. Cuttle (1966). The flow of light into buildings.
Transactions of the Illuminating Engineering Society (London), 31(3): 65–91.
Protzman, J.B. and K.W. Houser (2005). On the relationship between object modeling and
the subjective response. Leukos, 2(1): 13–28.
Simons, R.H. and A.R. Bean (2001). Lighting Engineering: Applied Calculations.
Oxford: Architectural Press.
Worthy, J.A. (1990). Lighting quality and light source size. Journal of the Illuminating
Engineering Society (New York), 19(2): 142–148.

6
Delivering the Lumens

Chapter summary
Throughout this book, the aim has been that a lighting designer should develop the skill to
visualise the distribution of light within the volume of a space in terms of how it affects
people’s perceptions of both the space and the objects within it. These envisioned
distributions of light comprise reflected light, while the distributions that the designer
controls are the direct light to be provided by the lighting installation. Furthermore, they
are, for the most part, three-dimensional variations of the light field, and the concept of
cubic illumination is introduced to provide a basis for understanding them and enabling
predictive calculations. Procedures are explained for specifying lamps and luminaires of
correct performance, as well as controls to enable installations to respond to daylight
availability. Measurement procedures are described for ensuring that design objectives
have been achieved, and two Cubic Illumination spreadsheets are introduced that perform
the calculations automatically.

Lighting calculations
Lighting calculations do not solve problems. Their purpose is to enable a designer to
specify a layout of lamps, luminaires and control circuits with a reasonable level of
confidence that it will create an envisioned appearance. No matter how well thought
through the envisioned appearance might be, it will not be achieved by guesswork or
‘hoping for the best’. Lamp wattages, luminaire spacings and beam spreads need to be
correct for the distribution and balance of the lighting to look right.
Even so, some common sense needs to be applied. Photometric laboratories do, very
properly, work to high levels of precision to specify the performances of lighting products,
but while lighting designers need to have confidence in the reliability of the data that they
are working with, precision in what they provide needs to be no better than differences
that users (perhaps critical users) are likely to notice.
The aim has to be that a client who has had a lighting design proposal described in terms
of perception-based objectives will be satisfied that their expectations have been met.
Specifying and predicting performance in terms of lighting metrics, followed by checking
the actual performance levels achieved, are necessary parts of the design process, but need
not unduly concern clients.
Lighting design should not be thought of as a linear process, but nonetheless, this
chapter follows a sequence that relates, quite sensibly, to a rational design procedure.

Mean room surface exitance, MRSE
Starting from how brightly lit, or dimly lit, the space is to appear, the designer decides
upon a level of ambient illumination and specifies this in terms of mean room surface
exitance, as explained in Chapter 2 and referring to Table 2.1. The general expression is:
where FRF is first reflected flux:
and Aα is the room absorption:
where:
Es(d) = direct illuminance of surface s (lux)
As = area of surface s (m2)
ρs = reflectance of surface s
Estimating the reflectance of a surface is not as simple as it might seem. Patterned surfaces
are particularly difficult, but reasonably reliable measurements can be made by attaching
an internally blackened cardboard tube to a light meter, as shown in Figure 6.1, and taking
a reading of the surface in question, taking care to avoid specular reflections. Then,
without moving the meter, slide a sheet of white paper over the surface and take a
comparative reading. Good quality writing paper typically has a reflectance around 0.9.
Alternatively, paint manufacturers often quote reflectance values for their products, and a
paint colour swatch can be used to make matches to surface colours.
It is sometimes useful to be able to determine the equivalent reflectance of a cavity
plane, ρeq, such as that of a luminaire plane, in which case the upper walls and the ceiling
form the cavity. Start by calculating the ratio of the area of the cavity plane Acp to the area
of the cavity surfaces Acs, and the average reflectance of surfaces within the cavity, ρav,
then:
When using formula 6.3 to calculate the room absorption value, Aα, it is often convenient
to use Acp and ρeq values. After that, the total first reflected flux required to provide the
MRSE value is calculated:

This FRF value is the number of ‘first bounce’ lumens that has to be provided to achieve
the design value of MRSE, and ways of accounting for this value are explained in
‘Illumination hierarchy design’ (page 32). It needs to be noted that room surface reflectance
values are much more strongly influential in MRSE calculations than in conventional HWP
calculations, and it is important that designers work with realistic values. The bad old
practice of assuming room surface reflectance values is a recipe for disaster.
Figure 6.1 Measuring surface reflectance, using an internally blackened cardboard tube fitted over an illuminance meter.
Comparative readings are taken of the surface, avoiding specular reflections, and of a sheet of white paper.

Illumination hierarchy and target illuminance values
After selecting the design value for the ambient illumination, the lighting designer decides
upon the illumination hierarchy, which determines the distribution of illumination within
the space. This is achieved by providing direct illumination selectively onto specific
surfaces and objects, as demonstrated in Boxes 3.1 and 3.2, using the Illumination
Hierarchy spreadsheet. The schedule of TAIR values is the first crucial statement of design
objectives. The principal tool for devising this distribution is the classic inverse square
cosine law (sometimes referred to as the ‘point-to-point’ formula), which is stated as:
Where
EP = illuminance at point of incidence P (lux)
IS = luminous intensity due to light source S (candelas)
θ = angle of incidence
D = distance from source S to point P (metres)
This statement of the law is often accompanied by a diagram of the sort shown in Figure
6.2 in which the whole issue of providing direct illumination is reduced to two dimensions
and, by default, it often happens that the plane of incidence is assumed to be the horizontal
working plane.
Once we become concerned with providing illumination onto planes that people actually
look at, we are likely to find ourselves dealing with situations that are far more like Figure
6.3. Here point P is on a vertical surface which may be of any orientation, and illuminated
by a directional light source S. The location of S relative to P is determined by dimensions
X, Y and Z (which may be positive or negative according to direction), and then, depending
on circumstance, it can be convenient to think of Y as being in the ‘eye’ direction, so that X
is ‘a-cross’ and measures positive to the right and negative to the left, while on the vertical
axis, Z measures positive up and negative down. It can be handy to keep this picture in
mind as it can avoid a lot of confusion when it comes to analysing measured data.
The performance of the light source S is indicated by its distribution of luminous
intensity, IS, specified in candelas (cd), and often this can be simplified into two essential
items of performance data. These are the intensity value on the beam axis, which for
historical reasons is still often referred to as the centre beam candle power (CBCP), and the
beam angle, B, for which the beam edge is defined by the angle at which intensity drops to
50 per cent of the CBCP value. For example, if CBCP = 3000cd and B = 12º, then at 6º to
each side of the beam axis, intensity IS = 1500cd. Any light emitted outside the beam
should be regarded as ‘spill’, and blocked by louvres or baffles.

First we will consider how to use these data to calculate the illuminance EP at point P.
Then we take note that, providing the beam is conical, it forms an elliptical pattern on the
surface, with minor and major axes q′ and q″. These too we need to be able to predict,
particularly as we often need to use several light sources to build up a pattern of
overlapping ellipses to provide coverage over a target surface. Also, it needs to be kept in
mind that, following the procedures described in the foregoing chapters, the purpose may
Figure 6.2 Application of the point-to-point formula, Ep = IScosθ/D2, for determining the illuminance at point P on a
horizontal plane. IS is the beam centre luminous intensity.

Figure 6.3 Determining the illuminance at point P on a vertical plane, and the beam pattern formed on the plane. B is the
beam angle, which defines the cone over which luminous intensity equals more than 50% of IS, the CBCP value.
be to provide the direct illumination required to provide the target/ambient illuminance
ratios (TAIRs) determined for the illumination hierarchy. Keep in mind that this means that
we need to start off knowing the illuminance that is required, and the aim is to determine
the luminous intensity to be provided. As we look though suppliers’ data for suitable
luminaires, we check the suitability of potential luminaires by noting their CBCP and B
values.
Application of the inverse square law to the situation shown in Figure 6.3 calls for some
careful examination of the situation. Pythagoras’ theorem tells us that the distance D of P
from S is given by 
, but what seems a little more tricky in this three-
dimensional situation is finding the cosine of the angle of incidence, θ. This is the angle
that the beam axis forms with the y axis, which is the normal to the surface at P, so that
cosθ = Y/D. Look back to Formula 6.6, and it can be seen that we can rewrite the formula
for calculating the illuminance at P as:
Take good note of this ‘D to the 3’ expression. By eliminating cosθ we have greatly
simplified the ‘point-to-point’ calculations, and we will make use of this formula. It may be

rearranged to give the required source intensity to achieve EP:
Now we turn our attention to the elliptical beam pattern formed on the surface. This
pattern becomes crucial when we are selectively illuminating a chosen surface from some
distance. According to the shape of the surface, it may be necessary to build up coverage of
overlapping ellipses using several light sources.
Referring again to Figure 6.3, it can be seen that:
qˊ / 2 = D.tan(B / 2)
and unless B is large, in which case the beam flux method described in Section 6.7 is likely
to be more suitable, this expression may be approximated to:
Note also that cosθ = Y/D, so that:
These handy expressions, which enable illumination to be provided onto vertical surfaces
evenly and with minimal spill, are summarised on Figure 6.3. Inclined surfaces can also be
dealt with by keeping in mind that Y is the dimension on the surface normal at P. For the
mathematically agile, an even more versatile approach employing vector algebra is
available (Cuttle, 2008).
As the perimeter of the beam pattern ellipse is defined by the contour where luminous
intensity drops to half the beam axis value, even coverage of a surface is achieved by
butting ellipses up edge to edge. It is reasonable to assume that the average illuminance
within an individual ellipse is 75 per cent of the calculated EP value.

The D/r correction
There is a lingering concern. The inverse square cosine law is referred to as the ‘point-
to-point’ formula for a good reason. It is based on the concept of a point source
illuminating a point on a surface, and of course, point sources are hypothetical as they have
no area. It may be shown that error will be not more than 1 per cent if the distance D is at
least five times the maximum dimension of the luminaire d, and on this basis it is generally
recommended that use of ‘point-to-point’ formulae is restricted to situations where D > 5d.
In practice, many situations may occur where D will be less than 5d, particularly where
there is a need to get in close with the lighting or large, diffusing light sources are being
used. For these situations various ‘area source’ formulae have been published, but they
tend to be cumbersome. A more simple solution is to stay with the prediction formulae
based on the inverse square cosine law and to apply the D/r correction.
Figure 6.4 The point P is illuminated by two alternative sources, S1 being a point source and S2 a luminous disc of radius
r. Both sources are at distance D.
Figure 6.4 shows a point P illuminated alternatively by two light sources, both at
distance D and normal to the surface at P. S1 is a hypothetical point source, and S2 is a
diffusing disc source of radius r and normal to the direction of P. For S1, the illuminance at
P is:
Es1=Is1 /D2
For S2, we apply the disc source formula (Simons and Bean, 2001):
where MS2 is the exitance of source S2.

For a diffusing source, the luminous intensity normal to the surface equals the luminous
flux output divided by π, so that:
So:
If we assume that IS1 = IS2, and we apply the more simple ES1 expression to calculate the
illuminance due to an area source, the illuminance value will be overestimated. This could
be overcome by applying a (D/r) correction:
Note that D is the distance S to P, and r is the radius, or half the maximum dimension, of
the light source normal to the direction of P.
The value of C(D/r) can be read from Figure 6.5 and applied directly to calculations using
Formulae 6.6 or 6.7. It may be noted that the value of D/r needs to reduce to a low value
before the correction makes much difference, in fact, the source radius has to approach the
distance before the error becomes really significant. Added to that, it may be noted that
Formula 6.11 assumes that the light source is a luminous disc of diameter 2r that is normal
to the direction of P, and this defines the ‘worst case’ situation. If a linear source is used
instead of a disc source, the C(D/r) correction will overestimate the illuminance reduction by
about one-third. The reality is that when we assume a point source we are tending to
overestimate illuminance, and when we assume a disc source, we are tending to
underestimate. Unless the source is large in relation to the distance, sensible judgment will
suffice.
In this way, Formula 6.11 enables simple ‘point-to-point’ expressions to be applied for a
wide range of practical lighting situations, and the C(D/r) correction may be applied with
reasonable confidence wherever the aim is to illuminate a two-dimensional surface with a
source that is other than small in relation to its distance from the surface. Practical
examples might include selected room surfaces, or pictures displayed on them, or
freestanding panels, as well as any surfaces for which target/ambient illuminance ratios,
TAIRs, have been specified as part of the illumination hierarchy planning.

Figure 6.5 The correction factor C(D/r) to be applied to point source illumination formulae to allow for the ratio of
distance D to source radius r.
It may be noted that the classic ‘point-to-point’ formula (Formula 6.6) could be restated in
a generally applicable form:
We will now move on to consider three-dimensional applications of these formulae, where
examples are given that deal with both two-dimensional surfaces and three-dimensional
objects.

Cubic illumination
The principle of cubic illumination (Cuttle, 1997) is illustrated in Figure 6.6. As has been
explained in Chapter 5, the illumination distribution about a point in three-dimensional
space, however irregular, may be represented as the sum of two simple distributions. One
of these is defined by a vector solid that accounts for the entire asymmetry of the
illumination distribution about a point, while the other is a symmetric solid that is, as its
name suggests, entirely symmetric about the point. To analyse an illumination distribution
into these components, we calculate (or measure) the illuminance values on the six faces of
a small cube centred at the point, orientated so that its facets are normal to the x, y and z
axes, as shown in Figure 6.6. The x and y axes lie in the horizontal plane and the z axis is
vertical, and the six facet illuminance values are designated E(x+), E(x-), E(y+), E(y-), E(z+) and
E(z-). If these conventions are adhered to, the procedure for dealing with six illuminances at
a point becomes surprisingly painless.
Distances of source S from P on the axes are indicated by X, Y, and Z dimensions which
may be positive or negative according to direction, as shown in Figure 6.7. The location of
the cube is X = Y = Z = 0, which would be recorded as (0,0,0), and if we refer back to Figure
6.3, it can be seen that if we were to replace the two-dimensional surface shown there with
the three-dimensional cube, the location of the light source S would be indicated by (X-, Y-,
Z+) dimensions.
Figure 6.6 The Cubic Illumination concept. The spatial distribution of illumination at a point is characterised by six
illuminance values on the facets of a cube centred at the point, with the facets aligned normal to the x, y, and z axes. From
these six values, the illumination vector magnitude and direction can be defined, and the scalar illuminance can be
estimated.

Figure 6.7 The location of source S relative to a three-dimensional object is defined in terms of X, Y, and Z dimensions,
which may be positive or negative according to direction.
Looking back to Formula 6.7, we can define the cubic illuminance values as:
According to the signs of the X, Y, and Z dimensions, the illuminance values may be
positive or negative, so that if E(x) has a positive value, that illuminance is incident on the
(x+) facet of the cube, and if negative, it is incident on the (x–) facet. It follows that positive
and negative E(x) values have to be summed separately, and negative values do not cancel
positive ones.
Consider a 50 watt halogen reflector lamp, such as the MR16 EXT, which we will
identify as S1, and this source is aimed so that its peak beam candlepower (IS = 9150
candelas) is directed towards P. The location of S1 relative to P is defined by the

dimensions X = –1.9m, Y = –2.7m, and Z = 3.2m. Then:
and
ISD3 = 9150/(4.6)3 = 94.1
Then from formulae (6.13–6.15):
E(x) = X (I/D3) = −1.9 × 94.1 = −179 lux
E(y) = Y (I/D3) = −2.7 × 94.1 = −254 lux
E(z) = Z (I/D3) = 3.2 × 94.1 = 301 lux
Yes, it really is as simple as that: no angles, no cosines and three illuminance values for the
price of one. However, it is necessary to keep an eye on those signs. Note that E(x) = –179
lux is simply another way of writing E(x-) = 179 lux. As we add the contributions from
different sources on each facet of the cube, we add separately the sums of E(x+) values and
E(x-) values, as they are the illuminances on opposite sides of the cube.
This example shows the underlying process for determining the six direct cubic
illuminance values, but for practical calculations we again utilise the facilities of a
spreadsheet. Box 6.1 shows the output of the Cubic Illumination spreadsheet, and as
previously, the only data to be entered by the user are those in red, as all other data are
calculated automatically. In the box, source S1 from the foregoing example is shown, and
three more sources have been added. Rather than have a separate spreadsheet for two-
dimensional surfaces, it is more simple to use this spreadsheet and to keep in mind that,
following the view direction convention shown in Figure 6.3, the E(y-) value gives the
surface illuminance.
Box 6.1
Cubic Illumination Spreadsheet
140121
Project:
Box 6.1
MRSE
150 lm/m2
Distances S-P

Vector components
Symmetric components
Evr(x)
–209.2
Esym(x)
513.2
Evr
791.6
Evr(y)
–446.3
Esym(y)
228.4
Esym
327.4
Evr(z)
619.3
Esym(z)
240.8
Esr
525.3
Esr(d)
375.3
Vector/scalar ratio
Unit vector components
Vector direction
Evr/Esr
1.51
e(x)
-0.264
α 51°
e(y)
-0.564
e(z)
0.782
Notes
Enter data only in cells shown in red.
Is = luminous intensity of S in direction of P.
MRSE is the design level of ambient illumination within the space.
Check Distances S-P: either a ‘+’ or a ‘–’ dimension; never both.
For a typical outdoor application it would be necessary to consider only the direct
illuminance values on the six faces of the cube, but otherwise, the effect of ambient
illumination needs to be included. As shown in Box 6.1, the user specifies the MRSE value
to be provided within the space by the entire lighting installation. Each of the six cubic
illuminance values will be the sum of direct and indirect values, and the MRSE value is
added to each direct cubic illuminance value to represent the effect of indirect light. This

assumes that the contribution of indirect light is uniform for all six facets, and while this
avoids the tedious process of making a precise evaluation of the indirect illuminance onto
each facet of the cube, some caution needs to be observed. For a situation where the
distribution of reflected flux is likely to be distinctly asymmetric, such as where an object
is located close to a dark wall surface, this simplification could lead to a misleading
outcome, and users need to be alert for this. Even so, the assumption is not unreasonable.
In an indoor space where the proportion of indirect illumination is low, it will have little
visible effect and so it would be a waste of time to evaluate its spatial distribution. Where
the proportion of indirect light is high, it is likely to be highly diffused by multiple
reflections from light-coloured room surfaces so that its contribution to the visible effect
will be to soften the directional effect of the direct light rather than to impart a distinct
directional effect. The user should be alert for situations where indirect light could be both
dominant and directional, and for a more rigorous treatment of indirect illuminance, see
Simons and Bean (2001).
The reason for predicting, or measuring, the cubic illuminance values is to enable vector
analysis of the illumination solid, and the Cubic Illumination spreadsheet performs the
analysis to produce Box 6.1 by applying the formulae given in the previous section. The
great benefit of using spreadsheets is not simply that they automate the calculations, but
that they enable the user to explore alternative options, and the reader is strongly
encouraged to access the spreadsheet and to experience how this is done. It is simple to
change a light source, or to move it from one location to another, and instantly the effects
on the vector/scalar ratio (VSR) and the vector direction are given, so that the user can
envisage how an arrangement of luminaires will influence the ‘flow’ of light, and how this
might affect the perception of a selected three-dimensional object.

Providing an illumination hierarchy
An illumination hierarchy expresses a lighting designer’s concept for the overall
appearance of a lit space. It specifies the ambient illumination level as a mean room surface
exitance (MRSE) value, and it expresses how the distribution of direct flux from the
luminaires will affect the relative appearances of specified targets in terms of a distribution
of target/ambient illuminance ratios (TAIR) values.
The effect of ambient illumination upon the impression of the brightness or dimness of
illumination within a space is at least as much determined by the MRSE level in adjacent
spaces as by the actual level within the space, and both Tables 2.1 and 2.2 need to be
considered for making a design decision. As described in Chapters 2 and 3, Table 2.2. is
used also for making decisions about TAIR values, and it can be seen that for target
illumination to be even noticeable, a TAIR value of at least 1.5 is necessary, with higher
levels needed to achieve distinct or strong effects. Emphatic differences can be difficult to
achieve, as unless very high target illuminance values are to be used, they call for distinctly
low levels of MRSE.
A schedule of direct illuminance levels to be provided onto each selected target can be
generated from the MRSE and TAIR values:
The sum of individual target FRF values gives the total first reflected flux due to direct
illumination of all target surfaces:
For two-dimensional targets, Etgt(d) is the average direct illuminance, and for three-
dimensional targets, the best guide is the direct component of the scalar illuminance, where
Esr(d) = Esr – MRSE. This value can be read from the Cubic Illumination spreadsheet (Box
6.1).
The level of first reflected flux (FRF) that is required to provide the design value of
ambient illumination, specified in terms of MRSE, comprises the sum of components due to
direct light reflected from target surfaces (FRFts) and from room surfaces (FRFrs):
Refer back to Boxes 3.1 and 3.2 and note the distinction that was made between first
reflected flux due to illumination directed onto target surfaces with the aim of establishing
an illumination hierarchy, and first reflected flux that was then required to bring the
ambient illumination up to the MRSE design value. While targets need significant levels of
selective illumination directed onto them in order to achieve appreciable differences of
appearances, for providing illumination onto other surfaces to bring up the MRSE level, the

aim should be to keep the Etgt(d)/MRSE well below 3.0, and preferably below 1.5 (although
this can be difficult), so that the flux directed onto these surfaces will not noticeably
detract from the illumination hierarchy.
From Formula 6.16, it follows that FRFrs = FRF – FRFts, and to provide this both
efficiently and with low Etgt(d)/MRSE will need one or more large, high-reflectance room
surfaces to receive direct flux. The ceiling is often the obvious choice, but other options
should be sought. A series of illuminated white ceilings can have a bland overall effect.
Before looking further at calculational procedures, it should be acknowledged that a very
effective way to explore design options for providing FRFrs is to use a proprietary lighting
design software package such as AGI32 or DIALUX. The trick is to set all surface
reflectance values to zero, so the program gives you direct surface illuminance values.
These packages usually give serious attention to working plane (or floor) uniformity and
provide precise-looking illuminance contours, while giving only average illuminance
values for walls and ceiling, so it pays to give attention to how the appearance of these
surfaces may be affected by luminaire spacing. However, used in this way, these packages
can provide a useful design facility.
Lighting techniques such as cove lighting onto ceilings, wallwashing and recessed
lighting onto floor planes are widely used for providing room surface illumination, but do
not overlook opportunities for suspended (and visible) pendant luminaires, or incorporating
lighting into furniture or handrails. Whatever lighting technique is employed, selection of
suitable luminaires involves careful examination of the angular relationships between the
source locations and the receiving surfaces. Where multiple sources are to be used, choose
sources with beam angles that are smaller than the subtence angle of the receiving surface,
but large enough to provide full coverage from overlapping beams. The number of
luminaires required is:
where FB is the ‘beam flux’, or the quantity of lumens within the beam(s).
Manufacturer’s data for lumen outputs of directional luminaires have to be examined
with care. The only lumens that count are those within the beam, as those outside the
beam are ‘spill’ and need to be blocked or shielded. For luminaires with conical beams (i.e.,
not shaped beams as in wallwashers) it is generally recognised that beam width is
measured to the direction in which the luminous intensity falls to 50 per cent of the
maximum value (Figure 6.3), and usually the quoted angle is whole angle from edge to
edge of the beam, although sometimes it is the half-beam angle, measured from the beam
axis to the edge. For this text, the whole beam angle is given the symbol B, and the half-
beam angle is b.
Because it is not always clear whether ‘lumen output’ data refer to the entire output of
the luminaire or just the beam lumens, the most reliable way of determining the value is to

work from data for the luminous intensity distribution, given in candelas. The beam flux,
in lumens, is given by:
here:
Imax = maximum beam luminous intensity, or CBCP, in candelas
b = half beam angle
LD = lumen depreciation factor
Consider the MR16 EXN halogen lamp, which has a beam angle of 36° and a CBCP of
1800cd. Allowing for a lumen depreciation of 0.8, FB = 1.5 × 1800 × π(1 − cos(18º)) × 0.8 =
332 lm. It should not escape notice that the luminous efficacy for beam lumens for this
lamp is just 6.6 lm/W, and that is not allowing for transformer losses. It is clear that even
with the precision focussing that these lamps achieve, a significant proportion of the
filament lumens do not find their way into the beam. This ‘spill’ light is not only a concern
from the point of efficiency, but also for achieving a controlled distribution of light.
Reflector lamps should always be housed in luminaires that are shrouded or have baffles or
louvres to intercept light spill. This becomes particularly important where spill onto
surfaces adjacent to the luminaires could produce very bright unwanted lighting patterns.
It is in this way that a layout of luminaires is developed that will deliver the required
quantity of lumens onto each selected room surface. The designer’s aim is to devise a flux
distribution that will provide the first reflected flux for the required ambient illumination,
together with the range of TAIR values that will achieve the envisaged illumination
hierarchy.

Daylight illumination
Lighting designers may, from time to time, become involved in fenestration design for
special applications, such as the windows for an observation tower or a picture gallery
skylight, but regrettably, it is much more usual practice (in this author’s experience) that by
the time a project is introduced to a lighting designer, others have determined the layout of
windows, clerestories and skylights, as well as the type of glazing, sunshading and blinds
to be installed. In case some readers should find themselves confronted with demands for
advice that differ from my experience, it may be noted that there is no shortage of books
on daylighting practice written for architects. However, this section is based on the
assumption that the lighting designer’s task is restricted to devising electric lighting
installations that may from time to time need to respond to significant presence of
daylight.
The principal means for assessing the performance of a daylighting installation has for
many years been the daylight factor, and despite a fair amount of recent activity aimed at
improving the modelling of outdoor daylight availability, the daylight factor continues to
be concerned with provision of illumination onto indoor horizontal working planes
(HWPs). In this section, a quite different approach is proposed. Every indoor space needs to
have an electric lighting installation. Where there is significant daylight admission, the
appearance of that space and its contents will be affected at different times and in different
ways, and a lighting designer needs to give thought to how the electric lighting installation
is to respond to the presence of daylight. This is to take account of both achieving what
may be perceived to be an appropriate balance of illumination at all times, while at the
same time gaining energy savings from reduced use of electric lighting.
Opportunities for either of these objectives vary hugely, and some elaborate evaluation
systems have been proposed. Taking a simple approach, fenestration systems can be
broadly categorised as side windows, clerestories, or skylights – or some combinations of
those types. Their impacts upon lighting design may be assessed in terms of the
contributions they make towards provision of ambient illumination, target illumination,
view-out and energy efficiency (Figure 6.8).
Skylights can provide very effectively for ambient illumination, as well as providing for
HWP illumination. As has been discussed, ambient illumination, indicated by the MRSE
level, is concerned with how inter-reflected light influences the appearance of surrounding
room surfaces, whereas the daylight factor is concerned with enabling effective
performance of visual tasks located on desktops or work benches. Skylights that are
designed so that sloped glazing is orientated in the polar direction (north-facing in
northern hemisphere; south-facing in southern hemisphere) can provide fairly consistent,
diffused, ambient illumination over much of the year, and this should be taken into account
in developing an electric lighting installation to provide room surface illumination out of

normal daylight hours. The daytime and night time illumination distributions may be quite
different, requiring careful thought about the transitions between these two conditions.
Progressive photoelectrical control is likely to be the option of choice, and for large area,
single-storey buildings, the prospects for doing this effectively and attractively by daylight
are good (Figure 6.8). By comparison, successful provision of ambient illumination by
clerestory windows is restricted to spaces having fairly high height/width proportions, and
more limited still, are side windows. This is not to imply that they are necessarily
ineffective, but rather that their use for providing useful ambient illumination is more
restricted, particularly where they occur only in one wall. It is common experience that
windows in one wall can provide all the illumination required for much of the time in
spaces of domestic scale, but that becomes uncertain in spaces where the room width is
more than double the height of the window head.
Figure 6.8 Assessment of likely prospects for various roles for fenestration in buildings.
Effective target illumination favours electric lighting as the reliable means for setting up
an illumination hierarchy, but nonetheless, nothing can compare with the impact created
when side windows enable an object, such as a sculpture, to be positioned to ‘catch the
light’ as discussed in Chapter 5. It is, perhaps, the obviously transitory nature of the
experience that adds to its appeal. To design fenestration specifically for the purpose of
providing target illumination raises the issue of how to integrate that illumination with
electric lighting to take over when daylight is inadequate. Where the circumstances are
seen to demand it, careful attention to achieving effective target illumination by daylight

can be very rewarding, but otherwise it needs to be recognised that the ever-changing
nature of daylight makes it a difficult source to use where the appearance of a specific
target forms an important component of the designer’s overall concept.
The suitability of side windows for providing view-out might seem to be too obvious to
warrant discussion, but in fact, misdirected thinking on this issue is so common that it
really does need some careful attention. Most surveys of building occupant satisfaction
have been conducted on office workers, and again and again, they report daylight as being
a highly rated option, and this has been translated into standards demanding that specified
minimum daylight factor values are provided over some specified percentage of the HWP.
The well-known fact that, in open plan offices, desks that are located close to windows are
regarded as prime locations, despite their much lower ratings on thermal comfort indices,
is widely accepted as confirmation of this preference. However, rethinking the basis of this
preference in terms of provision of view is likely to lead to distinctly different design
options. Side windows designed for view-out combined with reasonably high levels of
thermal comfort would be quite different from windows designed to maximise daylight
admission. In particular, they would be likely to incorporate sunshading devices, fixed or
adjustable, specifically designed for the orientation of the window, and which would
intercept sunlight with minimal obstruction of view-out.
So far, little attention has been given to energy efficiency, although this topic is discussed
in the final chapter. It should not be a matter of surprise that prospects for energy
efficiency are shown in Figure 6.8 to be in step with daylight provision of ambient
illumination. This is because daylighting systems that have good prospects for ambient
illumination are likely to also have good prospects for photoelectric control that will
balance electric light use against daylight availability. The essential difference from
common practice is how photosensors are located and commissioned. Sensors need to
respond to levels of inter-reflected light within the space, and so they need to be shielded
from direct light from both the daylighting and the electric lighting systems. For example,
in a space with side windows, a good location for a sensor is mounted vertically on the
wall above the window head, and shielded from direct light from the electric lighting
installation so that it is exposed to reflected light within the room, but not to direct light.
This is quite different from conventional practice, which is directed by the notion that the
purpose for admitting daylight into buildings is to provide working plane illumination. The
role that daylight can fulfil best of all is providing ambient illumination.
It may be noted that where the foregoing procedures have led to an electric lighting
installation that provides, out of daylight hours, an effective illumination hierarchy
through a combination of target and room surface illumination, the prospect exists for
effective lighting control by dimming just the room surface illumination. In this way, an
effective daytime balance of ambient illumination with a maintained illumination
hierarchy may be achieved with worthwhile energy savings.

Checking delivery: measuring the lumens
The on-site measurable illumination quantities that are integral to this perception-based
approach to lighting design are:
mean room surface exitance, MRSE
target/ambient illuminance ratio, TAIR
vector/scalar ratio, VSR, and vector direction.
While highlight contrast potential (HCP) has also been introduced as a relevant metric,
its usefulness is for making comparisons at the design stage, rather than as a metric to be
checked on site. Also, at the time of writing, there are no generally available meters for
checking metrics relating to the spectral distributions of illumination, but this may be
about to change. CCD-based spectrometers have recently become reasonably affordable,
and this could lead to the availability of portable instruments capable of making on-site
measurements of many of the visible and non-visible factors discussed in Chapter 4.
It is an essential part of acting as a professional lighting designer that the performance of
every installation is checked against the predicted performance, regardless of whether the
client has shown interest in the data. There never will be a perfect match, but knowing the
nature and extent of the departures is how a designer gains feeling for exercising control
over perceived aspects of illumination.
Measuring MRSE
While MRSE is reasonably straightforward to calculate, it is not obvious how to obtain a
reliable measure of its quantity. Conventional light meters have been developed to give
measurements of lumen density incident on a surface, without regard for the direction
from which the light is incident. MRSE is not related to any particular surface of incidence,
and it discriminates according to the origin of arriving light. It takes account only of
indirect light, and disregards light arriving directly from light sources, and this creates a
difficulty for measurement.
The purpose of MRSE is to provide us with a useful measure of ambient illumination,
and that means that we need to make a measurement that relates to light arriving at the
eye, rather than light incident on things that people might choose to look at. Figure 6.9
shows a simple approach. Choose a position and direction of view that, while it takes in
much of the space, avoids light from windows, table lights and so forth, and then hold a
luxmeter up to the eye and shield it from any luminaires before taking a measurement.
Depending on the size of the space, repeat this for other positions to obtain an average
value. Making measurements in this way can provide a reasonable indication of the extent

to which a predicted MRSE value has been realised, and this is valuable information for the
designer.
Proposals have been made for more rigorous procedures for MRSE measurement (Cuttle,
2013). This approach involves using high dynamic range imaging to produce a
Figure 6.9 A simple way of making an approximate measurement of MRSE using a conventional light meter. Expose the
meter to a wide view of the space avoiding, as far as possible, windows and other light sources, and shield direct light
from any overhead luminaires.
wide-field image of a space defined in terms of luminance. Light sources could then be
identified and excluded, so that the remaining field of view would represent the total inter-
reflected illumination. It is to be hoped that such a system will one day become available,
particularly as it could enable not only measurement of MRSE, but also of discomfort glare.
Measuring TAIR
The next step in evaluation will be to check TAIR values. Once again, the designer will
have explained the illumination hierarchy in terms of perceived difference, and will have
planned the luminaire layout to achieve specified TAIR values. Checking by measurement

develops confidence in relating appearance to metrics, as well as application of metrics for
determining required luminaire performance.
For a two-dimensional target, TAIR = Etgt/MRSE, which is quite straightforward, but
measuring Etgt for three-dimensional targets can pose difficulties. If practical, it is usually
best to move the target to one side and to measure the cubic illumination at the spot, using
the procedure described in the following paragraphs, from which the direct component of
scalar illuminance is determined by use of the Vector Measurement spreadsheet, which is
described in the following paragraphs. Otherwise, measurements corresponding to the
cubic illumination axes may be taken over the object’s surface, but it should be noted that
if a particular direction of view is significant in the overall appearance of that object within
the space, then a single measurement normal to that direction might provide for a better
indicator of how well the TAIR value relates to the illumination hierarchy.
Measuring VSR
It might seem that the most straightforward way to measure the six cubic illuminance
values would be to mount a small cube at the measurement point and take successive
readings on the cube’s facets, but in fact, this procedure is cumbersome and tedious,
particularly when it comes to taking the measurement on the downward facing facet.
Various cubic illumination meters incorporating six photocells have been developed, such
as the one shown in Figure 6.10, but it is worth taking note of a simple procedure that
makes use of just one photocell mounted on a photographic tripod (Cuttle, 2014).
Envisage the cube tilted, as indicated in Figure 6.11, so that a long corner-to-corner
diagonal of the cube is vertical, and three facets of the cube face upwards and three
downwards. The familiar x, y, z spatial axes are unchanged, but now the axes of the cube
are designated u,v,w. Figure 6.12 shows a vertical section through the tilted cube on the y
axis, where BC is one external edge of the cube, AB is a facet diagonal and AC is the
vertical long diagonal. The ratios of the triangle sides BC, AB and AC are 1, √2, and √3,
and the angle 
. This is the angle by which the u, v and w axes
are tilted relative to the horizontal plane, and as shown in Figure 6.11, the u axis is
assumed to lie in the same vertical plane as the y axis.
To make the cubic illumination measurements, a right-angle bracket is constructed to
support the photocell vertically on the head of a photographic tripod, as shown in Figure
6.13. It helps to have a tripod with a spirit level to ensure verticality and with the
horizontal and vertical movements scaled in degrees. The measurement procedure is then
straightforward. Set the photocell tilt to +35° as shown in Figure 6.14, and rotating the
horizontal movement of the tripod, read E(u+) at 0°, E(v+) at 120° and E(w+) at 240°. Reset the
photocell tilt to –35°, and read E(u-) at 180°, E(v-) at 300° and E(w-) at 60°.

Figure 6.10 A six-photocell cubic illumination meter. This instrument is self-levelling and is connected to a laptop
computer that automatically analyses the data. Photographed at the Lighting Research Center, Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, Troy, New York.
Figure 6.11 The measurement cube is tilted so that a long axis is coincident with the z axis, and three facets face upwards

and three downwards. The facets are normal to the u, v, and w orthogonal axes.
Figure 6.12 A vertical section through the tilted cube on the u axis, which lies in the same vertical plane as the y axis,
against which it is tilted through the angle a.
Figure 6.13 A photocell head mounted on a right-angle bracket, onto a photographic tripod.

Figure 6.14 The photocell tilted to +35° relative to the horizontal plane, and ready for measuring the three-dimensional
illumination distribution.
Box 6.2 shows the output of the Vector Measurement Spreadsheet. The only data to be
entered by the user are the six measured values, and from these a range of derived data
relating to the spatial illumination distribution is given based on formulae given in Chapter
5. While the illumination vector magnitude is derived directly from the measured data, the
output data for vector direction are converted from u, v, w axes to the more familiar x, y, z
axes, using the following formulae:
While there are other lighting quantities that are relevant to the design process, such as
correlated colour temperature and the highlight contrast, application of these concepts
need not involve calculations and so confirmation by measurement is not usual practice.
Nonetheless, when designers are verifying that all is according to expectations, it is
necessary that every aspect of interaction between the lighting installation and the space

and its contents must come under scrutiny.
Box 6.2
Cubic Illumination Measurement (u,v,w)
140121
Project
Box 6.2
Illuminance data input
E(u+)
109
E(u-)
311
E(v+)
365
E(v-)
305
E(w+)
342
E(w-)
70
Illuminance components
E(u)
-202
~E(u)
109
E(v)
60
~E(v)
305
E(w)
272
~E(w)
70
Vector and scalar data
E
344
~E
161
Esr
247
E/Esr
1.39
Horizontal and cylindrical data
Ewp
236
Ecl
268
Ecl/Ewp
1.13
Vector direction (unit vector)
e(u)
–0.587
e(x)
–0.436
e(v)
0.174
e(y)
–0.873
e(w)
0.791
e(z)
0.218
e(u,v,w)
1
e(x,y,z)
0.999
Vector direction (altitude and azimuth angles)
e(x,y)
0.975
alpha
12.7
e’(y)
–0.895
phi
–154.7
Notes

Input data shown in red only. All the rest are generated automatically.
alpha (vector altitude) may be +ive or -ive re horizontal
If phi (vector azimuth) = +ive then anticlockwise re y-axis; else clockwise

References
Cuttle, C. (1997). Cubic illumination. Lighting Research & Technology, 29(1), 1–14.
—— (2008). Lighting by Design: Second edition. Oxford: Architectural Press.
—— (2013). A new direction for general lighting practice. Lighting Research &
Technology, 45(1): 22–39.
—— (2014). A practical approach to cubic Illumination measurement. Lighting Research &
Technology, 46(1): 31–34.
Simons, R.H. and A.R. Bean (2001). Lighting Engineering: Applied Calculations.
Oxford: Architectural Press.

7
Designing for Perception-Based Lighting
Concepts

Chapter summary
The development of a lighting design proposal involves bringing together the variety of
perception-based lighting concepts into a balance that relates to the design objectives
specific to the location. It requires the ability to envision a space and its contents in light,
and seen in this way, the volume of the design space ceases to be a void, and instead is
perceived as a three-dimensional light field creating interactions with room surfaces and
the objects within the space. It is from this envisioned concept that the designer develops
understanding of the required characteristics of the light field, leading to the layout of
luminaires and light sources, together with strategies for their control. A flowchart linking
the lighting concepts to metrics and procedures is introduced. Where the procedures
involve calculations, their purpose is seen to be to increase the designer’s level of
confidence that the design objectives, stated in terms of perception-based concepts, will be
achieved. The design outcome is a comprehensive lighting equipment specification.

Achieving perception-based lighting concepts
We now turn our attention to the task of applying the range of perception-based lighting
concepts that has been discussed in the foregoing chapters. Each and every project is a
fresh challenge that calls for understanding of the various roles that the space and its
contents are planned to serve, backed up by the designer’s creative imagination directed
towards influencing people’s perceptions of the space, its setting, and its contents through
lighting.
Seen in this context, the lighting concepts provide a framework for ordering thinking
about lighting’s potential for influencing people’s visual experiences of their surroundings.
These range from overall impressions of brightness or dimness of spaces encountered in a
sequence of entering and passing through a building; the ways in which the spectrum of
light may arouse or subdue both visual and non-visual responses; through to ordered
distributions of illumination that differentiate activities within spaces and which relate to
the visual significance of objects; and on to the lighting patterns that reveal the form,
texture, glossiness, or translucency of individual objects. Within the volume of a space,
illumination may, at one extreme, be softly diffused, revealing everything without
emphasis; and at the other extreme, be selective and sharply directional, differentiating
surfaces and objects with clarity. As part of the same visualisation, lighting may on one
hand be perceived as being without apparent source, or on the other hand, sources of light
may be clearly expressed components of the scene. This is the gamut of variety (or at least
a good part of it!) that a creative designer may bring to bear upon a project, and the
perception-based lighting concepts provide means for both ordering creative thinking and
exercising control.
While design is not to be reduced to a step-by-step procedure, the flowchart shown in
Figure 7.1 presents a rational ordering of the lighting concepts and gives an overall guide to
this section.
Ambient illumination
Is the first impression to be of a brightly lit space, or a dimly lit space, or something in
between? This issue has been discussed in the sections in Chapter 2 entitled ‘The MRSE
conecpt’ and ‘Applying the ambient illumination concept in design’, and it requires careful
thought. A person visiting the space will inevitably experience it within a sequence,
arriving from outdoors or from another indoor space, before moving on. It may be their
destination, or a space that they will experience in passing. Perhaps the design aim is to
arouse attention, or alternatively, to provide a place for rest. The possibilities are limitless,
as are the roles that lighting may play, but throughout, the connection between the overall
sense of brightness and the first impression is strong. Tables 2.1 and 2.2 together provide a

simple introduction to ambient illumination, but it is up to the designer to develop
sensitivity to the relationships that may arise.
While MRSE (mean room surface exitance) may be an unfamiliar concept, it is
surprisingly easy and rewarding to come to terms with. The notions of visualising light
within the volume of a space rather than incident on surfaces, and of thinking in terms of
light at the eye, so that we achieve our aims through providing reflected light, and direct
light is simply a means to achieving that end, lead naturally to effective lighting
applications. The Ambient Illumination spreadsheet is a useful tool for the first stage of
linking a vision to a luminaire layout.
Illumination colour appearance
Apart from the brightness or dimness of ambient illumination, its colour appearance can
significantly affect the appearance of a space. Illumination that is basically ‘white’ may
nonetheless have a distinct tint, and the acceptability, or even the attractiveness, of that
tint, can be strongly affected by context and people’s expectations.
As has been explained, the generally accepted practice is to specify the tint of ‘white’
illumination by CCT (correlated colour temperature) where low values (CCT < 3200K) are
associated with yellowish-white light and ‘warm’ colour appearance, and high values

Figure 7.1 A lighting design flowchart. Follow through each row from concept, to metric, to procedure. The sequence of
concepts is proposed as being logical, but may be adapted to suit circumstances. The aim is to develop proposals for
discussion, which would lead to the design proposal. Post-installation assessment and measurement should also be
included as part of the design process.
(CCT > 5000K) with bluish-white light and ‘cool’ colour appearance. At present, this is the
choice that the lighting industry offers, but research findings have been noted (page 46)
which indicate that light source chromaticities departing from the black-body locus may
offer preferred colour appearance alternatives.
Illumination hierarchy
Situations occur where totally diffused illumination that reveals without emphasis can be
highly effective, but more usually some ordering of illumination distribution is called for.
There may be various reasons for this. The aim may be to distinguish between zones
within a space; it may be to increase the visibility of selected detail; or it may be to draw
attention to objects of visual significance. The ability to envision a structured distribution
of illumination is a defining skill of a lighting designer, but it needs to be understood that
while the envisioned effect is a distribution of reflected flux, it is achieved by providing a

distribution of direct flux onto selected targets that will generate that distribution. This
ability to separate in the mind the applied distribution of direct flux and the resulting
distribution of reflected flux is crucial. It is an acquired skill that evolves from careful
observation of how appearance is affected by the balance of direct flux applied to targets,
and of diffusely-reflected ambient illumination.
The notion of an illumination hierarchy, by which the lighting designer’s concept of
emphasis forms the basis of a structured illumination distribution, is set out in terms of
TAIR (target/ambient illumination ratio). The Illumination Hierarchy spreadsheet is a
useful tool for seeing through this stage of the procedure.
Colour rendering
CRI (colour rendering index) is the readily available metric, and its limitations have been
discussed at some length. CRI serves the needs of specifiers, but designers need more. The
GAI (gamut area index) adds an indication of colourfulness to that of fidelity, but too often
the values on this scale are unavailable. Really useful information, such as CMV (colour-
mismatch vector) data, is unlikely to be available, so that designers need to develop
through directed observation, as described in the section ‘Source spectrum and human
responses’ in Chapter 4, the experience to be able to select light sources with colour
rendering properties that really suit particular applications.
The ‘flow’ of light
The directional properties of a light field that generate shading patterns through
interactions with three-dimensional objects provide a dynamic quality to the appearance of
a space. This aspect of lighting is particularly associated with spaces lit by side windows,
and where daylight creates strong ‘flow’ of light effects, careful consideration needs to be
given to how the electric lighting is to respond to the varying shading patterns. Distinct
shading patterns on individual objects are easily produced by spotlights, but the ‘flow’ of
light concept refers to a lighting effect that creates a coherent sense of illumination
distribution within a space.
The VSR (vector/scalar ratio) relates to the perceived strength of the ‘flow’, and the
direction of ‘flow’ may be indicated by the unit vector e, or by the vector altitude and
azimuth angles.
The ‘sharpness’ of lighting
The potential for lighting to generate highlight patterns on glossy-surfaced three-

dimensional objects is indicated by the HCP (highlight contrast potential), which also
relates to the perceived ‘sharpness’ of shadow patterns and the overall appearance of the
‘crispness’ of lighting.
Luminous elements
This is the only one of the concepts listed in Figure 7.1 that has not been discussed in the
text, but it is in fact the easiest of all the concepts to come to terms with. Often it would be
true to say that, for lighting designers, the perfect luminaire would be invisible. As it is,
designers often strive to eliminate as far as possible any visible intrusion of luminaires into
the scenes that they create. Luminaires are recessed into ceilings, tucked above shelves or
cornices, or built-in under furniture or handrails. They are, for the most part, regarded as
necessary but unwelcome intrusions into the scene.
There are, however, times when the luminaires become features of the design concept.
There can be all sorts of reasons for this, but a recurring one is that the space is bland and
featureless, and would benefit from the presence of self-luminous, eye-catching objects that
add ‘sparkle’ and interest to the scene. There are no metrics for assessing the perceived
effect nor are there procedural steps for incorporating these elements into the design, but
when the decision is made that luminous elements are to be part of the scene, it is as well
to keep in mind the well-worn adage, “One man’s sparkle is another man’s glare”.
The design product
The spreadsheets that have been used to generate the Boxes shown alongside the text
facilitate the translation from envisioned effects to luminaire performance not only by
performing the calculations, but by providing the designer with almost unlimited
opportunity to explore alternative options. Designers are encouraged to use them as models
to develop spreadsheets that serve their own fields of lighting practice. Commercially
available ‘lighting design’ software packages generally fail to address the issues that
concern a creative designer.
While most people think of a lighting designer’s output being the illumination that users
will experience, the realities of life should cause the designer to take a different attitude. It
is the specification document, listing lamps, luminaires, circuits and controls, that
determines whether or not his or her vision of a space in light will be achieved, and for this
reason, the specification should be regarded as the design product. It has been stated above
that the ability to envision is the essential design skill, but the ability to translate that
vision into a specification document that will not be compromised runs it a close second.
Never lose sight of the fact that when the specification goes out to tender, the contractor
who will get the job will be the one that puts in the lowest price.


Defining illumination adequacy
While this ‘perception-based approach’ to lighting design is proposed as being appropriate
for indoor lighting applications ranging from simple, everyday activities to complex, large-
scale projects, it cannot be denied that there will always be some situations for which it
would be quite sensible to provide uniform illumination over the time-honoured horizontal
working plane, wp, which extends wall-to-wall and may be coincident with the floor plane,
or elevated above it.
This type of lighting practice is sometimes referred to as ‘lumen dumping’, and the
conventions adopted by lumen dumpers for planning their lighting installations include
treating every space as a rectangular room measuring L × W, with the lighting installation
comprising a regular grid of luminaires located on the luminaire plane, lp, which may be
coincident with the ceiling or below it, and with only the wall height H between lp and wp
being counted as wall area w. All of these dimensions are inter-related by the room index,
where RI = L.W/H(L+W). (North American practice uses the room cavity ratio, where
RCR = 5H(L+W)/L.W = 5/RI.)
Clearly this approach contrasts with that adopted by the rest of this book, so let us now
imagine what would be the implications for lumen dumpers if the designated lighting
standard were to be based on perceived adequacy of illumination, PAI, being prescribed
minimum level of ambient illumination, specified in terms of mean room surface exitance,
MRSE.
The defining expression states that MRSE equals the first reflected flux FRF divided by
the room absorption Aα, so that:
and:
FRF = MRSE × Aα
Room absorption is the sum of products of room surfaces (work plane, luminaire plane, and
walls) and their absorptance values:
Aα = Awp(1− ρwp) + Alp(1− ρlp) + Alw(1− ρw)
It is common in such situations for room surface finishes to be undefined, and for ‘typical’
surface reflectances to be assumed. Providing that assurances are given that ‘light’ finishes
will be used, the following surfaces’ reflectances may be assumed as typical:
ρwp = 0.25; ρlp = 0.75; ρw = 0.5;
Applying these reflectance values to the above expression gives:
Aα = L.W + H(L + W)

So:
The first step for determining a lighting layout is to use Formula 7.1 to calculate the first
reflected flux, after which the next task is to devise a distribution of direct flux from the
lighting installation that will provide the required level of FRF, and this presents the lumen
dumper with a novel quandary. There is no stipulated illumination distribution. At one
extreme, s/he could direct all of the flux onto the work plane, but that might create the
dreaded “cave effect”. At the other extreme, all of the flux could be directed upwards into
the cavity above the luminaire plane, and while that would be a very efficient way of
providing the FRF, it would distract attention away from the work plane.
The concept of illumination hierarchy is all about providing controlled distributions of
illumination, and for the lumen dumper, the solution would be to nominate the work plane
as the target and to work towards a suitable target/ambient illumination ratio, TAIR.
Target illuminance is the sum of direct and indirect components, so that if we assume
luminaires that direct all, or at least almost all, of the downward flux onto the work plane:
From Formula 7.1:
where UFFR = upper flux fraction ratio
Then:
In this way, both TAIR and UFFR are readily predictable for target work planes. If it is
decided to use fully recessed luminaires, or any other type of luminaire for which UFFR =

0, then TAIR values can be read from Table 7.1. It can be seen that high values are
unavoidable, particularly for low RI values.
Table 7.1 Values of target/ambient illuminance ratio, TAIR, against room index where the horizontal working plane,
HWP, is the target surface and all direct flux is incident on the HWP. Light surface reflectances are assumed
RI
TAIR
1
9
2
7
3
6.3
4
6
5
5.8
Figure 7.2 TAIR values for the horizontal working plane, when it is the target. Except for at low values, room index has
only slight effect, but the upper flux fraction ratio is strongly influential.
These high TAIR values can be avoided by use of luminaires that have some upward
light component. Figure 7.2 shows how UFFR values relate to TAIR, and this may be seen
as a simple version of a more comprehensive study reported by Lynes (1974). Jay (2002) has
commented that a BZ3 lighting installation with a 10 per cent upward light component
provides a satisfactory appearance in a wide range of workplace applications, and Figure
7.2 shows this to relate typically to a TAIR value around 5 except at low RI values. To this I
would add my own observation that it needs a TAIR value of at least 3 to impart a distinct
difference of appearance to a target, and for a level much less than 2, the difference is

unlikely to be noticeable.
The difference between this situation and current general lighting practice is that only
the amount of light, as it influences assessment of illumination adequacy, is specified, and
the distribution of that light is undefined. This means that for anyone to plan a lighting
installation, some thought has to be given to the question; What is the purpose of the
lighting? Perhaps a grid of luminaires providing uniform work plane illuminance is
appropriate, but perhaps not. MRSE specifications may apply to many locations other than
workplaces – in fact, the only exceptions would be locations where distinctly dim lighting
may be a legitimate design objective. Generally it should be assumed that providing for
PAI (perceived adequacy of illumination) does matter, and at the same time, that there
needs to be scope for specific targets to be selected so that an illumination hierarchy can be
drawn up in terms of TAIR values. It is in this way that an illumination distribution can be
created that meets the specific requirements of a space without being compromised by the
need to comply with a lighting standard that prescribes uniformity.

The important role of room surface reflectance values
It’s time for another thought experiment. Suppose that you are designing a setting in which
a white marble sculpture is to be displayed, and you want to achieve a stunning effect. You
want the sculpture to stand out from its background so strikingly that it appears to glow.
You want the highest possible target luminance contrast. Peter Jay has examined the
condition of maximum attainable contrast (Jay, 1971) for which every lumen provided
is incident on the target, and the background is illuminated only by light reflected from the
target.
To simplify the situation, we will assume all surfaces to be diffusing reflectors so we can
define maximum attainable contrast in terms of exitance (M) values for a target, tgt, seen
against a background, bg:
In any enclosed space, the total room surface area, Ars, is the sum of the areas of the
enclosing surfaces and any objects contained within the space. If we direct all of the light
from the luminaires onto a target area Atgt, then the remainder of the surface area, which
forms the background to the target, is Abg, so that Ars = Atgt + Abg. As the background
receives only indirect illumination, the contrast for this condition will be the maximum
attainable contrast, Cmax. Target and background illuminances and reflectances are Etgt,
Ebg, ρtgt and ρbg respectively.
The target is completely enclosed in a space of exitance Mbg, and so the indirect
component of its average illuminance will be equal to Mbg. The direct component of the
target illuminance is therefore Etgt – Mbg, and the total luminous flux from the luminaires
is At(Etgt – Mbg). We apply the conservation of energy principle to state that this flux must
equal the rate of absorption by both the target and background areas, so that:
Atgt(Etgt − Mbg) = AtgtEtgt(1 −ρtgt) +AbgEbg(1 −ρbg)
So:
AtgtEtgt − AtgtMbg − AtgtEtgt+AtgtMtgt = AbgEbg(1 −ρbg)
Atgt(Mtgt − Mbg) = AbgEbg(1 −ρbg)
Divide through by Mbg, noting Formula 7.4 and that Mbg = Ebg rbg:
This is Jay’s formula for maximum attainable contrast (Jay, 1971). It shows that Cmax is the
product of two factors, one being the ratio of the surface areas, Abg/Atgt, and the other
factor, (1-ρbg)/ρbg, being dependent only on the background reflectance. Now think back to

the white marble statue. These two factors tell us that to maximise the contrast, we need to
put the statue into a space that is large in relation to the statue, and with low surface
reflectance. There is nothing surprising about that, until we notice that there is no mention
of target reflectance. If we were to replace the white marble statue with a black one, all the
exitance values would be reduced proportionately, but the contrast would be unchanged.
Let’s look at this formula a bit more carefully. The target reflectance has dropped out,
and (1-ρ)/ρ term is the background absorptance/reflectance ratio, α/ρ, and as shown in
Figure 2.9, the inverse of this ratio, ρ/α, describes the influence of reflectance upon ambient
illumination. Both of these ratios are plotted in Figure 7.3, where it can be seen that they
mirror each other. This figure breaks down into three zones. Where the value of ρ is less
than 0.3, room surface exitance will be substantially lower than direct illuminance. Here
we have the potential to achieve high target/background contrasts, even where the target
area is not much smaller than the background area. Moving to the other side of the chart,
where ρ is greater than 0.7, room surface exitance exceeds direct illuminance by some
margin, and while this will give an enhanced sense of overall brightness, reasonably high
contrasts can be achieved only with targets that are much smaller than their surroundings.
In the mid-zone, where ρ values are in the range 0.3 to 0.7, room surface exitance values
will be fairly similar to direct illuminance values. This equal balance of direct and diffuse
illumination components gives scope for providing noticeable (but not distinct)
illumination differences while avoiding strong contrasts. It is also a prescription for
practical room surface reflectance values, and guides for good lighting practice invariably
recommend reflectances within this range. It may be looked upon as the safe range, in
which there is some limited scope for emphasis, but providing sufficient light is put into
the space, everything will appear adequately lit. However, this should not inhibit a creative
designer. The important thing is for the designer to have developed, through observation of
the impact that lighting can have on the appearance of lit spaces, the confidence to step
outside the restrictions of recommended practice.

Figure 7.3 The influence of room surface reflection properties. For every surface, ρ = 1-α, where ρ is reflectance and α is
absorptance. From Formula 2.1 it can be seen that MRSE is proportional to ρ/α, and from Formula 7.3, maximum
attainable contrast is proportional to α/ρ. Where overall room surface reflectance, ρ, is either more than 0.7 or less than
0.3, it’s effect upon appearance will be pronounced.
Jay’s study extended beyond a target object surrounded by a background, to examine the
limitations for contrast when the target is part of the space itself. Examples might be a
demonstration area in a teaching space, or a dance floor in a restaurant. It must not be lost
sight of that the formula is based on the assumption that 100 per cent of the provided
luminous flux is incident on the target, so that ambient illumination outside the target area
is due only to reflected flux. It is, after all, a formula for maximum attainable contrast,
and so unlikely to be achieved in practice. However, it may be noted that as the target
becomes a larger part of the total surface area, so it becomes realistic to assume that spill
light onto the background is more likely to be significant, which has the disadvantage of
reducing actual target contrasts, and the advantage of reducing the need to supplement the
target lighting to provide for safe movement.

Final remarks
The perception-based lighting design approach proposed in this book leaves untouched
some aspects of lighting that have traditionally been cornerstones of lighting policy. In
particular, the topics of lighting for productivity in workplaces and efficient use of energy
for lighting have been barely mentioned, and so we will close by looking at how these two
aspects interact with this perception-based approach.
Lighting for productivity in workplaces
We live in an era in which if things need to be seen, they are designed to be seen. Examples
of this surround us. Carbon copies were first replaced by photocopies, and then by laser
printed materials, before paper-based materials in turn gave way to screen-based displays,
originally CRT screens, which in turn have been replaced by high-definition, full-colour
LED displays. At least, that is what has happened where material has to be read by a
human being. Where the process of reading has been taken over by machines, such as the
bar-code readers at supermarket checkouts, the visual task has not simply been eased, but
has actually been eliminated, and similar examples can be found in many industrial
workplaces.
This revolution in the role of vision has not been accompanied by any serious
revaluation of the provision of illumination. Lighting standards and recommended practice
documents specify illuminance values for visual tasks, and for anyone who cares to read
the cited literature, these are claimed to be based on measured values of the luminance
contrast and angular size of the critical detail at the eye. The reality is that while the
specified illuminance has climbed during the previous half century, visual task difficulty
has eroded or vanished. What has not changed is the notion that providing for illumination
adequacy involves lighting the HWP (horizontal working plane) to a specified level, and
because this is the basis of lighting standards, it applies to all manner of indoor
applications. Every space from a waiting room to a precision machine shop is assessed by
someone holding an illuminance meter at around waist height, and wandering around to
ensure that at no point does the measured value drop below the specified one.
There are a few exceptions. Some visual tasks cannot be redesigned, and notable
examples are surgery, for obvious reasons, and quality control inspection, where the aim is
to detect even very slight defects in manufactured products. The common feature of these
applications is that they call for specialised solutions that are quite separate from the
general lighting. Consider, for example, that you have undertaken a project to light a
dentist’s premises. You think through the progression of a patient arriving at the entrance,
advancing to the reception, and moving through to the waiting room before being called
into the surgery. At every stage you have different ideas about the appearance that you

want to create, and how you will use lighting to achieve it. However, once the patient is
tilted back in the dentist’s chair, and the dentist needs a few thousand lux on the patient’s
back molars, a completely different form of lighting takes over, and the way that that is
provided is none of your concern. A luminaire that incorporates a high level of technical
expertise is brought into use, but it is a component of the dentist’s equipment and does not
form part of the lighting installation.
It may be said that, generally, in an indoor space where there is an activity that involves
the need for visibility, the surfaces associated with that activity should be designated as
target surfaces and incorporated into the illumination hierarchy scheme. Examples would
include art galleries, retail stores, industrial assembly lines, and the tellers’ counters in
banking premises. For activities that are particularly visually demanding, which include the
already cited examples of surgery and quality control, specialised lighting solutions that
are designed not merely to deliver lumens, but to enhance the visibility of the critical
detail, are to be applied. Wherever people are to spend long working periods, whether
visually demanding or not, provision for perceived adequacy of illumination requires
attention. If high levels of target illumination are to be applied, then keeping TAIR down to
modest values will have the effect of ensuring appropriately high levels of MRSE.
Efficient use of energy for lighting
It goes without saying that energy efficient lighting must make use of high luminous
efficacy light sources in optically efficient luminaires. Beyond this, the lighting needs to
provide for PAI (perceived adequacy of illumination), no more and no less, at all times that
the space is occupied. This may involve a control system that can dim the electric lighting
to take account of daylight availability, and that will switch it off when the space is
unoccupied. The important way in which this differs from good current lighting practice is
that it relates to PAI, which means that the lighting sensor is installed so that it responds to
MRSE, and not to HWP illuminance. The thinking behind this is that the space should
always appear adequately lit without ever being lit to excess, and that instead of the
designer working to keep inside a lighting power density limit (W/m2), the aim would be a
genuinely low energy installation, measured in kWh/m2.yr.
While this scheme seems reasonably straightforward, it could lead to the illumination
hierarchy being compromised. Overall dimming to allow for changing levels of daylight
would inevitably change the balance of the lighting, particularly in situations where the
designer has put together an installation that provides different TAIR values, and involves
different types of light sources focussed onto different targets. In such circumstances, it
may be an effective policy to maintain the selective target lighting, and to dim only
lighting that is provided to boost MRSE, particularly that which washes light over room
surfaces close to the source of daylight.

So the question arises, would changing from conventional practice of specifying
illumination requirements in terms of minimum HWP illuminance, to basing it upon
satisfying PAI, lead to lower energy consumption? The first thing to make clear is that this
perception-based approach is not proposed as means for reducing lighting levels. The basic
requirement is that a space should appear adequately lit, taking account of the viewer’s
likely expectations. Conventional practice can, on occasion, lead to the ‘cave effect’, a
dismal appearance brought about by the misguided pursuit of high efficiency. To restate
the illumination standards in MRSE values should have the effect of preventing this
unfortunate outcome. However, it has to be understood that the prescribed lux (or lm/m2)
values would need to be substantially lower than the current HWP values, not because less
light is to be provided, but because of the different way in which the metric evaluates the
level of illumination provision.
So if the aim is to come up with the ultimate energy efficient solution that will satisfy
the PAI criterion by providing a prescribed MRSE level, what would be the outstanding
features of such an installation? The most obvious difference would be the appearance of
the space itself. Every surface within such a space would be white or chromium plated! To
experience the space would be like stepping into an integrating sphere. Every lumen
emitted within the volume of the space would be guaranteed longevity. It would undergo a
prolonged life of multiple reflections before eventually being absorbed by the room
surfaces. To get an idea of why this would be so, take a look at Figure 7.3. The ρ/α would
be so high that it would take the emission of only a few lumens to build up a high lumen
density within the space. Of course high efficacy light sources and high efficiency
luminaires would be applied, so that only a very low power density would be required to
meet any reasonable MRSE value.
Look now at the α/ρ function in Figure 7.3, and it can be seen that as potential for MRSE
rockets upwards with increasing room surface reflectance, potential for contrast gets ever
lower. We are looking at an environment in which everything is visible, but nothing has
distinct visibility. There is no illumination difference, whether a planned illumination
hierarchy or an arbitrary outcome of source and distance, and there is no ‘flow’, and there
is no ‘sharpness’.
Compared with this outcome, it can be seen that lighting that relates to space, objects,
and particularly to people, comes at a cost. Seen in this way, current notions of good
lighting practice do, in fact, represent one particular type of energy efficiency compromise.
To pursue perception-based lighting concepts is to bring different factors into the equation.
Luminaire performance is still there, but the room and its contents are to be seen as the
secondary luminaire, whose role is to deliver luminous flux to the viewer. The role of the
primary luminaires (the lighting hardware) is to energise the secondary luminaire. This
process should be engineered for effectiveness and efficiency.

References
Jay, P.A. (1971). Lighting and visual perception. Lighting Research & Technology, 3: 133–
146.
—— (2002). Subjective criteria for lighting design. Lighting Research and Technology, 34:
87–99.
Lynes, J.A. (1974). Illuminance ratios as a constraint on utilance. Lighting Research and
Technology, 6: 172–174.

Appendix
Abbreviations used in the text
α
Absorptance, or vector altitude angle
φ
Vector azimuth angle
ρ
Reflectance
A, Aα
Area, room absorption (m2)
CAM
Colour appearance model
CBCP
Centre beam candle power (cd)
CCT
Correlated colour temperature (K)
CGA
Colour gamut area
CQS
Colour quality scale
CMV
Colour mismatch vector
CRI
Colour rendering index
D, D/r
Distance (m), distance/radius correction
E, Es(d)
Illuminance, direct illuminance on surface s (lx)
E, E(x)
Vector illuminance, vector illuminance component on x axis (lx)
e, e(x)
Unit vector, unit vector component on x axis
~E, ~E(x)
Mean symmetric illuminance, symmetric illuminance on x axis (lx)
FRF
First reflected flux (lm)
HCP
Highlight contrast potential
HWP
Horizontal working plane
MS
Exitance from surface s (lm/m2)
MRSE
Mean room surface exitance (lm/m2)
PAI
Perceived adequacy of illumination (MRSE)
RI
Room index
S/P
Scotopic/photopic ratio
TAIR
Target/ambient illuminance ratio
TCS
Test colour sample
VSR
Vector/scalar ratio

Index
Adelson, Edward H. 6
Ambient illumination 6, 11, 103, 120
Perceived brightness or dimness of 18
Attributes (of objects) 6, 28
Bezold-Brücke hue shift 41
‘Black-body’ 45
‘Cave effect’ 131
Checker shadow illusion 3
Circadian response 44, 60
Colour:
appearance models (CAMs) 55
‘Class A’ 60
gamut area 57, 60, 122
mismatch vector 57
quality scale 54
rendering index 51, 122
Correlated colour temperature 45, 48, 60, 120
D/r correction 97
Daylight factor 106
Energy efficiency 108, 131
Exitance 19
Fenestration systems 106
‘First bounce’ lumens 17, 93

Flux:
First reflected 17, 22, 33, 92
Inter-reflected 20
‘Flow’ of light 50. 66, 75, 122
Flowchart:
Illumination hierarchy 32
Lighting design 121
Gershun, A.A. 77
Gretag-Macbeth ‘ColorChecker’ 61
Highlight contrast potential 87
Horizontal working plane 12, 131
Hunt, R.W.G. 55
Illuminance:
Indirect 19
Ratios 28
Recommended levels 12
Scalar 81
Illumination:
Adequacy 124
Colour appearance of 45, 120
Colour rendering of 50
Cubic 99, 112
Daylight 106
Hierarchy 28, 103, 122
Perceived adequacy of 30, 33
Perceived difference of 18, 29
Solid 76, 81
Vector 79
International Commission on Illumination (CIE) 39

Intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells 44
Jay, Peter 127
‘Kruithof effect’ 49, 60
Lighting patterns:
Highlight pattern 5, 70, 84
Shading pattern 5, 67
Shadow pattern 5, 70, 89
Three object lighting patterns 66
Lighting standards 12
‘Lumen dumping’ 124
Luminous efficiency of radiant flux 40
Luminous sensitivity function (V(λ)) 39, 60
Other sensitivity functions 41–45, 60
Lynes, J.A. 28, 81
McCandless, Stanley 50, 60
Maximum attainable contrast 127
Mean room surface exitance 16, 17, 33, 92, 120, 131
Calculation 103
Measurement 109
Melanopsin 44
Melatonin 44
Mesopic condition 40
Nayatani, Y. 55
Perceived adequacy of illumination 30, 33, 124, 131
Perceived ‘tint’ 46
Photopic condition 40
Phototropism 27

Productivity, lighting for 130
Rea, Mark 41
Reciprocal mega Kelvin scale 46
Related (and unrelated) colours 4, 27
Room absorption 17, 92
Room surface reflectance values 127–129
Scalar illuminance 81
Scotopic condition 40
Scotopic/photopic ratio 42–43, 60
‘Sharpness’ of illumination 67, 84
Spreadsheets:
Ambient illumination 23
Cubic illumination 102
Cubic illumination measurement 117
Illumination hierarchy 35–36, 122
Symmetric solid 80
Target/ambient illuminance ratio 30, 33, 122
Calculation 103
Measurement 111
Test colour method 51
Thought experiment:
How brightly lit? 12
‘Sharpness’ of illumination 84
Uniformity factor 12
Umbra, penumbra 89
‘Visual clarity’ 59, 61
Vector direction:
Altitude angle 82

Azimuth angle 82
Unit vector 83
Vector/scalar ratio 67, 82, 122
Measurement 111
Vector solid 79
View-out 108
Waldram, J.M. 28
Worthy, J.A. 84

