
Light: Science & Magic
Photographic lighting is a topic that will never go out of style,  
no matter how sophisticated cameras and other technology get. 
Even with the most high-tech gear, photographers still need to 
put a lot of thought and vision into lighting their photographs  
in order to get great results. This key skill has the power to  
dramatically and quickly improve photographs.
Light: Science & Magic provides you with a comprehensive 
theory of the nature and principles of light, with examples and 
instructions for practical application. Featuring photographs,  
diagrams, and step-by-step instructions, this book speaks to pho-
tographers of varying levels. It provides invaluable information on 
how to light the most difficult subjects, such as surfaces, metal, 
glass, liquids, extremes (black-on-black and white-on-white), and 
portraits.
This new edition includes:
• All new chapter entitled “Setting Up Your First Studio”
• A re-vamped and expanded chapter 8, “Making Portraits”
• New appendix of reliable photo gear sources
• Over 100 new photographs and informational sidebars
• Updated information about advances in flash equipment, LED 
panels, and fluorescent lights
Styles of lighting continue to change, but the nature of light will 
always remain the same. Once photographers understand the 
basic physics of lighting, they can apply that knowledge to a broad 
range of photographic styles.

Fil Hunter was a highly respected commercial photographer 
specializing in still life and special effects photographs for adver-
tising and editorial illustration. During a career spanning over 
three decades, he worked for such clients as America Online 
(AOL), US News, Time-Life Books, Life Magazine (27 covers), 
the National Science Foundation, and National Geographic. He 
taught photography at university level and served as technical 
consultant on a number of photographic publications. Mr. Hunter 
won the Virginia Professional Photographer’s Grand Photographic 
Award three times.
Steven Biver has over twenty years of experience as a commer-
cial photographer specializing in portraits, still life, photomontage, 
and digital manipulation. His client list includes Johnson & 
Johnson, USDA, William & Mary College, Condé Nast, and IBM. 
He has been honored with awards from Communication Arts, 
Graphis, HOW Magazine, and Adobe, who have also included his 
work on a Photoshop ‘extras’ disc to inspire other photographers. 
He is also the co-author of FACES: Photography and the Art of 
Portraiture, another Focal Press publication.
Paul Fuqua has worked as an editorial and wildlife photographer 
for more than thirty-five years. He started his own production 
company in 1970 and is dedicated to teaching through the use of 
visuals. Paul has written and produced educational and training 
material in a variety of fields including law, public safety, history, 
science, and the environment. For the last ten years he has pro-
duced educational material dealing with the natural sciences and 
the need for global habitat stewardship. Paul is also a co-author of 
FACES: Photography and the Art of Portraiture for Focal Press.

iii
Light: Science & Magic
An Introduction to Photographic Lighting
Fifth Edition
Fil Hunter
Steven Biver
Paul Fuqua

First published 2015
by Focal Press
70 Blanchard Road, Suite 402, Burlington, MA 01803
and by Focal Press
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Focal Press is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa 
business 
© 2015 Fil Hunter, Steven Biver, and Paul Fuqua
The right of Fil Hunter, Steven Biver, and Paul Fuqua to be identified as 
authors of this work has been asserted by them in accordance with sections 
77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in 
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publishers.
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new 
research and experience broaden our understanding, changes in research 
methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become 
necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and 
knowledge in evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, 
or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they 
should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including 
parties for whom they have a professional responsibility. 
Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to 
infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
CIP data has been applied for
ISBN: 978-0-415-71940-7 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-0-415-71941-4 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-86739-7 (ebk)
Typeset in New Caledonia 
By Keystroke, Station Road, Codsall, Wolverhampton

Dedication 
We dedicate this book to our friend and co-author, Fil Hunter.  
It is his pioneering vision that this book so largely reflects.
Sadly, Fil died while this edition was in preparation after a 
long and tortuous battle against a terrible disease. We shall miss 
him, as will many others in the photography community.
Steven Biver and Paul Fuqua

--~ouna ro Create 
IF 
You are a creator 
Whatever your form of expression - 
photography, filmmaking, 
animation, games, audio, media communication, web design, or 
theatre -you simply want to create without limitation. Bound 
by nothing except your own creativity and determination. 
Focal Press can help. 
For over 75 years Focal has published books that support your 
creative goals. Our founder, Andor Kraszna-Krausz, established 
Focal in 1938 so you could have access to leading-edge expert 
knowledge, techniques, and tools that allow you to create 
without constraint. We strive to create exceptional, engaging, 
and practical content that helps you master your passion. 
Focal Press and you 
Bound to create. 
We'd love t o  hear how we've helped 
you create. Share your experience: 
www.focaIpress.com/boundtocreate I

vii
Table of Contents
Dedication 
v
Special Thanks 
xvii
Introduction  
1
Chapter 1
Light: the Beginning 
5
Lighting Is the Language of Photography  
6
What Are the “Principles”? 
6
Why Are the Principles Important? 
8
How Did We Choose the Examples for This  
Book? 
9
To Do or Not to Do? 
10
What Kind of Camera Do I Need? 
12
A Word of Caution 
13
What Lighting Equipment Do I Need? 
16
What Else Do I Need to Know to Use This Book? 17
What Is the “Magic” Part of This Book? 
18
Chapter 2
Light: the Raw Material of Photography 
21
What is Light? 
22
How Photographers Describe Light 
26
Brightness 
27
Color 
27
Contrast 
29
“Light” Versus “Lighting” 
33
How the Subject Affects Lighting 
36
Transmission 
36

TABLE OF CONTENTS
viii
“Direct” Versus “Diffuse” Transmission 
39
Absorption 
40
Reflection 
41
Chapter 3
The Management of Reflection and the Family of  
Angles 
43
Types of Reflections 
44
Diffuse Reflections 
45
The Inverse Square Law 
49
Direct Reflections  
50
The Family of Angles 
54
Polarized Direct Reflection 
55
Is It Polarized Reflection or Ordinary Direct 
Reflection? 
60
Turning Ordinary Direct Reflection into Polarized 
Reflection 
62
Applying the Theory 
63
Chapter 4
Surface Appearances 
65
Photographer as an Editor 
66
Capitalizing on Diffuse Reflections 
67
The Angle of Light 
68
The Success and Failure of the General Rule 
73
The Distance of Light 
75
Doing the Impossible 
78
Using Diffuse Reflection and Shadow to Reveal 
Texture 
83
Capitalizing on Direct Reflections 
85
Complex Surfaces 
89

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ix
Chapter 5
Revealing Shape and Contour 
95
Depth Clues 
97
Perspective Distortion 
98
Distortion as a Clue to Depth 
99
Manipulating Distortion 
100
Tonal Variation 
102
The Size of the Light 
103
Large Lights Versus Small Lights 
104
Distance from the Subject 
105
The Direction of the Light 
107
Light on the Side 
108
Light above the Subject 
110
Fill Light 
112
Adding Depth to the Background 
116
How Much Tonal Variation is Ideal? 
120
Photographing Cylinders: Increasing Tonal  
Variation 
120
The Glossy Box 
123
Use a Dark- to Medium-toned Background 
124
Eliminate Direct Reflection from the Box Top 
125
Move the Light Source toward the Camera 
126
Raise or Lower the Camera 
126
Use Falloff 
127
Eliminate Direct Reflection from the Box’s  
Sides 
128
Put a Black Card on the Tabletop 
128
Tip the Box 
129
Use a Longer Lens 
129
Finish with Other Resources 
129
Try a Polarizer 
130

TABLE OF CONTENTS
x
Use Dulling Spray 
131
Use Direct Reflection 
131
Chapter 6
Metal 
133
Flat Metal 
134
Bright or Dark? 
136
Finding the Family of Angles 
136
Position a White Target Where You Think the  
Family of Angles Will Be 
137
Place a Test Light at the Camera Lens 
137
Aim the Test Light 
138
Study the Position and Shape of the Area Marked  
on the Test Surface 
139
Lighting the Metal 
140
Keeping the Metal Bright 
140
What Is a “Normal” Exposure for Metal? 
144
Keeping the Metal Dark 
145
The Elegant Compromise 
149
Controlling the Effective Size of the Light 
152
Keeping the Metal Square 
157
Use a View Camera or Perspective Control Lens 157
Aim the Camera through a Hole in the Light  
Source 
158
Photograph the Metal at an Angle 
160
Retouch the Reflection 
160
Metal Boxes 
160
A Light Background 
163
A Transparent Background 
164
A Glossy Background 
167
Round Metal 
169

TABLE OF CONTENTS
xi
Camouflage 
171
Keeping the Light Off the Camera 
171
Using a Tent  
172
Other Resources 
174
Polarizing Filters 
175
Black Magic 
175
Dulling Spray  
176
Where Else Do These Techniques Apply? 
176
Chapter 7
The Case of the Disappearing Glass 
179
Principles 
179
Problems 
180
Solutions 
180
Two Attractive Opposites 
182
Bright-field Lighting 
182
Choose the Background 
184
Position the Light 
184
Position the Camera 
185
Position the Subject and Focus the Camera 
186
Shoot the Picture 
186
Dark-field Lighting 
188
Set Up a Large Light Source 
189
Set Up a Dark Background Smaller Than the  
Light Source 
190
Position the Camera 
191
Position the Subject and Focus the Camera 
192
Shoot the Picture 
192
The Best of Both Worlds 
193
Some Finishing Touches 
194
Defining the Surface of Glassware 
195

TABLE OF CONTENTS
xii
Illuminating the Background 
199
Minimizing the Horizon 
200
Stopping Flare 
203
Eliminating Extraneous Reflections 
204
Complications from Nonglass Subjects 
205
Liquids in Glass 
205
Liquid as a Lens 
206
Keeping True Color 
208
Secondary Opaque Subjects 
211
Recognizing the Principal Subject 
212
Chapter 8
Making Portraits 
215
The Single-light Portrait Set-up 
216
The Basic Set-up 
216
Light Size 
218
Skin Texture 
219
Where to Put the Main Light 
220
The Key Triangle  
221
Key Triangle Too Large: Main Light Too Near  
the Camera 
222
Key Triangle Too Low: Main Light Too High 
223
Key Triangle Too Narrow: Main Light Too Far  
to Side 
224
Left Side? Right Side? 
225
Broad Lighting or Short Lighting? 
225
Eyeglasses 
227
Additional Lights 
228
Fill Lights 
229
Reflector Cards as Fill Lights 
232
Background Lights 
234

TABLE OF CONTENTS
xiii
Hair Lights 
236
Kickers 
238
Rim Lights 
241
Mood and Key 
242
Low-key Lighting 
243
High-key Lighting 
244
Staying in Key 
247
Dark Skin 
247
The Unfocused Spot 
249
Using Colored Gels 
254
Chapter 9
The Extremes 
257
The Characteristic Curve 
258
The Perfect “Curve” 
258
A “Bad” Camera 
261
Overexposure 
263
Underexposure 
265
Using Every Resource 
270
White-on-White 
270
Exposing White-on-White Scenes 
271
Lighting White-on-White Scenes 
274
Subject and Background 
275
Using an Opaque White Background 
276
Light the Subject from Above 
277
Use a Gobo Above the Subject 
278
Add Dimension 
281
Using a Translucent White Background 
282
Using a Mirror Background 
286
In Any Case, Keep the Background Small 
287
Black-on-Black 
288

TABLE OF CONTENTS
xiv
Exposing Black-on-Black Scenes 
289
Lighting Black-on-Black Scenes 
290
Subject and Background 
291
Using an Opaque Black Background 
293
Using a Glossy Black Surface 
296
Keeping the Subject Away from the  
Background 
297
Histograms 
299
Preventing Problems 
301
Overmanipulation 
303
Curves 
305
New Principles 
306
Chapter 10
Traveling Light   
309
The Lights We Use 
310
Heavy-duty Portable Strobes 
310
“Hot-shoe” Flashes 
311
LED Panels 
312
Getting the Exposure Right 
313
Letting Your Flash Do the Figuring 
314
Using a Meter  
314
Meters and LEDs 
315
Getting More Light 
315
Multiple, or “Ganged”, Flashes 
316
Battery Packs 
318
Flash Extenders 
318
Getting Better-quality Light 
319
The Problems 
319
Take It Off 
320
Bouncing From Hard To Soft 
321

TABLE OF CONTENTS
xv
The Omni-Bounce—A Big Help For a Little  
Money 
323
“Raccoon Eyes” 
324
Feathering Your Light 
326
Forcing the Shadow 
328
Lights of Different Colors 
329
Why Is the Color of the Light Important? 
330
Tungsten 
330
Daylight  
331
Nonstandard Light Sources 
331
Do the Colors Mix? 
334
The Remedies  
337
Correcting Mixed Colors 
337
Correcting Unmixed Colors  
338
Filtering Daylight  
339
Correcting Errors in Reproduction 
340
Lights of Different Duration 
340
Different Approaches 
342
Other Useful Gear 
348
Chapter 11
Setting Up Your First Studio  
353
Lights: An Early Issue 
354
Getting Your Lights Right 
356
What Kind of Lights? 
356
Flash 
357
Continuous Lights 
358
How Many Lights? 
359
Light Stands 
359
Booms 
361
Light Modifiers—Which Do I Need? 
361

TABLE OF CONTENTS
xvi
Diffusers 
362
Reflectors 
363
Snoots and Grids 
364
Gobos and Flags  
364
Backgrounds 
365
Computers and Associated Gear 
366
Miscellaneous Equipment 
367
What Sort of Space? 
368
Appendix: Reliable Suppliers 
372
Index 
 
374

xvii
Special Thanks
I would like to thank, Leah Bassett (Hair & Make-up), Nicolette 
Steele, Brynn Tucker, Mike Jones, Tessa Biver, Mark Romanoff, 
Mike Harvey, Jade Biver, Nigel Biver, Union 206 Studio, the late 
Vance Bockis, Adonis, Quiterio, and the folks at Focal Press. I 
would also like to thank my wonderful family for all their support.
Steven Biver
With gratitude and undying admiration for Robert Yarbrough— 
a teacher who taught.
Paul Fuqua

7KLVSDJHLQWHQWLRQDOO\OHIWEODQN

1
Introduction 
Lighting is at the very heart of photography. Unlike some of our 
picture-making colleagues, we will not go quite so far as to claim 
that “Without great lighting, there can be no great photographs.” 
However, we do believe that comes close to being the truth. 
And that is exactly why we wrote the first edition of this book. 
In it we wanted to present a number of key lighting concepts in a 
clear, readily understandable way. Our aim remains exactly the 
same for this—the fifth edition.
It is important to understand that this is not a “how to” book 
in the sense that the term is generally used. In it we rarely, if ever, 
suggest appropriate lens apertures, shutter speeds, flash settings, 
or other such information—information that is often an impor-
tant part of the currently popular “recipe” approach to teaching 
lighting. If that is what you are looking for, you must look else-
where. (Personally, we would recommend the brilliantly done 
“Digital Photography Book” series by Scott Kelby.)
If, on the other hand, you want to understand something 
about the underlying nature of light and learn how to employ its 
key characteristics to the lighting of any sort of subject in any 
location or circumstance, we suggest that this is the right book for 
you. In it we present an overarching approach to photographic 
lighting. Applying it will enable you to understand why a subject 
looks the way it does when it is illuminated by any given “light,” 
and how to use this understanding to make exactly the picture 
you are after. 

2
INTRODUCTION
We also include chapters dealing with the peculiarities associ-
ated with using hot-shoe and similar flashes, and suggestions for 
those of you who may be considering setting up your first studio. 
Finally, in a brief appendix, we list some of the photographic sup-
pliers from whom we have received particularly good services 
over the years. 

7KLVSDJHLQWHQWLRQDOO\OHIWEODQN

4

5
1
Light: the Beginning
Light: Science & Magic is a discussion, not a lecture. You bring to 
this discussion your own opinions about art, beauty, and aesthet-
ics. We do not intend to change those opinions and may not even 
influence them very much. We will be more annoyed than flat-
tered if reading this book causes you to make pictures that do 
nothing but mirror ours. For better or worse, you have to build 
your own pictures on your own vision.
What we do have to offer you is a set of tools. This book is about 
technology. Science. Brass tacks. It is information for you to use 
when you please, if you please, and how you please. This does not, 
however, mean that this book is not also about ideas, because it is. 
The basic tools of lighting are principles, not hardware. 
Shakespeare’s tool was the Elizabethan English language, not the 
quill pen he used. A photographer without mastery of lighting is 
like a Shakespeare who could speak only the language of the 
people in the Globe Theatre pit. Being Shakespeare, he still 
might have come up with a decent play, but it certainly would 
have taken a lot more work and, very likely, more blind luck than 
most people are entitled to expect.

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
6
LIGHTING IS THE LANGUAGE OF PHOTOGRAPHY 
Patterns of light convey information just as surely as do spoken 
words. The information that light conveys is clear and specific. It 
includes definite statements, such as “The bark of this tree is 
rough” or “This utensil is made of stainless steel, but that one  
is sterling.”
Lighting, like any other language, has a grammar and a vocab-
ulary. Good photographers need to learn both. Fortunately,  
photographic lighting is a lot easier to master than a foreign lan-
guage. This is because physics, not social whim, dictates its rules.
The tools we have included in this book are the grammar and 
vocabulary of light. Whatever we say about specific technique is 
important only to the extent that it proves the principles. Please, 
do not memorize the lighting diagrams in this book. 
It is entirely possible to put a light in exactly the same spot as 
shown in one of the diagrams and still make a bad picture—espe-
cially if the subject is not identical to that in the diagram. But if 
you learn the principles, you may well see several other good 
ways to light the same subject that we never mention, and which 
perhaps have never even occurred to us. 
WHAT ARE THE “PRINCIPLES”?
To photographers, the important principles of light are those that 
predict how it will behave. Some of these principles are especially 
powerful. You will, however, probably be surprised to find how 
few they are, how simple they are to learn, and how much they 
explain.
We discuss these key principles in detail in Chapters 2 and  
3. They are the tools we use for everything else. Then in later 

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
7
chapters we put them to work lighting a wide range of subjects. 
At this point we will simply list them:
1. The effective size of the light source is the single most important 
decision in lighting a photograph. It determines what types of 
shadows are produced and may also affect the type of reflection.
Working with Light
Figures 1.1 These four images—very different pictures—are a small sample of some of the many different ways 
photographers have worked with light, be it either in a studio or the outside world.
1.1 Some examples of the different photographers that have worked with light.
Credit: Steven Biver
Credit: Steven Biver
Credit: Mark Romanoff
Credit: Paul Fuqua

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
8
2. Three types of reflections are possible from any surface: direct 
reflection, diffuse reflection, and polarized direct reflection. 
They determine why any surface looks the way it does.
3. Some of these reflections occur only if light strikes the surface 
from within a limited family of angles. After we decide what 
type of reflection is important, the family of angles determines 
where the light should or should not be.
Just think about that for a minute. If you think lighting is an art, 
you’re exactly right—but it’s also a technology that even a bad 
artist can learn to do well. These are the most important concepts 
in this book. If you pay close attention to them whenever they 
come up, you will find they will usually account for any other 
details you may overlook or we forget to mention.
WHY ARE THE PRINCIPLES IMPORTANT?
The three principles we have just given are statements of physical 
laws that have not changed since the universe began. They have 
nothing to do with style, taste, or fad. The timelessness of these 
principles is exactly what makes them so useful. 
Consider, for example, how they apply to portrait style. A rep-
resentative 1952 portrait does not look like most portraits made 
in 1852 or 2014. However, and this is the important point, a pho-
tographer who understands light could duplicate either of them.
Chapter 8 presents a number of useful approaches to lighting 
a portrait. But some photographers will not want to adopt those 
approaches, and even fewer will do so in 20 years. We do not care 
whether or not you use the methods of portrait lighting we chose 
to demonstrate. 

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
9
We do, however, care very much that you understand exactly 
how and why we did what we did. It is the answers to those very 
“hows” and “whys” that will allow you to produce your own pic-
tures your own way. Good tools do not limit creative freedom. 
They make it possible.
Good photographs take planning, and lighting is an essential 
part of that planning. For this reason, the most important part of 
good lighting happens before we turn on the first lights. This plan-
ning can take many days or it can happen a fraction of a second 
before pressing the shutter release. It does not matter when you 
plan or how long it takes, as long as you get the planning done. 
The more you accomplish with your head, the less work you have 
to do with your hands.
Understanding the principles we presented above enables us 
to decide what lights need to be where before we begin to place 
them. This is the important part. The rest is just fine-tuning.
HOW DID WE CHOOSE THE EXAMPLES FOR THIS 
BOOK?
The portrait is but one of the several basic photographic subjects 
we discuss. We chose each to prove something about the basic 
principles. We also lit the subject to show the principle, regard-
less of whether there might be other good ways to light the same 
thing. If you master the principles, you will discover the other 
ways without any help from us.
The above means that you should give at least some attention 
to every representative subject. Even if you have no interest in a 
particular subject, it probably relates to something you do want to 
photograph.

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
10
We also chose some of the subjects because they are rumored 
to be difficult. Such rumors are spread usually by people who lack 
the conceptual tools needed to deal with such subjects. This book 
dispels the rumors by giving you those tools.
In addition, we tried to use studio examples whenever possi-
ble. This, however, does not mean Light: Science & Magic is only 
about studio lighting. Far from it! Light behaves the same way 
everywhere, whether it is controlled by the photographer, by the 
building designer, or by nature. But you can set up indoor exper-
iments like ours at any hour of any day regardless of the weather. 
Later, when you use the same lighting in a landscape, on a public 
building, or at a press conference, you will recognize it because 
you will have seen it before.
Finally, we chose each example to be as simple as possible.  
If you are learning photography, you will not have to leave the 
set-up in your living room or in your employer’s studio for days at 
a time to master it. If you teach photography, you will find that 
you can do any of these demonstrations in a single class session.
TO DO OR NOT TO DO?
If you are learning photography without any formal instruction, 
we suggest you try all of the basic examples in this book. Do not 
simply read about them. What happens in your head is the most 
important part of lighting, but the eye and the hand are still 
essential. Guided experience coordinates the three.
When we talk about soft shadows or polarized direct reflec-
tions, for example, you already know how they look. They happen 
in the world, and you see them every day. But you will know them 
and see them still better once you have made them happen.

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
11
If you are a student, your class assignments will keep you busy 
enough without any further demands from us. Your teacher may 
use the exercises here or invent new ones. Either way, you will 
learn the principles in the book because they are basic. They hap-
pen in all lighting situations.
If you are a professional photographer trying to expand your 
expertise, your judgment about what exercises you need is better 
than ours. Generally, these will be those that are least like the 
things you are already photographing. You may find our basic 
examples too simple to be an entertaining challenge. Try compli-
cating things a bit. Add an unexpected prop, an unusual view-
point, or a special effect to our basic example. You might as well 
get a striking portfolio piece out of the effort while you are at it.
If you are a teacher, you can look at this book and see that 
most of the exercises show at least one good, simple, easy- 
to-master way to light even those subjects with reputations for 
maximum difficulty: metal, glass, white-on-white, and black-on-
black. Notice, however, that although we’ve done this in almost 
every case, we weren’t able to do it in absolutely every one of 
them. 
The “invisible light” exercise in Chapter 6, for example, is 
pretty difficult for most beginners. Some students may also find 
the secondary background behind the glass of liquid in Chapter 7 
to be beyond the limit of their patience. For this reason, if you 
find anything in this book that you haven’t already done with your 
own hands and eyes, we strongly encourage you to try it yourself 
before deciding whether it is appropriate to the skills of your  
students.

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
12
WHAT KIND OF CAMERA DO I NEED?
Asking “What kind of camera do I need?” may seem silly to expe-
rienced photographers. But we have taught this material. We 
know how many students ask it, and we have to answer it. There 
are two good answers, and they contradict each other slightly. 
The weight we place on each answer matters more than the 
answers themselves.
Successful photographs depend on the photographer more 
than the equipment. Inexperienced photographers work best 
with the camera with which they are familiar. Experienced pho-
tographers work best with the camera they like. These human 
factors sometimes have more to do with the success of a photo-
graph than purely technical principles.
Ideally, people learning photography should shoot digitally for 
the instant feedback this approach provides. Shooting digitally is 
also far less expensive, and the quality that most of today’s digital 
cameras provide borders on amazing. Of the many photographs 
in this book, we made all but a handful digitally.
Just which digital camera you should get is up to you. 
Fortunately, most manufacturers offer a number of reasonably 
priced models. Check out the many reviews that you will find in 
photography magazines and on the web. Talk to other photogra-
phers and, if possible, deal with a camera store whose sales staff 
know what they are talking about. Camera clubs are also another 
good source of information, and, if you are in school, your instruc-
tor will also be able to help you select the camera that best fits 
your needs and budget.

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
13
A WORD OF CAUTION
Any way you look at it, the advent of the digital world has been  
a wonderful thing for students. It has not, however, resulted in a 
totally win–win situation. Digital cameras are, at their hearts, 
computers. Because of this, camera makers can program the 
camera to alter the image they take without the foreknowledge  
or consent of the photographer! This is often a good thing. The 
camera’s decisions are, in our experience, more often than not 
correct. Sometimes, however, they are not.
A still bigger problem is that it is hard for students to know 
whether what has happened, for better and for worse, is because 
of the camera’s decision or because of the photographer’s deci-
sion. You may make mistakes that the camera fixes, costing you a 
learning experience, or the camera can make a mistake and you 
innocently blame yourself for it.
In light of the preceding paragraphs, we offer the following 
suggestions:
1. Develop at least a minimal competence in postproduction 
skills. You do not have to be a whiz-bang Photoshop genius to 
be an effective digital shooter. You do, however, need to learn 
at least the basics of one of the numerous (and often amazingly 
inexpensive) digital editing programs now available.
2. Shoot in the “Manual” mode. This will prevent your camera from 
“helping” you to get a technically satisfactory shot. It will, how-
ever, go a long way in that direction by leaving most of the deci-
sion making up to you and not your camera’s computer “brain.” 
3. Shoot in the Raw format. Because of its minimal in-camera com-
pression, it stores far more of the visual information that reaches 
your camera’s sensor than does the alternate JPEG format. 

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
14
Thus, during postproduction when you are fine-tuning your 
images, your software has far more digital information with which 
to work. And this can make a big difference—a very big difference.
A Raw Advantage
We shot Figure 1.2 in the Raw format. While adequate, we feel that it lacks the tonal 
range and color, in other words the “snap,” needed for visual impact.
1.2 Farm boy from the Dominican Republic as shot in the Raw format before 
any postprocessing. 
1.3 The same image as Figure 1.2, but after we did some postprocessing on it.

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
15
Unfortunately, this book does not have the space needed to deal 
with the above three issues in detail. The “A Raw Advantage” box 
is but a quick look at some of the things you can do when shooting 
in Raw. For more complete information, please consult one of the 
many fine books on the subject available today. 
If you are a student, the remedy for this is a close, ongoing talk 
with your instructor about what’s happening in your pictures. If 
you are an experienced photographer, you can already tell when 
the camera is helping you and when it is hurting you.
The hardest path is that of a novice photographer attempting 
to learn the material in this book without the benefit of formal 
Figure 1.3, by comparison, shows our young friend after we did some work on 
his image during postproduction. Because we shot the original in Raw, we had the 
flexibility we needed to produce the color and contrast treatment we wanted.
Figure 1.4 is a monotone variation on the above theme.
1.4 Here we see a variation on the previous theme. Once again, it was our use 
of the Raw format that gave us the flexibility needed to produce this black and 
white image.

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
16
instruction. What we can offer all photographers is the assurance 
that the material we present in the following pages can, indeed, be 
learned in that very way. All three of the authors of this book did 
so. Talk with other photographers as much as possible. Ask ques-
tions, and always share with others whatever you have learned.
WHAT LIGHTING EQUIPMENT DO I NEED?
We expect you to ask this question, and we offer this two-part 
answer:
1. No photographer has enough lighting equipment to do every 
assignment as well as possible. No matter how much lighting 
equipment you have, there will be times when you want more. 
Suppose, for example, you can illuminate a large set to shoot 
at f/96 at 1/5000 a second. (Please call the fire department 
before turning on this apparatus.) You will probably then find 
that you want still more light in a particular shadow, or you 
may find that you need to light a yet larger area to fit the 
required composition.
2. Most photographers have enough equipment to do almost 
every assignment well. Even if you have no lighting equipment 
at all, you may be able to get the job done. Can the subject be 
photographed outdoors? If not, sunlight through a window 
may be a good light source. Inexpensive tools, such as white 
cloth, black paper, foam board, black gaffer tape, and alumi-
num foil, can allow you to control sunlight as effectively as the 
best manufactured equipment.
The above said, there is no dispute that good lighting equipment 
can be a great convenience. If the sun moves too far across the 

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
17
sky before you are ready to expose, you may have to wait until it 
returns the next day and hope there is no more and no less cloud 
cover the second time around. Professional photographers know 
that convenience becomes necessity when they have to photo-
graph what the client wants when the client wants.
This message is not aimed at professionals, however. They 
already know how to do whatever is needed with whatever is 
available. We are more interested in encouraging students now. 
You have advantages that professionals do not. Within broad lim-
its, you can select the size of your subject.
Small scenes require less light. You may not have a 3-by-4-foot 
soft box, but a desk lamp with a 60-watt bulb and a tracing paper 
diffuser can light a small subject nearly as well.
Lack of equipment is, no doubt, a handicap. You know it and 
we know it. But it is not necessarily an insurmountable obstacle. 
A good dose of creativity may well overcome it. Just remember 
that creative lighting is the result of planning the lighting. Part of 
that creativity means anticipating the limitations you face and 
deciding how best to work within them.
WHAT ELSE DO I NEED TO KNOW TO USE  
THIS BOOK?
We assume you know basic photography. You know how to deter-
mine a reasonable exposure, at least close enough that bracketing 
can cover errors. You understand depth of field. You have mas-
tered the basic operation of your camera.
That is all. We have no intention of being ruthless in our 
examination of your background credentials. Just to be safe, how-
ever, we suggest you keep a good basic photography book on 
hand as you read this one. (We did when we wrote it.) We do not 

LIGHT: THE BEGINNING
18
want you to find easy material difficult just because we unknow-
ingly use a technical term you have not seen before.
Finally, do not overlook the Internet. There is a wealth of 
information to be found there about lighting and photography in 
general. A search here and a search there are moments well spent 
by any photographer—advanced or beginner.
WHAT IS THE “MAGIC” PART OF THIS BOOK?
Learn about the light and the science. Then the magic happens!

7KLVSDJHLQWHQWLRQDOO\OHIWEODQN

20

21
2
Light: the Raw Material of 
Photography
In some ways, photographers resemble musicians more than 
painters, sculptors, and other visual artists. This is because pho-
tographers, like musicians, are more interested in the manipula-
tion of energy than that of matter.
Photography begins the moment light is emitted from a 
source. It climaxes with still more light reflected from a printed 
page or beaming from a monitor and striking a human eye. All 
steps in between involve the manipulation of light—whether to 
control it, to record it, or, ultimately, to present it to a viewer.
Photography, at its heart, is the manipulation of light. Whether 
those manipulations serve artistic or technical purposes hardly 
matters; the two are often synonymous. Whether the manipula-
tions are physical, chemical, electrical, or electronic, they are all 
motivated by the same mission and guided by the same under-
standing of how light behaves.
In this chapter we are going to talk about light, the raw mate-
rial from which we make pictures. You are already familiar with 
most of the ideas we will discuss. This is because you have been 

22
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
learning to see since the day you were born. Even if you happen 
to be a novice photographer, your brain has already absorbed 
enough information about the behavior of light for you to be a 
master.
Throughout this chapter we aim to attach words and labels to 
some of this unconscious and semiconscious information. This 
will make it easier for you to talk about light with other photogra-
phers, just as musicians find it easier to say “b flat” or “4/4 time” 
instead of humming a scale or tapping a rhythm.
This is the most theoretical chapter in this book. It is also the 
most important because it is the foundation for all that follows.
WHAT IS LIGHT?
A complete definition of the nature of light is complex. In fact, 
several Nobel Prizes have been awarded for various contributions 
to the working definition we use today. We will simplify our dis-
cussion by using a definition adequate for applied photography. If 
you are still curious after reading this, see any basic physics text.
Light is a type of energy called electromagnetic radiation. 
Electromagnetic radiation travels through space in tiny “bundles” 
called photons. A photon is pure energy and has no mass when at 
rest. A box of photons the size of an elephant weighs nothing.
The energy of the photon produces an electromagnetic field 
around the photon. A field is invisible and cannot be detected 
unless there is a material object in the field on which it can exert 
a force. All this sounds pretty mysterious until one realizes that 
one common example of a field is the magnetic field surrounding 
an ordinary magnet. We cannot tell the field exists unless we 
move a nail close enough for the magnet to attract it. Then the 
effect of the field is apparent: the nail jumps to the magnet.

23
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
Unlike the field around the magnet, however, the electromag-
netic field around the photon is not constant in strength. Instead, 
it fluctuates as the photon travels. If we could see this change in 
the strength of the field it would look something like Figure 2.1.
Notice that the strength of the field moves from zero to its 
maximum-positive strength and then back to zero; it then repeats 
the pattern in the negative direction. This is why the field around 
a beam of light does not attract metal like an iron magnet does. 
The field around a photon of light is positive half of the time and 
negative the rest of the time. Thus the average charge of the two 
states is zero.
As the term implies, an “electromagnetic field” has both  
an electrical component and a magnetic one. Each component 
has the same pattern of fluctuation: zero to positive, to zero, to 
2.1 The magnetic field around a photon fluctuates from its maximum-positive to its 
maximum-negative strength as the photon travels. The electrical field behaves exactly 
the same but out of phase with the magnetic field; whenever one field is at its 
maximum, the other is at its minimum strength.
Zero Field Strength ' 1  
Maximum-negative 
Field Strength 
Zero Field Strength 
Zero Field Strength 

24
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
negative, and back to zero again. The electrical component is 
perpendicular to the magnetic one.
The relationship between these two components is easier to 
see if we assume that Figure 2.1 represents just the magnetic 
component. Then, if you turn this book so that the edge of the 
page is toward you, the same diagram will represent the electrical 
field. Whenever the strength of either the magnetic or the electri-
cal component is at its maximum, the other is at its minimum, so 
the total field strength remains constant.
All photons travel through space at the same speed, but the 
electromagnetic fields of some photons fluctuate faster than those 
of others. The more energy a photon has, the faster the fluctua-
tion. Human eyes can see the effect of this difference in photon 
energy levels and in the rate of field fluctuation. 
2.2 The rate at which the electromagnetic field fluctuates varies. We perceive this 
variation as different colors.
• 
Frequency of Red Light 
Frequency of Red Light 
Frequency of Red Light 
Frequency of Red Light 
• 
Frequency of 
Frequency of 
Blue Light 
.s::::. 
"5 
c 
~ 
en 
"0 
<ii 
u:: 
ti3 
c..> 
"C 
t3 
Q) 
W 
0 
ct: 
0 
c..> 
~ 
c 
OJ 
C\l 
~ 
Frequency of Red Light 
Frequency of Red Light 

25
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
We call the effect color (Figure 2.2). Red light, for example, 
has less energy than blue light, so the rate of its electromagnetic 
field fluctuation is only about two-thirds as fast.
We call the rate of fluctuation of the electromagnetic field  
its frequency, and we measure it with the unit called Hertz, or, 
for convenience, megahertz (1 megahertz = 1,000,000 Hertz). 
Frequency is the number of complete wavelengths that pass a 
point in space each second. Visible light is only one narrow range 
out of all the many possible electromagnetic frequencies.
Electromagnetic radiation can travel through a vacuum and 
through some forms of matter. We know that light, for example, 
can pass through transparent glass. 
Electromagnetic radiation is not closely related to mechani-
cally transmitted energy, such as sound or heat, which can travel 
only through matter. (Infrared radiation and heat are often con-
fused because they tend to accompany one another.) Sunlight 
2.3 This diagram shows the electromagnetic spectrum. Notice that visible light is but 
one small part of it.
Visible 
\ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
I 
, 
/ 
X-ray 
Ultraviolet '\ 
I' Infrared 
Radar 
Radio 
T 
T 
T 
1 1,000 million MHz 
1 1,000,000 million MHz 
Radar 
Radio 

26
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
reaches Earth, and very much beyond, without any fiber-optic 
lines to get it here.
Modern cameras are sensitive to a far wider range of electro-
magnetic frequencies than the human eye can perceive (Figure 
2.3). This is why a picture can be degraded by ultraviolet light, 
which we cannot see in a landscape, and film can be degraded by 
X-rays, which we cannot see emitted by a machine at an airport.
HOW PHOTOGRAPHERS DESCRIBE LIGHT
Even if we confine our attention to the visible portion of the elec-
tromagnetic spectrum, everyone knows that the effect of one 
group of photons may be radically different from that of another.
Examining our album of mental images, we all see the differ-
ence between an autumn sunset, a welder’s arc, and an early 
morning fog. Even in a standard office location, the decision to 
install fluorescent tubes, tungsten spots, or large skylights can 
have a major effect on the décor of a room (as well as on the 
mood and the productivity of the occupants).
Photographers, however, are interested in more than just the 
mental images of a given lighting effect. They need technical 
descriptions of the effect. Being able to describe the light is the 
first step in being able to control it. Or if the light is not control-
lable, as is the case in a landscape or an architectural picture, 
describing the light implies seeing the light well enough to know 
whether to shoot or to wait until conditions improve.
As photographers, we are primarily concerned with the bright-
ness, color, and contrast of a light. In the following pages, we will 
take a brief look at each.

27
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
Brightness
To a photographer, the single most important quality of a light 
source is its brightness. A brighter light is almost always a better 
light. At the most basic level, if the light is not bright enough, we 
cannot get a picture. If the light is brighter than the minimum  
we must have, then we can probably get a better picture. 
Those photographers who still use film can use a smaller aper-
ture or a faster shutter speed if they have more light. If they do 
not need, or want, a smaller lens opening or a shorter exposure 
time, then more light allows using a slower, finer-grained film. 
Either way, the image quality improves.
Color
We can use light of any color we please, and very strongly colored 
lights frequently make an artistic contribution to the photograph. 
Nevertheless, most pictures are made with white light. However, 
even this so-called “white” light comes in a range of colors. 
Photographers consider light to be “white” when it is a roughly 
even mix of the three primary colors: red, blue, and green. Human 
beings perceive this combination of light colors to be colorless.
The proportions of the color mixture may vary to a great 
extent, and people still cannot perceive any difference, unless 
they have the different light sources side by side for comparison. 
The eye can detect a very slight change in the color mixture, but 
the brain refuses to admit the difference. As long as there is a 
reasonable amount of each primary color, the brain says, “This 
light is white.”
Digital cameras make the same automatic adjustment to color 
that the brain does, but often not as reliably. Photographers must 

28
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
therefore pay attention to the differences between various  
white light sources. To classify variations in the color of white 
light, photographers borrow the color temperature scale from 
physicists. 
The color temperature scale is based on the fact that if we heat 
a material in a vacuum hot enough, it will glow. The color of this 
glow depends on how much we heat the material. We measure 
color temperature in degrees on the Kelvin temperature scale. The 
measurement unit, degrees Kelvin, is simply abbreviated as “K.”
It is interesting to note that the light with a high color tem-
perature is composed of a disproportionate amount of those colors 
artists call cool. For example, 10,000°K light has a great deal of 
blue in it. Similarly, what physicists tell us is a low temperature 
source has many of those colors artists call warm. Thus, a 2,000°K 
light tends toward the red to yellow family of colors. (None of this 
is surprising. Any welder can tell us that the blue-white welding 
arc is hotter than the piece of red-hot metal getting welded.)
Traditionally, photographers have used three standard light 
color temperatures. One of these is 5,500°K and is called  
daylight. There are two tungsten color temperature standards, 
3,200°K and 3,400°K. The last two are close enough together that 
sometimes the difference between them does not matter. These 
three light standards were developed for film, and we can still buy 
film that is color balanced for any of these three light color stan-
dards. 
Digital cameras, however, offer much more flexibility by 
adjusting numbers in the data processing to effectively allow 
shooting properly color balanced pictures, not only with light 
temperatures between any two of the three standards but also at 
temperatures much lower than 3,200°K and much higher than 
5,500°K.

29
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
Contrast
The third important characteristic of a photographic light is its 
contrast. A light source has high contrast if its rays all strike the 
subject from nearly the same angle. Light rays from a low- 
contrast source strike the subject from many different angles. 
Sunlight on a clear day is a common example of a high-contrast 
light source. The rays of sunlight shown in Figure 2.4 are parallel 
to one another and all strike the subject from approximately the 
same angle (despite the apparent difference in angle caused here 
by having to draw three dimensions on flat paper).
The easiest way to recognize a high-contrast light source is the 
appearance of the shadows. In the diagram we see that light does 
not enter the shadow area. This causes the edge of the shadow to 
be quite sharp and clearly defined.
2.4 The rays from a small, high-contrast light source all strike a subject at 
approximately the same angle. This produces hard-edged shadows.

30
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
We made Figure 2.5 with such a light source. Notice the crisp, 
relatively hard-edged shadow. A shadow with such defined edges 
is called a hard shadow. For this reason, high-contrast light 
sources are also said to be hard lights.
Now let us imagine what happens when cloud cover obscures 
the sun. Look at Figure 2.6. 
2.5 Hard-edged shadows are 
characteristically produced by small light 
sources.
2.6 The cloud scatters the sun’s light rays, causing them to strike the subject from 
many angles. This produces the soft shadow characteristic of large lights.

31
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
The sunlight scatters as it passes through the cloud. Consequently, 
the light that passes through the clouds strikes the subject from 
many different angles. Therefore, on an overcast day sunlight 
becomes a low-contrast light source.
Again, the contrast of the light source is revealed by the 
appearance of the shadow it produces. Some of the rays of light 
partly illuminate the shadow, especially at its edge. This differ-
ence is apparent in Figure 2.7.
In the photograph using low-contrast light, the shadow of the 
pepper is no longer clearly defined. It is no longer “hard.” The 
viewer cannot decide exactly what part of the tabletop is in 
shadow and what is not. A shadow such as this one, with no 
clearly defined edge, is called a soft shadow, and the light produc-
ing it is called a soft light.
Notice that we are using the words “hard” and “soft” only to 
describe how sharply the edge of a shadow is defined. We are not 
using these terms to describe how light or dark the shadow is. 
A soft shadow may be either light or dark, just as a hard 
shadow may be either light or dark, depending on factors such as 
2.7 A shadow so soft that much of it is 
just barely visible is the result of a very 
large light source.

32
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
the surface on which it falls and how much light gets reflected 
into the shadow by nearby objects.
For single light sources, the size of that source is the primary 
factor influencing its contrast. A small light source is always a 
hard light source, and most large sources are soft ones. We see 
that the sun in Figure 2.4 occupies little area in the diagram, so it 
is a small light source. The cloud covers a greater area in Figure 
2.6, making it a large light source.
It is important to understand that the physical size of a light 
does not always completely determine its effective size as a pho-
tographic light source. We know, for example, that the sun is 
more than 1 million kilometers in diameter. However, it is far 
enough away to act as a small source for a photographic subject 
on Earth.
If we could move the sun close enough to us, it would become 
an extremely large light source. We could then make softly lit 
photographs in sunlight, even without any cloud cover, assuming 
we could find a solution to the heat problem! 
Another extreme example has a more practical use: a small 
lamp on a laboratory workbench can effectively be a large source 
if we put it close enough to a tiny insect specimen. Be aware, 
however, that the correlation between the size of a light source 
and its contrast is just a generality, not an absolute. 
Remember that we can optically alter a light with special 
attachments, or, as photographers call them, “modifiers.” For 
example, a spot attachment can focus the light rays of a strobe 
head, and a grid blocks the rays from all but a narrow range of 
angles. In neither case can the light strike the subject from many 
different angles. This makes a light equipped with such a device 
hard, regardless of its size.

33
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
“LIGHT” VERSUS “LIGHTING”
We have talked about the brightness, color, and contrast of light. 
These are all of the important characteristics of light. However, 
we have said very little about lighting. Indeed, the little we have 
said about lighting has more to do with the absence of light, the 
shadows, than with the light itself.
Shadow is that part of the scene that the majority of the light 
in that scene does not strike. Highlight is the area illuminated. 
We want to talk about highlight, but we are not quite ready for it. 
If you look at the two pepper pictures (Figures 2.5 and 2.7), you 
will see why. The two photographs have very different lighting. 
However, even though the highlights are different, typically most 
viewers will notice only the difference in the shadows.
Is it possible that lighting determines the appearance of the 
shadow, but not the highlight? Figures 2.8 and 2.9 prove otherwise.
The Contrast of a Photograph
The contrast of the light is only one of the influences on the contrast of a photograph. 
If you are an experienced photographer, you know that you can find high contrast in 
an image with low-contrast light and vice versa.
Contrast is also determined by subject matter composition, exposure, and, if you 
are using film, its development. As everyone knows, a scene that includes black and 
white subjects is likely to have more contrast than one with entirely gray objects; but 
a software Levels or Curves adjustment during postproduction can produce high 
contrast, even in an entirely gray scene in very-low-contrast lighting.
The relationship between exposure and contrast is a bit more complex. Increased 
and decreased exposure can reduce contrast in an average scene. However, increas-
ing exposure will increase contrast in a dark-toned subject, whereas decreasing 
exposure may increase contrast in a light-gray scene.
We will talk about the relationship between lighting and contrast throughout this 
book, and we will show how exposure affects contrast in Chapter 9.

34
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
The glass bottle in Figure 2.8 was illuminated by a small, high-
contrast light source. Figure 2.9, on the other hand, is the result of 
a large, soft source. Now the difference in the highlights is obvious. 
Why does the contrast of the light have such a dramatic effect  
on the appearance of the highlight on the bottle but less so on the 
2.8 A small light source produces small, hard highlights on this glass bottle. Compare 
these with the highlights in Figure 2.9.

35
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
pepper? As you look at the examples, you already know that the  
difference in the lighting is caused by the subject itself.
The key point to grasp here is that photographic lighting is 
more than just light. Lighting is a relationship between the light, 
the subject, and the viewer. Thus, if we want to say any more 
about lighting, we must now talk about the subject.
2.9 We produced this large highlight by using a large light source.

36
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
HOW THE SUBJECT AFFECTS LIGHTING
Photons move. Photographic subjects often sit still. This is why 
we tend to consider light to be the “active” player in the photo-
graphic event. But this attitude can handicap our ability to “see” 
a scene.
Two identical photons striking two different surfaces can 
appear dramatically different to the eye and to the camera. The 
subject changes the light, and different subjects change the  
light in different ways. The subject plays an active role, just as  
the photon does. To perceive or to control lighting, we have to 
understand how the subject does that. 
The subject can do three things to a photon that strikes it: it 
can transmit, absorb, or reflect that photon.
Transmission
Light that passes through the subject, as in Figure 2.10, is said to 
be transmitted. Clean air and clear glass are examples of common 
materials that transmit light.
Showing you a photograph of transmitted light would be use-
less. A subject that only transmits the light cannot be seen. The 
subject that does not alter the light in some way is invisible. Of 
the three basic interactions between the light and the subject, 
simple transmission is the least significant in a discussion of pho-
tographic lighting.
However, the simple transmission shown in Figure 2.10 can 
occur only if the light strikes the surface at an angle perpendicu-
lar to it. At any other angle, the transmission of the light has 
accompanying refraction. Refraction is the bending of rays of 
light as they are transmitted from one material to another. 

37
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
Some materials refract light more than others. Air, for example, 
refracts light very little, whereas the glass used in a camera lens 
refracts it a great deal. Figure 2.11 illustrates the phenomenon.
Refraction is caused by a variation in the speed of light that 
results from the material through which it is transmitted. (The 
speed of light is constant in a vacuum.) The light in Figure 2.11 
is slowed as it enters the denser glass. 
The photons that strike the glass first are the first to have their 
speed reduced. The other photons, still in air, race ahead, causing 
a bending of the ray. Then the ray bends a second time, but in the 
opposite direction, as each photon regains its speed upon exiting 
back into the air.
Unlike simple transmission, refraction can be photographed. 
This is one of the reasons that completely transparent subjects 
2.10 Transmitted light. Clear glass and clean air are common materials that transmit 
visible light well.
Glass 
I L  
v 

38
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
2.12 The foreground bottle 
refracts the image of the 
cocktail glass in back of it.
2.11 A light ray striking a light-transmitting material—at any angle other than 
perpendicular—bends. This bending is called refraction. Dense glass, such as that 
used for camera lenses, refracts light especially strongly.
\ 
Air 
Glass \ 
Refracted Ray \ 
Refracted Ray 
Refracted Ray 

39
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
are not invisible. It is, for example, refraction that causes the wavy 
edge of the Martini glass in Figure 2.12.
“Direct” Versus “Diffuse” Transmission
So far we have talked about direct transmission, in which light 
passes through a material in a predictable path. Materials such as 
white glass and thin paper scatter the light rays in many random, 
unpredictable directions as they pass through. This scattering is 
called diffuse transmission (see Figure 2.13).
Materials that produce diffuse transmission are called translu-
cent to distinguish them from transparent materials, such as clear 
glass, which do not significantly diffuse the light.
Diffuse transmission is more important when we talk about 
light sources than in discussing photographic subjects. Covering a 
2.13 Diffuse transmission is the scattering of light as it passes through a translucent 
material.
s \ 
Air 
White 
Acrylic 

40
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
small light with a large translucent material is one way to increase 
its size and, therefore, to soften it. Both a diffusion sheet in front 
of a strobe and clouds covering the sun, as in Figure 2.6, are 
examples of translucent materials serving such a function.
Translucent subjects are of little special importance to photog-
raphers because their translucence usually requires no special 
lighting consideration. This is because they always absorb some of 
the light and reflect some of the light, in addition to transmitting 
it. Absorption and reflection are both more major influences on 
photographic lighting. We will deal with these next.
Absorption
Light that is absorbed by the subject is never again seen as visible 
light. The absorbed energy still exists, but the subject emits it in 
an invisible form, usually heat (see Figure 2.14).
2.14 Light absorbed by a subject is emitted in an invisible form. For the most part, 
this is heat.
Air 
Air 

41
LIGHT: THE RAW MATERIAL OF PHOTOGRAPHY
Like transmission, simple absorption cannot be photographed. 
It is “visible” only when we compare it to other light in the scene 
that is not absorbed. This is why highly light-absorbing subjects, 
such as black velvet or black fur, are among the most difficult 
things to photograph.
Most subjects absorb part, but not all, of the light striking 
them. This partial absorption of light is one of the factors that 
determine whether we see a given subject as black, white, or 
some intermediate gray. Any particular subject will also absorb 
some frequencies of light more than others. This selective absorp-
tion of certain light frequencies is one of the factors determining 
the color of a subject.
Reflection
Reflection is light striking a subject and bouncing off it. You know 
that fact already. The concept is easy because we use it daily. 
Reflection makes vision possible. We do not see objects; we  
see light. Because most objects produce no light, their visibility 
depends entirely on light reflected from them. Thus, there is no 
need to show you a photograph of reflection. Almost any picture 
you have on hand will serve the purpose.
However, the familiarity of reflection does not mean that it 
needs no further discussion. On the contrary, its extraordinary 
importance demands that we devote most of the next chapter  
to it.

42

43
3
The Management of Reflection 
and the Family of Angles
In the previous chapter we looked at light and how it behaves.  
We learned that the three most important qualities of any light 
source are its brightness, color, and contrast. We also learned that 
the subject, not just the light, has a major influence on lighting.  
A subject can transmit, absorb, or reflect the light that strikes it.
Of the three ways the subject can affect the lighting, reflection 
is the most visible. Highly transparent subjects have minimal 
effect on light, so they tend to be invisible. Highly absorbent sub-
jects may also be invisible because they convert light into other 
forms of energy, such as heat, which we cannot see.
Photographic lighting, therefore, is primarily an exercise in 
reflection management. Understanding and managing reflection, 
for the result you want, is what constitutes good lighting. In this 
section, we will look at how subjects reflect light and how to 
capitalize on those reflections.
We will begin our discussion of reflection with a “thought 
experiment.” We would like you to create three different images 
in your mind. First, on a desktop, imagine a piece of very thick, 

44
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
perfectly smooth, gray paper. The gray should be a medium one, 
light enough to write on but dark enough that no one would  
confuse it with white. 
Next, visualize a piece of metal of the same size as the paper. 
We suggest old pewter. The metal should also be smooth and 
exactly the same gray as the paper. Third, make a mental ceramic 
tile, very glossy and the same shade of gray as the other two sub-
jects. Finally, put the three mental images together on the same 
desk and examine the differences you see in the three subjects.
Notice that none of the subjects transmits any light. (That is 
why we made the paper thick.) Furthermore, they all appear to 
absorb the same amount of light (because they are all the same 
gray). Yet the difference in the three subjects is apparent. You 
have seen it. (If not, try again, and you will, now that you know 
we expect you to do so!)
The reason that these subjects, with identical transmission and 
absorption, appear different is that the subjects reflect the light 
differently. The reason you can see the differences without look-
ing at examples on this page is that they are part of that visual 
knowledge you already have stored away in the occipital lobe of 
your brain.
In this chapter, we are not going to tell you very many things 
your brain does not already know. We will, however, put some of 
that knowledge into words. This will make it easy for us to talk 
about reflection for the rest of this book.
TYPES OF REFLECTIONS
Light can reflect from a subject as diffuse reflection, direct reflec-
tion, and polarized direct reflection—or as it is often called, glare. 
Most surfaces cause some of each of these three types. The  

45
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
proportions of each type of reflection vary with the subject, and it 
is the proportion of each reflection in the mix that makes one 
surface look different from another.
We are going to examine each of these types of reflections in 
some detail. In each case, we will assume that the reflection is a 
perfect example, uncontaminated by either of the other two. This 
will make it easier to analyze each of them. (Events in nature 
sometimes offer nearly perfect examples.)
For now, we do not care what type of light source might be 
producing any of the following examples. Only the reflecting sur-
face matters. Any sort of light could work.
Diffuse Reflections
Diffuse reflections are the same brightness regardless of the angle 
from which we view them. This is because the light from the 
sources is reflected equally in all directions by the surface it 
strikes. Figure 3.1 shows a diffuse reflection. In it we see light 
falling on a small white card. Three people are pointing their 
cameras at it.
If each of these individuals were to photograph the white card, 
each of their pictures would record the subject as the same 
brightness. On film, the image of the card would have the same 
density in each negative. Neither the angle of illumination of the 
light source nor the camera’s angle of view would affect the 
brightness of the subject in such a picture.
Other than in lighting textbooks, no surfaces reflect light in a 
perfectly diffuse manner. However, white paper approximates 
such a surface. Now look at Figure 3.2 
There is a reason that we chose to put the largely white playing 
cards in this particular example. All white things produce a great 

46
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
3.2 The playing cards in this 
scene give off a great deal of 
diffuse reflection. This would 
appear white from any angle.
3.1 A white card gives off almost nothing but diffuse reflection. Because diffuse 
reflection from a light source is reflected equally in all directions from the surface, all 
three cameras see the card as having the same brightness.

47
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
deal of diffuse reflection. We know this because they appear 
white regardless of the angle from which we view them. (Walk 
around the room you are in now. Look at the white objects and 
the black objects from different angles. Notice that the apparent 
brightness of the black objects may change with viewpoint, but 
the white objects stay about the same.)
The contrast of the light source does not affect the appearance 
of a diffuse reflection. It is worth proving this with one more pic-
ture of the same scene. We used a small light for the earlier pho-
tograph. We could see that by the hard shadows cast by the 
objects in it. Now look at Figure 3.3 to see what happens when 
we use a large light instead. 
3.3 The soft shadows in it prove we used a large light to make this picture.

48
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
Predictably, the large light source has softened the shadows in the 
scene, but notice that the highlights on the playing cards look 
about the same. That is because the diffuse reflection from the 
surface of the paper is identical to that in Figure 3.2. So now we 
have seen that neither the angle nor the size of the light source 
affects the appearance of a diffuse reflection. 
However, the distance from the light to the surface of the  
subject does matter. The closer the light gets to the subject, the 
brighter the subject becomes and—at a given exposure setting— 
the lighter the subject appears in the finished picture.
Diffusion Confusion
Photographers often diffuse a light source by reflecting the light from an umbrella or 
by covering it with a translucent material. We call light passing through translucent 
material diffuse transmission. Now we speak of diffuse reflection. The two concepts 
have enough in common that we should pay special attention to the differences 
between them.
Diffusing the light source has no effect on whether the reflection is diffuse. 
Remember that small light sources are always “hard” (undiffused) and that large light 
sources are almost always “soft” (diffused). 
The word diffusion is a good one because its meaning is perfectly consistent in 
both uses. In each case, it means a scattering of the light. But what does the scat-
tering—the light or the subject? The source determines the type of light, and the 
surface determines the type of reflection. Any light can produce any reflection, 
depending on the subject.
Specular Reflection and Specular Light
Photographers sometimes call direct reflection specular reflection. As a synonym for 
direct reflection, this is a perfectly good term. If you use the word specular in this 
way, please feel free to substitute the words as you read direct reflection. 
However, some photographers also use specular to mean smaller, brighter high-
lights within a large one; others mean highlights created by a small light source. 

49
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
The Inverse Square Law
A diffuse reflection gets brighter if we move the light source 
closer to the subject. If we needed, we could calculate this change 
in brightness with the inverse square law. The inverse square law 
says that intensity is inversely proportional to the square of the 
distance. 
Thus, a light at any particular distance from the subject will 
light the subject with an intensity four times as bright as the same 
light twice as far away. Similarly, a light will have nine times the 
intensity of the same light moved three times as far from the sub-
ject. As the intensity of the light falling on the subject varies, so 
does that of the diffuse reflection.
Ignoring the math, this simply means that reflection from a 
surface gets brighter if we move the light closer and it gets dim-
mer if we move the light farther away. Intuitively, this seems 
immediately obvious. Why even bother to mention it? Because 
such intuition is often misleading. Some subjects, as we shall soon 
see, do not produce brighter reflections as the light moves closer 
to them.
Direct reflection does not necessarily imply either of these. Because specular reflec-
tion has different meanings for different people, we will not use the term in this book. 
Modern usage adds further inconsistency. Originally, specular was used to 
describe only the reflection, not the source of the light. (The Greek root means  
“mirror.”) Today, some photographers use specular light as a synonym for hard light, 
but a “specular” light source does not necessarily produce a “specular” reflection.  
A hard light is always hard, but the way it reflects depends on the surface of the 
subject. So we will always call specular lights hard to make it clear that we are talk-
ing about the light, not the reflection. 

50
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
Direct Reflections 
Direct reflections are a mirror image of the light source that pro-
duces them. They are also called specular reflections. Figure 3.4 
is similar to Figure 3.1, but this time we have replaced the white 
card with a shiny saw blade. Both the light source and the observ-
ers are in the same positions as they were in Figure 3.1.
Notice what happens. This time one of the three cameras now 
sees a bright reflection, whereas the others see no reflection at all.
This diagram illustrates the direct reflection produced when a 
light is directed at a surface such as polished metal or glass. The 
light rays bounce from the smooth surface at the same angle at 
which they hit it. More precisely stated, the angle of incidence 
equals the angle of reflectance. This means that the point at which 
3.4 Direct reflection. Looking at the diagram, the camera with an arrow path pointing 
at it sees a bright reflection of the light source. The others, however, see no reflection 
of it at all.

51
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
direct reflections can be seen is exactly determined by the angles 
between the light source, the subject, and the camera viewpoint.
Those cameras positioned on each side receive no reflected 
light rays. From their viewpoint, the saw blade would appear dark. 
None of the rays from the light source is reflected in their direc-
tion because they are not viewing the saw from the one (and only) 
angle in which the direct reflection of the light source can happen.
However, the camera that is directly in line with the reflection 
sees a spot in the reflective surface almost as bright as the light 
source itself. This is because the angle from its position to the 
reflective surface is the same as the angle from the light source to 
the reflective surface. Again, no real subject produces a perfect 
direct reflection. Brightly polished metal, water, or glass may 
nearly do so, however.
Breaking the Inverse Square Law?
Did it alarm you to read that the camera that sees the direct reflection will record an 
image as bright as the light source? How do we know how bright the direct reflection 
will be if we do not even know how far away the light source is?
We do not need to know how far away the source is. The brightness of the image 
of a direct reflection is the same regardless of the distance from the source. This 
principle seems to stand in flagrant defiance of the inverse square law, but an easy 
experiment will show why it does not.
You can prove this to yourself, if you like, by positioning a mirror so that you can 
see a lamp reflected in it. If you move the mirror closer to the lamp, it will be appar-
ent to your eye that the brightness of the lamp remains constant.
Notice, however, that the size of the reflection of the lamp does change. This 
change in size keeps the inverse square law from being violated. If we move the lamp 
to half the distance, the mirror will reflect four times as much light, just as the inverse 
square law predicts, but the image of the reflection covers four times the area. So 
that image still has the same brightness in the picture. As a concrete analogy, if we 
spread four times the butter on a piece of bread of four times the area, the thickness 
of the layer of butter stays the same.

52
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
Now we will look at a photograph of the scene in Figure 3.5. 
Once again, we will begin with a high-contrast light source. The 
saw blade in Figure 3.5 has a shiny surface. Here we see two 
indications that the light source is small. Once again, the shadows 
are hard. In addition, we can also tell that the source is small 
because it is reflected in the shiny surface of the saw. 
Because the image of the light source is visible, we can easily 
anticipate the effect of an increase in the size of the light. This 
allows us to plan the size of the highlights on shiny surfaces. Now 
look at Figure 3.6. 
3.5 Two clues tell us this 
picture was made with a 
small light source: hard 
shadows and the size of the 
reflection in the hand saw.

53
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
Once again, the large, soft light source we now use produces 
very soft shadows. The picture is more pleasing, but that is not 
the important aspect. More important is the fact that the reflected 
image of the large light source completely covers the saw. 
In other words, the larger light source fills the family of angles 
that causes direct reflection. This family of angles is one of the 
most useful concepts in photographic lighting. We will now dis-
cuss that family in more detail.
3.6 A larger light softens 
shadows. More important, 
however, is that the reflection of 
the light now completely fills the 
saw. This is because the light we 
used this time was large enough 
to fill the family of angles that 
causes direct reflection.

54
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
The Family of Angles
Our previous diagrams have been concerned with only a single 
point on a reflective surface. In reality, however, each surface is 
made up of an infinite number of points. A viewer looking at a 
surface sees each of these points at a slightly different angle. 
Taken together, these different angles make up the family of 
angles that produces direct reflection.
In theory, we could also talk about the family of angles that  
produces diffuse reflection. However, such an idea would be mean-
ingless because diffuse reflection can come from a light source at 
any angle. Therefore, when we use the phrase “family of angles” 
we will always mean those angles that produce direct reflection.
This family of angles is important to photographers because it 
determines where we should place our lights. We know that light 
rays will always reflect from a polished surface, such as metal or 
glass, at the same angle as that at which they strike it. So we can 
easily determine where the family of angles is located, relative to 
the camera and the light source. This allows us to control if and 
where any direct reflection will appear in our picture. 
Figure 3.7 shows the effect of lights located both inside and 
outside this family of angles. As you can see from it, any light 
positioned within the family of angles will produce a direct 
reflection. Consequently, any light positioned outside of the fam-
ily of angles will not light a mirror-like subject at all, at least as far 
as the camera can see.
Photographers sometimes want to see direct reflection from 
most of the surface of a mirror-like subject. This requires that 
they use (or find in nature) a light large enough to fill the family 
of angles. In other scenes, they do not want to see any direct 
reflection at all on the subject. In those instances, they must place 

55
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
both the camera and the light so that the light source is not 
located within the family of angles. We will use this principle 
repeatedly in the coming chapters.
Polarized Direct Reflection
A polarized direct reflection is so similar to an ordinary direct 
reflection that photographers often treat them as the same. 
However, these reflections offer photographers several special-
ized techniques and tools for dealing with them.
Like the direct reflection, only one viewer in Figure 3.8 will 
see the reflection. Unlike the direct reflection, an image of the 
polarized reflection is always substantially dimmer than a photo-
graph of the light source itself. 
3.7 The light positioned within the family of angles will produce direct reflection. The 
other light, outside the family of angles, will not.

56
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
A perfectly polarized direct reflection is exactly half as bright 
as an un-polarized one (provided the light source itself is not 
polarized). However, because polarization is inevitably accompa-
nied by absorption, the reflections we see in the scene are more 
likely to be much dimmer than that.
To see why polarized reflection cannot be as bright as an un-
polarized direct reflection, we need to know a bit about polarized 
light. We have seen that the electromagnetic field fluctuates 
around a moving photon. Figure 3.9 represents this fluctuating 
field as a jump rope being swung between two children. One 
child is spinning the rope while the other simply holds it.
Now, let’s put up a picket fence between the children, as shown 
in Figure 3.10. The rope now bounces up and down instead of 
swinging in an arc. This bouncing rope resembles the electromag-
netic field along the path of a photon of polarized light.
3.8 Polarized direct reflection looks like un-polarized direct reflection, only dimmer.

57
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
Molecules in a polarizing filter block the oscillation of the light 
energy in one direction, just as the picket fence does to the oscil-
lating energy of the jump rope. The molecular structure of some 
reflecting surfaces also blocks part of the energy of the photon in 
the same manner. We see such a photon as a polarized reflection 
or glare. 
Now, suppose, not being satisfied with eliminating just a part 
of the children’s play, we install a horizontal fence in front of the 
first, as shown in Figure 3.11.
3.9 The oscillating electromagnetic field around a photon represented as a jump 
rope. The child on the left is spinning the rope while the one on the right holds on.
3.10 When the children spin the rope through the picket fence, it bounces up and 
down instead of spinning in an arc. A polarizing filter blocks the oscillation of light 
energy in much the same way.

58
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
With the second fence in place, if one child spins the rope, the 
other sees no rope movement at all. The crossed picket fences 
block the transmission of energy from one end of the rope to the 
other. Crossing the axes of two polarizing filters blocks the trans-
mission of light, just as the two picket fences do with rope energy. 
Figure 3.12 shows the result. Where the polarizers overlap 
with their axes perpendicular, none of the type is visible on the 
3.11 Because we have added a horizontal fence to the first, when one child spins 
the rope, the other will see no movement.
3.12 The axes on the two overlapping polarizers are perpendicular. They block light 
much as the two fences did with the energy of the jump rope.

59
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
page. The transmission of light reflected from the page to the 
camera has been completely blocked.
A lake, painted metal, glossy wood, or plastic can all produce 
polarized reflection. Like the other types of reflections, the polar-
ization is not perfect. Some diffuse reflection and some 
un-polarized direct reflection are mixed with the glare. Glossy 
subjects produce a greater amount of polarized reflection, but 
even matte surfaces produce a certain amount.
Polarized direct reflection is more visible if the subject is black 
or transparent. Black and transparent subjects do not necessarily 
produce stronger direct reflections than white ones. Instead, they 
produce weaker diffuse reflection, making it easier to see the 
direct reflection. This is why you saw the change in apparent 
brightness of the black objects, but not of the white ones, when 
you walked around your room a while ago.
Glossy black plastic can show us enough 
polarized reflection to make a good example. 
The scene in Figure 3.13 includes a black 
plastic mask and a white feather on a sheet of 
glossy black plastic. 
We used the same camera and light posi-
tion as in the pictures of Figure 3.4 and mir-
rored surface. You can tell by the size of the 
reflections that we used a large light source. 
Both the mask and the plastic sheet produce 
nearly perfect polarized reflection. From this 
angle, glossy plastic produces almost no un-
polarized direct reflection; black things never 
produce much diffuse reflection. However, the 
feather behaves quite differently. It produces 
almost nothing but diffuse reflection.
3.13 The glossy sheet and mask produce 
almost nothing but polarized direct reflection.  
In contrast, the white feather gives off almost 
nothing but diffuse reflection.

60
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
The light source was large enough to fill 
the family of angles defined by the plastic 
sheet, creating direct reflection over the entire 
surface. The same light was large enough to 
fill only part of the family of angles defined by 
the mask. We know this because of the high-
lights we see only on the front of the mask.
Now look at Figure 3.14. We made it with 
the same arrangement used in the previous 
picture, but now we’ve placed a polarizing 
filter over the camera lens. 
Because polarized reflection was almost 
the only reflection from the black plastic in 
Figure 3.14, and because the polarizing filter 
blocks glare, little of the light reflected from 
any of the black plastic items photographed 
reached the camera. As a result, the plastic now looks black.
We did have to open our aperture by about two stops to com-
pensate for the neutral density of the polarizing filter. How do 
you know that we did not accidentally miscalculate the exposure? 
(Maybe we did so deliberately, just to get the image dark enough 
to prove our point.) The feather proves that we did not. The 
polarizer did not block the diffuse reflection from the feather. So 
with accurate exposure compensation, the feather is about the 
same light gray in both pictures.
Is It Polarized Reflection or Ordinary Direct Reflection?
Polarized and un-polarized direct reflections often have similar 
appearance. Photographers, out of need or curiosity, may want to 
distinguish one from the other.
3.14 A polarizer over the camera lens blocks the 
polarized direct reflection. Thus, only the feather—
which gives off diffuse reflection—is clearly visible.

61
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
We know that direct reflection appears as bright as the light 
source, whereas polarized direct reflection appears dimmer. 
However, brightness alone will not tell us which is which. 
Remember that real subjects produce a mixture of reflection 
types. A surface that seems to have polarized reflection may actu-
ally have weak direct, plus some diffuse, reflection.
Here are a few guidelines that tend to tell us whether a direct 
reflection is polarized:
• If the surface is made of a material that conducts electricity 
(metal is the most common example), its reflection is likely to 
be un-polarized. Electrical insulators such as plastic, glass, and 
ceramics are more likely to produce polarized reflection.
• If the surface looks like a mirror—for example, bright metal—
the reflection is likely to be simple direct reflection, not glare.
• If the surface does not have a mirror-like appearance—for 
example, polished wood or leather—the reflection is more 
likely to be polarized if the camera is seeing it at an angle of 40 
to 50 degrees. (The exact angle depends on the subject mate-
rial.) At other angles, the reflection is more likely to be un-
polarized direct reflection.
• The conclusive test, however, is the appearance of the subject 
through a polarizing filter. If the polarizer eliminates the reflec-
tion, then that reflection is polarized. 
• If, however, the polarizer has no effect on the suspect reflec-
tion, then it is ordinary direct reflection. If the polarizer 
reduces the brightness of the reflection but does not eliminate 
it, then it is a mixed reflection.

62
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
Turning Ordinary Direct Reflection into Polarized 
Reflection
Photographers often prefer that a reflection be polarized reflec-
tion so that they can manage it with a polarizing filter mounted on 
their camera lens. If the reflection is not glare, the polarizer  
on the lens will have no effect except to add neutral density.
However, placing a polarizing filter over the light source will turn 
a direct reflection into polarized reflection. A polarizer on the 
camera lens can then manage the reflection nicely. 
Polarized light sources are not restricted to studio lighting. 
The open sky often serves as a beautifully functional polarized 
light source. Facing the subject from an angle that reflects the 
most polarized part of the sky can make the lens-polarizing filter 
effective. This is why photographers sometimes find polarizing 
filters useful on subjects such as bright metal, even though the 
filter manufacturer may have told them that polarizers have no 
effect on such subjects. In those cases, the subject is reflecting a 
polarized source. 
Increasing Polarized Reflection
Most photographers know that polarizers can eliminate polarized reflection they do 
not want, but in some scenes we may like the polarized reflection and want even 
more of it. In such cases we can use the polarizer to effectively increase the polarized 
reflection. We do this by rotating the polarizing filter 90 degrees from the orientation 
that reduces reflection. The polarized light then passes through easily.
It is important to understand that a polarizer always blocks some un-polarized 
light. By doing this, in effect, it becomes a neutral density filter that affects everything 
except direct reflection. Thus, when we increase the exposure to compensate for the 
neutral density, the direct reflection increases even more.

63
REFLECTION AND THE FAMILY OF ANGLES
APPLYING THE THEORY
Excellent recording of a subject requires more than focusing the 
camera properly and exposing the picture accurately. The subject 
and the light have a relationship with each other. In a good pho-
tograph, the light is appropriate to the subject and the subject is 
appropriate to the light.
The meaning of appropriate is the creative decision of the 
photographer. Any decision the photographer makes is likely to 
be appropriate if it is guided by understanding and awareness of 
how the subject and the light together produce an image.
We decide what type of reflection is important to the subject 
and then capitalize on it. In the studio, this means manipulating 
the light. Outside the studio, it often means putting the camera 
in position, anticipating the movement of the sun and clouds, 
waiting for the right time of day, or otherwise finding the light 
that works. In either case, the job is easier for the photographer 
who has learned to see what the light is doing and to imagine 
what it could do.

64

65
4
Surface Appearances
All surfaces produce diffuse, direct, and polarized reflection in 
varying degrees. We see all of these reflections, but we are not 
always conscious of them.
Years of programming enable our brains to edit the image of 
the scene. This editing minimizes reflection that is distracting or 
trivial to the subject. At the same time, it maximizes the impor-
tance of whatever light is essential to our comprehension of the 
scene. The psychological image in the brain may be quite differ-
ent from the photochemical one the eye actually sees.
Psychologists have not completely explained why this differ-
ence exists. Movement certainly has something to do with it, but 
not everything. Some visual defects are less disturbing in a motion 
picture than they might be in a still photograph, but not much.
Photographers know that our brains cannot edit an image of a 
scene as well as they can the scene itself. We discovered that fact 
when we learned how quickly we could spot defects in our 
images, even though we could not see them at all when we care-
fully examined the original scene. Unconscious parts of our brain 
did us the “service” of editing the scene to delete extraneous and 

66
SURFACE APPEARANCES
contradictory data. A viewer, however, becomes fully conscious of 
the same details upon seeing the picture.
And just how do pictures reveal details we might never other-
wise notice? This is a question for another book. This book is 
about what we need to do about that fact and how to take advan-
tage of it. When we make a picture we have to consciously do 
some of the editing that other observers do unconsciously.
PHOTOGRAPHER AS AN EDITOR
Photographic lighting deals mainly with the extremes: the high-
lights and the shadows. When we are happy with the appearance 
of these two, we are likely to be pleased with the middle range 
also. Highlight and shadow together reveal form, shape, and 
depth. But highlight alone is usually enough to reveal what the 
surface of an object is like.
In this chapter we will concern ourselves primarily with high-
light and surface. Most of our example subjects will be flat—two 
dimensional, or nearly so. In Chapter 5 we will complicate mat-
ters a bit with three-dimensional subjects and a more detailed 
discussion of shadow.
In the previous chapter, we saw that all surfaces produce both 
diffuse and direct reflections and that some of the direct reflec-
tions are polarized. But most surfaces do not produce an even mix 
of these three types of reflections. Some surfaces produce a great 
deal more of one than another. The difference in the amounts of 
each of these reflections determines what makes one surface look 
different from another.
One of the first steps in lighting a scene is to look at the subject 
and decide what kind of reflection causes the subject to appear 
the way it does. The next step is to position the light, the subject, 

67
SURFACE APPEARANCES
and the camera to make the photograph capitalize on that type of 
reflection and minimize the others.
When we do this we decide what kind of reflection we want 
the viewers to see. Then we engineer the shot to make sure they 
see that reflection and not others.
“Position the light” and “engineer the shot” imply moving light 
stands around a studio, but we don’t necessarily mean that. We do 
exactly the same thing when we pick the camera viewpoint, day, 
and time outside the studio. We will use studio examples in this 
chapter simply because they are easy for us to control to demon-
strate the specifics clearly. The principles apply to any type of 
photography.
In the rest of this chapter, we will see some examples of sub-
jects that require us to capitalize on each of the basic kinds of 
reflections. We will also look at what happens when we photo-
graph reflections that are inappropriate to those subjects.
CAPITALIZING ON DIFFUSE REFLECTIONS
Photographers are sometimes asked to photograph paintings, 
illustrations, or antique photographs. Such copy work is one 
simple example of a circumstance in which we usually want only 
diffuse, and not direct, reflection.
Because this is the first concrete demonstration of lighting 
technique in this book, we will discuss it in great detail. The 
example shows how an experienced photographer thinks through 
any lighting arrangement. Beginners will be surprised at the 
amount of thinking involved in even such simple lighting, but 
they should not be dismayed by it. 
Much of this thinking is identical from one picture to the next, 
and it quickly becomes so habitual that it takes almost no time or 

68
SURFACE APPEARANCES
effort. You will see this as we progress, and we will omit some of 
the detail in future chapters.
Diffuse reflection gives us the information about how black or 
how white the subject is. The printed pages of this book have 
blacks and whites determined by areas that produce a great deal 
of diffuse reflection—the paper—and those that produce little 
diffuse reflection—the ink.
Because diffuse reflection can reflect light frequencies selec-
tively, it also carries most of the color information about the  
subject. We could have printed this page with magenta ink on blue 
paper (if those picky editors would have allowed it), and you would 
know it because the diffuse reflection from the page would tell you.
Notice that diffuse reflection does not tell us very much about 
what the surface material is. Had we printed this page on smooth 
leather or glossy plastic instead of paper, the diffuse reflection 
would still look about the same. (You could, however, tell the dif-
ference in material by the direct reflection.)
When we copy a painting or another photograph, we are  
usually not interested in the type of surface on which it was  
produced; we want to know about the colors and values in the 
original image.
THE ANGLE OF LIGHT
What sort of lighting might accomplish this? To answer that ques-
tion, let us begin by looking at a standard copy set-up and at the 
family of angles that produces direct reflection.
Figure 4.1 shows a standard copy camera arrangement. The 
camera is on a stand and is aimed at the original art on a copy 
board beneath it. Assume that the height of the camera is set so 
that the image of the original art exactly fills the image area.

69
SURFACE APPEARANCES
We have drawn the family of angles from which a light, or lights, 
can produce direct reflection. Most copy arrangements use a light on 
each side of the camera. We need only one light to see the principle.
Such a diagram makes it easy to light the set-up. Once again, 
any light within the family of angles will produce direct reflection, 
and a light located outside that family will not. We also know from 
Chapter 3 that a light can produce diffuse reflection from any 
angle. Because we want only diffuse reflection, we place the light 
anywhere outside the family of angles.
In Figure 4.2 the folk painting is photographed with the light 
placed outside of the family of angles. We see only diffuse reflec-
tion from the surface, and the tone values in the photograph 
closely approximate the original.
4.1 The family of angles that produces direct reflections in a “copy” lighting set-up. 
The light inside the family of angles will produce direct reflection; the other will not. 
There is a similar family of angles on each side of the camera.

70
SURFACE APPEARANCES
By way of contrast, in Figure 4.3 the light was inside the  
family of angles. The resulting direct reflection causes an unac-
ceptable “hot spot” on the painting’s surface.
4.2 In a good image, the folk painting we see has nothing but diffuse reflections, and 
the tones closely resemble those in the original.
4.3 Placing the light inside the family of angles caused an unacceptable hot spot on 
the image.

71
SURFACE APPEARANCES
This is all straightforward in the studio or the laboratory. 
However, photographers are also asked to photograph large 
paintings in museums or other locations from which they cannot 
be removed. Anyone who has ever done this knows that museum 
curators always place display cases or pedestals exactly where we 
want to put the camera. In such situations, we need to place the 
camera closer to the subject than we might otherwise. We then 
switch to a wide-angle lens to get the whole subject to fit the 
image area.
Figure 4.4 is a bird’s-eye view of our museum set-up. Now  
the camera has a very wide-angle lens with about a 90-degree 
horizontal angle of view.
4.4 The family of angles has grown much larger in this arrangement using a  
wide-angle lens. The result is a small range of acceptable lighting angles. Only the  
light outside the family of angles will produce glare-free lighting.
IL_~DiSPlay_case_~1 

72
SURFACE APPEARANCES
Look what has happened to our family of angles. The family of 
angles causing direct reflection has grown much larger, and the 
range of acceptable angles for copy lighting is much smaller. The 
light now needs to be much farther to the side to avoid unaccept-
able direct reflections.
Shooting a copy with the camera in this position would yield 
drastically inferior results if we kept the light where we had it in 
Figure 4.1. The same lighting angle that works well when the cam-
era is farther away can cause direct reflection if the camera is closer. 
In this case, we would have to move the light farther to the side.
Finally, notice that in some museum-like situations, the shape of 
the room may make the placement of the lights more difficult than 
4.5 A copy set-up using a long lens. Because the family of angles that produces a 
direct reflection is small, finding a good place to put the light is usually easy. (Had the 
wall on the right been a bit closer, however, it would have begun to limit the light 
placement. We will deal with such a problem below.)

73
SURFACE APPEARANCES
that of the camera. If it seems impossible to position the lights to 
avoid direct reflection, we sometimes can solve the problem just by 
moving the camera farther away from the subject (and using a cor-
respondingly longer lens to obtain a large enough image size).
In Figure 4.5, the room is too narrow to allow easy light place-
ment, but it is deep enough to allow the camera to be placed at 
almost any distance. We see that when the camera is farther from the 
subject, the family of angles that produces direct reflection is small. 
Now it is easy to find a lighting angle that avoids direct reflection.
THE SUCCESS AND FAILURE OF THE  
GENERAL RULE
Texts that attempt simply to demonstrate basic copy work (as 
opposed to general lighting principles) often use a diagram simi-
lar to Figure 4.6 to represent a standard copy set-up.
4.6 The “standard” copy set-up 
sometimes produces good 
results and sometimes does not. 
A usable lighting angle depends 
also on the distance between the 
camera and subject and the 
choice of lens focal length.
@52
45 °
45°

74
SURFACE APPEARANCES
Notice that the light is at a 45-degree angle to the original. 
There is nothing magic about such an angle. It is a general rule that 
usually works—but not always. As we saw in the previous example, 
a usable lighting angle depends on the distance between the camera 
and the subject and the resulting choice of lens focal length.
More important, we need to notice that this rule may fail to 
produce good lighting if we do not give attention to the distance 
between the light and the subject. To see why, we will combine 
the principle in Figure 4.1 with that of Figure 4.6.
In Figure 4.7, we see two possible light positions. Both lights 
are at a 45-degree angle to the subject, but only one of them will 
produce acceptable lighting. The light that is closer to the subject 
is within the family of angles that produces direct reflection and 
4.7 The importance of the distance from the light to the subject. Both of the lights 
shown are at 45 degrees to the center of the subject, but only one is satisfactory. The 
light inside the family of angles will produce direct reflection.
45°

75
SURFACE APPEARANCES
will cause a hot spot on the surface. The other light is far enough 
away to be outside the family of angles and will illuminate the 
surface nicely.
So we see that the 45-degree rule will work fine if the photog-
rapher gets the lights far enough away from the subject surface. 
In fact, the rule often does serve well because photographers 
generally do move the lights farther away from the subject for yet 
another reason—to obtain even illumination.
THE DISTANCE OF LIGHT
Up to now we’ve only considered the angle of the light, not its 
distance. But clearly that’s important too, because we know that 
diffuse reflections get brighter as the light gets closer to the 
reflecting surface. Figure 4.8 revisits an earlier arrangement, now 
emphasizing the distance of the light.
4.8 The shallow angle that 
avoids direct reflection is also 
more likely to cause uneven 
illumination if we don’t take care 
to avoid it.
Display Case 
~ 
~55"~ 
I 
I 

76
SURFACE APPEARANCES
Once again, we are using a wide-angle lens to photograph the 
subject. Remembering that such situations leave a very small 
range of angles of illumination that do not cause direct reflection, 
we have positioned the light at a very shallow angle to the surface. 
But the edge of the subject that is closer to the light receives  
so much more light than the edge farther away that uniform 
exposure is impossible.
Figure 4.9 shows the resulting exposure. The shallow lighting 
angle avoids direct reflection, but it does cause an unacceptable 
difference in the lighting of the picture’s sides.
Obviously, a second light on the other side of the subject 
would help produce more even illumination. (This is exactly why 
most copy set-ups do, indeed, use two lights.) With extremely 
shallow lighting angles, however, the second light still does not 
provide uniform exposure. We simply get two overexposed areas 
instead of one, with a dark area in the center.
4.9 A possible consequence of the situation shown in Figure 4.8. Although the light 
placement avoided direct reflection, the illumination is too uneven to preserve detail on 
both the camera-left and -right sides of the picture.

77
SURFACE APPEARANCES
One solution to this problem is to move the light closer to the 
camera. (An extreme example of this is a flash mounted directly 
on the camera.) Then the light is roughly the same distance from 
all points on the surface, and the illumination is more even. But 
this solution is also likely to place the light in the family of angles 
that causes direct reflection, which is a worse problem.
The only solution to this problem that always works is to move 
the light farther away from the subject. In theory, a light that is 
an infinite distance away will produce exactly equally bright dif-
fuse reflections at all points on the surface, even at the most shal-
low angle. Unfortunately, a light at an infinite distance away is 
also likely to be infinitely dim.
In practice, we do not usually need to get the light quite that 
far away to obtain satisfactory results. We just need to get the 
light far enough from the subject to produce acceptably even 
illumination, but we need to keep it close enough for acceptably 
short exposure times.
We could offer you mathematical formulas to calculate an 
acceptable distance between the light and the subject at any 
given angle (and for any given acceptable side-to-side exposure 
error), but you would not use the formulas because you do not 
need them. 
The human eye is good at judging the acceptable compromise 
distance, provided the photographer is aware of the potential 
problem from the start. Place the lights so that the illumination 
looks reasonably even; then double-check that judgment by mea-
suring various points on the surface with a light meter.

78
SURFACE APPEARANCES
DOING THE IMPOSSIBLE
The preceding examples tell us that even illumination and glare-
free illumination can be mutually exclusive goals. The closer the 
light source is to the camera, the more directly it lights the sub-
ject and the more even the illumination becomes. However, the 
farther the light is to the side, the less likely it is to be within the 
family of angles that causes direct reflection.
We have also seen that the usual solution to this dilemma 
requires more working space in any direction. Here is why:
• Moving the lights closer to the camera axis, for example, means 
moving the camera farther away from the subject (and using a 
correspondingly longer lens to get a similar image size). This 
creates a smaller family of angles that causes direct reflections 
and allows more freedom in choosing the angle to light the 
subject.
• Conversely, if circumstances dictate that the camera be very 
close to the subject, we must light the subject at a very shallow 
angle to keep the light source outside the family of angles. We 
must then place the lights much farther from the subject to 
achieve even illumination.
Unfortunately, we sometimes lack the working space we need for 
either of these solutions. A photographer may have to photograph 
a rare document in a storage area so filled with filing cabinets that 
there is almost no room to work. Even in a gallery area, there may 
not be enough floor space to properly light a really large painting.
Figure 4.10 shows such an “impossible” lighting problem. The 
camera could be on a tripod aimed at a document on the floor, 
the obstacles on the sides could be filing cabinets, and the ceiling 
could set the restriction on camera height. Or the camera could 

79
SURFACE APPEARANCES
be focused on an 8-by-10-foot painting on a wall with other walls 
or display cases presenting the obstacles. Either way, we cannot 
position the camera and lights to provide illumination that is both 
uniform and glare-free.
At a glance we predict that the photograph made with such an 
arrangement is useless. 
Figure 4.11 confirms the prediction. The solution is easy when 
we remember that (1) the “glare” we see on the surface of the 
original is a mixture of direct and diffuse reflection, and (2) a 
polarizing filter on the lens can eliminate polarized direct reflec-
tion.
Figure 4.12 shows how. We first position the lights for even 
illumination, without concern about whether we are creating 
direct reflection. Then we place polarizing filters over the lights 
with their axes oriented toward the camera. This assures us that 
the direct reflection is polarized. Next, a polarizing filter on the 
4.10 An “impossible” lighting 
situation: we cannot position the 
camera and lights to provide 
uniform, glare-free illumination.
Family of Ang/es
i—
CD
i—
CO
CD

80
SURFACE APPEARANCES
4.11 One result of the 
“impossible” situation shown in 
Figure 4.10. This picture is, as you 
can clearly see, useless. Because 
of the way in which we were 
forced to set up our lights, the 
original was partially obliterated by 
the direct reflection from its 
surface.
4.12 The solution to the 
“impossible” lighting requires 
placing the lights for even 
illumination and using polarizers 
to prevent glare. The axis of the 
light polarizer points to the 
camera; the axis of the lens 
polarizer is perpendicular to 
that.
Lens 
Polarizer 
Light 
Lens 
Polarizer 
Light 
Lens 
Polarizer 
Light 
L 
polarizer I 

81
SURFACE APPEARANCES
camera, with its axis oriented 90 degrees to those on the lights, 
eliminates that polarized direct reflection.
In theory, this arrangement allows the camera to see only the 
diffuse reflection. In practice, we may still see some polarized 
reflection because no polarizing filter is perfect. However, the 
defect is negligible in all but the worst cases. Figure 4.13 proves 
it. Neither the camera nor the light has been moved, but the 
improvement is dramatic.
4.13 A good photograph despite 
“impossible” circumstances, using the solution 
from Figure 4.12. This picture shows the  
same subject lit by the same light in the same 
position as in Figure 4.11. Compare the two 
pictures.

82
SURFACE APPEARANCES
Using Light-polarizing Filters
Polarizing the light source has serious drawbacks and is a solution to avoid whenever 
possible. Fortunately, understanding and controlling the size and angle of the light 
source make polarizing the light source itself unnecessary in most situations. Some 
photographers go for years without needing to use light-polarizing filters.
We have deliberately conceived the “impossible” copy problem to be one of  
those rare cases in which polarizing the light is the only solution to the problem. 
Photographers whose specialty routinely requires highly controlled lighting will occa-
sionally encounter these cases. 
Because awareness of a problem is the first step toward the solution of the 
problem, we want to list the possible difficulties now. In theory, the combined effect 
of a “perfect” polarizing filter on the light and another on the lens should cost a total 
of two stops of exposure. Real polarizers are far from perfect, though. In practice, 
because polarizers have a lot of neutral density, the actual exposure reduction is 
likely to be four to six stops.
The problem gets even worse in noncopy situations, where we are likely to lose 
additional light through diffusion materials. The consequent aperture may be too 
wide to maintain adequate depth of field, or the exposure may be so long that reci-
procity failure becomes difficult to calculate and camera or subject movement is 
increasingly difficult to avoid.
The ideal solution to this problem is to use the most powerful lights that our 
budget and the available electrical current allow. If that is not enough, we treat the 
problem as we would any other low-light-level scene: we use a camera support that 
is as sturdy as possible and focus the camera as carefully as possible to make 
maximum use of what little depth of field we have.
The second problem is that polarizing filters are vulnerable to damage by heat. 
Remember that the light absorbed by the polarizers does not simply disappear.  
It turns into heat and threatens to cook things!
Photographers using strobes often leave the polarizers off the lights until they are 
ready to shoot. They turn off the modeling lights before attaching the polarizing  
filters. The brief flash of the flash tube presents minimal heat danger.
Polarizing filters used with incandescent lights need to be attached to a bracket 
or a separate light stand a distance away from the light. The exact distance depends 
on the wattage and the reflector design of the light. It is worth cutting a small piece 
of the polarizing material and deliberately burning it in front of the light to determine 
a safe distance.

83
SURFACE APPEARANCES
USING DIFFUSE REFLECTION AND SHADOW  
TO REVEAL TEXTURE
In any discussion of surface definition, we must talk about tex-
ture. (This is why we promised at the beginning of this chapter 
that all examples would be nearly two-dimensional.) We will first 
look at a photograph that fails to reveal the texture of the subject. 
This will help us analyze the problem and come up with a better 
solution.
We photographed the detail on the light-blue sponge’s surface 
shown in Figure 4.14 with a portable strobe mounted on the cam-
era. If the object is to show texture, the picture is decidedly 
unsatisfactory.
Finally, we must remember that polarizing filters can have a minor effect on color 
balance. If you are shooting film and can’t adjust the color balance in the camera, it 
is wise to shoot and process a color test and adjust the color-compensating (CC) 
filtration before exposing the final film.
4.14 A sponge photographed with 
the light mounted on the camera. With 
no contrasting highlights and shadows, 
much of the sponge’s surface detail is 
invisible.

84
SURFACE APPEARANCES
The sponge’s light color contributes to the problem. We know 
that all light subjects produce diffuse reflections, and we know 
that the brightness of a perfect diffuse reflection does not depend 
on the angle of illumination. For this reason, light striking the 
side of a particle of texture reflects back to the camera almost as 
brightly as light striking the top of the particle.
The solution is to position the light at a very shallow angle to 
the surface so that it skims across it, as seen in Figure 4.15. This 
gives each particle of texture—it gives them, in other words—
both a highlight side and a shadow side.
Notice that this arrangement may produce uneven illumina-
tion, just as it did when we moved the light to a shallow angle in 
the copy set-up in Figure 4.8. The solution is the same: move the 
light farther from the subject.
4.15 A small light at a very low angle to the subject produces the contrasting 
highlights and shadows needed to reveal texture in medium- and light-toned subjects.
SmallUghl~ 

85
SURFACE APPEARANCES
The texture in this type of surface can be helped still more if 
we use as small a light source as possible. This is because small 
light sources produce sharply defined shadows. If the particles of 
texture are tiny, their image may be too small to resolve sharply. 
If the shadow itself is as sharp as possible, then the image of 
the shadow is more likely to survive the optical limitations. Figure 
4.16 is the result.
Lighting for texture in this manner is so easy to understand 
that it is almost intuitive. Novice photographers sooner or later 
learn this with no help from us. We are not trying to point out the 
obvious. Instead, we want to contrast the lighting of this sponge 
with another, less obvious, example in which the same technique 
does not work at all.
CAPITALIZING ON DIRECT REFLECTIONS
Figure 4.17 was produced by the same lighting as the successful 
photograph of the sponge’s texture that you saw in Figure 4.16. 
4.16 The same sponge we used  
in Figure 4.14. Only this time we 
photographed it with raking light such 
as shown in Figure 4.15.

86
SURFACE APPEARANCES
It shows how applying a good technique at the wrong time can 
produce a bad picture. The lighting that revealed the texture so 
well in the sponge loses almost all detail in the notebook’s cover. 
You have to take our word that the texture exists.
The raking light we used on the sponge revealed detail by 
placing a shadow on one side of each particle of texture and a dif-
fuse highlight on the other side. The same shadow exists on one 
side of each particle of texture in the black leather notebook 
cover (although you cannot see it), but the diffuse highlight on 
the other side of each particle is gone. The problem with this 
4.17 The same lighting that revealed texture in the light-blue sponge loses most of 
the detail in this black leather book cover.

87
SURFACE APPEARANCES
photograph is caused by the subject itself. It is black, and black 
subjects, by definition, produce little diffuse reflection.
We know that increasing exposure would enable the weak dif-
fuse reflections on the leather to record, but an exposure increase 
is rarely an available option because important light-toned areas 
also exist in most scenes. 
If we increased the exposure, the highlight detail in the lighter 
subject matter might be hopelessly lost. Besides, this is a book 
about lighting, and we are honor bound to deal with the problems 
without exposure modification, using lighting technique alone. If 
we cannot get significant diffuse reflection from the leather sur-
face, we will try to produce direct reflection instead. This seems 
to be our only remaining option. Because direct reflection can 
only be produced by light coming from a limited family of angles, 
our first step is to see where that family of angles might be.
Figure 4.18 shows where the light must be if the camera is to 
see direct reflection on the surface. Furthermore, to produce 
direct reflection across the entire surface, the light must be large 
enough to completely fill this family of angles. Therefore, we need 
a light of at least the size and in the position shown in the diagram.
The light source for this picture could be an overcast sky, a soft 
box, or a reflector card illuminated by yet another light source. All 
that matters is that the light be the right size and in the right 
place.
Notice that this arrangement could not be more different from 
the one that worked well for the sponge. Instead of raking the 
light from the side, we have put it above the subject. This nearly 
eliminates the small shadows that defined the sponge’s texture. 
Instead of a small light source, we have a large one. This means 
that whatever slight shadows do remain in the texture will be too 
soft to define the texture clearly.

88
SURFACE APPEARANCES
In other words, the theory that predicts the best way to light 
the sponge also says that our new lighting arrangement is the 
worst possible way to light the leather! This apparent contradic-
tion is caused by the earlier theory neglecting one consideration: 
direct reflection.
The large light above the table produces the magnificent tex-
ture visible in Figure 4.19. No exposure increase was necessary. 
The amount of light falling on the leather is the same as that in 
Figure 4.17. Nevertheless, the highlight in the leather texture has 
moved up the tonal scale from near black to middle gray.
The apparent increase in illumination comes from good reflec-
tion management. The leather surface can produce little diffuse 
reflection but a great deal of direct reflection. By capitalizing on 
the type of reflection appropriate to the surface, we have recorded 
the subject as well as possible.
4.18 A light filling the 
family of angles defined by 
the black leather book.
~ 
Family of Angles 
Defined by Camera Position 
and Size of Subject 
\ 
Glossy Black Subject 

89
SURFACE APPEARANCES
COMPLEX SURFACES
In this book we will use the term complex surface to mean a single 
surface that requires both diffuse and direct reflection to define 
it properly. Glossy wood is a good example. Only direct reflection 
can tell the viewer that the wood is glossy, but diffuse reflection 
is essential to reveal the color and the grain of the wood beneath 
the gloss.
Figure 4.20 shows a highly polished wooden box. We lit it to pro-
duce both direct and diffuse reflections. To do this, we positioned a 
4.19 Using the lighting diagrammed in Figure 4.18 maximizes direct reflection and 
reveals the texture we now see in the leather.

90
SURFACE APPEARANCES
medium-sized light source where it would be reflected in the lower 
portion of the box’s surface. This made the box’s glossy finish obvious. 
Notice that some of the wood’s texture is also revealed by the direct 
reflection.
The light was large enough that it filled the entire family of 
angles required to produce direct reflection over the whole sur-
face. However, we blocked part of the light with a gobo so that 
the camera-right part of the surface produces only diffuse reflec-
tion, which allows us to see the color and grain structure in  
the wood. Notice that the right area is the only area in which the 
true color of the wood would be clearly apparent. Figure 4.21 
diagrams the lighting method.
Finally, see how much easier this exercise becomes if we do 
not restrict ourselves to a two-dimensional surface. Look at what 
4.20 Direct reflection in the camera left of the scene shows the gloss, whereas 
diffuse reflection at the right reveals more of the wood’s grain and color.

91
SURFACE APPEARANCES
4.21 Lighting to produce both the direct and the diffuse reflections, used to illuminate 
the wood box in Figure 4.20.
4.22 The glasses add 
a three-dimensional 
element, which 
provides additional 
visual clues (the 
reflection of the 
glasses) that help prove 
the surface is glossy.
Material 
Diffusion 
Diffusion 
Material 
Diffusion 

92
SURFACE APPEARANCES
happens in Figure 4.22 if we put a three-dimensional object on 
the wood surface. 
The reflection of the glasses in the wood tells the viewer that 
the wood is glossy. And adding a secondary subject reveals the 
wood better than we are likely to be able to render it alone.
In addition, adding a three-dimensional subject to this kind of 
scene often makes the lighting easier. We cannot pursue this 
approach very far, however, because we promised that this chap-
ter would be about two-dimensional and nearly two-dimensional 
subjects.
In the next chapter, “Revealing Shape and Contour,” we will 
see what happens when those surfaces face three different direc-
tions at once.
Marrying New and Old Techniques
We opened this chapter with a “today” example of a vintage photographic technique. 
The process we used to make it is a modern version of a very old one. 
Our first step was to print a negative from a digital file onto a sheet of transparent 
inkjet film. 
Next, we painted an orange-colored light-sensitive dye emulsion on a wooden 
board. (Notice the wood’s grain pattern in the picture.) We then sandwiched our 
negative between a sheet of window glass and the emulsion-coated board and 
exposed in the simplest of ways—outdoors in the sun for 15 minutes. Finally, we 
used a standard copy set-up, such as shown in Figure 4.6, to digitally capture the 
image. See the result in Figure 4.23. 
(Please note: The INKODYE dye and inkjet film we used are available at Amazon.
com and store.lumi.co/.)

93
SURFACE APPEARANCES
4.23 Picture A shows the original black and white image with which we started. Picture B is our final 
image on wood coated with an orange dye emulsion. 
A
B

94

95
5
Revealing Shape and Contour
In the previous chapter we dealt with the problems and opportu-
nities for lighting objects that are flat, or nearly so—things, in 
other words, that are visually defined only in terms of length and 
width. In this chapter we add the third dimension—depth.
A box, for example, is a group of only three visible surfaces. 
Because we know how to light any of the surfaces well, we can 
also light all of them well. Does this mean we can light any of 
these surfaces using only the principles described in the previous 
chapter? Usually not. 
Lighting each visible surface well is not usually enough. We 
also have to think about how those surfaces relate to one another. 
Then we have to light and compose to add depth, or at least the 
illusion of it, to the picture.
Three-dimensional subjects require their own lighting tech-
niques. The lighting techniques that we are going to demonstrate 
are designed to produce the visual clues that our brains need to 
interpret depth.
Interpreting visual clues is the key concept on which this 
whole chapter hangs, so we will begin by describing what some of 

96
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
these visual clues are. It is difficult to make a photograph with 
absolutely no visual clues to represent depth. However, it is easy 
to draw such a picture. Figure 5.1 is an example. No one can say 
for sure what this drawing is intended to represent. We say that it 
is a cube, but you could just as reasonably insist that it is a hexa-
gon with a “Y” drawn in the center. 
The problem with Figure 5.1 is that it fails to supply our eyes 
with the essential visual clues our brains need to process the 
information coming from our optic nerves and to decide, “This is 
a three-dimensional scene.” The only way we can be sure that a 
viewer can understand that an object is a cube is to add these 
visual clues. 
Figure 5.2 has exactly the visual clues the brain is looking for. 
Compare it with Figure 5.1.
5.1 This diagram fails to provide any visual clues that would make us perceive it as a 
three-dimensional object.

97
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
DEPTH CLUES
Why does the second picture look more three-dimensional than 
the first? A look at the drawings gives us two immediate answers. 
The first is perspective distortion: some edges of the cube seem 
to be longer than others, and some seem to be shorter, even 
though we know they are all the same length. The corners all 
appear to join at different angles, even though we know they are 
all 90 degrees.
Besides perspective distortion, there is a second clue that our 
brain uses to perceive depth: tonal variation. As we just saw in 
Figure 5.2, a difference in the various tones in a scene also helps 
our brains to perceive, or “see,” depth. 
Notice that these visual clues are so powerful that the brain 
perceives depth that does not and never did exist! This is not 
really a cube; it is only a bit of ink on paper. Photographers record 
real subjects with real depth, but that depth is lost in the picture. 
A photograph on paper or on a monitor is as two dimensional as 
these drawings. 
5.2 Here we have 
added those visual clues 
that the brain needs to 
see depth.

98
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Photographers who want to maintain a sense of depth need to 
use the same techniques that illustrators do. Our task is often 
easier than theirs because nature does the job for us by providing 
the right lighting and perspective, but not always.
Both perspective distortion and tonal variation influence light-
ing decisions. Lighting produces highlights and shadows, so its 
effect on tonal variation is obvious. The relationship between 
lighting and perspective distortion is less obvious, but it is still 
important. 
Viewpoint determines both perspective distortion and the 
family of angles that causes direct reflection. Changing viewpoint 
to control that family of angles also alters perspective distortion; 
changing viewpoint to control perspective distortion also alters 
the family of angles.
PERSPECTIVE DISTORTION
Subjects appear smaller when they are farther away. Furthermore, 
if the subject is three dimensional, the part of the subject that is 
farther away appears to be smaller than the closer part of the 
same subject. Similarly, the closer part of the same subject 
appears to be larger. We call this effect perspective distortion.
Some psychologists believe that infants perceive more distant 
subjects to be actually smaller. No one is sure about this because 
by the time we are old enough to talk about the matter, our brains 
have learned to interpret perspective distortion as depth. We do 
know that learning is involved, however; people raised in emerg-
ing societies, without buildings that have right-angle corners, are 
less likely to be fooled by the illusion in Figure 5.3.

99
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Distortion as a Clue to Depth
Our eyes deceive us when we look down railroad tracks, but our 
brains do not. The rails appear to converge in the distance, but 
we know that the rails are parallel. We know that they are the 
same distance apart a mile down the track as they are where we 
are standing, so the brain says, “The tracks only appear to con-
verge because they are distant.” 
But how does the brain know that the tracks are distant? The brain 
answers, “They must be distant because they appear to converge.” 
We assume the brain actually uses a more complex process, 
but the effect is the same: perspective distortion is one of the 
major visual clues that our brains use to perceive depth. 
Controlling this perspective distortion allows us to manipulate 
the illusion of depth in the picture.
Conventional photography is two dimensional. Viewers notice 
the length and width of a printed picture but not the thickness of 
its paper. We perceive depth in a photograph despite the fact that 
it does not really exist. Figure 5.4 proves this.
5.3 The two vertical lines are the same length, but 
to most people one looks longer than the other.

100
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
The foreground chess pieces clearly appear to be in front of those 
in the background. But the “foreground” and “background” 
existed only in the scene, not in this picture. This image is printed 
on a flat paper surface. Perspective distortion is critical to this 
sense of depth that photography conveys.
One of the main reasons we know that this scene has depth is 
that the lines that delineate the square shape of the chessboard—
and, to a lesser extent, the squares on it—look distorted. In real-
ity, those lines are parallel to each other. That, however, is, as you 
can see, not the case in the picture. Like the railroad tracks we 
discussed earlier, these lines converge at a point on an imaginary 
horizon. This distortion gives the brain a strong visual clue that it 
is seeing length, width, and depth.
Manipulating Distortion
Within certain limits, we can increase and decrease the amount 
of perspective distortion in a photograph. This means that we can 
control the sense of depth our pictures give to viewers.
5.4 Although this photograph is a flat, two-dimensional representation of the scene, we perceive depth in it.

101
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Controlling the degree of perspective distortion in a picture is 
simplicity itself. The closer we move the camera toward the sub-
ject, the greater the distortion will be. Conversely, the farther the 
camera is from the subject, the less it will be distorted. It is that 
easy.
In Figure 5.5, we see the effect of the first half of the rule. It 
is the same chessboard, but the camera has been moved much 
closer to it. (Of course, changing the camera distance also changes 
the size of the image, but we cropped the pictures to keep the 
same subject size in all of them.)
See that the closer viewpoint increases the distortion. The 
lines that define the chessboard appear to converge much more 
radically than they did in the first photograph, Figure 5.4.
Exactly the reverse takes place in Figure 5.6. This time we 
moved the camera back. Notice how there is less distortion in this 
picture. The lines in it converge far less obviously than they do in 
either of the two previous illustrations.
5.5 Moving the camera closer increased perspective distortion and made the parallel lines that run toward the 
horizon appear to converge. This is one of the visual clues that the brain uses to perceive depth.

102
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
TONAL VARIATION
The second major depth clue is tonal variation. Tonal variation 
means that there are both light areas and dark areas in the sub-
ject. If the subject is a cube, ideal tonal variation means that the 
viewer sees a highlighted side, a shadowed side, and a side that is 
partly shadowed. (We use “side” for convenience. One of these 
sides could be the top of the cube, or even the bottom, if the cube 
is suspended above us.) Good lighting does not always require 
this ideal, but the ideal is still the standard we use to evaluate 
whatever lighting exists.
5.6 With the camera farther away, parallel lines appear to converge less.
Do Lenses Affect Perspective Distortion?
When many photographers use a wide-angle lens for the first time, they decide that 
it introduces a great deal of distortion. This is not quite accurate. The truth is, it is the 
camera’s position that determines perspective distortion, not the lens mounted on it.
To prove this, we made every picture of the chessboard with the same wide-angle 
lens. This means that we had to enlarge the image made at an intermediate distance 

103
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
These highlights and shadows are determined by the size and 
position of the light used. We treat size and position as two differ-
ent concepts, but they are not mutually exclusive. One can greatly 
influence the other. A large light, for example, illuminates the 
subject from many different “positions” at the same time. In the 
rest of this chapter, we will see how these two variables relate.
THE SIZE OF THE LIGHT
Selecting the size of the light is one of the most important steps 
in studio lighting. Time of day and weather determine the size of 
the light outdoors.
In previous chapters we discussed how adjusting the size of 
the light makes the edges of the shadows harder or softer. If two 
shadows record as the same gray, a hard shadow will be more vis-
ible than a soft one. For this reason, a hard shadow often increases 
somewhat, and we had to greatly enlarge the image made at a greater distance. 
Those enlargements produced images whose sizes match the one made with the 
camera closer. 
Had we used a lens with a longer focal length, we would not have had to enlarge 
those two images, but the shape of the chessboard would have been the same as 
the shapes in the three pictures we show.
Choosing a lens of the appropriate focal length does allow us to control image 
size to make it fit the sensor size. Assuming we want the usable image to exactly fill 
the sensor, a lens with a shorter focal length allows us a viewpoint that produces 
perspective distortion.
A longer lens allows us to get far enough from the subject to minimize perspec-
tive distortion without having to greatly enlarge the image later. In each case, the 
viewpoint determines the distortion, not the lens. Extremely wide-angle lenses and 
inferior lenses may produce their own other types of distortion, but not perspective 
distortion.

104
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
the illusion of depth more than a soft one. When we understand 
this concept, we have another way to manipulate the tonal values, 
and thus control the sense of depth, in our pictures.
This seems to say that hard lights are better lights, but depth 
alone does not make a good picture. A shadow that is too hard can 
be so visible that it competes with the primary subject. Because 
we cannot offer firm rules about what size light is always best, we 
will explore the general principles in more detail.
Large Lights Versus Small Lights
In Chapter 2 we discussed the following basic principles: a small 
light source produces hard-edged shadows, and a large one pro-
duces soft-edged shadows. Most of our lights are small. Portability 
and cost require it. Therefore, photographers more often need to 
enlarge a small light than the reverse.
Diffusing screens, umbrellas, soft boxes, and bounce cards  
all increase the effective size of any light. The effect of any of 
these is about the same as that of another. Because all of these 
devices can produce identical pictures, we pick the one that is 
most convenient. 
Thus, if the subject is small, we are more likely to use a framed 
sheet of diffusion material because we can place it close to the 
subject for brighter illumination. It’s harder to construct a very 
large diffuser, so we are more likely to bounce the light from a 
white ceiling to light a large subject.
Outdoors we can achieve the same effect by waiting for an 
overcast day. Clouds make excellent diffusion material, effec-
tively increasing the size of the sunlight source. Depending on 
the available time and the accessibility of the site, photographers 
wait for days for the right amount of cloud cover.

105
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
If we lack the time to wait for the best day, the same framed  
diffusion material we use in the studio is also good for small out-
door subjects. Alternatively, we can keep the subject in the shade. 
Then the large open sky, instead of the small direct sun, serves  
as the primary light source. (Although, without compensation, a 
subject lit only by the open sky can be quite blue.) 
Distance from the Subject
You may have been surprised that in the preceding section we 
referred to the clouds and the sky as larger light sources than the 
sun. A corollary to the effect of the size of the light relates to  
the distance between a light and the subject it illuminates. 
The closer a light is to the subject, the softer the shadows are; 
the farther a light is from the subject, the harder the shadows 
become. The sun behaves as a small light source to people on 
Earth because it is so far away.
Remember that large lights produce soft shadows because 
they illuminate the subject from more different directions. Figure 
5.7 shows this, but look at what happens in Figure 5.8 when we 
move the same light source farther away. The light still emits rays 
in many directions, but only a narrow range of these rays strikes 
the subject.
Moving a light farther from the subject increases its contrast 
by reducing the range of angles from which the rays can strike the 
subject. This is just another way of saying that large lights pro-
duce soft shadows and small lights produce hard ones. The closer 
we move a light to a subject, the larger that light source becomes 
in relation to it.
Photographers using portable strobes in small rooms some-
times insist that the opposite is true. They know that moving the 

106
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
5.7 When close to a subject, the light rays from a 
large light source strike the subject from many angles. 
The closer the light is, the softer its shadows are.
5.8 Moving the light farther away causes 
the rays striking the subject to be more 
parallel. This produces harder-edged 
shadows.

107
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
light farther from the subject softens the shadows, rather than 
making them harder. This is because moving the light farther 
away reflects more of the rays from the surrounding walls. The 
room itself becomes a more important component of the lighting. 
And since the room is larger than the strobe, the principle is not 
contradicted.
THE DIRECTION OF THE LIGHT
The direction of the light relative to the subject determines what 
part of the subject is highlighted and where the shadows fall. 
Light from any direction may be good in any particular case, but 
only a few of them are good for emphasizing dimension.
Light coming from the direction of the camera is called front 
lighting because primarily the front of the subject is illuminated. 
Front lighting shows the least possible depth because the visible 
part of the subject is entirely highlighted. The shadow falls 
behind the subject where the camera cannot see it. The camera 
sees no tonal variation and, therefore, no depth. For this reason, 
front lighting is often called flat lighting. 
However, the apparent lack of depth is not always a deficiency 
and, in fact, can sometimes be a virtue: front-lit portraits can be 
flattering by minimizing skin texture.
Backlighting also fails to reveal the depth of an object. Coming 
from behind the subject, backlighting puts the visible part of the 
subject in shadow. This can add drama, but without other lights, 
it will not add dimension.
Because the perception of depth requires both highlight and 
shadow, a lighting direction between front and backlighting 
maximizes that perception. Such lighting is called side lighting. 
Most good lighting is, at least to some extent, side lighting.

108
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Still life photographers often use top lighting for tabletop sub-
jects. Top lighting represents depth to the same extent as side 
lighting because it gives the subject the same proportion of high-
light and shadow. We base our choice between them entirely on 
taste. This is a question of where we want the highlight and 
shadow, not of how much of each.
Light directly from the side or the top often conceals too much 
of the subject detail in shadow. So photographers may pull the 
light toward the camera to a position between those of side light-
ing and front lighting. This compromise is called three-quarter 
lighting.
You can justifiably decide to use any of these lighting direc- 
 tions for any subject. The thinking process you use is more  
impor tant than whatever rules we offer. Your decision will almost 
always be good, as long as you consider what each direction accom-
plishes and how well it fulfills your objective for a particular subject.
Now we will look at a real subject and decide on one good way 
to light it. The subject will be a dried gourd, and our objective will 
be to light it so as to emphasize depth in the picture we make.
Light on the Side
One way of producing the shadows that we need as depth clues is 
to position the main light on one side of the subject. We tried this 
in Figure 5.9, using a small, high-contrast light so that you could 
see the shadow easily.
This is a potentially good approach, but it is usually not the 
best one for tabletop subjects. The combination of highlight and 
shadow does show dimension; however, the hard shadow, located 
where it is, is a problem. It distracts too much from the primary 
subject. 

109
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
We could improve this photograph with a larger light. That 
would soften the shadow, making it less noticeable. However,  
the position of the shadow would still cause it to compete. (The 
gourd, not the shadow, is the subject. On any other day we might 
decide the shadow is the subject, or at least an important second-
ary subject. Then we would light and compose the picture to 
capitalize on that shadow.)
The only way to keep this particular shadow from drawing the 
eye away from the subject would be to soften it so much that it 
would not exist at all. But notice that the shadow also proves that 
the subject is sitting on a table. Without the shadow, the brain 
would have no way of knowing whether the subject is on the table 
or floating above it.
5.9 The shadow 
helps the brain perceive 
depth, but in this case 
the shadow is 
obtrusive.

110
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
The relationship of the subject to the background tells the 
viewer an essential message about the depth in the scene. Conveying 
that message requires keeping the shadow. Because we must not get 
rid of the shadow, then we have to put it somewhere else. 
Light above the Subject
The least distracting place for the shadow in most compositions is 
directly under and in front of the subject. This means placing the 
light above and slightly behind the subject. 
5.10 With a small light above the subject, the shadow is small enough to be less 
obtrusive and it gives the gourd a “ground” on which to sit. However, the shadow is 
still too hard.

111
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Figure 5.10 was shot with such an arrangement. Now the 
shadow gives the subject a “ground” on which to sit.
Although the placement of the shadow is improved, the pic-
ture still has two problems. The first is that the subject still does 
not have as much depth as it needs. The top of the subject is 
highlighted, but either side is about the same tone as the other. 
This almost complete lack of tonal distinction between the left 
and right sides detracts from the illusion of depth. The second 
problem, for many photographers, is that the shadow under the 
gourd is too hard. Being so hard makes it obtrusive, too much of 
an element in the picture.
We will first deal with the hard shadow. We used a small light 
in this example to make it easier to see where the shadow falls. 
Now that you have seen the shadow clearly, we will soften it. We 
will substitute a large soft box for the earlier small light. Figure 
5.11 is a diagram of the lighting we used to make Figure 5.12.
5.11 Lighting with  
a soft box makes the 
shadow much softer and 
unobtrusive.
Seamless 
Background 

112
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Notice in the lighting diagram that the soft box is angled 
slightly toward the camera. This tilt is not essential, but it is com-
mon. The tilt keeps the seamless background evenly illuminated. 
Notice also that the light is closer to the top part of the back-
ground and that keeping the light level could light that area too 
brightly. The other reason for tilting the light is to cast more light 
on any reflector cards we might decide to use for fill light.
Fill Light
Sometimes a single, large overhead light is all we need, but not 
always. This lighting often fails if the subject is tall and thin or has 
5.12 The result of the 
lighting shown in Figure 
5.11.

113
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
very vertical sides. The tonal variation produced by the single 
overhead light may be too extreme and, compared with the top of 
the subject, the front and side are too dark. 
This can even happen for a shallow, flat subject if the detail in 
its front is highly important and what’s on top is not. Figure 5.12 
shows a bit of this problem; it’s not terrible the way it is, but some 
more light on the front of the gourd is needed.
The most obvious solution to this problem is to add another 
light to fill in some of the shadow. This is not always the best solu-
tion, nor is it always necessary. Placing the fill light to one side 
may cause competing shadows, such as those shown in Figure 
5.9. But placing the fill light over the camera may light the subject 
too evenly. That costs the very depth we are trying to achieve.
We can avoid adding problems by using a fill light that is as  
soft as possible and as dim as possible, provided it is still bright 
enough to do its job. If the fill is soft, the additional shadow will 
be too poorly defined to compete. If the fill is dim, a competing 
shadow will not be dark enough to be visible.
Keeping the fill soft means using a large enough source. 
Brighter fill lights usually need to be larger, but weaker ones can 
be smaller without creating noticeable extraneous shadows.
Sometimes a simple reflector card provides enough fill. We 
can add reflector cards on each side of the subject or directly 
under the camera. The amount of fill light affects both the bright-
ness of the subject and the amount of the ground shadow lost. 
Our choice of fill card will vary with both the subject and the 
background.
We made Figure 5.13 by placing a white reflector card under 
the camera and near the subject. 
A white background might have reflected so much light that we 
would have needed no reflector cards at all. A black background 

114
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
would have reflected so little light that we would have needed 
stronger fill.
We can use any combination of reflector cards and additional 
lights, depending on how much fill the specific subject needs. 
The least amount of fill we are likely to use is the light reflected 
from a light background surface on which the subject sits. 
In such cases we may also decide to put a black card on one 
side of the subject so that both sides do not get equal fill. (We will 
show an example of this with the white-on-white subject in 
Chapter 9.) The most fill we are likely to need is a light behind a 
large sheet of diffusion material on one side of the subject, plus  
a smaller silver card or a white one on the other side.
5.13 A fill card 
lightens the front of the 
gourd by reflecting 
some of the light from 
the overhead soft box.

115
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
The physical arrangement of the apparatus used in the photo-
graph influences how much freedom we have in positioning the 
reflector card. Sometimes we can put the card wherever we 
please, but on other occasions there is only one possible position 
that is close enough to the subject but still out of the image area. 
This may require using a white card when we might otherwise 
prefer a silver one.
A silver card usually reflects more light onto the subject than 
a white one, but not always. Remember that a silver card pro-
duces direct reflections. For this reason, the silver card has its 
own limited family of angles from which reflection can occur. In 
a crowded arrangement, the only possible position of a silver card 
may be at an angle from which it can reflect no light to the sub-
ject. In contrast, most reflection from a white card is diffuse. 
Because the angle of a white card is less critical, from some posi-
tions it will reflect more light to the subject than a silver one.
Notice that the size of the main light also influences our choice 
of reflector cards. A bright, smooth silver card produces a mirror 
image of the main light. Therefore, if the main light is large, then 
a large silver card will serve as a soft fill light. 
A small silver card will behave as a hard fill for the same reason 
any other small source is hard. If the main light is small, however, 
a silver card reflecting that light will always be a hard fill, regard-
less of its size. A white reflector card is the only reflector that can 
provide soft fill light from a small main light.
Finally, even though the background surface often provides 
adequate reflected fill, beware of colored backgrounds, especially 
if the subject itself is white or pastel. Fill reflected from a colored 
background can color the subject. 
Sometimes we have to add more fill from a white light source 
to overcome the color cast caused by the background surface. We 

116
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
may also need to cover part of the background surface with black 
cards to get rid of off-color reflected fill.
Adding Depth to the Background
In Figure 5.11 we show how we used a curved paper background, 
often called a sweep. Hung in this manner, the background covers 
the table on which the subject sits and also conceals whatever 
might be behind the table. The camera sees no horizon, nor is  
the gentle curve of the paper visible as long as we do not let the 
shadow of the subject fall on that part of the background. The 
brain thinks the entire surface is horizontal and extends a possibly 
infinite distance behind the subject.
So far, we have used simple, single-tone backgrounds for the 
sake of simplicity in our examples. Not only can this produce bor-
ing pictures, but such lighting also fails to capitalize on the illusion 
of infinite depth in the background. We can greatly enhance this 
illusion by illuminating the background unevenly.
We call this uneven illumination falloff. As we are using the 
term, it means a transition in the scene from light to dark. Falloff 
can occur in any area of the picture.
Photographers most commonly use falloff at the top of the 
picture; it looks good there and it also happens to be the easiest 
place to put it without interfering with the lighting of the primary 
subject.
Look at Figure 5.14. Notice how the background tone falls off 
from a light tone in the foreground to black in the background. The 
difference in the tonal value of the foreground and background 
tones provides another important visual clue to suggest depth.
Figure 5.15 shows how we produced the falloff. All we had to 
do was aim the light more toward the camera. This simple change 

117
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
5.14 The uneven 
illumination of the 
background, called 
falloff, adds depth to a 
picture and helps 
separate the subject 
from the background.
5.15 Aiming the light 
toward the camera 
produced the 
background falloff. The 
gobo is often essential 
to prevent flare.
£z I 
Gobo 
@!II 
Seamless 
Background 

118
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
in our set allowed less of it to fall on the seamless paper at the 
back of the set.
Notice also that we added a gobo over the lens. It was impor-
tant because the more we aimed the light toward the camera, the 
greater was the possibility that we would produce serious camera 
flare.
Managing Flare
Flare, also called nonimaging light, is the scattering of light so that it goes where we 
usually (more on that later) don’t want it. Technically, flare exists in every picture—
usually to an unnoticeable and harmless degree. However, the lighting that we dia-
grammed in Figure 5.15 would be likely to produce enough flare to degrade a 
picture. 
Flare can manifest itself in different ways. In Figure 7.17 we see it as a dull gray 
fog or “mask” over the entire picture. However, in Figure 5.16A the flare looks very 
different. Rather than being uniform, this time it shows itself as irregular streaking 
5.16A Notice that in 
this picture the flare is 
uneven. 

119
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
across different parts of the young woman’s face. The heavy flare in this portrait is 
caused by the low angle of the sun backlighting it.
Although flare is often problematic, some photographers purposely create and 
use it to express the “look” they want. Currently, this is particularly true in the fields 
of fashion and glamor photography.
There are two different kinds of flare: lens flare and camera flare. The effect of 
these two can look the same. The difference between them is where the light gets 
scattered. 
Figure 5.16B shows what causes camera flare and how to prevent it. Light from 
just outside the field of view enters the lens and reflects from inside the camera to 
the sensor, degrading the image. All cameras have black interiors and all professional 
cameras have ridges inside to absorb as much of this extraneous light as possible, 
but no camera design eliminates it entirely. 
The whole purpose of a lens hood is to block light coming from outside the scene 
before it enters the lens. Lens hoods, unfortunately, sometimes do not extend far 
enough forward to be of any help in preventing camera flare. The solution is to use 
opaque cards as gobos, as in Figures 5.15 and 5.16B.
If the light source is hard, we can position the gobo so that its shadow just barely 
covers the lens. However, placing the gobo is more difficult if the light source is soft. 
The shadow of the gobo may be so soft that we cannot tell when it adequately blocks 
the light falling on the lens.
Because we normally compose and focus with the lens opened to its maximum 
aperture, there is little depth of field in the image we see in the camera. This lack of 
5.16B Camera flare  
is caused by light from 
outside the field of view 
passing through the lens 
and reflecting from the 
inside of the camera. 
Blocking the light before  
it reaches the lens is the 
only way to prevent 
camera flare.

120
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
HOW MUCH TONAL VARIATION IS IDEAL?
We have said that a box with three visible sides needs to have a 
highlight side, a shadow side, and a side whose tone is between 
those two. Nowhere have we said how bright the highlight must 
be or how dark the shadow should be. In fact, we never specify 
lighting ratios in this book because the decision has to be based 
on the specific subject as well as personal taste.
If the subject is a simple cube with no important detail on any 
of its sides, we can make the shadow black and the highlight 
white. However, if the subject is the package for a product we 
want to sell, there may be important detail on all sides. This 
requires keeping the highlight only slightly brighter, and the 
shadow only slightly darker, than the third side.
Photographing Cylinders: Increasing Tonal Variation
Now we will consider cylinders and the special problems they can 
present. 
The rocket model in Figure 5.17 is basically a cylindrical 
object. However, the scant tonal variation in this picture of it does 
depth of field may make the image of the gobo so unsharp that it is impossible to 
see it even when it is intruding into the picture area. It can be difficult to place the 
card close enough to the field of view to be useful without blocking part of the scene.
Remember, however, that the glass lens reflects like a mirror. With the camera on 
a tripod, you can look into the front of the lens and see the reflection of any light 
source likely to cause flare. 
Move the gobo in front of the lens just far enough that you can no longer see the 
light source reflected in the lens. Then pull the gobo back slightly for safety. A gobo 
in that position eliminates almost all flare without extending into the image.

121
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
not reveal the model’s true shape very well. That is because the 
lighting we used was relatively even across its entire surface. Thus 
the model largely appears to be flat and without much obvious 
dimensionality. 
The result is that our picture of the model lacks sufficient 
visual clues for our brains to make an informed decision about its 
true shape. This problem is caused by the fact that the “sides” of 
our rocket are not separated by clear tonal variation. The shadows 
blend so gradually into the highlights that some of the dimen-
sional distinction is lost. 
5.17 This subject is 
basically cylindrical, but  
the flat lighting does not  
give enough visual clues to 
show it.

122
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
The solution to this problem is to build more tonal variation 
into the scene. Cylinders usually need a brighter highlight side or 
a darker shadow side than boxes do. Figure 5.18 shows what hap-
pens to our rocket picture when we change our lighting to achieve 
this.
One simple way to do this—and the way we chose—is to place 
a light source on one side of the model and a black card on the 
other. By lighting one side of it more than the other, enough 
variation from highlight to shadow supplies the illusion of depth.
5.18 Lighting the rocket 
model from the side gives 
pronounced tonal 
variation—just the clue that 
the brain needs to perceive 
depth.

123
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Unfortunately, however, placing the light to one side of the 
subject can create a problem. It causes the shadow of the subject 
to fall on the table surface beside it. And, as we saw earlier, shad-
ows are least likely to become strong compositional elements if 
they fall at the bottom of the picture, under the subject. 
With the above in mind, in those cases when we do place our 
main light to the side of a cylindrical subject, we usually use a 
large light source. This further softens the shadow and makes it 
less likely to compete for attention.
THE GLOSSY BOX
In Chapter 4 we saw that good lighting requires distinguishing 
between diffuse and direct reflection and then making an 
informed decision about which we are going to use. Everything 
we said about lighting a simple, flat surface applies equally to the 
group of surfaces that makes a three-dimensional object.
So far in this chapter we have discussed perspective distortion, 
light size, and light direction. These all determine whether the 
camera can see a light source within the family of angles that 
produces direct reflection. Now we are going to talk about some 
of the special techniques that are helpful when photographing a 
glossy box.
Look at Figure 5.19, a diagram showing a glossy box with two 
families of angles, one that produces direct reflection for the top 
of the box and one for the front. (Most camera viewpoints require 
photographers to deal with three families of angles, but it is easier 
to see them in a diagram showing only the top and front.)
Our first lighting decision is whether to produce direct reflec-
tion or to avoid it—whether, in other words, to place the light 
within or outside the family of angles.

124
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Figure 5.20 shows an antique wooden box with a very glossy 
finish. Because it is so shiny, much of the detail of the wood in its 
top is obscured by direct reflection.
We should be able to remedy the loss of detail by keeping light 
sources out of the family of angles that produces such reflection. 
The following describes a series of steps that can help to accom-
plish this goal.
Use a Dark- to Medium-toned Background
First, use a dark to medium background if possible. As you can 
see from Figure 5.19, one of the ways in which glare-producing 
light gets to the subject is by reflecting from the background. In 
addition, light from the tabletop can cause direct reflection on the 
sides of the box. 
5.19 Here are two of the 
families of angles with which we 
must contend when shooting a 
box. A light source in either of 
them will produce direct 
reflection.
Fa Ily of Angles 
or Top of Box,,," 
Fa Ily of Angles 
or Top of Box,,," 

125
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
If you are using a sweep, light from its upper part can reflect on 
the box top. The darker that background is, the less light reflects 
from it. This step alone may be adequate for some subjects.
Sometimes, however, you may not want a dark background. 
On other occasions, you will find that the light that produces 
direct reflection comes from someplace other than the back-
ground. In either case, the next step is the same—find the light 
creating the direct reflection and get rid of it.
Eliminate Direct Reflection from the Box Top
There are several effective ways of eliminating direct reflection 
from the box top. We can use one, or we can use a combination 
of them, according to the other requirements of the picture.
5.20 Details on the 
top of this box are 
largely obscured by 
direct reflection. We 
could remedy this by 
keeping light sources 
out of the family of 
angles producing that 
reflection.

126
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Move the Light Source toward the Camera
If the camera is high, then an overhead light can reflect in the top 
of the box. This is particularly true of a soft box. Such a light is so 
large that at least a part of it is very likely to be within the family 
of angles. This causes direct reflection to be brighter and worse 
than if a light background reflects in the top of the box. 
One remedy for the above situation would be to move the soft 
box toward the camera. Doing so, as shown in Figure 5.21, helps 
to reveal the detail on the box top.
Raise or Lower the Camera
Moving the camera also changes the family of angles. If an over-
head light source reflects in the box top, lowering the camera 
5.21 Here are some of the different ways to eliminate direct reflections from the box 
top. You can use any one or a combination of them.
" 
Remove Light from Family of Angles 
Move Camera 
to Change 
Family of Angles 
\ 
Gobo Blocking 
Family of Angles 

127
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
moves the family of angles so that the light is no longer in it as 
shown in Figure 5.22. If the top of a sweep is reflecting in the top 
of the box, raising the camera causes the studio area above and 
behind the background to reflect instead. Fortunately, it is usually 
a simple matter to keep that part of the studio dark.
Use Falloff
If it is not possible to use a dark background, we may at least be 
able to darken that part of the background that causes direct 
reflection on the top of the box. Falloff accomplishes this. Keep 
as much light as you can from the background. The less light  
hitting the box surface, the less that will reflect from it.
5.22 In this picture we see the results of moving the soft box forward. The detail on 
the box top is now clearly visible.

128
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Eliminate Direct Reflection from the Box’s Sides
It is a relatively simple matter to get rid of most direct reflection 
from the top of a glossy box. However, things get more difficult 
when we start trying to eliminate it from its sides.
Put a Black Card on the Tabletop
This will darken part of the surface and eliminate direct reflection 
from part of the subject. Figure 5.23 shows the result. This is a 
particularly useful technique when we want to eliminate some 
direct reflections but not others.
If you look again at Figure 5.19, you will see that if the box  
side is perfectly vertical, the black card cannot fill all of the family 
of angles unless it is close enough to touch the bottom of the 
5.23 Using a dark card to the camera right of the box gets rid of unwanted direct 
reflections and helps to restore detail.

129
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
subject. Nevertheless, getting the card as close as possible with-
out intruding into the image area is often a good start before 
going on to the next technique.
Tip the Box
Sometimes you can remove a good bit of offending direct reflec-
tion by tipping up the front of the box. The suitability of this 
tactic depends on the shape of the subject. 
For example, subjects like computers and kitchen appliances 
often sit on their own feet a small height above the tabletop. 
Hiding a small support in the shadow under such a subject is 
simple. Once the camera is tilted to make the subject appear 
level, the trickery is undetectable.
If the box is supposed to be flush on the tabletop, it is easier 
for the camera to see that the box is not level. We may be able to 
tilt the box less, or not at all. Even a slight tilt can be helpful, 
however, especially when used with the following technique.
Use a Longer Lens
There are times when a longer lens can come to the rescue. 
Figure 5.24 shows how a longer lens allows us to place the camera 
farther from the subject. 
As we see, the family of angles is smaller than it was in Figure 
5.19. This means less of the tabletop reflects in the subject.
Finish with Other Resources
If some direct reflection is still obscuring detail, the following 
techniques can eliminate it completely.

130
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Try a Polarizer
If the direct reflection is polarized, a lens polarizing filter will get 
rid of it. We suggested this as one of the first remedies to try for 
the competing surfaces presented in the previous chapter.
If, however, the subject is a glossy box, we more often save the 
polarizer as a next-to-last resort. This is because a glossy box usu-
ally has polarized reflection on more than one side. 
Unfortunately, the reflection from one side is likely to be 
polarized in a direction perpendicular to the polarization of the 
other side. This means that as the polarizing filter eliminates one 
polarized reflection, it effectively increases another.
5.24 Using a long lens sometimes helps get rid of unwanted reflections. Comparing 
the more distant viewpoint in this diagram with that in Figure 5.19 shows that the 
farther we move the camera, the smaller the family of angles gets.
Family ofAngles 
fo r jo p  of box
Family of Angles 
for FronTof box 
/

131
REVEALING SHAPE AND CONTOUR
Therefore, we first try the preceding steps. Then, whatever 
direct reflection is left is that which is the most difficult thing to 
eliminate. Then we use the polarizer to reduce that reflection. If 
the other remedies have been successful, the slightly increased 
direct reflection on the other sides will not cause trouble.
Use Dulling Spray
Yes, there are times when the dragon wins! There are times when 
Mother Nature, physics, and viewpoint produce reflections that 
cannot be eliminated with any of the techniques we have described. 
On such “dark” days we may be forced to use a dulling spray. With 
a bit of luck it may, just may, make an otherwise unacceptable  
picture work.
Be aware, however, that dulling spray can reduce the sharp-
ness of the very detail you are trying to preserve. If that detail 
happens to be fine type or the like, the loss of sharpness may be 
more damaging than a loss of contrast caused by direct reflection. 
In addition, there is always the chance that the chemistry of the 
dulling spray will not get along well with that of the subject upon 
which you are spraying it. So be careful—very careful! Always test 
a little bit of spray on a small, and hopefully insignificant, part of 
your subject. Not to take this precaution is to court disaster!
Use Direct Reflection
We chose the glossy box example to be one in which direct reflection 
is obviously offensive. But if direct reflection does not obscure detail, 
we are usually more likely to try to maximize it rather than to avoid it. 
After all, if direct reflection is essential to the surface, capital-
izing on that reflection produces an image of the subject that 
looks as much like the real thing as possible. We will discuss a 
specific technique in the following chapter.
 

132

133
6
Metal
Many student and apprentice photographers think metal is one of 
the most difficult photographic subjects and consider assign-
ments that require them to photograph metal to be nothing less 
than cruel and unusual punishment. However, when they master 
the assignment, they discover that nothing could be further from 
the truth. Metal is not difficult, and photography teachers have 
slightly less than sadistic motives when they require such work.
There are about a half-dozen classic subjects that all photog-
raphers are supposed to encounter as they learn lighting. These 
subjects teach basic techniques that enable us to light anything. 
Metal is one of the classic subjects for good reason. Brightly pol-
ished metal produces almost nothing but un-polarized direct 
reflection. This constancy makes metal a real joy to photograph. 
It is predictable. It plays by the rules. We can tell before we begin 
to light the scene what size the light needs to be.
Moreover, when it does turn out to be impossible to position 
the light source where it needs to be to light the picture well, we 
can also see the problem early in the process. We seldom invest a 
lot of time, only to find that what we are attempting cannot be 

METAL
134
done and that we have to start the lighting arrangement over 
from the beginning.
In addition, because the direct reflection in metal is largely 
uncontaminated by other types of reflections, it is easy to see how 
this reflection behaves. Therefore, learning to photograph pol-
ished metal helps give one the capability to see and to manage 
direct reflection whenever and wherever it occurs, even when 
other kinds of reflections compete in the same scene.
We will introduce new concepts and techniques in this chapter. 
The most important subject matter is the simplest: flat, brightly pol-
ished metal. A flat piece of metal, without any other objects in the 
scene, is easy to light, even without much thought or understanding 
of the relevant principles. But such simple subject matter can dem-
onstrate the most sophisticated techniques—techniques that can 
eventually make even the most difficult assignments possible.
Much of what follows is based on the family of angles that 
cause direct reflection. We introduced this family in Chapter 3. 
We have used the concept in each succeeding chapter, but in 
none of them was it as vital as it becomes when dealing with 
metal.
FLAT METAL
Brightly polished metal acts like a mirror: it reflects whatever is 
around it. This mirror-like quality means that when we photo-
graph metal, we do not make a picture of just the metal itself. We 
also make a picture of its surroundings, or environment, as it is 
reflected in the metal. That means that we must prepare a suit-
able environment before we photograph the metal.
We know that direct reflection can be produced only by a light 
source that is within a limited family of angles, relative to the 

METAL
135
subject and to the camera. Because the metal reflects its environ-
ment, it makes sense that the smaller that family of angles is, the 
less of the environment we have to worry about. A small piece of 
flat metal has only a small family of angles from which direct 
reflection can be produced. This makes such a piece of metal the 
simplest example we can use to talk about the general principles 
of lighting any metal.
Figure 6.1 is a diagram of a piece of flat metal and a camera. 
Note that the camera position is essential in any lighting diagram 
involving metal. This is because the family of angles depends on 
the position of the camera relative to the subject. Therefore, the 
relationship between the camera and the subject is at least as 
important as the subject itself. We know that direct reflection can 
only be produced by a light located within the limited family of 
angles we show here. 
6.1 The family of angles 
that produces direct 
reflection depends on the 
position of the camera 
relative to the subject.
Camera Position 
Subject Size and Shape 
Determines Family of Angles 
Camera Position 
Subject Size and Shape 
Determines Family of Angles 
Camera Position 
Subject Size and Shape 
Determines Family of Angles 
Camera Position 
Subject Size and Shape 
Determines Family of Angles 

METAL
136
Bright or Dark?
One of the first, and most important, decisions that we have to 
make when we photograph a piece of metal is how bright we want 
it to be. Do we want it to be bright, dark, or something in between? 
The answer to this question determines the lighting we use.
If we want the metal to appear bright in the photograph, we 
make sure our light source fills that family of angles that produces 
direct reflection on the metal. If, however, we want the metal to 
be dark in the picture, we put the light anywhere else. Either way, 
the first step in lighting metal is to find that family of angles. After 
that, the task is straightforward.
Finding the Family of Angles
Practice makes it easy to anticipate where the family of angles will 
be. Experienced photographers usually get the light so close to 
the ideal position on the first try that only minor adjustment 
needs to be made after the first look in the camera. However, if 
you have never before tried lighting metal, it may be difficult to 
visualize where the family of angles exists in space.
We are going to show you a technique that always finds exactly 
where the family of angles is. You may decide to use it often or 
you may decide to use it only for more difficult set-ups, depend-
ing on your need. Either way, an abbreviated version of this  
routine is adequate for most photographs. If this is the first time 
you have tried to light metal expertly, it is probably worth trying 
the entire following sequence of steps at least once as an exercise.

METAL
137
Position a White Target Where You Think the Family  
of Angles Will Be 
This white target can be any convenient large surface. The easiest 
will be whatever large piece of diffusion material you might eventu-
ally use to light the metal. Figure 6.2 shows two possible positions 
where we might suspend a large diffusion sheet over the metal.
You do not know exactly where the family of angles is at this 
point. Use a larger white surface than you think you need to fill 
those angles. The less sure you are of where the angles are, the 
bigger the surface needs to be.
Place a Test Light at the Camera Lens
We call this a “test” light to distinguish it from whatever light we 
eventually use to make the picture. The test light needs to have a 
narrow enough beam to light the metal without illuminating the 
6.2 The possible positions 
for the test surface in this 
exercise are also where we 
might suspend diffusion 
material if we wished to light 
the metal brightly.
F 
Possible Pos~r~ons 
Possible 
Possible Positions 
for Diffusion Material 

METAL
138
surrounding area. A small spotlight is ideal, but a flashlight is 
adequate if you can keep the room dark.
If you are photographing a small piece of metal from a close 
working distance, the test light must be exactly at the lens position. 
This may require temporarily removing the camera from the tri-
pod. Alternatively, if the camera is a view camera, you may be able 
to temporarily remove both the lens and the camera back and aim 
the test light through the camera. Be careful of this tactic, how-
ever! A photographic light too close to a black camera can quickly 
heat up the camera enough to cause very expensive damage.
When the camera has a long lens and the distance to the sub-
ject is great, it is usually not necessary to place the test light at 
exactly the lens position. Positioning the light as close to the lens 
as possible approximates the ideal well enough for more practical 
purposes.
Aim the Test Light
Aim the test light at the point on the metal surface that is nearest 
to the camera. The light will reflect off the metal and onto the test 
surface. As we see in Figure 6.3, the point at which the beam 
strikes the test surface marks the near limit of the family of 
angles. Use removable tape to mark the spot.
If the beam of light is broad enough to cover the entire metal 
surface, you can leave it in position without moving it for the rest 
of this exercise. If, however, the test light illuminates only part of 
the surface, aim it now at the farthest point on the metal. The 
light reflected from that point on the metal will strike the test 
surface at the far limit of the family of angles. Once again, mark 
the test surface with tape.
Similarly, mark as many points as you need to see where the 
family of angles lies. The shape of the metal subject determines the 

METAL
139
necessary number of points. At the least, you will probably decide 
to mark the near and far limits of the family of angles. If the metal 
is rectangular, you may decide to mark the points at which the  
corners reflect light onto the test surface, instead of the edges.
Study the Position and Shape of the Area Marked on  
the Test Surface
You will almost never need a light source or a gobo that exactly 
fits the family of angles. Nevertheless, this is good practice, so use 
this opportunity to examine exactly where those angles are. A 
little extra time invested now will pay back dividends later. 
Precisely locating the family of angles now will allow you to guess 
its position more quickly in a future project without going through 
this whole measurement procedure again.
Note especially that the point reflecting in the metal edge at 
the bottom of the image corresponds to the limit marked at the 
6.3 A test light in place of 
the camera reflects from the 
metal to show where the 
family of angles is located. 
News flash: Since the last 
printing of this book, a 
clever reader has suggested 
using a laser pointer as the 
test light. Should work well!
Mark Here for 
Near Limit Angle 
I 
Mark Here for 
Near Limit Angle 
I 
Mark Here for 
Near Limit Angle 
I 
Mark Here for 
Near Limit Angle 
I 

METAL
140
top of the test surface and vice versa. Remembering this will 
make it easy to find the source of glare or hot spots on any type 
of subject from now on.
The relationships you prove in this exercise apply to other cam-
era and subject orientations. Figure 6.2 here represents a side 
view of a camera photographing a small piece of metal on a table. 
Of course, it could just as easily be a bird’s-eye view of a camera 
photographing a building with a mirrored glass front. Then the 
area marked on the test surface might correspond to the portion 
of the sky reflected in such a building.
Lighting the Metal
Using the foregoing test, experienced judgment, or a combina-
tion of the two, we find the family of angles from which a light can 
produce direct reflection in the metal. Next, we have to decide 
whether we want the metal to be bright or dark in the picture. 
This is a critical step because it leads to two exactly opposite  
lighting set-ups.
In some photographs, the metal needs to be absolutely white 
while the rest of the scene is as dark as possible. On other  
occasions, we decide to keep the metal black in an otherwise 
high-key scene. More often we like to see something between 
these extremes, but learning to produce the extremes makes the 
compromise easier to obtain.
Keeping the Metal Bright
Because photographers usually choose to make the metal in their 
pictures look bright, we will deal with that case first. If we assume 
that we want the entire surface of the metal to photograph 

METAL
141
brightly, we then need a light source that at least fills the family 
of angles that produces direct reflection. 
Note that because polished metal produces almost no diffuse 
reflection, light coming from any other angle will have practically 
no effect on the metal, regardless of how bright it is or how long 
the exposure.
It is also important to realize that a light that just fills the fam-
ily of angles is the minimum light size we can use. Later, we will 
show you why we routinely use a light larger than the minimum. 
For now, we will assume that the minimum size is adequate.
Figure 6.4 shows one possible lighting arrangement. We have 
used a light on a boom above a diffusion sheet and have adjusted 
the distance from the light head to the diffusion material so that 
the beam approximately fills the family of angles that we marked 
earlier. 
6.4 The main light 
positioned so that it fills the 
family of angles we marked 
in Figure 6.3.
Family of 
Family of 
Family of 
Family of 
Family of 
Family of 
Family of 
Family of 
Family of 
Family of 

METAL
142
We could use an opaque white reflector card instead of the 
diffusion sheet. Then we would use the alternative lighting shown 
in Figure 6.5. A spotlight near the camera, with the beam of the 
light focused to approximately fill the family of angles, would light 
the subject identically to the light through the diffusion sheet.
Most soft box arrangements do not allow adjustment of dis-
tance of the head to the diffusion material on the front. The light 
is fixed inside the box to illuminate the entire front of the box as 
evenly as possible. However, we can achieve a similar effect by 
attaching black cards to the front of the soft box to limit its effec-
tive size, as shown in Figure 6.6.
We used the first of these three options to photograph a 
brightly polished metal spatula on a white paper background. 
Figure 6.7 is the result.
As we expected, the metal is a pleasing light gray. If you  
have never lit a scene this way, you might not have expected the 
6.5 An alternative to the 
lighting shown in Figure 6.4 
uses an opaque white 
reflector card and a 
spotlight focused to fill  
the family of angles.
Far L i d  UI 
&&&of 
Angles 
Far L i d  
UI 
&&&of 
Angles 

METAL
143
6.6 A second alternative to 
the lighting shown in Figure 
6.4: a soft box, with its 
effective size adjusted by 
black cards.
6.7 The bright metal 
spatula blade is placed 
against a white background. 
Do you know why the white 
background looks so dark?
Black
Card
\  
x \ ^
V \  ^
Black
Card

METAL
144
photograph to render the “white” background so dark! This is a 
necessary consequence of the lighting. The exposure is “normal” 
for this scene.
What Is a “Normal” Exposure for Metal?
Because the metal was the important subject matter in Figure 
6.7, we exposed to get it right and ignored the background. How 
might we expose the metal to “get it right”? 
One good way is a spot meter reading on the metal, remem-
bering to expose two to three stops more than the meter  
indicates. (The meter tells us how to expose the metal to be an 
18% gray. However, we want it brighter than that. Just how much 
brighter is a creative decision, not a purely technical one. Two to 
three stops is a reasonable range.)
Keep in mind that in the preceding example, we lit the metal 
to be as bright as possible without bothering with any other con-
siderations. Because the metal produces almost nothing but 
direct reflection, its brightness in the image approximates that of 
the light source. 
A gray card reflection reading of the scene will probably not 
predict an acceptable exposure if the metal is the important  
subject. The general rule that tells us to place the middle grays 
accurately, letting the extremes fall where they may, fails when 
the important subject happens to be very much brighter than  
an 18% gray card. Thus, the “proper” exposure for this scene 
renders the white background as a dark gray.
Suppose, however, that the metal is not the only important sub-
ject. This could happen even in this simple scene. There are no other 
important objects here, but the white background could be critical 
in an advertisement requiring legible black type in the image area.

METAL
145
In that case, a gray card reading would give an excellent expo-
sure of the white background but at the expense of hopelessly 
overexposed metal. There is, unfortunately, no “normal” exposure 
that works for both. If the metal and the white paper are both 
important, we have to relight the scene. We will soon see several 
ways to do so.
Keeping the Metal Dark
In the previous section, we talked about how to photograph metal 
to appear bright. Now we will relight the scene to keep the metal 
as dark as we can. In principle, nothing could be easier. All we 
have to do is to light the metal from any direction we please, 
other than from within that limited family of angles that produces 
direct reflection. One simple way to do this is to put the light near 
the camera. We will start by showing what happens when we do.
The light position shown in Figure 6.8 is one of many that 
would work. Note that the same family of angles we determined 
earlier now marks the positions where we must not place the light 
if we want to keep the metal dark.
Although the family of angles is still in the diagram, notice  
that the white test surface on which it was marked is gone. Had 
we left it in place, it would have reflected some of the general 
illumination, behaving as an additional light source.
Figure 6.9 proves the theory. It shows graphically what hap-
pens when we place the light source outside the family of angles 
that produces direct reflections on the metal spatula. The lighting 
set-up in Figure 6.8 can cause only diffuse reflection. Because  
the metal cannot produce much diffuse reflection, it is black.  
The paper can produce diffuse reflection from a light from any 
direction, so it is rendered white.

METAL
146
6.8 This light position is 
one of the many that would 
work if we want to keep the 
metal dark. The important 
point is to keep the light 
outside the family of angles.
6.9 The light is outside the 
family of angles reflected by 
the spatula. With no direct 
reflections on the metal 
surface, it is black in this 
picture.
Light Outside 
Family of ^-gles 

METAL
147
An incident reading, a gray card reading, or a reading of the 
white paper (with the appropriate compensation) would all be 
good exposure indicators. This is true of almost any scene with 
reasonably even illumination and little or no direct reflection. 
With neither direct reflection nor important dark subjects in 
shadow, we do not have to think about the extremes. Getting the 
middle grays exposed properly is all we need to worry about.
We are unlikely to use the lighting in Figure 6.8 as the princi-
pal lighting of a scene except to demonstrate the principle. The 
position of the soft shadows does not help to delineate the shape 
of the object. With that in mind, we will move to a slightly more 
difficult variation on the same theme. We will keep the metal 
surface black but remedy the objectionable shadow. 
Assume the test target we used to find the family of angles was 
much larger than the minimum needed to fill those angles. If we 
light the subject with every point on the surface except the 
marked family of angles, we will have a large, soft source that still 
keeps the metal black. Figure 6.10 shows how we can accomplish 
that result.
Notice that we have backed up our light to illuminate the 
entire diffusion sheet as evenly as possible. Then we have 
attached a gobo cut to a size and shape that barely fills the family 
of angles. Figure 6.11 is the result.
This technique would also work very well using a soft box 
instead of a framed diffusion sheet and a light on a boom, but it 
would be less effective using an opaque white reflector card. The 
light illuminating the reflector card would also illuminate the 
gobo brightly. The gobo would behave more like a reflector than 
a light-blocking device, even though it might be black. 
Because that black gobo would absorb some photons and 
reflect others, it would not be a good way to demonstrate either 

METAL
148
6.10 The large light 
illuminates the scene 
softly, but the gobo fills the 
family of angles and keeps 
the metal dark.
6.11 We used a gobo to 
block the family of angles 
reflected by the metal 
when we took this shot. 
This darkened the spatula.
Diffusion 
v Material
Gobo

METAL
149
bright-metal or dark-metal lighting. However, it might be the 
most pleasing compromise of all.
The Elegant Compromise
We almost never use the bright-metal or the dark-metal lighting 
techniques by themselves. More often we prefer a combination 
of the two—a compromise between the extremes.
Figure 6.12 is a compromise. It was made with light filling the 
family of angles that produces direct reflection from the metal 
plus illumination from other angles to produce diffuse reflection 
from the background.
Figures 6.13, 6.14, and 6.15 show some possible lighting 
arrangements that could have produced the photograph. Every 
arrangement uses light from within the family of angles and from 
other directions. We used the lighting in Figure 6.15, but any of 
these lighting arrangements could produce equivalent results. 
The best way is whatever suits the equipment you have on hand.
The most important point behind this demonstration is not to 
convince you that the compromise lighting makes the best pic-
ture, but to get you to understand the thinking that leads up to 
the compromise.
We can decide exactly where we want to place the metal on 
the grayscale. The precise tone of the metal is fully controllable, 
independently of the rest of the scene, and it can be any step 
between black and white that the photographer’s creative judg-
ment determines.
If we had used the lighting in Figure 6.13, for example, we 
could have made the metal brighter by increasing the power  
of the light above the diffusion material, or we could have made 
the paper background brighter by placing a more powerful fill 

METAL
150
6.12 An elegant 
compromise between 
Figures 6.7 and 6.9. Light 
fills the family of angles that 
produces direct reflection 
from the metal, and light 
from other angles produces 
diffuse reflection from the 
background.
6.13 One way to light the 
spatula shown in Figure 
6.12. The main light is 
positioned within the family 
of angles to produce the 
large, bright, direct reflection 
on the spatula. The fill light 
brightens the background.
Fil 
Light 
Vain 
ight 
I 
Fil 
Light 
Fil 
Light 

METAL
151
6.14 Another way to light 
the spatula shown in Figure 
6.12. The gobo partly blocks 
the light from the part of the 
reflector within the family of 
angles, marked A, but not 
from the rest of the reflector 
card, marked B.
6.15 The part of the soft 
box, B, outside the family of 
angles, A, lights only the 
background, not the metal.
Reflector 
Card 
Reflector 
Card 

METAL
152
light near the camera. Using two lights in this manner gives  
infinite control of the relative brightness of the metal and the 
background.
Even a single light provides excellent control if it is large 
enough. Look again at the single soft box in Figure 6.15. Notice 
that the entire light source produces diffuse reflection from the 
paper, but only that portion that covers the family of angles  
produces direct reflection on the metal. 
Having more of the surface of the soft box within the family of 
angles makes the metal brighter. However, if the soft box is large 
enough to have very little of its surface within the family, then the 
background will be brighter. 
The distance between the light source and the subject deter-
mines how much of that source will be within the family of angles.
Controlling the Effective Size of the Light
In previous chapters, we have seen that control over the size of 
the light source is one of the most powerful manipulative tools a 
photographer has. 
We have also seen that the physical size does not necessarily 
determine the effective size. Moving a light closer to the subject 
makes it behave like a larger one, softening the shadows and, for 
some subjects, enlarging the highlights. Moving the light farther 
away does the opposite. This principle is even more significant if 
the subject is bright metal.
In Figure 6.16 we see the same camera and subject relation-
ships used earlier. Now there are two possible positions for the 
same soft box. One position is much closer to the subject than 
that used in the previous example, whereas the other is much 
farther away.

METAL
153
We expect the closer light to illuminate the background more 
brightly, but the brightness of the metal does not change because 
the brightness of direct reflection is not affected by the distance 
to the source. Figure 6.17 confirms that expectation. Moving the 
light closer has greatly lightened the background without affect-
ing the brightness of the metal. Compare it with Figure 6.12, 
made with the same soft box farther away. Similarly, moving the 
light farther from the subject would darken the background, still 
without affecting the brightness of the image of the metal.
Changing the distance of the light source changes the brightness 
of the background but not of the metal. This seems to give us nearly 
infinite control of the relative brightness of the two. Sometimes it 
does, but not always. This is because the focal length of the lens can 
also indirectly influence the effective size of the light. This is often 
surprising, even to highly experienced photographers, but the dia-
grams in Figure 6.18 A and B show how it can happen.
6.16 Two possible 
positions for a soft box. 
Either position lights the 
metal identically. However, 
the closer we move the light 
to the subject, the brighter 
the background becomes.
'ossible Light 
Positions 
Light 
Positions 

METAL
154
In Figure 6.18A, the camera farther from the subject has a lens 
of long focal length, and the closer camera (B) has a short lens. 
Therefore, the image will be the same size in either photograph.
To camera A, farther from the subject, the soft box is much 
larger than the family of angles that produces direct reflection. 
We could move the light much closer or much farther away with-
out affecting the lighting of the metal. The longer lens, by allow-
ing a more distant viewpoint, offers a more flexible choice of 
places to put the light. Thus, it maximizes the control over the 
relative brightness of the subject and the background.
But look at the difference in the effective size of the light seen 
by camera B. The soft box just fills the family of angles defined by 
the close viewpoint. We cannot move the light much farther away 
without the edges of the metal becoming black.
6.17 Compare this 
photograph with Figure 
6.12. Moving the soft box 
closer has brightened the 
background but not the 
spatula.

METAL
155
6.18 The distance from the 
subject to the camera affects 
the effective size of the light. 
Camera B is close, and the 
resulting family of angles is 
large. Camera A is farther 
from the subject than B, and 
the resulting family of angles 
is much narrower. If the 
metal is exposed identically 
in the two scenes, the 
background will be brighter 
in arrangement A and darker 
in B, despite the fact that the 
actual incident light is 
identical in both scenes!
Camera Position 
with Long Lens 
Lens 
Camera Position 
with Long Lens 
Camera Position 
with Long Lens 
Camera Position 
with Long Lens 
Camera Position 
with Long Lens 
Camera Position 
with Long Lens 
Camera Position 
with Long Lens 
Camera Position 
with Long Lens 

METAL
156
In Chapter 5 we saw that camera viewpoint also determines 
perspective distortion. Sometimes there is not much choice about 
where to put the camera. 
In other scenes, there is a wide range of satisfactory camera 
positions. In those cases, if the subject is bright metal, we recom-
mend using a longer lens and getting the camera farther away to 
allow more freedom in lighting.
Another “Take” on Direct Reflections
And while on the general subject of freedom in lighting, here is an example of a  
different way to produce a direct reflection. To explain it, we made two versions of 
this chapter’s opening image.
When shooting Figure 6.19A we used a soft box placed to the side, and in the 
upper left, of our set-up. When making Figure 6.19B we added two white reflectors 
to our set-up—one above the guitar and the other below the camera and to the side 
of the guitar. 
6.19 We used light reflected from our soft box main light to produce the direct 
reflections needed to bring out the detail and shine of this vintage guitar’s 
hardware.
A
B

METAL
157
Keeping the Metal Square
In none of the preceding examples was the camera perpendicular 
to the metal surface. Sometimes we need a photograph in which 
the camera viewpoint appears to be perpendicular to the metal 
and centered directly in front of it. Because the metal is a mirror, 
the camera is likely to reflect in the subject. 
Now we will see several ways of dealing with this problem. You 
will probably use each of them at one time or another, depending 
on the specific subject and the available equipment.
Use a View Camera or Perspective Control Lens
This is the best solution. When using a view camera, as long as the 
camera’s back is parallel to the reflective metal, the metal will 
appear to be centered in front of the camera to most viewers. 
(Please note: Manufacturers such as Canon and Nikon sell per-
spective control, or, as they are also called, tilt shift lenses. While 
often helpful, their range of movement is more limited than that 
of view cameras.)
In Figure 6.20, we positioned the camera off center so that it 
does not reflect in the metal. The image plane is still parallel to the 
subject so the viewpoint does not introduce perspective distortion. 
We then shifted the lens to center the subject in the image 
area, just as it would be if the camera were directly in front of the 
subject. Notice that this places the family of angles to one side of 
the camera.
It is the light from the soft box reflecting off these reflector cards that provides 
most of the direct reflection that brings out both the detail of and the shine from the 
nickel hardware on this vintage electric guitar. 

METAL
158
All lighting tactics discussed earlier are applicable: we use a 
light large enough to fill the family of angles, keep the light out of 
the family of angles, or use a combination of the two, depending 
on how bright we want the metal to appear.
If the camera position requires shifting the lens a great distance 
off center, we may encounter two special problems. First, the lens 
may begin to vignette the image. This creates black corners at the 
edge of the picture. Second, viewing the subject too far off center 
can produce geometric distortion or reveal the slight distortion 
that can be present even in good lenses. Fortunately, keeping the 
camera as far from the subject as possible, and using a correspond-
ingly longer lens, minimize both of these problems.
Aim the Camera through a Hole in the Light Source
Assuming we want to keep the metal bright, we sometimes posi-
tion white seamless paper to light the metal. We then cut a hole 
6.20 The camera will not 
reflect in the metal because 
it is outside the family of 
angles. The metal will not 
be distorted because it is 
parallel with the image 
plane.

METAL
159
in that light source that is just large enough for the lens to see 
through it (Figure 6.21). This solution minimizes the problem of 
camera reflection, but it does not get rid of it. Although the cam-
era is not visible in the subject, the hole in the light source is.
This technique works fine if there is enough irregularity in the 
metal subject to camouflage the offending reflection. If, for 
example, the subject is a machine with a complex control panel, 
reflection may be invisible among the knobs and meters.
Whether the light source is a reflector card or a diffusion 
sheet, we have to be especially careful in lighting the area near 
the camera. A light aimed at a reflector card can cause flare if the 
rays fall directly into the lens. Lights projecting through a diffu-
sion sheet can cause a shadow of the camera on the diffusion 
sheet that reflects visibly in the subject.
6.21 The camera will not reflect in the metal, but the hole in the paper will.
'I- 
White Paper 
'I- 
White Paper 
'I- 
White Paper 

METAL
160
Photograph the Metal at an Angle
Keep the camera as far from the subject as possible to minimize 
perspective distortion. Then correct the distortion in postproduc-
tion. However, digitally removing the distortion is not an ideal 
solution. This sort of image manipulation always results in some 
quality loss.
Keep these solutions in mind as an available option if circum-
stances force it upon you. A bad remedy may be better than no 
remedy. If you use this alternative, be sure to compose your pic-
ture with a generous amount of extra space around the subject. 
You will have to crop the trapezoidal projected image to fit the 
rectangular print.
Retouch the Reflection
Shoot the metal straight on, let the camera reflect, then remove 
the reflection digitally. This is not a lighting solution, so we will 
not discuss it in detail. Nevertheless, for some subjects, especially 
large ones, retouching is so much easier than any of the lighting 
solutions that we should not forget the option. 
Let’s face it, spending half a day lighting instead of spending 
half an hour at a computer makes absolutely no sense. Furthermore, 
this solution, unlike the immediately preceding one, loses no 
image quality.
METAL BOXES
A metal box presents the viewer with up to three visible sides. 
Each side needs a treatment similar to that of any other flat piece 
of metal. Each surface has its own family of angles to consider. 
The difference is that each family of angles faces a different 
direction and we have to deal with them all at once.

METAL
161
In lighting a metal box, we need to deal with some of the same 
considerations involved with lighting a glossy box made of any 
other material. (If you are browsing through this book without 
reading the chapters in sequence, you may want to look at the 
sections on glossy boxes in Chapters 4 and 5. However, although 
this theory is identical to that applied in the earlier picture, the 
difference makes us likely to apply it the opposite way from that 
in the earlier example.)
Figure 6.22 is identical to Figure 5.19, repeated here so that 
you don’t have to keep turning back to it. Now, however, the box 
has a metallic surface. There are two families of angles, one for 
the top and one for the front of the box. We may place light 
within these families of angles, or not, depending on whether we 
want the surfaces to be bright or dark.
6.22 Two families of 
angles of a box 
positioned so that the 
camera can see both 
its top and front.
Farmly of Angles 
/  for Top of box
Family of Angles 
/
for Front of b o /

METAL
162
If the box were turned to show the camera three sides, the 
same principles would apply—but they would be harder to see in 
a drawing. The family of angles defined by the front of the box 
would then fall below and to the side of the box. The other visible 
side of the box would produce a similar family of angles on the 
other side of the scene.
A glossy nonmetallic box that is not black produces both dif-
fuse and direct reflection. We often avoid direct reflection on a 
glossy box to avoid obscuring the diffuse reflection. A polished 
metal box produces only direct reflection. Without direct reflec-
tion, we see the metal box as black. Because we more often like 
to render metal bright, we usually want to create direct reflection 
rather than to avoid it. This means that we need to fill each family 
of angles with a light source.
The family of angles defined by the top of the box is easy to light. 
We treat it just as we did the flat metal in our earlier examples.
The sides of a metal box are more difficult. If we position the 
camera and subject as in Figure 6.22, then at least one of the light 
sources must be in the picture. The family of angles defined by 
the front of the box falls on the table where the box sits. That 
means the table surface is the light source for the front of the box, 
whether we like it or not.
We cannot use a reflector card, or any other light source, for the 
sides of the box without it showing in the scene. The closer to the 
box we can crop the picture, the closer we can put the reflector. 
Even so, some of the bottom of the box will still reflect the table.
If we do not want to crop the bottom of the box out of the 
image, and if the box is truly mirror-like, the line where the 
reflector meets the table will be visible and objectionable. Figure 
6.23 shows the problem. We have left the picture uncropped so 
that you can see the reflector card.

METAL
163
Brightly polished metal boxes almost always exhibit this prob-
lem. Fortunately, however, it is usually the only major problem; 
the remainder of this section presents a collection of techniques 
for dealing with it. Pick the one you need according to the  
circumstance.
A Light Background
By far the easiest way to photograph a three-dimensional metal 
subject is to use a light-gray background. The background itself is 
the light source for much of the visible metal. As soon as we place 
the subject on such a surface, much of the work is done and we 
need only a few adjustments to perfect the lighting.
To produce Figure 6.24, we began with a background surface 
larger than we needed to fill the image area. Remember that the 
6.23 The bottom  
of the box nearly 
disappears into the 
dark table. The only 
way to prevent this 
would be to place the 
reflector so that it 
touches the front of  
the box.

METAL
164
background needs to fill the family of angles reflected by the 
metal, not just the area the camera sees. Then we lit the top of 
the metal box with a soft box, just as if it were any other piece  
of flat metal.
That was almost all we had to do. The set-up was completed 
by silver reflectors on each side of the scene to fill the shadow in 
the ribbon.
If good lighting for the metal box were the only objective, we 
would always use a light-toned background. Art and emotion 
often impose other requirements, however, so we will look at 
some other techniques.
A Transparent Background
The only way in which we can orient a metal box as we did in the 
previous examples without having a light source in the scene is to 
6.24 The light-gray 
surface on which we 
photographed this box 
acted as a light source 
for the front of it.

METAL
165
put the box on a transparent surface. When we do that, the cam-
era sees the reflection of a light source (in this case, a white card) 
in the metal without having that light source in direct view of the 
camera. Figure 6.25 shows how.
This arrangement allows us to position a dark card large 
enough to fill the background but small enough that it stays out 
of the family of angles that lights the front and the side of the 
metal box. The photograph in Figure 6.26 was made this way. 
Notice that the background is dark, but not black, and that the 
table surface has a reflection in it. From this viewpoint, any light 
source producing direct reflection on top of the metal will also 
create direct reflection on the glass surface supporting it.
The picture is good. But suppose we disliked the reflection in 
the glass and wanted the background to be absolutely black. We 
could eliminate the reflection of the box by using frosted glass, 
but that would make the background lighter instead of darker.
6.25 One way of lighting 
the front of a metal box 
without having a light source 
in the scene. Placing the box 
on a sheet of clear glass 
allows reflecting light through 
the glass to the box.
Transparent Sheet 
Transparent 
Transparent 
Transparent 
Transparent 

METAL
166
6.26 The result of the 
lighting shown in Figure 
6.25. Whether the dark 
reflection under the  
box is objectionable 
depends on the specific 
subject and your 
opinion of it.
6.27 The same scene 
as in Figure 6.26, but 
with a lens polarizer 
removing reflection from 
the glass. The polarizer 
does not affect the 
metal.

METAL
167
Fortunately, most of the direct reflection from glass viewed at 
this angle is polarized, so we were able to eliminate that reflection 
in Figure 6.27 by putting a polarizing filter on the lens. The glass 
is now black. 
Remember, too, that direct reflection from metal is never 
polarized unless the light source itself is polarized. So the polar-
izing filter did not block the direct reflection from the metal.
A Glossy Background
If the metal is on a glossy surface, it is possible to have the light 
source in the image area without the camera seeing it! We call this 
technique invisible light. Here is how it works: look back at Figure 
6.22, but this time assume the subject is sitting on a glossy black 
acrylic sheet. The family of angles defined by the front surface 
tells us that the only possible place from which the metal could get 
light would be from the black plastic surface, but “black” is a short 
way of saying that the plastic reflects no light. Together, these facts 
suggest that the front of the metal cannot be lit.
However, we have also said that the black plastic is glossy. And 
we know that glossy things do produce direct reflection, even if 
they are too black to produce diffuse reflection. This means that 
we can light the metal by bouncing light off the plastic surface as 
in Figure 6.28.
If you examine the angles, you see that a light under the cam-
era can bounce light from the glossy plastic to the metal. That 
light strikes the metal at such an angle that it then reflects back 
to the camera to record on film. The metal is lit, and the bright 
metal in Figure 6.29 proves it.
As far as the metal can tell, it is being lit by the plastic surface 
in the scene. However, the camera cannot see that light is reflecting 

METAL
168
6.28 “Invisible” light 
reflected from the 
glossy black plastic 
lights the metal. No 
light reflects directly 
from the acrylic to the 
camera, so the camera 
cannot see the light 
source for the metal.
6.29 The result of 
“invisible” light. The light 
source for the box is in 
the scene—the black 
acrylic directly in front  
of it.
Glossy Black Acrylic 

METAL
169
from the black plastic; the family of angles defined by the plastic 
makes it impossible.
Like the earlier glass surface, the acrylic surface will reflect 
the overhead light source. Once again, we used a polarizing filter 
on the lens to eliminate the glare.
When metal is not absolutely flat, the family of angles required 
to light it becomes larger. Next we’ll examine an extreme example 
of that circumstance.
ROUND METAL
Lighting a round piece of metal begins, like any other metal 
shape, with an analysis of the family of angles that produces direct 
reflection. Unlike any other metal shape, the family of angles 
defined by a piece of round metal includes practically the whole 
world!
Figure 6.30 shows the relevant family of angles for a camera 
photographing a round metal object at a typical viewing distance. 
6.30 The family of angles for a round metal 
subject consists of its whole environment, 
including the camera.
~'3.f(\ilY of Angles 
Round Metal 

METAL
170
Remember, lighting metal requires the preparation of a suitable 
environment. Round metal requires a lot more work to light 
because it reflects so much more of that environment.
Notice that the camera will always be in the environment  
the metal sees. There are no view-camera tricks to remove the 
camera from the family of angles reflected by round metal. 
Furthermore, the reflection of the camera will always fall exactly 
in the center of the metal subject, where it is most noticeable to 
the viewer.
For this exercise we will use the most difficult example possi-
ble: a perfectly smooth sphere. Figure 6.31 shows the problem.
The first step in fixing this problem would be to get rid of 
unnecessary objects. However, the camera is the one offending 
object that no clean-up effort can remove. There are three ways 
6.31 The common problem presented by a shiny sphere.

METAL
171
to eliminate the camera reflection: we can camouflage the reflec-
tion, keep the camera in the dark, or put the subject in a tent.
Camouflage
For our purposes, camouflage is any desirable clutter that helps 
make unwanted reflections less obvious. Sometimes the subject 
provides its own camouflage. If the surface is irregular, the cam-
era reflection may fall between the cracks.
Additional subjects in the scene can also provide camouflage. 
The reflection of surrounding subjects in the metal can break up 
other reflections that we do not want the viewer to see. 
If all the surrounding objects reflected in Figure 6.30 were 
appropriate to the scene, instead of studio tools, they might make 
good camouflage. Small subjects can also be put directly on top 
of a reflection of a larger one.
Keeping the Light Off the Camera
If the camera is kept in the dark, then it cannot see itself reflected 
in the subject. Whenever possible, confine the lighting to the 
subject. Long lenses help. A camera farther from the subject is 
less likely to have extraneous light falling on it.
If it is impossible to keep the light off the camera, covering it 
with black material can work as well. Black cloth or a black card 
with a hole in it can conceal the camera entirely. However, this 
works only in a studio large enough that the surrounding walls do 
not reflect. In a smaller room, building a tent may be the only 
solution.

METAL
172
Using a Tent 
A “tent” is a white enclosure that serves as both the environment 
and the light source for the subject. The subject goes inside the 
“tent” and the camera is almost always outside, looking in through 
an opening.
We regularly use tents for subjects, such as polished metal, 
that produce a great deal of direct reflection. We also sometimes 
use them simply to produce very soft light for subjects such as 
scientific specimens and for fashion and beauty.
As we show in Figure 6.32, we often build tents out of opaque 
white materials—such as lightweight foamcore, art board reflec-
tor cards, seamless background paper, and diffusion materials 
such as paper and frosted plastic or vinyl. 
6.32 Building a tent around the subject and shooting through a hole in it is one way 
of cutting down on unwanted reflections on shiny round subjects.
Seamless 
Background 
Seamless 
Background 
Seamless 
Background 
Seamless 
Background 

METAL
173
We can then put lights in the tent and bounce them off its 
inside walls or outside it and shine them through the translucent 
diffusing material. This set-up produces a very soft light. However, 
if we use lights inside the tent, they will reflect obtrusively in any 
mirror-like subject. 
Frequently we place lights both in and outside our tents, but 
their exact positions and sizes vary tremendously. Sometimes we 
like to light the whole tent uniformly, whereas in other cases  
we want to illuminate only a few small areas.
We shot Figure 6.33 in a tent similar to the one diagrammed 
in Figure 6.32. This shot is a typical example of “tenting at work.” 
The lighting on the holiday ornament is acceptable. However, 
there is one very obvious problem with it—the dark camera hole 
and tent seams are reflected on the ball. They must be retouched 
out of the picture.
6.33 A photograph 
of a shiny sphere shot 
with the help of a tent 
such as the one 
diagrammed in the 
previous figure. By 
itself, the tent does not 
solve the problems. 
However, it will make 
any retouching easier.

METAL
174
One of the authors once made a picture similar to this one  
for the cover of a department store Christmas catalog. But the 
peripheral areas also included bits of ribbon and greenery to cam-
ouflage the seams in the tent.
It is tempting to build a very large tent to keep the camera as 
far from the subject as possible. Intuitively we know that if the 
camera is farther from a metal subject, then the reflection of  
the camera will be smaller. However, the image of the subject 
also becomes smaller, so we have to shoot with a longer lens. 
However, such a “remedy” also enlarges the reflection of the 
camera back to its original size! The camera itself is the only 
reflection whose size cannot be reduced by moving it farther 
away. It always remains constant, relative to the subject. Resist 
the temptation; the extra work is always wasted.
OTHER RESOURCES
The basic approach to lighting metal is determined by the family 
of angles and, therefore, by the shape of the metal. Beyond the 
basic lighting, there are a few more techniques you may want to 
try at any time with any piece of metal.
Any of these additional options can be purely creative deci-
sions, but they can serve technical purposes, too. For example, 
you may find that the edge of a piece of metal is disappearing  
into the background. Keep in mind, the closer the metal comes 
to producing pure direct reflection, the closer that reflection 
comes to photographing at the same brightness as the light 
source. 
As we have seen, the surface on which the metal is sitting is 
often the light source. If they are of identical brightness, the cam-
era cannot see where one surface ends and the other begins. This 

METAL
175
is a case where polarizing filters, “black magic,” or dulling spray 
can add the finishing touches to the lighting.
Polarizing Filters
Metal does not produce polarized direct reflections. Therefore, 
we cannot usually use a lens polarizer alone to block the direct 
reflections coming from metal. Remember, however, that the 
light source may have some polarized rays. If so, they remain 
polarized as they reflect from the metal. This is frequently the 
case if the metal is reflecting blue sky. 
In the studio, the light reflected from the surface on which the 
metal rests is often partly polarized. In either case, a polarizer on 
the lens gives additional control over the brightness of the metal. 
Even if there is no polarized light in the scene, we can put it there 
by using a polarizing filter over the light.
Black Magic
Black magic is anything added to the basic lighting set-up solely 
to place a black “reflection” in the metal surface. Black reflected 
in an edge can help to differentiate it from the background. 
Reflected across the center of a slightly irregular surface, black 
magic can also add dimension.
Black magic usually involves the use of a gobo. This works 
especially well with a diffusion sheet. Placing the gobo between 
the diffusion sheet and the subject makes a hard black reflection. 
Putting it on the other side of the diffusion sheet from the subject 
creates a softly graduated reflection. The farther behind the dif-
fusion sheet you place the gobo, the softer it becomes.
Occasionally you may decide to use an opaque reflector 
(reflecting another light somewhere else in the set) as a light 

METAL
176
source for the metal. In this case, a gobo cannot produce softly 
graduated black magic, but a soft-edged stripe of black spray 
paint across the reflector will create the same effect.
Dulling Spray 
Dulling spray creates a matte surface that increases the diffuse 
reflection and decreases the direct reflection from a piece of 
metal. This allows a little more freedom to light the metal without 
strictly obeying the limitations imposed by the family of angles. 
Unfortunately, metal with dulling spray on it no longer looks 
brightly polished and may not even look like metal!
Heavy-handed use of dulling spray is a habit to avoid. To an 
educated eye, it reveals, rather than conceals, a photographer’s 
inability to light metal well. With that said, we should also admit 
that all of the authors of this book keep dulling spray handy in 
their studios.
Try to light the metal as well as possible. Then, if necessary, 
add a little dulling spray just to an overly bright highlight or a 
disappearing edge. Keep as much of the gleam of the metal as 
you can, and avoid thickly coating the entire surface.
WHERE ELSE DO THESE TECHNIQUES APPLY?
The techniques we use for metal are good to remember any time 
direct reflection is important. We will see more of them in the rest 
of this book. Some of these applications may not be obvious yet. 
For example, we will see in the discussion of extremes in 
Chapter 9 why much of the technique for lighting metal is useful 
for almost any black-on-black subject, regardless of the material 
of which it is made.

METAL
177
Other subjects that produce direct reflection are readily 
apparent. One of them is glass. Glass, however, offers additional 
opportunities and challenges of its own. We will see why in the 
next chapter.

178

179
7
The Case of the  
Disappearing Glass
The distant genius who first fused sand into glass has tricked the 
eyes and delighted the brains of every generation of humans that 
followed. Glass has perhaps also grayed the hair and wasted the 
time of more photographers than any other substance.
Fortunately for us picture makers, however, attempting to 
reproduce the appearance of glass need not lead to the photo-
graphic disasters we so often see. This chapter discusses the  
principles, the problems, and some straightforward solutions to 
the basic challenges that glass offers. 
PRINCIPLES
The appearance of glass is determined by many of the same prin-
ciples we discussed in the preceding chapter on metal. Like 
metal, almost all reflection produced by glass is direct reflection. 
Unlike metal, however, this direct reflection is often polarized.
We might expect the techniques used for lighting glass to be 
similar to those used for metal. We might find a polarizing filter 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
180
useful more often, but otherwise apply the same methods. 
However, this is not so. When we light metal, we are primarily 
interested in the surfaces facing the camera. If they look right, 
then minor adjustments can usually take care of the details. 
Lighting glass, however, requires attention to the edges. If they are 
clearly defined, we can often ignore the front surface altogether.
PROBLEMS
The problems caused by glassware are a result of the very nature 
of the material. It is transparent. From most angles, light striking 
the visible edge of a piece of glassware does not reflect in the 
direction of the viewer. Such an edge is invisible. An invisible 
glass has no shape or form. To make matters worse, the few tiny 
reflections we do see are often too small and too bright to tell us 
anything about surface detail or texture.
Figure 7.1 shows both problems. The direct reflections of the 
lights illuminating the scene do nothing but distract from the com-
position. They are not adequate to define the surface of the glass.
The lack of a clearly defined form is an even more serious 
problem. With no clear outlines and no marked differences in 
edge tonality, the glass merges with the background.
SOLUTIONS
Having seen what does not work, look now at Figure 7.2. 
Compare the visibility of the glass shown in it with that shown in 
the earlier photograph. Both photographs show the same glass-
ware and the same background, and both are made from the 
same viewpoint with the same lens. As you can see, however, the 
difference is dramatic.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
181
In the second photograph, strong black lines delineate the 
shape of the glass. No distracting reflections mar the surface. By 
comparing these two photographs, we can list our objectives in 
glassware photography. If we want to produce a picture that clearly 
and pleasingly reproduces glassware, we must do the following:
1. Produce strong lines along the edges of the subject. These lines 
delineate its shape and set it apart from the background.
2. Eliminate distracting reflections of the lights and other equip-
ment we are using.
Let’s now look at some of the specific ways we can accomplish 
these objectives. We will begin by looking at some “ideal” shooting 
7.1 The problems with this picture are caused by the 
nature of the glass from which the subjects are made. 
The glass is both transparent and highly reflective.
7.2 Good edge definition is essential to lighting glass.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
182
situations. These will help us demonstrate the basic techniques. 
Later, we will have to go beyond those basics to overcome prob-
lems that arise whenever nonglass objects are in the same scene. 
We will begin by talking about our first objective, edge definition.
TWO ATTRACTIVE OPPOSITES
We can avoid almost all the problems associated with edge defini-
tion by using one of two basic lighting arrangements. We will call 
these the bright-field and the dark-field methods. We could also 
call them dark-on-light and light-on-dark approaches.
The results of these two are as opposite as the terms imply, but we 
will see that the principles guiding them are identical. Both methods 
produce the strong tonal differences between the subject and the 
background that delineate edges to define the shape of glassware.
Bright-field Lighting
Figure 7.2 is an example of the bright-field approach to lighting 
glass. The background dictates how we must treat any glass sub-
ject. On a bright background, we have to keep the glass dark if it 
is to remain visible.
If you have read Chapter 2 and the chapters following it,  
you have already guessed that the bright-field method requires 
eliminating all direct reflection from the edge of the glass surface. 
You also should be able to see why we need to begin this discus-
sion by examining the family of angles that determines direct 
reflection from this particular subject.
Look at Figure 7.3. It is a bird’s-eye view of the family of 
angles that can produce direct reflection on a single round glass. 
We could draw a similar diagram for each piece of glassware in 
our example photograph.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
183
The family of angles in this diagram is similar to that defined 
by round metal in the previous chapter. This time, however, we 
are not interested in most of that family. For now, we care only 
about the extreme limits of the family of angles, labeled “L” in the 
diagram. Light from these two angles determines the appearance 
of the edge of the glass.
These limits tell us where the light must be if the edges of the 
glass are to be bright in the pictures or, conversely, where it must 
not be if the edges are to remain dark. Because in the bright-field 
approach we do not want the edge of the glass to be bright in the 
photograph, there must be no light along the lines marked “L” in 
the diagram.
Figure 7.4 illustrates one good way to produce a bright-field 
glass photograph. It is not the only way, but it is a good exercise 
that we suggest you try if you have not done it before. Look at the 
way the light behaves in each step. This will make it easy to  
7.3 The limits of the family 
of angles in this diagram are 
marked by “L.” Light from 
these two points determines 
the appearance of the edge 
of the glass.
Glass Subject 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
184
predict what will work and what will not in any variation on this 
arrangement you decide to try in the future.
The following steps work best in the listed sequence. Notice 
that we do not bother to put the subject into the scene until near 
the end of the process.
Choose the Background
Begin by setting up a light-toned background. We can use any 
convenient material. Translucent materials such as tracing paper, 
cloth, and plastic shower curtains are a few good materials to try. 
We might also use opaque surfaces, such as light-toned walls, 
cardboard, or foamboard.
Position the Light
Now, place a light so that it illuminates the background evenly. 
Figure 7.4 shows two possible ways to accomplish this; both can 
7.4 This is one way to 
produce the bright-field 
illumination used in Figure 
7.2. We would rarely use 
both lights shown. Either 
lighting position works, 
depending on the 
background.
Dark Background 
or No Background - 
7 
Visiblc 
A 
Subjec~ 
Light 
for Opaque 
Background 
Light 
for Translucent 
Background 
Dark Background 
or No Background 
- 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
185
produce identical results. Usually the photographer uses one or 
the other, rarely both.
Figure 7.2 was shot using a light behind translucent paper. 
This is a particularly convenient set-up because it keeps the  
workspace around both the camera and the subject free and 
uncluttered.
We can also use an opaque surface such as a wall for the back-
ground. If we do, however, we need to find a place to position the 
light so that it will illuminate the background without reflecting 
in the glass or appearing in the image area. Putting the light on a 
short stand behind and below the glass is one good way.
Position the Camera
Now, place the camera so that the background exactly fills its field 
of view. This step is critical because the distance from the camera 
to the background controls the effective size of the background.
The effective size of the background is the single most impor-
tant consideration when using this technique. For this exercise  
to be most effective, the background must exactly fill the field of 
view of the camera, no more and no less.
A background that is too small is an obvious problem: it simply 
will not fill the picture. A larger background causes a subtler 
problem. A background that is too large will extend into the fam-
ily of angles that produces direct reflection on the edge of the 
glass. Light from those points eliminates the dark outline that we 
need to define the edge of the glass.
Note that if the background surface is so large that we cannot 
keep it from extending beyond the limits of the viewfinder (e.g., 
the wall of a room), we can also reduce its effective size by light-
ing only a small portion of its total surface or by covering part of 
it with dark cards.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
186
Position the Subject and Focus the Camera
Next, move the subject back and forth between the camera and 
the background until it is the desired size in the viewfinder. As we 
move the subject, we notice that the closer it is to the camera, the 
more clearly the edges are defined. 
This increase in edge definition is not brought about by the 
simple principle that larger detail is easier to see. Rather, it is 
caused by the fact that as the subject moves farther from the 
lighted background, less light reflects off its edges. The closer  
the subject is to the background, the more the bright background 
falls within the family of angles that produces direct reflection to 
obscure those edges.
Now, focus the camera on the subject. Refocusing will slightly 
increase the effective size of the background, but that increase 
will usually not be enough to cause any practical problems.
Shoot the Picture
Finally, use a reflection meter (the one built into most cameras  
is fine) to read the light on an area on the background directly 
behind the subject.
Bright-field illumination does not require a pure-white back-
ground. As long as the background is any tone significantly 
brighter than the edges of the glass, then that glass will be ade-
quately visible. If the glass is the only subject to worry about, we 
can control the brightness of the background by the way we inter-
pret the meter reading:
• If we want the background to appear as a medium (18%) gray, 
we use the exposure that the meter indicates.
• If we want the background to photograph as a light gray that 
approaches white, we increase the exposure up to two stops 
more than the meter indicates.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
187
• If we want the background to be dark, then we expose as much 
as two stops less than indicated. This will produce a very dark-
gray background.
It is important to note that in this scene there is no such thing as 
“correct” exposure. The only correct exposure is the one that we 
like. We can place the tone of the background anywhere we like 
on the grayscale except black. (If the edge of the glass is black and 
the background is black, there is nothing left to record!) In prac-
tice, the lighter the background, the more graphically the glass is 
defined.
• If we do expose to keep the background very light, we do not 
have to worry about extraneous reflection in the front surface 
of the glass. Whatever reflections exist are almost always too 
dim to be visible against the background. 
• However, if we decide to expose to produce a medium- or dark-
gray background, surrounding objects may reflect visibly in the 
glass. We will offer some ways to eliminate these reflections 
later in this chapter.
In principle, there is nothing particularly complicated about the 
bright-field approach to photographing glassware. Of course, we 
have used an “ideal” example to demonstrate the principle as 
clearly as possible. In practice, complications may occur when-
ever we decide to deviate from this ideal.
For example, many compositions will force us to keep the glass 
much smaller, compared with the background, than in our exer-
cise. That will reduce edge definition. Whether the sacrifice will 
be significant depends on what else is in the photograph.
Of course, understanding the principle and becoming familiar 
with why the ideal works give us the understanding that provide 
the best solution in less than ideal situations. If a composition 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
188
produces bad lighting, the ideal explains the problem and sug-
gests a remedy. 
If a particular composition prevents any remedy, then the ideal 
tells us that, too. We need not waste time trying to accomplish 
what physics says is impossible.
Dark-field Lighting
The dark-field method produces the opposite result, illustrated in 
Figure 7.5.
7.5 In dark-field 
illumination, shape and form 
are delineated by light lines 
against a dark background.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
189
Review the family of angles that produces direct reflection in 
Figure 7.3. We saw that in the previous arrangement there must 
be no light at the limits of the family of angles, L, if the edge of 
the glass is to remain dark. It makes sense to suppose, then, that 
the light must come from L if the edge of the glass is to be bright. 
Furthermore, if we do not want other bright distractions in the 
glass, then the glass must not see light at any other point. 
Figure 7.6 shows the specifics to put the theory to work. Once 
again, we will present the technique in the following steps. Some 
of them are identical to those used in the earlier bright-field 
approach. 
Set Up a Large Light Source
On first examination, the bird’s-eye view in Figure 7.3 seems  
to indicate the need for light at two points. This, however, is a 
representational defect caused by having to draw in only two 
7.6 This is one good way 
to produce dark-field lighting.
Diffusion 
Material 
> 
O 
Glass 
Diffusion 
Material 
Diffusion 
Material 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
190
dimensions. In actuality, such an arrangement would light only a 
point on each side of the glass.
To keep the rim bright, a similar light source must be placed 
above and behind the glass. Furthermore, if the glass is a stemmed 
glass with a bowl, then yet another light source must be added to 
illuminate the bottom of that bowl.
So we need four large sources to light just the edges of a single 
tiny glass! This arrangement would be unwieldy at best. We usu-
ally avoid such a complex clutter by replacing all of these lights 
with a single source large enough to illuminate the top, bottom, 
and sides of the glass. The exact size of this light source is not 
critical. Any size between 10 and 25 times the diameter of the 
subject will work well.
Figures 7.6 and 7.7 show two good ways to create an appropri-
ately large light source. One is translucent and the other is 
opaque.
Set Up a Dark Background Smaller Than the Light Source
There are several ways to do this. The easiest way, shown in 
Figure 7.6, is to attach a dark card directly to the translucent light 
source.
An opaque surface such as a wall can also make an excellent 
light source. We simply need to illuminate it with reflected light. 
Such an arrangement may preclude putting the dark background 
directly on the wall because it may get too much light to photo-
graph as dark as we want.
Instead, we like the set-up used in Figure 7.7, which allows 
lighting the opaque reflective surface as brightly as we want with-
out allowing significant light to fall on the background that the 
camera sees. Attaching the dark background to a light stand or 
suspending it from above with string works fine.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
191
The result of both of these arrangements is the same: a dark 
background is surrounded by bright light.
Like the light source, the exact size of the background is not 
critical. As with the bright-field approach, we can adjust the 
effective background size by the camera distance. The only size 
limitation is that the dark background must be small enough to 
leave plenty of light visible around it.
Position the Camera
Again, the background should exactly fill the field of view of the 
camera—no more and no less. This is important for reasons simi-
lar to those in the bright-field approach. If the dark background is 
too large, it will extend into the family of angles that produces 
direct reflection. That would block light needed to brightly define 
the edge of the glass and to keep it from disappearing into the dark 
background.
7.7 This set-up allows  
you to light the opaque 
reflective surface brightly 
without lighting the part of 
the background that the 
camera sees.
Subject 
Background 
Background 
White 
Background 
White
Back
Subject 
Subject 
Subject 
Subject 
White 
Background 
Background 
Subject 
Subject 
Subject 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
192
Position the Subject and Focus the Camera
Next, move the subject between the camera and the background 
until it is the size we want. Once again, edge definition improves 
as the subject moves closer to the camera. 
Finally, focus the camera on the subject. As in the bright-field 
method, any change in background size caused by refocusing will 
be too minimal to cause problems.
Shoot the Picture
Accurate exposure determination with this set-up requires the 
use of a very narrow-angle spot meter to read the highlights on 
the edges of the glass. In most compositions of this sort, “very 
narrow angle” means much less than 1 degree. Few photogra-
phers have such a meter, however. But do not despair. Fortunately, 
any conventional reflection meter (including those in many cam-
eras) can give an acceptably close approximation of the desired 
exposure with the help of bracketing.
To see why the following method works, we must remember 
that pure direct reflections from a subject are as bright as the 
light source that produces them. Those reflections may be too 
small to read, but the large source is not.
First, place the meter close enough to the light source to read 
it alone. Read the edge of the light source because that is the part 
illuminating the glass.
Next, to photograph the glass as near white, expose two stops 
more than the meter indicates. (This is because the meter thinks 
it is seeing 18% gray instead of white.) This is a good exposure if 
the highlight on the glass is perfect un-polarized direct reflection. 
Such an exposure is theoretically important because it deter-
mines the starting point for the bracket. In practice, there is  
no practical chance that the direct reflection is both perfect and 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
193
un-polarized, so we may want simply to note this exposure and to 
move on to the next one. Because perfect direct reflections rarely 
occur, try additional exposures with one, two, and then three 
stops more exposure.
All of this assumes the background remains black because  
little or no light is falling on it. If, however, we desire it to be a 
lighter value, it will then be necessary to use additional light just 
for the background. Omitting this additional light and attempting 
to lighten the background by increasing exposure (according to 
the metering procedure recommended in the discussion of the 
bright-field method) will usually overexpose the subject.
Once again, we have used an ideal example that avoids com-
plexities for the sake of simplicity. Deviate from this ideal as 
much as the composition requires but no more.
THE BEST OF BOTH WORLDS
Bright-field and dark-field methods are easy to learn, but they can 
be difficult to combine. Most failures in photographing glass 
result from deliberately or naively using both simultaneously.
For example, we have known some photographers who tried 
to light glass in a tent like the one described in the previous chap-
ter. They successfully eliminated extraneous reflections, but they 
equally successfully eliminated the edge of the glass. The part of 
the tent visible to the camera provided a light background. The 
rest of the tent lit the glass. The result was the light-on-light 
approach.
Using the two methods together requires that we keep them 
separate, even in a single picture. We make a mental division of 
the scene and decide that one part of the picture is to be bright 
field while the other is to be dark field. We have done this in 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
194
Figure 7.8, in which the frosted white plastic is illuminated from 
below by a small light. 
Notice that we have not truly combined the two basic meth-
ods. Part is bright field and part is dark field. Wherever the two 
methods remain distinct, the glass is well defined. Only in the 
transition area do the two methods mix. There can be a notice-
able loss there. However, by keeping the transition small this 
problem can be minimized.
SOME FINISHING TOUCHES
Up to this point we have discussed techniques that define the 
shape of glassware. As you have seen, we can define the subject 
shape by using either dark lines against a light background or by 
using light lines against a dark background. These two techniques 
7.8 A classic lighting 
arrangement in which 
part of the scene is 
bright field and the other 
part is dark field.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
195
are the foundation for lighting glass. However, we often need 
additional techniques to produce a satisfactory photograph. 
In the remainder of this chapter, we will discuss some finish ing 
touches. Specifically, we will examine how to accomplish the  
following:
1. Define the surface of glassware
2. Illuminate the background
3. Minimize the horizon
4. Stop flare
5. Eliminate extraneous reflections.
Because the above techniques are primarily useful in dark-field 
situations, we will demonstrate them using that approach.
Defining the Surface of Glassware
In many situations, it is not enough merely to define the edges  
of a subject. It is not enough just to show its shape, no matter  
how beautifully we do it. Frequently, the photograph must also 
show the glass surface clearly. To accomplish this, we must care-
fully manage the highlights that reflect from the surface of the 
subject.
Large highlights are essential to glass surface definition. To see 
proof of this, compare the highlights on Figure 7.9 with those 
seen earlier in Figure 7.1.
The tiny bright spots we see in Figure 7.1 are distracting at  
the least and meaningless at best. The opposite is true in Figure 
7.9. Instead of competing, the larger highlight provides the 
viewer with information. Rather than cluttering the other ele-
ments of the photograph for the attention of the viewer, it serves 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
196
the constructive purpose of saying, “This is how this glass surface 
looks and feels.”
Defining a glass surface requires a highlight of the right size in 
the right place on the surface of the subject. Fortunately, that is not 
too difficult. Doing it successfully simply requires remembering 
what the theory of reflection tells us about how direct reflection 
behaves.
We have seen that almost all reflections from a glass surface 
are direct reflections and that direct reflections always obey strict 
rules that predict the angles at which they occur. Now, look at 
Figure 7.10.
7.9 Large highlights add 
surface definition to the 
glassware in this picture.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
197
Assuming we want to create a highlight on the area shown on 
the glass surface, we need to fill the indicated family of angles with 
light. These are all of the directions and the only directions from 
which light can produce direct reflection on that part of the glass.
Notice that the rounded glass causes this small subject to 
reflect much of the studio in its surface. For this reason, lighting 
for surface definition can sometimes require surprisingly large 
light sources.
Figure 7.10 shows two possible ways to provide such a light 
source. Light sources at either of the two positions would light 
the glass equally well. However, one needs to be several times the 
size of the other if it is to cover the required family of angles.
Determining the distance between the photographic light and 
the diffusion sheet can be an important decision. Notice that in 
Figure 7.9, the light was close enough to light brightly only the 
center of the diffusion material. 
7.10 Creating a highlight 
on the indicated surface 
requires filling its family of 
angles with light. In this 
diagram, a lighted diffusion 
sheet reflects on the glass 
surface to produce the 
highlight.
0 
..................................... 
Glass 
. -. 
.............. 
F 
- - - - - - - - -.C..- - 
Subject 
.- 
......... 
.............. 
,pi: 
....... 
pr 
\ 
..... 
Possible 
..... 
Possible 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
198
Figure 7.11 shows an alternative method. Here we have pulled 
the light head farther back. This allows the full rectangle of the 
diffusion sheet to be lit and to be reflected in the glass surface.
Lighting the whole diffusion sheet more evenly produces a 
larger highlight, but we usually want to keep that larger highlight 
dimmer. Had we lit the whole diffusion sheet brightly, it would 
have reflected in the glass as an obvious hard-edged rectangle. 
This reflection would have advertised the presence of a studio 
light and detracted from the reality of the scene.
Regardless of where we put the light, we sometimes minimize 
the studio look with strips of black tape on the diffusion sheet. 
Then the reflection of the light appears to be that of a window, as 
shown in Figure 7.12.
7.11 Compare the large highlight in this picture with  
that in Figure 7.9. This time we positioned the light far 
enough away from the diffusion sheet that the entire 
sheet was lit and reflected in the glass.
7.12 We used tape to reduce the “studio look” of 
this shot and to give the illusion of a window being 
reflected on the glass surface.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
199
Before we move on, notice that these are the first examples in 
this chapter in which the light does not come from behind the 
glass. This enables us to better define glass that does not have a 
simple, smooth surface. It is also useful when there are additional 
nontransparent subjects in the scene. Later in this chapter we will 
see more examples of this technique.
Illuminating the Background
The basic dark-field approach produces a picture in which the 
background appears dark regardless of the actual tone of the back-
ground material. Brightening that background material requires 
an additional light source.
To brighten a dark-field background, 
we simply shine an additional light on the 
dark background. We position this light 
similarly to one used to produce bright-
field illumination on a white opaque back-
ground. Usually, we can even use a light of 
similar intensity because the darker back-
ground material will keep the result from 
becoming a bright-field photograph.
Figure 7.13 was made in this way. 
Notice that the tone of part of the back-
ground has been lightened to a medium 
gray. In addition, the glass is free from 
any extraneous reflections.
7.13 A light on the background significantly 
brightened areas of it in this dark-field shot.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
200
Minimizing the Horizon
Glass things have to be put on tables; tables cause horizon lines 
in photographs. What can we do if we decide that the horizon is 
an undesirable distraction?
Eliminating the horizon is easier in photographs of subjects 
other than glass. Nonglass photographic subjects allow us to use 
a large enough table to keep the table edge out of the image area. 
Alternatively, we can use a sweep of seamless paper, raising its top 
edge high enough to prevent the camera from seeing it. These 
methods will work for glass subjects too, but not as well.
Remember that the best lighting of the glass requires a back-
ground that barely fills the image area. Large tables and paper 
surfaces interfere with this requirement. If the background is 
light, we can cover whatever part doesn’t show in the scene  
with anything dark. This produces reasonably good bright-field 
illumination.
We can also use white or silver reflectors to cover part of a 
dark table for dark-field illumination. This tends to be somewhat 
less effective because the light on the reflectors is the same 
source illuminating the table. The right amount of light on the 
reflectors may be too much for the table. Therefore, if the table 
is not an essential element in the composition, we would prefer 
to get rid of it altogether. We cannot do that, but there are several 
ways to approximate the effect.
A transparent glass or acrylic table surface resembles a nonexis-
tent table more closely than anything else. In most preceding pho-
tographs, we used a transparent table. The background was visible 
through the table, so the distracting horizon line was minimized. 
The transparency of the table allowed the background light to 
pass through and illuminate the scene as if the table did not exist. 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
201
Figure 7.14 shows light critical to defining this glass, which could 
pass through a transparent table but would be blocked by an 
opaque one.
Another reasonable approach is to place the subject on a mir-
ror. The reflection of the background in the mirror shows less 
abrupt tonal difference between the background and the fore-
ground than other opaque surfaces. 
Even better, reflection from the mirror surface can light glass 
surfaces almost as well as light passing through a transparent 
table. The horizon is likely to be visible but less obtrusive. An 
interesting variation on both of these approaches is to mist the 
glass table with water, thus disrupting and camouflaging any 
potentially disturbing reflections of the subject.
However, even a transparent table or a mirror can produce a 
slight horizon line, and there are situations when reducing the 
visibility of the horizon is not good enough. Some pictures require 
7.14 A transparent table 
allows light to pass through 
as if the table didn’t exist, 
but an opaque table blocks 
light essential for edge 
definition.
Diffusion 
laterial 
> -  
Glass 
L 
Glass 
Diffusion 
Diffusion 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
202
7.15 A paper strip, 
such as this one, will 
eliminate the horizon but 
maintain edge definition.
7.16 A photograph made using 
the paper strip illustrated in Figure 
7.15. The edge definition is good 
on almost all parts of the glass, 
and there is no horizon.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
203
that the horizon be eliminated altogether. In these instances, we 
can use a paper strip such as the one shown in Figure 7.15.
In this example, the paper strip is taped directly to a large sheet 
of diffusion material. A light behind the diffusion material provides 
illumination. If we cut the paper strip carefully so that it fits the field 
of view of the camera exactly, there will be no sacrifice of the light-
ing quality. Figure 7.16 shows the result of such an arrangement.
Stopping Flare
Unfortunately, the basic dark-field approach 
to photographing glassware is probably the 
worst flare-producing arrangement that  
we could encounter. We have discussed the 
principles of camera flare in earlier chap-
ters. Dark-field lighting exaggerates the 
problem by giving camera flare the oppor-
tunity to occur on all four sides of the 
image. Figure 7.17 is an extreme example.
Even if the flare is not bad enough to 
produce a visible fogging or streaking on 
the edge of the image, the general degra-
dation of the image from all sides accu-
mulates. At best, it produces a picture 
with low contrast.
Fortunately, this problem is easy to 
correct if we understand and anticipate it. 
We use gobos just as we did earlier in this 
book, but we have to remember to block 
the nonimaging light striking the lens 
from all four sides of the field of view.
7.17 Because camera flare can occur on all four 
sides of the image, it is essential to use gobos to 
prevent it when using dark-field lighting.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
204
We can make such a gobo of four cardboard blades or of a 
single board with a rectangular hole. Then we clamp it to a light 
stand in front of the camera.
Eliminating Extraneous Reflections
Because glass reflects in a mirror-like manner, anything in the 
room may reflect in the subject. Therefore, after satisfactorily 
lighting a piece of glassware, we must finish the job by removing 
any extraneous reflections caused while putting together the set-
up. This is especially true of dark-field lighting because the dark 
background visible through the glass makes the brighter extrane-
ous reflections particularly visible.
The first step in getting rid of these unwanted reflections is to 
find which objects in the surrounding area are being mirrored in 
the glass surface. Once we have done this, there are three basic 
strategies from which to choose. Often we use a combination of 
these strategies:
1. Eliminate objects that create offending reflections. The easiest way 
to deal with highly reflective objects such as extra light stands and 
unused reflector cards is simply to get them out of the room.
2. Block the light falling on the offending objects. Notice that in 
Figure 7.18, the light that is supposed to light the diffusion 
sheet next to the camera is also falling on the camera itself. A 
gobo between the light on the camera darkens the reflection 
of the camera sufficiently that it is no longer visible in the sur-
face of the glass.
3. Darken the object. Finally, if the light cannot be blocked from 
the offending object, we may be able to sufficiently darken the 
object by covering it with black cards or cloth.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
205
COMPLICATIONS FROM NONGLASS SUBJECTS
The information that we have presented so far in this chapter is 
all we need to light glass subjects. However, in many cases we 
need to include nonglass objects in the same picture. The best 
lighting for the glass may be the worst lighting for the rest of the 
scene.
As examples, we will look at the two subjects most likely to 
accompany glass: a liquid in a glass and a label on a bottle. The 
remedies we propose will be useful for other subjects as well.
Liquids in Glass
We are often called on to photograph glassware filled with liquid. 
Bottles full of beer, glasses full of wine, vials full of perfume, and 
bowls full of fish all produce an interesting challenge.
7.18 Lighting the diffusion 
sheet can also light the 
camera, causing a reflection 
of the camera in the subject. 
In this set-up we have used 
a black card as a gobo to 
prevent the problem.
(,) Subject 
Card 
Subject 
Card 
L 
Light 
Diffusion 
Material 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
206
Liquid as a Lens
Optical laws dictate that a round, transparent container filled  
with a liquid is, in fact, a lens. The troublesome result of this is 
that a liquid-filled subject may reveal surroundings that we would 
prefer the viewer not see.
Figure 7.19 is a good example of what can happen. It was 
made from the same “normal” viewpoint used earlier for the glass 
without liquid.
We see that a background large enough to fill the field of view 
of the camera is not large enough to fill the field of view that is seen 
through the liquid. The white rectangle in the center of the glass is 
the background. The dark area around it is the rest of the studio.
Our first inclination might be to use a larger background (or to 
increase the effective size of the background by moving it closer). 
7.19 Notice how the “liquid lens” 
in this wine glass reveals the edge 
of the background. It also darkens 
the apparent color of the liquid.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
207
However, we have seen that using a background larger than the 
field of view sacrifices the best delineation of the glass. 
Such a solution is sometimes practical—but not in a chapter 
devoted specifically to well-defined glass! For the present need, 
we will have to think of another technique.
The solution to this problem requires simply moving the cam-
era closer to the subject. Then, if necessary, substitute a lens of 
shorter focal length to obtain a similar image size. This enables 
the existing background to fill the area seen through the liquid.
Remember, however, that a closer viewpoint always increases 
perspective distortion. The increased distortion is apparent in the 
deeper ellipse of the rim of the glass, as shown in Figure 7.20. 
Many people would not consider this a defect in this particular 
photograph, but the distortion could be offensive in another 
7.20 Moving the camera closer 
to the subject allowed the 
background to fill the entire area 
seen through the liquid-filled 
glass.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
208
scene with other important subjects or from a higher or lower 
viewpoint.
Keeping True Color
Maintaining the true color of a liquid in a transparent glass can be 
tricky. Suppose, for example, that you have a client who needs a 
picture of a glass of amber-colored beer shot against a mottled, 
middle-toned background. The problem with making such an 
image is that a liquid in a transparent container always takes on 
some of the color and/or texture of its background. In this case the 
result of that, as Figure 7.21 clearly shows, is a dark and unap-
pealing murky-looking brew—hardly what your client wants!
7.21 In this shot the light 
amber-colored beer looks 
unattractively dark and murky.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
209
The solution to the above problem is to set up a secondary 
white or silver background just behind the glass. This secondary 
background must be the same shape as the subject, even if the 
glass is stemmed or has an irregular shape. 
The secondary background must also be large enough to fill as 
much of the area behind the liquid as possible, without extending 
far enough to be visible beyond the edges of the glass. All this 
sounds tedious, but in practice it is not. Figure 7.22 shows one 
easy way to construct the set-up. 
Here are the steps:
1. Place a white or silver card behind the subject. Some photog-
raphers prefer a foil with a color similar to the liquid, such as 
gold for beer. A flexible wire taped to the table surface can 
make an invisible support for the card, but do not attach the 
card firmly yet.
7.22 One set-up that  
uses a secondary white 
background behind the 
glass.
Light for Secondary 
Background 
Turned off while 
Making Tracing 
' /  
est Light 
emporarily 
' /  
Light for Secondary 
Background 
Turned off while 
Making Tracing 

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
210
2. Remove the camera, and replace it with a test light aimed at 
the subject. This will cast a shadow of the subject on the mate-
rial from which we cut the background.
3. Outline the shadow of the subject on the background. A felt-tip 
marker is handy for this. After outlining the shadow, remove 
the card and cut it out.
4. Reposition the cutout behind the subject. At this point, we can 
also remove the test light and replace it with the camera. Look 
at the subject through the camera and make sure that the card 
and the camera are accurately positioned and that the edges of 
the card cannot be seen.
5. Place an additional light so that it illuminates only the cutout. 
Figure 7.23 shows the result.
7.23 The beer has the right 
color and brightness this time, 
thanks to the white secondary 
background we placed behind  
the glass

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
211
Secondary Opaque Subjects
A liquid is likely to be the only transparent secondary subject in  
a photograph of glass. Other secondary subjects are more often 
opaque and, therefore, more likely to need lighting techniques 
beyond those adequate for the transparent glass.
The usual lighting for such a scene begins with the lighting 
arrangement used earlier in Figure 7.10. The same light that pro-
duces a highlight on the front surface of the glass can also give 
good illumination for an opaque secondary subject. In many 
cases, this is enough. The next step is to make the exposure.
Unfortunately, other subjects require more work. A paper 
label is one of the most common examples. Remember that we 
see neither perfect direct nor perfect diffuse reflection in nature. 
Although most of the reflection produced by most paper is diffuse 
reflection, some of it is direct. The lighting that produces direct 
reflection on the glass surface is also likely to obscure the paper 
label. Figure 7.24 is a good example.
This particular camera position allows two remedies to this 
problem. One is to move the offending light higher; then any 
direct reflection from the paper goes downward instead of toward 
the lens.
If good highlight placement on the glass prevents you from 
moving the light, use a small opaque card to block the light from 
just those angles that produce direct reflections on the label. The 
position and size of this gobo are critical. If it extends beyond the 
family of angles defined by the label, it will reflect in the glass. We 
see the resulting photograph in Figure 7.25.
Changing the position of the light or adding a gobo will almost 
always remove the direct reflection from a secondary subject 
without harming the lighting of the glass.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
212
We may also consider a polarizing filter as a third remedy. 
However, this solution is rarely effective because much of the 
desirable highlight on the glass is usually already polarized. If the 
polarizer eliminates the offending reflection from a label, it is also 
likely to interfere with the light the glass needs.
RECOGNIZING THE PRINCIPAL SUBJECT
In this chapter we have talked about using bright-field and dark-
field methods for lighting glass. We have also discussed some 
remedies to manage complications caused by competing nonglass 
7.24 The same lighting that produces direct 
reflection on glass can also cause it on a paper label. 
The result is reduced legibility.
7.25 Here we see the result of using a gobo to block 
light from those angles that produced the direct 
reflections on the label.

THE CASE OF THE DISAPPEARING GLASS
213
subjects. However, we have not said very much about when to use 
which of these techniques.
The nature of the subject determines the best lighting. 
Deciding which subject is more important is the first step in light-
ing a scene that includes both glass and nonglass. Should we light 
the glass as well as possible and then make adjustments to accom-
modate the rest of the composition? Should we first establish the 
general lighting, and then add any secondary lights, reflectors, or 
gobos needed to enhance the glass a bit?
We cannot make these editorial and artistic decisions on a 
purely technical basis. We might light two identical scenes differ-
ently, depending on what is the intended picture caption, on who 
is paying our bill, or on personal whim.
Seeing how light behaves matters more than the mere ability 
to make a routine glassware shot look professional. We devote a 
whole chapter to lighting glass because generations of photogra-
phers have found glass to be one of the classic subjects that helps 
us learn to see.

214

215
8
Making Portraits
Good lighting is one of the most important aspects of portrait 
making. We can do everything else beautifully, but if our lighting 
is poor our picture will suffer—often fatally. It is that simple. And 
with that in mind, we will look at some of the factors that it is 
important to keep in mind when lighting any portraits.
We will start by explaining the simplest of all portrait lighting: 
the use of a single light source. We call the light that provides 
most of the illumination for any portrait the main or key light, and 
we generally handle this light the same way. This is true whether 
we use it alone or with additional lights.
Aside from the main light, this chapter also introduces more 
complex lighting arrangements than any we have discussed ear-
lier. Such so-called “classic” portrait lighting requires several 
lights. Most of these lights could serve similar needs for any 
subject. If you decide not to use all of them for portraiture, you 
probably will use them for something else later. Therefore, we say 
more about the fill light than we have before. From there we will 
move on to explain the use of other lights, such as kickers and hair 
lights. Finally, we will conclude with several examples of various 
approaches to contemporary portrait lighting.

MAKING PORTRAITS
216
THE SINGLE-LIGHT PORTRAIT SET-UP
Simple, yes. Simplistic, no. A single light is adequate for most 
portraits; the rest are optional. However, even one light needs to 
be used well. Otherwise, no amount of additional lighting will 
salvage the picture.
The Basic Set-up
Figure 8.1 is a diagram of one of the simplest possible studio 
portrait set-ups. In it is a single bare bulb that has been placed to 
one side of the subject. She is sitting several feet in front of the 
plain blue wall that serves as a backdrop. This positioning is 
important. Were she closer to the wall, her body would cast a 
potentially distracting shadow on it.
Figure 8.2 is a portrait made with the lighting set-up we have 
just described. In some ways, it is a satisfactory picture. It is 
8.1 Here is a diagram of 
the simplest of studio 
portrait lighting. The subject 
is lit by a single bare bulb 
that is placed to one side.

MAKING PORTRAITS
217
sharp, properly exposed, and acceptably composed. However, it 
suffers from one very serious fault—harsh, distracting, and very 
uncomplimentary shadows.
Now look at Figure 8.3. It shows the same young woman in 
the same basic pose. This time, however, we made the image with 
a far softer light.
And look at the difference between the pictures. The hard-
edged, unattractive shadows that produced such an unpleasant 
picture before have vanished. The softer shadows of this lighting 
help, rather than detract from, the picture. They help define 
facial features and add an element of depth and interest to the 
picture. The result is more likely to please most people, especially 
the subject!
8.2 The result of the lighting diagrammed in Figure 
8.1. The harsh, uncomplimentary shadows in the 
portrait distract from our model’s features.
8.3 The softer shadows in this picture are the result 
of a larger light source. These shadows define the 
features of the subject and add depth.

MAKING PORTRAITS
218
Light Size
And just what is it that made such a difference between the two 
portraits we have just seen? Why were the shadows hard and 
unpleasant in one and soft and flattering in the other? The answer 
is simple and familiar—light size. 
We made the first portrait (Figure 8.2) with a single small, 
bare bulb. And, as we have pointed out in previous chapters, such 
small light sources produce hard, sharply defined shadows. We 
then made the second picture (Figure 8.3) with a larger light 
source. The results prove the key photographic principle that 
large light sources produce soft shadows. And here, in Figure 8.4, 
we see the result of using a very large light source.
8.4 We made this picture  
using a very large light source.  
It produced an extremely “soft” 
look.

MAKING PORTRAITS
219
Skin Texture
The size of the lights also influences the amount of texture we can 
see in the skin. Skin texture appears as microscopic shadows in 
the photograph. Such shadows may be either hard or soft, just as 
the shadows of the general features may be. 
This difference in texture may not matter if the image is repro-
duced at a small size in a book or magazine, especially if the  
subject is young. However, people often hang very large portraits 
on the wall. (Most photographers who do consumer portraiture 
usually try to sell prints as large as possible to increase their 
income.) Age and weather add enough skin texture to be visible 
in even small pictures of many people.
8.5 In this picture you 
can see the large soft 
box and reflector card 
we used to produce 
the very soft light we 
needed for the previous 
portrait.

MAKING PORTRAITS
220
Where to Put the Main Light
Placing the main light is, of course, our first decision. Look at  
the abstract ball in Figure 8.6. It is the simplest thing we could 
draw to convincingly represent a ball; without the highlight and 
shadow, it could just as well be a ring, a hole, or a flat disk. 
Notice also that the placement of the highlight simply feels 
more “right” than if we had centered it, say, or put it near the 
bottom of the sphere.
The most common placement of the portrait main light is 
about where we have it in the sphere illustration. Faces, however, 
are more complex than abstract balls. They have noses, eye sock-
ets, mouths, wrinkles, creases, and all the other irregularities that 
come as part of the human form. Let’s look at all of these as we 
fine-tune the basic light placement.
In most cases, we prefer to position the light so that there is a 
shadow on one side of the face. This, as we have seen, is accom-
plished by keeping the light to one side. In addition, we also want 
to keep it high enough so that there are similar shadows under 
the eyebrows, nose, and chin. 
8.6 The placement of the highlight, above and to the left or right of center, simply 
feels natural.

MAKING PORTRAITS
221
Having read this, however, you may well ask just how far to 
keep the light “to one side” and how high is “high enough.” These 
are valid questions. We will begin to answer them with a look at 
a very useful helper—the key triangle.
The Key Triangle 
The proper placement of this triangular highlight is 
the basis of much good portrait lighting. Using the 
key triangle as a guide to good lighting is simplicity 
itself.
All we have to do is move the light around until we 
see a triangular-shaped highlight on our subject’s face 
such as the one shown in Figure 8.7. The base of the 
key triangle should run through the eye, and its point 
should extend down the cheek approximately to the 
lip line.
The importance of the key triangle is its ability  
to let us see lighting defects before shooting. Some  
of the subtleties of good lighting become easy to  
see when we look at the boundaries of where the key 
triangle falls.
We will look at the three most common variations 
and see what might be wrong with them. None of 
these potential “defects” is an inevitably fatal sin in 
every picture. In fact, every one of them has been 
used at one time or another to make a good portrait. 
This said, an understanding of the following variations 
will serve you well as you develop your own favorite 
portrait styles.
8.7 The key triangle extending from 
the eye, through the cheek, to the lip 
line is the starting point for good 
classic portrait lighting.

MAKING PORTRAITS
222
Key Triangle Too Large: Main Light Too Near the Camera
As Figure 8.8 shows, placing the light too near the camera and in 
front of our subject lights her too uniformly to show good contour 
in her face. (The extreme example of such “flat” lighting comes 
from mounting a strobe directly on top of the camera.)
Evaluating whether the lighting is too flat can be difficult for 
students who are just beginning to learn portrait lighting, espe-
cially if the picture will be printed in only black ink. 
Anticipating how color translates to shades of gray takes prac-
tice. But the decision becomes simple when we see that such 
lighting also makes the key triangle so large that it is no longer a 
triangle.
8.8 Flat lighting shows less of 
facial contours than side lighting. 
It results from placing the main 
light near the camera and in front 
of the subject.

MAKING PORTRAITS
223
We can usually improve such lighting by moving the light far-
ther to the side and higher to reduce the size of the key triangle. 
To maximize contour, we move the light far enough to get the key 
triangle as small as possible but stop just short of creating either 
of the following two problems.
Key Triangle Too Low: Main Light Too High
Regardless of whether eyes are a window to the soul or not, they are 
certainly essential to almost any portrait. Keeping the eyes of the 
subject in shadow can be unsettling to anyone looking at the portrait.
Figure 8.9 illustrates this problem. Notice how the strong eye 
shadow eliminates the top of the key triangle and produces an 
8.9 The unsettling and deeply 
shadowed “raccoon” eyes we 
see in this image come from 
lifting the main light too high over 
our model’s head.

MAKING PORTRAITS
224
unnatural and ghoulish picture. This shadow is there because we 
positioned our light too high above the head of the subject. Fixing 
the problem simply involves moving the camera forward until you 
see highlights in your subject’s eyes.
Key Triangle Too Narrow: Main Light Too Far to Side
Figure 8.10 illustrates still another potential problem. When 
making it we positioned the light so that it casts a dark shadow 
across half her face. This shadow blocks the key triangle. 
Once again, the cure is simple. To avoid a shadow such as this 
one, all we have to do is move the light a bit more to the front. 
When we do this, the key triangle will reappear.
8.10 The result of positioning 
the main light too far to one side. 
This casts a shadow across half 
her face, blocking the key 
highlight.

MAKING PORTRAITS
225
Left Side? Right Side?
Photographers generally prefer to put the main light on the same 
side as the subject’s dominant eye, or the eye that appears to be 
more open than the other. The greater the visible dominance of 
the eye, the more important it is that we light that side. Of course, 
some people have very symmetrical features; then it makes no 
difference on which side we put the main light.
The other influence on our decision is where the person’s hair 
is parted. Lighting on the same side as the part prevents extrane-
ous shadows, especially if the hair is long.
Some people absolutely insist that we photograph them from 
one side or the other. Often we should listen to such opinions 
because they are based on that individual’s dominant eye or hair-
style, whether the person knows it or not. Just be sure that the 
subject has not confused the “good” side with the “bad” side 
when looking in a mirror!
Broad Lighting or Short Lighting?
So far we have made all pictures with our model approximately 
facing the camera. Whether the light was on the right or the left 
would have made only a minor difference. However, the differ-
ence is major if the subject turns his or her head to either side. 
Where do we position the main light then? 
Figures 8.11 and 8.12 show the options. We either put the light 
on the same side as the subject’s visible ear or on the other side.
A main light on the same side as the visible ear is called broad 
lighting. Positioning the main light on the side opposite your sub-
ject’s visible ear produces short lighting. (Whether the hair covers 
the “visible” ear has nothing to do with which side of the face we 
are talking about.)

MAKING PORTRAITS
226
If you look at Figures 8.11 and 8.12 again, the reason behind 
these two somewhat confusing names becomes apparent. First, 
look at the picture that we made with broad lighting. Notice that 
a broad, or wide, highlight runs from the back of our model’s hair, 
across her cheek, all the way to the bridge of her nose. 
Now, look at the portrait that we made with short lighting. This 
time the highlight is quite short, or narrow. The brightest part of 
it only extends from the side of our model’s cheek to her nose.
There are no firm rules dictating when to use broad and when 
to use short lighting. Our personal preference, however, leans 
decidedly to short lighting. It puts the light where it will do the 
most good, on the front of the face. This, we feel, often produces 
the most interesting portraits.
8.11 Putting the main light on the side opposite the 
visible ear (were it not in dark shadow) produces short 
lighting.
8.12 Broad lighting means putting the main light on 
the same side as the visible ear.

MAKING PORTRAITS
227
Other photographers have a completely different bias. They 
feel strongly that the short or broad light decision should be 
based on the subject’s body build. They prefer to use short light-
ing if their subject has a broad face. Such lighting, they argue, 
helps make the subject look thinner by putting much of the face 
in shadow. If, however, the subject is very thin, they like the way 
that broad lighting increases the amount of the image that is high-
lighted and makes the subject appear more substantial.
Eyeglasses
Eyeglasses sometimes dictate the position of the main light, 
regardless of the other preferences of the photographer. We  
shot Figure 8.13 using short lighting. Look at the resulting direct 
reflection from the glasses.
It is impossible to eliminate the glare with the light positioned 
as it was for this portrait. We could, of course, raise it, but 
depending on the size and shape of the glasses, by the time we 
get it high enough it might fill the eye with shadow.
Figure 8.14 shows the only solution that always works. It is  
the same subject shot with broad lighting. Changing from short 
to broad lighting positions the main light outside the family of 
angles that produces direct reflection.
Problems with eyeglasses increase with the diameter of the 
eyeglass lenses. From any particular camera position, the family 
of angles that produces direct reflection is greater if the glasses 
have big lenses. 
If the subject has small eyeglass lenses, we can sometimes 
keep a short lighting arrangement by using a smaller main light. 
It is easier to position the smaller light so that no part of the light 
is within that family of angles.

MAKING PORTRAITS
228
Still life photographers exploring portraiture are sometimes 
tempted to use polarizing filters on the main light and on the 
camera lens to eliminate reflection from glasses. However, this 
can cause other problems. 
Human skin also produces a small amount of direct reflection. 
Consequently, eliminating all direct reflection in the highlights of 
a portrait may give the skin a lifeless appearance.
ADDITIONAL LIGHTS
Up to this point, we have shown some of the different ways to 
position and manipulate highlights and shadows using a single 
light source. These techniques are powerful because they pro-
duce fine work even if we have only one light at our disposal.
8.13 Short lighting produces an objectionable glare 
on the eyeglasses.
8.14 Broad lighting eliminates the glare problem.

MAKING PORTRAITS
229
Depending on taste, we may be satisfied with the results of a 
single light and proceed no further with the lighting, even if  
we have a whole studio full of strobes available. This should be 
reassuring to anyone not earning a professional income from pho-
tography and only able to afford to light a portrait with sunlight. 
Still, very few photographers shooting professional portraits use a 
single light, so we will now move on and discuss what those other 
lights are and how to use them.
Fill Lights
Shadows are essential to the success of most portraits. Much of the 
time, however, we prefer to lighten a shadow or even eliminate it 
altogether. We can do this with a single light source only if we place 
it near the camera lens. If, however, we want to keep the main light 
farther from the camera, we need to use some kind of fill light.
Photographers commonly use a fill light that gives the subject 
about half as much illumination as the main light, but this guide-
line is by no means absolute. Some photographers like to use a lot 
of fill in portraits, whereas other equally talented ones prefer to 
use none. The important thing is not to try to memorize any set 
of rules; instead, adjust your lighting until it is satisfactory to you.
Some photographers use additional lights for fill, whereas others 
prefer flat reflecting surfaces. Both methods have their advantages. 
The most basic multiple-light arrangement consists of a main light 
plus a fill light. An additional light allows good flexibility in fill light 
placement. We can put the fill light far enough from the subject to 
be out of the way and still expect it to be bright enough.
We made Figure 8.15 with a single fill light. We turned off the 
main light so that you could see exactly what effect a fill light has 
by itself.

MAKING PORTRAITS
230
Now look at Figure 8.16 in which we turned the main light 
back on. This is a typical example of the combination of fill light 
and a main light.
Size is very important when you are using fill lights. Generally 
speaking, the rule is, “the bigger, the better.” As you might 
remember, the larger a light source is, the softer the shadows it 
produces. The soft-edged shadows produced by a large fill light 
are less visible and less likely to compete with shadows produced 
by the main light.
The use of a large fill light or fill card also allows greater free-
dom in deciding where to place the light. Because the shadow of 
large fill lights or cards is not clearly defined, the position of the 
light is, within a wide range, of no importance. That means we 
8.15 All we used to make this exposure was the fill 
light. Notice how much dimmer it is than the main 
light.
8.16 We used a main and a fill light together to make 
this exposure.

MAKING PORTRAITS
231
can put it nearly anywhere that we will not knock it over and the 
lighting differences will be too minor to matter.
Figure 8.17 shows a two-light portrait arrangement including 
a main light and two possible fill lights—a large one and a small 
one. We are unlikely to use both fill lights, but we could success-
fully use either, depending on our preference and available 
equipment.
One fill light, like the main light, uses an umbrella. This 
increases its effective size and softens the shadows it produces. 
Because it is large, we could move the fill light around a good bit 
without a major effect on its shadow pattern. Such an arrange-
ment makes it easy to vary the fill light intensity by moving it 
closer to or farther from the subject.
Alternatively, the fill light can be small if we position it near 
and slightly above the camera. Notice that the fill light is as close 
to the camera lens as we can put it. Such a fill light still casts hard 
8.17 Two fill light 
alternatives. Bouncing  
one light into an umbrella 
produces softer lighting.  
The small light, near the 
camera, produces hard 
shadows, but they fall 
mostly behind the subject, 
where the camera cannot 
see them.
Large Fill Here 
Large Fill Here 
Large Fill Here 
Large Fill Here 
Large Fill Here 

MAKING PORTRAITS
232
shadows, but most of these shadows fall behind the subject, 
where the camera cannot see them.
Reflector Cards as Fill Lights
If you do not have a secondary light, one of the simplest—and 
least expensive—ways of brightening dark shadows is to use 
reflector cards to bounce light coming from the main light onto 
the face of the subject. We show this on the camera-right side of 
the studio set-up shown in Figure 8.5. 
We would also like to show you the effect of the reflector fill 
card alone, but this is impossible. That is because the reflector is 
illuminated by the main light; it has no effect by itself. 
The only bothersome problem with using a reflector for fill is 
that it may not be bright enough to suit your tastes. This is espe-
cially likely if you move your camera back to include more than 
your subject’s head and shoulders. Then you must also move the 
reflector back to get it out of camera range.
The amount of fill light a reflector provides is determined by 
numerous factors, including the following:
• The reflector’s distance from the subject. The closer the reflec-
tor is to the subject, the brighter the fill light becomes.
• The reflector’s angle. A reflector card illuminates the subject 
most when it faces an angle between the subject and the main 
light. Turning it more to the subject reduces the intensity of the 
light falling on it. Turning it more to the main light reflects 
more light in a direction away from the subject.
• The reflector’s surface. Different reflector surfaces reflect  
different amounts of light. In our example, we used a white 
reflector card. If we had wanted more light on the subject, we 
could have used a silver reflector. 

MAKING PORTRAITS
233
• Remember, however, that the choice of reflector surface also 
depends on the size of the main light. A large silver reflector fill, 
for example, can be a soft source only if the main light is also soft.
• The reflector’s color. When shooting in color, you may also want 
to experiment with colored reflector cards. At times they are 
useful for either adding or subtracting shadow color. 
• In a daylight portrait, for example, the sun is usually the main 
light and, without reflectors, the open sky is the fill. The blue 
sky adds blue to the shadow. Using a gold reflector warms  
the shadow, thus eliminating the blue and producing a more 
neutral color. 
• Using exactly the opposite approach can make a studio portrait 
resemble daylight. A pale-blue reflector cools the shadow color 
enough to look more like that in an outdoor photograph. The 
effect is subtle and few viewers will notice it consciously; still, 
they are more likely to believe it is an outdoor portrait.
8.18 A main light, reflector 
fill, plus other commonly 
used portrait lights. Although 
some photographers use 
fewer lights and others use 
more, this arrangement is 
common.
a 
Main s 
Background 
Gob0 
Abo~ 
Reflector c$$'l 
Hair Light 

MAKING PORTRAITS
234
Figure 8.18 shows where we placed the reflector in a more com-
plex portrait lighting arrangement. We will now talk about the 
other lights in it.
Background Lights
So far we have talked about lighting the subject. Background 
lights illuminate, as the name implies, the background rather 
than the person being photographed. Figure 8.19 shows the 
effect of the background light by itself.
We made Figure 8.20 using a three-light set-up. Besides the 
main and fill lights we used before, we added a background light. 
Compare it with Figure 8.16, which we made with just a main 
light and a fill.
As you can readily see, the two pictures are similar, but look at 
how nicely the back of our model’s head and her shoulders are 
separated from the background in Figure 8.20. That is exactly 
what background lights do. They provide a degree of tonal sepa-
ration between the subject and the background. 
This separation helps give a feeling of added depth to a  
portrait and surrounds the subject with what is often a visually 
pleasing “glow.” You can be heavy-handed with this, giving the 
subject a pronounced halo, or you can be subtle, pulling the light 
farther from the background or using multiple lights to light the 
background evenly.
Background lights can also add color to portraits. We do this 
by attaching colored gels, or filters, to the light. Gels are not 
expensive and they come in a wide range of colors. By using them 
and a white background, photographers can reduce the number 
of different colored backgrounds that they need to keep around 
the studio. Several background lights with filters of different  

MAKING PORTRAITS
235
colors can create color combinations impossible with colored 
seamless paper and white lights.
The diagram in Figure 8.18 also shows one common back-
ground light position. The light is placed on the floor and aimed 
up to lighten the background. This arrangement works well for a 
head-and-shoulders portrait. Hiding the background light behind 
the subject is more difficult in a full-length portrait.
Furthermore, lighting the background uniformly, instead of a 
bright center spot, is almost impossible with the background light 
in such a position. To photograph the whole body or to illuminate 
the background evenly, we prefer to use two or more background 
lights on each side of the subject.
8.19 In making this picture, we used a background 
light to separate the subject’s head and shoulders from 
the background. 
8.20 Adding the background light to the fill and main 
lights surrounds the subject with a pleasing glow, and 
adds a sense of depth to the image. 

MAKING PORTRAITS
236
Background lights may be very bright or very dim. Experiment 
until you come up with the lighting you like. For portraits you 
intend to later paste into another scene, try lighting a background 
slightly lighter than pure white (just to be sure). You can then 
often place the portrait into another scene using the software 
“darken” mode. In many scenes, this eliminates the need for 
tediously silhouetting the hair.
Hair Lights
The next light that we are going to discuss is the hair light. This 
light is often used for highlights that separate dark hair from a 
8.21 We made this exposure using nothing but a 
hair light. Notice in this picture the highlights it puts on 
our subject’s hair, shoulder, and top of her head.
8.22 A hair light used along with the main and fill 
lights. This one is of typical brightness. Some 
photographers like brighter highlights, whereas others 
prefer them dimmer.

MAKING PORTRAITS
237
dark background. However, even if the hair is blond, brightening 
it with additional light can make the photograph less somber. 
Figure 8.21 was made with a hair light alone to show the effect.
Now look at Figure 8.22. We made it with a main light, a fill 
light, and a hair light. This combination has the hair light set at a 
typical brightness. Some photographers might prefer to keep it 
dimmer, providing separation in the dark areas but attracting less 
attention to it. Others prefer a brighter hair light for a more “the-
atrical” look.
Hair lights are often used to separate a subject’s hair from the 
background against which they are placed. They also add tonal 
variation to a picture. 
However, as Figures 8.23 and 8.24 demonstrate, you can  
also use hair lights to add a sense of drama and excitement to 
8.23 In this portrait we used a hair light to make 
our model’s portrait somewhat “edgy” and visually 
interesting, and a grid on the main light. 

MAKING PORTRAITS
238
portraits. Please note that in making both of these images we 
used grid spots as the main lights and strip boxes as fill. Combined, 
these lights produced the contrasty, dramatic look we wanted.
It is important to position a hair light so that light coming from 
it does not produce flare. Remember to look at the lens as you 
position the hair light to see if the light is falling directly into the 
lens. If it is, you may be able to move the light a bit. 
If you do not want to change the light position, block the 
offending light from the lens with a barn door or a gobo. The 
gobo above the lens in Figure 8.18 serves this purpose.
Kickers
Along with the different lights that we have talked about so far, 
some photographers also like to use a kicker as a part of their  
set-up. We lit Figure 8.25 by a kicker alone.
8.24 This time we 
placed the hair light 
farther behind our 
subject than we  
did when making  
Figure 8.23. The black 
background also 
accentuates this kind  
of lighting.

MAKING PORTRAITS
239
As you can see, a kicker adds extra illumination to, or “kicks 
up,” the brightness on part of the face by providing an extra high-
light. Kickers are usually about half the brightness of the main 
light.
Figure 8.26 shows what happens when you use a kicker with a 
main light and a fill light. For this picture we placed a kicker 
behind our model, and on the same side as the main light. Notice 
how it added an appealing highlight to one side of her face. 
Now let us move on to Figure 8.27. It shows in the alternative 
“look” to that of Figure 8.26. Notice how the model in it is illumi-
nated by a very soft, and to our mind, pleasing “wraparound” 
light.
8.25 A kicker by itself. Kickers are lights that are 
sometimes used to brighten (or “kick up”) small extra 
highlights.
8.26 The kicker added appealing highlights down 
the side of our model’s face and shoulder.

MAKING PORTRAITS
240
8.27 Our goal when 
we made this portrait 
was to “wrap” our 
model in extremely soft, 
and to our mind, very 
pleasing light and one 
that was totally 
appropriate for the 
subject.
8.28 The several 
lights and a reflector 
we used produced 
what amounted to a 
very large kicker.

MAKING PORTRAITS
241
As you can see in Figure 8.28, we used several lights plus a 
reflector for our set-up. The result is, in effect, a “mega” kicker.
Rim Lights
Some photographers use rim lights to illuminate the edges of the 
subject. Rim lighting is often a combination of hair lights and 
kickers so similar to the arrangements described in the preceding 
sections that it makes no difference which terms we use to 
describe the lights.
However, one variation on rim lighting is different from any-
thing we have seen. This technique places the light directly 
8.29 Rim lighting by itself places a bright “halo,” or 
rim of light, around our model’s head.
8.30 A rim light along with a main and a fill light. 
Notice how the rim of light around our model’s head 
helps to separate it from the background.

MAKING PORTRAITS
242
behind the subject in a position similar to that of a background 
light but aims the light at the subject rather than the background.
Figure 8.29 shows such a rim light used alone, Figure 8.30 is 
a combination of the rim light plus other lights, and Figure 8.31 
shows how we position the rim light.
MOOD AND KEY
Mood is one of those subjective ideas hard to discuss and still 
harder to quantify. It is one of those terms that often has different 
meanings for different people. At the simplest level, we will all 
agree that pictures that have a dark and somber lighting evoke a 
different response from those that are light and brilliant.
8.31 Notice how we placed the rim light in about the same position as we might 
have placed a background light, only in this case we pointed the light at the back of 
our model’s head.
( 5 6 4 -  
Main 
Rim Light 
Main 
Rim Light 
Main 
Rim Light 

MAKING PORTRAITS
243
To keep from confusing each other with different personal 
perceptions, photographers talk about the key or brightness key 
instead of mood. No one factor determines key. Lighting may be 
the most essential factor, but subject matter and exposure also 
greatly influence key.
Low-key Lighting
Large, prominent areas of dark are characteristic of low-key light-
ing. Pictures made with this kind of lighting tend to be somber, 
serious, formal, and dignified in mood. 
Figure 8.32 is a classic example of such an image. To make this 
portrait we used one light, which is characteristic of low-key lighting.
8.32 Notice the large dark areas 
in this portrait. They give it the 
somber, dignified look that is often 
characteristic of low-key images.

MAKING PORTRAITS
244
High-key Lighting
High-key lighting is quite the reverse of low-key lighting. Pictures 
made with high-key lighting are light and bright. They have many 
white and light-gray tones in them. This tends to give them their 
characteristic upbeat look. For this reason, photographers fre-
quently use high-key lighting to produce a youthful, happy look.
Figure 8.33 shows a typical high-key portrait. Look at how  
different the portrait is when done with a high-key approach.  
Its mood is completely different from the low-key, moodier pho-
tographs in this chapter.
8.33 The preponderance 
of light tones gives high-key 
pictures a fresh and bright 
look. Such images are 
common in the fashion and 
editorial fields.

MAKING PORTRAITS
245
Many of the lower-key portraits you have seen in this chapter 
used lighting that produced highlights of one kind or the other 
along the edges of the subject. We needed these highlights to 
delineate the subject’s features and to separate them tonally from 
the background. Without them, the features of the subject would 
have melted into the background.
High-key portrait lighting always uses a great deal of front 
light and background light. Edge highlighting is less beneficial in 
high-key lighting because the edge of the subject threatens to 
disappear against the light background. Thus, we tend to omit 
many of the lights that are important in low-key work. It is usually 
easier to light high-key pictures than it is to light low-key ones.
One way to do this is to use a large main light, a reflector 
placed below this subject, and a pair of background lights. We put 
the main light above the camera but as close to the lens as pos-
sible. In this position, it bathed our model in soft, and almost 
shadowless, illumination. 
We then placed the reflector under the camera, and close to 
our model. So positioned, it bounced some of the main light illu-
mination back onto her. The two background lights turned the 
background into one large and evenly lit highlight.
This set-up produced a very flat lighting with few shadows to 
help delineate the features. This lack of shadow is both the advan-
tage and the disadvantage of such lighting.
Because such lighting reduces contrast, it helps to make blem-
ishes and other skin imperfections less noticeable. Most photog-
raphers consider this to be flattering and appropriate to young 
women and children. If you have any doubts about this, just look 
at the covers of fashion and beauty magazines. Many of the 
images in them are made with lighting similar to this. However, 
you should use “beauty” lighting with care. The lack of shadows 

MAKING PORTRAITS
246
can also produce pictures that appear flat and formless and seem 
to be wholly without character.
And finally we come to a somewhat different “bright” look 
with Figure 8.34. It shows another kind of high-key image. We 
made this portrait using a ring light. 
This lighting succeeded in giving a particularly intense, high-
key look to our model’s face. This is a “look” much in demand by 
today’s glamor and fashion industries. 
8.34 We used a ring 
light to make this 
particularly bright and 
intense high-key picture. 
The bright, shiny metal 
background also added 
to the effect.

MAKING PORTRAITS
247
Staying in Key
Many photographers consider it a good idea to keep a portrait 
definitely low key or definitely high key whenever possible. They 
do not mix low- and high-key subject matter and lighting tech-
niques unless there is a definite reason for doing so. However, we 
cannot always follow this rule. Exceptions include a fair-skinned 
blonde in dark clothing or a dark-skinned, dark-haired person in 
light clothing. 
Professional portrait photographers often discuss wardrobe 
with the subject in advance, but most nonphotographers would 
be amazed at how many people agree with the photographer’s 
advice and then show up dressed exactly the opposite.
Unless you crop to include only the face, either one forces you 
to mix high-key and low-key elements in the portrait. On other 
occasions, you may decide to move the main light more to the 
side to increase the shadow area in a high-key portrait to empha-
size facial contour, or you may decide to minimize shadow in an 
otherwise low-key portrait to make the skin appear smoother.
Nevertheless, staying in key has some merit. If most of the com-
position is in the same tonal range, the picture has less clutter to 
compete with the face. This is especially useful for photographers 
beginning to learn portraiture who have not yet learned to fully 
combine lighting, posing, and cropping to unify the composition.
DARK SKIN
We know that photography is most likely to lose detail in the high-
lights and in the shadows. Few people with light skin are light 
enough to cost highlight detail, and we rarely encounter such 
problems. However, a few people with dark skin are dark enough 
to present potential shadow detail problems.

MAKING PORTRAITS
248
Some photographers increase the exposure in these cases. 
Sometimes, and we must emphasize only sometimes, this strategy 
works well. If, for example, the subject is dark skinned and wear-
ing a dark shirt and coat, it is safe to open the lens considerably 
to compensate for the light lost by skin absorption.
However, if the subject is a bride with very dark skin in a white 
wedding dress, the preceding strategy could lead to disaster. The 
face would still be properly exposed and have good shadow detail, 
but her dress would be hopelessly overexposed. 
Fortunately, there is a better way to approach this problem 
than just opening the aperture and hoping for the best. The key 
to successfully dealing with dark complexions is to increase the 
direct reflections from them as we demonstrate in Figure 8.35.
Human skin produces only a small amount of direct reflection, 
but as you might remember, direct reflection is most visible on a 
dark surface. Therefore, capitalizing on direct reflection is one 
way to lighten dark subjects without increasing general exposure.
Another point to keep in mind is that the larger the light 
source, the greater the group of angles from which its light will 
strike the subject. This enables a large light to fill more of the 
family of angles that causes direct reflection. Thus, in a portrait of 
a person with dark skin, a larger light produces a larger highlight 
on the skin without adjusting the exposure at the camera.
Be aware, however, that just a slight increase in the size of the 
light would offer almost no improvement. Because a human head 
is roughly spherical, the family of angles that produces a large 
direct reflection is also quite large. The larger the light we use, 
the better the result. 
We may still have to open the aperture a bit, but not very 
much, and both the bride’s face and her dress will photograph 
well. (If you are not reading these chapters in order, we suggest 

MAKING PORTRAITS
249
you look back at Figure 6.30 or Figure 7.3, glass, to see the family 
of angles of direct reflection on a round object.)
THE UNFOCUSED SPOT
When making Figure 8.36, our aim was to create a dramatic por-
trait in which our subject’s face stood out brightly from its somber, 
almost monochromatic, setting. 
8.35 The bright 
highlights that help to 
increase the “readability” 
of this subject's face 
were produced by direct 
reflections from his skin.

MAKING PORTRAITS
250
To make the picture we wanted, we decided to use two very 
different light sources (Figure 8.37). One was a large soft box; the 
other was a tight grid spot. 
Prior to shooting, we asked our model to wear a neutral-toned 
shirt that would complement the neutral background we had 
selected previously. 
When time to shoot, we put the large soft box to our camera 
right, about a foot in front of our model. So positioned, it put 
noticeably more light on the camera-right side of her face, thus 
helping to delineate her features. 
8.36 We combined the 
light given off by a large soft 
box with that of a 7-inch 
tight grid spot to illuminate 
our model generally and to 
highlight her face.

MAKING PORTRAITS
251
We then placed our grid spot close to, and directly in front of, 
the bank light. This produced a closely defined and intense spot 
of light on our model’s face. 
Once we completed our set-up, we made a series of test shots 
varying our exposure settings and the output of the two lights we 
were using. After several shots, we selected the combination that 
produced the image we show as Figure 8.36.
For the sake of comparison, in the illustration that follows, we 
show what our model looked like when lit with each of the two 
lights we used to make her finished portrait.
On the left we see our model illuminated by just the grid spot. 
Only the soft box was used to make the image on the right. 
Referring, once again, back to Figure 8.36 we see the impact—
the additive effect—that resulted when we combined these two 
very different lights.
8.37 This diagram  
shows the “additive” lighting 
set-up we used to make 
Figure 8.36.
Grid Spot 
Background 
Grid Spot 
Background 
Grid 
Spot 
Background 
Grid Spot 
Background 
Grid Spot 
Background 
Grid Spot 
Background 

MAKING PORTRAITS
252
8.38 On the left (A), we see our model’s face lit by the grid spot alone. On the right (B), we see her face lit by 
only the softbox.
A
B
Small Light? Large Light? Why Not Both?
We’ve seen the advantages of a small light: crisply defined shadow, good texture in 
subjects, which reveal that texture in mostly diffuse reflection. 
We have also seen the advantages of a large light: shadows soft enough that they 
do not distract from the principal subject, and the ability to fill a large family of angles 
to reveal the surface of a glossy subject.
What if we want both at once? We can certainly do this, and there are several 
ways to accomplish it. One is essentially cost-free, assuming we’re already reason-
ably equipped; another is fairly expensive, but far quicker and easier to reposition. 
The difference in effect may be fairly subtle, depending on the subject. Try both,  
if you can, with borrowed equipment, and then decide which you want to mostly  
use.

MAKING PORTRAITS
253
A Small Light Placed Very Close to a Big Diffusion Screen
The light doesn’t illuminate the whole screen evenly. There will be a hot spot in the 
center, serving as a fairly hard light. There will also be light scattered to fill the whole 
sheet; that gives us our soft light. 
Essentially, we get two different lights from one electronic device and we get very 
good control: move the light closer to the diffusion material to increase the hard light; 
move the light farther from the diffusion material to increase the soft light. 
One photographer can manage this set-up practice, but having an assistant will 
speeds things up. The photographer moves the pivotal stand holding the diffuser and 
then tells the assistant where to put the other stand (“No, not quite, 6 inches closer 
to the subject. Yes, there!”). Then we have to reposition the light, assuming we have 
the diffusion screen in the right place. 
Difficult to learn? No. Practice required? Definitely. But the fact that you have read 
this far into this book probably proves that you are one of those who intends to put 
the extra effort into your lighting.
Back up the Light Behind the Diffusion Material and Then Put  
a Second Small Light in Front of It
Nearly the same effect as method 1 but more controllable because we can adjust 
the power of the two lights independently.
Another Approach Is to Use a Beauty Dish
A beauty dish is a metal reflector similar to many other studio strobe reflectors 
except they are quite large, usually 20 to 30 inches in diameter. The large reflector 
acts as a soft light; the smaller flash tube acts as a hard light. 
Some beauty dishes have optional covers for the flash tube for softer light: sort 
of a beauty dish–soft box combination effect. They require only one stand instead of 
the three or four needed by the other methods, so one photographer can easily 
control them. 
Sounds like a win–win situation, right? Not totally. Beauty dishes do not fold up 
for travel, and they are relatively expensive. Still—if you are already fairly well 
equipped and you do most of your work in the studio, buying a beauty dish may be 
the next step for you.

MAKING PORTRAITS
254
USING COLORED GELS
Up to this point we have used normal, daylight-balanced lights. 
Now for something different. Figure 8.39 shows a three-light set-
up—a main light, a kicker, and a background light.
We attached a light-blue gel to the silver umbrella we used 
over our main light. Next, we attached an amber gel inside the 
grid strip box that we used as our kicker. Finally we attached a 
bluish-green gel over our background light. Figure 8.40 shows 
the result. It is a very different and endlessly changeable look—
and one you may well wish to explore.
8.39 We used a three “gelled” light set-up—a main light, a kicker, and a background 
light—to make the following portrait.

MAKING PORTRAITS
255
8.40 The result of the previous set-up—an endlessly changeable and slightly 
haunting image whose only limitation is the viewer’s imagination. 

256

257
9
The Extremes
The extremes are the lightest and the darkest groups of grays  
or colors in a photograph. For years they were the parts of the 
picture most likely to lack quality because of the inherent, irre-
mediable defects in film. Good photographers managed to get 
excellent pictures anyway because they paid a lot of attention to 
these defects and how to minimize them.
The extremes are a potential problem in any photograph, but 
in a white-on-white or a black-on-black image, pictures com-
posed entirely of the extremes, little defects can quickly turn into 
big ones.
Digital technology, lacking some of the film defects, has elimi-
nated some of these problems but revealed a new one: some  
people like these “defects.” If we shoot a technically perfect picture 
and reproduce it well, we think it looks dull and unappealing! Thus, 
we have to reintroduce the classic defects—the ones we always 
hoped to someday avoid—just to bag a picture that looks right.
When we talk about what people like and don’t like, it sounds 
as if we are playing to popular taste—stuff that could reverse 
itself in a year or a generation—but we’re not. These likings seem 

THE EXTREMES
258
to be hardwired into the human brain and will not change with-
out a few more hundreds of thousands of years of evolution or, 
possibly, the surgical implanting of digital eyes and learning to 
use them. In this chapter we are going to talk about what those 
defects are, how we reintroduce them into the digital image, and 
how we minimize the loss in quality.
THE CHARACTERISTIC CURVE
In this book, we generally keep our attention on lighting and stay 
away from extensive discussion of basic photography. Nevertheless, 
the characteristic curve dictates some of our technique when we 
light black-on-black or white-on-white subjects, thus we have to 
talk about it. Other writers have explained this material in more 
detail. You may give this section as much or as little attention as 
you need, depending on whose books you have already read.
Characteristic curves are used in many technical fields to plot 
the response of one variable to another. In photography, the char-
acteristic curve is a graph of the way the brightness of a recorded 
image varies with different amounts of exposure to light. (We are 
using the nontechnical term brightness to mean both the electrical 
response of a digital sensor and the density of film.) For simplicity 
we will talk about grayscale curves. Whatever we say here also 
applies to color, except that color requires three curves—one each 
for red, green, and blue (or, for film, cyan, magenta, and yellow).
The Perfect “Curve”
The characteristic curve is a way to compare two grayscales: one 
representing exposure steps in the scene and the other represent-
ing brightness values in the recorded image.

THE EXTREMES
259
Note that when we talk about characteristic curves, exposure 
means something slightly different from when we talk about making 
a picture. Photographers shooting pictures talk about exposure as if 
the whole image received a single uniform exposure—for example, 
f/8 at 1/60 second. Exposure used this way is convenient shorthand for 
“How I set my camera for this subject under this lighting condition.”
But photographers also know that ideally each shade of gray  
in the scene is represented by a unique value in the recorded picture. 
Assuming we are not photographing a blank wall, the recorded 
image is a group of exposures that make an image of the grays in the 
scene. Therefore, when we talk about exposure steps in the charac-
teristic curve, we mean “the whole scene,” and not necessarily a large 
number of recorded pictures with a range of different exposures.
Figure 9.1 shows what might happen when we record a scene 
containing a grayscale made up of 10 steps. In this graph, the 
horizontal axis represents exposure steps, the grays in the original 
9.1 A perfect “curve”: any 
change in exposure would 
produce an exactly corresponding 
change in the recorded image.
9 
8 
~ 7 
Q) 
en 
6 
Q) 
~ 5 
E 4 
3 
2 
An Ideal Characteristic Curve 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Exposure Steps 
9 
5 
E 
4 
3 
2 
An 
9 
8 
5 
E 4 
3 
2 
An 

THE EXTREMES
260
scene. The vertical axis represents image steps, groups of grays in 
the recorded image.
Each exposure step is the same length on the graph as any 
other exposure step. This is no accident. Photographers and sci-
entists who invented the scale deliberately decided to divide the 
range of possible grays into equal steps. However, the size of cor-
responding brightness steps in the final image may not be equal 
to one another. This difference in the size of the steps is exactly 
what the characteristic curve is designed to graph.
The important characteristic of an ideal image is that all its 
steps are the same size. If you measure the length of the vertical 
line marked “step 2,” for example, you will find it to be the same 
as the length marked “step 5.”
This means that any change in exposure will produce an 
exactly corresponding change in the brightness of the recorded 
image. For example, Figure 9.2 is a graph of the same scene, shot 
9.2 An ideal curve with 
exposure increased by three 
stops. After postproduction 
correction, it could print the same 
as the previous one because the 
relationship of the density steps is 
the same.
If) 
10 
9 
8 
g. 7 
en 
6 
Q) 
~ 
5 
E 
4 
3 
2 
o 
An Ideal Characteristic Curve 
with Increased Exposure 
o 
2345678910 
Exposure Steps 

THE EXTREMES
261
with an ideal digital sensor (or an ideal film) with the exposure 
increased three stops.
Later, if we decide the image is too light, we can simply darken 
it. If an ideal digital sensor existed, exposing it would be easy.  
Any photographer who had any doubt about the ideal exposure 
could be safe in simply giving more exposure than necessary.  
The resulting image could, with manipulation, produce a print 
with the same grayscale. (Furthermore, as long as we are talking 
about ideals, we might as well assume the film grain would be  
fine also.)
In the real world, however, exposure is a more critical deci-
sion. This is because the graph of density steps in a recorded 
image is not a straight line; it’s a curve.
A “Bad” Camera
Photographers almost never use a diagram of a characteristic 
curve in their daily work, but they keep a mental image of the 
shape of a curve with them always because it helps them previsu-
alize how a real scene will appear in the picture. Furthermore, 
this mental image slightly exaggerates the problems found in real-
ity. We will call this exaggerated example a “bad” camera.
Figure 9.3 shows the characteristic curve we would get from a 
bad camera if we exposed it like the ideal one in the first example. 
The exposure steps shown on the horizontal line are identical to 
those in the first graph because we are photographing the same 
scene, but look what has happened to the recorded brightness on 
the vertical line.
Steps 1 to 3 occupy very little space on the brightness scale; 
likewise for steps 8 through 10. The shadows and the highlights 
have been greatly compressed. Compression means that tones 

THE EXTREMES
262
9.3 In a bad camera, both the 
highlights and the shadows are 
greatly compressed.
9.4 A scene exposed normally has some compression in both the shadows and the 
highlights; however, the problems are not obvious.
A Bad Characteristic Curve 
109 
8 
7 
II) 
6 
C. 
Q) -
en 
Q) 
~ 5 
E 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Exposure Steps 
0 

THE EXTREMES
263
that were very different and easy to distinguish in the scene are 
now very similar and difficult to distinguish in the photograph.
Figure 9.4 is a normally exposed scene. The outdoor signage, 
for the most part, is a mixture of medium to light tones along with 
some darker areas.
Overexposure
Keep in mind that in an average scene with a normal exposure, com-
pression occurs at both extremes of the density grayscale. Changing 
the general exposure decreases compression at one end of the gray-
scale, but it worsens the compression at the other extreme. Figure 
9.5 shows the benefits and the sacrifices of overexposure.
As we can see, increased exposure eliminates some of the 
shadow compression. This is good, but the highlight compression 
is made much worse. 
9.5 Overexposure eliminates 
compression in the shadow 
tones—but at the cost of making 
the highlight compression much 
worse.
7-10 6 
til 
5 
g. 4 -
CJ) 
Ql 
3 
C) 
C'tI 
.5 
i 
2 
~ 
... o P 1 
o 
A Bad Characteristic Curve 
with Overexposure 
o 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Exposure Steps 
10 
1 
o 
A Bad Characteristic Curve 
with Overexposure 

THE EXTREMES
264
Now let’s see what might happen if we overexpose the earlier 
scene to such a degree? Figure 9.6 is the result. We see improved 
shadow detail in the edge of the signs; however, the rest of  
the picture is much too light. That is only part of the problem, 
however. We can fix that part by making the image darker in  
postproduction. 
Let’s look at a Figure 9.7 to see what would happen if we did 
that. Now the middle tones are somewhat similar to those in the 
earlier print. However, we cannot remedy the compression 
caused by overexposing the picture. The distinctions within the 
scene are still not well delineated. And although the highlights 
are darker in this version, the detail in them is not improved. 
Notice, however, that this terrible picture is not without vir-
tue. Overexposure put detail into the deepest shadows that sur-
vived, even in the darker print.
9.6 The same scene, only this time greatly overexposed.

THE EXTREMES
265
Underexposure
If the image is underexposed, we see similar problems with the 
shadow tones. Figure 9.8 is the characteristic curve for an under-
exposed picture.
Figure 9.9 is such an image. The highlight steps are better 
separated. In other words, each step appears more different from 
the steps above and below it. Whether this technical improve-
ment is more pleasing depends on the particular scene and the 
opinion of the viewer. In this scene, the highlights in the signs are 
now better differentiated. Of course, no viewer would consider 
that gain worth the increased compression of the shadow we see 
here. 
Once again, we will try to cure the problem. In Figure 9.10 we’ve 
lightened Figure 9.9 in an attempt to recover the shadow detail.  
As we might have expected when looking at the characteristic  
9.7 A “correction” of the overexposed photograph offers little additional distinction 
between the highlights.

THE EXTREMES
266
9.8 The characteristic curve that 
results from underexposure. The 
shadows are compressed badly.
9.9 An underexposure. Many shadow tones—different in the original scene—are now 
compressed.
10 
I/) 
9 
Q. 
~ 
Q) 
01 
cu 
8 
.§ 
7 
6 
5 
0-3 4 
0 
2 
3 
A Bad Characteristic Curve 
with Underexposure 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Exposure Steps 

THE EXTREMES
267
curve, the lighter version does not restore the shadow detail. This is 
because the underexposure has compressed those tones too much 
for them ever to be salvaged. 
9.10 A lighter print of the underexposed image. Even though the overall scene is 
lighter, shadow detail has not been restored.
Shooting in Raw
For at least a century photographers regretted that S-shaped characteristic curve 
and wished the film makers could get it straight. They saw the loss of highlight and 
shadow detail in those parts of the curve and rightly thought that detail could be 
improved by a linear curve. Now, with digital photography replacing film, we have our 
wish, but it turns out that it has its own shortcomings.
The Raw file format offered by digital cameras straightens the curve and keeps 
the highlight and shadow detail that used to be lost if we do not overexpose or 
underexpose the scene. The trouble, now that we can actually see such a picture, is 
that it looks flat. 
We like to see more contrast in the middle tones and we’re willing to sacrifice  
a bit of highlight and shadow detail to get it. So it appears we will have to keep  

THE EXTREMES
268
those photographic defects until, possibly, a major and unlikely change in human 
psychology.
The advantage of Raw is that we get to keep the detail until postproduction and 
make judgments about what detail we need to sacrifice to make the picture look 
right. Raw is often called “the digital negative” because photographers can make 
some of the same decisions they used to make in the darkroom. 
Like a negative, a Raw file also gives the photographer the freedom to change his 
or her mind, tomorrow or next year, and use the Raw file to make a new, wholly dif-
ferent TIFF or JPEG than whatever he or she first liked.
An annoying disadvantage of shooting in Raw is that every camera maker defines 
it differently and keeps that definition a secret. Potentially, this makes the Raw format 
hostage to the camera makers’ proprietary software. That’s a huge problem. You or 
I could print Matthew Brady’s negatives today, maybe better than he did, but if the 
Raw software to interpret today’s digital file doesn’t exist in another 150 years, what 
will our descendants do with our digital negatives?
It’s interesting to go to the US National Archives to look at pictures shot by Edward 
Steichen when he was a Navy photographer during World War II. The government 
owns the negatives and generally makes much worse prints than he did. But once in 
a while a government lab technician makes a better print than he did. Old film can 
reveal new information.
Some feel that a better solution to proprietary Raw is Adobe’s Digital Negative 
Format (DNG). It’s an open, nonsecret standard, likely to survive history’s forgetful-
ness. It preserves the advantages of Raw, but anyone with software savvy, including 
those using whatever computers we’ll have in 150 years, can read it and interpret it. 
Some camera makers have made their Raw formats compatible with DNG but, alas, 
too few.
Grain
Some photographers still shoot film, for very good reasons. Even after technology 
renders film truly obsolete, some photographers will probably still shoot film just to 
be different, like those few who still print on nineteenth-century emulsions. You can 
overexpose negative film to be safe, but we need to warn you that overexposure 
increases grain.

THE EXTREMES
269
The two factors that most affect grain size are the sensitivity of the film to light 
and the density of the image. We usually choose the slowest film that allows an 
acceptable aperture and shutter speed. After that, we minimize grain by paying 
attention to density.
The denser the image is, the coarser the grain size is. It makes very little  
difference whether a density increase is caused by an exposure increase or a devel-
opment increase. The effect on the grain is similar.
And this means that the grain is not uniform throughout the scene. The highlight 
area has more grain than the shadow area because of the density difference. This 
fact surprises some photographers, especially those whose negatives are consistent 
enough to print with very little manipulation.
The denser areas in most negatives produce light gray or white in the print. The 
grain is coarse in those areas, but it is too light to see. Highlight grain is also con-
cealed in a print by further highlight compression inherent in the characteristic curve 
of the paper itself.
Suppose, however, that the highlight detail is not adequate with a normal printing 
exposure. Depending on the scene, most photographers remedy the problem by 
increasing either the general printing exposure or the exposure just in the problem 
area (a “burn”). This makes some of the highlight steps print as if they were middle 
steps. Printing the denser gray steps as middle steps reveals the coarsest grain in 
the negative.
Highlight compression in the negative is not as bad as shadow compression, but 
the defect is compounded by increased grain. The resulting effect on image quality 
can be even worse.
For many years, good photographers realized that black and white film, printed 
with modern enlargers, needed about 20% less development than the film data 
sheets told them, and they got much less grain with the reduced development. 
Photographers shooting color negative film, however, were pretty well stuck  
with standardized development times because reducing development hurt the color 
badly. Those photographers owe a lot to the former president of the Professional 
Photographers of America, Frank Cricchio, who, before he started shooting digitally, 
worked out an exposure system for color negative film that guaranteed adequate 
exposure without overexposure. He proved his system by making much larger prints 
than other photographers, with better sharpness.

THE EXTREMES
270
USING EVERY RESOURCE
The difficulties of white-on-white and black-on-black subjects are 
not caused just by the subjects themselves. The problems are 
related to the very basics of the photographic medium: scenes  
get recorded on those portions of the characteristic curve that 
preserve the least detail. This means that no single technique, or 
even group of techniques, is always adequate to deal with such 
subjects.
White-on-white and black-on-black require complete command 
of all types of photographic techniques. The two most essential  
sets of these techniques are lighting and exposure control. These 
two work together to produce each picture. 
The relative importance of each varies from one scene to 
another. We sometimes think primarily about exposure control 
and in other situations use lighting techniques as the primary 
tool. The remainder of this chapter discusses both and suggests 
guidelines about when to use which tool.
WHITE-ON-WHITE
White subjects on a white background can be both practical and 
appealing. In advertising, such subjects give designers maximum 
flexibility in the composition of the piece. Type can go anywhere, 
even over an unimportant part of the subject itself. Black type on 
a white background is likely to survive even poor reproduction in 
a newspaper. 
In addition, photographers do not have to worry as much 
about making the crop fit the available space. If the picture is 
reproduced to keep the background pure white, readers cannot 
see in the ad where the edge of the print might have been relative 
to the subject.

THE EXTREMES
271
Unfortunately, white-on-white subjects are also among the 
most difficult of all scenes to photograph. A “normally” exposed 
white-on-white subject is recorded on the worst portion of the 
usable characteristic curve. Lesser contrast in that portion of the 
curve causes compression of that part of the grayscale. Gray steps 
that were distinctly different in the scene can become similar or 
identical grays in the photograph.
White subjects on white backgrounds also largely deprive us  
of the use of one of our favorite lighting ingredients: direct reflec-
tion. We have seen in earlier chapters that balancing direct and 
diffuse reflection can reveal detail that might otherwise disap-
pear. Direct reflection is especially controllable by polarizing  
filters on light sources or lenses.
White-on-white scenes generally have as much direct reflec-
tion as any other scene, but the diffuse reflection is usually bright 
enough to overpower the direct reflection. With so much compe-
tition from diffuse reflection, the camera cannot see much direct 
reflection, and photographers accomplish little by trying to 
manipulate it.
However, we will accomplish even less by continuing to com-
plain about the problems. So we will go on to a discussion of how 
to deal with them.
Good lighting control produces tonal distinctions in white-on-
white subjects. Good exposure control preserves those distinctions. 
Neither control alone is adequate to do the job. Therefore we will 
discuss both in some detail.
Exposing White-on-White Scenes
The extremely high and extremely low ranges of the characteris-
tic curve are those areas where we are most likely to lose detail. 

THE EXTREMES
272
Reducing the exposure of a white-on-white scene puts the expo-
sure in the middle of the characteristic curve. Doing this may 
make the scene look too dark, but we can fix it later. 
The worst thing that can happen is that we fix a picture so that 
it has the same loss it would have had with a normal exposure, 
and that’s not too bad. The other thing that can happen is that we 
find we can get more highlight detail, and that’s a very good thing. 
Keep in mind that the loss of shadow detail that comes from the 
underexposure of a normal scene is nothing to fear here because 
the shadow area of a white-on-white scene is pretty light. How 
much can we reduce exposure without getting into other trouble?
The following are some definitions we will be using. We will 
consider a normal exposure to be a reflected light reading from 
an 18% gray card or an incident light reading. We will further 
assume that standard reproduction renders that card as exactly 
18% reflectance in the printed image. Finally, we will consider 
reduced exposure and increased exposure to be deliberate devia-
tion from the normal. This differentiates them from accidental 
underexposure and overexposure.
A typical white diffuse reflection is about 2½ stops brighter 
than an 18% gray card seen under the same light. This means  
that if we meter a white subject, instead of a gray card, we need 
to increase exposure by 2½ stops more than the meter indicates 
to get a normal exposure.
Suppose, however, we fail to make that 2½-stop correction and 
expose exactly as the meter suggests. This means that the same 
white will reproduce as 18% gray with a standard printing expo-
sure. This is much too dark. Viewers will almost never accept 18% 
gray as “white.” Such an exposure does have its advantages, 
though. It places the white subject on the straight-line portion of 
the characteristic curve.

THE EXTREMES
273
However, we are under no obligation to use standard repro-
duction. We can reproduce the image as light as we need so that 
the resulting image is an appropriately light gray that viewers will 
call “white.” Once we move the image up the tonal scale and con-
vert it from Raw to a standard file format, we get the expected 
highlight compression.
So if we’re getting the highlight compression anyway, why  
not shoot it normally and let the compression happen from the 
beginning? We should not do so for two reasons: (1) the reduced 
exposure reserves more choices for later, and (2) the digital  
sensor does not have a perfectly linear response. It also has a 
characteristic curve with a shoulder, albeit slight. Reduced expo-
sure keeps the hard-to-hold detail away from that shoulder.
Reducing the exposure of white-on-white subjects by 2½ stops is 
the minimum exposure we are ever likely to use. Try it for scenes that 
have very, very bright whites. The way to do this is to use the exposure 
indicated by a reflection meter and ignore the routine correction.
Photographers who have thoroughly mastered metering tech-
niques may be offended by our suggestion to just point the meter 
and read, then do what the meter says, without any calculation or 
compensation. They ought to be! We would be completely irre-
sponsible to make such a recommendation if we did not go on to 
warn you about secondary black subjects and transparencies.
Using the uncorrected exposure indicated by the reflection 
meter works fine if the scene is composed entirely of light grays. 
If an additional black subject is in the scene, however, that part of 
the scene will lack shadow detail.
Whether this lack of detail is a problem depends entirely on 
what the subject is in the specific scene. If the black subject is 
unimportant and if it is too small to advertise the defect, then the 
lack of shadow detail will not be objectionable.

THE EXTREMES
274
However, if the significance or the size of the secondary black 
subject commands the viewer’s attention, the defect will also be 
apparent. In such a case, it would be better to use a normal expo-
sure instead of a reduced one. “Importance” is a psychological 
judgment, not a technical one. It is entirely reasonable to decide 
to reduce the exposure for one white-on-white scene but to use a 
normal exposure for another technically identical scene.
If we consider the possible errors and accept the reflection 
meter reading of a white-on-white scene without compensation, 
then that is a deliberate decision to reduce exposure. If we use 
the exposure that we read on the meter without thinking about 
the dangers, the result may be accidental underexposure.
Realize that being free to use less exposure in a white-on-white 
scene also allows using a slower ISO. Deciding to reduce exposure 
by 2½ stops means that we can use the same aperture and shutter 
speed for ISO 32 as for an ISO 180 exposed normally.
Lighting White-on-White Scenes
Lighting a white-on-white scene requires enhancing both texture 
and depth, like the lighting of any other scene. We can do this 
with the same techniques we used in Chapter 4 and 5. The other 
special requirement of white-on-white scenes is to keep any part 
of the subject from disappearing!
The easiest way to obtain a true “white-on-white” scene is to 
simply “print” a blank piece of paper. Of course, photographers 
do not really mean “white-on-white” when they use the term. 
Instead, they mean “very light gray on very light gray, with some 
whites in the scene.”
We have talked about why these similar light tones tend to 
become the same tone in a photograph. Good exposure control 

THE EXTREMES
275
minimizes this problem. But a light gray still disappears against 
an identical light gray. The only way to keep such a subject visible 
is to make one of those grays lighter or darker. And that is what 
correct lighting does.
Subject and Background
The most important grays to distinguish are those of the subject 
and its background. Without this separation, the viewer cannot see 
the shape of the subject. A viewer may never notice the loss of 
minor detail within the subject, but a lost edge is readily apparent.
We can light either the background or the edge of the subject 
so that it reproduces as white (or very light gray) in the photo-
graph. Once we decide which of these is to be white, we know 
that the other must be at least slightly darker. Technically, it does 
not matter whether the main subject or the background is slightly 
darker. Either way preserves tonal distinction.
Psychologically, however, it matters a lot whether the back-
ground or the subject is white. Figure 9.11 shows a white subject 
against a white background. We have lit the scene to render the 
background white and the subject light gray. When you look at 
the picture, your brain interprets the scene as white-on-white.
However, the brain is less willing to accept a gray background 
than a white one. Look at Figure 9.12. We have relit the scene to 
render the background light gray and the subject white. You no 
longer see a white-on-white scene; you see a white-on-gray one.
Figure 9.12 is not a bad picture. It still has good tonal distinc-
tion between the subject and the background, and it is pleasing in 
every other way. You may prefer the lighting, and we have no 
reason to discourage it. We are simply saying that it is not a good 
white-on-white example.

THE EXTREMES
276
Because this section is about white-on-white, we will keep the 
background white, or nearly so, in all remaining examples. In 
these examples, the background needs to be between ½ stop and 
1 stop brighter than grays in the edges of the primary subject. If 
it is less than ½ stop brighter, part of the subject may disappear; 
if it is more than 1 stop brighter, flare may scatter enough light 
inside the camera to cost contrast in the subject.
Using an Opaque White Background
The easiest white-on-white subjects are those that allow separate 
control over the lighting of the primary subject and its background. 
9.11 The background looks white and the Bach bust 
looks to be a light gray. The brain interprets such a 
scene as white-on-white.
9.12 The background is now a light gray and the 
bust appears white. The brain now interprets the visual 
message as white-on-gray rather than white-on-white.

THE EXTREMES
277
In those cases, we can slightly increase the light on the background 
to keep it white. 
Putting the subject directly on a white opaque background is 
the most difficult white-on-white arrangement because whatever 
we do to one also affects the other. This is also the most common 
arrangement, so we will deal with it first. Figure 9.13 illustrates 
the process.
Light the Subject from Above
Lighting from above places the front of the subject slightly in shadow 
but fully illuminates the tabletop. This readily establishes the gray 
subject and white background we want. In most cases, the camera 
sees good distinction between the sides of the subject and the back-
ground without any further adjustments. Figure 9.14 is the result.
9.13 One good lighting arrangement for a white-on-white subject. We used it without 
the gobo in place to make Figure 9.14 and with the gobo in place to make Figure 9.15. 
/ 
n 
Seamless 
Background 
Background 

THE EXTREMES
278
Notice, however, that such an arrangement also fully illumi-
nates the top of the subject. The loss of tonal distinction in that 
area means we have to do some more work before exposing.
Use a Gobo Above the Subject
This step is almost always necessary. We place the gobo to cast 
just enough shadow on the top of the subject to bring its bright-
ness down to a level similar to that of the front. You can see the 
improvement in Figure 9.15.
You may have been surprised that we did not discuss the size 
of the light in the previous step. As far as the subject is con-
cerned, you can use a light of whatever size that looks good. 
However, we recommend a medium-sized light because it is 
likely to work most effectively with the gobo in this step.
9.14 There is good differentiation 
between the side edges of the Bach 
bust and the background. However, 
the top of the head has largely 
vanished.

THE EXTREMES
279
The hardness of the shadow cast by the gobo is usually more 
critical than that of the subject. If the light is too small, we may 
not be able to get the shadow of the gobo soft enough to blend 
with the rest of the scene. A light that is too large may keep that 
shadow too soft to effectively shade the subject. Using a medium-
sized light from the beginning reserves the privilege of experi-
menting with the gobo later.
If you have not done this before, you may not know how large 
the gobo should be or how far it should be from the subject.  
The above factors vary with the subject, so we cannot give you 
formulas. We can, however, tell you how to decide for yourself. 
9.15 A gobo blocking light from the bust’s head takes care of the problem we saw in 
the previous picture. The top of the head is now clearly visible.

THE EXTREMES
280
Begin with a gobo about the size of the offending highlight. 
For ease of movement, hold it in your hand while experimenting. 
You can alter the size of the gobo and clamp it appropriately 
when you fine-tune the set-up later.
The closer the gobo is to the subject, the harder the shadow of 
the gobo becomes. Move the gobo closer to the subject, then 
farther away, to see this happen. The edge of the shadow of the 
gobo needs to blend nicely with the edge of the highlight we need 
to conceal.
The shadow of the gobo may become too light as you move  
it farther from the subject. If this happens, try a larger gobo. 
Conversely, if the shadow of the gobo blends well but is too dark, 
cut the gobo smaller.
Finally, when the gobo position is right for the primary sub-
ject, look at its effect on the background. The gobo will also cast 
a shadow there. On most subjects, the shadow the gobo casts on 
the background will blend nicely with that of the subject and will 
not be noticeable. The gobo shadow will be softer on the back-
ground than on the top of the subject because the background is 
farther away from the gobo than the subject is.
If the subject is tall enough, the gobo may produce no percep-
tible shadow on the background at all. There will be a problem, 
however, with very shallow subjects. In an extreme case, such as 
a white business card on a white table, it is impossible to put a 
shadow on the card without shading the background equally. In 
such situations, we must either use one of the other backgrounds 
discussed later in this chapter or resort to masking or retouching 
after the photograph is completed.

THE EXTREMES
281
Add Dimension
The white background on which the subject sits will provide a great 
deal of fill light. Unfortunately, this fill illumination will usually be 
too even to give the picture a good sense of dimension. Figure 9.15 
is technically acceptable because the subject is reasonably well 
defined, but the bland uniformity of the grays makes it boring.
If the subject is very much darker than the background, we 
need to add a reflector to one side. This adds both fill and dimen-
sion. More often, white-on-white subjects are only slightly darker 
than the background, and we dare not further brighten them with 
fill. Instead, we usually add a black card, again to one side. This 
blocks some of the light reflecting from the background and pro-
duces a shadowed side to the subject. 
9.16 A black card on the camera 
left reduced the fill reflected from the 
tabletop, creating a sense of depth. 

THE EXTREMES
282
Figure 9.16 was made with a black card on the camera left, 
just out of camera range. 
Using a Translucent White Background
If the shape of the subject is very flat, there is no way to shadow 
it without doing the same to the background on which it sits. One 
good solution to this problem is to use a translucent background 
that can be lit from behind. White acrylic is good for this purpose. 
As long as the subject is reasonably opaque, we can light the back-
ground to whatever brightness we please without affecting the 
subject. Figure 9.17 shows the lighting diagram.
Figure 9.18 applies this technique. The subject is well  
differentiated from the background. Notice, however, that the 
illumination under the subject has erased any hint of a ground 
shadow.
9.17 A translucent 
background can 
photograph whiter than a 
white subject.
Backgrounc 
Light 
u 
Backgrounc 
Light 
u 
Backgrounc 
Light 
u 
Backgrounc 
Light 
u 

THE EXTREMES
283
After looking at this picture, we might be inclined to avoid this 
set-up any time we want to preserve a shadow under the subject. 
Should we avoid it? Absolutely not. One of the single biggest 
advantages to this technique is that it allows us to control the 
apparent shadow of the subject completely independently of the 
lighting of the subject. Here’s how.
9.18 Light from under the flower eliminated any hint of a ground shadow in this print.

THE EXTREMES
284
Begin by turning off any lights we intend to use to photograph 
the subject. Next, set up a test light to produce a pleasing shadow. 
It doesn’t matter whether this light is good for the subject because 
we will not use this light to shoot the picture. 
We intend to use the light to trace a pattern (as we did for the 
family of angles in Chapter 6 and the reflector behind the glass of 
liquid in Chapter 8).
Next, slide any opaque or semi-opaque paper—which acts as 
a “custom” gobo—under the subject. (If you move the subject in 
the process, don’t worry. Critical positioning is unnecessary at this 
time.) Trace the shadow pattern on the paper with a pencil. Then 
remove the opaque paper and cut out the shadow pattern. The 
final step is to glue the shadow pattern under the translucent 
background, as shown in Figure 9.19.
9.19 Manufacturing a ground shadow.
Test Light la 
A 
Gob0 
Translucent 
Background 
Background 
Light 

THE EXTREMES
285
Now you can turn off the test light and light the subject in  
any manner you please. Figure 9.20 is the finished picture. The 
shadows under the blossom and stem were not cast by the light 
illuminating the subject. However, it certainly looks like it.
9.20 We put a “custom” gobo under the table to produce a shadow that looks as 
though it was cast by the flower.

THE EXTREMES
286
Using a Mirror Background
Probably the easiest “white” background to use is a mirror. A mir-
ror reflects almost nothing but direct reflections. These reflec-
tions are likely to be much brighter than the diffuse reflections 
from a white subject.
We begin the arrangement with a light large enough to fill the 
family of angles that produces direct reflections on the entire mir-
ror surface. (We determine where that family is exactly as we did 
with the flat metal in Chapter 6. You can look back at that section 
if you need a lighting diagram.) Because the light source must fill 
the family of angles defined by the entire background, this may 
turn out to be the largest light we will ever need for a flat subject.
The other special requirement for the light source is that it 
should show no distracting texture. Remember that the light itself 
will be visibly and sharply reflected in the mirror.
No additional steps were needed to produce Figure 9.21. 
A light so large usually produces shadows so soft that no other 
light is required for fill. Furthermore, this is one of the few tech-
niques in which the background can reflect much fill light under 
the subject.
An occasional drawback to this technique is the reflection of  
the subject. It may be confusing, depending on the crop and on the 
shape of the subject. If the subject is appropriate, try misting the 
tabletop with water to camouflage and break up that reflection.
The other possible complaint is the lack of ground shadow. 
There is no way to obtain one with this set-up. If you feel the 
shadow is necessary for your subject, then some other arrange-
ment will be better.

THE EXTREMES
287
In Any Case, Keep the Background Small
We have explained why direct reflections are usually not very 
important to white subjects. The few we see generally add a bit 
of dimension, but compared with the diffuse reflections, they 
tend to be too weak to be major players in the lighting event.
9.21 A mirror reflecting the light source is another background that is “whiter” than 
the “white” flower.

THE EXTREMES
288
The exception to this is direct reflection on the edge of the 
subject. Direct reflection in those areas is especially likely to make 
the subject disappear against the white background. To make mat-
ters worse, the white backgrounds in all of these arrangements are 
in exactly the position most likely to cause these reflections.
The most common solution is the same as the technique for 
keeping reflection off the edge of the glass in the bright-field 
method, as discussed in Chapter 7. Keep the background as small 
as possible. Sometimes our background is much larger than the 
area the camera sees, and we do not want to cut it. In those situ-
ations, we either confine the light to the image area or surround 
the image area with black cards.
Another danger of white-on-white situations is camera flare. 
Large white backgrounds scatter a lot of light inside the camera. 
This flare will probably be so uniform that you will not see it, even 
when the general loss of contrast is significant. However, if you 
stay in the habit of keeping the white background only as large as 
it needs to be, you will not need to worry about the flare.
BLACK-ON-BLACK
Mastering white-on-white is a good step forward in the process of 
mastering black-on-black. Many of the principles are similar but 
applied in reverse. We will point out some of these similarities, 
but we will emphasize the differences.
The major difference in exposure considerations is not record-
ing in the camera’s noise range. The major difference in lighting 
considerations is the increased visibility of direct reflection.

THE EXTREMES
289
Exposing Black-on-Black Scenes
The section on the characteristic curve pointed out the compres-
sion of gray steps in both the shadow and the highlight steps.  
This happens whenever we shoot a JPEG, and it happens when-
ever we convert an image from Raw to any other conventional 
format. We also saw why overexposure exaggerates this problem 
in white-on-white scenes and why underexposure exaggerates it 
in black-on-black scenes.
The problem is somewhat worse in the shadow steps as a 
result of digital noise. These random, minute speckles may be 
unnoticeable in a normal scene with no large dark areas but 
apparent in black-on-black. The severity of the problem depends 
on the quality of the camera, but for now at least we see it to some 
extent in all cameras. So we increase the exposure of a black- 
on-black scene to move it closer to the middle grays, even if we 
know we’re going to darken it back down later in postproduction.
The most extreme amount that we might use to modify the expo-
sure is similar to white-on-white, 2½ stops, except that, because of 
noise, we’re more likely to actually go to that extreme here. This 
means we expose that much more than a gray card reflection read-
ing or an incident reading tells us. Or we can accomplish about the 
same thing by simply pointing a reflection meter at the subject and 
exposing as it says, without any compensation.
This is a satisfactory shortcut to more sophisticated metering 
techniques if we remember the potential problems it can create. 
These, too, are similar to those for white-on-white subjects. This 
method will, of course, overexpose any secondary light-gray sub-
jects in the same scene. Therefore, it’s applicable only when the 
scene truly approximates black-on-black.

THE EXTREMES
290
Lighting Black-on-Black Scenes
Black-on-black scenes require special attention to exposure to 
record as much detail as possible. However, increasing the expo-
sure of a black-on-black scene works only if there are no secondary 
white subjects in danger of overexposure.
Even without any white subjects, increased exposure of a 
black-on-black scene sometimes does not look right, even if it 
records more detail than a normal exposure. Although good expo-
sure is essential, it is not enough. The manipulation of exposure 
and lighting in combination helps to record the scene well. Now 
we will look at the lighting principles and techniques.
Like “white-on-white,” “black-on-black” is an accurate descrip-
tion of a scene only when we acknowledge it to be an abbreviation 
for a longer description. A better description would be “a scene 
composed mostly of dark grays but with some blacks in it also.”
And like all scenes, lighting black-on-black scenes requires 
that we reveal depth, shape, and texture. Just as with white-on-
white scenes, the lighting of black-on-black scenes needs to move 
some of the exposure steps in the scene to the middle of the den-
sity scale. This is how we overcome the tendency for very light or 
very dark similar tones to become identical in a photograph.
White-on-white scenes produce a great deal of diffuse reflec-
tion; this is what makes them white. Conversely, black subjects 
are black because of their lack of diffuse reflection. This differ-
ence in diffuse reflection is important mainly because of what it 
implies about direct reflection.
The greatest single difference between lighting black-on-black 
and white-on-white scenes is that most black-on-black scenes 
allow us the full use of direct reflection. White subjects do not 
necessarily produce less direct reflection. Instead, whatever direct 

THE EXTREMES
291
reflection a white thing does produce is less noticeable because 
the diffuse reflection is so much brighter by comparison. 
By the same token, black things do not produce any more 
direct reflection. However, the direct reflection they do produce 
is more visible because those reflections have less competition 
from diffuse reflections.
Thus, the rule of thumb for lighting most black-on-black scenes 
is to capitalize on direct reflection whenever possible. If you have 
mastered lighting metal, you know that we usually do the same for 
those cases. (Direct reflection makes the metal bright. We rarely 
want to photograph it to appear dark.) Therefore, another good 
rule for black-on-black is to light it as if it were metal, regardless 
of the actual material.
Generally, this means finding the family of angles that pro-
duces direct reflection and filling that family of angles with a light 
source or sources. (Chapter 6 describes how to do this.) We will 
talk about specifics during the remainder of this chapter. 
Subject and Background
We can only photograph a scene composed of grays, not a truly 
black-on-black one. This means that either the subject or the 
background needs to be dark gray, not black, to keep the subject 
from disappearing.
Figure 9.22 is a black subject on a black background. We top lit 
the black crow. This lighting helped to separate it from the darker 
tones of the seamless background. This rendering of the subject 
keeps it distinct from the background and preserves its shape.
A black subject on a dark-gray background could maintain  
the same distinction. In either case, there is enough difference 
between the subject and the background to keep the subject from 

THE EXTREMES
292
9.22 The brain 
interprets a largely 
black subject, such as 
this crow, against a 
black background as a 
black-on-black scene.
9.23 However, in this 
picture our friend the 
crow looks black, and 
the background gray. 
The brain no longer 
accepts the scene as 
black-on-black.

THE EXTREMES
293
disappearing. However, illuminating the background causes addi-
tional problems. Figure 9.23 shows them.
Note that the background no longer looks black. We are  
psychologically willing to accept a dark-gray subject as black; 
however, we cannot accept a dark-gray background as black. This 
is almost always true for simple scenes that do not give the brain 
many other clues to decide how the original scene looked. The 
same is also true for many complex scenes. 
This correlates with the earlier principle that human brains 
consider most scenes to be white-on-white only when the back-
ground is pure, or nearly pure, white. It also suggests similar 
action to rectify it. 
If you just want to differentiate the subject from the back-
ground, keep either one of them black and make the other one 
gray. However, if you want to successfully represent “black-on-
black,” make sure the background is as black as possible.
You will see that this opinion influences almost every tech-
nique we are going to suggest. There is only one exception, using 
an opaque background, which we discuss next.
Using an Opaque Black Background
Putting a black subject on an opaque black background is usually 
one of the worst ways of creating a black-on-black scene. We dis-
cuss it first because it is often the most available solution. Most 
studio photographers have black seamless paper handy.
Figure 9.24 shows the problem. (The lighting is a large over-
head source like the one used for a box in Chapter 5.) The paper 
background directly under the subject receives as much illumina-
tion as the subject itself. There is no easy way to light the subject 
any brighter than the background. We know that we need to 

THE EXTREMES
294
render the subject dark gray, not black, to preserve detail. 
However, if the subject is not black, then the background under it 
cannot be black either.
We could use a spotlight to concentrate the light on the pri-
mary subject, thus keeping the background darker. Remember, 
however, we want to produce as much direct reflection on the 
subject as possible. This requires a large light source to fill the 
family of angles that does that. Using large lights generally means 
using no spotlights.
We could also hope that a lot of the reflection from the  
background is polarized direct reflection. Then we could use a 
polarizing filter on the camera lens to block that reflection and 
keep the background black. Sometimes this works, but in most of 
9.24 The black paper cannot be exposed dark enough to render it black if the 
flashlight is properly exposed.

THE EXTREMES
295
those scenes the direct reflection from the subject is also polar-
ized. Unfortunately, the polarizer is likely to darken the subject at 
least as much as it darkens the background.
The best solution is to find a background material that pro-
duces less diffuse reflection than the subject. Black velvet serves 
this purpose for most subjects. Figure 9.25 shows the earlier sub-
ject photographed with the same lighting and the same exposure 
but with black velvet replacing the paper.
There are two possible problems to the black velvet solution.  
A few subjects are so black that even the velvet will not be blacker 
than they are. A more common problem is that the edges of the 
black subject merge with their own shadow, and we see some of that 
in this picture. Whether the loss is acceptable is a judgment call and 
9.25 With the same exposure, the black velvet is much darker than the black paper 
used in Figure 9.24.

THE EXTREMES
296
will differ from one picture to another, but we’ll assume it’s unac-
ceptable here because we want to talk about how to deal with it.
Fill light does not help much. Remember that the subject does 
not produce significant diffuse reflection, and the only place from 
which a light can produce direct reflection on the edges of the 
subject is located within the image area.
Notice that this problem is similar to the one presented by  
the metal box shown in Chapter 6. We solved that problem with 
invisible light. Unfortunately, we cannot reflect very much light, 
invisible or not, from black velvet. That requires a glossy surface.
Using a Glossy Black Surface
In Figure 9.26 we substituted a black acrylic surface for the black 
velvet. Then we bounced a little invisible light from the glossy 
surface to fill in the sides of the subject. This works for almost any 
black subject. Or does it? 
Notice that the large light above the subject also fills the fam-
ily of angles that produces direct reflection on the glossy acrylic. 
Therefore, the background is no longer black. Because you saw 
that so quickly, you probably also remember that we said earlier 
that the background had to stay black.
We would like to talk our way out of this apparent discrepancy 
by pointing out that the brain needs to see a black background  
in simple black-on-black scenes. The subject, background, and 
reflection of the subject add up to a more complex scene. We 
maintain that the black reflection under the subject is a sufficient 
visual clue to tell the brain that the surface is black but glossy and 
reflecting light. So this is still a black-on-black scene!
This argument ought to convince most readers to let us get by 
with the gray background, but a few of you will be less charitable 

THE EXTREMES
297
and insist that we keep our original commitment. We will do so 
with the next solution.
Keeping the Subject Away from the Background
Suppose we place the subject far enough from the background 
that the lighting of the subject has no effect on the background. 
We can then light the subject any way we please and the back-
ground will remain black.
This is easy if we crop the bottom of the subject out of the 
picture. In Figure 9.27 the model hand is on a pedestal several 
feet from the background. This allows us to light the hand well 
with almost no light on the background. However, if the entire 
subject has to show, we have to support it with trickery.
9.26 A black acrylic background. Notice the sharply outlined reflection of the 
flashlight. Is the scene black-on-black?

THE EXTREMES
298
Amateurs assume professional photographers do this with 
string. Sometimes we do, but too often the string needs to be 
retouched. (String might occasionally escape undetected in a 
brief motion picture or video shot, but it is likely to be apparent 
in a high-quality still.) Retouching a black background is usually 
not difficult. However, doing no retouching at all is even better, 
so we will suggest some other ways.
In Chapter 6 we invisibly supported the metal box on a sheet 
of glass. Then we had to use a polarizing filter to remove the 
9.27 The subject is 
several feet from the 
background. This makes it 
easy to light without light 
falling on the background.

THE EXTREMES
299
polarized direct reflection from the glass surface. This did not 
affect the metal because direct reflection from metal is rarely 
polarized.
The glass table will not work for most black subjects. Much of 
the direct reflection from a black subject is likely to be polarized. 
If we use a polarizing filter to take the reflection off our table 
surface, we will probably turn the subject black too.
HISTOGRAMS
A chapter on black-on-black and white-on-white requires more 
talk about the technology of photography than any other. This 
makes it a good place to talk about the histogram. 
Many photographers first encountered the histogram in 
Adobe Photoshop (Image > Adjust > Levels gets you there). After 
learning to use histograms, many of us decided this was a much 
more straightforward method of image control than any technol-
ogy in traditional photography. Now digital cameras have brought 
the histogram into traditional photography. 
Many cameras display a histogram of the scene we are about 
to shoot and allow us to make Photoshop-like corrections before 
we shoot. None of the digital camera makers has yet implemented 
the histogram as elegantly as Adobe, but presumably they will get 
there.
Conceptually speaking, histograms are simple enough. They 
are nothing more than graphs—and quite simple ones at that. 
However, once you learn how to interpret them—how to decode 
the information they contain—histograms become extraordi-
narily useful tools. The truth is that in today’s digital world, an 
understanding of histograms is so important no photographer can 
afford to be without it.

THE EXTREMES
300
A histogram is made up of lines. Each line represents the number 
of pixels the image contains for each of the 256 values that constitute 
the gray tonal scale from the blackest black to the whitest white.
If we are shooting color, usually the case when we are shooting 
digitally, the basic histogram is a composite of three histograms: 
one each for red, green, and blue. If we need to make color 
adjustments, we can select the histogram for a single color and 
manipulate it alone.
For now, however, we will ignore that and assume we are 
shooting a black and white photograph as we do in most of the 
rest of this book. It’s just simpler to talk about and simpler to 
understand that way.
Look at Figure 9.28. It is a typical histogram, and it represents 
information about the photograph we saw earlier in Figure 9.27. 
Put another way, we can say that Figure 9.28 is a graph showing 
the number of pixels at each of the many different brightness 
levels that make up Figure 9.27.
The y-axis at the far left of the graph shows the number of 
pixels, and the x-axis along the bottom shows their brightness, or 
where they fit into the picture’s overall tonal range. 
9.28 The histogram shows how 
much of each grayscale or color 
value exists in the scene.

THE EXTREMES
301
The darkest pixels are on the histogram’s left side. The lightest 
are on the right, and the middle-gray tones are in the middle. 
When we put all this pixel information together, we end up with 
a graph that shows us what tonal values are present in a picture 
and how they are distributed throughout it.
To translate this into the language of grayscale values, we can 
say that the blackest of blacks at the histogram’s far left has a tonal 
value of 0. The whitest of whites has a tonal value of 255, and the 
middle gray has a tonal value of 128. For those familiar with the 
Zone system, the far left of a histogram corresponds to the “0” 
Zone. The middle gray corresponds to Zone V, and the far right 
corresponds to Zone X.
Earlier we told you there were 256 shades of gray from black 
to white. Now we tell you the highest number on the scale is only 
255. This is not a typo: the zero counts as a color also.
Because this is a histogram of a black-on-black scene, it shows 
no white or light grays. Notice that the lightest pixel in the scene 
is about 218 or 220, not 255. Similarly, a white-on-white scene 
would have very few pixels at the left side of the graph.
Preventing Problems
We can also look at this histogram and tell that the picture has 
probably been manipulated. Look at the gaps in the histogram at 
brightness levels of about 93, 110, and 124 and in several other 
places. Such gaps are rare in scenes we photograph and they usu-
ally indicate data lost through subsequent manipulation. In this 
case, the loss is minor. Overmanipulation, however, can lead to 
severe problems.

THE EXTREMES
302
Suppose we had decided that Figure 9.27 was too dark and 
then lightened it. Figure 9.29 is the result and Figure 9.30 is its 
histogram.
The new histogram has approximately 100 gaps. This is exactly 
why histograms are so useful. By glancing at a histogram, fairly 
inexperienced photographers can see problems they might other-
wise overlook and even the most experienced eyes get reassurance. 
Even if we decide that Figure 9.29 is a good picture, its histogram 
should cause us to worry.
9.29 The same picture 
we saw in Figure 9.27—
now substantially lighter.

THE EXTREMES
303
Overmanipulation
Many aspects of manipulating the histogram are identical in the 
camera and in postproduction, but the differences between the 
two are important. Although postproduction has nothing to do 
with lighting, we would be remiss in telling you as much as we  
do here and then leaving you to think we have told the whole 
story. We haven’t. There’s more, and it’s so important we ought to 
mention it even if it doesn’t relate directly to lighting.
The best way to avoid a “bad” histogram is to light the  
scene correctly and expose the picture correctly in the first place. 
Sometimes this is impossible. We can’t ask a rapidly evolving 
news event to wait for us to set up lights!
Overmanipulation is often caused by repeated adjustments to 
the image: we adjust the image, look at a proof, tweak a bit more, 
then run another proof. Please don’t do this!
In today’s digital world, images often move around from place 
to place and person to person. At each step along the way, their 
color range, saturation, hue, and all the other parameters may 
shift and change.
9.30 The histogram for  
Figure 9.29.

THE EXTREMES
304
It is not unusual that such “refining” produces an image that  
is hopelessly overmanipulated. Unfortunately, however, this con-
dition may not be immediately obvious when we look at the  
picture on almost any existing monitor. Fortunately, however, its 
histogram will warn us at a glance.
When we adjust a histogram, we spread certain grayscale  
values over a larger range. (That’s what causes those gaps in the 
“bad” histogram.) However, the tonal scale is limited, and when 
we expand part of the range we compress another part.
This compression means that grayscale values once repre-
sented as a wide range now occupy a narrower range. This means 
that two values that were originally different grays now become 
the same gray. Detail is lost. Is this all right? Very often, yes, if the 
sacrifice is more than compensated for by improvements in other 
parts of the image.
The more serious problem comes from repeated adjustment. 
The loss is cumulative, and if it happens in small steps, you may 
not even notice it.
One time-tested solution is to keep the original file, to make 
adjustments to a copy, and to keep notes about what the adjust-
ments were. Then if we are not happy with the result, delete the 
altered file and return to the original to readjust based on our 
notes. Recent versions of Photoshop allow keeping such notes in 
the file itself.
Another alternative is to use a Photoshop adjustment layer. 
This way, no adjustment is made to the original; instead, the 
adjustment layer represents the image on the monitor or in a 
printout as if the adjustments had been made. There is, therefore, 
no harm in returning to the adjustment layer and readjusting as 
many times as we please.

THE EXTREMES
305
CURVES
Because the digital realm forces us to talk about issues that do not 
strictly relate to lighting, we should also mention curves. We will 
not give detailed information here because existing digital cam-
eras display only histograms. (Some cameras may display curves, 
however, by the time you read this.) 
Curves are a postproduction tool that on the monitor look very 
much like the film characteristic curves we saw earlier in this chap-
ter. They look quite different from the histogram but represent 
much the same information (Figure 9.31). Their use differs from 
that of the histogram in two ways: (1) they do not tell us how much 
of each value is in the scene, and (2) whereas the histogram allows 
us to adjust three points on the scale (black, white, and the mid-
point), curves allow us to set and adjust as many points as we please. 
The ability to correct multiple points in the scale makes curves 
a much more powerful tool for correcting a picture and for  
9.31 The Curves 
dialog box.

THE EXTREMES
306
ruining it. As it does for levels, Photoshop allows making curves 
adjustments in a nondestructive layer.
We encourage beginner photographers to learn to control the 
histogram first and then, later, to move on to curves and use those 
nondestructive adjustment layers.
NEW PRINCIPLES
We have introduced very few new principles in this chapter. 
Instead, we have talked mostly about basic photography and basic 
lighting (plus a few bits of magic and chicanery).
White-on-white and black-on-black subjects do not require 
many special techniques. These subjects do, however, require the 
basics, applied meticulously. This may be true of photography in 
general. Professional development may not be so much a matter 
of learning new things but of learning and relearning the basics 
and combining them in more perceptive ways.
One of these basics is that light behaves like light, and no 
amount of our piety or wit can ever make it do otherwise. We like 
to say we control light, but often all we can really do is to cooper-
ate with what it wants to do. This is true of any light, in the studio 
or out of it.
You will hear more about this in the next chapter.

7KLVSDJHLQWHQWLRQDOO\OHIWEODQN

308

309
10
Traveling Light  
Up to this chapter, most of what we dealt with can be thought of 
as classic “studio” photography. This chapter, however, is differ-
ent. In it we venture outside. We leave the confines (and familiar 
comforts) of our studios and step forth to make pictures on loca-
tion. In other words we go portable.
Not all that many years ago, such outside or “location” shoots 
were more than likely to be real—as in excruciating—pains. Big 
lights, heavy power packs, generators, cords, stands, diffusers, 
reflectors, and other such gear all had to be carefully packed into 
heavy, crate-like, cases. 
Once on location, everything then had to be unpacked, used, 
repacked, and then carted back to from whence it came. Not only 
was such schlepping hard work, it took lots of time and often 
required extra manpower. Needless to say, this could, and often 
did, run costs way up—a fact that often left our clients far from 
delighted! 
Fortunately, however, things are very different now. Today, we 
often handle location assignments that only a few years ago would 
require us to transport multiple cases weighing hundreds of 

TRAVELING LIGHT
310
pounds, with nothing but a couple of small bags weighing but a 
fraction of that. And shoots that might require three or four assis-
tants are done with one or none. 
And why such a difference, you ask? Well, the answer is sim-
ple—shrinking. Today, many shoots can be made, and beautifully 
so, with amazingly small lighting equipment that produces big 
amounts of light.
THE LIGHTS WE USE
Today, most photographers use three basic kinds of lights when 
working on location. These are: heavy-duty “portable” strobes, 
lightweight “hot-shoe” flashes, and LED continuous light panels. 
While the first of these, portable strobes, are still sometimes 
used, many photographers—both professional and amateur—
have switched from them to the other two. For this reason, we 
will present but a cursory overview of portable strobes, and focus 
the rest of this chapter on the use of hot-shoe flashes and LED 
light panels.
Heavy-duty Portable Strobes
Battery-powered, these flash units are less powerful than their 
studio counterparts. They are, however, considerably lighter and 
thus much easier to carry. Averaging from 100 to 1,200 watt- 
seconds, the lower-wattage power packs can be carried by  
shoulder straps and attached to a flash head by a power cord.  
The higher-wattage units are most often set on the ground and 
connected to a flash head mounted on a light stand sturdy enough 
to support it.

TRAVELING LIGHT
311
“Hot-shoe” Flashes
Lightweight and powerful, today’s amazingly versatile hot-shoe 
flashes, or as they are sometimes called, “speedlights” or “speed-
lites,” offer a high degree of portability and more than enough light 
for many assignments. Not only can these units be used on camera 
(hence the common names, “hot-shoe” and “shoe mounted”) they 
can be, and often are, used off-camera (Figure 10.1). 
And making these flashes even more useful, hot-shoe flashes 
can be combined easily into powerful multi-flash “gangs,” or 
groups, and controlled by remote control. Additionally, many dif-
ferent diffusers, extenders, reflectors, grids, gels, and other such 
light modifiers, are readily available for hot-shoe flashes, most at 
reasonable prices. With the above in mind, it’s easy to understand 
why hot-shoe flashes have become the lights of choice for many 
of today’s top-flight shooters—particularly those who spend the 
bulk of their time on the road shuttling from location to location.
10.1 Their lightweight, relatively small 
size, and powerful output have made  
hot-shoe flashes “must have” gear for 
many photographers.

TRAVELING LIGHT
312
LED Panels
These bright little “bulbs” are one of the newest—and certainly 
one of the most revolutionary—entries into the world of photo-
graphic lighting. Panels are made up of from hundreds to thou-
sands of small, but amazingly bright, light-emitting diodes (Figure 
10.2). The smallest of these panels are battery powered and are 
light enough to attach to a camera’s hot-shoe. Other configura-
tions are larger and usually mounted on stands.
Because LED panels produce continuous light, they have 
become very popular with those still photographers who also shoot 
video. Another plus for LEDs is that they do not produce appre-
ciable amounts of heat. And finally, many of today’s LED units 
allow their users to “dial in” the color temperature they wish. This 
can save a good bit of work and time during postproduction.
10.2 LED panels are particularly 
useful for still photographers who also 
shoot video. As LED’s light output 
increases —as it surely will—more 
shooters are likely to adopt them.

TRAVELING LIGHT
313
GETTING THE EXPOSURE RIGHT
Now that we have introduced the lights most commonly used in 
location shooting, we’ll move on to some techniques that are 
helpful for getting the most out of them. We will begin with ways 
of determining the proper exposure. 
Studio photographers often work under such consistent condi-
tions that they can use the same exposure they did the day before 
without even thinking about it. However, determining the right 
exposure can get a good deal more complex when shooting on 
location. 
For example, ambient lighting often varies. The brightness 
from reflective walls and ceilings and similar surfaces differs from 
one location to another. The distance to those reflective surfaces 
depends on the size of the room in which one is working. Keeping 
such considerations in mind, there are three basic ways of deter-
mining the right exposure:
• Let your flash, in combination with your camera, do the figuring
• Use a meter
• Calculate it.
In this edition we have decided to concentrate on the first two 
and leave the third out. We came to this decision for two reasons. 
First, today’s digital cameras are the master providers of instant 
gratification. A moment after you press the shutter release, the 
result is staring at you from your camera’s LCD. That allows you 
see if you are using a correct exposure while you are shooting. 
Thus, if your shot looks on the dark side, you know it immediately 
and lighten it then and there. 
Secondly, today’s through-the-lens metering (or TTL) systems 
are extremely accurate. They almost always produce flash results 

TRAVELING LIGHT
314
that are at least acceptable. With a few test shots, it is then easy 
enough to arrive at exactly the exposure you want. 
If, however, you are interested in learning the calculations 
behind the exposure decisions made by today’s flash units, go to 
their instruction books. They usually include detailed information 
on how to calculate the correct flash exposure with their gear.
Letting Your Flash Do the Figuring
Simply put, today’s hot-shoe flashes fire short blasts of light at 
your subject. They then “read” the light reflected back from it, 
and adjust their output so as to produce proper exposures. 
Obviously this is an incredibly precise procedure, and several 
major manufacturers offer so-called “dedicated” flashes. These 
are specifically designed for use with their cameras. Such dedi-
cated units maximize the ability of their cameras and flashes to 
work together. We highly recommend using such dedicated units, 
even though they tend to be quite expensive.
One of the most important features dedicated flashes offer is the 
option to use through-the-lens metering. In addition to ease and 
speed of operation, an important advantage of such metering is that 
it takes into the account the environment where you are shooting. 
This can be very helpful. If, for example, you use one in a large 
gymnasium and then take it into the coaches’ office, it will auto-
matically make the proper exposure adjustment to compensate for 
the light reflected from the walls and ceiling of the smaller room. 
Using a Meter 
A number of excellent flash meters are available. Although the 
details of their operation vary somewhat, they all calculate the 

TRAVELING LIGHT
315
proper aperture at which the lens should be set for any given 
combination of ambient light and flash assuming you maintain 
the same shutter speed.
We use flash meters from time to time, and we like them. 
However, to our way of thinking, they have disadvantages that 
prevent us from depending on them entirely. And like any other 
sophisticated equipment, flash meters can break, or, more often, 
their battery can run out. 
Meters and LEDs
Because LED panels are continuous light sources, the light 
meters that are built into today’s digital cameras provide very 
accurate exposure readings in most shooting situations. Of course, 
if you prefer, you can also use any standard “stand-alone” light 
meter as you would with other light sources, such as sunlight or 
incandescent and fluorescent bulbs, when using LED lighting.
GETTING MORE LIGHT
When it comes to light, we photographers tend to be on the 
greedy side. We always seem to want more of it than we have. 
This is especially true of location assignments because mobility 
and the available electrical power often preclude carrying all the 
lighting gear we would like to have with us.
There are times, of course, when all that really counts is  
having enough light to get the picture. We have all been up 
against such situations. We know before we even release the 
shutter that the lighting will produce harsh, high-contrast results, 
but, due to situations beyond our control, such lighting is the best 
we can get.

TRAVELING LIGHT
316
Some time ago, for example, we were asked to photograph 
police officers working in a busy precinct. They worked at night 
and when things happened, they happened fast. There was no 
time to think the shot through, no time to put the flash in another 
spot. Because most of the action took place on the street, there 
were no ceilings or close-by walls from which to bounce a light. 
The workable alternative was to use a flash mounted on the 
camera.
When the action started, the only thing we had time to do was 
aim and shoot. Under such circumstances, it would have been 
foolish to worry about the “quality” of the light we were using. All 
that really counted was having enough of it to make a picture. 
The list of such situations could go on and on. Examples could 
be drawn from almost any kind of photography. But no matter 
how diverse such situations may be the common thread is that 
you must have the amount of light you need to make the picture 
you want.
The first thing you can do to meet this need is to use common 
sense: carry the brightest lights you can use practically. Less  
obvious is that this does not always mean just using as many  
watt-seconds as possible. For example, some flashes have more 
efficient reflectors than others and they increase light output 
without increasing weight.
Multiple, or “Ganged,” Flashes
One of the great things about today’s hot-shoe flashes is that they 
can be combined, or “ganged,” together to produce as much light 
as, but allow far more flexibility than, some “studio” strobes. We 
can use such “gangs” separately or in multiple-light set-ups much 
as you might use larger lights in a studio (Figure 10.3). 

TRAVELING LIGHT
317
Ganged together, hot-shoe flashes can be arranged individu-
ally and then programmed to fire either separately or together by 
using remote triggers. Once you invest the time in learning how 
to gang and control multiple flash units (and that means reading 
their instruction manuals), you may well wonder how you ever 
got along without them.
Ganged flashes also have another benefit—especially if you are 
in a situation in which you need to work quickly. They often 
recycle far faster than individual units—especially if you reduce 
their output. With some models, for example, a pair of flashes 
ganged together will recycle almost twice as fast as a single one. 
Such added recycling speed is a huge help when shooting fast-
moving fashion, sports, weddings, or similar dynamic assignments. 
10.3 Ganged flashes can be 
both versatile and extremely 
powerful light sources. This is 
especially true when the flashes 
are controlled by remote triggers.

TRAVELING LIGHT
318
Battery Packs
Battery packs are another handy tool for maximizing your flash—
for getting the longest battery with shortest recycle time. Often 
sized to fit into a pocket, and powered by four to eight standard 
AA batteries, battery packs extend greatly the number of flash 
shots you can fire off before having to change batteries. In addi-
tion, if you reduce your flash’s output and compensate with a 
higher ISO, they will also cut the recycling time between flashes 
markedly.
As is the case with most camera accessories, we strongly suggest 
that if you do buy a battery pack, you choose a dedicated unit made 
specifically for your flash. Such units are more expensive than 
“generic” models. However, you can be sure they provide maxi-
mum compatibility. This definitely was not the case with one of our 
friends. He bought a very powerful, non-dedicated battery pack, 
plugged it into his flash, and totally fried it the first shot he took. 
The batteries that you use in it also affect the efficiency of your 
flash. More powerful and longer-lasting batteries are continually 
being offered. At the time this is being written, we prefer shoot-
ing with rechargeable Nickel-Metal Hydride ones. However, by 
the time this edition is available, some fabulous new, and much 
better, battery may well be available. So “stay tuned.” 
Flash Extenders
Extenders can be very useful in those cases when your flash,  
by itself, does not provide the light you need to make the shot  
you want. Flash extenders use a Fresnel lens to focus the light 
rays from a flash into a powerful, far-reaching beam. Sports, bird, 
and other wildlife shooters often take advantage of this. With 

TRAVELING LIGHT
319
extenders in place it is possible for them to photograph subjects 
in dim light and at a considerably greater distance than it would 
be by using their flash alone.
GETTING BETTER-QUALITY LIGHT
The previous section offered some suggestions for obtaining 
enough light when using hot-shoe flashes. The other challenge 
common to such lighting is making it look good. Thus we will now 
move from quantity to quality—and how to get it.
The Problems
The light from hot-shoe flashes (and other sources) often suffers 
from three basic defects. It often is:
• too hard,
• too uneven,
• too unidirectional. 
Hot-shoe flashes are—unless we modify them with some form of 
diffuser—very small light sources. And as you know well, small 
lights produce hard-edged, often unattractive, shadows. 
Uneven lighting becomes a problem when one does not use 
enough light at a location to “cover,” or illuminate, it adequately. 
This frequently happens when one is forced to shoot using only 
one flash. 
Unidirectional, or “flat” frontal lighting, results from keeping 
our flash and camera too close together. Usually, this happens 
when we mount our flash on our camera’s hot-shoe. 
Fortunately, however, there are several relatively simple tech-
niques that help deal with each of these problems. We will  

TRAVELING LIGHT
320
continue by looking at one that is both simple and effective—take 
the flash off the camera.
Take It Off
That’s my first commandment for successful hot-shoe flash shoot-
ing. Whenever I can (and that’s most of the time!) I avoid  
shooting with my flash lodged in my camera’s hot-shoe. That’s 
because the blast of hard, frontal light that camera-mounted 
flashes often produce creates less than desirable images.
Of course, shooting with our flash attached to our camera may 
be the best we can do in some situations—such as breaking news 
stories or street shooting in a busy part of town. However, such 
images are definitely not the standard we want for the bulk of our 
work. Thus, the above commandment—“take it off.” 
And when we do—when we take our flash off our camera—we 
are free to move it around. We have true directionality. We can 
place our lights in positions that produce the kind of eye-catching 
lighting that will make us proud of our work.
During the years camera and flash manufacturers have both 
worked hard to make effective, fully featured off-camera flash 
photography a reality. And the good news is they have pretty well 
succeeded. The most practical, and to my mind, best ways of 
working with an off-camera flash are to connect it to your camera 
using either a good-quality sync cord or a radio-controlled wire-
less trigger. Both can give you great results. Unfortunately,  
however, both also have their drawbacks. 
Take sync cords first. You will notice in the paragraph above I 
put the words “good quality” in italics. I did that because they are 
important—really important! 
Never ever buy a bargain-priced, low-quality sync cord. With 

TRAVELING LIGHT
321
all the twisting, stretching, coiling, and uncoiling that sync cords 
go through, the cheapos die young, and usually when you are in 
the middle of a complex shoot. So just grin and bear it. Buy a 
good-quality cord and always keep a spare in your bag. 
Another thing to be sure of is that the cord you buy will sync your 
camera and flash together in such a way that you can use the gear’s 
through-the-lens (TTL) shooting mode. Like many of my friends, I 
like to shoot in the manual mode whenever I can, but when things 
really heat up, being able to work with all your camera’s and flash’s 
automatic features can save the day. So don’t take a chance. Check 
your cord. Connect your camera and flash together with it and make 
sure they do everything you want them to.
Moving on to wireless triggers, two words describe them best 
to me—“fabulous” and “if.” They are fabulous—if you need 
them, if you do not mind parting with a good bit of money, and if 
you do not mind spending hours with your nose buried in some 
of the most hopeless instruction manuals ever written.
There are lots of different wireless triggers on the market 
today. Some are quite inexpensive. Limited in what they can do, 
these gizmos do, however, provide the tools needed to get started 
with remote triggering. At the other end of the price range,  
several brands of high-end triggers provide you with the ability 
not only to fire your camera but also to adjust your flash remotely. 
Obviously, this can be hugely helpful. But it’s help that you will 
have to pay for both in cold cash and in the time you spend  
mastering your new gear.
BOUNCING FROM HARD TO SOFT
Portable flashes are, by their very nature, very small light sources, 
and small light sources—as we have already said—have one 

TRAVELING LIGHT
322
drawback. Unless their light is diffused in some way, they pro-
duce hard-edged, and frequently distracting and unattractive, 
shadows. There are, however, several very effective ways to attack 
this problem when using flash. 
One helpful approach is to “bounce” the light from your flash 
off a ceiling or a wall, as shown in Figure 10.4. They—instead of 
the flash itself—then become the effective light source. And 
because they, the ceiling or wall, act as a much larger light source, 
the shadows in your picture will be much softer and less noticeable.
Often used, bouncing—especially when it is done from a ceil-
ing—is a technique that’s in the arsenal of many an experienced 
photographer. And that is for one simple reason: Bouncing is a 
10.4 Bouncing a flash from a ceiling or wall enormously increases its effective size. 
This causes shadows to become much softer and lights the location more evenly.

TRAVELING LIGHT
323
strategy that can, and often does, work very well. It often softens 
light beautifully. 
You will notice, however, that I have called attention to the 
word “often” in the last sentence. And that’s because bouncing 
flash is very definitely an “often” and not an “always” tool. 
Bouncing often works well when:
• you are working inside and there is a ceiling, 
• when said ceiling is not too high, 
• when it is not dark wood, nor painted some awful color that is 
reflected back into the picture.
The Omni-Bounce—A Big Help For a Little Money
As was mentioned earlier, there are several light modifiers that 
can be a big help when using a hot-shoe flash. Figure 10.5 shows 
one that we use regularly. Inexpensive, small, and easy to stuff in 
a gear bag, it is the clip-on Omni-Bounce Flash Diffuser. 
The Omni-Bounce was designed to fill a room with a soft, 
wraparound light that produces soft shadows. And when used the 
way it is supposed to be, that’s exactly what it does very well.
Putting an Omni-Bounce to work is simplicity itself. All you do 
is snap it over your flash’s head, point that up at a 75-degree angle 
toward the ceiling and fire away. In addition, if you want to move 
up just a bit up on the complexity scale, you can add colored fil-
ters to the Omni-Bounce.
While using an Omni-Bounce—and bounce lighting in general—
will often make your pictures look much better, it does have some 
drawbacks. First, rarely if ever can you gain anything from using an 
Omni-Bounce outside. Obviously that’s because outside there are 
few, if any, suitable surfaces from which to bounce your flash. 

TRAVELING LIGHT
324
Secondly, there is the matter of efficiency. All diffusers, no 
matter what kind they are, do absorb some light. In addition, light 
rays from a flash have to travel farther when they are bounced off 
of something and onto a subject. Fortunately, however, we don’t 
find this to be an overly serious problem. In most cases, we have 
found that compensating by 2 or 3 stops gives a satisfactory expo-
sure. However, to be safe, always make some test shots before 
any shoot using any sort of diffuser.   
“Raccoon Eyes”
And then there are “raccoon eyes!” If the ceiling from which you  
are bouncing your flash is unusually high, or if your subject is very 
close to your camera, and if you have not fitted your flash with an 
Omni-Bounce, or some other diffuser, ceiling bounce may cause 
prominent dark shadows in your subject’s eye sockets (Figure 10.6). 
10.5 Omni-Bounce diffusers are easy 
to carry, attach, and use. That, and their 
time-tested effectiveness, make them a 
favorite among many experienced 
photographers.

TRAVELING LIGHT
325
Many photographers minimize this defect by using small 
bounce cards, such as the one we show in Figure 10.7. They help 
to prevent excessively dark and hard-edged shadows from form-
ing in your subject’s eye sockets. 
We usually attach bounce cards to our flashes by a rubber 
band or a bit of gaffer tape. In addition, some of the newer hot-
shoe flashes have a built-in bounce cards. This is a great help 
because they are always available when you want to use them. 
These cards reflect some of your flash’s light directly onto your 
subject’s face. The rest of the light is bounced from the ceiling. 
The combined result is a more evenly illuminated picture. Figure 
10.8 shows what a difference using a bounce card can make.
10.6 Without a bounce fill card, bouncing the strobe 
light from the ceiling can cause unflattering facial 
shadows.
10.7 A small bounce fill card on the flash will help to 
reduce the facial shadows caused by bouncing light 
from the ceiling.

TRAVELING LIGHT
326
One last note: If you ever find yourself having to shoot with a 
flash for which no bounce card is available—despair not. There is 
an easy, yet perfectly satisfactory, solution to your problem. 
Simply use your hand in the same way you would a bounce card 
to direct some of your flash’s light toward your subject. You will 
be amazed at how good the results can be.
FEATHERING YOUR LIGHT
“Feathering” a light—as we are using the term here—means aim-
ing it so that part of its beam illuminates a scene’s foreground and 
the rest illuminates its background or surroundings. Figure 10.9 
shows one, often useful, way in which we can use this technique.
10.8 Look at how much lighter 
and less objectionable the bounce 
fill card makes the shadows on our 
subject’s face.

TRAVELING LIGHT
327
However, before we continue, a word of caution is due. How 
well feathering works—or whether it will work at all—depends 
largely on how your flash head is constructed. For example, some 
heavy-duty portable strobes are made with large-diameter, circu-
lar reflectors. These usually scatter a great deal of light in direc-
tions other than toward your subject. Such units can almost 
always be feathered well.
On the other hand, hot-shoe flashes are made with small flash 
tubes surrounded by highly efficient focused reflectors. These 
direct most of the light toward the subject and waste very little in 
other directions. This type of beam is less suited to feathering. 
Fortunately, however, today there are many light-modifying 
accessories available for hot-shoe flashes. Some of these drastically 
10.9 Feathering a flash’s light. The success of this technique depends greatly on the 
design of the flash’s reflector. Some work well. Others do not.
e? 
Weaker 
Rays 
Brighter 
Rays 
) 

TRAVELING LIGHT
328
change the light distribution pattern of the flash head with which 
they are being used. 
What all this means is that the only reliable way to find out if 
your flash can be feathered is to try it out both without any and 
then with as many different modifiers as you can get your hands 
on. With a bit of luck you will discover a way to feather with your 
flash, no matter what kind it is. The preceding warning noted, let 
us now move on to what is actually involved in feathering.
Referring back to Figure 10.9, notice how the strongest rays of 
light are emitted from the center of the flash head. If the flash is 
held at the proper angle, these will illuminate the rear of the 
scene. 
The light rays that spill out of the sides of the reflector are far 
weaker. They illuminate things that are closer to the camera. 
With a little practice, it is fairly easy to learn how to hold the flash 
to achieve the desired degree of feathering.
FORCING THE SHADOW
There is still another lesson to learn from Figure 10.9. In it you 
will notice that the flash is being held as high as possible. This is 
done to position it so that any shadows its light casts will be as 
unobtrusive as possible. The higher the light is, the lower the 
shadow will be cast. Thus, if a subject is standing near a wall and 
the flash is held high, the shadow will fall where the camera  
cannot see it.
We made Figures 10.10 and 10.11 with the flash in two differ-
ent positions. In Figure 10.10, for example, we held the flash low, 
and off-center from the camera, at about camera height. Notice 
the very pronounced and distracting shadow on the wall this 
lighting produced.

TRAVELING LIGHT
329
Now look at Figure 10.11. This time we made the picture with 
the flash centered and above the camera. Notice how that posi-
tioning caused the shadow to disappear. 
LIGHTS OF DIFFERENT COLORS
Photographers working in a studio carefully control the color 
temperature of their light. All lights usually need to have the 
same color balance. Adding other lights with gels or lights of 
another type is a deliberate attempt to alter the color—not a 
whim or an accident.
Photographers working on location are not often able to con-
trol the color temperature of the light around them carefully. 
More often than not, existing light in the scene does not match any 
standardized photographic color balance. In addition, frequently 
it is impossible to get rid of the existing light.
10.10 Holding the flash too low produced a 
distracting shadow of our subject on the wall behind her.
10.11 Holding the flash high enough caused the 
shadow in the previous picture to disappear.

TRAVELING LIGHT
330
Even in an indoor location in which the existing light can be 
turned off, it may be essential to leave it on in order to have 
enough light to illuminate a large area. Whatever its cause, non-
standard color has unpredictable consequences if photographers 
do not anticipate problems and take steps to deal with them.
Why Is the Color of the Light Important?
Shooting a color image with light sources of different colors can 
be a serious problem. When we look at a scene, our brains com-
pensate for some fairly extreme differences in the color of light to 
interpret most scenes as lit by “white” light. There are, however, 
exceptions. 
If, for example, you are traveling at dusk, with your vision 
adjusted for dim daylight, you will probably see the lights of a 
distant house to be the orange color that they really are. If you 
stop at that house, however, and go in, your brain will immedi-
ately compensate, and you will see the light as white. To see  
why this happens, let’s consider the two standard light colors—
tungsten and daylight. 
Tungsten
This term applies to a scene lit by tungsten bulbs. These tend to be 
relatively orange. Set for tungsten, the camera’s white balance 
“brain” compensates for the orange. Used with tungsten lights, it 
produces picture colors that are close to natural. If, however, we 
were to use a tungsten white balance to shoot a picture illuminated 
by daylight, the resulting color would be nonstandard. Instead of 
looking “normal,” the entire scene would have a distinctly bluish cast.
To be accurate, we have to point out that household  
tungsten bulbs almost never produce light that is the color of 

TRAVELING LIGHT
331
photographic-standard tungsten. They are more amber when 
they are new and shift toward orange as they age. (Quartz-
halogen lights, used by photographers and theater producers, do 
have accurate tungsten color and keep that accurate color 
throughout the life of the bulb.)
Daylight 
Daylight white balance produces standard color in a scene that is 
illuminated by the sun. Obviously, sunlight is different colors at 
different times of day, in different places, and in different weather 
conditions. (Originally “standard daylight” was sunlight, at a spe-
cific time of day, at a specific time of year, at a specific location, 
and on a cloudless day, in Britain.) 
Such light is rich in blue, and that is why the sky on a clear day 
is blue. A daylight color balance compensates for this and gives 
the most accurate color reproduction used with either midday 
sunlight or flash. As you can imagine, if you were to use this bal-
ance setting with tungsten light, your pictures would look orange.
Nonstandard Light Sources
Photographers consider daylight and two slightly different colors of 
tungsten light to be standard. All of the others are nonstandard to 
us. Unfortunately, “nonstandard” does not mean “unusual” or 
“rare.” Other colored lights are quite common. We will use a few 
of them as examples. This does not approach a complete list of 
nonstandard sources, but they show the dangers well enough to 
keep you alert to the potential problem in any location assignment.
The frequent mix of lighting, especially in many modern offices, 
can present serious problems. Today’s digital cameras can compen-
sate for the color of almost any nonstandard light. Furthermore, 

TRAVELING LIGHT
332
they can compensate for almost any even mix of light colors. The 
difficulty comes from an uneven mix—part of the scene is lit by one 
light, while lights of different colors illuminate different areas. 
It’s expecting too much to want the camera to fix such prob-
lems. Instead, we have to think better than the camera does and 
fix them ourselves. To do this, we must be familiar with the light 
sources we call nonstandard. Thus, we present some of the most 
common below.
Fluorescent tubes are the nonstandard light source photographers 
encounter most frequently. The light produced by fluorescent tubes 
presents a special problem. In addition to being nonstandard, it 
comes in many different colors. Age can also change the color of 
fluorescent tubes.
Furthermore, people often replace burned-out tubes with 
new ones of another type. After a few years, a single large room 
may have many different types of tubes. And unfortunately, a 
white balance that is good for any one particular type may be  
a total disaster for the rest.
As a rule, the light from fluorescent tubes tends to have a 
green to yellow cast. However, in other cases they are daylight 
balanced. This wide variation can produce some particularly 
unpleasant nonstandard colors when either a tungsten or daylight 
setting is used. We humans, in particular, tend to look awful when 
we are pictured under uncompensated fluorescent lighting.
Nonstandard tungsten light is more common than either of 
the photographic standard tungsten color temperatures. Ordinary 
tungsten bulbs are significantly more amber than photographic 
bulbs, and they get more so as they grow older. The difference is 
enough to matter whenever color balance is critical.
Nonstandard daylight does not surprise most people. We all 
know that sunlight is much warmer in color at dawn and at dusk. 

TRAVELING LIGHT
333
What surprises most of us more is learning that daylight can be 
very nonstandard, even in the middle of a bright day.
When we use the term “daylight” we mean light that is made 
up of a combination of rays that come directly from the sun and 
those that come to us from the sky around it. 
Another common cause of nonstandard daylight is foliage. 
Subjects shaded from the direct sunlight may still be illuminated 
by the open sky. This problem is compounded when green leaves 
filter and reflect whatever sunlight reaches the subject. In extreme 
cases, the result looks more like fluorescent light than daylight.
Once again, the color error may not be significant in many 
cases. But regardless of that, we have to think about the impor-
tance of accurate color in each scene and decide whether the 
problem needs a remedy.
Light-emitting diodes, or LEDs, are relatively new to the 
everyday lighting scene. At the time we are preparing this edition 
they are increasing in popularity for both home and commercial 
lighting. Unfortunately for those of us who must take pictures 
illuminated by ambient LED lighting, there is quite a range  
in the color temperatures that some of them produce. For the 
present, at least, that means that experimentation is the only 
dependable path open. 
Take test pictures, and if they look too warm, or orange, try 
using a blue gel on your LED. If, on the other hand, your pictures 
look too cool, or blue, try using an amber filter. This approach 
may seem simplistic, but most of the time it yields a usable image.
At the time of this writing several companies are producing 
LED panels that offer adjustable color temperatures. We have 
yet to be completely satisfied by any of those we have seen. 
However, we see it as a sure bet that within a short time very 
accurate color adjustable units will be widely available. 

TRAVELING LIGHT
334
Do the Colors Mix?
There are two basic situations that we encounter when working 
with different colored light sources. The first happens when we 
use what we will call mixed color; the second occurs with unmixed 
color. As you will see shortly, mixed and unmixed color present 
different challenges, and they are handled in different ways.
Mixed color lighting is just what the name implies. It occurs 
when the rays of light with different color balances mix or blend 
together to produce a color balance different from that of any 
single light source.
Figure 10.12 shows how light sources can mix together in this 
way. Fluorescent tubes provide the ambient illumination. 
10.12 Mixed flash and fluorescent lighting produces generally even illumination. 
Fluorescent Lighting 
i i 

TRAVELING LIGHT
335
A flash is bounced from the ceiling. The bounced flash illumi-
nates the scene much as the fluorescent tubes do. The light rays 
from the flash tube mix with those produced by the fluorescent 
tube. The result is a fairly even illumination throughout the scene 
by light of a new and different color balance from either the flash 
or the fluorescent tubes alone.
Unmixed color is diagrammed in Figure 10.13. The scene is 
the same, but the flash is now directed at the subject, not the ceil-
ing. This is a common example of a scene that is illuminated  
differently by each of the two light sources. 
Notice in the diagram that most of the scene is lit by overhead 
fluorescent bulbs. However, the flash lights the foreground subject, 
10.13 Using the flash as shown here will produce a picture in which different parts of the 
scene are lit by very differently colored light. This can cause issues when shooting in color.
Fluorescent Lighting 
'------'" 
i i 
Ii 
i i 
i i 
Ii 

TRAVELING LIGHT
336
and his immediate surroundings. The result is two very differently 
colored areas in the picture. 
The foreground subject and his immediate surroundings will 
be illuminated by the relatively blue “daylight” from the electronic 
flash. The rest of the scene will, however, receive the yellow/green 
light from the overhead fluorescents. The problem is that the  
camera can be balanced for only one light source, whatever that 
may be.
Sometimes unmixed lighting can occur when we do not expect it. 
In Figure 10.14, the wall behind the subject is not a great deal farther 
from the flash than the subject himself. We might expect to have the 
same mix of flash and ambient light on everything in the picture.
10.14 Because the fluorescent light illuminates the shadow that the flash casts on 
the wall, it will tend to look yellowish-green in a color photograph.
Fluorescent Lighting 
II 
Ii 
II 
II 
i i 
Ii 

TRAVELING LIGHT
337
Notice, however, that the flash and the fluorescent light come 
from different directions. The flash casts a shadow on the wall, 
but the fluorescent light illuminates the shadow and makes it a 
putrid yellow/green.
The Remedies 
Both mixed and unmixed light situations, such as the ones we 
have discussed, are common, and thus it is important to be able 
to handle both of them. We use a slightly different remedy for 
each.
Correcting Mixed Colors
Mixed color situations are relatively easy to handle because the 
improper illumination that results from them is uniform through-
out the scene. In other words, the entire scene is lit by light that 
has the same color balance. The color balance of the whole pic-
ture will be wrong, but all the parts of the scene will be wrong in 
the same way. 
Correcting Color While Shooting. It is this uniformity of error 
that makes the problem so simple to correct. The camera will 
probably fix it for you. If it doesn’t, it will be close enough that 
using color correction filters on your flash to produce a slight 
warming or cooling of the image will fix it. The result will be a 
picture that has the correct color balance and in which colors 
within the scene reproduce in a standard, or realistic, way.
Correcting Color After the Picture Is Shot. Because any color 
balance problems are uniform when mixed colors are used, it is a 
simple matter to make any required color adjustments during post-
production. This gives you a useful safety margin should you fail to 
get the proper correction when you are shooting the picture. 

TRAVELING LIGHT
338
The resulting color balance may not be quite as good as a pic-
ture that was shot right to begin with. However, it is likely to be 
good enough that an experienced viewer cannot tell the differ-
ence without a side-by-side comparison of the two.
One caution is due, however. Beware of those scenes that 
include either a light source or the mirror reflection of one. Such 
extremely bright areas record in a picture as white highlights 
regardless of the color of the light producing them. These high-
lights may then take on the color of whatever correction you use 
to remedy the rest of the scene. 
You can deal with this problem, but to do so requires more 
than the straightforward color adjustment most people know how 
to do in their image editing software and is a topic too far from 
photographic lighting to be covered in this book. 
To make matters worse, only first-rate printers have prepress 
departments that can deal with such issues. The way to be sure  
to get it right is either to correct the color while shooting the pic-
ture or to compose it so that it does not contain any troublesome 
highlights.
Correcting Unmixed Colors 
No white balance adjustment can correct unmixed color. Whatever 
correction is right for one area is wrong for another. Trying  
a compromise white value between the two produces just that: a 
compromise in which nothing in the scene is quite right. 
You can, of course, try your hand at correcting the color bal-
ance locally using your image editing software—a little more blue 
here, more yellow there—but that’s tedious, and it’s best to avoid 
it when you can. 
The best way to cope with unmixed color sources is to filter 
the lights to match each other as closely as possible. The objective 

TRAVELING LIGHT
339
of this is to get all of the light sources to be a single color—but 
not necessarily the right color. Then let the camera adjust the 
overall scene to be right.
Thus, if we were faced with situations such as those in Figure 
10.13 or 10.14, we could cover our flash with a light-green color 
correction gel that approximately matches the color of the ambi-
ent fluorescent light. (Gels of this color are included in the many 
different color correction kits for flash available today.) 
Doing this would add enough green to make the light from 
your flash approximate the color of many overhead fluorescents. 
Then the entire scene would be lit by light of at least similar color. 
The camera could probably get the color close enough that what-
ever adjustment we need to make during postproduction is 
minor. 
Or even better, we can make a global color correction for  
the entire scene without individually retouching each item in the 
picture.
The filter we suggest here is a solution that frequently, but not 
always, works. The specific filtration varies with the scene. As was 
the case earlier, the only really satisfactory way of determining 
exactly what filter to use is by trial and error.
Filtering Daylight 
Remember that windows are light sources and that they can be 
filtered just like any other light source. Motion picture and video 
photographers do this routinely, but many still photographers 
tend to overlook the possibility.
Consider a scene in which a room is lit by tungsten photo-
graphic lights and by daylight coming through open doors or 
windows. A quick solution would be to use blue gels on the pho-
tographic lights to make them match the daylight. Then the scene 

TRAVELING LIGHT
340
could be shot at a daylight white balance. However, our lights are 
probably weaker than the sun, and we would prefer not to dim 
them even more with the light absorbed by the filter.
A better solution would be to put orange theatrical gels on  
the outside of the window and then shoot with a tungsten white 
balance. This accomplishes the same balancing of light colors but 
also better balances the intensity of the two sources. 
Correcting Errors in Reproduction
When the color is unmixed, this is the worst solution. Use it only 
as a last resort. No single correction will work for the entire 
scene. Local correction within the scene can be fun when you are 
learning image manipulation software, but it costs extra time, 
money, or both.
LIGHTS OF DIFFERENT DURATION
Photographers often use photographic light and existing light 
together so that one source is the main, or “key” light and the 
other is the fill. Measuring the relative brightness of the two is 
easy if both lights are turned on continuously. This is true, for 
example, if the two sources are sunlight or tungsten.
However, if the photographic light is flash instead of tungsten, 
comparing its brightness with the daylight is more difficult. The 
daylight is “on” continuously, but the flash lights for only a frac-
tion of a second. This makes it impossible to see the relationship 
between the two.
Figure 10.15 shows a common outdoor shooting situation in 
which flashes are useful. When we placed the model where we 
desired, she was backlit. As a result, a normal exposure was far too 
dark.

TRAVELING LIGHT
341
There were two ways in which we could have corrected this 
picture. One would have been to increase our exposure substan-
tially. This exposure correction would have lightened the subject, 
but it also might well have caused serious flare from the sunlight 
coming through the trees. Our other alternative would have been 
to use a flash to fill in the shadow. Figure 10.16 shows the result 
of such lighting.
The fill flash did just what we wanted it to do. It allowed us to 
produce a picture in which both the background and the subject 
are properly exposed. Given that the use of a fill flash was a good 
idea in this situation, the next question is how to calculate the 
proper exposure for the picture. 
How were we able to select an exposure that took into account 
both the ambient daylight present in the scene and our flash out-
put? Well, to answer that question we had to keep the following 
points in mind:
• In situations such as our example, the flash exposure will be 
determined almost exclusively by the aperture. That is because 
10.16 Using a fill flash produced an exposure in 
which both the subject and the background are 
properly exposed.
10.15 The composition we wanted called for our model 
to be backlit. However, with a normal exposure, this 
arrangement produced a picture that was far too dark.

TRAVELING LIGHT
342
the flash is too brief to be significantly affected by shutter 
speed.
• The ambient light exposure will, on the other hand, almost 
always be determined by the shutter speed.
Practically, this means that if you are trying to bag a picture of 
some crooked politician dashing to his limousine after being 
indicted for fraud, you will certainly let your camera determine 
the balance between your flash and the ambient light at the 
scene.
If, on the other hand, you are photographing a room interior 
for the cover of a major magazine, you will need to balance the 
ambient and artificial light carefully. To do this, you will decrease 
your shutter speed for more of the ambient light. Or you will 
increase the shutter speed for less ambient light.
If the above changes in the shutter speed make the image 
either too light or too dark you can then adjust the aperture to 
compensate and get the balance of both you desire.
DIFFERENT APPROACHES
Another way to deal with backlighting—in this case from the 
sun—is to use a reflector of some kind. Easily portable models 
are readily available in white, silver, and gold. Figure 10.17 shows 
how we positioned ours as our main light when we made the por-
trait in Figure 10.18. To make it we used a silver reflector and 
used the sun as both a backlight and hair light.
As we have said before, shooting outside has its problems. Not 
the least of which is finding the “right” light in which to work. 
This can be especially true on bright sunny days. The direct  

TRAVELING LIGHT
343
10.17 This diagram 
shows how we used the 
reflector card.
10.18 A single  
silver-colored reflector held 
in front of, and below, our 
models' heads provided the 
light needed to illuminate 
their backlit faces.
Reflector 
A 
. 
Reflector 

TRAVELING LIGHT
344
sunlight one confronts on them often produces unattractive, 
hard-edged shadows. Such harsh undiffused light has been the 
ruination of many outdoor portraits and other pictures. 
Fortunately, there is a way around this problem. It’s called 
“open shade.” Basically this technique involves placing our sub-
ject in the shade of something such as a tree, building or wall and, 
then using light that is reflected on them from their surroundings 
to illuminate them. We did exactly that to make Figures 10.19 
and 10.20.
10.19 The shade from  
a nearby building and  
light reflected from its 
surroundings provided the 
softly diffused light needed 
for this street portrait.

TRAVELING LIGHT
345
A nearby building provided the shade I needed to make the 
sort of picture I wanted of this schoolboy in Cuba. Light from the 
bright, tropical sun passed over it and flooded much of the area 
around the sidewalk on which the boy was walking. Some of this 
ambient “fill” reflected back onto him producing the softly dif-
fused light that illuminates this street portrait.
We used the same sort of softly diffused light to make this 
softly lit portrait of our model, Jade. This time a conveniently 
located tree blocked her from the sun’s direct rays, and she was 
10.20 Similar to Figure 
10.19, but this time we 
used a convenient tree to 
shade our model from the 
sun’s direct rays.

TRAVELING LIGHT
346
illuminated by light that was reflected upon her from her brightly 
sunlit surroundings. 
Unbalanced Light As a Plus—Not a Problem
Up to this point, we have treated unbalanced light colors as a problem. And often 
they are just that—but not always! As Figures 10.21 and 10.22 demonstrate, there 
are times when unbalanced light colors make a picture rather than break it. 
There are times, in other words, when using unbalanced light sources gives a 
picture that extra kick up that turns it into an eye-catcher. Take for example Figure 
10.21. A good part of its unique look comes from the fact that we used unbalanced 
light colors when we made it.
10.21 To achieve the “Cinema Noir” look we were after, we made use of the 
mixed-color ambient lights we found at our shooting location. Later, during 
postproduction, we refined the image until we were satisfied with it.

TRAVELING LIGHT
347
The urban street corner where we shot our friend Mark included a rich mixture of 
different colored light sources. The result of this mixing was that Mark’s skin color 
ended up looking like something you might expect to see in an antique “Grade B” 
horror movie.
Obviously, this was not the kind of look that would cut it for a Sports Illustrated 
Swimsuit Edition cover. That being said, however, it was just what was needed to 
produce the harsh and edgy “Cinema Noir” mien we were after for Mark’s portrait.
Now, moving on to Figure 10.22, we see an example of a bit more complex 
“positive” use of mixed color temperature lighting. It shows our friend Mike in his 
recording studio. To make this environmental portrait, we used three lights plus the 
incidental ambient light in his studio.
10.22 We combined the light given off by three portable strobes with the 
ambient light inherent to the studio in which we were working to make this 
image.

TRAVELING LIGHT
348
OTHER USEFUL GEAR
As we mentioned earlier, location photography is full of chal-
lenges. Not the least of these is deciding what gear you will need. 
Obviously, there is no “one answer” to this deceptively simple 
question. Your “must have” list for a two-week jaunt into the 
Arctic to make candid polar bear portraits (yes, I actually did that) 
is going to be very different than the list you draft for a day spent 
picturing folks at a nearby carnival or beach. 
However—as challenging as one location shoot may be, and as 
easy as another is—there are some basic lighting considerations 
that are pretty close to being universal. Thus, there are some sorts 
of gear, such as diffusers, filters, reflectors, and stands that prove 
useful when shooting in just about any location. 
For example, when shooting in “inside” locations such as 
offices and factories, we often end up using much the same gear 
that we do in our studios. In addition, we often take along such 
items as:
The main light was a small, but bright, soft box. This I placed several feet in front 
of Mike. Next, I put a kicker fitted with a grid spot to camera right. Finally, I placed a 
background light (also fitted with a grid spot) behind Mike, and aimed to produce a 
bright spot of light behind him.
When ready to shoot I hand-held my camera. Because my flash fired the instant 
I pressed my camera’s shutter release—and Mike was close to my main, and most 
powerful, light—he remained relatively sharp in the image. And that was directly 
what I wanted. However, the result was the dark-toned and somewhat blurred back-
ground that I wanted for this portrait, because:
• my camera’s shutter remained open for the full ¼th second exposure for which I 
set it, and,
• my hands shook a bit (which is what I wanted), and,
• the ambient light in the control room was quite bright.

TRAVELING LIGHT
349
• spare power supplies and tethering and sync cords for our com-
puter and lights;
• extra radio slaves;
• gels to cover windows and change existing light colors;
• spare batteries for any gear that uses them;
• clamps that can grasp such supports as doors and tabletops;
• gaffer tape;
• heavy-duty photo and computer travel cases;
• extension cords—high quality, heavy duty;
• basic tool kit;
• safety markers such as “caution” tapes and extension cord 
safety covers;
• small first aid kit;
• small step ladder;
• foldable carrying cart.
When working at outside locations, things can—and often do—
get complex. In addition to the above, you may well need such 
things as:
• weather software for your phone or laptop;
• cell, or if needed, satellite phone;
• “outdoor” filters such as polarizers and neutral density and color;
• clamps that can hold on to such “outdoor” supports as fence 
posts, tree branches, utility poles, and sign posts;
• flashlights;
• strong string or cord;
• “Leatherman,” or other tool and knife combination;
• substantial first aid kit;
• insect repellent and sun screen;
• foul weather gear, as appropriate to climate you will be in;
• plastic garbage bags and tarps to protect gear and sets;

TRAVELING LIGHT
350
• folding chairs;
• sun umbrellas;
• tent, or some other shelter, if location conditions merit it;
• water and snacks, warm or cold depending on conditions;
• coolers (and ice for them);
• packing/shipping cases, with locks—top quality;
• comfortable, high-quality footwear.

7KLVSDJHLQWHQWLRQDOO\OHIWEODQN

352

353
11
Setting Up Your First Studio 
Congratulations on having arrived at this, the final chapter of this 
edition. The very fact that you have, means that you had the for-
titude to plow through a great deal of material on both the nature 
of light and how it behaves. We sincerely hope that this informa-
tion helps you to produce the kind of pictures you want and, just 
as importantly, to enjoy doing so.
Now, let’s move on to the “meat” of this chapter. It is different 
from those that have gone before it. The science of light, and how 
it behaves is not its focus. Rather, this chapter centers on practi-
calities. Specifically, it covers some of the key considerations 
involved in setting up a basic, but functional, first studio.
There are, of course, many ways of getting started with such a 
venture. Depending on one’s interests and the girth of one’s wal-
let, photography studios can range from small and bare-boned to 
huge and state-of-the-art. For both instructional clarity and finan-
cial reality we have written this chapter to reflect the lower end 
of that scale. That’s to say our suggestions are geared toward the 
putting together of a modest studio adequate for making small- to 
medium-sized product and still life shots and three-quarter-size 
portraits. 

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
354
LIGHTS: AN EARLY ISSUE
What sort of lights should I buy? That’s one of the first questions 
to ask yourself when you start thinking about putting together 
your own studio. Your answers will, of course, depend largely on 
the kind of photography you want to do. 
Take, for example, Marilyn—a charming and truly talented 
photographer I met some years ago. Her passion was shooting 
still life pictures of colorful fruits and vegetables. I was totally 
amazed by the magnificent images she composed out of nothing 
more than a few artfully arranged tomatoes, strawberries, or 
some other salad in the raw.
What was also amazing was how simple the studio in which 
she turned out her masterpieces was. Marilyn worked on a small 
11.1 A relatively small, but well-equipped, home studio such as this one is more than 
adequate for most small- to medium-sized photographic assignments.

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
355
table in her minuscule kitchen pantry. Her entire lighting “set-
up” consisted of nothing more than a sun-filled window and a 
couple of old gooseneck office lamps. 
Her modifiers included some reflectors and gobos she made 
from foamboard, a couple of diffusers fashioned from an old 
shower curtain, and a small collection of colored gels. These she 
held in place in front of her lights with “stands” she cobbled 
together from clothes hangers, wooden dowels, tape, plastic cable 
ties, and binder clips.
By no stretch of the imagination could this set-up be called a 
“professional” studio. Yet, truth be known, it most certainly was 
one. It was one in which a gifted photographer using minimal 
gear produced truly wonderful pictures time and time again. 
Now, I tell this story to make a simple, yet important, point. The 
best way to begin planning your studio is to do what Marilyn  
did. And that was to ask herself a simple question—“What sort of 
pictures do I want to make?” 
By Marilyn’s account, she was indeed fortunate. She was 
blessed with being sure of the kind of photography she wanted to 
do from the earliest days of her career. As an art student she had 
been exposed to still life paintings done by the masters. And, as 
she put it, she was “blown away” by them. From then on she 
knew exactly the kind of images she wanted to make. 
And what about you? What sort of images do you want to 
make in your studio? Are you most interested, for example, in 
starting a portrait business? Or are you perhaps more interested 
in product, fine art, and scientific or some other photographic 
avenue? 
Once you have decided on at least a tentative answer to these 
and similar questions, you have taken a major step forward in 
planning your studio. Once you have decided what kind of  

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
356
pictures you want to start out by making, you can then begin sort-
ing out the gear you will need. And as you do that, one of the first 
kinds of gear you will probably consider are lights—and which 
ones you should get? And that’s what we shall turn to next.
GETTING YOUR LIGHTS RIGHT
What kind of lights should I buy? How many of them do I need? 
These are among the questions we hear most often from students 
and other beginning photographers who are thinking about set-
ting up their own studios. And, let’s face it, the answers to them 
are more than just a little important. 
Not only do decent-quality lights cost a good bit of money—if, 
from the very beginning, you have the correct lights you need to 
make the sort of pictures you want to make, your studio shooting 
days will be off to a good start
What Kind of Lights?
As we mentioned in previous chapters, there are several different 
kinds of lights from which to choose. And while it is true that 
“light is light,” different photographers often use very different 
ways of producing it. One of these is as a continuous, or “always 
on” beam. Another is as a flash—or momentary burst of light. The 
flashes we like range in size and power from small hot-shoe mod-
els to large, powerful studio strobes. The continuous lights we 
favor are produced by either fluorescent or LED sources. 
Both continuous light sources and flashes are available in 
prices ranging from modest to very expensive. In this chapter we 
will concentrate on mid-range, modestly priced lights. If, how-
ever, cost is no object to you, we suggest you consider equipping 

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
357
your studio with high-end studio strobes. These can provide con-
siderably more light than their less expensive cousins. 
Flash
Most of today’s hot-shoe flashes are powerful enough to be useful 
in many studio situations—especially when you “gang” several 
together. In addition, as we saw in the last chapter, there are a wide 
variety of modifiers available for them. However, on the negative 
side, high-quality hot-shoe flashes are expensive. In addition, they 
do not have modeling lights—a feature we find very helpful. 
For these reasons—unless you are planning to do a good bit of 
shooting outside of your studio—we suggest spending a bit more 
and buying medium-price-range studio lights instead. This is 
especially true if you intend to make pictures of relatively large 
subjects, such as full-bodied portraits or product shots of larger 
items such as furniture or appliances. Such flashes produce more 
than enough light for that sort of shooting. 
Several brands are available, and all provide a good bit of light 
at a relatively low cost. Called “monolights,” these units are com-
pact, relatively lightweight, and easy to set up and use. Plugged 
directly into standard wall sockets, each has a battery, flash tube, 
modeling light and controls built into its head (Figure 11.2). And, 
as is the case with hot-shoe flash, monolights can be remotely 
controlled by radio triggers. Some models even come with built-
in radio transceivers.
As is the case with all photographic gear, we suggest you 
research any lights you are considering before making any pur-
chase decisions. And while we are on that subject, we cannot stress 
too strongly how useful the web is when one is in the market for 
any photographic gear. User reviews, manufacturer write ups, and 
technical information, and more are all there—all available to help 

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
358
us photographers make informed product decisions. And equally 
useful, the web is also well stocked with “tutorials” showing differ-
ent ways to use a wide range of lights and the various modifiers 
that work well with them.
Continuous Lights
If you plan to shoot video, or just simply prefer working with 
continuous light, we suggest one of two choices—fluorescent 
lights or LEDs. Because, other than in small arrays, LEDs are 
quite expensive, we recommend that unless you can get by using 
small LED arrays, you choose fluorescent lights. Several types are 
available, ranging in price from moderate to expensive. And once 
again, a little time spent searching the web will go a long way 
toward helping you to buy the lights that best fit both your needs 
and your budget.
11.2 Monolights, such as the 
one shown here with its reflector 
removed, are a reasonably 
priced and extremely serviceable 
lighting choice for many studios. 

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
359
How Many Lights?
Once you have some idea of the sort of lights to buy, you can 
move on from quality to quantity. Looking back at our own expe-
rience, we suggest that you should start off with at least two lights, 
and if your wallet can stand the extra strain, three. 
While it is true that you can make great pictures with just one 
light, two gives you much more flexibility in lighting your sub-
jects. In addition, when you have three lights at your disposal, you 
have the option of using two of them to illuminate your subject, 
and the third to light some other part of your scene, such as its 
background. 
Later, you may well want to add even more lights to your  
arsenal. We have, for example, acquaintances that regularly use 
six, eight, or even more lights when shooting. Obviously, equip-
ping a studio for such large-scale mega-light photography becomes 
very expensive very quickly. 
Fortunately, however, in many parts of the country you don’t 
have to go broke just to try your hand with this sort of high-
intensity lighting. That’s because well-stocked lighting equipment 
rental companies now serve a surprisingly large number of areas. 
And if you are really fortunate, you may even find fully equipped 
rental studios that are only too glad to rent you a place where you 
can experiment with multiple light set-ups at reasonable prices. 
LIGHT STANDS
It’s hard to overestimate the importance of having sturdy, good-
quality light stands. Nothing is more disconcerting, or potentially 
more expensive, than having your shoot interrupted as a poor-
quality light stand falls over and smashes into your subject—be it 
human, or your best client’s prized product prototype. 

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
360
With that in mind, it’s a good idea to always buy the best-
quality, most robust, light stands your budget allows. Not only are 
such stands less likely to fall over at embarrassing moments; they 
also tend to stand the test of time well. For example, I have used 
my favorite set of stands regularly for the last 25 years, and they 
still work just as well as they did the day I bought them.
At the very minimum, any stand you are considering should be 
able to support heavier lights than you usually use at heights 
higher than you normally use them. You may also want to buy 
stands with built-in wheels. These make it easy to move them 
around even when they are holding up lights and heavy accesso-
ries such as booms and counterweights.
It’s also important to check the construction details of any 
stand you’re considering. Do its legs spread wide enough apart to 
provide stability? Do the setscrews loosen easily when you want 
them to, and, on the other hand, do they stay set firmly in place 
once you have tightened them? Does it appear that any of the 
stand’s parts are made of overly thin metal or easily breakable 
plastic? Is a tough, durable case available for the stand you’re 
considering? One or more “No” answers to the above, and you 
should probably consider a different make of stand.
Finally, it may well pay you to consider buying one of the fully 
integrated, modular lighting systems now available from several 
manufacturers. A major advantage to using stands that are included 
in such systems is that all the various components that are part of 
them can be easily fitted together into a wide variety of different 
configurations. Such compatibility can make your job both quicker 
and easier when you have to set up for a complex shot.

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
361
Booms
A lighting boom is an important accessory—and one we suggest 
you buy in your first round of purchases. When shooting, it is 
frequently necessary to suspend things such as lights, diffusers, 
and gobos above our subjects, and using booms is often the best 
way of doing that. 
Often attached to light stands, some boom assemblies are sold 
separately. Others are offered as part of boom and light stand kits. 
Such kits will often cost you a good deal less than if you buy 
booms and stands separately.
LIGHT MODIFIERS—WHICH DO I NEED?
No matter what lights you buy, nearly always it’s the modifiers  
you pick for them that make them useful—that create the  
11.3 Here we see the set-up we used to shoot this edition’s cover. Notice we used  
a grid on one side of our “still life” subject and black aluminum foil on the other to 
produce the lighting effect we were after. We also positioned a gobo to the rear of  
our set-up to prevent extraneous light from spilling on it.

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
362
particular “light” you want for a given shot. With that in mind, do 
not be surprised if you end up spending as much, or even more, 
on modifiers than you do on your lights. Many photographers, 
including me, have done that.
Diffusers
As we seen throughout previous chapters, diffusing the lights 
they are using is one of the most important steps that photogra-
phers take to achieve the results they want. And thus it follows 
that diffusers are one of the most widely used light modifiers. 
Being as important as they are, it should be no surprise that 
diffusers come in many different sizes, shapes, and types. Which 
will be most useful to you, in the sort of photography that you 
wish to do, only you can tell. Thus, we will confine our comments 
on diffusers to a few general recommendations.
First, there’s no doubt that size is important when it comes to 
softening any light. With that in mind, we suggest that the first 
diffusers you buy, be they umbrellas, panels, or soft boxes, be 
large. “And just how large?” you ask. Well, there’s no one, always 
correct, answer to that question. Generally speaking, however, we 
suggest you buy at least one soft box, or other sort of diffuser, that 
is somewhat larger than the subjects you intend to light with it. 
For example, if you plan to take pictures of still life set-ups 
that are 2 feet or so across in each direction, we suggest that you 
use diffusers that are at least 3 feet across in each direction. At 
that size, they should provide plenty of the sort of soft light that 
“wraps around” subjects of that size nicely.
What sort of diffusers should one buy when starting out? 
That’s another question we are frequently asked. And, once again, 
there’s no single “right” or “wrong” answer. Personally, I prefer to 

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
363
use soft boxes whenever I can. But I gladly use umbrellas when 
they’re the only diffusers readily available. I also frequently use 
diffusion panels, both large and small. Some of these I bought, 
others I built—something that’s surprisingly easy to do.
And finally, quality counts—as in really counts! When I started 
out in photography, my wallet was more than just a bit thin. Truth 
be, it was flat. And that meant I had no option but to buy the 
cheapest diffusers I could find. And that’s what I did. And, at least 
for a time, they worked pretty well. 
But then, all too soon, my bargain-basement umbrellas and 
soft boxes started to fall apart—really fall apart, and no amount of 
gaffer tape and string could hold them together. Fortunately, at 
about the same time I sold some pictures to a buyer willing to pay 
way too much for them. Using this unexpected wallet enhancer,  
I rushed to the nearest camera store and invested in some top-
quality diffusers. It was a good move. Some of them, I am happy 
to say, are still in use today—a quarter of a century later.  
Reflectors
Two words describe reflectors—“simple” and “useful.” Everything 
from mirrors to pieces of foamboard, as well as frames covered 
with different colored reflective fabrics are used for studio and 
location shoots. We frequently use all of the above.
Several companies offer reflectors that fold into convenient-
sized carrying cases. In addition, combination reflector/diffuser 
models are also available. We know photographers who find these 
useful. On the negative side, however, well-made models tend to 
be rather expensive. 
If you’re planning to shoot both in your studio and at outdoor 
locations, we suggest that any reflectors you buy are equipped 

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
364
with sturdy handgrips. These are a feature that will make your 
reflector far easier to handle should you be on location when a 
breeze comes up.
Snoots and Grids
Both snoots and grids are useful when you need to focus a spot of 
light on a particular part of a scene. Most manufacturers offer 
both as accessories for the lights they make.
A snoot is nothing more, basically, than a tube that fits on the 
front of a light. It allows only the center part of the light’s beam 
to reach the subject at which it is aimed. Relatively inexpensive, 
snoots come in different lengths and diameters. Which one you 
select depends on how large you want the spot of light you’re 
aiming with it to be. 
It is also easy enough to make your own snoots from heavy-duty 
black aluminum foil. Such foil is available from many theatrical 
and photographic supply houses.
Grids, or, as they are sometimes called, “honeycombs,” are 
metal or plastic screens with honeycomb-shaped openings. Like 
snoots, they are attached to the front of lights. The result is 
largely similar to that of snoots. However, grids produce a bright 
central area surrounded by soft, feathered edges. These gradually 
fall away into increasingly darker tones.
Gobos and Flags 
These items include anything that’s opaque and that’s placed 
between a light source and a subject, background, or lens. These 
“light blockers” range from small, hand-held, black cards to 8 3 10 
foot, or larger, panels. Gobos and flags are easy to make, and we 

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
365
often construct our own out of foamboard or any other lightweight 
opaque material, such as artist’s board.
Foldable fabric-covered light blockers are also available in dif-
ferent sizes. Some of these are supplied with additional fabric 
diffusion panels.
BACKGROUNDS
The background is an important element of every picture. And 
with that in mind, it is important to give some thought to the kind 
you want for your studio. Seamless paper is perhaps the most 
versatile and widely used photographic background material.
Relatively inexpensive, seamless (as it is often called) is avail-
able in many different colors as well as in black, white, and gray. 
One of the easiest ways to use seamless backgrounds is to sus-
pend them from a crossbar running between two heavy-duty 
stands.
Any number of painted and printed designs, patterns, and 
scenes are also available for use as backgrounds. Some are designed 
for use as self-supporting “stand-alone” panels. Others are hung 
from the same sort of background stands used to hold seamless 
paper. 
In addition, we also use backgrounds that we have made from 
plywood sheets painted the way we wanted. And recently we shot 
in a studio where areas of repurposed rough lumber, corrugated 
metal (see Figure 11.4), and faux bricks had been attached to its 
walls for use as backgrounds.

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
366
COMPUTERS AND ASSOCIATED GEAR
If you are like most photographers we know, you will want to 
equip your studio with one or more computers and monitors—
along with all the various cords, cables, and other devices that can 
be used to allow them to “speak” to each other.
There are many ways that the above can be configured. We 
prefer to tether the camera we are using to a nearby laptop. This 
allows us to quickly and easily check our shots while we are mak-
ing them. We also use a more powerful desk model at our studio 
11.4 A sheet of brightly lit 
corrugated metal attached to the 
studio wall provided an attractive 
background. You saw the result in 
Figure 8.34, a similar shot.

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
367
“editing station.” This unit is linked to the several high-density 
external drives we need to process and store our final images.
In addition, some photographers we know have also found it 
helpful to mount large flat screen monitors on their studio walls. 
This makes it easy for clients, art directors, or other guests to 
watch a shoot while it is going on. To our taste such involvement 
breeds a little too much “group-think.” However, you may well 
find that it works well for you and your clients. 
MISCELLANEOUS EQUIPMENT
In addition to the equipment we have already mentioned, many 
kinds of miscellaneous gear are also part of any well-equipped 
studio. This includes such things as:
• basic tool box with assorted tools and hardware;
• black curtains to block out window light;
• chairs, sofas, desks, and other such “office” furniture;
• clamps of different sorts and sizes;
• coffee maker and mini-fridge;
• extension cords, heavy duty;
• fans to blow artificial smoke and hair around;
• filters, polarizing, neutral density, and close-up;
• fire extinguishers, some certified for electrical fires;
• first aid kits;
• flashlights;
• gaffer tape and cable ties to hold things together;
• gels, colored and color correction;
• sand bags to keep stands from falling over;
• step ladder;
• storage cabinets, with good locks;
• tabletops and saw horses for product shots.

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
368
WHAT SORT OF SPACE?
When it comes to deciding how much and what kind of space one 
needs for a photographic studio, once again, there is no fixed 
answer. One of my co-authors built his first studio in an aban-
doned movie theater. A successful wedding photographer I know 
uses the living room of his house as his studio. I built my first 
studio in an abandoned auto-repair garage. Obviously, each of 
these spaces was different, but each works well for us.
One of the first things to consider when you’re selecting a 
space for your studio is its size. Based on our own experiences, we 
suggest that you find a space that is at least 600 to 750 feet square. 
Preferably, its ceiling should be 12 feet or higher. And if you plan 
11.5 In this picture we show a typical medium-sized studio. Notice how its high 
ceiling allowed us to position our out lights above and some distance from our 
model—something we needed to do to achieve the particular “look” we were after.

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
369
to photograph larger objects such as furniture, motorcycles, or 
groups of people, you will need more—sometimes much more—
space.
And no matter what space you’re considering, be sure that the 
electrical wiring in it is adequate, or can be made so for a reason-
able price. In particular, be sure that any space you are consider-
ing has enough electrical outlets, and that they are all properly 
wired. Improperly wired plugs and metal light stands can prove a 
lethal combination. So, unless you are well versed in such mat-
ters, hire a qualified electrician to advise you. After all, the last 
thing you need when you’re starting out is to be hit with a bill for 
expensive electrical repairs that you never dreamed you were 
going to need!
And then there are burglars. Photographic studios—with all 
the expensive gear they so often contain—have always been a 
target of choice for them. So be sure that all doors and windows 
to any space you are considering already are, or can be, suffi-
ciently “hardened.” And along those same lines, it’s a good idea to 
have a burglar alarm system installed before you move in.
Theft insurance, both the “on” and “off” premises kinds, is 
important as well. In addition, if you plan to have clients or mod-
els visit your studio, be sure to add liability coverage to your 
policy. The last thing you want is anybody suing you because your 
heaviest light fell over and left a nasty scar on his or her head!
Now, as a change of pace, please go back and look at the  
picture with which we opened this chapter. Then read the box 
entitled “How We Used the Set-up that Opened this Chapter.”

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
370
How We Used the Set-up that Opened this Chapter
Here is a picture (Figure 11.6) from a series we shot using the lighting set-up that 
opens this chapter. It was composed of three lights.
Our first and main light was a large soft box. We further softened it by placing a 
large diffusion screen in front of it, and closer to the flowers we were shooting. Next, 
we put a strobe, which we had first set to a very low power, behind our background, 
and bounced its light off the ceiling. Our third light was a grid spot. We put it behind 
the diffusion screen, and aimed it so that its concentrated beam fell, for the most 
part, on the flowers.
11.6 A floral still life made using a technique similar to one we used to shoot 
some of the portraits in Chapter 8. 

SETTING UP YOUR FIRST STUDIO
371
And with the above we come to the end of this edition. It is our 
most sincere wish that whatever you have learned from it proves 
useful to you, and that your adventures in the wonderful world  
of light, science, and magic prove as rewarding—and as much 
fun—as ours have been. 
Finally, we thank you very much for your interest in this book, 
and we wish you the very best of luck with all your photographic 
endeavors.
As you may well have noted by now, the above approach to lighting is a variation 
of the unfocused spot technique we demonstrated in Chapter 8, Figures 8.36, 8.37, 
and 8.38 A and B. And as such, it clearly shows that techniques that work well with 
one sort of subject may well be useful with other very different ones.

372
Appendix: Reliable Suppliers 
My father had a pet declaration: “A man’s most important asset is 
his Rolodex.” Well, most of today’s photographers are far too 
young to even know what a Rolodex was—much less how useful 
these wonderful little desk-top revolving files were. However, to 
my father’s generation, Rolodexes were the much-depended-
upon repository of all “where to get what” information. 
Well, the glory days of the Rolodex are now long gone. 
However, the need for photographers to know which suppliers 
they can rely on to offer good service and fair prices has not. And 
that is where the following brief list comes into play. It is a list of 
dealers that, over many years, we have found both to be reliable 
and to charge reasonable prices. 
You will notice that we have included no “local” camera stores. 
The reason is simple. Due to the savage forces now driving our 
economy, such businesses are fast becoming as hard to find as the 
oft-cited dodo bird. 
The following three dealers are “800-pound gorillas” in the 
photography business. When you need fast and reliable delivery 
along with reasonable prices, they are an excellent place to start:
• B&H Photo (www.bhphotovideo.com)
• Adorama.com (www.adorama.com)
• Amazon.com (www.Amazon.com/photo)
Not as big or fully stocked as the previous three, the next two  
dealers also are good choices. In addition to their reliability and 

373
APPENDIX
prices, we have also been impressed by how knowledgeable and 
helpful their staff are:
• Hunt’s Photo and Video (www.huntsphotoandvideo.com) 
• Midwest Photo Exchange (www.mpex.com)
When we are looking to buy or sell used camera gear, KEH 
Camera is the place we contact first. And we have always been 
satisfied with the results. 
• KEH Camera (www.keh.com)

374
Index
References to figures are indicated in italics. 
18% gray cards 144–145, 147, 186–187, 
192, 272, 288
45-degree rule 74–75, 74
A
absorption 40–41, 41
acrylic: glossy black surface 167, 168, 
169, 296, 297; translucent white 
background 282; transparent acrylic 
table 200
adjustment layers 304, 306
Adobe: Digital Negative (DNG) format 
268; Photoshop 13, 299, 304, 306
Adorama 372
Amazon (photo) 372
angle of light: and copy work 68–73,  
69, 70, 71, 72; and “standard” copy 
set-up 73–75, 73, 74; see also family  
of angles
B
B&H Photo 372
background lights, portrait lighting  
234–236, 235, 254, 254
backgrounds: adding depth to 116, 117, 
118; and glass 199, 199; and glossy 
boxes 124–125; and metal boxes  
163–167, 164–166, 167, 168; in studio 
365–366, 366; see also black-on-black; 
white-on-white
backlighting 342–344, 343; open shade 
344–346, 344–345
battery packs 318
beauty dishes 253
“beauty” lighting 245–246
black magic, and metal 175–176
black-on-black 270; and exposure  
288–289; and lighting 288 
(background and subject 291, 292, 
293; direct reflections 290–291;  
with glossy black surface 296–297, 
297; keeping subject away from 
background 297–299, 298; with 
opaque black background 293–296, 
294–295)
black velvet 41, 295–296, 295
booms 361
bounce cards 325–326, 325–326
bouncing technique 321–323, 322; 
Omni-Bounce Flash Diffuser  
323–324, 324; “raccoon eyes”  
324–326, 325–326
bright-field lighting: combined with 
dark-field lighting 193–194, 194; 
family of angles 182–183, 183; one 
possible technique 183–188, 184
brightness: of light source 26–27; of 
recorded image 258; see also 
grayscales
brightness key (portrait lighting)  
242–247, 243–244, 246
broad lighting 225–228, 226, 228
“burn” 269
C
camera flare 117, 118–120, 118–119, 
203–204, 203, 238, 288
cameras: choice of 12; keeping the light 
off the camera 171; position of and  
flat metal 135, 135, 156; position of 
and perspective distortion 102–103; 
reflection of in glass 204, 205; 
reflection of in round metal 170–174, 
170, 172–173; view cameras 157;  
see also digital cameras; lenses
camouflage, and round metal 171
characteristic curves: bad curves  
261–263, 262 (with overexposure  
263–265, 263–265; with 
underexposure 265–267, 266–267); 
exposure and grain 268–269;  
perfect curves 258–261, 259–260;  
Raw file format 267–268; see also 
black-on-black; white-on-white
“Cinema Noir” look 346–347, 346
“classic” portrait lighting 215
clues: depth clues 97–98, 99–100, 100; 
visual clues, interpreting of 95–97, 
96–97
color balanced film 28

INDEX
375
colored gels (or filters) 234–235,  
254–255, 254–255, 323, 337, 339–340
color of liquids 208–210, 208–210
color of the light: basics 24, 25, 26, 
27–28; different colors 329–330; 
filtering daylight 339–340; mixed 
colors 334–335, 334, 337–338; 
nonstandard light sources 331–333; 
standard light sources 330–331; 
unbalanced light as a plus 346–348, 
346–347; unmixed colors 334,  
335–337, 335–336, 338–339, 340; 
white light 27–28, 330–331, 332
color temperature scale 28
complex surfaces 89–92, 90, 91
compression 261, 262; and grain  
268–269; and overexposure 263–264, 
263–265; and underexposure 265–267, 
266–267; and white-on-white 273
computers, in studio 366–367
contour see shape and contour
contrast 26, 29–33, 29, 30, 31
cool colors 28
copy work and diffuse reflections 67–68; 
angle of light 68–73, 69, 70, 71, 72; 
angle of light and “standard” copy 
set-up 73–75, 73, 74; distance of light 
75–77, 75, 76; “impossible” situation 
and use of polarizers 78–83, 79, 80, 81
Cricchio, Frank 269
curves: postproduction tools 305–306, 
305; see also characteristic curves; 
histograms
cylinders, and tonal variation 120–123, 
121–122
D
dark skin 247–249, 249
daylight: filtering of 339–340; 
nonstandard daylight 332–333; 
standard daylight 28, 331
“dedicated” flashes 314
degrees Kelvin 28
depth clues 97–98, 99–100, 100
diffuse reflections: basics 8, 44–45, 46, 
47–48, 47, 49; and black-on-black vs 
white-on-white 290–291; and complex 
surfaces 89–90, 90, 91, 92; and copy 
work 67–68 (angle of light 68–73,  
69, 70, 71, 72; angle of light and 
“standard” copy set-up 73–75, 73,  
74; distance of light 75–77, 75, 76; 
“impossible” situation and use of 
polarizers 78–83, 79, 80, 81); and 
texture 83–85, 83, 84, 85
diffusers 362–363; Omni-Bounce Flash 
Diffuser 323–324, 324
diffuse transmission 39–40, 39, 48
digital cameras: advice and tips 12, 
13–16; and color balanced pictures  
28; and curves 305; and exposure  
313–314; and light colors 331–332; 
and white light 27–28; see also 
cameras; histograms; lenses; Raw 
format
“digital negative” 268
Digital Negative (DNG) format (Adobe) 
268
“Digital Photography Book” series  
(Scott Kelby) 1
direction of the light 107–108; adding 
depth to background 116, 117, 118;  
fill light 112–116, 114; flare 117,  
118–120, 118–119; side lighting 107, 
108–110, 109, 222, 223; top lighting 
108, 110–112, 110–112
direct reflections: basics 8, 44–45, 48–49, 
50–53, 50, 52, 53; and complex 
surfaces 89–90, 90, 91, 92; different 
“take” on 156–157, 156; and glossy 
boxes (eliminating direct reflection 
from sides 128–129, 128, 130; 
eliminating direct reflection from  
top 125–127, 126–127; family of 
angles 123–124, 124, 125, 126–127, 
126, 128–129; tone of background 
124–125; use of direct reflection  
131; use of dulling spray 131; use  
of polarizers 130–131); and mirrors 
286; ordinary direct reflections and 
polarized reflections 60–61; ordinary 
direct reflections turned into polarized 
reflections 62; and texture 85–89,  
86, 88, 89; and white-on-white 271, 
287–288; and white-on-white vs  
black-on-black 290–291; see also glass; 
metal; polarized direct reflections
direct transmission 36–39, 37, 38
distance of light and copy work 75–77, 
75, 76

INDEX
376
distortion see perspective distortion
DNG (Digital Negative Format, Adobe) 
268
dulling spray 131, 176
duration of lights 340–342, 341
E
electromagnetic fields 22–25, 23, 24;  
and polarized light 56–58, 57, 58
electromagnetic frequencies 25–26, 25
electromagnetic radiation 22, 25–26
“elegant compromise” (flat metal)  
149–152, 150–151
equipment: lighting equipment, 
assessment of needs 16–17; location 
shoots 348–350; see also studio 
equipment
exposure: and black-on-black 288–289; 
and characteristic bad curves 261–263, 
262 (with overexposure 263–265,  
263–265; with underexposure  
265–267, 266–267); and characteristic 
perfect curves 258–261, 259–260;  
and contrast 33; and flat metal 143, 
144–145; and grain 268–269; and 
location shoots 313–315; and shooting 
in Raw 267–268; and white-on-white 
271–274
extremes 257–258; see also black-on-black; 
characteristic curves; curves; 
histograms; white-on-white
eyeglasses, and portrait lighting 227–228, 
228
F
falloff 116, 117, 127
family of angles: and copy work  
(diffuse reflections 69, 69, 70–73, 
70–72, 74–75, 74, 77; “impossible’ 
lighting situation 78, 79); and dark 
skin 248–249; and flat metal 134–135, 
135, 136–140, 137, 139 (keeping the 
metal square 157–158, 158; lighting 
“elegant compromise” 149–152,  
150–151; making metal look bright 
141–143, 141–143; making metal look 
dark 145, 146, 147, 148; size of the 
light 154, 155); and glass (bright-field 
lighting 182–183, 183; dark-field 
lighting 189; surface definition 197, 
197); and glossy boxes 123–124, 124, 
125, 126–127, 126, 128–129; and 
metal boxes 160–163, 161, 163, 164, 
169; and reflection 8, 53–55, 55; and 
round metal 169–171, 170–171;  
and texture 87, 88; and viewpoint  
98; and white-on-white (with mirror 
background) 286
feathering technique 326–328, 327
fill lights 112–116, 114; and portrait 
lighting 229–232, 230–231; reflector 
cards as fill lights (portrait lighting) 
232–234, 233
filters see colored gels (or filters); 
polarizing filters (polarizers)
flags 364–365
flare 117, 118–120, 118–119, 203–204, 
203, 238, 288
flashes see hot-shoe flashes
flash extenders 318–319
flash meters 314–315
flat lighting 107, 222; unidirectional 
(“flat” frontal) lighting 319–321
flat metal: family of angles 134–135, 135, 
136–140, 137, 139; keeping the metal 
square 157–160, 158–159; lighting 
“elegant compromise” 149–152,  
150–151; making metal look bright 
140–144, 141–143; making metal look 
dark 145–149, 146, 148; “normal 
exposure” for metal 143, 144–145;  
size of the light 152–154, 153–155, 
156; see also metal; metal boxes; 
round metal
floral still life 370–371, 370
fluorescent lights 332, 358
front lighting 107
G
“ganged” (multiple) flashes 316–317,  
317
gear see equipment
gels see colored gels (or filters)
glare 44; see also polarized direct 
reflections
glass: basics (principles, problems and 
solutions) 179–182, 181; bright-field 
lighting (combined with dark-field 
lighting 193–194, 194; family of angles 
182–183, 183; one possible technique 

INDEX
377
183–188, 184); dark-field lighting 188 
(combined with bright-field lighting 
193–194, 194; family of angles 189; 
one possible technique 189–193, 189, 
191); finishing touches (eliminating 
extraneous reflections 204–205, 205; 
illuminating the background 199, 199; 
minimizing the horizon 200–203,  
201–202; stopping flare 203–204, 203; 
surface definition 195–199, 196–198); 
with nonglass subjects (liquids  
205–210, 206–210; secondary opaque 
objects 211–212, 212); recognizing the 
principal subject (glass or nonglass) 
212–213
glossy boxes: eliminating direct  
reflection from sides 128–129, 128, 
130; eliminating direct reflection from 
top 125–127, 126–127; family of 
angles 123–124, 124, 125, 126–127, 
126, 128–129; tone of background 
124–125; use of direct reflection  
131; use of dulling spray 131; use of 
polarizers 130–131; see also metal 
boxes
gobos 364–365
grain, and exposure 268–269
gray cards 144–145, 147, 186–187, 192, 
272, 288
grayscales: and characteristic  
bad curves 261–263, 262 (with 
overexposure 263–265, 263–265;  
with underexposure 265–267,  
266–267); and characteristic perfect 
curves 258–261, 259–260; and grain 
268–269; and histograms 300–301, 
300, 303; and shooting in Raw  
267–268; see also black-on-black; 
white-on-white
grids (“honeycombs”) 364
H
hair lights 236–238, 236–238
hard lights 30, 49
hard shadows: and bouncing technique 
321–323, 322; and contrast 30, 30, 
31–32; and hot-shoe flashes 319; and 
portrait lighting 217–219, 217;  
and size of the light 103–105, 106, 
107; see also shadows; soft shadows
Hertz 25
high-contrast light source 29–30, 29
high-key lighting, portrait lighting  
244–247, 244, 246
highlights: and brightness key (portrait 
lighting) 245; and compression 261, 
262 (grain 268–269; overexposure 
263–264, 263–265; underexposure 
265–267, 266–267; white-on-white 
273); and cylinders and tonal variation 
120–123, 121–122; and dark skin  
247–249, 249; and direction of light 
107–108; and glass surface definition 
195–199, 196–198; and portrait 
lighting 220, 220; vs shadows 33–35, 
34, 35; and shooting in Raw 267–268; 
and surface appearances 66; and 
texture 84, 84, 86–88; and tonal 
variation 102–103, 120
histograms 299–304, 300, 302–303;  
see also curves
“honeycombs” (grids) 364
horizon lines, and glass 200–203,  
201–202
hot-shoe flashes 310, 311, 311, 313–314, 
319, 327; “ganged” (multiple) flashes 
316–317, 317; off-camera flashes  
320–321; vs studio lights 357–358, 
358; see also bouncing technique; 
feathering technique
Hunt’s Photo and Video 373
I
“impossible” situation (copy work) 78–83, 
79, 80, 81
Internet: buying lights 357–358; as a 
source of information 18
inverse square law 49, 51–52, 52
invisible light 167, 168
J
JPEG format, vs Raw format 13–14, 
14–15, 15
K
KEH Camera 373
Kelby, Scott, “Digital Photography Book” 
series 1
Kelvin temperature scale 28
key see brightness key (portrait lighting)

INDEX
378
key light see main/key light (portrait 
lighting)
key triangle, and portrait lighting  
221–224, 221–224
kickers 238–241, 239–240, 254, 254
L
LED (light-emitting diodes): ambient 
LED lighting 333; LED panels 310, 
312, 312, 315, 333; studio continuous 
lights 358
lenses: liquid as lens 206–208, 206–207; 
longer lenses and direct reflection 
129, 130; longer lenses and flat bright 
metal 156; and perspective distortion 
102–103; tilt shift lenses 157
light: absorption 40–41, 41; angle of light 
and copy work 68–73, 69, 70, 71, 72; 
angle of light and “standard” copy 
set-up 73–75, 73, 74; brightness 
26–27; color see color of the light; 
concept (definition and scientific 
concepts 22–26, 23, 24, 25; principles 
6–9); contrast 26, 29–33, 29, 30, 31; 
diffuse transmission 39–40, 39, 48; 
direction see direction of the light; 
direct transmission 36–39, 37, 38; 
distance of light and copy work 75–77, 
75, 76; invisible light 167, 168; vs 
lighting 33–35, 34; photography as 
manipulation of light 21–22; reflection 
41; size see size of the light; see also 
lighting; lights
lighting: backlighting 342–344, 343  
(open shade 344–346, 344–345); 
bouncing technique 321–323, 322 
(Omni-Bounce Flash Diffuser  
323–324, 324; “raccoon eyes”  
324–326, 325–326); bright-field 
lighting (combined with dark-field 
lighting 193–194, 194; family of angles 
182–183, 183; one possible technique 
183–188, 184); dark-field lighting 188 
(combined with bright-field lighting 
193–194, 194; family of angles 189; 
one possible technique 189–193, 189, 
191); feathering technique 326–328, 
327; flat lighting 107, 222; front 
lighting 107; high-key lighting  
244–247, 244, 246; as language of 
photography 6; vs light 33–35, 35;  
low-key lighting 243, 243, 245, 247; 
short vs broad lighting 225–228, 226, 
228; side lighting 107, 108–110, 109, 
222, 223; three-quarter lighting 108; 
top lighting 108, 110–112, 110–112; 
uneven lighting 319; unfocused spot 
technique 249–252, 250–252, 371; 
unidirectional (“flat” frontal) lighting 
319–321; see also black-on-black; color 
of the light; duration of lights; glass; 
light; lights; location shoots; metal; 
portraits; white-on-white
lighting booms 361
lighting equipment: assessment of needs 
16–17; see also equipment; studio 
equipment
light modifiers 32, 327–328, 361–362, 
361; diffusers 362–363 (Omni-Bounce 
Flash Diffuser 323–324, 324); gobos 
and flags 364–365; reflectors 363–364; 
snoots and grids 364
lights: background lights (portraits)  
234–236, 235, 254, 254; fluorescent 
lights 332, 358; hair lights 236–238, 
236–238; hard lights 30, 49; kickers 
238–241, 239–240, 254, 254; 
monolights 357, 358; portable strobes 
310, 327; quartz-halogen lights 331; 
rim lights 241–242, 241–242; ring 
lights 246, 246; soft lights 31; specular 
lights 49; speedlights (speedlites) 311; 
test lights 137–138, 139; see also color 
of the light; duration of lights; 
equipment; fill lights; hot-shoe flashes; 
LED (light-emitting diodes); light; 
lighting; studio equipment
light stands 359–360
liquids, in glass 205–210, 206–210
location shoots 309–310; backlighting 
342–344, 343 (open shade 344–346, 
344–345); bouncing technique  
321–323, 322 (Omni-Bounce Flash 
Diffuser 323–324, 324; “raccoon eyes” 
324–326, 325–326); colors of the light 
328–329 (filtering daylight 339–340; 
mixed colors 334–335, 334, 337–338; 
nonstandard light sources 331–333; 
standard light sources 330–331; 
unbalanced light as a plus 346–348, 

INDEX
379
346–347; unmixed colors 334,  
335–337, 335–336, 338–339, 340); 
duration of lights 340–342, 341; 
exposure 313–314 (flashes 314;  
meters 314–315); feathering technique 
326–328, 327; forcing the shadow 
328–329, 329; getting better-quality 
light (issues 319–320; off-camera 
flashes 320–321); getting more light 
315–316 (battery packs 318; flash 
extenders 318–319; “ganged” 
(multiple) flashes 316–317, 317); types 
of lights (heavy-duty portable strobes 
310, 327; hot-shoe flashes 310, 311, 
311, 313–314, 319, 327; LED panels 
310, 312, 312, 315, 333); useful gear 
348–350; see also studio equipment; 
studio space
low-contrast light source 31
low-key lighting, portrait lighting 243, 
243, 245, 247
M
main/key light (portrait lighting) 215; 
position of 220–221, 220; position of 
and key triangle 221–224, 221–224
“Manual” mode 13
megahertz 25
metal 133–134; and black magic  
175–176; and dulling spray 176; and 
polarizing filters 175; see also flat 
metal; metal boxes; round metal
metal boxes: family of angles 160–163, 
161, 163, 164, 169; glossy background 
167, 168; light background 163–164, 
164; transparent background 164–167, 
165–166; see also flat metal; glossy 
boxes; metal; round metal
meters: flash meters 314–315;  
through-the-lens metering (or TTL) 
systems 313–314, 321
Midwest Photo Exchange 373
mirrors: and direct reflections 286;  
see also reflectors
mixed colors 334–335, 334, 337–338
modifiers see light modifiers
modular lighting systems 360
monolights 357, 358
mood, and brightness key (portrait 
lighting) 242–247, 243–244, 246
multiple (“ganged”) flashes 316–317,  
317
N
Nickel–Metal Hydride battery packs 318
nonstandard daylight 332–333
nonstandard light sources 331–333
nonstandard tungsten light 332
O
off-camera flashes 320–321
Omni-Bounce Flash Diffuser 323–324, 
324
opaque objects, and glass 211–212, 212
open shade 344–346, 344–345
orange dye emulsion 92, 93
outside shoots see location shoots
overexposure: and characteristic curves 
263–265, 263–265; and grain 268–269
over-manipulation (histograms) 301, 
303–304
P
paper label, on glass 211–212, 212
perspective control 157
perspective distortion 97, 98–99, 99; 
distortion as a clue to depth 99–100, 
100; and flat metal 157–160, 158–159; 
and lenses 102–103; manipulation of 
100–101, 101–102; perspective control 
157
photographer, as editor 65–67
photography: lighting as the language  
of 6; as manipulation of light 21–22
photons 22–25, 23, 24, 26, 37; and 
polarized light 56–58, 57, 58
Photoshop (Adobe) 13, 299, 304, 306
pixels, and histograms 300–301, 300, 303
polarized direct reflections 8, 44–45, 
55–60, 56–60; polarized vs ordinary 
direct reflections 60–61; turning 
ordinary direct reflections into 
polarized reflections 62; see also glass
polarizing filters (polarizers): and  
black-on-black 294–295, 298–299;  
and glass vs metal 166, 167; and glossy 
boxes 130–131; and metal 175; and 
metal boxes 169; and paper label  
on glass 212; and polarized direct 
reflections 57, 60, 61, 62; and portraits 

INDEX
380
with eyeglasses 228; and surface 
appearances 79, 80–81, 81–83
portable strobes 310, 327
portraits: dark skin 247–249, 249; 
different approaches 215; mood and 
brightness key 242–247, 243–244, 246; 
and principles of light 8; single-light 
portrait set-up (basic set-up 216–217, 
216–217; light size 218–219, 219; 
position of main light 220–221,  
220; position of main light and key 
triangle 221–224, 221–224; right or 
left side 225; short or broad lighting 
225–227, 226; short or broad lighting 
(eyeglasses) 227–228, 228; skin texture 
219); unfocused spot technique  
249–252, 250–252, 371; using a  
beauty dish 253; using colored gels 
254–255, 254–255; using other lights 
(background lights 234–236, 235, 254, 
254; fill lights 229–232, 230–231; hair 
lights 236–238, 236–238; kickers  
238–241, 239–240, 254, 254; reflector 
cards as fill lights 232–234, 233; rim 
lights 241–242, 241–242; ring lights 
246, 246); using small and large lights 
at once 252–253
postproduction: and contrast 33; and 
correcting mixed colors 337–338; and 
curves 305–306, 305; and histograms 
303–304; and LED panels 312; 
necessary level of skills 13–14; and 
perspective distortion (flat metal) 160; 
and shooting in Raw 268
Q
quartz-halogen lights 331
R
“raccoon eyes” 324–326, 325–326
Raw format: and characteristic curves 
267–268; vs JPEG format 13–14, 
14–15, 15
reflections: concept 41; and family  
of angles 8, 53–55, 55; and glass  
204–205, 205; “thought experiment” 
43–44; types of (diffuse reflections  
8, 44–45, 46, 47–48, 47, 49; direct 
reflections 8, 44–45, 48–49, 50–53, 50, 
52, 53; polarized direct reflections 8, 
44–45, 55–60, 56–60; polarized vs 
ordinary direct reflections 60–61; 
turning ordinary direct reflections into 
polarized reflections 62); see also 
diffuse reflections; direct reflections; 
specular reflections
reflector cards, as fill lights (portrait 
lighting) 232–234, 233
reflectors 363–364
refraction 36–37, 38, 39
remote triggering 320, 321
retouching 160, 173, 298
rim lights, and portrait lighting 241–242, 
241–242
ring lights 246, 246
round metal: camouflage 171; family of 
angles 169–171, 170–171; keeping the 
light off the camera 171; using a tent 
172–174, 172–173; see also flat metal; 
metal; metal boxes
S
seamless paper 365
shadows: and compression 261, 262 
(grain 268–269; overexposure  
263–264, 263–265; underexposure 
265–267, 266–267); and contrast 
29–31, 29, 30, 31; and dark skin  
247–249; and direction of light  
107–108; forcing the shadow 328–329, 
329; vs highlights 33–35, 34, 35; open 
shade 344–346, 344–345; and portrait 
lighting 220, 220; and portrait lighting 
and fill lights 229–232, 230–231; and 
portrait lighting and key triangle 224, 
224; and shooting in Raw 267–268; 
and side lighting 108–110, 109; and 
texture 84–85, 84, 86; and tonal 
variation 102–103, 120; and tonal 
variation and cylinders 120–123,  
121–122; and top lighting 110–112, 
110–112; and white-on-white (with 
translucent white background)  
282–285, 282–285; see also hard 
shadows; “raccoon eyes”; soft shadows
Shakespeare metaphor 5
shape and contour: clues (depth clues 
97–98; interpreting visual clues 95–97, 
96–97); glossy boxes (eliminating 
direct reflection from sides 128–129, 

INDEX
381
128, 130; eliminating direct reflection 
from top 125–127, 126–127; family of 
angles 123–124, 124, 125, 126–127, 
126, 128–129; tone of background 
124–125; use of direct reflection 131; 
use of dulling spray 131; use of 
polarizers 130–131); light, direction of 
107–108 (adding depth to background 
116, 117, 118; fill light 112–116, 114; 
flare 117, 118–120, 118–119; side 
lighting 108–110, 109; top lighting 
110–112, 110–112); light, size of  
103–104 (distance from subject  
105, 106, 107; large vs small lights 
104–105); perspective distortion 97, 
98–99, 99 (as a clue to depth 99–100, 
100; manipulation of 100–101,  
101–102); tonal variation 97, 98,  
102–103, 120 (and cylinders 120–123, 
121–122); see also surface appearances
shoe mounted lights 311; see also  
hot-shoe flashes
short lighting 225–228, 226, 228
side lighting 107, 108–110, 109, 222, 223
single-light portrait set-up: basic set-up 
216–217, 216–217; light size 218–219, 
219; position of main light 220–221, 
220; position of main light and key 
triangle 221–224, 221–224; right or 
left side 225; short or broad lighting 
225–227, 226; short or broad lighting 
(eyeglasses) 227–228, 228; skin texture 
219; see also portraits
size of the light: and contrast 32; and flat 
metal 152–154, 153–155, 156; key 
principle of light 7; and portrait 
lighting 218–219, 219; and shape and 
contour 103–104 (distance from 
subject 105, 106, 107; large vs small 
lights 104–105)
skin: dark skin 247–249, 249; skin texture 
219
snoots 364
soft boxes 362–363
soft lights 31
soft shadows: and contrast 31–32, 31;  
and portrait lighting 217–219, 217; 
and size of the light 103–105, 106, 
107; see also hard shadows; shadows
specular lights 49
specular reflections 48–49, 50; see also 
direct reflections
speedlights (speedlites) 311
standard daylight 28, 331
standard light sources 330–331
standard tungsten light 28, 330–331
Steichen, Edward 268
strobes, portable 310, 327
studio equipment 353–354, 354; 
backgrounds 365–366, 366; computers 
and associated gear 366–367; lighting 
booms 361; light modifiers 361–362, 
361 (diffusers 362–363; gobos and 
flags 364–365; reflectors 363–364; 
snoots and grids 364); light stands 
359–360; miscellaneous equipment 
367; number of lights 359; types of 
lights 354–356 (continuous lights  
358; hot-shoe flashes vs studio lights 
357–358, 358); see also equipment
studio space 368–369, 368
suppliers 372–373
surface appearances: complex surfaces 
89–92, 90, 91; diffuse reflections and 
copy work 67–68 (angle of light 68–73, 
69, 70, 71, 72; angle of light and 
“standard” copy set-up 73–75, 73,  
74; distance of light 75–77, 75, 76; 
“impossible” situation and use of 
polarizers 78–83, 79, 80, 81); diffuse 
reflections and texture 83–85, 83, 84, 
85; direct reflections and texture 
85–89, 86, 88, 89; photographer as 
editor 65–67; see also shape and 
contour
sweep 116
sync cords 320–321
T
tents, and round metal 172–174,  
172–173
test lights, and flat metal 137–138, 139
texture: and diffuse reflections 83–85, 83, 
84, 85; and direct reflections 85–89, 
86, 88, 89; and family of angles 87, 88; 
skin texture 219
three-quarter lighting 108
through-the-lens metering (or TTL) 
systems 313–314, 321
tilt shift lenses 157

INDEX
382
tonal variation 97, 98, 102–103, 120; and 
cylinders 120–123, 121–122; and hair 
lights 237
top lighting 108, 110–112, 110–112
translucent materials 39–40
transmission: diffuse 39–40, 39, 48; 
direct 36–39, 37, 38
transparent materials 39
triggers, wireless triggers 320, 321
TTL (through-the-lens metering) 
systems 313–314, 321
tungsten light: nonstandard tungsten 
332; standard tungsten 28, 330–331
U
umbrellas 362–363
unbalanced light, as a plus 346–348, 
346–347
underexposure 265–267, 266–267
uneven lighting 319
unfocused spot technique 249–252,  
250–252, 371
unidirectional (“flat” frontal) lighting 
319–321
unmixed colors 334, 335–337, 335–336, 
338–339, 340
V
video shoots, types of lights for 312,  
358
view cameras 157
viewpoint: and family of angles 98; and 
perspective distortion 102–103
visual clues, interpreting of 95–97,  
96–97
W
warm colors 28
white light 27–28, 330–331, 332
white-on-white 270–271; and exposure 
271–274; and lighting 274–275 
(background and subject 275–276, 
276; keep background small 287–288; 
with mirror background 286–287,  
287; with opaque white background 
276–282, 277–279, 281; with 
translucent white background  
282–285, 282–285)
Z
Zone system 301

