Welcome to our decorating guide, in this part of the guide we will take you 
through the process of cross lining a wall.  
 
 
To complete this task you will need the following items: 
• 
Lining Paper  
• 
Suitable Wallpaper Paste  
• 
Wallpaper Pasting Brush  
• 
2 Trestle tables (or step ladders) and two 
scaffold boards (there should be a local 
company where these items can be 
rented)  
• 
Suitable filler (if required) along with a 
suitable applicator  
• 
Tape Measure  
• 
Spirit Level  
• 
Blunt Pencil  
• 
Paperhanging brush  
• 
Suitable Scissors  
• 
Decorating table (pasting table)  
 
 
 
When working at heights always ensure that the structure is safe and secure. Never 
stretch out, always get down and re-position the scaffold. 
 
Lining Paper. 
The benefits of hanging lining paper far outweigh the work involved, especially if you are going to 
hang expensive or embossed wallcoverings. Lining paper hides any imperfections on the wall and 
gives an ideal surface onto which to hang your wallcovering.  
 
NOTE: If you intend to hang the lining paper vertically (for painting) then see our guide to 
hanging wallpaper.  
 
The lining paper should be hung horizontally (across the wall) if you are going to hang a top 
covering as this stops the edges of the lining paper and the wallcovering falling in the same place 
and protruding, it also reduces the risk of the final covering upseating the first.  
Roll Calculation  
 
The first thing is to establish how many rolls of lining paper are 
required, to do this you use a simple calculation.  
1. Divide the drop by the width of the lining paper roll.  
2. Multiply this figure by the perimeter of the room.  
3. Divide by the length of the roll.  
For example say the drop (room height) is 2m and the roll width 
is 0.60m wide that gives: 2m ÷ 0.60m = 3.4 (rounded up)  
 
and let's say the room is 14m in perimeter (including 
doors/windows) that means the next part of our calculation is: 
3.4 * 14m = 48 (rounded up)  
 
and finally let's say our roll of paper is 11m long, that gives us: 
48 ÷ 11 = 4.37 (rounded up) so we need 5 rolls of lining 
paper.  
Fig 1.1  

 
 
Preparing the Walls 
Firstly make sure your trestles and boards are set at the right 
height and are safe and secure. 
 
If the walls have an old covering then remove it (see our guide to 
stripping wallpaper) making sure to get rid of every trace of 
wallpaper.  
 
Inspect the wall surfaces for cracks, holes and any loose plaster.  
 
For small cracks use a suitable fine filler, for larger cracks and holes 
use a stronger more suitable filler (see manufacturer's instructions).  
 
To check for any loose plaster, tap the wall around any suspect areas, 
remove any loose plaster and repair with a suitable plaster repair 
product (filler if the damaged area is not too big).  
 
When filling try and leave a nice smooth finish, it is better to leave the 
filled area slightly proud of the surrounding area and then sand down 
with a fine sandpaper until flush.  
Fig 1.2  
 
 
Prepare the lengths 
First read the manufacturer's instructions on the paste packet, usually 
paste takes about 20 minutes until it is ready to use, if this is the case 
then mix the paste now and it will be ready when you need it.  
 
Take your tape measure and pencil, measure down from the ceiling 
the width of the roll, mark it with your pencil and then take your spirit 
level and mark a guide line across the wall level with your first mark 
(see Fig 1.3).  
 
Now measure the length of the wall and add 10cm, take the roll of 
lining paper and cut as many lengths as you need (remember it is the 
length of the wall plus 10cm) for the one wall.  
Fig 1.3  
 
 
Pasting the lining paper 
Place one of the lengths of paper face down on the pasting table, 
ensure you have allowed enough time for the paste to thicken, take 
your pasting brush and apply the paste to the first length, starting at 
one end, work the paste evenly over the paper working from the 
middle to the edges (see Fig 1.4), fold the paper into a loose 
concertina as you work, this will make the paper easier to work with. 
Allow the paper to soak for as long as instructed (see label).  
Fig 1.4  
 
 
Hanging the lining paper 

Now take the paper holding the end in one hand and the concertina 
section in the other. Put the paper into place butting the end into the 
corner and lining up the bottom edge with your guide line (see Fig 
1.5), then work the paper with your paper-hanging brush ensuring 
not to leave any air bubbles under the paper.  
 
Unfold the paper as you go along the wall removing any air trapped 
with your paper-hanging brush. When you reach the end push the 
paper into the corner (there should be 10cm to trim) and then run a 
blunt pencil or the back of the scissors down the fold as a guide (see 
Fig 1.6), pull the paper away from the wall and then trim the paper 
using the fold as a guide, then smooth the paper back onto the wall.  
 
Now take the next length and paste as before (if the paper needs a 
long time to soak you may wish to paste more than one at a time), 
butt it up against the first length and work your way along the wall as 
before ensuring to remove all trapped air.  
 
When you hang the last length the chances are it will need trimming 
along the bottom of the wall. To trim push the paper into the edge and 
mark along the paper with your blunt pencil, pull the paper away from 
the wall just enough for you to be able to trim along the line with your 
scissors.  
 
Now move onto the next wall and repeat the process, once you have 
lined the whole room, allow the paper 24 hours to dry out before 
hanging the top covering.  
Fig 1.5  
Fig 1.6  
 

