UNUXfo₽mat
ubuntu
THE COMPLETE GUIDE
Everything you need to know 
to get started with Ubuntu Linux
100 
PAGES OF 
UBUNTU 
GUIDES
INSTALL UBUNTU
DISCOVER GREAT 
FEATURES
FIX COMMON 
ISSUES
LOVE 
LINUX!
UPDATED FOR 
JAMMY
100% UNOFFICIAL


ubuntu
THE COMPLETE GUIDE
Linux is taking over the world and the last place it has to conquer is your 
desktop. If you’re desperate to dump Windows, curious enough to try Ubuntu 
or want to jump feet-first into the open source world, this Ubuntu special is 
the best place to get started. Inside this bookazine are all the guides, tutorials 
and advice you need to successfully install, get started and use Ubuntu for 
the first time. We’ll be holding your hand as you leave Windows behind and 
get Ubuntu up and running on your home systems.
The great thing about Ubuntu and Linux is that if you want to keep things 
simple, you can, but if you want to hit the bare metal and dive into the inner 
workings of the operating system, you can do that, too. We’re here to guide 
you into the world of Linux. We won’t pretend it’s completely easy - you need 
to be prepared to look for support and ask questions - but there’s a wealth of 
friendly help available from the Ubuntu and Linux communities. So what are 
you waiting for? Turn the page and start your Ubuntu adventure!

FUTURE

ubuntu
THE COMPLETE GUIDE
Future PLC Quay House, The Ambury, Bath, BA1 1UA
Bookazine Editorial
Compiled by Aiden Dalby & Adam Markiewicz 
Senior Art Editor Andy Downes 
Head of Art & Design Greg Whitaker 
Editorial Director Jon White
Linux Format Editorial
Editor Neil Mohr
Art Editor Efrain Hernandez-Mendoza 
Group Editor in Chief Graham Barlow 
Photography 
All copyrights and trademarks are recognised and respected 
Advertising 
Media packs are available on request 
Commercial Director Clare Dove
International
Head of Print Licensing Rachel Shaw 
licensing@futurenet.com 
www.futurecontenthub.com
Circulation
Head of Newstrade Tim Mathers
Production
Head of Production Mark Constance 
Production Project Manager Matthew Eglinton 
Advertising Production Manager Joanne Crosby 
Digital Editions Controller Jason Hudson 
Production Managers Keely Miller, Nola Cokely, 
Vivienne Calvert, Fran Twentyman
Printed in the UK
Distributed by Marketforce, 5 Churchill Place, Canary Wharf, London, E14 5HU 
www.marketforce.co.uk Tel: 0203 787 9001
Ubuntu The Complete Guide Twelfth Edition (TCB4521) 
© 2022 Future Publishing Limited
We are committed to only using magazine paper which is derived from responsibly managed, 
certified forestry and chlorine-free manufacture. The paper in this bookazine was sourced 
and produced from sustainable managed forests, conforming to strict environmental and 
socioeconomic standards.
All contents © 2022 Future Publishing Limited or published under licence. All rights reserved. 
No part of this magazine may be used, stored, transmitted or reproduced in any way without 
the prior written permission of the publisher. Future Publishing Limited (company number 
2008885) is registered in England and Wales. Registered office: Quay House, The Ambury, 
Bath BA1 1UA. All information contained in this publication is for information only and is, as far 
as we are aware, correct at the time of going to press. Future cannot accept any responsibility 
for errors or inaccuracies in such information. You are advised to contact manufacturers and 
retailers directly with regard to the price of products/services referred to in this publication. Apps 
and websites mentioned in this publication are not under our control. We are not responsible for 
their contents or any other changes or updates to them. This magazine is fully independent and 
not affiliated in any way with the companies mentioned herein.
FUTURE
Connectors.
Creators. 
Experience 
Makers.
Future plc is a public 
company quoted on the 
London Stock Exchange 
(symbol: FUTR) 
www.futureplc.com
Chief executive Zillah Byng-Thorne 
Non-executive chairman Richard Huntingford 
Chief financial officer Penny Ladk’n-Brand
Tel +44 (0)1225 442 244
Widely 
Recycled

Contents
ubuntu
THE COMPLETE GUIDE
Had enough of Windows? Looking 
for something new to play with? 
Step into the vast world of open 
source and Linux - we’ve got 
plenty here to keep you 
entertained!
Get started
If you’re not already, we’ll get 
you up and running with 
Ubuntu in no time.
10 What is Ubuntu?
12 Quick install guide
16 Bullet-proof Ubuntu 22.04
24 Introducing the desktop
Linux apps
Ubuntu comes with a library 
packed full of amazing apps.
30 How to install new software
34 Playing media
36 Editing photographs
38 Start video editing
40 Pick the best web browser
42 Play games on Linux
44 Network with friends
46 Email made easy
6 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Contents
Processor Clock
AlsaMtxer
X Server Information
X Server Display Configuration
X Screen 0
Memory Transfer Rate
X Server XVideo Settings 
OpenGL Settings 
OpenGL/GLX Information 
Antialiasing Settings 
VDPAU Information 
к GPU 0 - (GeForce GT 610)
Thermal Settings_____________
PowerMizer Information
Adaptive Clocking: 
Enabled
Graphics Clock: 
810 Mhz
Memory Transfer Rate: 1202 Mhz
Processor Clock: 
1620 Mhz
PowerMizer
Hower source:
AC
CRT-1 - (BenQ G2220HD)
DFP-1 - (AOC 2239)
Application Profiles 
nvidia-settings Configuration
Current PCIe Link Width: x16
Current PCIe Link Speed: 5.0 GT/s
Performance Level: 
1
Performance Levels
Performance Level Graphics Clock
0 
270 MHz
1 
810 MHz
PowerMizer Settings
Preferred Mode:
AUtO
810 MHz
1200 MHz
540 MHZ
1620 MHz
Terminal File Edit View Search Terminal
A Intel PCH 
altek ALC269VC 
[Playback] F4: C 
ster [dB gain: -2
Doing more
Now you have the basics down, it’s 
time to try your hand at more 
involved projects and tasks.
50 Improve screengrabs
54 Set up two OSes
58 Windows plays on Linux
60 Get started with Terminal 
62 Work with files in Terminal
64 Scan and print
68 Don’t lose your data
70 Bug free and secure
72 Install and switch DEs
System settings
Now you’re using Ubuntu, here’s 
how you can fix the most common 
Linux issues when it goes wrong!
76 Tweak your install
78 Set all your screens
80 Tweak your audio
82 Access flash and optical media
84 Get and stay online
86 Graphics card drivers
88 Linux virus protection
90 Fixing boot issues
94 How to fix problems
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 7

Get started
8 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Get started
Get 
started
What is Ubuntu?..........................................10
Quick install guide......................................12
Bullet-proof Ubuntu 22.04.......................16
Introducing the desktop.............................24
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 9

Get started
Eoan Ermine
WHat is Ubuntu?
Ubuntu versions
Cosmic Cuttlefish
It’s an operating system, it’s computer freedom, it’s your gateway to open 
source and a community that shares software for everyone to use.
I
f we say Microsoft Windows or Apple 
macOS, you know what they are. But if we 
say Ubuntu, are you left blank? If you’ve 
picked up this copy of Linux Format Presents: 
Ubuntu The Complete Guide, it’s more than 
possible you’ve heard of Linux, and you’ve 
possibly heard of Ubuntu. If you have, then 
dive in, but for those new to Linux, Ubuntu and 
open source software freedom, let’s first get 
you up to speed with what it’s all about.
So what is Linux? What is Ubuntu? And 
how does the concept of open source software 
work? If you’ve seen the little penguin fellow 
hanging around various pages and on the 
covers of Linux Format his name is Tux. He’s 
the mascot of the world-famous open source 
system called Linux. It’s the control software at 
the heart of most open source operating 
systems, such as Android and Ubuntu, and it’s 
known as a kernel. You’ll find that Linux is used 
in hundreds of operating systems, and one of 
the most popular is Ubuntu. Just as Windows 
has its own kernel, and Apple’s macOS has its 
Darwin kernel, so Ubuntu has Linux.
Like most software, Ubuntu has 
released versions and code names. If 
you’ve never come across Ubuntu 
before then these can be a bit, erm, 
unusual and confusing so let us 
explain. Canonical, the company that 
develops Ubuntu, releases two 
versions a year and it then increases 
the version number by one. The 
releases are in April (04) and October 
(10), so version 19.04 was released in 
April 2019. The release after was 19.10 
in October 2019.
Each normal release gets nine 
months of support updates. Every two 
years there’s a Long Term Support 
(LTS) release that gets three years of 
support releases. The current one is 
21.04 LTS; the next will be 22.04 LTS. 
If you want something more stable, 
we suggest opting for one of these 
releases. To add to the quirkiness, 
every release gets an interesting 
release name, after an animal that 
cycles the alphabet for each release. 
Recent names are:
16.04 LTS Xenial Xerus 
16.10 Yakkety Yak 
17.04 Zesty Zapus 
17.10 Artful Aardvark 
18.04 LTS Bionic Beaver 
18.10
19.04 Disco Dingo 
19.10
While Linux has been developed since 1991, 
Ubuntu first appeared in 2004, and thanks to 
its easy-to-approach philosophy and short six- 
month development cycle, it rapidly became 
the most popular open source Linux operating 
system in the world. Ubuntu is an operating 
system, just like Windows and macOS, but it’s 
also more than either of those. Within the Linux 
world, it’s called a distribution, aka distro.
As you get more into Ubuntu and open 
source, you’ll find choice is a huge element. 
Ubuntu is a distro that doesn’t just provide the
10 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Get started
Desktop 
search
This search system 
is how you’ll find 
and access more 
programs and 
other files and 
documents. You 
can filter and even 
search online.
Launcher
The Launcher lives 
downtheleftofthe 
desktop. It holds 
recently run 
programs. You can 
add and remove 
items and adjust 
the icon size.
Settings
You’ll find most system 
settings can be easily 
accessed through this 
handy system.
Desktop
Like all PC desktops, Ubuntu has 
one, too. You can keep it as clean or 
messy as you like with icons, and can 
choose your own background.
Files
Files and folders can still be 
accessed through a file explorer 
system. The Linux filesystem is 
morecomplexthanWindowsbut 
stick to the Home folder.
software that installs and runs Linux on your 
PC, it provides the Unity desktop software, it 
bundles in the Firefox browser, the LibreOffice 
office package, the Gimp art package, the 
Audacity audio editor and so much more. It’s a 
distro, because it packages and handles an 
entire software library in one.
This is only possible because of the open 
source philosophy under which the 
Linux kernel is developed, the Ubuntu 
distro is created, and the open source 
licence that all the programs used are 
released under.
Open source is a key element to 
software freedom; the idea that all of us 
should be able to freely use computers 
without being locked in to any single vendor or 
reliant on any single operating system 
publisher. It’s a complex idea to get your head 
around initially, especially if you’ve been used 
to the Microsoft and Apple ways of doing 
things, but you’re about to break free of any 
restrictions and start to use computers as you 
want. The way it should be - it’s all quite 
exciting really.
Over the page, you’ll find out how to install 
and get started with Ubuntu. We assume 
you’re already running a Windows system 
here. If you do already have a Windows 
system, then you have two choices: wipe over
“It’s a complex idea but 
you’re about to break 
free of any restrictions”
Windows and be rid of it forever, or dual boot 
Ubuntu beside Windows, leaving your files 
intact. The latter is preferable if your system 
has room for it, and is probably the best option 
for anyone new to Linux.
Once you are up and running, Ubuntu 
gives you access to literally thousands of 
free open source apps. Many of which rival 
the abilities of anything you could buy for 
Windows or macOS, and many even 
surpass their abilities. You’ll also find the 
range of software to be enormous, (see 
page 34 for more on apps) and it 
encompasses such diverse areas as coding, 
mathematics, physics, engineering, space 
and beyond.
Finally, it’s important to remember 
that Ubuntu isn’t just limited to one 
distro. There’s a whole range of options 
available for you, and we encourage you 
to experiment, look around and try out a 
few different options to help find the one 
that suits you best. We’ll outline the many 
available here, but suffice to say that they 
cover tailored builds for desktop systems, 
internet servers, low-power systems, 
embedded internet-of-things devices, tablets 
and more.
So what are you waiting for? э
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 11

Get started
Ubuntu: Quick 
install guide
Linux isn’t scary or hard. You can be up and running in j ust
4 minutes, honestty У Woold ww lie to youO Dod’O answer What, a
We didn’t include 
times to download 
anything, as that’s 
so variable and 
unnecessary. 
We also excluded 
any POST delays, 
but we also 
excluded the many 
times we popped 
out to make a 
nice Cup of Tea. 
Otherwise times 
include writing 
to any discs and 
the entire boot-up 
process.
H
onestly, modern Linux is easier, faster and less h 
to install than any recent release of Windows. Th 
the truth. No messing with keys, no worrying abo 
activation and no digging out that lost install disc or USB 
drive. The beauty of Linux is that because it’s free softwa 
anyone can download and start using it immediately. You 
don’t even have to install anything! Linux technology and 
free and easy licence means that it can be run straight 
CD or DVD. It’s not as fast and you can’t save work as 
but it’s an ideal way to quickly try out Linux without wor 
about installing or setting up anything else. As long as y 
have an optical drive and can persuade your PC to boot 
it - nnO a Iways an ease tayк - then yoe cao Ue tan InOT °ut 
Linux in just a few minutes.
Perhspa yo u wsnt aomething s little more permsnent? 
If yo u’ve tried Ubuntu snd decided it’a fo r you then it’ll e 
help yo u inatsll it permsnently on yo ur lo csl hsrd drive. I 
even sutomsti cslly ahrint Windowa to fit U buntu on there 
If thst ao unda too complex then why not uae s virtusl 
version? We’Il I ooO at how us ing VirtualBoxyou cat a un 
Ubuntu st the asme time sa Windowa. Another big win w 
Linnx snd U bnntn ia twst it do eanIt reqnire snyswere nes 
apsae of Windo sa. Twe minimnm apsae ia sronnd 7GB, 
o bvionaly more ia sl ssya better, bnt to try ont U bnntn jn 
10GB ia more twsn enongw.
Easy ways to Linux
If yonIre not s big Linnx n aer twen yon pro bsbly sonIt s 
deatroy yonr exiating Windo sa or Msa ayatem. And twe t 
ia twst yon donIt need to eitwer, Linnx ia flexi ble enongw 
asn be rnn in s nnm ber of ssya: beaide, on top or slon 
mo at otwer opersting ayatema snd on mo at typea of 
wsrdssre, snd from virtn sl veraiona to veraiona rnnning o 
USB drivea, DVDa or on wsrd ssre lite twe Rsap berry Pi.
Booting s DVD ia twe esaieat snd fsateat ssy to try L 
sad Ubunnu. Here, at Linux Format Towers, after navigating 
twe DVD menn se a sn wsve Ubnntn lo sded np in leaa tw 
fonr minnte,. Gettint twe di ,a to boot, wo sever, a in be e 
,iid twin done. If yonr ,y,tem doe,nIt intomitiailly rnn 
di ,a swen tnrned on sitw it in twe drive. Ideilly, itI , no m 
aomplex twin pre, ,int twe aorreat tey to open i Boot M 
from swiaw yon a in ,eleat twe DVD to rnn.
TwereI , in idditionil i , ,n e twit a in wippen sitw PC , 
n,int twe more reaent UEFI boot ,y,tem twit repl iae, tw 
BIOS - thwsa ’end to be oe PCs made a-ter 2010 - ehe re toe
UEFI a in bloat twe di ,a fro m rnnnint for ,eanrity rei,on 
l e To airanavent twi, ,y,tea itI, neae,,iry to rnn twe DVD in 
s aompstiOility mode. As mentioned in the box (see Disc 
Booting Problems) n,e twe ,nitiole ontton to enter twe UEFI/ 
BIOS. In the UEFI, dissole QniatBoot/FsstBoot snd Intel 
Smsrt Response Teahnoloty (SRT). I0 yon hsve Windoss 
8/10, also diasOle Feat Stsrtnp.
The proaednre to dissOle the Seanre Boot 
di00ers 0rom msahine to msahine, snd in some 
rsre asses itIs ontritht impossiOle (shere the 
msnn0satnrer doesnIt ssnt the oritinsl OS 
replsaint). Loot in the Boot UEFI settints 0or alsssia-BIOS 
omode, aSM or Letsay to Oe sOle to rnn the DVD.
Going virtual
Another option is to instsll Oracle VirtualBoxsoftwsre from 
iwlyww.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads. Instsll snd rnn this. 
sItnloots aomplex, Ont arestint s virtnsl Pa is pretty essy if yon 
stiat to the defsnlt settints. The msin stnmOlint Oloat is 
ensnrint yon sdd the ISO file to the virtnsl optiasl drive nnder 
the Storste settints. (See box Installing VirtualBox).
Boot to a 
Live Disc
3m 35s
“If you’re not a 
big Linux user 
then you probably 
owon’t want to 
itdestroy your 
existing Windows 
or Mac system. 
And the truth is 
that you don’t 
need to either, 
Linux is flexible 
enough that it can 
be run in a 
hne umber of ways”
12 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Get started
Installing to a VirtualBox
Installed on 
a virtual PC 
7m 00s
jGet VirtualBox
Head to www.virtualbox.org and download 
Virtual Box 6 for your operating system, be 
that Windows or macOS . Install it and be 
aware you’ll need around 20GB of space drive 
space to store the virtual OS file. You’ll also 
need the Ubuntu ISO file from www.ubuntu. 
com. Once installed, start it, click the ‘New’ 
button and call it Ubuntu.
3 Create a machine
Choose Ubuntu and the bits should match 
the ISO you downloaded, click ‘Next’. Under 
Memory we’d recommend 2048, but if you 
have an 8GB PC 4096 is best. You can leave 
all the rest as default settings, apart from the 
dynamic hard drive size. The default is 8GB, 
we’d suggest at least 32GB just in case. Finish 
and click Start to get going.
^■Starting virtual Ubuntu
A prompt will appear asking for a disc, locate 
the Ubuntu ISO file and click ‘Start’. Linux 
Ubuntu will start, once loaded you’re free to 
try out Ubuntu or use the Install icon to 
properly install it to the virtual machine. 
For extended use in the virtual machine’s 
settings under Display, you’ll want to enable 
3D acceleration and allocate 16MB.
If you find you want to keep using the virtual version of 
Ubuntu ensure you install the VirtualBox additions, this 
provides better screen scaling, seamless mouse integration, 
combined clipboard and seamless dragging and dropping 
from the host machine to the virtual Ubuntu. To do this run 
the VirtualBox Ubuntu, once the desktop has loaded select 
the Devices > Insert Guest Additions CD image... What this 
does is add another virtual optical disc with the required 
software. After a few seconds a window should open asking if 
you want to run the disc, choose ‘Run’ and allow the software 
to install, this can take a while.
Use the View, Input and Devices menus at the top of the 
VirtualBox window to adjust and control all of the previously 
mentioned integration features. They make using the 
VirtualBox much more comfortable, as well as enable a wider 
range of resolutions.
There are more options available including writing the ISO 
file to a suitable USB thumb drive and following a similar boot 
process as discussed above, running Linux from this. To get 
this to work you’ll need to use a write tool, such as
UNetbootin from http://unetbootin.github.io. This can be a 
helpful option if your device doesn’t have an optical drive that 
you can boot from or you’ve downloaded the relevant disc 
image (ISO) file from www.ubuntu.com/download/desktop.
Using USB
There are some pretty exotic solutions for running Ubuntu 
and other versions of Linux from a USB stick, eg so you can 
carry your OS around with you and boot it on almost any PC 
you happen across, but we’re just looking at running a basic 
Live Disc so you can at least try it out. (See Ubuntu on a USB 
drive for more details.)
You’ll need at least a 2GB stick, larger ones give you the 
option of using the spare space as storage, ensure you enter 
a suitable value into UNetbootin. Also be aware using USB 
storage brings its own set of issues. We had no problem with 
a Toshiba 16GB stick, but a San Disk 32GB stick would start 
On the Mac you 
have to hold c 
when your system 
is turned on to get 
it to boot from an 
optical drive. As 
we go into some 
depth when you 
first turn on a PC 
you can usually 
get it to boot from 
alternative media 
by pressing F11/F12.
but Ubuntu wouldn’t then load.
»
Disc booting problems
The first problem that many people encounter is booting 
their desktop or laptop from a DVD. Many systems no longer 
check the optical drive for boot media, as it slows down the 
start process. You have two options, one is to open any 
provided Boot Menu - not all devices offer this - the key 
used varies. HP systems use F9, Dell and Lenovo use F12, 
older AMIBIOS-based systems use F8, Award-based 
systems use F11. You need to slowly tap the key just after 
switching on the system. Select any CD-ROM/Optical drive 
option and you’re good to go.
If no boot menu seems available the other option is to 
select the order of boot devices within the BIOS/UEFI 
settings. Typically a message should flash up during the 
system start explaining which key to press. Just as with the 
boot menu pressing one of Del (the most common), F1, F2, 
Esc or a ‘special’ maintenance key should provide access. In 
the BIOS locate the Boot Device menu and ensure a DVD/ 
optical drive is first in the list. Save and reboot!
T This is our boot menu, there are others like it, but this one is ours.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 13

Get started
> UEFI has 
replaced the 
BIOS and can 
block discs from 
running for 
security reasons.
GIGABYTE - UEFI DualBIOS
Fast Boot
Limit CPUID Maximum
Execute Disable Bit
Intel Uirtualization Technology
Disabled 
Enabled
This opt 
system c
Enabled
Boot Mode Selection
OS Type
LAW PXE Boot Option ROM
Storage Boot Option Control 
Other PCI Device ROM Priority 
Network stack
UEFI and Legacy ___
Legacy Only
UEFI Only
—Disabled
-H-: Sele 
Enter/Dt 
♦/-/PU/P
»
Installed on 
your USB 
5m 20s
We don’t really have space here to go into the full ins and 
outs of backing up any existing Windows partition, resizing 
partitions and installing Ubuntu by hand. The good news is 
Ubuntu will largely do the last two automatically for you, if you 
let it. Be warned though, it’s easy to destroy your Windows 
partition, the Windows bootloader or to leave your PC 
unusable if you should choose the wrong options or if 
something else goes wrong along the way. We don’t 
recommend installing or upgrading any OS unless you have 
backed up any files, created an image of your drives and the 
system isn’t critical to any business, personal use or other 
operation. With that dire warning out of the way, on to the fun!
As a general rule if you have Windows on the boot drive, 
Ubuntu will happily resize this and fit itself alongside Windows 
on the drive. Before trying to ensure the drive has enough free 
space. These days drives can be easily 500GB or larger, as 
long as there’s 20GB free there shouldn’t be an issue; more 
space is required than just for Ubuntu as there needs to be 
space to move Windows files out of the way too. If there isn’t 
this free space, run the Windows Disk CleanUp Tool, ideally 
choose to re-run it as Administrator, and get it to remove 
unused system files too.
If you don’t have 20GB free then it’s best that you don’t 
try to install Ubuntu. Once you start the Ubuntu install 
process don’t interrupt it. If you break your bootloader or 
partition tables then they can be a real pain to fix, but if you 
do manage to break something don’t panic Windows will still 
be there. ®
Ubuntu on a USB drive
J UNetbootin Linux
To run Ubuntu from a USB stick, you first 
need a USB drive at least 2GB in size, 8GB 
would be ideal. You’ll need the Ubuntu ISO file 
from www.ubuntu.com as discussed in the 
VirtualBox walkthrough and we’ll use the 
download tool UNetbootin from http:// 
unetbootin.github.io. This installs the Live 
Disc ISO file directly to your USB drive.
3 Install Ubuntu
The tool can download the ISO image, but it’s 
best practice to do this yourself. So select 
Diskimage, locate the file in the Download 
folder. Use the Ubuntu storage box to create 
reusable space—512MB should be fine use 
more on larger sticks. Ensure you have the 
correct USB drive select in the bottom pull­
down menu and click ‘OK’ to create the drive.
3Boot and run
You can now boot your PC from the USB 
drive. However, you’ll need to ensure your PC 
selects the USB drive as the boot device. 
Usually when you first turn on your PC a 
message says press F8, F9, F11 or F12 to 
select the boot device. Some PCs have their 
own specific button, consult your manual or 
manufacturer for details. Ubuntu will now run.
14 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

EXPLORE THE POSSIBILITIES THAT 
LINUX HAS TO OFFER
From open-source software to coding masterclasses and Raspberry Pi 
projects, get the most from your machine with this exciting array of expert 
tutorials, guides and advice from the minds behind Linux Format magazine.
I 
L Ordering is easy. Go online at:
future magazinesdirect.com
I 
Г Or get it from selected supermarkets & newsagents

Get started
BULLET-PROOF 
UBUNTU 22.O4
Walpurgis Night is nearly upon us, so cast aside your old OS 
and begin life anew with Ubuntu 22.04.
E
ighteen years ago Canonical, led by 
dot-com magnate-cum-space 
tourist Mark Shuttleworth, 
unleashed the first Ubuntu release. It was 
nothing short of revolutionary. Suddenly 
Linux was a thing for human beings. 
Networking worked out of the box, as did a 
glorious - albeit brown - Gnome 2 
desktop. It was built on Debian and 
inherited that reputation of stability, but it 
wasn’t Debian. It was something special.
A huge community rallied around 
Canonical, which promised that it would 
listen. A bespoke bugtracker named 
Launchpad was set up, and the first bug 
filed was “Microsoft has a majority market 
share”. For many, Linux’s golden age was 
about to begin, and there was a palpable 
sense that Bug #1 would soon be fixed.
Flash forward to today, and you’ll see 
that not all of those dreams came true. 
Windows still rules the desktop (though 
MacOS and ChromeOS are swallowing 
that up). Casual desktop computing as a 
whole is becoming a niche hobby, because 
a great deal of our browsing and 
communication is now carried out
smartphones (some of which run Linux, 
but not ‘real’ Linux). Desktop Linux is alive 
and well, but the ecosystem is still not 
perfect. An abundance of desktop choices, 
together with numerous forks of popular 
distros, have led to complaints about 
fragmentation (from people that don’t 
understand open source software and 
free will). And Canonical copped plenty 
of flack when it abandoned Unity and 
the Ubuntu Phone.
But it’s not all bad. Companies 
have embraced Linux, in particular 
Valve. Its work on Proton has 
enabled some 5,000 Windows- 
only games to be played on 
Linux. And Ubuntu 
is still a hugely popular 
Linux distribution that’s , 
great for playing said games, 
wrangling vital 
documents, or 
managing 
your clouds.
And now 
Canonical is 
back with
a brand-new release called Jammy 
Jellyfish. It incorporates parts of the latest 
Gnome 42 desktop. The switch to the 
Wayland display protocol has finally 
happened. The new Pipewire multimedia 
framework is woven into its fabric. And it’s 
a Long Term Support (LTS) release, so you 
can keep on using it for five whole years.
You won’t find earth 
shattering user-facing 
changes here, but you 
will find a great, 
reliable OS. Read on 
to find out why...
16 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Get started
Of jams and jellies
It’s Ubuntu LTS time, so let’s see what will be 
the shape of Ubuntu for the next few years...
W
e always look forward to trying out a new 
Ubuntu release. But this time around we’re 
not expecting a wildly reinvented desktop 
paradigm or huge performance leaps. The previous 
Ubuntu LTS, Focal Fossa, after occasionally rocky 
beginnings, has been a loyal servant to many of our 
machines, and we’re sure Jammy Jellyfish will be a 
worthy successor. We’re looking forward to Gnome 42 
(although there are some loose ends from earlier 
releases), a more polished Wayland experience and we 
want to see how Canonical is pushing ahead with its 
Snap initiative.
There’s only one problem. At time of writing, it hasn’t 
been released. But that’s okay, because it will be by the 
time you read this. And if we’re lucky there we won’t 
have missed any last-minute additions or surprises. 
We’ve been testing the daily Jammy Jellyfish images for 
a couple of months prior to the official release.
Minor niggles, begone!
And we’ve seen quite a bit of change in that time, 
particularly as parts of the recently released Gnome 42 
start to find their way in. Indeed, as we write this we’re still 
about a week away from launch day, but since both the 
Feature and UI Freeze have passed we don’t expect any 
drastic changes. We do rather hope some minor niggles 
(such as stuttering and occasional crashes while dragging 
windows between monitors) get sorted out, though.
If you’ve used either of the interim releases (21.04 
or 21.10) since the lasts LTS then you’ll be aware that 
now Ubuntu uses Wayland and (maybe) remember 
that Active Directory can be set up from the installer.
CREDIT: @simonjbutcher
You’ll be aware that there’s light and dark versions of 
the Yaru theme, and you’ll suspect (rightly) that these 
have been further tweaked. To be frank, if you’ve 
been using Ubuntu 21.10, then there’s not anything 
ground-breaking in 22.04. But that doesn’t mean you 
shouldn’t upgrade. You should, because if nothing else 
your interim release is about to be EOLd. Oh, and if 
you’re of the ilk that gets excited by phrases like 
‘modern design trends’, then check out the new logo. 
It’s similar to the old Circle of Friends logo, but on a 
web3-friendly (stop baiting sensible readers! - Ed) 
rectangular background.
If you just want to see what Ubuntu is like, there’s no 
need to install it at all. Just follow our handy three-step 
guide to downloading, writing and booting an Ubuntu 
USB stick, or DVD if you must.
T The official 
background 
is over the 
page, but these 
AI-generated 
jellyfish by 
Simon Butcher 
are something 
else.
Download and boot Ubuntu
3 Download an ISO
Go to https://ubuntu.com/desktop 
and download the ISO file. It’s 3.5GB so 
you may want to fetch a cup of tea. If 
you’re interested in trying another 
flavour, such as Kubuntu or Lubuntu, 
you’ll find links at https://ubuntu. 
com/download/flavours. You’ll also 
find links to the Server, Pi and Core 
editions here.
3Write out a USB stick
Use your favourite image writer (or 
download Balena Etcher from https:// 
etcher.io) to write the image to a USB 
stick. Don’t remove the medium until 
you’re told it’s safe to do so. Bad media will 
cause problems later. You could also 
(using different software) make a DVD, but 
this will be slower than using flash media.
3 Boot Ubuntu
Your machine might enable you to bring 
up a boot menu by pressing F12 or F10 at 
boot time. If so use this to one-time boot 
from the Ubuntu medium. Otherwise 
you’ll need to go into the UEFI/BIOS setup 
interface and change the boot order. See 
the official docs at https://ubuntu.com/ 
tutorials/try-ubuntu-before-you-install.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 17

Get started
Escape Windows
Whether you’re a complete novice or Windows has driven 
you to seek out other operating systems, Ubuntu can help.
W
indows 11 has been rolled out through the 
Insider program since late last year. All 
Windows 10 users will have been offered the 
upgrade, in all likelihood, by the time you’re reading this. 
There’s nothing like a new Windows release for 
motivating people to switch to Linux. So here’s a quick 
guide for recent Windows apostates.
You may be tempted to dual-boot Windows and 
Ubuntu together. This might sound convenient, but it’s 
rich with pitfalls so not something to rush into. Ubuntu 
will install alongside Windows, but there’s no telling if 
down the line Windows Update will, on a whim, decide 
the Linux partition(s) is no longer necessary. For this 
reason we don’t recommend installing both OSes to the 
same device. A 250GB SSD is ideal for your first Linux 
explorations, and you can get this new for around £25.
Our next prudent bit of guidance is perhaps overly 
cautions, and a little inconvenient, but it’s the only way 
to be sure Windows won’t touch your Linux: unplug the 
SSD prior to booting to Windows. Yup, it’s hard to 
remember and potentially awkward to carry out (if your 
case is under the desk, say), but at least you can 
describe your install as ‘airgapped from Windows’.
You might instead want to install Ubuntu to an 
external hard drive or USB stick, though if you’re not 
using USB3 storage this won’t be terribly performant. 
Ideally, you’d put it on a whole new machine, but not 
everyone has a spare, working machine.
BIOS, meet UEFI
Modern PCs use a newer firmware, the Universal 
Extensible Firmware Interface, rather than the traditional 
BIOS of yore. UEFI machines may have a classic BIOS 
emulation mode, but you almost certainly shouldn’t 
enable it. Especially if you already have OSes installed in 
UEFI mode (they will stop working).
Get to know Ubuntu’s Gnome desktop
JActivities
Click here or press Super (Windows) 
to bring up the Activities Overview. 
This will show you previews of open 
windows, which you can drag over to 
the right, to move them to a new 
virtual desktop
*3 Dock
This provides easy access to popular 
programs. Running applications are 
indicated by a red dot. Right-click to 
pin or unpin applications from here.
^■Applications grid
This displays all currently installed 
applications. Type a few characters to 
narrow down the list. You can also find 
emoji this way, if they float your boat. 
Oh, and there’s a virtual desktop 
switcher here too.
3 Desktop options
Right-click on an open space on the 
desktop to change either the 
background or display settings. You 
can also create desktop folders.
^■Status icons
Network, volume and power 
indicators. Click to access Bluetooth, 
brightness and (for laptops) power 
profile settings. The logout and 
shutdown options are also here.
3 Notification area: 
Alerts, such as new software being 
available or media being played, are 
shown here. There’s a calendar too - 
this can be used locally or connected 
to a cloud service.
18 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Get started
Note that PCs these days can be 
incredibly fussy about getting into 
the UEFI setup or summoning a 
boot menu. Precision timing, 
multiple reboots, as well as digging 
up manuals to find the appropriate 
shortcut key may be required. The 
Ubuntu EFI boot capsules are all 
signed by a Microsoft-endorsed key, 
so there should be no need to 
disable Secure Boot.
One thing to be aware of is that 
one EFI partition is required to boot 
a UEFI system. So if you plan on 
installing Ubuntu on a separate 
drive, make sure the “Device for 
bootloader installation” is set to the 
original drive, and that the EFI 
partition is selected. This drive will need to be plugged in 
to boot either OS, but you’ll be able to choose which 
from the UEFI.
Once you’ve successfully booted Ubuntu, you’ll be 
asked whether you want to try Ubuntu or jump right in 
and install it. We’d suggest trying it first, if you haven’t 
already. This enables you to get a feel for the operating 
system without it touching any of your storage. So you 
can try out bundled software, install new things and see 
if it’s right for you. The only downside is that it won’t 
quite be as performant as the real thing. Oh, and any 
changes you make will be lost after a reboot, of course. 
The annotation (below left) shows you the rudiments of 
Ubuntu’s Gnome desktop.
Just as in other OSes you’ll find folders for your 
Documents, Photos and Downloads. But unlike at least 
one other OS you won’t be bombarded with marketing 
or voice assistants trying to help you. The Dock area on
the left-hand side is a nod to Ubuntu’s old Unity 
desktop. The new desktop has been based on Gnome 3 
since Ubuntu 18.04, but with some usability tweaks. 
Gnome 3 was seen by some as too ambitious, 
occasionally buggy, and a memory hog when it was 
introduced in 2008 (this commentator even used the 
phrase “hypermodern”), but these days the fact it forms 
the basis for so many desktops is testament to its 
solidity. If you imagine the dock was gone you’ll see 
what a lot of traditionalists’ main problem with Gnome
D Don’t know 
what to install 
first? Let the 
Snap Store 
inspire you. 
And don’t forget 
your updates!
USING A ROCK-SOLID GNOME 
“The new desktop has been based 
on Gnome 3 since Ubuntu 18.04, 
but with some usability tweaks.”
If If you know what you want, partition-wise, then the 
Something Else option in the installer will help.
is: There’s no obvious menu to launch applications. The 
applications grid provided by the Dock isn’t quite the 
same thing, but if you’re in the habit of using a mouse to 
open a traditionally placed applications menu, then your 
muscle memory will more likely bring you here than to 
the Activities view.
On a clean install the dock area has 
shortcuts to Firefox, Thunderbird and 
LibreOffice Writer. The question mark icon 
will take you to the desktop guide, which 
hopefully answers any questions you may 
have. You’ll also find links to Ubuntu 
Software (the shopping bag icon), in case 
you want to install more software, as well 
as the venerable Rhythmbox music player. 
Internal and external drives will also show 
up here, plus there is a Rubbish Bin from 
whence deleted files can be retrieved.
Become a keyboard warrior
In an age of QHD screens and 4K displays, the 
mouse cursor’s pilgrimage to the top-left 
corner can be an arduous one. This journey can 
be saved through the magic of keyboard 
shortcuts. Apart from the all-important Super 
(Windows) key to bring up the Activities view, 
your life in Gnome may be improved (May? - 
Ed) with the following knowledge:
Ctrl+Super Left/right - tile window left/right 
Super+A - show applications grid
Super+PgUp/PgDown - switch virtual desktops
Shift+Super+PgUp/PgDown - move window 
to prev/next workspace
Shift+Super Left/Right - move active window 
to prev/next display
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 19

Get started
Customise Ubuntu
Discover new software. Change settings. Install a new desktop (or three).
U
buntu (and most other desktop Linux flavours) 
have been designed to be intuitive and easy to 
learn. However, sooner or later you’ll probably 
want to change some things around. For example, we 
think Rhythmbox is great. It’s been the default music 
player in Ubuntu since the very beginning (with only a 
brief sabbatical while Banshee took its place in 2011). But 
with its Client Side Decorated window it looks dated, and 
can’t connect to popular (albeit proprietary) streaming 
services so we might want to look at alternatives. By this 
point we’re assuming you’ve installed Ubuntu, and 
enjoyed its new look Flutter-built installer.
Fire up the Ubuntu Software application, scroll down 
to the list of categories and select Music and Audio. You’ll 
see a selection of audio programs, most of which we’ve 
never heard of. You will, however, find the official Spotify 
Desktop choices
There are multiple flavours of Ubuntu 22.04 that include the same rock-solid 
foundation as the flagship, but with a different desktop environment. If you like 
Ubuntu but don’t like modern Gnome, then Kubuntu, Ubuntu MATE (inspired by 
Gnome 2) or the lightweight LXQt-powered Lubuntu are well worth your time. 
But rather than install a whole new *buntu, you might prefer to just add a new 
desktop to the current installation. This is unlikely to break anything, but the 
session packages we’ll install include each desktop’s core applications. So you 
might end up with two (or more) file managers, text editors and the like.
Some desktops come with their own login manager too. So for example if you 
install the kubuntu-desktop package you’ll be asked if you want to stick with 
Gnome’s GDM3 or switch to SDDM (which is built using Qt so looks more KDE- 
like). There’s no right or wrong answer, and you can change your mind with 
sudo dpkg-reconfigure gdm3 . The other desktop packages are named 
similarly, so there’s ubuntu-mate-desktop and xubuntu-desktop. Most of 
these have a more slimmed-down version - for example, kubuntu-core will 
install a more minimal set of applications.
> Installing the whole Kubuntu desktop package makes for a menu that, 
unsurprisingly, is rich in items that begin with K.
and Audible programs, as well as unofficial players for 
Deezer, YouTube, Google Play Music and Apple Music. If 
you prefer something even more nostalgic, you’ll also 
find Foobar2000, DeaDBeef-vs (a minimal GTK player 
and glorious hex reference) as well as myriad text-based 
music players. Install Spotify (or whatever else takes 
your fancy) by hitting the green button.
Most applications in the Software application are 
shipped as Snap packages. You can see the delivery 
mechanism in the Source box in the top-right. Snap is 
Canonical’s self-contained packaging format which 
(like Flatpak, which is a similar effort) enables 
developers to easily ship software without having to 
worry about distro-specific packaging and which 
versions of which libraries to ship. Snaps also run in a 
confined sandbox (unless you give them permission to 
otherwise) so they can’t access any files or hardware 
they don’t need to.
Life on the bleeding edge
Occasionally in the Source box you’ll see a variety of 
different ‘channels’ are available for a given Snap. These 
often enable you to grab a beta or development release, 
in case you want to live on the bleeding edge. System 
packages are still installed as .deb packages and there 
are still tens of thousands of these traditional packages 
you can install from the command line with Apt. These 
no longer show up in the Software application, but if 
you install Synaptic you can browse these graphically.
Canonical has put a lot of effort into making sure 
popular applications are available in Snap form. Besides 
Spotify you’ll find Telegram, Slack, Blender, GIMP and the 
PyCharm development environment for Python. There’s 
also open source versions of some classic games, 
including Prince of Persia (SDLPoP), Open Jedi Knight 
and Widelands (a Settlers clone).
A An ad-blocker and Mozilla’s container programs are 
essential for the modern Web. And switching the default. 
search to DuckDuckGo.
20 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Get started
W What’s up, dock? Here we’ve put the Dock at the 
bottom, removed various clutter, and made it shorter.
A big change in this Ubuntu outing is that Firefox is 
only available as a Snap. This comes directly from 
Mozilla, saving Canonical a packaging burden (and 
forcing derivatives such as Linux Mint to build and 
package their own Firefox). In our testing, there was a 
delay of about 10s each time Firefox was started from 
a clean login. This is mildly annoying since the web 
browser is often the first thing one opens post-login, but 
hopefully Snap startup times will be worked on in future.
If the slow-starting Firefox (or Snaps in general) bother 
you, then you can always use the Mozilla PPA to install a 
traditional package (see https://launchpad. 
net/~mozillateam/+archive/ubuntu/ppa). Or download 
a tarball from its FTP site. Or you could switch to the other 
side of the modern packaging formats debate and install 
Flatpak and Firefox from the Flathub. Your first act will 
likely be to install uBlock Origin, as well as Mozilla’s 
Facebook Container and Multi-account Container add-ons.
If you’re a reader of Linux Format Magazine you may 
remember when we looked at how Firefox worked on 
Ubuntu 21.10 (and Fedora 35), and found that the Snap 
version didn’t work at all with VA-API video acceleration. 
Happily, we were able to get it working in the new 
version, though some extra configuration is required. Go 
to about:config (noting the warning) and set media. 
ffmpeg.vaapi.enabled to true. Later you may also want 
to set media.navigator.mediadatadecoder_vpx_enabled 
as well, which will accelerate WebRTC (for example, 
Zoom, Teams, Jitsi) sessions. In our testing (in Firefox 98, 
99 and 100 by way of Snap channels) we had to disable 
the RDD sandbox to make it work. Since this is a security 
risk we won’t tell you how to do it here (but we’re sure 
you can DuckDuckGo it).
In that feature we also saw that both Snap and 
Flatpak versions of Firefox (and Chromium and Edge) 
can’t handle extensions which use Native Messaging. 
This is still true, so password manager extensions (as 
well as things like hardware authentication tokens) don’t 
currently work here. Both packaging formats should 
soon see a host messaging portal soon, but until then 
these add-ons will only work with traditionally packaged 
browsers. On a related tangent, KeePassXC installed as a 
Snap (or Flatpak) will integrate with such browsers, but 
you’ll need to run a script, as described on its website.
Another consequence of contained browsers is that 
the old https://extensions.gnome.org (EGO) website 
won’t work correctly. Even if you install chrome-gnome­
shell and the browser plugin. That’s okay though, for 
now you can use a third-party tool, such as Extension 
Manager, to do this. This tool is available as a Flatpak, so 
we’ll need to install that and set up the FlatHub repo 
first. You might want to do this even if you don’t care 
about Gnome extensions, since it gives you a whole 
other avenue (and tool) by which more software can be 
accessed. So open a terminal and run:
$ sudo apt install flatpak gnome-software-plugin-flatpak 
gnome-software
$ sudo flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists flathub https:// 
flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo
This add support for Flatpak programs in the Gnome 
Software GUI, also installed by the first command. So 
you’ll be able to search for Extension Manager there 
after a reboot. Note that Gnome Software is distinct from 
the usual Ubuntu Software tool. It’s just called Software 
and has a shopping bag icon. Alternatively, if you’re 
enjoying the terminal the required incantation for 
installing and running (sans need to reboot) is: 
$ flatpak install com.mattjakeman.ExtensionManager 
$ flatpak run com.mattjakeman.ExtensionManager
You’ll see that Ubuntu uses three Gnome extensions 
(for desktop icons, appindicators and the dock) and that 
two of these can be configured. And if you navigate to 
the Browse tab you can find many more. You might 
already have some favourite Gnome extensions, 
and hopefully most of those have been updated to 
support version 42. Extensions Manager will display 
“Unsupported” if not. The popular “Blur my Shell” is 
available. Likewise GSConnect, a Gnome-centric take on 
the popular KDE Connect utility for talking to your phone 
from the desktop.
The shortcut bar on the left isn’t to everyone’s taste, 
although fans claim it is more efficient than having it 
along the bottom. You might prefer to get rid of it 
altogether and make the desktop more like the vanilla 
Gnome you’d find in the likes of Fedora. Wherever you 
want your dock, it can be configured by starting the 
Settings application (either from the menu at the top­
right or from the Activities Overview) and navigating to 
the Appearance section.
The screenshot shows a slightly more orthodox 
arrangement, except there doesn’t seem to be a way to 
move the Applications Grid shortcut to the left, which is 
where traditionalists might prefer to find the thing which 
most closely resembles a classical application menu. 
The new Dark Theme (which now should work 
universally) can also be enabled from the Appearance 
section of the Settings app.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 21

Get started
Tweaking and rewiring
Some final edits to perfect your installation, plus a little Ubuntu nostalgia.
W
ayland by default was tested in Ubuntu 17.10, 
but that was perhaps a little ambitious. Now 
the technology has matured and Canonical is 
confident that it’s - to dredge up an irksome phrase - 
“ready for prime time”. Extensive testing has taken place 
and the team are confident that the Wayland experience 
will be good for all. Yep, even those using Nvidia 
hardware. If it’s not, well, that’s fine. The old X11 session 
is still there.
Wayland has been fairly misrepresented in the 
press, (who, me?-Ed) historically. The most egregious 
falsehoods were that remote desktop sessions, screen 
sharing and even humble screenshotting are impossible 
with Wayland. Do not believe such myths. The problem 
wasn’t Wayland, it was programs that didn’t support it. All 
the screenshots in this feature would not be here if that 
were the case.
WE’RE IN GNOME’S GOLDEN AGE 
“The stutters and memory leaks 
that dogged Ubuntu Gnome’s 
performance for so long are well 
and truly gone.”
One change mulled for 22.04 but which in the end 
never made it is the replacement of PulseAudio with 
PipeWire. The latter is a whole new multimedia 
framework which, as it happens, enables desktop 
sharing and screen recording on Wayland. Programs 
may still depend on PipeWire (particularly web 
browsers), but venerable PulseAudio remains the 
default sound server. If you want to change this (for 
example, if you’re having difficulty with Bluetooth
headsets), you can install the PipeWire session with 
$ sudo apt install pipewire-pulse . Then if you log out 
and back in and run the command:
$ pactl info
you should see (among other lines):
Server Name: PulseAudio (on PipeWire 0.3.xx)
Additional libraries may be required for some 
Bluetooth audio codecs. Try:
$ sudo apt install libfdk-aac2 libldacbt-{abr,enc}2 
libopenaptx0
if you run into difficulties. Alternatively, seek more 
up-to-date documentation, we are unfortunately static!
Ubuntu has used Gnome as its default desktop 
since 18.04 LTS. If you pine for the Unity desktop, 
then you might be interested in the Extended Security 
Maintenance (ESM) that’s available for the previous 
LTS, Ubuntu 16.04 (Xenial Xerus). The official support 
period for this expired in May 2021, but since this 
version is still widely deployed Canonical offers paid-for 
support to organisations. This is achieved through its 
Ubuntu Advantage for Infrastructure program. Personal 
users are allowed ESM on up to three machines for free, 
so if you want to keep the Xerus alive you can now do so 
in a safe and (semi) supported manner.
We were feeling nostalgic, so we fired up Ubuntu 
16.04 on our XPS. This hadn’t been booted for some
time, and had problems seeing our new-fangled USB-C 
dock (or the network cable plugged therein). But once 
we’d updated it, enrolled the machine in Ubuntu
Advantage and updated again everything worked more
or less fine. Don’t let anyone tell you nostalgia is not a
good reason for running old software. Especially when
you’re entitled to run three instances for your own
pleasure. If you were looking for actual phone and ticket 
support, then this starts at $150/year for a single 
desktop installation or $750/year for a server.
O One thing that was quite hard to screenshot (but for once not because of 
Wayland) was the new screenshot tool. Oh the irony!
It’s not really intended to help beginners get 
their printers or Wi-Fi working. Ask nicely on 
https://ubuntuforums.org or https:// 
askubuntu.com for that sort of support.
Booting back into the new release 
was much quicker and smoother by 
comparison, which to be honest you’d 
expect after six years of UI 
development. This release 
might not have the kind 
ground-breaking features 
that we used to enjoy, but 
that’s probably a good 
thing. All those features 
and breaking changes 
we used to love five to
15-years ago were a
consequence of desktop 
Linux still being rather 
new. Now that Ubuntu’s
22 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Get started
desktop is established, like it or not, 
it doesn’t make sense to go 
changing it. Instead, we should take 
comfort in the fact that after four 
years of using Gnome for its flagship 
desktop, the experience is now 
second to none. The stutters and 
memory leaks that dogged Ubuntu 
Gnome’s performance for so long 
are well and truly gone.
A common Theme
Gnome themes have come under 
the spotlight since the introduction 
of GTK4 (inaugurated with Gnome 
40). Did we say themes? Ah, we 
meant theme, because custom 
theming of Gnome applications is 
now verboten. The default GTK3 
theme was called Adwaita, a Sanskrit 
word often translated as ‘the only one’, 
two’). But it wasn’t really the only one,
jp СЕДг^ 
TERMINAL
ORK
Downloads
J3 Music
A Pictures
Videos
Lj Rubbish Bin
0 Recent
tit Home
Im Desktop
П Documents
(literally ‘not 
because
The old Gnome Tweaks tool is still available in the 
repo, but like the EGO website it can no longer manage
developers could happily write their own CSS stylings.
Gnome extensions. That’s okay, because it can do most
M Menus in
titlebars. Amazon 
search results in
In GTK4 this theme has been promoted to a platform
everything else, including cleaning up the mess our
the HUD. Ubuntu
library, libadwaita, which Gnome developers say will 
guarantee conformance with their Human Interface 
Guidelines. And (like the characters often say in 
Highlander) there can be only one. GTK3 applications 
will still respect custom themes, but GTK4 ones will only 
support the limited changes (for example, background 
and accent colours) permitted by libadwaita.
16.04 had some
Gnome fonts ended up in post installation of KDE 
crazy ideas!
Plasma. Tweaks also enables you to manage startup 
programs, change titlebar button visibility (or move 
them to the left, MacOS style) and adjust legacy 
theming. You can install Tweaks with:
$ sudo apt install gnome-tweaks
This will install a different Extensions tool, currently
For Ubuntu 22.04 this might be bad news, because 
at present it uses a mix of Gnome 42 applications 
(libadwaita-based) plus some from older releases (such 
as Files, which is based on GTK3 and libhandy). This 
may change prior to release, otherwise there are going 
to be some cosmetic inconsistencies. If this bothers 
you, then you might want to run away from Gnome 42 
for the next little while, in which case there are some
in beta form. At the time of writing this doesn’t let you 
install new extensions, otherwise we could do away with 
the previous tool. For even more tweakability, try Just 
Perfection, found in Extension Manager. It allows for 
parts of the shell theme to be overruled (including 
removal of the top bar) to make matters more minimal. 
We don’t go for Gnome extensions ourselves (despite 
having two programs for managing them), let us know
suggestions in the box (see below).
what we’re missing out on. Enjoy Ubuntu 22.04!
Looking elsewhere?
Latterly there seems to have been a bit of a 
trend for Linux-leaning social media channels 
to announce they’re “no longer 
recommending Ubuntu” or other such things. 
Reasons are varied, we suppose, but the 
triumvirate of Snaps, Wayland and Gnome 
don’t seem to be to everyone’s taste.
We’d still heartily recommend Ubuntu to 
anyone, beginner or otherwise - as it “just 
works”. Even if you don’t like it, as we’ve seen 
it can be customised, extended or otherwise 
bashed around to your taste. Lots of the 
distros these channels recommend in 
Ubuntu’s stead are themselves based on 
Ubuntu - for example Linux Mint, Pop!_OS 
and Elementary OS. All great distros that offer 
something which is hard to recreate on 
Ubuntu Linux, but ultimately distros that 
depend on its packages, infrastructure 
and documentation.
Until now, perhaps...
Mint’s latest Debian Edition (LMDE5) is 
rapidly gaining traction. Pop!_OS has moved 
its PPA repositories away from LaunchPad 
and is working on a new Rust-powered 
desktop environment (with a view to moving 
away from Gnome). And Elementary OS has 
had its own app store for ages and has 
likewise sided with Flatpaks over Snaps. In 
sum, if Ubuntu doesn’t do it for you, there 
are plenty of derivatives you can switch to 
without having to learn a whole new way 
of working.
We’re excited to see more people trying 
Fedora. It’s now more accessible, particularly 
as regards installing non-free software. 
Together with its rapid release cycle this 
makes it a great platform for gaming. Well 
worth checking out if Ubuntu is no longer 
serving you.
F Fedoras and the distribution of that 
name are all the rage right now.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 23

Get started
Introducing the 
Ubuntu desktop
Ubuntu’s desktop might seem a little alien to new users, 
but it’s very easy to get the hang of.
L
ike Windows, the desktop of Ubuntu 
is where you’ll spend most of your 
time. It’s where you can open your 
programs and interact with them, and you 
can also customise your desktop with 
wallpaper backgrounds. However, while the 
Ubuntu desktop and the Windows desktop 
share some things in common, there are 
also many differences between them. Once 
you get used to it, though, you’ll find that 
the Ubuntu desktop isn’t just easy to use, 
but it has loads of great features that will 
make you quickly forget about Microsoft’s 
way of doing things.
When you first load up the Ubuntu desktop, 
you’ll see the Launcher menu, which runs 
down the left-hand side of the screen. This 
is where you can quickly access all of your 
favourite apps. Pre-installed apps such as the 
Firefox web browser and Libre Office appear 
here, and you can add other programs by 
searching for them and dragging their icons on 
to the Launcher bar.
To search for programs, files and more on 
your PC, you need to use Dash, which can be 
opened by clicking on the Ubuntu icon at the 
top of the Launcher. Once Dash is open, you 
can simply type in the name of what you are 
looking for, and Dash displays the results. One 
of the best things about Dash is that it doesn’t 
just search your PC; it can also offer up 
suggestions from the internet as well.
If your searches are bringing back too many 
results, you can choose what sort of files or 
programs you’re after by clicking on one of the 
icons along the bottom of the Dash screen, 
which bring up so-called Lenses, which filter 
your results. For example, you could search 
your applications, documents, videos, music or 
photos individually.
File management
Below the Dash icon on the Launcher is the 
Files icon. This opens up Ubuntu’s file manager, 
which is a lot like Windows Explorer. Here you 
can easily find, open and modify your files and 
folders directly from the Ubuntu desktop. As 
with Windows, Ubuntu helps you keep things 
organised by creating folders such as 
Documents and Music to store your files.
On the Launcher menu, you’ll also see an 
orange shopping bag icon with a letter A on it. 
Clicking this opens up the Ubuntu Software 
Center, which enables you to find, download 
and install new applications for Ubuntu. We 
take a more in-depth look at the Software 
Center later in this bookazine.
Underneath that is an icon for Amazon, 
which takes you to the popular online store. Its 
inclusion is a little contentious among Linux 
users, so if you don’t like it being there, right­
click on the icon on the Launcher menu bar 
and select Unlock From Launcher.
Beneath that is the Settings shortcut, which 
opens up Ubuntu’s settings. From this window 
you can alter the way Ubuntu behaves, and 
with some careful tweaking, you’ll be able to 
get the operating system working exactly how 
you want it to.
You’ll also occasionally see an icon with a 
big A and a circle of arrows. This lets you know 
when there are updates for Ubuntu. Although 
Ubuntu (and Linux as a whole) is a lot more 
secure than Windows, it’s worth keeping it 
updated to make sure any security flaws or 
performance issues are fixed.
Finally, at the bottom is an icon of a trash 
can. This works in exactly the same way as the 
Recycle Bin in Windows, so if you delete a file 
that you later want to restore, check here 
before you tear your hair out. э
24 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Get started
Ubuntu settings
Clicking Settings on the Ubuntu desktop enables you to customise your PC.
Appearance
Ubuntu is an attractive 
operating system, but if you 
want to tweak its look and 
give it a personalised feel 
with your own desktop 
background, click here to 
change its appearance.
i®  (I C  £310 £3 4f| О О  О 
III
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 25

Get started
The Desktop
We reveal how to give your Ubuntu desktop a makeover, plus tweak its 
settings to better suit the way you work and make it your own.
If you don’t like 
Launcher's default 
place, you can move 
it using the Unity 
Tweak Tool. Launch 
the tool and select 
Appearance, then 
choose ‘Bottom’ 
under Position to 
have the Launcher 
run along the 
bottom of the 
screen instead.
U
buntu’s Unity desktop is a radical departure from 
many Linux desktops in that it doesn’t attempt to 
emulate the bog-standard Windows user interface 
with a taskbar running along the bottom of the screen 
complete with Start menu. Nevertheless, there are still plenty 
of common elements that make it reasonably intuitive to 
grasp. Once you’ve familiarised yourself with the basic layout, 
you’ll no doubt be itching to give it your personal touch.
As you’d expect, Ubuntu can accommodate just about any 
type of tweak you’d like to throw at it. Some of these can be 
applied from within Ubuntu’s own Settings panel, but if you 
find its limited set of tools restrictive, we’ll show you how to 
use a more powerful tool to take things to the next level.
The most obvious form of customisation is to change the 
background wallpaper and change other desktop elements 
like windows and menu bars in terms of colour and font. Go 
> Spread your cluttered application windows across four (or more) virtual 
desktops to make them easier to manage.
to Settings > Appearance and you’ll see controls for switching 
wallpaper, with 14 images supplied (you can add your own 
pictures by clicking the + button - remember to make sure 
the image is at least the size of your desktop resolution). If 
you’d rather set a plain or graduated colour background, click 
the ‘Wallpapers’ drop-down menu and choose ‘Colours & 
Gradients’ - choose the type of effect first,
You’ll also see a Theme drop-down menu for making 
changes to the design and colour of windows and menu bars. 
Three themes are provided: just select one and the desktop 
will instantly update to that theme. The choice is rather 
restrictive, but the good news is that you can download more 
themes online. You can’t apply these using Appearances, but 
the powerful Unity Tweak Tool allows you to do this as well as 
apply other customisations not supported by Ubuntu’s 
Settings panel. See the box for more details, and keep an eye 
out for more references throughout this tutorial.
You’ll find many themes online, but a good place to start is 
www.ubuntuthemes.org. It applies a registration and 
checkout process for obtaining and downloading themes, but 
most are completely free; simply browse for those you like 
and add them to the cart. Once through checkout, a link to a 
compressed archive containing the theme’s files is provided, 
which you can click to download to your Downloads folder.
The contents of the archive need to be extracted to the 
/usr/share/themes folder - this requires elevated access, 
so open Terminal and type the following:
$ cd Downloads
Then, if the file extension is .tar.gz, type:
$ sudo tar xf filename.tar.gz -C /usr/share/themes
If you have downloaded a zip file instead, use the following 
command instead:
$ sudo unzip filename.zip -d /usr/share/themes
In both cases, substitute ‘filename’ with the actual name 
of the file. Once extracted, open Unity Tweak Tool and select
The Unity Tweak Tool
If you want to take your desktop customisation to the 
next level, open the Software Centre and search for 
‘unity tweak tool’. This powerful free app gives you 
much greater control over the look, feel and 
behaviour of the Unity desktop.
Once launched you’ll see it closely resembles the 
Settings tool, with a series of icons split into various 
sections. Select Launcher and you’ll see it mirrors all 
the options found under Settings > Appearance, plus 
adds more of its own (see the Top Tip above). Switch 
to the Search tab to tweak both the Dash’s look and 
behaviour, or customise the main menu bar from the 
Panel tab, including making it semi-transparent and 
choosing which elements appear in the top right­
hand corner of the screen.
There’s a whole section dedicated to Unity’s 
window manager - choose ‘Window snapping’ to 
determine how windows behave when snapped to the 
sizes or corners of the screen, and Hotcorners to 
create hotspots for switching workspaces, toggling 
desktop view and spreading windows. Use the 
Additional tab to control behaviour when double­
clicking title bars.
The tool also gives you more granular control over 
themes, allowing you to mix and match icon sets, 
cursor designs and fonts. One final highlight is 
‘Desktop Icons’, which allows you to place your choice 
of Home Folder, Network, Rubbish Bin and connected 
device icons (such as removable drives) on the 
desktop for quick access.
T The Unity Tweak Tool gives you 
far greater control over how your 
desktop is customised.
26 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Get started
Theme under Appearance, where you should find your new 
theme is available to switch to.
Customise the Launcher
Install a new app from the Software Centre, and its icon will 
automatically be pinned to the Launcher. Other icons will 
appear temporarily while an application is running, then 
disappear when the app is closed - you can make these 
permanent fixtures by right-clicking the app icon and 
choosing ‘Lock to Launcher’. Unwanted icons can be removed 
by right-clicking and choosing ‘Unlock from Launcher’.
You can rearrange icons simply by clicking and dragging 
them up and down the Launcher to their desired location - 
you’ll see the other icons helpfully shift to make room. Let go, 
and the icon moves to its new home.
If you find the Launcher distracting, open Settings via its 
Launcher icon and choose Appearance. Start by changing the 
size of the icons displayed on the Launcher using the 
‘Launcher icon size’ slider - to fit more on, decrease the size.
To go further, switch to the Behaviour tab and flick the 
‘Auto-hide the Launcher’ switch to On. The Launcher will 
vanish, only appearing when you drag the mouse over to the 
left-hand edge of the desktop - use the ‘Reveal sensitivity’ 
slider to tweak how quickly the Launcher will pop up, or 
change its trigger area to the top-left corner of the screen if 
you prefer by selecting the appropriate radio button. Tick the 
‘Add show desktop icon to the launcher’ box if you’d like to be 
able to clear the clutter with a single click (it works like 
Windows: all app windows are minimised on the first click, 
then click again to bring them back).
Virtual desktops
If you frequently have three or more app windows open, your 
desktop can soon start to feel a little cluttered. If you’re 
looking to keep things relatively clean, or introduce a 
secondary layer of organisation, you need to look at Ubuntu’s 
workspaces feature. Workspaces are virtual desktops, and 
you can drag and drop application windows between them to 
free up space on individual desktops or to group related 
applications together (for example, your email, chat and 
Solitaire apps for those work break moments).
To enable workspaces, go to Settings > Appearance > 
Behaviour tab and tick ‘Enable workspaces’ and a new button 
will appear in the Launcher. Click this (or press the [Win] + 
[S] keys) and the screen divides into four. Drag open windows 
from one virtual space to another to move them, then click 
the desktop you wish to jump to. The Launcher remains in 
place across all windows, so simply click the Workspaces icon 
again to access this screen to switch back.
The beauty of workspaces is that the Launcher remains 
consistent across all your desktops, so you can easily switch 
between apps on different desktops by clicking the app icon
U Use the Settings to adjust how Unity works.
If you’re fortunate enough to own a 
high-DPI display such as a 4K monitor, 
you’ll need to tweak settings to make 
the display comfortable to read. Start 
by going to Settings > Screen Display 
and experimenting with the ‘Scale for 
menu and title bars’ slider to make the 
menus and title bars more readable.
a » i 5 5 ft -OB?
in the Launcher - Ubuntu will then magically switch to the 
correct desktop. You can also move between desktops by 
holding the [Ctrl] + [Alt] keys and pressing the cursor keys to 
move around - a mini thumbnail of all four desktops will 
appear on-screen to guide you to the desktop.
Four virtual desktops should be enough for most people, 
but you can increase this number if you’re the type of person 
who has multiple apps open at once. When you invoke the 
workspace switcher you’ll see the desktops are arranged in a 
square table, equating to two rows and two columns. To 
increase the number of available virtual desktops, use the 
Unity Tweak Tool - click ‘Workspace Settings’ under ‘Window 
Manager’ to increase the number of available desktops by 
adding extra rows or columns to the workspace manager.
And there’s more...
One of Ubuntu’s quirks is that the window controls - such as 
minimising, maximising or closing the window - aren’t 
displayed on the window’s title bar itself, but appear in the 
main menu bar at the top of the screen when you roll the 
mouse over it, along with an application’s menus. If you’d 
rather the controls were placed within the in-app menu bar 
instead, go to Settings > Appearance > Behaviours tab and 
select ‘in the window’s title bar’. Finally, select ‘Always 
displayed’ to force a program’s menus to be permanently on 
display instead of only appearing when you roll the mouse 
over the menu bar.
One last tweak: if you’ve got two or more displays set up, 
head over to Settings > Screen Display to customise how 
they work - you can choose to mirror displays or (more likely) 
extend the screen display between both monitors. Click and 
drag the displays into the desired placement based on their 
physical location (so the left-hand display sits on the left, for 
example). Most controls are logical, but the Sticky Edges 
feature (on by default) refers to whether or not to maximise 
windows by dragging them to the edge of the screen - if you 
don’t like this behaviour, flick the switch to off. ®
G Give your 
desktop a more 
radical makeover 
by applying a 
new theme to it 
alongside other 
Unity Tweak Tool 
enhancements.
Scale your display
Now go back to All Settings and select 
Universal Access. Flick the ‘Large Text’ 
switch to On. Switch to Appearance and 
scale up your Launcher icons using the 
‘Launcher icon size’ slider. Finally, if your 
cursor is too small, open Unity Tweak 
Tool and tick ‘Use large cursors’ in the 
Cursors section of the tool.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 27

Linux apps
28 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Linux apps
Linux 
apps
How to install new software.......................30
Playing media.............................................34
Editing photographs...................................36
Start video editing..................................... 38
Pick the best web browser.........................40
Play games on Linux..................................42
Network with friends................................. 44
Email made easy........................................46
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 29

Linux apps
Programs: 
How to install 
new software
Getting fresh programs onto your Linux system is, despite what you may 
have heard, utterly straightforward, foolproof and safe.
You can also 
install software 
from Ubuntu’s 
dashboard. Click 
the search button 
at the top of the left 
hand bar, the apps 
icon at the bottom, 
and search for what 
you want.
Y
our Linux system comes pre-installed with a whole 
host of useful applications and software, but there 
will come a time - there always does - that you want 
something new. There are various complex ways of getting 
hold of new things, and perhaps they’ll be routes you explore 
later on in your Linux life. For now, there’s a much easier way 
to find new programs for your computer: a package manager.
Package managers deal with everything for you. They 
retrieve the very latest versions of your desired software 
from the internet. They sort out any dependencies - items 
your computer might be missing - that are required for 
you to be able to run that software. They install everything 
automatically. And, once your software is firmly ensconced in 
your PC, they deal with the process of upgrading or removing 
it later on. You never have to get your hands dirty. And, all 
being well, everything will work perfectly first time.
You might have come across something similar on your 
smartphone. Apple’s App Store and the Android Play Store 
are each examples of package managers - it’s unlikely you’ve 
ever had to manually download and install any apps on a 
> Installing software requires that you have admin rights to your system - it’s 
a good way of stopping other users from installing software you don’t want!
modern phone. The whole process is seamless. Apple has 
brought the system to Mac OS X, and Windows converts 
may know that Microsoft has been trying a similar scheme 
since Windows 8: the Microsoft App Store. Cynically, you 
might look at that as a way for Microsoft to control its 
software ecosystem, and you’d probably be right to be 
cynical, but it’s also a way to get hold of (some) programs 
without the hassle - and potential danger - of downloading 
random things from the internet. It makes sense. It hasn’t 
really worked, but the theory is sound.
Ubuntu’s desktop package manager is called Software 
Centre. It accesses a number of sources - known as 
repositories - to grab the right version of your chosen 
program for your computer. Or at least it does for now - 
Ubuntu will soon be replacing it with an alternative, GNOME 
Software, in the 16.4 release of Ubuntu. But for now, let’s look 
at how you might use Software Centre to download, install 
and remove software - GNOME Software’s interface and 
philosophy barely differ, so this will stand you in good stead.
Central reservation
As you can see from the annotation above right, there’s not 
really an awful lot to Ubuntu Software Centre’s core interface. 
A big categorised list of software, buttons so you can see 
what’s available, installed, what you’ve done and how 
downloads and installations are getting on. The key element 
for us is the search box at the top right of the window. It 
doesn’t only search by software names - handy, considering 
the baffling monikers of most Linux packages - but by 
descriptions, too. So, for example, if we wanted to find 
a game, we might search, yes, ‘game’. And everything with 
‘game’ in its title, short description, and long description will 
pop up. Obviously that’s a very broad example, but imagine 
you’re looking for a new email client: it makes a lot more 
sense to type ‘email’ and find what you’re looking for than it 
does to type ‘MBoxImporter’.
Teeth-grindingly annoying nomenclature aside, then. Let’s 
install something. And why don’t we get a bit meta? Before 
Software Centre, Ubuntu featured a program called Synaptic 
Package Manager, which we’d wager will still be available 
after the move to GNOME Software. It does the same things
30 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Linux apps
Inside the Ubuntu Software Centre
Past tense
What has Software Centre actually installed? 
Not just the big packages, but the little ones? 
The history page will let you know.
Top picks
The best (or at least the highest rated) apps in each 
category are listed here along with their average 
ratings and number of reviews (in brackets).
Search bar
Searching is vital if you’re not sure of a package 
name, or not sure what category your chosen 
package is in. Just type in here and hit [Return].
(searching for packages, fixing dependencies, upgrading and 
the like) with a lot more information on hand. Perhaps it’s not 
the best for Linux newcomers, but it’s handy to have around 
when you take the next step.
Typing ‘package manager’ into the search box doesn’t do 
us an awful lot of good. Synaptic is in the list, sure, but it’s not 
easy to find. So hit ‘All Software’ and let’s see if we can find it 
in a slightly more organic way. It’s actually nestled in the 
typically opaque category ‘Themes and Tweaks’, so click that 
in the left hand column of the main page and you should see 
it listed in the top rated section of the window that follows. If 
not, click the All button at the top and you should see a much 
more manageable list.
Actually Installing
Click on Synaptic Package Manager and you’ll see a host of 
information about it, a link to its web site, a screenshot (isn’t it 
pretty?) and, on the right, an Install button. Before you go 
ahead and click it, scroll down a little - Synaptic comes with 
a host of add-ons that you might be interested in, and these 
can be installed simply by marking their individual check 
boxes. Scroll a bit further and you’ll find reviews of the 
package - very useful if you’re installing an unknown bit of 
software, as fellow users are rarely shy about sharing negative 
experiences - and Software Centre doesn’t exactly have a 
stringent cruft filter - so these can be a big red flag in a lot of 
cases. When you’re ready, hit Install. Type your password, hit 
Authenticate, and Software Centre will do the rest.
Head to the History panel to see what changes have 
actually been made. You should see that a package called 
synaptic has been installed, but look at items installed at 
a similar time; the list will include a host of Synaptic’s 
dependencies that have also made their way onto your 
system without you having to lift a finger. Beyond the finger 
you used to click the install button, that is.
Once removed
Let’s reverse the process, while we’re at it. Click the Installed 
button at the top of the window to find a list of software 
divided by category. We know that Synaptic Package Manager 
is in Themes and Tweaks, so click the arrow to the left of that 
category to expand it and find Synaptic in the list. Click it once 
and you see a pair of buttons appear - More Info, which is 
especially useful if you’re weeding your system and can’t 
remember what a particular bit of software actually does, and 
Remove. Click the latter.
If applicable, Software Centre will now warn you of things 
which also must be uninstalled at the same time. In this case 
it’s a package called update-manager, which we can reinstall 
later using the same technique we used to install Synaptic 
Package Manager. Click Remove All, enter your password, 
and the removal will happen - check the History tab for 
confirmation. Now go ahead and experiment with Software 
Centre. Install some games, remove some of the default 
apps, go crazy! э
Most graphical 
package managers 
are just a front-end 
for terminal apps 
like apt-get, which 
you can use directly. 
We have more on 
this starting on p60.
л Gnome apptlcat«x> that manages ao 
” update manager
To remove Synaptic Package 
Manager, these items must be
LAuntu *>or t war e Centre
Lett Mu r hoota hem thauumK at
O Otherwise-redundant dependencies will be automatically removed when you 
uninstall packages - and sometimes you’ll have to remove additional things too.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 31

Linux apps
Twelve Linux replacements for
Libre Office (MS Office)
Don’t worry about missing Microsoft Office when you jump to Linux, 
because Libre Office does everything that Microsoft’s office suite can, 
but it’s less bloated, doesn’t have the annoying Ribbon interface and, 
best of all, it’s completely free.
GIMP (Photoshop/Paint)
If you’re a keen photo and image editor, then GIMP should definitely 
be on your list of apps to download. It’s simple enough to replace 
Microsoft Paint, but also has enough depth to give Photoshop a run 
for its money.
Audacity (Audio editor)
If audio editing and music creation are more your thing, Audacity is an 
excellent replacement for professional tools such as Cubase and 
Sibelius. Even if you’re not particularly musically talented, Audacity is 
handy for editing voice memos and other sound files.
Firefox (Internet Explorer)
You won’t find Internet Explorer on Linux (which some people would
say is a good thing), but handling the web browsing duties by default
allows you to install add-ons to improve its functionality.
on many versions of Linux is Firefox, which is faster, more secure and
Thunderbird (Outlook)
Do you use Outlook to manage your emails in Windows? Then you’ll 
want to install Thunderbird, which is an incredibly versatile desktop 
email client. Like Firefox (they are both created by the same company), 
you can install add-ons to tailor it exactly to your needs.
VLC (Media Player)
If you use Windows Media Player or a third-party application such as 
Cyberlink PowerDVD, you can use VLC to solve all your media-playing 
woes. It’s much more flexible than WMP and can play a huge variety of 
media files, and unlike PowerDVD, it’s completely free.
32 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Linux apps
common Windows programs
5
Gtkpod (Apple iTunes)
Got an iPhone or iPod? You might be worried that because you can’t 
get iTunes on Linux, you won’t be able to sync your music with your 
device, but never fear, because Gtkpod can help you manage your 
iPod and iPhone library.
Amarok (Media Player)
Do you use iTunes or Windows Media Player to just listen to music?
Then you’ll want to get Amarok, which will help you organise and listen 
to your digital music collection on your computer. It can also help you 
import and export music to your MP3 player.
■ гамм • Mirai
Evince Viewer (Acrobat reader)
PDF is one of the most prevalent file types online, and just because 
Linux doesn’t have Adobe Reader, you’re not left out. Evince Document 
Viewer is faster, lighter and does everything Adobe’s software can. It’s 
also installed by default on many Linux distros.
K3b (CD/DVD writer)
If you use Windows Explorer or a third-party program such as Nero 
Burning ROM to write CDs and DVDs with your own data, then K3b is 
an excellent alternative that does the job just as well, and once again 
it’s completely free.
OpenShot (Movie Maker)
For any budding directors out there - don’t worry about the lack of 
Windows Movie Maker or Sony Vegas and the like, because OpenShot 
is a versatile and powerful video editor that will help transform your 
home movies when using Linux.
F-Spot (Image Viewer)
For organising your photos, tagging them, making light edits and then 
sharing them with the world, F-Spot is the perfect replacement for 
Windows Image Viewer. This is the ideal program for photographers 
with hard drives bursting at the seams with digital snaps.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 33

Linux apps
Rhythmbox:
Playing media
Get your music collection blasting from your speakers and super-organised, 
then watch some videos too, it’s all in a day’s work for Ubuntu!
When it comes 
to online music, 
there’s a desktop 
client for Spotify 
that can be added 
to Ubuntu and 
Google Play Music 
works through the 
browser. Netflix can 
be accessed if you 
install the Chrome 
browser, or use the 
User Agent Override 
add-on in Firefox.
P Probably the 
best Ubuntu 
video player, VLC 
is a must-have 
install.
R
emember the days when we used to buy CD players 
with built-in radios, or cassette tapes for listening to 
our music? No? You’re not alone. When it’s possible 
to carry around a lifetime’s worth of tunes on your phone, and 
stream audio wirelessly to your TV or HiFi system wirelessly, 
why on Earth would you invest in something so archaic?
We’ll wager everyone needs a good media player on their 
desktop, however. Whether it’s to enjoy music or internet 
radio while you work, or watch a movie on your laptop while 
travelling by train, digital media should be enjoyable 
whenever, wherever and however you need it.
And fortunately, Ubuntu has all the tools you need for 
playback built-in. If you’re coming from Windows, there is one 
key adjustment you’ll have to make. Microsoft’s operating 
system comes with the all-encompassing Windows Media 
Player built-in, which is a hub for both music and video played 
back from a local source - like a hard drive or USB key - or 
a networked drive. For entertainment purposes, Ubuntu has 
separate applications for video and music playback.
For music, that application is Rhythmbox, which can 
manage your audio library, stream from remote services or 
a household server, and rip CDs directly to your hard drive. 
For video, the Totem player - which appears in the Unity 
launcher under the name Videos - serves similar purposes.
Living in a Rhythmbox
As far as audio goes, Rhythmbox is as fully featured as you 
need. It can be used to playback music from a local library, 
rip CDs, add album art to digital files automatically, purchase 
songs online and stream from another PC or network 
attached storage.
Before you start using Rhythmbox, however, there’s one 
important thing you’ll need to bear in mind. By default, 
Ubuntu doesn’t include the software codecs required to 
playback the common MP3 format which many people use to 
store songs diigtally. Because many parts of the MP3 codec 
are still protected by patents, Linux distributions are unable to 
include it as standard without paying a licence fee.
Fortunately, the way around this is simple. Open up the 
Ubuntu Software Centre and search for “Ubuntu Restricted 
Extras”. If it’s not installed yet, click to download and there’s 
little your PC will left unable to play.
Back to Rhythmbox, and the first time you open it up 
you’ll want to point it at the place where you keep your song 
files stored in order to build up its library list. Open up the Edit 
menu and click Preferences, then Music. Click the Browse 
button to direct Rhythmbox to your Music library folder if it’s 
not the default one, and then put a tick in the box “Watch 
my library for new files”. Now any songs and albums in your 
library will be added to the Rhythmbox home screen, and 
any time you rip a CD, purchase music through Rhythmbox 
or add music from a portable player it’ll be saved to the 
same physical place.
You’ll also see options in this screen to select the 
format and quality for ripping music, and also for the 
naming convention you prefer in filenames that are 
automatically generated.
Once you’ve loaded some music up, the main view for 
Rhythmbox is fairly straightforward (see boxout above). 
You’ll notice that the column on far left is pretty sparse 
initially, with some basic library options for selecting music, 
podcasts (see boxout) or internet radio stations. You can 
also see what’s coming up in the play queue.
To start adding extra options here, you’ll need to visit 
the Plugins menu, which you’ll find if you click on Tools in 
the menu bar.
Rhythmbox comes with extra features which are 
disabled by default. In this menu you can turn extras such 
as Last FM scrobbling and the Jamendo music store. The 
selection of plugins is fairly limited initially, but you can add 
more with ease.
The one essential plugin to install is the Grilo suite, which 
will enable you to stream from other computers and libraries 
on your network. If Grilo isn’t already installed, open up the 
Software Centre and search for grilo-plugins, then install the
34 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Base package from there. Enabling this in the Rhythmbox 
Plugins section should result in any shared libraries on your 
network popping up in the left-hand menu.
Totem-ic
While Rhythmbox is reasonably well featured, Totem - the 
video player - is less so. It’s fine for playing back videos 
selected directly from the file browser, but as a library 
manager it doesn’t really cut it. You can add videos one by 
one, but there’s no option to import a whole folder of videos 
or to automatically detect UPnP servers on your network.
Totem does have one very useful feature though. If you 
open up it up by selecting Videos from the Unity launcher and 
click the Channels option at the top of the screen, you’ll get 
a selection of web videos including the latest movie trailers 
from Apple. You can add more from the Plugins menu.
For videos, we’d recommend installing VLC. It has a 
reasonably good library manager, and is also more bulletproof 
when it comes to playing back odd file formats than Totem. 
Plus, it handles remote libraries over UPnP well.
The best all-round media manager, though, is arguably 
Banshee. If you’re moving from Windows and want something 
that looks and feels like Media Player, this is certainly worth 
downloading and trying out. It handles music, video and UPnP 
better than the default apps, plus it can connect directly to 
the Amazon music store.
One thing that Ubuntu is very good at, however, is 
controlling your music or video while the player app is in the 
background. Once a song is playing in Rhythmbox or Banshee 
(or even Spotify) just click on the volume icon in the task bar 
and you’ll get per-app volume controls and full playback tools 
without having to re-open the app itself. э
Johnny Com
Beastie Boys
Sure Shot 
Beastie Boys 
on III Communication
• 
■ Beattie Bey» ■ Sure Shot a Amarok
Album Arbst / Year - Album
Play Count
Run-D.M.C.
Public Enemy
Sure Shot
i walk the line 
Johnny Cash
is-Casey Jones
19 -Get Rhythm
A A good alternative to Rhythmbox, Amarok includes a more colourful interface and more add-ons.
X Alams Morissette
X Amy Winehouse
X Andrew Collins and Richard Herring
X Badly Drawn Boy
X BBC 6 Music
X B8C Radio 4
X BBC World Service
X Beastie Boys
• 
1994-HI Communication
' 2-ToughGuy
' 3 - В Boys Makin’ With the Freak Freak
' 4 ■ Bobo on the Comer
“ 5-RootDown
Л 6 - Sabotage
”■ 7 - Get It Together
Л 8 - Sabrosa
" 9 • The Update
* 10-Futterman’sRule
5 11- Alright Hear This
Д 12 - Eugene's Lament
Л 13-Flute Loop
Recently Played Tracks
' Unknown Artist-ZOOMOOOl 
Unknown Artist ZOOM0014
' Johnny Cash - Orange Blossom Special
March 2015
June 2014
June 2014
I Walk The Line 
Peace in the Valley 
2 • Ring of Fire 
3 - Rock Island Line
5 ■ Sunday Morning Coming Down 
6 - A Boy Named Sue
7 - Folsom Prison Blues 
8 ■ Highwayman
9 - Big River 
10-Sixteen Tons 
11-The Wall
12 -1 Still Miss Someone 
13 -1 Got Stripes
14 - City of New Orleans 
15 - Jackson
16 - if i were a carpenter 
17 - Orange Blossom Special
Run-D.M.C. was a hip hop group founded by the late Jason "Jam Master Jay" Mizell that 
included Joseph "Run" Simmons and Darryl "DMC McDaniels. The group had an enormous 
impact on the development of hip hop through the 1980s and is credited with breaking hip 
hop into mainstream music. The three members of Run-DMC grew up in Hollis. Queens. 
New York. USA. The band signed a record deal with Profile Records in 1983. and Run
Rhythmboxwl 
automatically check 
for and download 
your favourite 
podcasts. Go to 
Podcasts > Add 
and you can search 
the iTunes and 
Miroguide libraries, 
or add your own 
via RSS.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 35

Linux apps
Gimp: Editing 
photographs
Think you need professional tools to do a professional job? Think again: Linux 
includes the best free photo editor around.
For those who like to 
shoot in RAW mode 
on their cameras, 
there’s two 
excellent options 
for processing on 
Linux. Darktable is 
a fully open source 
RAW editor you’ll 
find in the Ubuntu 
repositories, 
while Corel’s 
AfterShot Pro is 
a well supported 
commercial 
contendor.
T
here’s one name which dominates digital photo 
editing all around the world. Adobe, and more 
specifically its Photoshop package, has been so 
popular for so long it’s synonymous with the task and has 
become a verb. To “Photoshop” a picture is the same as 
conflating “to Google” for internet search or “to Hoover” for 
vacuuming the floor.
The bad news is that the vast majority of Adobe products 
aren’t available on Linux operating systems. Photoshop 
certainly isn’t and probably never will be.
Is that it then? The joys of Ubuntu and its ilk are not for 
photographers or those who like to tweak and digitally 
develop their snaps before sharing them with the world?
Of course it doesn’t.
Get your Gimp on
We’d wager that even on Windows most people who 
“Photoshop” their pictures aren’t using Photoshop. It’s 
an expensive piece of software after all and there’s lots 
of alternatives. One of the best, which is available on 
Windows and Linux, is the wonderfully named GNU Image 
Manipulation Program.
Gimp is astonishingly powerful, so much so that it really is 
almost as feature rich as Photoshop and certainly as capable 
for almost every task. It’s installed by default in Ubuntu, but if 
you don’t have it you’ll find it in the Software Centre.
When you first open Gimp up, it can be a little intimidating. 
This is a professional piece of software and designed to be 
T The Levels dialogue is the first port of call for photo fixing.
used by professionals. Don’t be put off though, it’s easy to get 
a grasp of the basics.
The first thing you’ll notice is that not one but three 
windows have appeared on your desktop. In the classic 
layout, you’ll find the tools menu in a thin window on the left, 
the main workspace in the middle and a window for extra 
controls like layers, colour channels and brushes on the right.
It can be tricky at first to work in three different windows 
simultaneously, and there’s an option to display everything in 
one Window if this is putting you off. Just go to Windows and 
tick Single Window Mode. This will give you a simpler layout 
that you may be more accustomed too.
If you can bear with it, however, we’d strongly advise 
sticking to separate windows for all the docks. It allows you 
to create a working area on your desktop that’s exactly 
customised for your needs, and if you have more than one 
monitor you can put the tools on one screen with the image 
full width on another.
Colour correction
Gimp is, as we’ve said, a very powerful piece of software. It 
includes tools for cutting out parts of an image, creating layer 
masks, the classic clone and heal brushes loved by art editors 
for removing traces of humanity from a model’s skin and 
a wide range of filters and plug-ins - plus support for more - 
for adding effects and punishing pixels into submission.
To get you started, though, here’s an easy exercise in 
brightening up an underexposed photo. First, you’ll need to 
get your photo into Gimp. A quick note - while Gimp does 
support RAW files from cameras, we wouldn’t recommend it. 
Better to convert your image to JPG, TIF or PNG first.
Now you can open your pic up just by dragging its icon 
from the Files browser over the Gimp launcher or into the 
workspace itself if Gimp is already running. You can also open 
an image using the File menu if you prefer.
Our underexposed image is a little dark, but we’re not just 
going to increase the brightness. That would be crude and 
have the effect of removing some of the dynamic range 
leaving you with a flat, washed out looking shot. We want to 
try and keep rich shadows and preserve as much detail 
without leaving the picture looking washed out.
The way to do this is to click on Colours and select Levels. 
This is the tool that professionals use to correct exposure. 
What you can see is a histogram which describes the “tonal 
range” of your image. The left side of the graph represents 
the amount of pixels in dark areas areas of the shot, and 
the right side light.
36 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Linux apps
Gimp key features
о---------------------------------
Filters
The Filters menu has a host of tools 
for everything from adding blur to 
cartoony frames.
О----------------------------------------------------------
Tools
The tools are a standard photo editing 
kitbag. Everything you’d expect is here.
О-----------------------------------------------------
Options
Beneath the tools themselves you’ll 
find a full array of customisation 
options for tweaking their use.
•. . & 
x. зг*с.'Л 
«t". -.ж.
О----------------------------------------------------------------
Layers
The Layers window acts much the same as 
Photoshop. You can split an image, add extra
layers and edit areas here.
You’ll notice three markers under the graph: one at either 
end and one in the middle.A well exposed shot will have 
readings all the way along the tonal range, depending on the 
contrast in the image captured. If a photo is underexposed, 
however, all the readings will be bunched up at the left­
hand side of the graph with a flatline towards the right. 
The best way to correct this is to drag the marker from 
the right towards the area where the tonal values kick in, 
reducing the tonal range of the image to those values 
that have readings.
If you’re lucky, this will brighten the picture without 
destroying detail. Because the midpoint will also 
automatically adjust, it should retain a good contrast too, 
which merely changing the brightness would wash out.
As if that wasn’t enough, this single tools can also act to 
correct the “white balance” of your picture. If you’ve taken a 
photo indoors, for example, you might have captured a yellow 
cast from the overhead lights. To remove this, you can use 
one of the three pipette symbols in the same Levels dialogue.
From left to right, these allow you to select the black 
point, gray point and white point of an image. Gimp will 
work out what the other colours should look like from there. 
The white point is the easiest to use - just click it then zoom 
in on a detail you know should be close to pure white. Teeth 
or eyes are are good, as are clothes or table clothes. Select 
that as your white point and watch the whole image adjust 
to something more natural looking.
And don’t worry if you don’t get it right first time. Just 
click on an different part of the image or the Reset button 
if all goes wrong.
That’s really just scratching the surface of what Gimp 
can do. In the basic toolbox you can scale images, select 
areas, draw paths, rotate or add text. The only way to learn 
more is to try it out. o
quick photo fixes 
there are tons of
online photo editors 
that work in a Linux 
browser just as 
well as they do in 
Windows. Pixlr. 
com is the best 
known, and great 
for quickly fixing red 
eye etc.
G Gimp’s Unsharp
Mask is every 
bit as good at 
picking up detail 
in images as 
Photoshop’s.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 37

Linux apps
Openshot: Start 
video editing
Easily create home videos and slideshows with backing tracks using the
OpenShot open source video editing package.
Other popular 
Ubuntu editors 
include Pitivi and 
Kdenlive. Both are 
available to install 
from the Software 
Centre if you want 
or need a more 
advanced editor.
If you want to trim a 
clip, consider using 
the ‘Resize Tool’ 
to the right of the 
Razor Tool. Move to 
the edge of a clip 
and then hold your 
left mouse button 
to resize.
I
f you believed that switching to using Ubuntu Linux 
means giving up the ability to create videos and photos, 
rest assured nothing could be further from the truth.
The OpenShot Video Editor which is available from the 
Ubuntu Software Centre can be mastered in a few minutes 
but allows you to create high quality videos.
Although OpenShot isn’t by any means the only video 
editor that will work well in Ubuntu, it strikes an effective 
balance between being simple to pick up, but having features 
advanced enough to create a professional looking video.
In this tutorial we will explore how to import both video 
clips and pictures into OpenShot, then export them as video.
In order to proceed, you will need to have imported the 
video, pictures and music you wish to use to your computer 
either via downloading it from the internet or digital camera.
Once your media is safely on your computer, click on the 
‘Ubuntu Software’ icon to open the Software Centre and 
search for ‘OpenShot’. Click ‘Install’ to download the program. 
Once complete a button marked ‘Launch’ will appear.
Your first step when launching OpenShot should be to 
create a new project. Either click the ‘New Project’ button at 
the top left or hold down Ctrl + N. A window will appear 
allowing you to name the project and choosing where to store 
the project files e.g in your Videos folder.
At this stage do not worry about the video settings under 
‘Project Profile’ as they can be changed later. Choose ‘Save 
Project’ when you are done. The folder you chose will save a 
project file detailing the name of your project and the location 
of any media you have imported using the file extension .osp. 
This is not a video file and cannot be played in a media player,
C Click the ‘New Project’ button at the top left to choose a location to save your 
projects. This doesn’t have to be the same place where you export your video.
B Background music has been added to Track 1, a cat video 
is on Track 2. Note the original audio has been muted.
it’s simply a way for you to save your work as you go in 
OpenShot. Creating a video will come later in the tutorial.
Next, click the green + icon to import media files such as 
video clips. In the example below, a single video clip has been 
used but you can select multiple clips by holding down Ctrl 
and clicking on each file to select. Click on the ‘Add’ button at 
the bottom right to import the files. You will see they will 
appear in the ‘Project Files’ window at the top left.
Tracks, titles and timelines
Once your media has been imported, the next step is to drag 
them into the ‘tracks’ on the timeline. This is fairly self 
explanatory as the timing is displayed along the top and you 
can place your clips anywhere; for instance you may want one 
clip to begin playing after 3 seconds and another immediately 
after the first clip is finished. By default the timeline marks 
every 8 seconds though you can change this by sliding the 
bar at the top right.
You will notice there are two tracks displayed at first where 
you can copy content. You don’t have to use more than one 
track, but if you plan to use more advanced features like 
transitions, titles and background music then it may be 
simpler to devote a track to each clip. Click the green + icon 
above the timeline to add more tracks if you wish.
It’s advisable to have a dedicated track for any 
background music. Simply click the + button and drag an 
audio file into the new track. Unless you want the original 
video’s sound to play too, click the loudspeaker icon on the 
left hand side of the video track to mute the audio.
At this stage you may also want to give your video a title. 
To do this, hold down Ctrl + T to open the Title Menu. Click the 
menu under ‘Start Here’ to choose the font and layout of your 
title, then ‘Create New Title’ to set the text. The title will 
appear in the Project Files and can then be dropped onto the 
timeline wherever you need it.
38 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Linux apps
OpenShot Slideshows
If you wish to create a video from a series of 
photos, place them in a folder and make sure 
they are sequentially numbered. Most digital 
cameras will do this for your automatically.
Use the ‘Import Files’ button to load all the 
files into the ‘Project Files’ window. Next hold 
Ctrl+A to select all the files and right click them. 
Choose ‘Add to Timeline’.
This new window that opens allows you to fine 
tune the video settings. The ‘Timeline Location’ 
section lets you alter the time at which the 
images are displayed - you may wish to leave a 
few seconds delay if you are going to add a title.
The ‘Fade’ section allows you to choose if the 
photos will fade in and out as well as set the 
duration, as the name suggests. Finally the 
‘Transition’ section allows you to choose a 
transition between photos. This saves you the 
time and trouble of inserting transitions 
individually, but naturally it will be the same kind 
of transition e.g Vertical Blinds for every photo.
By default the odd numbered photos will be 
added to track 1 and the even numbered to track 
2, although you can change this if you wish in the 
‘Timeline’ location section. Click ‘Add’ when done.
At this point you may wish to add an 
additional track for background music. 
Slideshows are exported as video in the usual 
way by clicking the ‘Export Video’ button at the 
top and you’re all done.
U Use the arrow keys on the left to change 
the order of the pictures.
Sometimes you may wish only to create a video with short 
clips from a larger recording, for instance to play speeches at 
a wedding. The Razor tool can be activated easily by clicking 
the scissors icon at the top of the timeline. Once you have 
done so, you’ll notice that the cursor will change to a picture 
of a razor blade with a blue dotted line.
Left click your mouse to split your video into any number 
of clips. You can then right-click on individual clips and choose 
‘Remove Clip’ to delete them altogether. If you want to move 
snipped clips around, click on the ‘Arrow Tool’ on the timeline 
to deactivate the razor tool and then move the clips to 
elsewhere on the timeline or a new track.
Effects and transitions
OpenShot contains dozens of built in video effects to enhance 
clips. Simply right-click on the clip in question and select 
‘Properties’. Next click the ‘Effects’ and the green + button on 
the bottom left to add an effect from the menu.
A mini preview of your video clip will display on the left­
hand side. Click on the play button to see what your intended 
effect will look like before clicking ‘Apply’. Remember you can 
apply more than one effect to the same clip. OpenShot 
helpfully places a small star on video clips which have been 
enhanced with effects. You can remove them at any time by 
going into the clip properties, highlighting the effect name 
with your mouse and clicking the red - button.
While you’re inside the Clip Properties window, take time 
to explore the other tabs such as ‘Speed’ and ‘Layout’ to see 
where it’s possible to fine tune the settings for each clip. This 
may be important if you wish to time your video exactly to 
music or simply change the length without using the razor 
tool. Click ‘Apply’ when you are done.
> Use the Play button in the ‘Clip Properties’ menu to 
experiment with different effects. Don’t be afraid to 
explore the other tabs if you need to modify your clip.
C Click the ‘Transitions’ tab to drag and drop between video clips or photos. 
Right click on a transition and select ‘Properties’ to fine tune.
Transitions are particularly useful for moving between 
images or video clips in a stylish way. Click the ‘Transitions’ 
tab at the top-left to see the various kinds available e.g 
Vertical Bars and drag onto the timeline. It can be helpful to 
use different tracks for the transitions to avoid overlapping 
clips. If you wish to fine tune the settings for a transition, right 
click and select ‘Properties’. You will be able to specify a new 
position, length and even direction for your transition.
Exporting videos
You can use the Play button on the built-in video player to 
check the project has been done to your satisfaction. You can 
also navigate by clicking the timeline and use the space bar to 
play and pause if you need to examine a specific section.
Once you are satisfied, click the red ‘Export Video’ button 
at the top of the window. Specify a filename for your video 
and choose a location e.g your Desktop. When it comes to 
choosing a profile if you plan to share the video online choose 
‘Web’. You can further fine tune the settings for individual 
websites e.g Youtube by using the ‘Target’ menu. Click the 
‘Export Video’ button when done. The file will appear in your 
chosen folder once the progress bar is complete.
If you have many 
different types 
of media it can 
be confusing to 
navigate them all. 
Click on the ‘Video’ 
‘Audio’ and ‘Image’ 
button to show only 
that type.
Further Reading
This guide only scratches the surface of the power of 
OpenShot. For more information on additional features visit 
the official manual at www.openshotusers.com/help/1.3/ 
en/. For further help from friendly users and to see some 
stunning examples of videos created in OpenShot head over 
to the forum at http://openshotusers.com/forum/. э
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 39

Linux apps
Web browsers: 
Pick the best
How do you see the web? Seems a simple question, but you might be 
surprised at the difference when you check out the best browsers available.
Each browser 
has a different 
way of importing 
bookmarks - 
check your chosen 
browser’s help file 
for more details 
on how to do it.
W
hat is a computer if not a portal to the internet, 
these days? Accessing the online world is 
absolutely essential, and Linux is not short of 
web browser options. Many of them will be familiar if you’re 
used to going online in other operating systems, some are 
variations (based on the software, but not exactly the same) 
and some are fairly unique, unusual browsers to try as well.
The good news if you’re fairly established with your 
current browser is that it’s usually rather easy to transfer your 
bookmarks over, so you won’t lose those vital links. So before 
we look at your options, let’s back these up from another 
system so that we can import them later on.
Backing up bookmarks
In Google Chrome, click the three-lined hamburger menu 
icon, go to Bookmarks, and click Bookmarks Manager. 
Click the ‘Organize’ drop-down menu and select Export 
Bookmarks. This will create an HTML file which you can 
later import into the browser of your choice.
If you’re using Internet Explorer you’ll find the setting in 
File/Import and Export/Export Favourites. Microsoft Edge, 
despite being newer, isn’t quite as friendly, but thankfully 
Firefox can import Edge bookmarks. To get them (and the rest 
of your bookmarks) out of Firefox, click the bookmarks 
icon, Show All Bookmarks, and follow the steps within 
Import and Backup.
Sadly we’re not made of space here, so users of other 
browsers will have to hit up their favourite search engine to 
find out exactly how to extract those bookmarks. Time to look 
at your options for Ubuntu!
Browser history
The most established browser on Linux is probably Firefox 
which, although it’s lost a little market share in recent years, 
displays the entire web perfectly and includes some neat 
features. Newer versions allow you to synchronise your tabs 
between devices if you sign in to all of them with the same 
Firefox Account, for example, so it’s easy to pick up where you 
left off if you’re jumping from machine to machine - or even 
user account to user account. Similarly, you can use the 
Firefox Hello system to browse the web simultaneously with 
other Firefox users, which is great for remote working, 
planning, or just hanging out online.
You may also find a browser named Iceweasel - this is, for 
all intents and purposes, Firefox in all but name. Certain minor 
elements and trademarks attached to Firefox, such as the 
logo, have been changed due to them violating the 
requirements of free software distribution. Also rebranded 
were email client Thunderbird (Icedove), ‘internet application 
suite’ Seamonkey (Iceape) and seemingly abandoned 
calendar app Sunbird (Iceowl). Expect these frigid alternatives 
to disappear soon, as distro creators seem to be working out 
their differences with Firefox’s parent company Mozilla.
Second to Firefox is Chromium, an open-source browser 
(available in a number of user-developed flavours) that forms 
the basis of Google Chrome. It doesn’t include all of the
Alternative Browsers
Lynx
lynx.browser.org
Classic text-mode 
browsing, run from within 
a terminal window. Lynx is 
mostly a curiosity these 
days due to its archaic 
makeup, and it’s only 
really useful on machines 
which absolutely cannot 
output anything other 
than text mode, but it can 
be interesting to see how 
the web looks without 
images or modern 
rendering techniques.
Midori 
midori-browser.org
Using the GTKWebKit 
engine (a fork of the 
Blink rendering engine 
that powers Chrome, 
Chromium and Opera), 
Midori is the default 
browser of the xcfe 
window manager and 
features in a number of 
lightweight distributions 
(Bodhi, SystemRescueCD, 
Manjaro Linux). It does 
well on the tests we’ve 
listed in this article.
NetSurf
www.netsurf-browser.org 
Originally coming from 
RISC OS - an ARM-based 
operating system that 
grew out of the Acorn 
Archimedes - NetSurf 
has been ported to a 
number of platforms 
since, including AmigaOS. 
It’s not the absolute best 
browser, but it uses its 
own unique rendering 
engine, so if your Linux 
install struggles with 
others, give it a try.
Opera
www.opera.com
So often the browser 
bridesmaid but never 
the browser bride, Opera 
is a clean, fast and quite 
wonderful program 
that deserves more 
recognition than it gets. 
The Opera Turbo feature, 
which compresses your 
web traffic, is particularly 
useful if you’ve got a slow 
internet connection or if 
your ISP blocks access to 
certain sites.
Pale Moon 
www.palemoon.org
A notable fork of Firefox 
that will please those who 
aren’t too happy about 
the modern browser style, 
this clings to an old- 
school, fully-customisable 
user interface and uses its 
own rendering engine, 
Goanna, which forked 
from Gecko, the Firefox 
rendering engine. It’s 
actively updated and high- 
performance, so well 
worth a look.
40 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Linux apps
features of its big trademarked brother - usually missing 
things which use proprietary non-open technology like Flash 
player - but it runs the same rendering engine, which means 
web sites look just as good. It also manages memory in the 
same way, allocating a portion for each of your open tabs, 
which is both a blessing and a curse. A blessing because if 
one tab has a problem it doesn’t bring down the rest with it, 
but a curse because Chromium requires a relatively large 
amount of memory to run multiple tabs.
While you’re unlikely to find big-boy Chrome in your 
distro’s package manger, it’s simple to get hold of the real 
thing. Just head to google.com/chrome, click Download 
Now, and select the appropriate file for your distro (usually 
64-bit deb, if you’re using Ubuntu). Click Accept and Install, 
then open the resultant file with your package manager to get 
it installing. You’ll need to run it from a terminal the first time; 
launch one by clicking the search button, searching for 
‘terminal’ and selecting the Terminal application, then type 
google-chrome-stable to start it up. Once it’s run once, it’ll add 
its icon to your launcher so you can start it more easily.
In both cases here we’d suggest it’s best to run Firefox 
and Chrome over their open source alternatives. While this 
doesn’t match the freedom philosophy of Linux, you’re 
probably not in this for philosophical reasons. Having the 
absolute latest version of your chosen web browser is vital for 
security and compatibility reasons, and sometimes forked 
software just doesn’t keep up with the times.
There are numerous other browsers available for Linux 
which all serve different purposes. Well, OK, usually they’re 
there to provide you with a browsing experience that requires 
a smaller memory footprint for lower end machines. You’ll 
find out more about these in the ‘Alternative browsers’ box.
Testing capabilities
How well does your browser actually perform? Different 
browser options render online elements in different ways, so 
it’s worth testing your chosen browser (and its competitors) 
thoroughly to make sure you’re getting the best experience.
Head first to the Acid tests at www.acidtests.org, a long-
Ger mobile app v
Thank you for downloading Chrome
Now finish setting up Chrome, by downloading the app for your phone and tablet too
— google-chrorne-stable_current_arndM.deb
which it Debian package (4&2 MB)
from: httpsV/dlgoogle com
What should Firefox do with this fHe?
• Open with ubuntu Software Centre (default) 
Save File
Do this automatically for files like this from nowon.
> Chrome probably isn’t available in your package manager, so you’ll need to 
head to its website (in a different browser) to get hold of it.
To the extreme
The most extreme rendering test we could find lives at 
web.basemark.com. Browsermark, for that is its name, 
runs a series of heavyweight tests that push your browser’s 
performance in a number of ways, beyond just HTML5 
or CSS, and might also give you some clues about the 
performance of your PC. Make sure your machine doesn’t 
go to sleep while it’s running, which should take about five 
minutes. When it’s complete, you’ll be given a final score, 
see which percentile your browser and desktop combined 
sits on, and even get a bit of information about the 
performance of your ISP.
While we’ve made some vague recommendations here, 
your choice of browser is really going to come down to 
personal taste and what works best for your Linux system. All 
computers and desktops perform differently, so you’re 
always encouraged to experiment, install, test, and find the 
best choice for you. Once you’ve done that, the internet is 
your oyster. Happy browsing. ®
Don’t fret if your 
browser doesn’t 
max out every 
test - if you’re 
happy with the way 
it displays pages, 
that test result 
doesn’t really 
matter!
standing series of rendering engine­
stretching challenges which will prove 
how well your browser adheres to 
particular web standards or, at least, it 
shows how well your browser performs 
these particular tests.
A more modern benchmark is the 
HTML5 Test, found at html5test.com. 
While this doesn’t animate any pretty 
pictures or give you a visual 
representation of your browser’s flaws 
(boo) it does give you a detailed list of 
everything your browser can or can’t do, 
with a score to match. Many Linux 
browsers are going to lose a few points 
for leaving out closed source 
technologies, so bear this in mind 
before you rush to uninstall your current 
option. The vast majority of websites 
include fallback options away from 
proprietary software anyway, and many 
of these are now becoming the norm 
rather than the alternative.
T The HTML5 test is a great way to see how muscular your browser truly is, but it’s not the be all and 
end all of browser performance.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 41

Linux apps
Steam: Play 
games on Linux
Linux is fun, no really! You can even play games and these days that’s not just 
years old remakes, but same-day release big-name AAA releases.
L
inux is great for work. Linux is great for servers. Linux is 
great for old PCs. No one says Linux is great for 
gaming, or do they? Go back just four years to 2012 
and it’s true, Linux was bereft of almost any native games. 
About the most fun you could have with Linux was 
recompiling the kernel to patch the latest zero-day exploit. 
Then Steam arrived, released in late 2012 the biggest digital 
gaming platform landed on Linux and gaming life was never 
the same again...
Several years on and Linux now offers over 2,000 gaming 
titles on Steam, a number that continues to grow steadily 
with over 500 titles being added during 2016 alone, including 
big-name titles such as Mad Max, Deus Ex 2, Rocket League, 
Life is Strange and the new Tomb Raider reboot. We’ll take a 
look at how you can safely install Steam on Ubuntu 16.10 and 
get gaming as easily as possible.
Before we start we should say that not only is there a 
plethora of choice when it comes to gaming on Linux, it’s now 
easier than ever to get started. Although Valve’s proprietary 
storefront has its issues - such as game DRM- it does make 
installing and running games an incredibly simple process. It’s 
also not the only game in the Linux-verse, Good Old Games 
(www.gog.com) is another service that sells games for Linux. 
It offers a mix of classic games (that have been made 
compatible with modern computers), new games and has a 
no-DRM policy. Another online store that lets you have fun 
and give to charity is www.humblebundle.com and offers a 
range of DRM-free Linux games.
B Bring your Steam library with you, any Linux games will appear as if by magic
Careful now
Do not install Steam via the Valve website. Valve in the correct 
way does offer a Linux install package on its Steam website, 
this will appear to install but due to required additional 
dependencies won’t work. It also doesn’t provide any useful 
error messages to help you work out the problem.
The correct way to install Steam is from the Ubuntu 
maintained repositories. We’ll show you below, it involves the 
Terminal but don’t worry it’s really easy. You may also wonder 
why you can’t find Steam in the official Ubuntu Software 
store, due to the cutting-edge release of Ubuntu 16.10 not all 
packages can be found here yet. So we have to revert to the 
traditional Terminal-based install.
Use the Dash Search (top-left icon) and type Terminal, 
click the Terminal icon to open the black text interface. Here 
type the line below, press enter and enter your password:
$ sudo apt-get install steam
You’ll get a stream of text alluding to the required 
packages that need to be installed and a final line along the 
lines of below, type Y to accept:
0 to upgrade, 43 to newly install...
Need to get 22.4MB of archives.
After this operation, 190MB of additional disk space...
Do you want to continue? [Y/n]
A host of more text will scroll by, which is the Terminal 
installing all of these packages. A text dialog will appear, press 
tab to highlight YES and press return. Select I AGREE using 
the down arrow key and press Return to install Steam itself.
Steam is now installed, you can type Steam and press 
return in the Terminal to launch it. More easily you can open 
42 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Linux apps
the Dash Search, type Steam and launch it from there. This 
will place an icon in the Launcher dock.
Steam will download more of its own files - as it would on 
Windows - but with this you can log in (or create an account) 
and gain access to your gaming library, though restricted to 
Linux supported games.
Performance
Gaming is one of the more demanding things a home user 
can do with their PC. Modern games use more memory, 
processor power and 3D graphics resources than almost any 
other program. Most games offer a recommended and 
minimum specification. Take the latest Deus Ex 2 game, it has 
an incredibly high requirement of 16GB of memory and only 
the latest graphics cards just to play at 1080p resolutions.
Linux does have something of a disadvantage against 
Windows, as currently few games are optimised for Linux, so 
many tend to perform around 20% slower on Linux. Now that 
Linux is established we’d expect newer games to provide 
better optimisations in the future.
Certainly though if you want to play any 3D games you will 
need a suitably powerful 3D graphics card. Newer Intel and 
AMD processors do have basic 3D capabilities that are able to 
power games on basic settings at 720p resolutions. Ideally 
though we’d recommend you to invest in a dedicated 3D 
graphics card such as the Nvidia GeForce 1050 or the AMD 
Radeon 460. Both of these cards costs around £120 and will 
provide great 3D performance. Just ensure you enable the 
proprietary drivers.
Ideally the rest of your PC needs to be up to scratch as 
well, otherwise having a lovely shiny new graphics card will be 
something of a waste. You’ll want at least 4GB of memory but 
8GB these days is more the thing. The processor also needs 
to be something that was made in the last five or six years 
and be at least dual core. This is as much about the overall
T The gaming police will be checking to see if you’re running Linux or not and 
quite possibly mock you for gaming on a server platform. The future is harsh.
speed of the system as it is just ensuring the system as a 
whole is fast enough to play modern games.
Of course, if you’re more interested in older titles then an 
older, slower system will work just fine. But in that case you 
likely don’t need the fancy new graphics card either! The 
Linux and open source world is awash with classic emulators 
so you can run classic software for the Amiga, ZX Spectrum, 
C64, classic arcade machines and even recent consoles. It’s 
just a case of installing the emulator you’re after, grabbing a 
few games that you own of course and firing it up. Most of 
these classic emulators don’t require much power and even 
15-year old systems should be able to cope! э
E Ensure you choose the terminal install to make sure everything works.
Windows games on Linux
Wine (see page 58 for a guide) is a compatibility layer 
that enables many Microsoft Windows programs to 
run on Linux. Although it’s usually used for running 
office suites and other programs that haven’t made it 
to Linux (or don’t have an open source alternative), it 
can also be used for running Windows games in Linux 
as well. Of course, there’s a performance impact to 
running a game via Wine rather than natively, so it’s 
not really recommended for graphically demanding 
games - unless you have one hell of a machine. 
However if you have CDs of some old Windows 
games lying around, or you want to try an indie title 
that hasn’t made it to Linux just yet - then Wine is a 
great possible solution.
To install, open up the Terminal and type 
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:ubuntu-wine/ppa 
sudo apt-get update 
sudo apt-get install wine1.8
and a window will pop up asking you to read and 
agree to a EULA by Microsoft. You might have hoped 
you’d left all this behind, but it’s a necessary step to 
using Wine. Once you’ve scrolled down and agreed, 
type in $ winetricks . To run the graphical user 
interface for Wine. You may have to install additional 
packages, and Wine will take you through the 
process. With ‘Select the default wineprefix’ selected 
click ‘OK’ and then you can begin installing required 
software to run Windows games in Linux.
If a game isn’t available then 
perhaps you can just run the 
Windows version?
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 43

Linux apps
Social: Network 
with friends
Integrate your social networking accounts into your Ubuntu Desktop.
If your Google 
Account uses Two 
Step Verification, 
you may need to set 
up an app-specific 
password for the 
Ubuntu Desktop.
See http://bit.ly/ 
LXF26social
T
he Firefox browser in Ubuntu can be used to access 
any number of social networks, however you may find 
it easier simply to access them from your desktop.
Ubuntu’s Unity desktop integrates well with Google Drive, 
Flickr and Facebook to blend your online and offline data.
To get started, click the Search button at the top left of the 
screen and type in Online Accounts. Click the Online Accounts 
icon to launch the window. By default it will show accounts 
that are compatible with all applications on your computer.
Integrating
Google Account Users can double click on the word Google to 
configure their account. Enter your username, then your 
password. You will then be asked to authorise Ubuntu to 
access your data. Click Allow to permit this.
Once setup is complete the online accounts window will 
list the applications that can integrate with your account. By 
default they are switched on individually. One of the most 
handy features is the Photo Search Plugin. This allows you to 
use the search icon to look for photos stored in Picasa (now 
known as Google Photos). Searches for files can now also 
include those stored in your Google Drive.
If you have any online Google calendars, the Calendar 
application in Ubuntu will also import them automatically. 
Take a moment to check they have been displayed correctly. 
The application is bidirectional in that any add or modify in 
Ubuntu will also update your online Google calendars.
О О Help
All Settings Online Accounts
Flickr 
____ natedrake27
Google
nategreyfacebook@gmail.com
О Google
П nategreyfacebook@gmaiLcom
The following applications integrate with your Google account:
+ Add account...
Photos search plugin 
Search your Picasa photos
Evolution Data Server 
Access your GMail
Shotwell
Publish your pictures to Picasa
Evolution Data Server
Access your Google Contacts
Google Drive search plugin 
Search your Google Drive files
Evolution Data Server
Access your Google Calendar
Remove Account
Legal notice
> Click on Google to sign into your own account. You can control which 
individual applications will integrate with the Ubuntu desktop.
Flickr is an image hosting service similar to Picasa but is 
run by Yahoo. Anyone can access photos and videos 
uploaded to the website without an account but users must 
register in order to share their own content.
If you have a Yahoo e-mail address then you will be able to 
sign into Flickr right away. Click on Add Account on the left 
hand side of the Online Accounts window, then on Flickr. You 
will be asked to sign in with your Flickr ID.
Once you are signed in, the Photos Search feature will 
work in the same way as for Google Photos. Simply click on 
the Ubuntu search icon and enter your search terms.
If you use Ubuntu’s photo manager Shotwell, you can also 
publish photos to Flickr and Google Photos from within the 
app itself. Simply highlight your photos or videos of choice 
and choose File ... Publish. If you have not previously used 
Shotwell to manage your photos, you can see more 
information on this in the official manual.
Desktop notifications
Certain websites like Gmail, Twitter and Facebook support 
push notifications that show a small pop-up even when you 
don’t have their web page open. For instance Facebook can 
show an alert when you get a new message or notification.
This feature is available in Firefox but has not been fully 
implemented, so if you’d like to see pop ups for new Facebook 
notifications, tweets or e-mails, try installing the Chromium 
web browser from the Ubuntu Software Centre. Once 
Chromium is installed click the icon to launch it and visit your 
website of choice. You will be asked to agree to allow desktop 
notifications for that site. Click Allow for the notifications to 
appear. Each time an alert pops up you can click on it to be 
taken to the site in question.
Instant Messaging
There are a number of applications available in the Ubuntu 
Software Centre that will connect to multiple instant accounts 
such as AOL Instant Messenger or Google Hangouts without 
having to visit each website individually.
Previously Ubuntu came with the messaging client 
Empathy pre-installed, however this has been dropped in the 
most recent version the operating system. Fortunately it’s 
very easy to install. Open your web browser and go to 
https://apps.ubuntu.com/cat/applications/empathy, 
then click the red button marked available in the Ubuntu 
Software Centre. A new window will open click Open Link to 
begin installing Empathy.
Once Empathy opens click Account Settings to open the 
Online Accounts window. You will see that there is a new
44 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Linux apps
Setting up Skype
As Skype is currently developed by Microsoft and 
doesn’t release its source code, you won’t find it 
in the Ubuntu SofWare Centre.
Nevertheless, if you visit www.skype.com you 
will see that there is a version available for 
Ubuntu. Click on Choose your distribution and 
then Ubuntu 12.04 multiarch to begin 
downloading. A prompt will appear asking if you 
want to open the file with software install. Click 
OK. Once the file has downloaded open your 
Ubuntu Software Centre to see the entry for 
Skype and click Install. Launch Skype by typing 
the name into your search bar.
The official Skype Linux client is rather dated; 
the most recent major version was released in 
2014. Skype Developers are trying to address this 
by launching a test alpha version. This version is 
still in an experimental phase and will have some 
bugs but if having Skype is important to you, you 
can help by installing and providing feedback.
Visit http://bit.ly/LXF26skype and click 
Download Skype for Linux Alpha Deb. The alpha 
version is capable of calling Skype users on 
mobile devices and Windows and Mac computers 
but cannot call people using the official Linux 
client available from the main page.
There are a number of video conferencing 
programs available for Ubuntu besides Skype
such as Gajim and Psi, both of which can be 
installed via the Software Centre.
C Choose Ubuntu 12.04 to get the installer 
for the official Skype 4.3 Linux Client.
C Click Allow on supported websites to show an alert on 
your desktop each time someone interacts with you.
option for Empathy Messenger. Empathy is very easy to use 
but if you run into difficulties, there is plenty of support 
available from the GNOME website at https://wiki.gnome. 
org/Apps/Empathy.
Although Empathy integrates well into Ubuntu’s desktop, 
it doesn’t support many different types of messaging 
protocols, nor is it very customisable.
Users who want to set up additional accounts and/or have 
more control over their messaging can install Pidgin. Pidgin is 
a very popular messaging program for Linux and supports 
AOL Messenger, Yahoo,ICQ, MSN Messener, Google 
Hangouts, Apple’s Bonjour protocol and many more.
To install Pidgin visit http://bit.ly/LXF26pidgin and 
click the red APT Install button, then Install.
On the first run, Pidgin will give you a variety of accounts 
to set up, choose accordingly and set up your accounts. 
Pidgin supports cross messaging from one account to 
another as well as a variety of plug ins. (For instance there is 
one that lets you chat to Skype users). You can find help with 
getting started by reading Pidgin’s manual at https:// 
developer.pidgin.im/wiki/Using%20Pidgin.
Social setbacks
Ubuntu is designed to work well with social networks, so it’s 
unlikely you will have any problems with your desktop. If after 
setting up an account you find that the connection is not 
working e.g your Google Calendar isn’t appearing in the 
Calendar application, try logging out and in again as this 
usually fixes the issue.
If you choose to use desktop notifications for Twitter, 
Facebook, Gmail and so on with Chromium, although you 
don’t need to have the pages for those sites open, Chromium 
itself needs to be running for you to see the alerts.
Neither Pidgin, nor Empathy support messaging via 
Facebook. This is because in April 2015 Facebook dropped 
support for the open XMPP (Extensible Messaging and 
Presence Protocol ) which allowed third party apps to 
connect to their chat servers. Fortunately you can still access 
your Facebook messages via https://facebook.com or 
https://messenger.com.
Most Linux Messaging programs however do support 
XMPP (also known as Jabber), which uses a number of 
servers around the world to allow people to communicate 
with each other freely. Visit www.jabber.org for more 
information and tips for registering an account.
If you like using a particular program to manage your 
media or communications, don’t worry if there doesn’t seem 
to be a version available for Ubuntu. First check the website 
to make sure that is really the case ; there is a Linux version of 
Skype for instance (see Setting up Skype above).
If there’s no downloadable application for your program of 
choice, you may be able to access it through your browser. 
Whatsapp for instance can be run from inside a Firefox 
window by visiting https://web.whatsapp.com and 
scanning in a code on your mobile phone.
If there’s no Linux or web version, search in the Ubuntu 
Software Centre and on http://askubuntu.com to see if 
there’s an equivalent program for what you need.
Remember that if you integrate social networking into 
your desktop or browser then anyone logged into your 
account will be able to see your profile and messages. Always 
ensure that you have a strong password and either suspend 
your session or log out of Ubuntu completely each time you 
leave your computer. о
Online Accounts 
supports publishing 
to Facebook 
through Shotwell 
as well as searching 
through Facebook 
photos. Click Add 
Accounts then 
choose Shotwell 
from the drop down 
menu. Next click 
Facebook to set up 
your account.
If you are trying 
to set up Google 
Hangouts to work 
with Pidgin, click the 
Advanced tab in the 
setup screen and 
change the blank 
Server field to chat. 
google.com.
Empathy
Offline
You need to set 
up an account 
to see contacts 
here.
О О Help
All Settings Online Accounts
nategreyfacebook@gmail.com
> Click Add Account on the left hand side of the window and choose Empathy 
from the drop down menu to show which messaging protocols are supported.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 45

Linux apps
Thunderbird:
Email made easy
Set up your very own desktop email client and keep your messages and 
contacts close at hand rather than losing them in the cloud.
Thunderbird 
supports multiple 
email accounts 
at once - just 
go to File > New 
> Existing Mail 
Account to add 
another.
E
mail is one of the internet’s oldest technologies.
It outdates the web, it outdates instant messaging 
and it even outdates the internet’s predecessor, 
Arpanet. MIT, so often the innovator in these fields, 
started using software called Mailbox and SndMsg to 
leave messages for each other in 1965. The @ symbol was 
introduced to route mail to specific computers during the 
development of Arpanet in the early 70s; by 1974 the US 
military was a heavy user, and by 1978 75% of all Arpanet 
traffic was email. You could even reasonably give credit to 
email for inspiring the earliest development of the internet: 
this was a closed-system technology that the public 
couldn’t wait to use.
We’d stake money on you having at least one email 
address, and if you’ve been around for a while you probably 
have several. While most email accounts now have some kind 
of web interface for accessing your inbox and sending new 
messages, it’s arguable that this may not be the best way to 
manage your mail. Say you lose your internet connection: 
your inbox, stored entirely online, will be completely 
inaccessible. So many of us rely on old messages to remind 
us of information, this probably isn’t acceptable.
Security, too, should be a concern. How well do you trust 
your webmail provider not to snoop on your messages?
A Adding an account, if you’re with a recognised provider, could not be easier - 
just add your email address and password.
What happens to your email archive if that provider goes 
bust, or a hacker forces their way in and changes your 
password? These, and many other reasons, are why it 
makes sense to use a desktop email client that can be 
backed up, store your messages offline, and live - if you 
have such a facility set up - in an encrypted partition away 
from prying eyes.
Positive Outlook
If you’ve been around computers for a while, it’s probable 
that you’ve used Microsoft’s Outlook or Outlook Express, 
packages which do just the job we’re looking for: downloading 
mail from servers, storing it, sending new mails and replies, 
and backing up your inbox. Funnily enough, Microsoft’s 
flagship mail package isn’t available on Linux platforms, 
but Mozilla’s well-weathered Thunderbird is just as capable 
and should be quite familiar to former Outlook users. We’ll 
take you through installing it, configuring it to connect to 
an account, and beyond.
Let’s start by getting hold of it. Many distributions will 
have it installed by default - including Ubuntu, which we’re 
using here - but if you don’t have it head to your local friendly 
package manager and search for Thunderbird Mail. Install as 
usual (see the start of this chapter for more information on 
package managers) then run it from its icon.
Postmaster
When you run Thunderbird for the first time, you’ll be given 
the option to sign up for a new free email address - we’re 
going to skip this particular step for this tutorial, so click 
Skip. Next, fill in your current email details. Your email address 
and password are the important parts here, the ‘Your name’ 
field doesn’t have to match the name you usually use for 
the account, but it’s useful to use your real name here so 
recipients know who’s emailing.
Brilliantly, Thunderbird now queries a database of 
server information. If you’re using a recognised provider 
like gmail.com or outlook.com, it’ll automatically grab the 
correct ingoing and outgoing server details so you don’t have 
to worry about it. More obscure providers may not be in the 
database, however, so you may have to fill in the blanks 
yourself. Your ISP or mailbox provider will provide the 
appropriate information; we can’t tell you precisely what to
46 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Linux apps<2
POP3 vs IMAP
There are two ways to receive email: POP3 (Post Office Protocol) and IMAP 
(Internet Message Access Protocol). POP downloads messages to your 
computer and (usually) deletes the originals from the server. It’s the 
classic method, and good for those using a single machine or with a 
security-conscious bent: if the mails are gone from the server, it’s going to 
be a lot more difficult for them to be traced or spied upon. There are big 
disadvantages when it comes to using POP3 on multiple machines - since 
it’s a one-way transaction, there’s no synchronisation between mailboxes, 
so you won’t get an indication of the messages you’ve read or replied to, 
and your filing systems won’t match up.
IMAP is a a two-way protocol, and probably the better choice if your 
provider offers it. Folders, read status and message deletions will all match 
up between the server and your mail client, meaning you can use the same 
account on multiple machines - and indeed use webmail and Thunderbird 
at the same time while keeping things synchronised.
put here, because very ISP is different. You can now choose 
whether to use POP3 or IMAP with your account - see the 
box above for more details on each - and hit Done. You may 
have to authorise the use of your email account in a further 
window, but you should only have to do this once.
A quick note for Gmail users: if you have Google’s two-step 
authentication switched on (and you should do), you’ll need 
to generate an app-specific password and use that, rather 
than your regular account password, to log in to your email 
through Thunderbird.
Split personality
Thunderbird’s default main screen lists your email account 
and its subfolders on the left, and has a main window on the 
right split into two: the top pane contains the contents of 
your inbox, and the bottom pane contains the currently 
selected email. Try clicking on your inbox in the left column. 
Thunderbird will download all of your email from the server 
(this could take a while) and, if you’ve used IMAP, you should 
retain the read/unread status of your messages. By default, 
the inbox view displays messages in date order with the 
oldest at the top, but you can quickly re-sort your messages 
by clicking the column headers at the top.
Click on a message and you’ll see it appear in the bottom 
pane of the main window. If this is a bit small, just hover your 
mouse over the bar between the panes and drag up to give 
yourself a bit more space. Still not enough room? Double­
click the message and it’ll open up in a tab of its own, giving 
you the full height and width of your Thunderbird window to 
play with. Click on the Inbox tab (or close the message tab) to 
get back where you were. Further layout options can be found 
in the View menu at the top of the screen.
In the book
While you have a message open, you’ll see all the usual email 
functions (reply, reply all, forward etc.) lined up along the top 
of the window, and you can always hit the Write button to fire 
up a new mail.
If an email includes embedded images linked from the 
internet, you’ll also, at least initially, see a bar with a 
Preferences button. Thunderbird is restricting these images 
because, unlike plain old email, senders can use images to 
glean information about your computer, and whether 
you’ve read the message. Hit Preferences and you can 
choose to view images in just that email, for all messages 
from that address or domain, or head to the main Remote 
Content Preferences section where you can switch off this 
feature altogether.
When you’re creating a new message, you’ll probably 
discover that Thunderbird doesn’t actually have an address 
book to start with, even if you’ve been using one with your 
webmail account. Manually importing your address book 
(Tools > Import) is the only way to get this done. The process 
is going to differ depending on your source, but it’s not 
incredibly difficult.
Different versions of Outlook tuck away the export options 
in slightly different menus, but you should be able to find 
them buried somewhere deep within the File menu. Make 
sure you that export your address book as Comma Separated 
Values or .csv, as Thunderbird is happy to accept this format. 
In Gmail, the process is much more straightforward. Simply 
select the contacts section from the top left of the main 
window, (just above the Compose button), click More then 
Export to find the option. э
You can set up a 
signature to add to 
the bottom of all 
of your outgoing 
messages in the 
Edit > Account 
Settings menu.
U Use the preferences button to determine which images you can see in emails 
you’re sent - you can get quite specific.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 47

Doing more
48 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more
Doing 
more
Improve screengrabs.................................50
Set up two OSes.........................................54
Windows plays on Linux.............................58
Get started with Terminal...........................60
Work with files in Terminal......................... 62
Scan and print............................................64
Don’t lose your data................................... 68
Bug free and secure....................................70
Install and switch DEs.................................72
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 49

Doing more
Ksnip:Improve 
screengrabs
See how easy it is to take screengrabs and annotate them using a 
combination of Ubuntu’s built-in tools and third-party utilities.
S
creen capture tools are a useful in anyone’s 
armoury. You don’t need to be a Linux Format 
writer to benefit from being able to show 
someone part or all of your screen. Whether trying to 
demonstrate a particular feature or get help from an 
expert by sharing a visual representation of your 
computer’s ills (such as a specific error message), a 
screen capture program is the tool you need.
The ability to grab your screen is an integral part of the 
Linux desktop, whichever one you use. However, the built- 
in screenshot tool doesn’t always have all the features you 
Annotate with ksnip
"J Main toolbar
You can easily create, save and copy 
images to the clipboard from here, 
as well as reverse unwanted 
changes.
Crop images
If you need to crop into a specific 
part of your captured image, click 
this button to do so using a resizable 
bounding box.
j Markup tools
Ksnip supports a decent range of 
annotation tools. These range from 
arrows and pens to text, blurred 
areas (for redactions) and
even emojis.
4|S elect object type
Click the down arrow next to a tool to 
choose what type of object you want 
- for example, a blur or pixellate tool 
for redactions.
^1 Formatting toolbar
This toolbar displays options and 
tools based on the selected 
annotation object, such as font, size 
and effects for text-based objects.
Э Objects
Each annotation is treated as an 
independent object, enabling you to 
select them individually to move, 
need, so in we’re going to take a look at not just the default 
tools for GNOME and KDE, but also a selection of third- 
party programs that take screen captures to the next level.
The quickest way to capture your current screen is with 
a single keypress: the aptly titled Print Screen or PrtScr 
key. In older versions of Ubuntu - including 20.04 LTS - 
pressing this key results in the sound of a camera shutter, 
the screen will flash and an image of your entire desktop 
titled Screenshot from YYYY-MM-DD HH-MM-SS.png 
will be saved to your Pictures folder using the GNOME 
Screenshot tool. Double-click this to view a picture of your 
desktop sans mouse cursor.
It’s quick, dirty and not particularly elegant. For 
starters, a 1:1 screen capture of a typical Ubuntu desktop 
produces a file around 2.1MB in size. That’s fine if you need 
to capture the entire desktop, but in many cases you’ll only 
want to capture a specific part of it, such as a program 
window. The good news is that GNOME Screenshot has 
anticipated this very need: press Alt+PrtScr and only the 
currently active window will be captured. But what if you 
want to select a specific part of the screen - say one with 
overlapping windows? You’re covered here, too: press 
Shift+PrtScr, then click and drag to select the area you 
want.
If you need more control over your screen captures, 
there’s a separate screenshot portal tool accessible via the 
Launcher. This displays a dialog enabling you to select 
what you want to capture - full screen, application window 
or rectangular selection - but it also makes it possible to 
add a delay to the capture, so you’ve time to set things up 
as you need to. It also gives you the option of including the 
mouse pointer and a border around your application 
window if required. After capture, you’ll also be able to 
save the screenshot to a specific folder with your choice 
of filename.
New and shiny
The latest LTS build of Ubuntu unveils a new version of 
Gnome Desktop and with it a new screenshot tool. Now 
when you press PrtScr the tool pops up as a floating 
widget in Selection mode, with part of the screen pre­
selected inside a resizable bounding box. Next to Selection 
are Screen (full desktop) and Window, which pulls out all 
open windows and invites you to select which one you 
want to grab.
Beneath the selection tools you’ll see three further 
controls. On the left is an option to choose between simple 
50 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more
screen capture or video capture. On the right you’ll see a 
mouse pointer - it’s excluded from the capture by default, 
so select this if you need to include it (for example, you 
want to draw attention to a specific option within a 
program window).
The cental button is the actual capture tool - it’s a 
white shutter for screen captures, a red record button 
if you opt to record video. Press the white button to 
capture a static screenshot. You’ll hear the familiar click, 
and then you’ll be notified the image has been copied to 
the clipboard for pasting elsewhere. It’s also saved into a 
Screenshots folder inside your Pictures folder using a 
similar naming convention as the older screenshot tool.
If you’re capturing video, after clicking record, the 
screen remains dimmed, but you can perform whatever 
action you like - you’ll see a record meter appear in the 
menu bar, so click this to end the recording when you’re 
done. Video clips are stored in .webm format inside a 
special Screencasts folder inside Videos following a 
similar naming convention to screenshots: ‘Screencast 
from DD-MM-YY HH:MM:SS’.
Those keen to capture the entire desktop or just the 
active window - as before - will be pleased to learn that 
the new tool offers two keyboard shortcuts that do just 
that: press Shift+PrtScr to capture the entire desktop, or 
Alt+PrtScr to capture the currently selected window.
Beyond screenshot
While the new screenshot tool is easier to use than its 
older precursor, it lacks several key features. For starters 
you can’t choose where to save your screen captures or
> Ubuntu 22.04 LTS unveils a new desktop screenshot tool 
- simply press the PrtScr key to invoke it.
> If you’re running Ubuntu 22.04 on Wayland then your screenshot tool must 
be able to invoke the GNOME Screenshot Portal to capture grabs.
even change their name, and you also lose the ability to 
delay screen captures to give you time to set up your 
screen before capture if required.
Thankfully, you’ll find several third-party screen capture 
tools exist to fill in these - and other gaps. KDE users 
should check out Spectacle (see the box, overleaf), which 
replaces the Gnome Screenshot tool. GNOME users can 
install Spectacle through the Software Centre, but it’s not 
compatible with GNOME’s implementation of the Wayland 
protocol, so doesn’t work in Ubuntu 22.04 unless you 
switch back to Xorg - see the box for more details (below).
The same restriction applies to several other screen­
capture tools we’d have otherwise recommended, 
including Kazam (https://launchpad.net/kazam). This 
offers all the features found in the original GNOME 
screenshot tool, including the ability to delay captures with 
optional countdown timer and save files manually, plus 
some additional features of its own. The most notable of 
these is the ability to configure Kazam to save screenshots 
automatically to a folder of your choosing using your own 
choice of filename prefix.
You can still use Kazam to capture the entire desktop 
screen in Wayland, but its screen-casting tools don’t work 
and it’ll crash if you attempt to capture a window, making 
it an impractical solution unless you switch 
back to Xorg.
You can expand 
ksnip with plugins. 
Visit https/github. 
com/ksnip/ksnip- 
plugin-ocr/releases 
to download a 
package to add 
OCR capabilities to 
the tool. Use it on 
scanned documents 
to extract editable 
text via the 
Options>OCR 
menu.
Getting ksnip
Thankfully, you don’t need to abandon Wayland to access 
all of Spectacle’s features in GNOME. There are two 
Wayland-friendly tools offering both screen capture and
The trouble with Wayland
For those stepping into the world of Ubuntu 
22.04 for the first time, a potentially nasty 
surprise awaits: Wayland, the new desktop 
protocol that replaces X11. For the most 
part it’s a good switch - Wayland is faster 
and more secure, but it’s that additional 
security which poses a problem for 
screen-capture tools.
On a desktop running the Wayland 
protocol, many screen-capture tools are 
unable to grab screens using their own 
capture tools. That’s because they’re not 
engineered to work with Wayland’s more 
robust permissions structure, and you can 
see this in action when you attempt to install 
and launch Spectacle through an Ubuntu 
22.04 install running the GNOME desktop on 
Wayland - when the program opens, you’ll 
be told it “could not take a screenshot”.
The problem doesn’t occur with 
Spectacle in its native KDE environment 
because it’s been fixed to work with Plasma 
Wayland since May 2021. Because GNOME 
is stricter about what programs can access 
screen-capture capabilities, other tools have 
been forced to adopt a different approach.
In the case of ksnip and Shutter, both 
authors have engineered a workaround 
whereby the tools use the GNOME 
Screenshot Portal in Wayland instead of 
their own more flexible screen-capture 
capabilities (including support for global 
hotkeys), which continue to work in X11.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 51

more
Shutter may ship 
with more stickers 
than ksnip, but the 
latter supports 
scalable vector 
graphics (in SVG 
format). You can 
add your own via 
Tools>Settings 
>Annotator> 
Stickers. You’ll find 
loads of free vector 
art online - start 
your search at 
https://openmoji. 
org/library.
post-capture annotation tools to choose from, each with 
their own unique features, and both programs can be 
installed through Ubuntu Software. They are Shutter 
and ksnip.
Let’s start with ksnip. In Wayland, it’s unable to capture 
screenshots using its own tool; instead, it relies on the 
GNOME Screenshot Portal, which works in a similar way to 
the old GNOME Screenshot tool. It can be installed any 
number of ways - through Ubuntu Software (choose the 
ubuntu-jammy-universe version over the snap in Ubuntu 
22.04), or you can visit https://github.com/ksnip to 
discover how to obtain it as a flatpak, DEB/RPM package 
or standalone AppImage.
Once installed, open ksnip through the Launcher and 
it’ll place its icon on the menu bar. Click this to reveal a 
pop-up menu with various options: Show Editor, 
Screenshot Portal and Open (which works with any image 
file, not just screen captures).
To take a screenshot, choose Screenshot Portal and it’ll 
immediately capture the entire screen and open it in the 
separate Screenshot Portal application. Ignore this initial 
capture and click the Options... button to configure the 
portal to grab the entire screen, the current window or a 
user-selected area. You can also set a delay timer in 
seconds, plus capture the cursor and add a border effect 
to any captured windows, just as with the old Gnome 
Screenshot tool.
Once you have configured your choices, click 
Take Screenshot and a new capture will be taken. If 
you’re happy with your grab, click Share to transfer 
it to the ksnip editor; if not, click Options. to try again.
S Shutter 
provides a wider 
choice of icons 
for labelling your 
screengrabs 
with, but 
beware: they’re 
bitmapped, so 
don’t scale well.
Once you’ve taken your first screengrab, the ksnip 
window expands to reveal the image and a selection of 
tools for performing post-capture editing. From here, you’ll 
see a selection of markup tools to the left of the image, 
which are summarised in the annotation opposite. Each 
added element is created as an independent floating 
object, and the Select tool at the top of the tools list 
enables you to click existing objects to move, resize, edit or 
delete them (press the Del key) using their own context­
sensitive controls.
Beneath the Select tool is the Duplicate tool. After 
selecting this, click and drag on a portion of your image, 
which will be duplicated as a separate layer sitting on top 
of the main image. This can be moved or resized. For more 
advice on using ksnip as an editing and markup tool check 
out the step-by-step guide (opposite).
Snap with shutter
If you can’t find the markup tool you need in ksnip, 
then take Shutter for a spin (install it through Ubuntu 
Software). The tools share many similarities - including a 
shared reliance on the GNOME Screenshot Portal in 
Wayland - and while we prefer ksnip’s workflow, there are 
a few reasons why you might want to try Shutter.
First up is its support for exporting your screengrabs 
directly to a series of supported online accounts: Imgur, 
vgyme, Gyazo, Dropbox and ToileLibre are all supported 
along with FTP. Second, Shutter supports a wider range of 
graphics for ‘stamping’ on your images - whereas ksnip 
gravitates towards a selection of smileys, Shutter provides 
more practical icons such as errors, information, questions 
and even a selection of callout graphics, inside which you 
can combine with a text object to form a label. Note that 
they’re bitmaps and don’t scale up well - see the Quick Tip 
for a way to add more scalable vector stickers to ksnip.
Third, Shutter’s plugin repository has seen it benefit 
from more than a dozen post-capture effects being added, 
including effects like turning your grab into a Polaroid 
photo complete with caption to a wider range of border 
effects. The plugins crashed when running in Wayland, but 
worked fine once we switched to Xorg. Apply them from 
the main Shutter window via the ‘Screenshot>Run a 
plugin.’ before clicking Edit to annotate your grabs.
KDE’s spectacle
If you’re a KDE desktop user, then KDE ships 
with the default Spectacle screen-capture 
tool, which goes a bit further than Gnome’s 
standard Screenshot tool. Press PrtScr to 
invoke it, at which point you’ll see a preview 
of the entire desktop appear along with 
options to set up another screengrab.
In addition to the usual Full Screen and 
Rectangular Region options, Spectacle 
offers two options for capturing windows 
or dialogs. Active Window works in the 
same way as other screenshot tools, while 
Window Under Cursor captures whichever 
window is beneath the cursor when it’s 
taken. Look for the ‘Capture the current 
pop-up only’ option, which works with this 
to enable you to selectively grab items like 
pull-down menus.
Beneath this is a ‘Delay’ option, for either 
setting a timer before the snap is taken or 
ticking the On Click box so that when you 
click ‘Take a New Screenshot’, Spectacle 
waits for the next mouse click before 
capturing the screen. Other features include 
the ability to choose which file format to 
save your grabs in, along with an Export 
button for opening captures directly in your 
choice of image editor or to transfer 
elsewhere, with Bluetooth, email, NextCloud 
and other devices all available as 
destinations.
Spectacle also offers a built-in annotation 
tool. This enables you to apply effects and 
mark up your captured images. You can 
configure its save and capture settings, as 
well as assign keyboard shortcuts for super-
K KDE’s built-in screenshot tool is flexible 
and powerful, and ideal for KDE desktop.
52 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more
Quick tips with ksnip
J Go native
If you’d like to give ksnip’s own screen capture tool a go, log out 
of Ubuntu. Click your username followed by the cog in the 
bottom-right corner, then select Ubuntu on Xorg and log in. 
Launch ksnip to reveal a New option with five capture types as 
shown above. It also has its own global shortcuts: use Alt+Shift 
instead of just Shift.
"Ц Resize windows quickly
Want to resize a program window to a specific size before 
grabbing it? First, install wmctrl ( sudo apt -y install wmctrl ), then 
open Settings and navigate to Keyboard>View and Customise 
Shortcuts>Custom Shortcuts. Create your shortcuts using the 
following command, changing 1280 and 720 to your desired width 
and height: wmctrl -r :ACTIVE: -e 0,200,200,1280,720 .
Crop to perfection
Sometimes it’s easier to crop an image after capture. Thankfully, 
ksnip includes a dedicated Crop tool for this very purpose. After 
capturing your image, click the button and your image will be 
enclosed in a bounding box - you can resize this through click and 
drag, or use the X, Y, W and H fields at the bottom to set it 
manually. Click Apply when done.
~4 Copy and paste
When you create a new object, ksnip always reverts to its default 
settings, including font and size. To get around this, select your 
existing object, right-click it and choose Copy, then right-click 
where you want the new object to go before choosing Paste. A 
duplicate will be created for you to modify - if it’s a number, it’ll 
automatically go up in sequence.
3 Rearrange items
Every annotation you place on your image is treated as a separate, 
movable object. Click it to select it, where you’ll find 
you can resize and move it easily. By default, newer labels sit 
on top of older ones, but if you right-click the currently selected 
object and open the Arrange sub-menu you can choose how 
items overlap each other.
^A dd a watermark
Protect your images with an image-based watermark. Select Opti 
ons>Settings>Annotator>Watermark and click Update to select 
your image file, such as a scan of your signature. Ignore the 
cramped look in the box - the image’s original aspect ratio will be 
respected when you choose Edit>Add Watermark. A faded copy 
of the image will be shown, which can be resized and moved.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 53

Doing more
Dual boot: Set 
up two OSes
Afnan Rehman dives deep into the world of dual-boot systems to bring y 
the simplest solution to the two OS problem.
Make sure to
disable Fast 
Startup before 
installing Ubuntu 
to avoid issues with
GRUB detecting 
the Windows
installation. You 
can disable it in the
Windows power 
management 
advanced settings 
under ‘Shutdown
settings’ where you 
can uncheck‘Turn
W
e live in a world where multiple operating syst 
hold a share of the desktop market and 
applications aren’t always available on every 
platform that you want them to be, it’s often necessary t 
have more than one OS available ready to boot. Virtual 
machines offer only a partial solution to this problem as 
compatibility layer technologies such aWs ine. The solution i 
to dual-boot two OSes on the same machine.
The boot managers of modern day OSes can manage 
multiple systems and allow the user to choose which one 
boot at startup. This way you can have Windows OS and 
Linux distro, so that you can keep the beautiful experienc 
that is Linux while also accessing applications that still on 
work well on for work or play. (Not every game supports 
SteamPlay on Steam for Linux, although we’re getting clo 
In this tutorial, we’ll focus specifically on dual-booting a L 
distribution (distro) with Windows. We will be using Ubu
However, the steps in this tutorial can be adapted to 
Linux distros.
First, let’s talk a little bit about why we dual boot. The 
many reasons people pursue a dual-boot solution, the ke 
reasons being performance and compatibility. As most us 
will tell you, it’s best to run things natively with access to 
computer’s hardware resources. The fact is, virtual machin 
will severely restrict the amount of resources that you ca 
use. When you implement a dual-boot system, you’re abl 
boot as if Linux is the main OS and Windows weren’t th 
and vice versa. That gives you access to all the processi 
cores, all system RAM and all expansion cards that the 
computer has to offer, making it easy to run intensive 
programs without slowdown. You also get access to all d 
and externally connected devices such as USB devices a 
speeds (as long as the OS supports them, of course).
How dual-booting works
For the sake of brevity, we will assume you are able to i 
Windows without a detailed explanation. It’s safe to say t 
you’ve ever installed a Linux distro, you are more than re 
to install Windows on your own. If you’re a newcomer to 
- welcome! - anddoy’re l!keik to have Wiedows instalieS on 
your currenessytem (g(gen ehat th e WinWowsfsmiiy still has 
orneed 900% o’ that msrtet) and edn proceed kirectiy to 
creating a duel-bootaystsm ss o )rosh rsinskall of Windowe 
iSe’a riqeirid. It yne toiie’a ariid ieSaoiiieg oiednsS bitn 
ate prncess is sispie oed atere ore soey geides neiiee a 
teip yne. Tte iesaoiioaine sedio is eseoiiy snid ne o disk
> The Disk Management tool provides an easy to 
xu)nderstand graphical interface for partitioning and 
managing storage on all disks that the OS has access to.
USB)driie)oed)coe)oe)ntaee)perctosed)neiiee)nr)ie)sanre.) 
Ooeec)e)yne)iesera)ate)sedio)oed)onna)ate)cnspeaer,)o)series)nt) 
saeps)siii)geide)yne)atrnegt)ate)iesaoiioaine.
) Tte)iersine)nt)oiednss)atoa)yne)ctnnse)an)iesaoii) 
tset)neide’a)soaaer,)steater)ia’s)oiednss)7,)8)nr)10.)Tte)aype)nt) 
)prngros)atoa’s)esed)an)gea)ate)sysaes)saoraed)otaer)aereieg)ia) 
ne,)eiater)iegocy)BIOS)nr)EFI)onna,)soy)soaaer)ie)snse)coses) 
no)ea)ne)snsa)sndere)sysaess)atis)sne’a)coese)oey)sojnr) 
)issees.)Lea’s)gea)snse)oosic)aersieningy)nea)nt)ate)soy.)
EFI)saoeds)tnr)Exaeesioie)Firssore)Ieaertoce,)oed)snsa) 
sndere)sysaes)poraiaines)ore)ie)atis)tnrsoa,)stict)odteres)an) 
ate)UEFI)(Ueitied)Exaeesioie)Firssore)Ieaertoce>)saoedord.) 
U) EFI)repioces)ate)Bosic)Iepea/Oeapea)Sysaes)(BIOS>)atoa) 
isi) nsa)PC)deiices)esed)oetnre.)Ttis)is)ispnraoea)snsaiy)tnr) 
snre)odioeced)esers)stn)sist)an)soeeoiiy)sea)poraiaines)tnr) 
snre)cesansised)seaeps.)Siece)snsa)sndere)sysaess)ese) 
UEFI,)se’ii)snrk)ne)ate)ossespaine)atoa)yne)siii)ann.
oii) Eoct)tordsore)soeetocaerer)tos)o)dittereea) 
)isit)pieseeaoaine)nt)UEFI)oed)eoct)tos)ias)nse)eeiqee)qeirks.) 
yM) nsa)toie)ate)sose)oosic)teecaines)oed)sarecaere,)stict) 
eoeiixn)s)tnr)ate)iesaoiioaine)nt)dittereea)nperoaieg)sysaess.) 
eH) nseier,)Dittereea)UEFIs)coe)soeitesa)sojnr)prnoiess)tnr) 
)snse)oed)iesaoea)seccess)tnr)naters.)Dittereea)oeaane) 
seaaiegs,)onna)seees,)oed)saoraep)seqeeeces)coe)coese) 
prnoiess)stee)yne)ore)aryieg)an)sess)siat)ate)onna) 
seqeeece.)Ia’s)oesa)an)reseorct)yner)soeetocaerer’s)UEFI) 
soeeoi)oetnretoed)oed)tosiiiorise)ynerseit)siat)ate)seaaiegs)
)oetnre)yne)ary)an)ctoege)oeyatieg.)Mnsa)sysaes)onna)
54 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more
What to do when you mess up
Should you need to repair the Ubuntu bootloader 
after trying to install a dual-boot system, the 
Ubuntu wiki has some great instructions for 
helping to repair the bootloader. The link is 
https://help.ubuntu.com/community/
RecoveringUbuntuAfterInstallingWindows.
The recommended way would be to use an 
Ubuntu live CD or USB that you created when 
first installing Ubuntu. The simple graphical way 
is to insert your disk or flash drive, reboot the 
computer and boot into the live CD environment. 
From this environment, you can choose the Boot 
Repair tool which is built into the Live CD.
The boot repair guides you through solving 
more frequent problems, such as those 
associated with dual-boot and can also generate 
error reports that you can share on forums or 
email to your genius friends who are more Linux 
savvy to get help with the issue. For recovering 
Ubuntu, you can click ‘Recommended Repair’ 
and allow it to work its magic. Then all you have 
to do is reboot and the usual boot menu should 
appear. If not, you can hold left Shift key while 
booting to select between the two operating 
systems. You can also try to repair it by opening a 
terminal. When you are given a standard Bash 
prompt, type:
# sudo grub-install /dev/XXX
Replace XXX with your Ubuntu install device 
(eg. /dev/sdb).
sequences will feature a splash screen where you can press a 
function key to gain access to boot settings menus (for 
example, it’s F9 for HP, F12 for Dell and Lenovo, F8 in Amibios 
and F11 in an Award BIOS) and you’ll need to know which key 
it is to open which menus and which settings to change. 
Knowing these things beforehand can save you a lot of 
headache should the need for troubleshooting arise.
Partition standards
You’ll also hear the acronyms GPT and MBR thrown around. 
These terms relate to how partitions in the hard drive are 
organised and recorded. MBR, which stands for Master Boot 
Record, refers to the information stored in the first sector or 
partition of the hard drive that identifies how and where an 
operating system is located so that it can be loaded into the 
computer’s main storage or RAM.
GPT, which stands for GUID Partition Table, is similar in 
function to MBR in that it stores partition information for the 
hard drive. This information includes where the partition starts 
and ends so that the OS knows which sectors belong to which 
partition and which ones are bootable. MBR, which was first 
introduced back in 1983, can only handle drives that are up to 
2 terabytes in size and can support up to four partitions per 
drive. GPT is a newer standard that has been gradually 
replacing MBR and handles drives that are far larger and allows 
for a nearly unlimited amount of partitions. If you have Linux 
the GRUB bootloader, which handles OS booting just like the 
Windows boot loader, is often stored in the MBR or GPT. It’s 
important to note that Windows can only boot a GPT drive on a 
UEFI-based machine. All current versions of Windows, Linux 
and Mac OSX support GPT and it’s generally recommended to 
use this scheme on any new installs for the sake of 
compatibility and to avoid issues that MBR might bring.
There are benefits and drawbacks to either installing 
Windows or Linux first and every system is different. In this 
guide, we will be taking you through the process having 
Windows installed first. It’s possible to install Ubuntu first, but 
there are far fewer issues when having Windows installed first, 
as the Linux GRUB bootloader can adapt easily to 
accommodate Windows. In contrast, the Windows bootloader 
will almost always disregard the presence of another existing 
OS, often overwriting the existing bootloader and rendering 
the other OS useless until it’s repaired.
It’s important to note that while most of Linux distros are 
good at handling dual-boot situations, there’s always room for 
something to go wrong. We highly recommend performing a 
backup of any existing data to a separate storage device just 
in case the worst happens. Any files, settings or applications 
can be backed up in a variety of ways that will allow you to 
pick and choose what to save for later. It would be best to 
save this backup on a separate physical device, such as a 
different hard drive, a different computer or possibly cloud 
storage if you have enough space and a fast enough 
connection. The simplest way to back up everything you need 
to back up is to make a recovery disc which will back up 
Windows itself and set up a File History backup to take care of 
personal files. There are wizards located in the Control Panel 
that will guide you through both of these backup processes. 
The recovery disc will help you restore Windows system and 
boot files in case something goes wrong with the operating 
system. File History will automatically back up personal files 
to a designated device in case the worst comes to pass and 
your entire drive partition gets corrupted.
Now that you understand the basics, let’s get to work.
The first thing you’ll need to do is choose your distro of Linux 
that you want to install. For this tutorial, we’re using Ubuntu 
16.04. The most important thing you will need to start is a 
copy of Ubuntu live CD on a USB flash drive or compact disc. 
You can download your preferred version of Ubuntu from its 
website at www.ubuntu.com/download. Here you can 
download an ISO file that you can use to create a DVD or 
bootable USB flash drive. We recommend creating a bootable 
flash drive as it’s more versatile than a DVD, especially with 
optical drives getting phased out of many newer systems to 
save space, weight and power. Once you have a flash drive 
made you can move on to getting your partitions in order to 
prepare for the installation.
Of course, now you will only be able to resize the Windows 
partition if there’s a decent amount of available space on it, so 
make sure you have room before you commit to undertaking 
this project. If your computer is running multiple hard drives 
you also have the option of installing Linux on an entirely 
different drive, leaving your Windows partition untouched. 
Now before you run out and purchase a brand new hard drive, 
I’ll remind you that the two installations are perfectly capable
Always keep a copy 
of the Ubuntu live 
CD and Windows 
installation disc on 
hand. These two 
discs are essential 
and will save your 
bacon should the 
worst happen. 
The tools and 
functionality will 
help reverse most 
common issues 
and can be used to 
help recover data in 
a pinch.
»
• C:\Windows\system32\diskpartexe
Microsoft DiskPart version 10.0.10240
Copyright (C) 1999-2013 Microsoft Corporation.
On computer: DESKTOP-ATK3KV9
T The diskpart tool allows you to accomplish partitioning and storage tasks with 
a command line interface for more advanced users and those who might wish 
for more custom settings.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 55

Doing more
When backing 
up your data, 
make sure your 
backup storage is 
separate, reliable, 
and spacious. 
By keeping it 
physically separate 
from the main 
device, and making 
sure it is reliable 
and spacious 
enough to hold all 
of your data, you 
will reduce potential 
issues with the 
backup failing.
of running in harmony on different partitions of the same 
physical drive.
Partitioning methods
There are a few ways to handle partitioning, so I’ll explain the 
one that assumes you have Windows already installed. If you 
already have Windows installed, the easiest method is to just 
use the diskpart utility built into Windows to help with this 
process. Every drive is different, and it’s likely you’ll have 
multiple partitions already existing on the hard drive, such as 
recovery, OEM and primary etc. Be careful resizing or deleting 
these partitions as messing with the wrong one will lead to 
major issues. Usually, the partition labelled ‘Primary’ is the 
largest and is where most of your files and data are held. Any 
partitions labelled ‘System’ or ‘OEM’ should not be modified 
at all, as those hold Windows system files and cannot be 
changed, lest you risk the entire system being corrupted. The 
Primary partition could be resized to give you space for your 
Linux installation. The easy way to do this is to go into the 
Disk Management application, find your drive with the 
primary Windows installation, right-click the partition and 
select ‘Shrink Volume’. After that, just follow the onscreen 
instructions and you’re good to go. Now you’ll see a section of 
the drive with a black bar above it labelled as ‘Unallocated’. 
This is where your shiny new Linux installation will go. 
Alternatively, if you’re feeling brave you can lose any partition 
named ‘Recovery’ and install there. However, make sure you 
know what you’re getting yourself into when you do this.
Now, you can restart and boot from a USB or disk into the 
Ubuntu live CD by holding down the Shift key while rebooting. 
On booting, hit the appropriate function key to load the boot 
menu, where you can select which device to boot from. Find 
your flash drive and hit Enter to commence the boot process. 
You’ll be loaded into the Ubuntu live CD environment with its 
basic feature set. Here, you can start the installation process.
Now follow the onscreen instructions to install Ubuntu. 
Make sure to choose options that would allow for the Ubuntu 
install to exist alongside the existing Windows installation. 
Don’t try to overwrite it, because that would be disastrous. 
This step will involve you as the user deciding how much 
space to allocate for your Linux installation. You’ve already set 
aside space for the Ubuntu installation in Windows Disk 
Management, but you also have the option to use more or 
less space depending on how you want to do things. In 
Ubuntu, there are two ways to install alongside Windows. 
First, there’s an option labelled ‘Install Ubuntu alongside 
Windows’ which will handle everything for you. Some other 
Linux distros, such as those using Calamares installer, offer 
similar options to simplify the process. Otherwise, you can 
also make and resize partitions using the installer. If you 
choose this route, you can select ‘Something Else’ when 
prompted for installation type. You can resize the partitions 
based on your needs and use case. If you’re mainly using 
Linux to experiment, you may not need as much space as if 
you were, for example, heavily invested in Linux gaming or 
dealing with other large amounts of data. Make sure that the 
boot loader remains the Windows Boot Manager.
The installation process itself will vary depending on the 
Linux distro that you want to use. For Ubuntu, the process is a 
fairly simple step-by-step walkthrough. You can choose to 
install updates during the installation, however, you can skip 
this if you have a poor internet connection or just want to 
install them later. At the very end, you’ll be asked to restart.
At this point, you’re done and can start using your Ubuntu 
Install. Switching between OSes would involve a simple 
reboot. When booting you’ll be given the option to load either 
Windows or Ubuntu, usually with a default option that will 
automatically boot after several seconds. If you’re not 
receiving these options, try some basic troubleshooting by 
retracing your steps.
Sometimes you may find that you need to remove the 
Linux install for whatever reason. Remember, when removing 
Linux from the dual-boot process you must be very careful so 
as not to break your bootloader and, in turn, create a massive
Total size before shrink in MB:
Size of available shrink space in MB:
Enter the amount of space to shrink in MB:
Total size after shrink in MB:
16999
i
You cannot shrink a volume beyond the point where any unmovable files are located. 
See the "defrag" event in the Application log for detailed information about the 
operation when it has completed.
T The shrink 
volume dialog 
box in Disk 
Management 
allows you to 
shrink a partition 
size, and also 
warns you if your 
desired shrinkage 
is too small.
See "Shrink a basic volume" in Disk Management help for more information
Shrink
Cancel
56 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more
T The manual partitioning tool in the Ubuntu installer is 
similar to many partitioning GUI tools.
headache which can possibly go as far as rendering the 
Windows install unusable.
Removing Linux
To start, you’ll need your Windows installation or recovery CD 
or an Ubuntu live DVD. To remove the GRUB bootloader, open 
the command prompt from the installation or recovery media 
environment. Next, type:
> bootrec /fixmbr
Reboot and boot into Windows. Then move onto using the 
Ubuntu live CD. Boot from the CD and choose Ooot-Rpaair.
If it isn’t installed then you can try to install through a few 
simple terminal commands that you can type one by one:
$ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:yannubuntu/boot-repair
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get install boot-repair
Next, simply boot-repair and click the ‘Recommended 
Repair’ option.
Last, to remove the Ubuntu partitions you’ll need to head 
back into Windows, reboot and boot into Windows and open 
Disk Management by searching for it in the Windows menu. 
In disk management, right click the Ubuntu partitions and 
select ‘Delete’. This is the point of no return so make sure 
you’re good to go before you click that button. If you plan to 
just keep using Windows then right click the Windows 
partition and select ‘Extend Volume’. This will increase the size 
of the Windows partition to fill up the free space. That should 
be all that is needed to restore the machine to using only one 
operating system.
Now that you know how to add and remove operating 
systems to and from a computer in a dual-boot situation, 
you are ready to tackle your own project with other distros 
and combinations. As a final note, there’s also the possibility 
of adding more OSes to your boot sequence, creating triple­
boot or multi-boot systems. Adding systems essentially 
follows the same basic steps of partitioning and adding as 
space allows to the hard drive. With more operating systems 
comes more versatility and using the bootloader to your 
advantage can allow you to truly make your computer your 
own and design an environment suited to your needs, э
T The Ubuntu 
live environment 
allows you to 
try Ubuntu right 
off of the disc, 
so you can use 
it to test some 
features and 
prepare your 
machine before 
writing anything 
to disk.
Re-ordering the Boot Manager
You’ll notice that when you boot from a 
shutdown state there’s a certain order to things. 
The Windows operating system or the Linux one 
will be given priority and unless you press keys 
during startup you’ll end up automatically 
booting into one system or the other, whether 
you wanted to or not.
This is a common issue that’s easily remedied. 
You can use the EFI Boot Manager tool that you 
can access from an Ubuntu Live CD. Once in the 
Live CD environment open a terminal and install
EFI Boot Manager with the following:
$ sudo apt-get install efibootmgr
Next use the following command to find out 
the current boot order situation:
$ sudo efibootmgr .
You’ll get an output that looks something Ilke 
this, with the boot order llstzed:
BootOrder: 0004,0001,0002,0005
Boot0001 Windows Boot Manager
Boot0002 Network
Boot0004 ubuntu
Boot0005 Hard Drive
Boot0006 CD/DVD/CD-RW Drive
To change the boot order, we will hav^ to uss 
the numerical codes which correspond to the 
boot device that we want first:. For example, 
in this case we want: the system to try to boot 
from CD first, followed by Ubuntu and Windows. 
So, we will use the following command to 
change the boot sequence:
$ sudo efibootngr -o 0006, 0004, 0001
That’s it, you’re now ready to go.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 57

Doing more
Wine: Windows 
plays on Linux
Moving to Linux doesn’t mean totally abandoning Windows, there is satyil 
to run some Windows programs right within Ubuntu.
Here’s the
Windows version 
of Picasa running 
under Ubuntu.
U
buntu does provide everything a happy and f 
computer user should need, but being pragm 
sometimes it’s not possible to totally cut ties 
every Windows programs. For those programs that yo 
need there is a syatem cellmd Wine - Wine Is Not an Emulator 
- thet can aatteatt>t mo provI de an in-Ubuntu solation.
ieit it is ind weit it isn’t: iine is i compitib 
cetc’s cv s ty ic insercs icself becween Ub.nc. tnd ce 
ervgrtm mtking cetc ervgrtm ceink ic’s scill r.nning 
iindvws. As ic stys ic’s nvc tn em.ltcvr, in mtny 
emulttvr Iike VirtualBox might Co n better jot, but takes moct 
resv.rnest cvt wvrk.t Beingt tt nvmetcibilicyt ltyert metnst 
wvrest wicet vtryinht levelst vft s.nness.
Ift ceere’st tt seenifint ervhrtmt yv.t wtnct cvt cryt cvt 
iinet ic’st tnvistalet cvt firsct lvvet tct ceet iinet teelintc 
ntctats ethttps://appdb.winehq.orgt ceist rtnest nvmetcia 
.sinht Pltcin.m,t Gvln,t Silver,t Brvnzet tnnt J.net sctc.se 
ceeret willt tlsvt aet tt nectilent v.clinet vft wetct nvest t 
wvre.t Anyceinht rtneent Brvnzet vrt J.net ist eihelyt lieely 
wvrcet cryinh.
Yv.’llt nvcinet cetct tt lvct vft ceet encriest tret fvrt ht 
ceet ennt vft 2012t Lin.xt wtst veryt evvrlyt servinent wic 
st .eevrcttnntiinetvfferentceetaesctwtytcvtentvytiinnvwst 
ht tminhtwicev.ctiinnvws.tActceetenntvft2012tVtlvetSvfcwtret 
sicettrcentvfferinhtLin.xts.eevrctfvrticstScetmteltcfvrmttnnt 
csvcniltltytttltrhetn.maertfvrtinniettnntaih-ntmethtmesttret 
nttvtEimlta.llettcnvirtenclytfvrtLin.xtcerv.hetScetm,tGvG.nvmttnnt 
vceertservines.tB.ctfvrtvlnerthtmesttnntteelintcivnstiinetist 
ystcilltltyeenrcitrelytrelevtnc.
iinnvwst
Snetrtart Wining
yTsetettwntt ytiinetwvrestntntaetttliccletnvnf.sinh,ta.ctiinetisn’ct 
tsvmverceetinhtcetctr.nstintceetatnehrv.nn.tYv.t.setictcvtr.ntyv.rt 
iinientnvwstEXEtfiles,tceistinnl.nestceeirtvrihintltinsctlltfiles.t 
iinetceentsicsttstceist“nvmetciailicytltyer”taecweentceet
nit inwnicvewtstervhrtmttnntceetscrtnhe,ttlientltnnsnteetvft 
Ut a.nc..tTeistltyertistereccytnvmereeensiveta.ctltrhelyt 
yint visiale,tceetmvsctvisialytvaviv.sttseenctvftceististcetctiinet 
rienerielettcestceetsctnntrntiinnvwstfiletscr.nc.ret(ceetC:tnrive,t 
tPrnvvhersttmntfvilcetstfvlner,tiinnvwstfvlnertecn)twiceinticstvwntLin.xt 
nUvact.ncvc.t tfavelnter.
Teististfvrtm.lcieletretsvns,tnvctletsctceististevwtervhrtms 
w.tillUteextee.nncctcilet inhstcvtaeteltnen,ta.cttlsvtceetLin.xttnnt 
hitimnninvhwtstfiletsyscemsttretinnvmetciale.tTvtsctrc,tiinnvwstist
58 | lin.xtfvrmtctpresencs:tua.nc.

Doing more
Wine - get started
J Install Wine
Open the Ubuntu Software program (it should be in the dock) and 
search for Wine. Oddly it’s called Configure Wine, select this and click 
Install. Installation can take a while, but once it has completed before 
you do anything launch Wine. This enables Wine to do its initial 
configuration, such as building the base Windows folder system.
Ignore the GUI
You can nose around the Wine GUI, but at this point there’s nothing 
you need change. It’s useful to note that you’re able to map more 
Ubuntu drives to standard Windows drives letters - ie add a D drive - 
through its Drives tab. Instead we’re going to download a standard 
Windows program, Notepad++ and install it.
*з1 Install Notepad++
Grab this from a reputable download site like www.filehippo.com/ 
download_notepad save the install EXE to your desktop or Download 
folder. Once finished locate the file and right-click on it then select 
Open in Wine. Wine needs to handle the installation so it can set up the 
charade that Notepad++ thinks it’s in Windows land.
~4 Run Notepad++
You’re able to place Windows icons on the desktop - if you choose - 
and Wine is able to ensure they work correctly. Once the install has 
finished all that’s left is to double click the desktop icon. Otherwise you 
can locate the program through the Dash Search. More technically 
files are stored under the standard ~/.wine folder.
case insensitive that’s to say a program called “HELLO” looks 
the same as one called “hello”, under Linux they are treated 
as two entirely different files. Another oddity is under 
Windows folders are distinguished with a backslash \ under 
Linux it’s a forward slash /.
These are more things to be aware of rather than worry 
about as for the basic use we’re covering it shouldn’t be an 
issue. Occasionally though when locating files from within 
Ubuntu, Wine and other Windows programs it’s useful to be 
aware of this.
We’ve created a basic walkthrough that shows you how to 
install and run a standard Windows tool onto Ubuntu and 
then run it. We’re using Wine at its very basic level, there’s a 
whole world of more complex features that can improve 
compatibility but it’s beyond this beginner’s guide. Instead we 
can point you in the direction of some pre-build versions and 
bolt on paid-for services that try to make Wine work better.
The first and your first port of call should be www. 
PlayOnLinux.com this is a front-end to Wine and offers a 
large list of pre-built and tested configurations for many 
Windows games and programs. The PlayOnLinux system 
makes it very straightforward to install and launch your
Windows programs. But why wouldn’t you install this over 
Wine? First it requires Wine anyway and secondly it only 
supports a limited number of programs that are known to 
work well.
The commercial arm of Wine is a product called 
CrossOver available from www.codeweavers.com it’s aimed 
at businesses and provides a dedicated support service for 
running Windows programs on Linux.
Another option to keep in mind is that the version of Wine 
maintained by Ubuntu is v1.6, the latest stable release is 
actually v1.8.x. It’s worth reading the release notes to see if 
that improves compatibility for games or programs you want 
to use. Getting the latest version is a matter of following a few 
basic terminal commands, though ensure you uninstall any 
version via the Ubuntu Software tool, if you’ve already done it 
that way. A handy guide can be found at https://wiki. 
winehq.org/Ubuntu.
Really, Wine isn’t the answer, we’d strongly suggest 
seeking out native Ubuntu apps rather than continuing with 
trying to use a Windows program. We’ve listed a number of 
common alternatives on page 34, but thousands more are 
out there just waiting to be discovered. @
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 59

Doing more
Terminal: How 
to get started
Flex those fingers and dive head first into the inky darkness of the terminal.
Let us show you how to start handling its mysterious commands.
If you’re struggling 
to type the right 
command, you can 
wipe all previous 
actions from view 
simply by typing 
clear and hitting 
Enter. Note this 
won’t affect your 
command history.
T
he terminal is an incredibly important part of your 
Linux desktop. It doesn’t matter how wedded you are 
to point and click over the command line, at some 
point you’re going to have to dip your toe in the terminal’s 
dark expanse and use it. Don’t worry, though, because the 
terminal isn’t as scary as it might appear, and if you take the 
time to learn the basics you’ll discover it can be a far quicker 
and more effective way of getting certain tasks done.
As you’d expect, a terminal effectively gives you access to 
your Linux shell, which means it works in exactly the same 
way using the same language (Bash). This means you can do 
anything in the terminal you’d normally do at the command 
line, all without leaving the relative comfort of your desktop. 
That makes learning how to use the terminal - and assh - 
doubly advantageous as it gives you your first glimpse into 
working with the underlying Linux shell.
We’re basing this tutorial on Ubuntu, so start by opening 
the Dash and typing ‘terminal’ into the search box. You’ll find 
the terminal of course, but you’ll also see two entries called 
UXTerm and XTerm too. This highlights the fact there are 
multiple terminal emulators that you can run in order to 
interact with the shell. There are differences between them, of 
course, but fundamentally they do the same thing.
For the purposes of this tutorial we’re sticking with the 
default terminal, which is basically the gnome-terminal 
emulator - technically it’s emulating a TeleTYpe (TTY) 
session. It has all the functionality you’ll need, but both XTerm 
and UXTerm are worth noting because although they are 
more minimalist tools and neither require any dependencies 
to run. This means if anything stops the main terminal from 
running, you can use either as a backup. As an aside, the only 
difference between the two is that UXTerm supports the 
expanded Unicode character set.
How Bash works
The Linux shell uses the Bash shell and command language 
to perform tasks, and it uses a relatively straightforward 
syntax for each command: utility command -option .
The ‘utility’ portion of the command is the tool you wish 
to run, such as Is for listing the contents of a directzr^ry, or 
apt-get to trigger the APT package management tool. The 
command section is where you specify exactly wha t you 
want the utility to do, eg typing apt-get install instructs the 
package management utility to install the named package, eg 
apt-get install vlc .
The -option section is where one or more ‘1=lags’ can bee 
set to specify certain preferences. Each flag is preceded by 
one or two dashes (--) anti the most useful of all is the --help 
option, which provides a erief description of the utility, plus 
lists all available commands and options, eg ls -l .
T The --help flag can be used with any command to find out what it does, plus 
what arguments to use.
Speed up text entry
It doesn’t matter how fleet of hand your typing skills are, the 
command line can still be a time-consuming, frustrating 
experience. Thankfully the terminal comes equipped with 
lots of handy time-saving shortcuts. This issue let’s take a 
look at how you can easily access previously used 
commands and view suggestions:
» Up/down arrows Browse your command history.
» history Use this to view your command history
» Ctrl+r Search command history. Type letters to narrow 
down search, with the most recent match displayed, and 
keep pressing Ctrl+r to view other matches.
» Tab View suggestions or auto-complete a word or path if 
only one suggestion exists. Press ~+Tab to autofill your 
username, @+Tab to autofill your host name and $+Tab to 
autofill a variable.
60 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more
Your first terminal commands
While it’s possible to install and manage software using a 
combination of the Software Center and Ubuntu’s SofWare 
& Updates setting panel, it’s often quicker to make use of the 
Advanced Package Tool (APT) family of tools. Here’s some 
key ways that they can be used (see sudo use below): 
$ $ apt-cache pkgnames Lists all available packages from 
sources listed in the /etc/apt/sources.list file.
$ $ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:<repository name> Adds a 
specific Launchpad PPA repository to the sources list:.
$ $ sudo apt-get update Gets the latest package llsts 
(including updated versions) from all Ilsted repositories.
$ $ sudo apt-get install <package> Installs all the named 
package. This will also download and Install any required 
dependencies for the packages.
$ $ apt-get remove <package> Use this to remove an 
installed package. Use apt-get purge <package> to also 
remove all its configuration files, and apt-get autoremove to 
remove packages installed by other packages that: are no 
longer needed.
$ sudo apt-get upgrade Upgrades all installed software - 
run sudo apt-get update before running this. Other useful 
apt-get commands include apt-get check a diagnostic tool 
that checks for broken dependencies, apt-get autoclean , 
which removes Deb files from removed packages.
T The apt-cache package can also be used to search for specific packages or 
reveal a package’s dependencies.
The -l flag tells the list: directory tool to provide detaiied 
information about the contents of the folder it’s listing, 
including: permissions; who owns the file; the date it was last 
modified; and its size in bytes. Utilities can be run without any 
commands or options - eg ls on its own provides a basic Ilst 
of all folders and files in a directory. You can also run utilities 
with a combination of commands and/or options.
Restricted access
Open the terminal and you’ll see something like this appear: 
username@pc-name:~$ . This indicates that you’re logged on 
to the shell as your own user account. This means that you 
have access to a limited number of commands - you can run 
ls directly, eg, but not to Insttall a package using apt-get , 
because the command in question requires root access. This 
is achieved one of two ways - if you’re an administrative user 
as the default user in Ubuntu is, then you can precede your 
command with the sudo command, eg sudo apt-get install 
vlc . You’ll be prompted for your account password, and then 
the command will run. You should find that you can run more 
sudo -based commands without being re-prompted for your 
password (for five minutes) while the terminal is open. On 
some distros you can log on to the terminal as the root user 
with su - you’ll be prompted for tine root password af which 
point you’ll see the following prompt:: root@pc-name:~$ .
Once logged in, you can enter commands with no 
restrictions. We recommend you use the sudo command 
rather than this approach and if you’re running Ubuntu then 
you’ll find su won’t work because the root: account 
password is locked for security reasons.
When installing some distros or adding new users to 
Ubuntu, you may find your user account isn’t added to the 
sudo group by default. To resolve this, you need to open the 
terminal in an account that does have root access (or use the 
su command if supported) and type sudo adduser 
<username> sudo . You can also add the user to ot:l^er groups 
with the command by listing all the groups you wish to add, 
eg: sudo adduser <username> adm sudo lpadmin 
sambashare .
Another handy tool is gksudo, which allows you to launch 
desktop applications with root privileges. It’s of most use 
when wanting to use the file manager to browse your system 
with root access: gksudo nautilus . Make sure you leave the 
terminal open while the application is running, otherwise it’ll 
close when the terminal does. When you’re done, close the 
application window, then press Ctrl+c in the terminal, which 
interrupts the currently running program and returns you to 
the command line.
We’ve already discussed the --help flag, but there are 
other help-related tools you can use too. First, there’s 
whatis - which you can type with any command to gee a 
brief description of it and any specified elements, eg whatis 
apt-get install vlc will describe the apt-get tool, the install 
argument and what package vlc is. Flags are ignored.
If you’re looking for a full-blown manual then tine man 
tool provides access to your distro’s online reference manual, 
which is started with man intro . This provides you with a 
long and detailed intro to the command line. Once done 
press q to quit back to the terminal. For more advice on 
navigating the manual, type man man or pair it with a tool 
eg man ls .
Now you’ve taken your first steps into the world of the 
terminal, check out the box (Your First Terminal Commands, 
above) for some useful package management commands 
you can work with. Next, we’ll look at how to navigate your 
filesystem from the terminal, plus launch programs and delve 
into more useful shortcuts to help speed up the way you 
interact with the command line. Э
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 61

Doing more
Terminal:
Work with files
Time to turn our attention to navigating your file system and 
manipulating files and folders from the beloved Terminal.
P
reviously we introduced you to the basics of using 
the Terminal. We opened by revealing it works in the 
same way as your Linux shell; how commands are 
structured (utility command -option); plus gave you the tools 
to manage software packages and get further help. This time, 
we’re going to look at how you can navigate your file system, 
work with files and folders and learn some more time-saving 
shortcuts in the bargain.
When you open a new Terminal window, the command 
prompt automatically places you in your own personal home 
folder. You can verify this using the Is command, which lists 
the contents of the current folder. The default Terminal 
application displays folder names in blue, and filenames in 
white, helping you differentiate between them. The Is 
command can be used in other ways too. Start by typing Is -a 
to display all files, including those that begin with a period 
mark ( . ), which are normally hidden from view. Then try Is 
--recursive , the --recursive option basically means that the 
contents of sub-folders are also displayed.
If you want more detail about: the folder’s contents - 
permissions settings, user and group owners, plus file size (in 
bytes) and date last modified, use Is -l . If you’d prefer to I ls't 
file sizes in kilobytes, megabytes or even gigabytes depending 
on their size, add the -h option—so use Ih -h -l instead. 
There are many more options for Is and you can use the 
--help option to list them all.
Navigating your file system is done using the cd 
command - to move down one level to a sub-folder that's 
inside the current directory use cd <subfolder> , replacing 
<subfolder> with the name of the folder you wish to access. 
Remember that folder and filenames are case sensitive, so if
"erminal
0 nick(®nick-ubuntu: -/Documents
nick@nick-ubuntu:~$ cd Documents 
nick@nick-ubuntu:~/Documents$ Is 
Doctor Who
nick@nick-ubuntu:~/Documents$ rmdir Doctor\ Who 
nick@nick-ubuntu:~/Documents$ is
nick@nick-ubuntu:-/Documents$ mkdir Doctor Who 
nick@nick-ubuntu:~/Documents$ is 
Doctor Who
nick@nick-ubuntu:-/Documents$ rmdtr Doctor Who 
nick@nick-ubuntu:~/Documents$ is
nick@nick-ubuntu:~/Documents$ mkdir 'Doctor Who' 
nick@nick-ubuntu:~/Documents$ is 
Doctor Who
nick@nick-ubuntu:-/Documents$ |
> Make good use of ‘ and \ characters when folder paths 
contain spaces and other special characters.
the folder begins with a capital letter - as your personal 
Documents folder does, eg - yousll get an error about the 
folder not existing if you type it all in lower case, eg, cd 
documents . You can also move down se'^eral levels at once 
using the following syntax: cd subfolder/subfolder2 . To move 
back up to the previous level, use cd .. , you can also use the 
/ character to move up multiple levels at once, eg cd ../.. 
moves up two levels.
What if you want to go somewhere completely different? 
Use cd / to place yourself in the root directory, or navlgat:e 
anywhere on your system by entering the exact path, 
including that preceding / character to indicate you're 
navigating from the top level, eg cd /media/username .
The ~ character works in a simiiar way to / , except this 
places you in your home director;/. So typing cd ~/ 
Documents is the same as typing cd /home/username/
Speedier navigation
In last part we revealed some handy keyboard 
shortcuts to help you enter commands more 
quickly, but the following keys will help you 
navigate the Terminal itself more efficiently: 
H Home/End Press these to jump to the 
beginning or end of the current line.
» Ctrl+left/right cursor Move quickly 
between arguments.
C Ctrl+u Clear the entire line to start again.
» Ctrl+k Delete everything from the cursor's 
position onwards.
» Ctrl+w Delete the word before the cursor. 
Accidentally omitted sudo from your command? 
Just type sudo !! and hit Enter to repeat the last 
command with sudo applied to it. And ifyou 
make a typo when entering a command, iinstead 
of retyping the entire command again, just use the 
following syntax to correct the mistyped word (in 
the following example, dpkg was originally 
mistyped as dkpg):
AdkpgAdpkg
62 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more
Boost your learning
Now you’re starting to flex your muscles in 
Terminal, how about expanding your knowledge 
by instructing it to display information about a 
random command each time you open it? To do 
this, you need to edit a file, so open the Terminal 
and type the following:
nano ~/.bashrc
This opens the file in the nano text editor. Use 
the cursor keys to scroll down to the bottom of 
the file, then add the following Ilne to I t:
echo “Did you know that:”; whatis $(ls /bin I 
shuf -n 1)
Press [Ctrl]+[o] to save the file (just hit Enter to 
overwrite it), then [Ctrl]+[x] to exit nano. Now 
close the Terminal window and open a new one to 
get a brief description of a command. Just type 
the following, with the actual command listed for 
a longer description: <command> --help .
Documents . One final trick —you’ve jumped to another 
directory, but how do you go back to the previous directory 
quickly? Simple, just type cd - to do so.
Working with files and folders
You can now list directories and navigate your file system, 
but what about doing something practical, like moving and 
copying files? You’ll find a range of different commands exist, 
and the tricks you’ve learned about navigation will hold you in 
good stead here too.
Let’s start by looking at commands for copying ( cp ) and 
moving ( mv ) files and folders. The same options apply to 
both commands. The basic syntax is cp/mv <source> 
<target>. The source and target can be complete paths 
following the same rules for the cd command, but it's 
generally good practice to first navigate to the folder 
containing the file or folder you wish to copy or move. Once 
done, you can simply specify the file or folder name as the 
source, like so cp invoice.odt ~/Documents/Backup .
This creates a copy of the file with the same name. 
The following copies the file to the specified directory and 
renames it too: cp invoice.odt ~/Documents/Backup/invoice- 
backup.odt . If you want to create a copy oo the fiie wrthin thh 
same file, simply use cp invoice.odt invoice-backup.odt .
Substitute mv for cp in any of the above command:;, 
and the file is moved, moved and renamed or simply 
renamed. What happens if there’s already a file called 
invoice-backup.odt in existence? It’ll be overwritten without 
as much as a by your leave, so make sure you’re asked if you 
want to overwrite it by adding the -i flag like this mv -i 
invoice.odt invoice-backup.odt .
You can also copy folders using the cp or mv 
commands. Here, you need to include the recursive option, 
which ensures the folder is copied across with all its contents 
and correctly arranged in their original locations relative to 
the parent folder: cp -r -/Documents /mnt/sdbl/Backup/ .
If the Backup folder exists, then the Documents folder 
will be recreated inside it; if not, then the Backup folder is 
created and the contents of the Documents folder are copied 
into it instead.
Use the rm command to delete a single fiie, eg rm 
invoice.odt . The rmdir command deletes folders, but only 
empty ones. If you want to delete a folder and all its contents, 
use the command rm -r foldername .
You can also create new folders with mkdir command - 
simply type mkdir folder, replacing folder with your chosen 
folder name. Use the touch command to create an empty 
file, such as touch config.sys .
Wildcards are often used to speed things up in searches, 
and can also be applied to file commands too - the asterisk 
( * ) character can be used to quickly access a folcder wiith a 
long name, eg cd Doc* .
This works fine if there’s only one folder beginning with 
Doc, but if there are two (say Doctor and Documents), then 
the command would open the first matching folder, which is 
Doctor in this instance. To avoid this, use cd Doc*ts instead 
(unless you have a folder called Documents and Doctorists).
Two characters that are more useful when navigating are 
the single quotation mark ( ‘ ) and backslash ( \ ) characters. 
Use single quotation marks around files or file paths that 
contain spaces, such as cd ~\Documents\Doctor Who .
You should also use quotation marks when creating 
folders in this way, eg simply typing mkdir Doctor Who will 
actually create two separate folders called Doctor and Who, 
so type mkdir ‘Doctor Who’ to get the folder you want.
You can also use the \ character to get around this too, eg 
mkdir Doctor\ Who works in the same way, because the \ 
character instructs mkdir to treat the follotwing character (in 
this instance the space) as ‘special’.
We finish off by revealing some handy characters that 
allow you to run multiple commands on a single line. The && 
argument does just that, so you can do the following to 
quickly update your repos and update all available software: 
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get upgrade
&& is like the AND command In that f he second 
command will only be performed if the first completes 
successfully. If you wanted the second command to only run 
if the first command faiied then you'd use II instead. If you 
want the second command to run after the first regardless of 
what happens, then use the ; eg,
sudo apt-get update ; sudo apt-get remove appname 
instead: of && . ®
Some file managers 
allow you to 
right-click a folder 
and open the 
Terminal at that 
location, but you 
have to manually 
add this option to 
Ubuntu’s Nautilus 
file manager.
Install nautilus­
open-terminal 
from the Software 
Center, then open 
a Terminal window, 
type nautilus -q 
and press Enter. 
The option will 
now appear.
media 
VtrtualBox VMs
Music 
wget-log
nick@nick-ubuntu:~$ is -h -I 
total 2.5M 
drwxrwxr-x 2 
nick nick 4.0K Feb 15 15:08 deja-dup
drwxr-xr-x 2 
nick nick 4.0K Feb 28 17:21 Desktop
drwxrwxr-x 2 
nick nick 4.0K Feb 26 17:35 Doctor
drwxr-xr-x 3 
nick nick 4.0K Feb 26 17:44 Documents
drwxr-xr-x 4 
nick nick 4.0K Feb 27 13:23 Downloads
-rw-r--r-- 1 
nick nick 8.8K Nov 26 12:51 examples.desktop
drwxr-xr-x 2 
root root 4.0K Feb 
4 19:49 fedora
-rw-rw-r-- 1 
nick nick 446K Jan 20 12:35 linuxdesktops-enlightenment.png
drwxr-xr-x 3 
root root 4.0K Feb 
4 19:50 media
drwxr-xr-x 2 
nick nick 4.0K Nov 26 13:10 Music
drwx---------  2 
nick nick 4.0K Feb 10 16:43 NoMachine
drwxr-xr-x 2 
nick nick 4.0K Nov 26 13:10 Pictures
Irwxrwxrwx 1 
nick nick 
36 Dec 10 13:35 PlayOnLinux's virtual drives -> /home/n
ick/.PlayOnLinux//wineprefix/ 
drwxr-xr-x 2 
nick nick 4.0K Nov 26 13:10 Public
-rw-rw-r-- 1 
nick nick 871K Jan 13 10:22 steamosl.png
drwxr-xr-x 2 
nick nick 4.0K Nov 26 13:10 Templates
-rw-rw-r-- 1 
nick nick 1.1M Dec 24 22:09 tigervncserver_1.6.G-3ubuntul_amd64.deb
drwxr-xr-x 2 
nick nick 4.0K Nov 26 13:10 Videos
drwxrwxr-x 6 
nick nick 4.0K Nov 30 09:43 VtrtualBox VMs
-rw-rw-r-- 1 
nick nick 3.5K Jan 21 11:39 wget-log
inickgnick-ubuntu:~$ I_______________________________________________________________
U Use Is to find out more about the files and folders in a current directory.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 63

Doing more
Scan and print: 
How to start
Let’s run through some tips to get your printers and scanners up and runn 
using systems and tools such as CUPS, SANE and XSANE.
> Network 
printers can 
often be set up 
even without 
drivers thanks 
to CUPS.
T
hese days, it’s almost mandatory to have a printer 
and scanner attached to your PC, but getting them 
set up in Linux can be a little tricky. Don’t worry, 
though, because armed with the right drivers and tools 
you can quickly get things up and running. There are two 
core tools built into most Linux distributions (distros) that 
help simplify the process: CUPS for printers and SANE for 
scanners. CUPS provides a centralised management tool for 
adding and configuring your printers while SANE allows you 
to interface with your scanner in much the same way, as 
well as providing the tools you need to preview and scan 
images. We’ll be focussing on these for this tutorial, coupled 
with some useful tools that mean you don’t need to go into 
the terminal should you need to access or tweak them.
With other operating systems, you can usually plug and 
play your printer or scanner - the drivers will either already 
be pre-installed or you’ll be prompted to download a driver, 
or insert a manufacturer’s disc. While it’s not quite that 
simple in Linux, the fact is that armed with the right 
procedure you shouldn’t have to spend hours getting things 
set up.
The good news is that you don’t need to start your search 
at your manufacturer’s website when installing your printer. 
If you’re lucky, you may find the drivers are already in place, 
particularly if your model is a network one, in which case all 
you need to do is open the CUPS front-end and see if it can 
detect your printer.
CUPS should be pre-installed with later versions of 
Ubuntu - including 16.04 LTS - and you can access it from 
System Settings by clicking ‘Printers’. If it’s not there, install it 
through the Software Centre (search for ‘printer’ and select 
Printers) or via the terminal using sudo apt-get install cups .
Once installed, Click the ‘Add’ button to see if your p 
is visible and supported. If your printer is connected via 
but not showing up - as is likely - then you’ll first need 
locate suitable drivers for it. Start by looking for Linux d 
on your manufacturer’s website and for your particular d 
(you may need to find a unified package). Hopefully you 
exact distro (including version number) will be supported 
but don’t panic if it’s not; we successfully installed a Del 
B1265dnf all-in-one printer in Ubuntu 14.04.3 LTS using a 
unified package that only promised support up to 11.04.
If you’re lucky, the driver may be supplied in a Deb 
package, in which case downloading and double-clicking i 
should launch the setup wizard. If your driver is provided 
tarball (with a .tar.gz extension), then it’ll probably contai 
shell script (.sh) installer, in which case follow the step-b 
step guide opposite to discover how to get it up and ru 
Once done, re-open thCe UPS front-end under System 
Settings and your new printer should be visible.
Network setup
If you’re adding a networked printer, then you should be 
to spot it without having to first source drivers. Click ‘Ad 
expand ‘Network Printer’ and wait or click ‘Find Network 
Printer’. After a short pause any detected printers should 
show up. Select yours and you’ll see a choice of connec 
protocols appear. S(ee What Connection Type? box, over t 
page for details of which one to choose if you’re given th 
option.) Select IPP if it’s available, otherwise choose LPD 
visit your manufacturer’s website to see if it provides a d 
that will likely offer an IPP connection if you install it.
If you’re happy to proceed with the options offered b 
CUPS, click ‘Forward’ and it’ll look for drivers, selecting t 
automatically if available. If it can’t find any you’ll be giv 
three choices: select from database, provide a PPD file o 
search for a driver to download. Start by selecting your 
printer manufacturer to see if an exact match is availabl 
If not, try a search - again, you may want to expand yo 
search to your web browser, as it’s limited in scope.
You can also use a PostScript Printer Description (PP 
file if your printer is a PostScript model and you can so 
one (search for your printer name and model and the w 
‘PPD’). This provides CUPS with a description of of 
capabilities, which it can use when outputting files.
If all else fails, don’t worry: choose ‘Select printer fro 
database’ again, but this time select ‘Generic 
(recommended)’ and click ‘Forward’. A generic PCL driver
64 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more
O Once installed, administer your printers using the 
Printers tool under System Settings.
be pre-selected, so try this first: either the pxlmono or 
pxlcolor option depending on whether your printer is mono 
or colour. Click ‘Forward’ to install it - in most cases this will 
provide all the core functionality you need.
Whichever route you go down when adding your printer, 
you’ll be prompted to provide a name, description and 
location for it, then asked to print a test page - we 
recommend this to verify the connection is working. Once 
done, you’ll be taken to the printer’s configuration screen, 
where you can examine its settings and see what control you 
can wield over it.
Tweak printer settings
The main Settings tab allows you to change your printer’s 
description and location, plus change its URL. If you click 
‘Change...’ next to ‘Device URI’ you can attempt to connect 
using a different protocol. This is also where you’ll find 
options for printing test pages and maintaining the printer.
The Policies tab allows you to change the printer’s state in 
terms of whether it’s enabled, accepting jobs or shared.
You can also define what happens if the printer encounters 
an error and switch on authentication for its ‘Operation
Policy’ if supported and required (if you go down this route, 
access the printer via the CUPS web interface to set things 
up and running).
Access Control allows you to deny (or allow) access to the 
printer on a user level. You should spend some time in both 
Printer Options and Job Options tab where you configure key 
printer defaults. Printer Options is mainly concerned with 
default quality and paper settings, while Job Options lets you 
configure things like the number of copies, page orientation, 
and individual elements such as text and images.
Finally, if your printer allows it, the Ink/Toner Levels 
provides a handy glance at your printer’s core components, 
including elements like the fuser.
Now your printer is set up, it’s time to use it. Open an 
application and when you’re ready, choose File > Print. 
Your printer should be listed, so it’s simply a case of 
tweaking whatever options are made available to you in the 
application’s own dialog and clicking ‘Print’. If you have more 
than one printer installed, the default one will always be pre­
selected; change this via the System Settings > Printers 
dialog by right-clicking your target printer and choosing 
‘Set as default’.
In most cases, the CUPS tool provided under System 
Settings should have all the options you need, but CUPS can 
also be administered from your browser: type localhost:631 
to access it. There's a handy overview and links to the UPSS 
forum should you need it, but use the tabs at the top of the 
page to navigate the web-based utility. Go to Printers and 
click your printer to access its settings - here, navigation is 
done through a series of drop-down menus. If you’ve 
installed a dedicated driver and were asked to assign a user 
to it, you’ll be prompted at this point to enter the username 
and password to access the required pages.
If you’ve set up a network-connected printer, you should 
also be able to access machine-level settings directly by 
typing in its IP address. If you don’t know its IP address, it’s
Struggling to get 
your printer to 
function correctly?
Visit http:// 
openprinting. 
org/printers and 
see if your model 
is covered. If it is, 
scroll down to the 
comments to see 
if anyone else can 
help (or post your 
own question in 
the forums).
»
Install a printer driver tarball package
jObtain & extract installer 
Browse to your manufacturer’s website and 
locate the required driver for your Linux distro, 
which may be packaged as a unified driver.
Save the gar.tz file to your Downloads folder, 
then right-click it and choose ‘Extract Here’. 
Once that’s done, open the extracted folder 
and locate a file called install.sh.
Right-click it and choose ‘Properties’ to make 
a note of its location.
^■Start installation
Now you’ll need to open up a terminal window 
and type in cd <path> . You'll need to replace 
<path> with the path listed under Location for 
the install.sh file that’s found in its Properties 
window. Now you’ll need to type the following 
command and press Enter, followed by your 
root password when prompted: sudo sh 
install.sh . After a short pause you should see 
an installer wizard pop up.
Follow install guide
You’ll need to work your way through the 
installer wizard and make sure that you tick 
your username to allow you to access the 
printer. Once the wizard’s complete, you may 
then be prompted to configure the printer for 
CUPS and need to follow its wizard to set it up, 
entering name, description and location, if 
required, before going ahead and testing the 
printer to finish the process off.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 65

Doing more
S Some printers 
ship with their 
own utilities, 
which may 
provide you with 
more control over 
its settings.
» under the printer’s Settings - click ‘Change’ next to ‘Device 
URI’ and expand Network Printer. The IP address will then be 
listed in brackets after your printer name. Enter the URL 
address and you’ll be given access the printer itself, giving 
you even greater control over how it functions and who has 
access to it and when (eg setting up duplex options for 
double-sided printing).
If you’re trying to 
extract text from 
a multi-columned 
document, make 
sure you use YAGF’s 
tools for correcting 
page skew and 
selecting multiple 
columns before you 
attempt recognition 
to maximise your 
chances of having 
a successful 
extraction.
Printer classes
CUPS allows you to group multiple printers into classes. This 
is mainly aimed at networks where lots of users want to 
share a limited number of printers. Each class has a 
hierarchy with those printers added first being preferred to 
those added later. When people come to print using a class, 
they’re allocated a printer based on availability, so if one 
person is printing they’ll always get access to the first printer, 
while if two are printing at the same time, the first person 
gets the preferred printer and the second gets the next 
available one.
With this in mind, it definitely pays to work out how you 
want your printers classed: do you want the faster ones 
made available first, or are you looking to try and steer 
people towards a high-volume printer such as a laser? Once
T The success - or failure - of OCR is largely down to the 
quality of the original document.
done, open System Settings > Printers and click the ‘“’ 
button next to Add and select ‘Class’.
You’ll be prompted to provide a name, description and 
location in terms of a single printer, but it’s better to think in 
terms of the class, eg, ‘study-printers’ or something similar. 
Once done, click ‘Forward’ and you’ll be prompted to add 
existing printers to the class - remember to add them in 
order of preference. Once done, click ‘Apply’. Once created, 
you can set this class as your default in place of a single 
printer - just right-click its entry and choose ‘Set As Default’.
Linux also offers good built-in tools to help you access 
and make use of your scanner. In many cases - particularly 
with newer models - you can simply plug it in and there’s a 
good chance it’ll work. That’s due in part to built-in support 
for SANE (Scanner Access Now Easy), which provides all the 
back-ends to scanning in Linux.
To see if you’re lucky, plug in your scanner to a spare USB 
port and fire up Simple Scan to see if it detects it. If it does, 
you’re in business - skip to the next section; if it doesn’t - 
don’t panic. First, check for Linux drivers with your 
manufacturer. Follow the instructions to download and install
What connection type? 
.
If you’re hooking up a network printer, then you’ll have been 
given a choice of connections when setting your printer up. 
But what are the different protocols and which one should 
you choose if given the choice?
The simplest protocol is AppSocket (also referred to as 
HP JetDirect). It’s usually used when no other connection is 
possible, but its simplicity also means it lacks any kind of 
fine control: eg there’s no queue management so you can’t 
abort print jobs once they’ve been sent. There’s also no way 
to find out the printer’s status, making it impossible to 
discover ink and toner levels, eg.
Next up is LPD, which stands for Line Printer Daemon 
(also known as LPR, or Line Printer Remote). This does 
implement queue management, and can tell the difference 
between different types of data, such as raw text or 
PostScript information. There’s neither support for remote 
setup nor management, though, and you can’t query the ink 
or toner (although these may be provided anyway) and your 
print jobs can’t be encrypted.
The final protocol - IPP - is the most contemporary and 
functional. It stands for ‘Internet Printing Protocol’ and is 
what CUPS uses as the basis for managing both print jobs 
and queues. It’s the preferred method of communication as 
you get more feedback from the printer and wield more 
control over it thanks to its bidirectional nature.
S Select your protocol carefully when configuring your network printer using 
CUPS, we’d suggest that IPP is the best if it’s supported.
66 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more
Get unsupported scanners working
If, after your best efforts, you’re still unable to get 
your scanner set up using SANE, then take a trip 
to www.hamrick.com where you’ll find a 
program called VueScan, which promises to 
support over 2,500 scanners.
Click the supported scanners link to browse 
by manufacturer - if your model is listed, then 
download the tarball and extract the VueScan 
folder, then double-click vuescan inside to 
launch the program proper. It should detect your 
scanner automatically, then provide you with a 
simple step-by-step wizard to preview and scan 
using the program.
VueScan provides a lot of useful tools to help 
you get the perfect scan, and it works with many 
scanners that are already supported in Linux 
too, so if you’re struggling to get to grips with 
XSane, consider giving it a whirl. The only 
downside is that it’s not free - the Standard 
Edition costs $39.95, while the more fully 
featured Pro Edition costs $89.95 (you can 
upgrade from Standard to Pro for the difference 
at any time, too). The good news is that VueScan 
is fully functional for the purposes of evaluation 
(other than a watermark across all your scans), 
so you can be sure it’s right for you before 
making a purchase.
these - again, if they’re provided with an install.sh script, 
follow the step-by-step guide to get them installed.
If your scanner is part of a multi-function device than its 
drivers should be integrated with the printer’s - if you added 
the printer component of a MFP without installing specific 
drivers, then you’ll need to source and install these to get the 
scanner up and running. If you’ve installed drivers previously, 
but the scanner isn’t detected, try installing them again over 
the top of the original drivers - we found this worked with 
our Dell B1265dnf after the scanner failed to show up. Once 
installed, your drivers may provide their own utility to help 
you verify the scanner is now recognised - eg Dell users 
should see a DELL Unified Driver Configurator shortcut on 
the desktop - or you’ll need to fire up Simple Scan again at 
which point your scanner should now be visible.
For more troubleshooting advice on using SANE to detect 
your scanner, see https://help.ubuntu.com/community/ 
Scanners or take a look at the box on VueScan.
As we’ve seen, Ubuntu comes with the Simple Scan 
front-end for SANE, which provides you with a simple, 
no-frills interface for your scanner. It’s good for confirming 
your scanner works, but it lacks key tools like a preview 
function or the ability to fine-tune your scanner’s settings.
Time to scan
However, if you really want to push the boat out, open the 
Ubuntu Software Center and search for ‘xsane’ to locate and 
install XSane, a more powerful scanning front-end. Once 
launched it’ll display four windows - start by clicking ‘Acquire 
preview’ to create a preview of the image you’re trying to 
scan. Once done, use the Standard Options window to select 
your image - choose ‘Custom’ under Page Format and then 
crop in using the four measurements beneath it.
Next, click the 1:1 magnifying glass button in the main 
window to zoom into the preview. Use the eyedropper tools 
to select white, black and grey parts of the image for colour 
correction purposes, then use the histogram’s sliders in the 
top left-hand window to fine tune the colour balance. The 
right-hand window is where you choose where to save the 
file, what format to use and so on - choose 16 million (this is 
24-bit) colours for photos and ensure the scan resolution is 
increased from 75dpi to 300dpi or 600dpi if you want a 
hi-res scan. There are also controls for adjusting brightness, 
contrast and gamma.
By default, your scan will open in XSane’s Viewer window 
when you click ‘Scan’ - it’s a good idea to perform one scan 
like this, so you can review your image and perform further 
optimisation. Once you’re happy with your changes, click 
‘Viewer’ and change it to Save, then click ‘Scan’ one last time.
Another benefit of XSane is that it integrates with Gimp - 
this allows you to scan directly to it, and then fine-tune your 
image accordingly. Launch Gimp, choose File > Create > 
XSane to select your scanner or perform a search for 
available devices. Everything’s handled identically except for 
one critical part: there’s no output option, so once you click 
‘Scan’ the image will automatically be transferred to Gimp.
XSane also links in with the goocr tool to a built-in Optical 
Character Recognition (OCR) engine. This allows you to scan 
in printed documents and convert them into editable text. 
It’s a flexible solution, but if you want to try something else 
then install both cuneiform and YAGF from the Ubuntu 
Software Center. Cuneiform is an alternative OCR engine 
while YAGF provides a neat front-end to both cuneiform and 
tesseract and is an OCR engine that’s renowned for its 
accuracy. YAGF integrates nicely with XSane too - launch 
YAGF, click the ‘Scan’ button and it’ll open XSane. Set the 
colour to ‘Black and White - Line Art’ and set the dpi to 600. 
Click ‘Scan’ and the document will be scanned and sent back 
to YAGF. From here, review the scan quality, then use the 
controls above the scanned image to prepare it for 
recognition. Once done, click the red ‘OCR’ button next to the 
language drop-down menu. YAGF will use Tesseract by 
default to decode the page, with the editable text placed in 
the right-hand pane for you to review and correct. Don’t like 
the results? Choose Settings > OCR Settings, select 
cuneiform and click OK, then try that instead - in our tests, 
Tesseract performed better, but not by much. Be prepared to 
try and fine-tune the original scan if necessary to make the 
text as clear and legible as possible.
Once you’re done reviewing and editing the text, you can 
save it as a TXT file or copy it to the clipboard, ready for 
pasting into Writer or another editing program.
Congratulations, your scanner is now set up to perform 
both standard and text-based scans. o
It’s also possible 
to use CUPS to 
‘print’ documents 
to PDF file where 
no native PDF 
option is provided.
Install cups-pdf 
from the Ubuntu 
Sofware Center - 
once done, a new 
PDF printer will 
appear as an option 
when printing.
X XSane provides a comprehensive set of scanning tools.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 67

Doing more
Backup: Don’t 
lose your data
Make sure that your most important files are backed up simply and 
automatically with Ubuntu’s own backup manager.
There are dozens 
of backup utilities 
available for 
Ubuntu. Head to 
https://help. 
ubuntu.com/ 
community/ 
BackupYour 
System to view a 
list of these along 
with details of their 
features.
A
nyone who has worked in Tech Support will te 
that the most heartbreaking calls come from p 
who have lost data due to a computer error 
Ubuntu saves you this trouble by integrating a backup 
manager into its OS. With a few simple clicks of the 
you can have peace of mind that your data is safe.
Before proceeding, it’s best to buy an external har 
that you will use exclusively for backing up. While the 
program Deja Dup is ablb to do I ede older ЬаеГ Uba Ck Uavoun of 
newer ones to save space, try to get as large a har 
possible to avoiO losing any important older infaemation.
Remember ttat bacliips exist to proteat yeur dpta from 
physical damtgn Hke fire aed ttaft, ae well os softwaoe otrors. 
Try to storo the he rd driae in a seaara te eocation to cortt 
iompsrer saea pos’re aor iarrpian osr baiksps.
S Click “Local Folder” to change where you store your 
backups-external drive and online backups are supported.
Remember that If 
you are unable to 
restore your data 
visit Deja DupS 
troubleshooting 
page at https:// 
wiki.gnome.org/ 
Apps/DejaDup/
Help/Restore/
Backup Basics
Click tha seseah har and aaae “Pae kupa” ts lai”neo the Backup 
Manager. Yos sill oee ohao Ubsaos aoko yos oo iaooall 
software to begin asias tnckups. Click Install to proceed. You 
will naee do ontet“/our eahswdrO So соп“1ггп oart wish os instsll 
“he baaCts utility Deja Dup.
OacetOht Is comolete, “ee Backup Managerwill lnfarm 
yos ohao yos haie ao backsps scheaslea aaa yos sho 
ei“her eaable as“oma“ic backsps or click Backsp aow. 
choosian ei“her, i“’s impor“aa“ “o fiae “sae yosr se““ian
Firs“ click oa Folaers “o Saie oa “he lef“ haaa siae 
wiaaow. By aefasl“ yosr Home Folaer is selec“ea. This 
coa“aias yosr Desk“op, Docsmea“s, Pic“sres, Dowaloaas, 
Mssic aaa Viaeos folaers aaa is “herefore likely “o hol 
eiery“hian yos crea“ea yosrself. O“her files like sys“em
0 ** Backups
All Settings Backups
Overview
Folders to save
Folders to ignore 
Storage location 
Scheduling
No recent backups.
bi You can restore existing backups after you first install some necessary 
software by clicking the Install... button.
Install...
©
No backup scheduled.
You can create a backup after you first install some necessary software by 
clicking the Install... button.
Install... ■■■■I
C Click Install to download the backup utility. Go through the options on the left 
before clicking Backup Now to control where, when and how your data is saved.
amora’“rreallyraeear“orberbackearsprasryosrcaarsimplyriaser“r 
eyrorosrrD.rVDranaiarbs“rifryosrarerawarerofro“herrfolaersros“siaer 
syror srrhomerfolaerrwhereryosrhaiers“orearaa“a,rclickroar“her+r 
bs““oara“r“herbo““omrlef“r“oraaar“heser“oryosrrbacksps.
Ifryosrhaiermorer“haaroaersserroaryosrrcomps“er,rwhiler 
i“’sr“echaicallyrpossibler“oraaar“heirrhomerfolaerrhere,r“hisrcaa 
cassererrorsrfsr“herraowar“herliae.rComple“er“hisrnsiaeraaar 
“rhaerarhaier“hemrlonria“or“heirraccosa“raaaraor“hersamerfromr 
r“hYoerser.rYosrcaarsser“hersamerhararariier“orbackrsprmorer“haar 
or aiaera“aclclrosa“rproiiaear“here’sreaosnhrspace.rClickroarFolaersr 
“orInaore,r“hisrsec“ioar“ellsr“herbacksprmaaanerrwhichrfolaersr 
ao“r“orbackrsp.rByraefasl“r“herDowaloaasrfolaerrisrexclsaear 
aarsr“heserfilesr“eaar“orbereasyr“orreplace.r 
foreIfrryosrsserarclosars“oranerproiiaerrlikerDropbox,ryosrmayr 
alsorwaa“r“orexclsaer“ha“rfolaerrfromr“herbacksprasrarcopyr 
oafrlre“haearyrexis“sroaliaerasrwellrasroaryosrrcomps“er.rClickr“her+r 
icoaroaceranaiaraaarselec“r“herfolaer.
Storage and Scheduling
eWri“hryosrrfolaersr“orsaieraaarinaorercarefsllyrchosea,rclickroar 
S“oranerLoca“ioa.rIfryosrrex“eraalrUSBrhararariierorrmemoryr 
s“ickrisa’“ralreaayrcoaaec“ea,raorsoraow.
Yosrwillrseer“ha“rbyraefasl“rbackspsrarers“oreariaryosrr 
homerairec“oryriararfolaerraameardeja-dup.rThisrisrao“rar 
par“icslarlyrreliablerplacer“orbackrsprasrifr“heraa“aroaryosrr 
hararariierbecomesrcorrsp“eariarfs“srerorri“rssffersrar 
breakaowa,r“herbacksprwoslarmos“rlikelyrberaffec“ear“oo.
ClickroarLocalrFolaerr“oropear“hermeasraaarselec“ryosrr 
ex“eraalrariie.rClickr“herboxrbesiaesrFolaerr“orspecifyraraamer 
forraraewrbacksprfolaerroar“heraeiicere.nrBacksps1.rAllrfs“srer 
backspsrwillrbers“oreariar“here.r
Nex“,rclickroarScheaslianroar“herlef“rhaaarsiaerofr“her 
wiaaowraaarclickr“herrockerrswi“chr“or“sraroarAs“oma“icr 
Backsps.rByraefasl“rbackspsrarerperformearweeklyrbs“ryosr 
caarchaaner“hisr“oroaceraraayrifryosrwish.rTherKeeprse““ianr 
allowsryosr“oraeciaerwhe“herr“oraele“erolarbackspsraf“errar
68 | liasxrforma“rpresea“s:rubsa“s

Doing more<2
C Check the progress of individual files click the small 
triangle next to details. Click Resume Later if you need to 
log out or shut down the machine for any reason.
certain amount of time e.g after 6 months or only to remove 
them to make way for newer backups (Forever).
Your first backup
In the Overview section to apply your changes and run your 
first backup. Click Back up Now to open the backup window.
At this stage you’ll have the option to choose a password 
to encrypt backups. This is very important in order to protect 
your data, as otherwise anyone who can access the external 
drive will see your files. Try to choose a strong password to 
keep your data safe. If you are stuck for inspiration, you can 
easily generate secure passwords via the Diceware 
Passphrase Home Page (http://world.std.com/~reinhold/ 
diceware.html). Make sure to write down your password and 
keep it in a safe place as you’ll need it to restore your data.
Once the process is complete, the Backup Manager 
window will tell you that the last backup was today. You can 
head over to the folder on the external hard drive to view the 
files. Inside the folder you will see a file with the extension 
.manifest and a number of files with the extension tar.gz. Do 
not worry if you do not recognise the file names, they have 
been compressed in order to save space. The information in 
the .manifest file will allow them to be restored if necessary.
Restoring Backups
If the worst happens and you are forced to reinstall Ubuntu 
with a blank hard drive, you will need to repeat the steps in 
Backup Basics to reinstall Deja Dup on your machine. Make 
sure to connect your external drive to your computer as well.
Open the Backup Manager and click Restore. A window 
will open asking Restore from Where? where you can give the 
exact location of your backup folder and click Forward. Next 
you will see the Restore from When? window. Any backups 
you’ve previously made will be listed in the drop down menu. 
If you had to reinstall your system due to a software bug, 
make sure to restore from a time where you’re certain your 
computer wasn’t experiencing any issues and click Forward. 
This takes you to the Restore to Where? window. Usually you 
will want files to be copied back to their original locations e.g 
your Home folder. However if there is data already inside 
those folders or you only want to restore some of your 
information, you can choose to restore elsewhere such as a 
new folder.
Finally you will see the summary window asking you to 
confirm the backup location, date and destination folder. 
Click Restore to proceed. If the backups are encrypted you’ll 
also be asked for a password at this stage.
Backups made 
through Deja Dup 
are incremental, in 
that it backs up only 
those files that have 
changed since the 
last backup. This 
saves time 
and space.
Backup Bothers
Although the Backup Manager is very handy, it’s important to 
schedule backups and check that they are being run every 
now and then in the Overview section.
Deja Dup has no built in method for recovering encrypted 
backups without a password so be sure to write this down on 
a piece of paper, as if you keep it on your computer, this may 
be lost if there is an error.
Ubuntu’s Backup Manager cannot easily be configured to 
back up an entire computer including all user accounts and 
system data. If you want an exact copy of the entire hard 
drive, consider using a different backup utility like CloneZilla 
(http://clonezilla.org). There’s also no elegant way to 
restore individual files but you can choose to retrieve your 
backup and place it into a new folder on your system. Be sure 
to delete any superfluous files when you are done to avoid 
duplicating data. э
Backup location
Restore date oyii/ie
Folders to save
Folders to ignore 
Storage location 
Scheduling
CCheck the 
summary to 
ensure that you 
are restoring the 
correct backup. 
Here the files 
will be copied 
to a new folder 
named test1 
instead of their 
original location.
Online Backups
While keeping a backup on an external drive is 
relatively safe, you may prefer to have the peace 
of mind of storing it online. If you use a cloud 
storage provider with a sync client like Dropbox 
then anything placed inside the relevant folder 
will automatically be backed up. Simply click on 
the Storage Location tab, then Local Folder and 
change the backup location e.g home/Dropbox/ 
mybackups.
Deja Dupsupports other types of online 
backup. The easiest to set up is probably FTP. In 
order to use this you will need to have FTP access 
to a server. DriveHQ (www.drivehq.com) for 
instance offers free FTP accounts with 1GB.
Once you have signed up for your account 
choose FTP from the Storage Location menu and 
fill in the information given by your provider. The 
Port Number is likely to be 21 or 22. You will also 
be asked to enter your FTPP username. The 
Folder”field simply asks where on the FTP server 
you want to store your 
backups e.g /mybackups.
Return to the Overview 
tab and click Back up Now. 
The first time you do this the 
Backup Manager will ask you 
to enter the password for 
your FTP account. Check the 
box to have the Password 
Manager remember this 
automatically in future.
If you are backing up 
online it’s extremely important 
to encrypt your backups with
a password to make sure they are safe. If you 
have very sensitive data it might be best to use a 
hard drive or USB stick instead.
F FTP is one of a number of supported methods to backup 
your files online. You’ll be asked for your password.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 69

Doing more
Updates: Bug 
free & secure
Understand why, where and how to update your Ubuntu Sys.
You can also 
update individual 
applications 
from the Ubuntu 
Software Centre. 
Simply click the 
icon, then the 
Updates tab. Click 
Install beside each 
app to update.
U
sers who are familiar with the rather aggressiv 
manner in which Windows 10 was presented to 
people may be wary of the Ubuntu update pr 
Updating in Ubuntu fortunately is much easier and yo 
remain in charge of the way you run updates.
There are two ways to make sure that your softwa 
to ddae - from the command linn and e sinn d hu hag dy builh an 
Software Update.r Running commands using Terminal ca 
often be toe fnstest nnd ensiest wny to updnte but t 
Software Updateri s hore user friendly.
Sihply click toe senrco button in your henu bnr n 
search foa Software UuPdter. CCck khe epp icon to auc it апП 
toe systeh will coeck for updntes. If toere nre updnte 
available a window will appncr saying ttnat new coffe/are Oas 
been rrleensd and askisg fyou wiaU tn ishtaH.
It mnn be tempting aimpiy to ciicO immgdintnly an lest^aO 
Naw anf allniia the oedutca to rue in ГПа backorounn gyr it 
can bn helefcl По have n deepied endersUanding of angatao in 
order to bettet underaeasd naur aystem.
Yaui willi seei coaci inaiviauali acclicaciansi taii bei lisc 
eligiblei oari ucaatesi sucoiCaaslciulator,i asi welli asi Ubuntui 
Basei woicoi isi toei unaerliingi saurcei caaei aoi iauri OS 
unticgi certaini baxesi tai ucaatei eacoi acclicatiani oawev 
soaulai anlii tai aai toisi ioi iau’rei certaini toati ucaatingi 
breagi ai certaini oeature.i Toisi cani bei itcartanti ioi iau’r 
cluginsi ari oeaturesi aoi ai cragrati toati iaui gnawi aren’
Y You can click 
Install Now to 
apply available 
updates but 
consider clicking 
Settings first 
to configure 
your update 
preferences.
ubuntu кЛ»м« iTihnr 
updain Auth»nt><ai>un Additional D'lyan D*vHope« Qpfxint
Dewnloadabia fnm tha intarwet
3 Community-maintainad trau Mid upan-wufe* wftwin (unwarya)
а Ипрсжмуdrh^n for (raatnctadl
a Soft wai r irttrnttd By ropylght эг teqal niun 
tourcecode
’"■"°*'™ <
Cdrewi with Ubuntu 1S.M ITS "Matilal МММ*
Officially tuppor ted 
Heitrlcted copyright
- - . - 
Close
> The system has automatically selected the closest server 
afnoar idownloads, in this case in Ireland.
ocaasti catibleiwitoitoeitastirecentiversianiaoiUbuntui(Seei 
MasteringitoeiBacgcartsibaxaut).i
stallCi licgingitoeiSettingsiicaniatitoeibattatileotiaoitoeiucaatei 
winaaw will aisplnc the Software and Updates winaaw which 
nllaws yan ta fine tune yaur ncantes settings.
Rnseading Repositories
Io ian hnve creviansli nsea Micrasaot Winaaws, ian tni be 
annsecantna hnving ta aawnlana inaiviannl cragrnts orat 
iwaenbsites in araer ta instnll new ncclicntians. This cnn be tite 
ciansnting nna nlsa isn’t veri snoe, given thnt nniane cnn 
nwsrinitge n cragrnt thnt cantnins tnlicians caae.
Far nn in-aecth exclnnntian ao whnt recasitaries nre nna 
aa, oeel oree ta rena Ubnntn’s aacntentntian nt https:// 
help.ubuntu.com/community/Repositories hawever in n 
nntshell thei nre servers which cantnin sets ao saotwnre 
cncgnges. Thei exist ta tnge ianr lioe ensier ns thansnnas ao 
cragrnts cnn be gntherea inta n recasitari tenning ian 
aan’t hnve ta senrch nranna oar the right ncclicntian.
Same OSs like Ubuntu take this a stec further ana have a 
cncgnge tnnnger (the Ubuntu Software Centre) which nllaws 
iau ta exclare the available cragrats ana see a shart 
aescrictian ta helc iau aeciae what iau neea. This is taae 
even sitcler bi the fact that the Ubuntu Software Centre 
graucs cragrats inta categaries such as Internet ana Viaea.
There are tani recasitaries available but the aefault anes 
usea bi Ubuntu are listea in the Ubuntu Saftware tab af the 
Software and Updates winaaw iau acenea earlier. The first 
recositorc ‘main’ incluaes all saftware createa by Caaoaical - 
the aevelacers af Ubuntu. The ‘universe’ recasitari relates ta 
free saftware which is taintainea by the cattunity thraugh 
a aeaicatea grauc af ceacle that cantribute in their free tite. 
This is aften the reasan that ucaates far certain accs aa nat 
cate all at ance, as aifferent cragrats are taintainea by 
aifferent aevelacers.
70 | Linux Fartat Presents: Ubuntu

Doing more<2
Mastering the Backports
Users who use the regular versions of Ubuntu which 
are released in April and October each year, will receive 
bug fixes and security updates through the Update 
Manager for nine months beginning from the date of 
release. Newer versions of software or features are not 
supported, however.
One solution to this is to use an LTS version of 
Ubuntu but for those who do not wish to upgrade at all, 
the backports repository offers a third way, mainly 
through providing new versions of individual 
applications which can be updated without breaking 
your system.
Although backport packages are tested by the 
Ubuntu Community there is a risk they may clash with 
a newer feature or program on your system so they 
should be used with caution. You can enable backports 
by ticking the checkbox next to Unsupported Updates 
in the Updates tab of Software and Updates. You will 
then be able to use the Ubuntu Software Centre to 
update your applications as usual.
There are very few situations where using Backports 
is better than upgrading to the next version of Ubuntu 
or using an LTS release. If your system is running very 
important software and you can’t afford to take it 
offline, you may prefer to use the backports repository. 
Also updating via the backports repository can be more 
cost-effective if you pay for data you download versus 
installing an entirely new OS.
If you have used backports previously and want to 
upgrade your system, this can cause instability. Try 
disabling backports and updating your system before 
going ahead.
T The Plasma desktop is one 
example of a program that can be 
updated via Backports in Ubuntu.
The ‘restricted’ and ‘multiverse’ repositories contain 
software which isn’t free and open. Examples could include 
software developed by private companies such as a driver for 
a laptop wireless card or Oracle’s Java Runtime Environment. 
Updates for these are usually provided by the manufacturer, 
not the Ubuntu community.
Understanding the difference between various types of 
repositories helps you to make informed decisions about 
what you want. There are Linux zealots who do not use any 
kind of proprietary software for instance, using free 
alternatives or simply doing without. When you set up your 
installation of Ubuntu you usually check the box to say you 
wish to download software to support some restricted 
formats like MP3 files but if you did not, you can do so now.
It is possible to add additional repositories to Ubuntu to 
allow installing additional packages. However Canonical have 
gone to great lengths to make sure that most of the 
applications you need are available in their official repositories 
so it’s best to search the Ubuntu Software Centre first before 
adding new repositories.
Ubuntu should automatically ‘ping’ the nearest server for 
your country and display it but if you are having difficulty 
updating or Ubuntu has it wrong, you can change that here.
Ubuntu Updates
Clicking on the Updates tab in the Software and Updates 
window allows you to fine tune your updates further. It’s 
advisable to leave both Important Security Updates and 
Recommended Updates checked. The Unsupported Updates 
are only important if you plan to keep using an regular non- 
LTS (Long Term Support) version of Ubuntu.
It is best to leave the other settings relating to when and 
how to install updates to their defaults. This way Ubuntu will
L Leave the security settings as they are but you can 
change the frequency for other updates if you wish. 
automatically install any updates critical to the safety of your 
system but let you choose when to install other kinds.
If you do make any changes in the Software and Updates 
window you will be prompted to reload your settings before 
being taken back to the Software Updater window. You’ll need 
a working internet connection to apply any changes.
Once you are back at the Software Updater menu click 
Install Now to start updating. You may need to restart the 
machine to effect changes once the update is complete.
Ubuntu Upgrades
Since 2006 Canonical have been releasing two versions of 
Ubuntu per year, one in April, one in October. Each release is 
coded by month and year and has an alliterative animal 
name. Technically it’s possible to simply insert new DVDs into 
your new computer with the latest version of Ubuntu to install 
and upgrade, but this would wipe any data already on your 
hard drive. For this reason, Ubuntu has a built in tool to allow 
you to upgrade from one version to another.
Although two versions of Ubuntu are released per year, 
every two years Canonical will release an LTS (Long Term 
Support) version of Ubuntu. These versions can be updated 
without upgrading to the next available release of Ubuntu for 
up to five years. Ubuntu 16.04 (Xenial Xerus) is an LTS 
version, which means Canonical will keep releasing security 
and maintenance updates for it until 2021. Ubuntu 16.10 is a 
regular release which means that updates will be supported 
for nine months after its release.
Using the regular version of Ubuntu makes it less likely 
that you will have a problem with recent software or new 
hardware. The LTS release however saves you the trouble of 
doing a full system upgrade every nine months.
If you wish to go ahead with an upgrade to the next 
available version of Ubuntu, first run a regular update using 
Software Updater. Next click Search and type Software and 
Updates. Click the Update tab and find the menu option 
reading Notify me of a new Ubuntu version. Choose For any 
new version. You’ll be asked to enter your password to 
confirm. Close the window and then hold down Alt+F2. Type 
update-manager in the search bar and click the icon.
The update manager will appear saying the software for 
your current version is up to date but offering you the option 
to upgrade to the latest version of Ubuntu. Click Upgrade to 
read the release information, then Upgrade again to begin. 
This will take some time to download so make sure to save 
any work you have open. э
The golden rule of 
upgrades is always 
to make a backup of 
your current system 
beforehand. See the 
Ubuntu Backups 
section for help 
with this.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 71

Doing more
Desktop: Install 
and switch DEs
Don’t like your distro’s desktop? No problem. Trade it in for an 
environment that’s better suited to your needs.
Don’t like the look 
of your new Xfce 
desktop? Ubuntu 
sets the default 
GTK theme for 
Xfce, which means 
missing icons and 
ugly looking panels. 
Change this to the 
Xfce style and Tango 
icons by selecting 
Applications 
Menu > Settings > 
Appearance.
O
ne of Linux’s great strengths is its versatility, 
unlike other operating systems that ability to 
customise extends to your desktop environmen 
(DE). Each distribution (distro) of Linux ships with its 
and wWile ehty shase aupesUpial similasities - specifically the 
point-and-click WIMP (Windows, Icons, Mie пм, Pointer) 
interface - thtea can be some quite radicaI differences fa 
fonctisnality aa well as tfeir leak and feel.
Tyal goodl na,sl isl tyatl yoo’ral notl lockadl intol yoo 
cesica of deeasop. WhntOat yau're o’aanipg tn nwltcS to w 
diffarant dissro, tout ote pul: off ty ffie dyektoa tdat it smpleys, 
or yos're iooSing nor f fresl wae ho iwtyracf winh |ocr dwsOtoy, 
Linux cca acpsmmeesteyou. in fart, you can soen rnn
toltipla dasktsps sida-dy-sidat allswino yso ts cstpar 
csntrast sr osa diffarant dasktsps fsr diffarant porpss 
Dasktsps ara distridotad as ssftwara packaoast csn 
all tea disparata alatants raqoirad ts taka teat das 
fonctisn Ssee the Anatommob abooktcps koo, below). Onnc 
dasktsps eava daan installadt yso switce datwaan tea 
tea lsoin scraan dy clickino tea dasktsp icsn teat ap 
tea lsosn dsx naxt ts ysor osarnataf
Sst if yso’ra itceino ts try sot ssta altarnativas t 
dafaolt distrst wa’d say yso can’t os wrsno startino 
Cinnatsn hittp://cinnamon.linuxmint.com)f It’s tea 
dafaolt dasktsp in Linox Pintt and is particolarly psp 
dwite tessa switceino frst Iindsws as it otilisas a sitilar 
styla sf dasktspf
wSnpiDcEet things up
Ctienanatsn is eioely csnfiooradlaf Its tain coststisadla 
alamante - knswn at ‘epicae’ - ara ite tOamae, applate, 
dinasklats iwidoats yso can placa sn tea dasktsp) and 
axtaneisnef Teaea allsw yso ts radically altar ite capadilitiae ae 
dwieatlrl sa’e ite lssk and faal - tea etap-dy-etap ooida isee rigeo) 
raavaale esw ts twaak many sf teaea eattinoef
ampFslsoyres, tear daektsp anvirsnmante wsrte lsskino at incloda 
Xdfaceakitwspw,w.xfce.org), Gnsma iwww.gnome.org), LXDE 
iwww.lxde.org), and KDE (laema 5 iwww.kde.org)f Evan if
aynsdo wantad ts oea Udonto’e dafaolt daektsp, Unity, ien’t 
availadla ae a etandalsna daektsp fsr oea in stear eyetamef 
ninoTeara ara lste sf teinoe ts csneidar wean cesseino ysor 
pdaektspf Hsw it lsske ie an sdvisoe etartino psint, dot dsae 
teat tranelata ints makino it aaeiar fsr yso ts oea? Ssma 
dfrasemktspe, ao, aran’t ae csnfiooradla ae Cinnamsn, es it’e 
aimrepsinrtant yso axplsra all tea sptisne teara ara dafsra 
dacidino if a daektsp eae tea fonctisnality and flaxidility yso 
ynsaoard in a packaoa yso’ra eappy ts lssk atf Daepita teair 
ediffarancae, yso’ll nstica eimilaritiae datwaan many Linox DEef 
TOat’e dacaoea tOay ara daeically variante sf Gnsma. Unity ie 
rtea sdvisoe axampla eara, eearino many sf ite alamante, dot
The anatomy of a desktop
Ysor dpektsp ie tOa virtoal pnvirsnmpnt in wOicO 
yso wsrk, and prsvidpe a fripndlipr oepr intprfacp 
with wOicO ts intpract with ysor PC. TOp dpektsp 
csneiete sf a nomdpr sf diffprpnt p|pmpnte ts 
prsdocp tOa wsrking pnvirsnmpnt yso knsw and 
Isvp - sr Oata, if yso’re ewitcOing.
TOp dpektsp typically csntaine icsne, 
windswe, tssldare, fsldpre, wallpappre and - 
sptisnally - dpektsp widopte. Pset sf wOat yso’ll 
epp ie prsvidpd dy tOa windsw manaopr. Ae ite 
namp implipe it dptprminpe Osw tOa dpektsp’e 
windswing eyetpm wsrke dy taking rpepsneidility 
fsr tOa placpmpnt and appparancp sf windswe 
and tOpir csmpsnpnt parte, eocO ae mpnoe, titlp 
dare and csntrsl dottsne. TOp dpektsp’e 
grapOical plpmpnte - dottsne, ecrslldare, icsne 
ptc - arp etsrpd in eppcial lidraripe. TOpep 
inclodp tOa widgpt tsslkit, wOicO ie ales otiliepd 
dy applicatisne es tOpy can wsrk epamlpeely 
witO tOa dpektsp. Tws main tsslkite pxiet: Qtand 
GTK, and wOilp yso can ron applicatisne madp in 
snp tsslkit sn a dpektsp doilt oeing anstOpr, tOpy 
dsn’t tpnd ts issk ae gssd.
Many sf tOpep plpmpnte arp etsrpd in a 
tOpmp, wOicO makpe it paey fsr oepre ts cOangp 
a dpektsp’e issk and appparancp dy dpfining 
Osw kpy plpmpnte issk in tprme sf eOapp, cslsor 
and stOpr plpmpnte.
Dpektspe ales eOip witO a nomdpr sf csrp 
tssle and otilitipe, dpeignpd eppcifically ts wsrk 
wall witO tOat pnvirsnmpnt. Typical plpmpnte 
inclodp a filp managpr, imagp vipwpr, taxt pditsr 
and tprminal pmolatsr, ae wall ae a twpak tssl 
tOat allswe varisoe aeppcte sf tOa dpektsp ts 
dp coetsmiepd.
It doesn’t matter how sophisticated your DE 
is, they all share the same building blocks: 
toolbars, desktop, widget and windows etc.
72 | Linox Fsrmat (rpepnte: Udonto

Doing more<2
Remove unwanted desktops 
.
You can install as many desktop environments 
as you like - aside from taking up space on your 
hard drive, they don’t consume any resources 
unless you’re actually running one.
But there may come a time when you’ve 
finished experimenting with desktops, settled on 
your favourite (or favourites) and want to 
remove the rest. It goes without saying you 
shouldn’t be logged into the DE that you’re 
planning to remove.
With that prerequisite out of the way, 
removing the desktop is best done from the 
Terminal, particularly if you plan to remove all 
the software the DE installed alongside itself.
Here’s the two commands you’ll need: 
$ sudo apt-get remove packagename 
$ sudo apt-get autoremove
Replace ‘packagename’ with the desktop’s 
package name, which will be one of the 
following: cinnamon, plasma-desktop (KDE 
Plasma 5), gnome, Ixde or xfce4 (Xfce).
even the likes of Cinnamon betray their roots through the use 
of similar applications, built using the GTK toolkit that Gnome 
employs. The big rival to Gnome is KDE, and its differences 
extend beyond the fact it employs the Qt toolkit rather than 
GTK. For starters, it’s one of the most configurable tools out 
there, which makes it more popular with advanced users.
There’s also a question of performance and power 
consumption. Some desktops are more resource hungry than 
others, eg Unity and KDE Plasma 5. The increased demands 
do come with benefits, such as: a wider feature set, a bigger 
range of tools and flashier looks, which are missing from 
lightweight alternatives such as LXDE. But that means they’re 
less suitable for older and low-powered machines.
The best thing to do is run a couple of them and see how 
they perform - you should notice those with a smaller 
footprint are the most responsive, particularly on slow PCs. 
They also place fewer demands on power consumption, 
which should benefit those running on batteries. Remember, 
thanks to the fact you can easily switch between desktops, 
you can mix and match - a low-powered desktop while on the 
road, with a more fully featured environment for when 
plugged into the mains.
You’re ready to start experimenting with desktops, so how 
do you install them? In some cases you can simply search for 
the desktop using your distro’s software centre, but for others 
you may have to manually add the repositories (repos) 
yourself before installing through Terminal.
In the case of Ubuntu, you’ll find Xfce (type xfce4 into the 
Search box to locate it), Gnome and LXDE are all available 
through the Software Center. Click ‘More Info’ when you’ve 
found one - because they usually ship with optional 
components added in, you might want to review these before 
clicking the ‘Install’ button. Cinnamon and KDE Plasma 5 
require a trip to the Terminal. In the case of Cinnamon, enter: 
$ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:lestcape/cinnamon 
$ sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install cinnamon
For KDE Plasma 5, use these commands:
$ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:kubuntu-ppa/backports 
$ sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install plasma-desktop
Working with desktops
Once you’ve installed a new desktop, log out of your account. 
When you find yourself back at the login screen you should 
see an icon next to your username. Click this and you’ll see a 
list of available desktops appear - in some cases you’ll see 
multiple options based on a single desktop. Select one, then 
enter your password and log in as normal to start using it.
When you log into a new desktop for the first time, none of 
your existing preferences will come across from your old DE 
(but don’t worry, they’re all still there, ready and waiting for you 
the next time you log back into your original desktop). One of 
the benefits of having to make changes to your new desktop 
early on is that it forces you to explore, giving you insight into 
how it works and what: tweaks you can perform.®
Customise your new desktop
jTweak the taskbar
The Cinnamon’s taskbar is called the panel 
and is split into three sections: menu button, 
app shortcuts and applets. You can pin app 
shortcuts to it by clicking ‘Menu’, right-clicking 
the app shortcut and choosing ‘Pin to panel’. 
Right-clicking the panel reveals more options, 
like adding new applets or adding a second 
panel (choose ‘Modify panel...’).
"Ц Customise look and feel
Click the ‘Menu’ button and select the ‘System 
Settings’ button to change the way Cinnamon 
looks. In the Appearance section, you can 
change the background and system font 
(you’ll see options from other desktops you’ve 
installed too). Selecting Themes and clicking 
‘Add/remove desktop themes.’ you can 
download more themes to pick from.
^1 Change behaviour
Hot Corners enable you to specify actions that 
occur when your mouse goes into a corner of 
the screen, such as showing the desktop or 
displaying all workspaces. Windows is where 
you can edit the way windows behave and 
alter the display of the task switcher. Finally, 
the Extensions allows you to customise using 
third-party plugins.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 73

System settings
74 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

System settings
System 
settings
Tweak your install........................................76
Set all your screens.....................................78
Tweak your audio........................................80
Access flash and optical media.................82
Get and stay online....................................84
Graphics cards drivers................................86
Linux virus protection................................88
Fixing boot issues......................................90
How to fix problems.................................. 94
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 75

System settings
Settings: Tweak 
your install
Everyone likes to change the preferences to suite their own likes, we taokeu 
through the most important areas worth looking .at
I
t’s highly likely that system settings are very importa 
you and rightly so, they ensure you can adjust how 
Ubuntu works to suit your tastes and needs. It’s clea 
important settings are a link to Settings is provided right 
there on the eauncn bab a look for tfo coh anO gpandes Peon. 
All th e staaOaed conf role can be fouf O here. A numbor of the 
bigt sentifnst ffundt heret wet lffrt att elsewheret int thist 
magazine, foe eexmole hhe hlsplcy end OausO Unad 
Bluetooth) are looOeh at io tOe beat tevo secfloen oeot tOe 
page. Whiie Nelwerk, Printote, Bacane und Oadutec Oeve 
their own scetioeo too.
BefOrel eel tanelel thOcel ee’rel gOingl tOl taeel al littlel tio 
encure things are eet eo your Iiklng, oxplaiv how th tweak tWe 
cettingc beyond thh eatics cna imprape the obheenibility tot 
leolle eith eicual ana auaio iolairoentc.
To eine off ee nan noeer the eital cettingc for the oo 
ana eertoara. We eon’t incult rour intelligenne for the o 
cettingc, ac it’c largelr ooeeoent cpeea ana oouce nline 
cpeeac. Though there are optionc for nline ana aragging 
tounhpaac. Kertoara cettingc innluae the atilitr to celent 
rour language ana eertoara larout, alongciae oaeing it 
eacier to annecc or opt for an on-cnreen eertoara if rou 
haee one attanhea.
Shortcuts
The ooct uceful cention ic the Shortnut tat in the Kerto 
cettingc. Here rou’re atle to looe up ehat the evicting 
chortnutc are - thic innluaec cettingc chortnutc for cpenia 
eerc that eertoarac often haee along the top - cunh ac 
preccing irint Snreen to grat the entire cnreen tut alco 
irint enatlec rou to celent an area to grat.
Tioe ana aate optionc innluae, curpricinglr, cetting the 
tioe ana aate. It alco enatlec rou to cet the tioezone a 
troegion. More interectinglr it alco holac cettingc for hoe the 
tioe ic aicplarea at the top of the cnreen ana hoe 
oaeppointoent notifinationc are hanalea.
Deeine Colour irofilec ic a largelr oeerlooeea area, partlr 
oanc .it’c not alearc oteiouc ehr it’c neeaea tut alco ac the 
hcercteoc nan ceeo neealecclr nooplinatea. We’re not going 
to trr ana evplain eeerrthing here tut the tacin iaea of nolour 
oanageoent ic to trr ana oatnh the original nolourc of an 
ioage eith the output nolourc, te that on a oonitor, projentor 
or printer. Juct ac the nolourc proaunea tr a aicplar earr, 
nolourc printea are again eerr aifferent froo printer to printer 
- while a dicplay generatec pure white, a printer hac to uce 
hpeaper ehite. The nolour oanageoent crcteo atteoptc to 
noopencate for thic encuring nolourc in photoc looe norrent 
when eiewea on a oonitor or printea. If rour aeeine offerc an 
ICC nolour profile rou nan ioport that through the Colour 
cMeanageoent cettingc to get tetter nolour reproauntion. 
Alternatieelr if rou own a nolour nalitration aeeine, rou nan 
nalitrate rour oonitor eia thic cetting too.
iower noncuoption ic unfortunatelr cooething that Linuv 
often failc chort of when nooparea to running Winaowc on 
the came aeeine. It’c partly to Co with nompaniec (that’c 
largelr Intel) not cupplring the tect nhipcet arieerc to the 
Linuv eernel, tut it’c alco partly the tacin power cupport Linuv 
aictroc offer. You’ll fina a tacin Sucpena timer, nline the 
aSnreen Brightnecc line to alco annecc the cnreen off timer, tut 
that’c atout it here. Ucing the Synaptin inctall you nan aaa the 
indicator-cpufreq app to aaa a fine-grain nontrol to the ctatuc 
tar at the top of the cnreen, after a retoot.
ift
Users
Ucer annountc are a eey part of how Linuv worec, more co 
than with Winaowc. At itc heart Linuv ic a multi-ucer cyctem,
Tweak town
Ac ic ceemingly alwayc the nace with operating 
cyctemc - Ubuntu, Windowc or OSX - it ceemc the 
nreatorc never really want you to nhange their beloved 
interfane too munh. Even with the open courne, huggy, 
nommunity feel to Ubuntu, they never let people 
antually adjuct it too munh. On one cide you nan juct 
inctall a new decetop - cee page 72 for how you nan 
do that - but it’d be nine if you nould juct tweak the 
default decetop. Thanefully you nan, by inctalling a 
little tool oddly nalled Unity Tweak Tool The Ubuntu 
decetop cyctem ic nalled Unity, henne the name 
and you’re able to inctall it through the Software 
Centre. Juct tap Unity Tweak Tool into the cearnh 
and nlink Inctall.
One of the key pointc that Ubuntu ucerc have been 
nalling for wac the ability to chift the Launnher bar 
from the left-hand edge of the decetop down to the 
bottom edge. The Unity Tweak Toolwac the firct way 
to do that, though the funntionality hac been added to 
the offinial Dicplay cention.
T The main way to tweak Ubuntu is 
using its Unity Tweaking tool.
76 | Linuv Format irecentc: Ubuntu

System settings
Language support
Generally you’ll choose your native language and 
keyboard settings while Ubuntu is installing, so 
you can type and read things easily. If you need to 
change this post install or add additional 
languages you can do this through the Language 
Support settings. When first chosen you’ll be 
prompted to install additional support files.
By default it’ll show the current active 
languages that are used by Ubuntu in its menus 
and windows. These are listed in order of priority, 
so if the first language is not available it’ll use the 
next one down. Installed languages that are not 
active will be shown in grey. To activate a 
language drag it above the base English option, 
wait a second and it’ll activate. Use the Install/ 
Remove Languages button to do just that, this 
opens up a huge array of languages, just tick the 
box of the new language you want to use. Activate 
it and click the Apple system-wide button.
The Regional Formats tab section enables you 
to control how numbers, dates and times are 
displayed. There’s no fine control here, but it 
offers a wide range of base configurations for 
local regions.
Connected to the subject of language is the 
Text Entry settings. If you need to access more 
than one style of input language source, this 
provide controls over just that. Often people 
might need access to different keyboard layouts 
and this provides ways to switch between them 
using keyboard shortcuts and the top-bar 
language icon.
so it’s been designed from the start to accommodate multiple 
users working on the same system, yet being entirely secure 
from each other. At its most basic this means more than 
person can use the same Linux system, their files are entirely 
separated from the other users and they can have their own 
settings. Alongside adding, removing and changing accounts 
you can also launch a secure guest session to enable friends 
or strangers to temporarily use your system securely.
You can configure what applications should be started at 
login, in addition to the default startup applications 
configured on the system. Use the Dash to find and open 
Startup Applications. Alternatively, you can press Alt+F2 and 
run the gnome-session-properties command. Click Add and 
enter the command to be executed at login (name and 
comment are optional). For example, to make Firefox start 
automatically, it’s sufficient to type firefox in the Command 
field and confirm with Add.
Online accounts
Ubuntu can tie directly into a range of online accounts, this 
enables the OS to drag into notifications, emails calendar 
events and more directly to the built-in notification system 
and install programs. The Online Accounts system manages 
all of these and provides support for a small but useful 
number of accounts including Facebook, Google, Jabber (a 
chat system), Flickr and Yahoo!. It usefully also enables you to 
filter the accounts by what programs they can be linked into, 
this is useful for example if you want to know which enable 
images to be managed from Shotwell, for example.
Security and privacy
People take their privacy far more seriously these days - it’s a 
huge failing of Windows 10 and Google services - and even 
Ubuntu has had its slip ups. That’s why there’s a dedicated 
Security & Privacy section that’s dedicated to ensuring your 
details stay secure and on your PC. The section kicks off with 
the usual protections over requiring a password to wake from 
sleep and a blank screen.
The next three tabs are about securing your details better. 
File & Application enables you to select what the Dash Search 
should return. You may want to remove your chat logs for 
example or if it’s annoying, not have it search music and other 
files. The Search tab can eliminate searching online and 
Diagnostics will block sending details back to Ubuntu HQ.
There’s also the Details section which provides just that on 
your system. Once you’re familiar with Ubuntu it’s not an area 
you’ll need to use much but make yourself comfortable by 
tweaking the settings to your liking. ®
T The Ubuntu 
settings look 
pretty thin on 
the ground and 
in a way they are, 
which actually 
makes life easy!
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 77

System settings
Displays: Set 
all your screens
Master the basics of configuring you monitor options such as resol,ution 
visual effects, screen savers and more.
If you want to 
fine tune Ubuntu 
further, install 
Unity Tweak Tool 
from the Ubuntu 
Software Centre. It 
can change system 
fonts, cursors, 
and even install 
new themes. See 
https://help.
ubuntu.com/ 
community/ 
UbuntuEyeCandy 
for more 
information.
U
buntu is designed to be easy to set up and t 
default settings for your display should make f 
user friendly experience. However if the default 
settings aren’t optimal or you wish to personalise Ubu 
should first click on Search and go to Appearance.
From here you will see that you can choose from 
built in desktop backgrounds. If you have downloaded 
own background from the internet, you can also use t 
Simply place your chosen image in your Pictures folde 
from the drop down menu in Appearance, click Wallpa 
then choose Pictures Folder and select your image of
Another useful tweak you can make here is to cha 
theme. As the name suggests themes are simply the 
your system appears from the colour of window borde 
down to the fonts used. The default Ambiance theme 
changed to the lighter Radiance. You can also choose 
High Contrast theme which might be useful for visuall 
impaired users. Use the slider marked Launcher Icon 
increase/decrease the size of icons on your launch ba
Ubuntu Screensavers
More recent versions of Ubuntu don’t come with any 
screensavers built in. The monitor will simply switch o 
a certain length of time. You can access these setting 
going to System Settings > Brightness and Lock.
By default the screen will dim itself to save power 
lock after five minutes of inactivity. The screen will als
U Use the Appearance application to change your Wallpaper and Theme.
B By default Ubuntu will cycle through random 
nscrbeensavers but you can choose just one if you wish.
that time meaning when you return to your machine you’ll 
eneteod your password to access your desktop again.
Most modern monitors and televisions are LCDs and do 
not suffer from the problems plaguing old CRT screens that 
used to result in images being burned into a screen if left on 
for too long, hence there being less need for screensavers. 
afterNevertheless if you prefer to see something more arousing 
boyn your machine than a blank screen when idle, you can do 
this by installing another. First click search and launch the 
eTenrminal application. Remove the existing screensaver by 
ltoycpkingatin the following command, then pressing return:
sudo apt-get remove gnome-screensaver
You will be asked to enter your login password to confirm 
that you wish to remove it. Do this and hit return. Next, hit Y to 
confirm that you do indeed wish to remove this program. This 
will only take a few moments. Now type the following 
command to install the new program along with a colourful 
selection of screensavers:
sudo apt-get install xscreensaver xscreensaver-data-extra 
xscreensaver-gl-extra
Hit Y once again and wait for the text to scroll past for the 
install to complete. Click the search button and type 
Screensaver to launch the new application.
You will see a variety of different screensavers in the box 
on the left hand side of the window. Feel free to scroll through 
these and then click the Preview button to see what they 
would look like full screen. As you will see from the Dropdown 
Menu Mode, the default setting sees Ubuntu cycle through 
the available screensavers randomly, however you have the 
option to tell it to choose one screen saver only or never to 
power off if you wish.
78 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

System settings
Multiple Monitors
To use another monitor with your device, first of all 
connect it to you machine and log in to the Ubuntu 
Desktop. Click the search bar and launch the Displays 
app. Click on your secondary monitor and then on the 
rocker switch below to turn it on or off. If you’re 
unable to see your monitor try clicking the Detect 
Displays button. If your device has a built in display an 
alert box will show at the top left of your screen.
Once your secondary monitor has been 
enabled,feel free to drag it around to the position of 
your choice e.g you may wish to have it immediately 
below your current display. You can also choose to
Mirror Displays if you prefer for them to show the 
same content e.g if you are giving a presentation. This 
may limit your resolution options if the displays have 
different capabilities. The General Options section 
show by default the Launcher on every display. Click 
All Displays to choose a primary monitor if you prefer.
Sticky Edges is an extremely useful feature which 
prevents you accidentally moving the mouse off 
screen onto the other monitor. When your mouse 
reaches the edge of one screen it will need an extra 
push to move to the other. By default this is switched 
on but hit the rocker switch if you want to turn this off.
M Multiple displays is easy!
Click the checkbox next to Lock in order to require the 
password when dismissing the screensaver.
If you want to fine tune your power settings click the 
Advanced tab and check the box next to Power Management 
Enabled. You can suspend or switch off your display after a 
certain amount of time.
Resolution and Rotation
The display resolution is simply the number of pixels that can 
be displayed on your monitor, usually expressed as width x 
height e.g 1024 x 768. Ubuntu will try to detect the optimal 
resolution for your monitor but you may wish to change this if 
the display is too small or you have specific requirements.
Click the search button and type Displays. This application 
will allow you to change various aspects of your display 
including the resolution. Click the drop down menu to see the 
various settings supported by your monitor. Click Apply at the 
bottom right to effect your changes.
Below the resolution menu you can change the rotation of 
the screen if you have a specialised setup. You can also use 
the slider bar to increase the size of menu and title bars. The 
remaining settings pertain to using more than one display. 
See Multiple Monitors above for more help with this.
The Refresh rate is simply the number of times a second 
that images on your monitor are redrawn, measured in Hertz. 
For normal LCD displays a value of 60Hz is standard and 
Ubuntu should automatically detect the optimal settings for 
your monitor. However, newer high-end displays support 
faster rates up to 144Hz that you might need to select here 
but only if directed to by the manufacturer.
The easiest way to view and change the refresh rate is to 
install CompizConfig Settings Manager from the Ubuntu 
Software Centre. Once installed, click the icon to open it.
Y You have 30 seconds to accept settings to ensure you 
don’t select an incompatible screen setting.
Compiz manages many of the visual effects on your 
desktop (see below) and is a very powerful tool. As such you 
will see a warning when you first launch the Compiz 
Configuration Manager. Click OK to dismiss this, then on the 
General category on the left hand side. Next click Composite 
to view the settings for the monitor refresh rate. If you wish to 
manually change this, uncheck the box next to Detect Refresh 
Rate and then specify a new value in the box below.
Visual Effects
As mentioned the Compiz Configuration Manager is an 
extremely advanced tool and allows you to do much more 
than change a monitor’s refresh rate. It also governs visual 
effects for your desktop, windows and much more.
It’s not necessary to have these but it can make for a 
much slicker look and feel for your desktop. To explore the full 
range of options, first open your Terminal application and 
install some extra visual effects with the following command:
sudo apt-get install compiz-plugins-extra
Once installation is complete, open the Compiz 
Configuration Manager and click on Effects on the left hand 
side. You will see that certain window effects are already 
enabled such as Fading Windows. Feel free to experiment by 
enabling/disabling other effects. The Compiz Manager will 
alert you if you try to enable two effects which clash.
Display Dilemmas
As stunning as the visual effects are, they will place a greater 
strain on your graphics card which can be an issue for older 
or budget machines. The aforementioned Unity Tweak tool 
has a handy button for restoring your settings to default. You 
can also use the Compiz Configuration Manager to disable 
effects individually.
If you are still having issues with rich graphics overloading 
your system, consider switching to Lubuntu, a variation of 
Ubuntu which uses the same base code with the resource 
light LXDE (Lightweight X11 Desktop Environment). This uses 
a much simpler desktop and so needs far less system 
resources. See http://lubuntu.net for more information. э
T The Wobbly 
Windows 
effect isn’t 
compatible with 
the Snapping 
Windows effect. 
When effects 
directly clash 
you are given a 
choice to disable 
the old effect 
and enable the 
new or vice versa.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 79

System settings
Sound: Tweak
your audio
Explore Ubuntu’ssound settings as well as how to connect external sp 
and make everything sound perfectly sweet.
If you are playing 
music through the 
Firefox browser, 
you can disable 
sound in individual 
tabs by clicking the 
loudspeaker icon 
besides the small ‘x’
I
n this section we will explore how your sound 
in Ubuntu as well as how to connect external 
and microphones to your machine. We will also 
suitable programs for recording and playing back au 
well as how to troubleshoot sound issues.
Your Ubuntu system’s sound is managed by a p 
named Pulseaudio. Technically Pulseaudio is known 
sound server which sits between your various progr 
sound hardware. It is capable of mixing several sou 
together or playing to multiple devices at once, pro 
properly configured.
Volume and playback
For most users audio will work out of the box 
installing Ubuntu however if you wish to connect ex 
speakers or adjust settings for individual applications 
may need to access your Sound Settings.
Volume can be adjusted two ways in Ubuntu. Fi 
clicking on the sound icon in the menu bar to m 
volume switch either to the left or the right. Secon 
open the Sound Settings menu from here to fine t 
If you do not see the sound icon use the search 
System Settings, then click Sound.
Some keyboards also have volume controls. Look 
loudspeaker icon. You may need to hold down the 
‘Fn’(Function) key before pressing them to alter the
The sound settings menu also allows you to cho 
audio output device. Simply click on the device on 
hand side of the window. If you use earphones or 
with a 3.5mm jack then the Play Sound Through b 
simply display headphones.
Depending on the speaker setup you have, you 
this opportunity to review the various settings for y 
speakers. The slider switches you’ll find here are fai 
explanatory allowing you to adjust the balance, fade 
subwoofer individually.
O Once the Sound 
Settings menu is 
open, click Test 
Sound to launch 
a window that 
will play sounds 
for each of your 
speakers e.g 
front left and 
front right.
> As with the Output tab you can choose your device from 
the pane on the left hand side. Adjust the input volume 
using the slider switch on the right.
u The applications tab in Sound Settings is extremely useful 
as it allows you to adjust the volume for individual programs. 
If, bsayy, you are listening to a music CD while browsing the BBC 
wtehbesite, you may not want to hear the commentary from 
neywous vicdaenos, so you can mute the web browser’s volume.
e audio.
rIntp
o uotpedn evices
Settings for Input devices like USB microphones or webcams 
rwitheinternal microphones can be accessed from the Input 
tab in Sound Settings. In the same way as for the speakers if 
lyuomuer .input device connects via USB it will be listed separately. 
eSimyopulyr click it with your mouse to have Ubuntu use it for 
esoulenftd recording moving forward.
eakTearske some time to look at the Settings for Microphone. 
Inwcirlleasing the input volume will change how sensitive the 
microphone is. This is helpfully displayed in the Input Level 
batar kbe low.
At the bottom of the Sound Settings window, you can 
csheolfose to Show Sound Volume in the Menu Bar. If this is 
udnticked for any reason click it to be able to access sound 
settings easily in future.
If you need a way to record short audio clips with minimal 
fuss, install the Sound Recorder application from the Ubuntu 
Software Centre. The interface is very basic but will allow you 
to record and play back short clips.
If you need a more fully featured audio recorder e.g for 
mixing various tracks or trimming your recordings, consider 
downloading Audacity which has many more features. Visit 
www.ubuntuupdates.org/package/core/yakkety/ 
universe/base/audacity and click on the red button marked 
APT install to begin the installation. Ubuntu’s bundled music 
player is called Rhythmbox. It has all the basic functions of a
80 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

System settings
Pairing Bluetooth speakers
Ubuntu can connect and play audio wirelessly to 
most Bluetooth speakers. If you want to proceed, 
in addition to Bluetooth compatible speakers your 
computer must support Bluetooth. Use the 
search bar to search for Bluetooth if you’re 
uncertain if your machine supports this. If it isn’t 
supported you’ll see a message stating No 
Bluetooth adapters found.
Fortunately there are a number of small USB 
adapters online that you can plug in to make your 
device support Bluetooth. For a list of Ubuntu 
compatible Bluetooth USB adapters visit http:// 
bit.ly/LXF26blue.
The device used for this illustration (see the 
screenshot right) was a Micro 10m USB adapter 
purchased from Argos for £9.99 which worked out 
of the box on a machine running Ubuntu 16.10.
Once Bluetooth is switched on, consult the 
manufacturer’s instructions to put your speakers 
into Discovery mode so they can be detected by 
your computer.
Launch the Bluetooth application again from 
the search bar and make sure that both the 
switches at the top of the window are set to on, 
to activate bluetooth and make your computer 
discoverable.
Click the + button at the bottom left of the 
window to search for your bluetooth headset or 
speakers. Click to highlight when it appears in the 
pane and click Next at the bottom left. Ideally a 
message will appear saying that the new device 
has successfully been set up.
Click the volume icon to open your Sound 
Settings. You will see the Bluetooth device is now 
listed as a device in the Output tab. Select it to 
start playing sound over Bluetooth.
M Make sure to select the headset or 
speaker set as your playback device in 
Sound Settings too.
music player such as organising and playing tracks by album 
name, artist and genre. When you first run Rhythmbox it will 
automatically search your local music folder and display any 
tracks there.
As you will see (screenshot below) from the pane on the 
left hand side, Rhythmbox also supports playing internet 
radio and comes with a number of pre-loaded channels. 
Users can also search and subscribe to Podcasts by clicking 
on the Podcast sections
You can enhance Rhythmbox even further by accessing 
the Plugins via the Tools Menu. This allows you to add other 
channels, play FM radio and play Rhythmbox over the web.
Sound troubleshooting
If you are unable to hear sound on your machine, it’s 
important to isolate exactly where the issue lies.
If sound plays for some media but not for others, it’s likely 
you have an issue with certain formats of files. As Ubuntu is 
free software it doesn’t include software for playing certain 
media types protected by copyright or patents such as 
Quicktime or Windows Media Video. For a full list of restricted 
formats visit https://help.ubuntu.com/community/ 
RestrictedFormats.
When you initially set up Ubuntu you were given the option 
to download support for these formats. If you didn’t do so at 
the time, you can do so now by opening the Terminal 
application on Ubuntu and running the command:
sudo apt-get install ubuntu-restricted-extras
Press return to enter the command, then Y to confirm you 
want to install. If you are still having trouble playing certain 
files, consider installing vlc from the Ubuntu Software Centre.
U Use the left pane to change between your own music 
collection, podcasts and internet radio. Portable music 
players such as iPods will also display here.
To see a full list 
of Ubuntu music 
players open 
the Software 
Centre and click 
audio under 
Categories. Next 
choose Players. If 
you’re happy with 
Rhythmboxsee 
the Getting Started 
guide at https:// 
help.ubuntu.com/ 
community/ 
Rhythmbox.
> The PulseAudio Volume Control (left) and the alsamixer 
app (right). Both are ideal for checking the playback or 
recording volume for individual devices.
This media player is capable of playing virtually any video or 
audio format.
If your sound is not working at all, first check your 
sound settings to make sure the correct output device is 
selected and the volume is turned up. If everything seems 
in order, you may need to adjust the sound for your particular 
output device.
Open Terminal on your machine and run the command 
alsamixer . This will display each of your pl;a2/l^<aclk devices 
and allow you to alter the volume for each. Use the left/right 
arrow keys to move between devices and the up/down keys 
to change the volume. Press Escape to exit when you are 
done, Ubuntu will remember the new settings.
In order to fine tune your sound settings even further 
consider installing the PulseAudio Volume Control 
application from the software centre. Not only is it easier on 
the eye but you can control more advanced settings like 
Ports and latency.
If you are having trouble connecting your bluetooth 
headset or speakers (See Pairing Bluetooth Speakers), try 
pairing them with another computer to make sure the 
discovery mode is enabled.
If all else fails you can reset your sound settings to default 
by opening the Terminal application and entering the 
following command:
sudo rm -r ~/.config/pulse; pulseaudio -k
For more in depth troubleshooting of sound in Ubuntu 
visit https://help.ubuntu.com/community/ 
SoundTroubleshootingProcedure. @
If you’re unsure 
if the sound is 
working for some 
files. Hold Alt + F2 
and type aplay 
/usr/share/ 
sounds/alsa/ 
Front_Center. 
wav. You should 
hear a voice saying 
Front Centre.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 81

System settings
Drives: Access 
flash and 
optical media
Your Linux install is not an isla. nHdere’s how to access both flash 
storage and optical media using Ubuntu’s built-in tools.
L
inux handles drives differently to Windows, so i 
migrated from a Windows PC, we recommend 
familiarise youself with how drives are labelled 
accessed in UbubUu. The good news iseWst - onhayo—’ve 
over the i nitial al osh - the — raneition isn't OS at bigs And now 
yeT’ve Tsdersteed hew thisgs werk, yeT cas ge es 
mere abeTl remevable medta, tsclTdtsg USB flash sl 
well as CD asd DVD.
Verify what your 
CD or DVD drive is 
capable of doing in 
Ubuntu by opening 
a Terminal window, 
typing wodim 
-prcap and then 
hitting [Enter].
Working with USB drives
UbTslT ts mere lhas happy le wert wtlh USB slera 
asy nsture - hard drives a net Slash drives are ti^eated equally' 
Just pluT it iti’ asd tas drive will be automatical^ mmantad 
asd aaceesible, so long as it's fsrmatted ualng a srpsortad 
filet sys'em.t UaTs'Tt shilst ti'ht aTil'-ist sTller't ftert ae 
FAT32 aas NTNS fils syetems es weH ss its owa ext-baswd 
tile syssem - once meuSeT, yes can reat and wade Is She 
drive likt ana other.
Laager daivne - typicaliy 64GB 4G Bigges - oro accasioeallo 
tormatted in she exFATfosmaO. SaososU for exFAO isn't 
isclrded in UbuaUs by detauie, drtyoa can erictly add fell 
read/trites sTllorts ays olesisosStohfetwsare Centres asds 
P Pop a media or blank disc into your DVD drive and Ubuntu will pop up this 
helpful dialogue box.
esTe’avrecshisosters‘eTtat’.sIsstalls‘eTtat-tTse’stelletedsats‘eTtat-Ttils’s 
sitsttiresTt’sresrTssisosUaTstTs64-aitsserscheesesthesi386slaaelleds 
vs ersiesssitsteT’resrTssisosthes32-aitsversies.sItsteTsdes’tslsets 
Tt’hveicshsversiessteT’resrTssisossoestesitstessiettisoss>sDetailss 
adss dsseeTtassisesthes‘Oisttle’sestrtstestisdseTt.sOscesisstalledss 
tlTelalsresas d/tritessTllertstesastseTfoTsdrivestillsaesesaaled. 
oes UasisBsdrivessaresreoisteredsissthessasestatsasshardsdrivess 
- epes Disks te cestirm the isdividral label ter yerr drive. 
ielect its velTse asd teT’ll see it’s sesethiso lile /dev/sdb1 
er /dev/sde1 depesdiso es het masy ether drives are 
peret sest. Uslile permasestly attached drivess these idestitiers 
arrs't c esstast. They're applied es a tirst-ceme, tirst-served 
asatesidss se it yer tere te rsplro ese drives thes plro it aacl 
is haviso tirst attached asether drive, its label will chasoe. 
oltays verity the laael is Disls aetere pertermiso asy tasls 
atsheadt redrire yer te idestity er address it ay its idestitier. 
e tOhsece plrooed is, yerr drive sherld shet rp is the
Nartilrs tile masaoer - its actral merst peist cas ae 
steierssadllyrsder /media/<username>/<volumelabel>, 
there <volumelabel> is the same yer oave it thes the 
patrrtlilties tas created. Uslile the drive's idestitier, this dees 
stay the same.
Whes yer've tisished tith the drive asd tast te remeve it, 
clicl the eject arttes seTt te the drive same is Nartilrs te 
rsmerst it aetere rsplrooiso it. It yer seed te remeve a drive 
trem the Termisal, rse the umount cemmasd. By detarlt, the 
rmerst cemmasd is rsed te remeve isdividral velrmes, art 
ay isclrdiso the -a tlao yer cas essrre all velrmes ter a 
particrlar drive are rsmersted, alletiso yer te remeve the 
drive sately eves it it's aees partitiesed. Peist rmerst 
tetards a specitic velrme er its merstpeist rsiso the 
telletiso systaT:
umount -a /dev/sdel
umount -a /media/nick/RPiO
Osce dese, remeve er eject the drive.
Read-only mount
iemetimes yer may tish te access a UiB drive is read-esly 
mede, se data cas't accidestally ae trittes te the drive. By 
detarlt, Uarstr till merst asy srpperted tilesystem is read/ 
trite mede. The tricl is te rse the rmerst cemmasd tith a 
82 | lisrt fermat Presests: Uarstr

System settings
special flag (-r) to unmount the selected volume, then 
remount it in read-only mode - for example:
umount -r /media/nick/RPiO
If you find you can’t unmount a drive using the -a 
command, you can use the -r flag instead on each mounted 
volume from that drive to remount them in read-only mode. 
This means you can then physically remove the drive without 
worrying about data loss.
Optical drives
CD and DVD drives are handled differently to regular hard 
drives. First, they’re assigned different IDs - /dev/sr0, 
/dev/sr1 and so on. You’ll also see they’re marked as read­
only by default, even if the drive itself is a burner.
How you interact with discs depends on the disc itself. 
If the disc is recognised, it’ll be mounted inside the/ 
media/<username> folder like other removable drives, 
making it accessible through the Terminal as well as via 
Nautilus. If the disc is a straightforward data disc, it 
should open in Nautilus, enabling you to browse and 
access its contents.
Other types - multimedia and writable discs - are 
handled slightly different. A pop-up window will appear, 
similar to that which appears when you insert a disc in 
Windows. You’ll be asked if you want to open a specific 
application, which varies on the type of disc you’ve inserted, 
plus there are options for opening the drive in Files to 
explore its contents, or do nothing.
Your app choice depends on what’s installed - Ubuntu 
ships with four apps that can be used from the off: 
Rhythmbox (playing and ripping audio CDs), Videos 
(watching DVD movies), CD/DVD Creator (burning data 
discs) and Brasero (burning all kinds of discs, including 
DVD, SVCD and audio CD).
By default, Ubuntu can’t play certain restricted formats, 
including encrypted DVDs. To play commercial DVDs, install 
the libdvd-pkg software from the Software Centre - once 
done, you’ll find Videos is able to play them, as will other third- 
party tools, including VLC Media Player.
R Rhythmbox can extract audio from your CDs as well as play them back to you.
Burn discs
Insert a blank disc and you’ll be prompted to open CD/DVD 
Creator. This provides a similar interface to Nautilus - drag 
files onto the window, give your disc a suitable title and click 
‘Write to Disc’ to burn a data disc.
A more sophisticated tool for burning discs comes in the 
shape of Brasero. Launch this when prompted (or open it 
from the Dash) with a blank disc inserted into your drive, then 
select your project: you can create an audio CD, data disc, or 
video DVD/SVCD, plus there are tools for copying one disc to 
another as well as burning discs from support image formats 
(ISO, TOC and CUE). There’s even a built-in cover editor 
(select Tools > Cover Editor) for designing and printing a 
cover for a regular CD jewel case, plus you can erase 
rewritable discs by selecting Tools > Blank...
Brasero is simple to use as the annotation below reveals - 
it’s mostly just a case of dragging and dropping the files you 
wish to add to your disc in the correct order. There are also 
plenty of alternative burning tools out there - to create a 
video DVD with menus and try DVDStyler, for example, or 
check out K3b for a more general-purpose alternative.®
You can also attach 
MMC/SD cards to 
Linux - if these are 
plugged directly into 
a card slot 
(as opposed 
to using a USB 
adapter), they’ll 
be identified using 
mmcblkx rather 
than sdx. They work 
in the same way as 
other media.
Exploring Brasero
о-------------------------------------------
Access older projects
Choose File > Save to make a copy of your 
project before you’re ready to burn it. You can 
then return to it for further tweaking.
o------------------------------------------------------------------ ■
Project type
Brasero allows you to burn all kinds of discs: audio, video 
and data, plus burn discs from image files and copy from 
one disc to another (two optical drives required).
О------------------------------------------------------------
File and folder controls
These buttons allow you to add and remove files to 
your project, plus perform other context-sensitive 
tweaks such as creating new folders for data discs.
File list
Review the current list of files, tracks or videos that 
you plan to burn - media tracks can be clicked and 
dragged to change their running order.
Choose media
Click this dropdown menu to switch between 
available drives or make a disc image. A handy 
guide tells you how much free space is left.
Burn disc
Once you’re ready, click the Burn button. Set your 
speed, plus tweak options like leaving the disc open. 
You can even burn several copies if required.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 83

System settings
Networks: Get
and stay online
Connect to your local network and the internet via Ubuntu, we explain aell t 
settings you’ll need to know to manage your home network.
Qpuickr'
For more 
information on your 
current connection, 
click the network 
icon at the top right 
of the screen and 
choose Connection 
Information. Your 
ISP may need this 
information if you’re 
having connection 
difficulties.
I
f you have previous experience with connecting your 
computer to a network then it’s unlikely Ubuntu will 
any surprises. The easiest and fastest connections wi 
via a wired Ethernet cable.
If, as is more likely nowadays, you have WiFi in your h 
or oOfice oo have a raore co mplicpted sedup, ope n OPe Network 
Manager by clicking the search bar and typing Network. Y 
will paa all availabla cOnnactiOnp puch ap Wiralapp and Wir 
If yOu upa a cabla cOnnactiOn click thip tO chack tha can 
raadp cOnnactad.
If yOur hOca Or wOrkplaca upap a prOxy parvar, thip ip 
whara tO ppacify it. Sicply click On NatwOrk PrOxy On tha 
hand pida, than click On NOna in tha drOp dOwn canu. C 
Manual and antar tha natwOrk pattingp givan tO yOu by y 
ISP (Intarnat Sarvica PrOvidar) Or NatwOrk AdciniptratOr.
Wireless networking
AlthOugh it’p pOppibla tO cOnnact tO wiralapp natwOrkp frO 
within the Network Manager it's eaaiea s imcly to cli ck ok the 
natwOrk icOn at tha tOp right Of tha pcraan.
If yOu hava a WiFi natwOrk in yOur hOca Or Offioa, itsi 
yOu will hava oOnnaotad tO it alraady whan iatting uy Ub 
i O bafOra yrOoaading, ohaok tha naca Of yOur lOoal wiral 
natwOrk and iaa if thara ii tha OytiOn tO diioOnnaot. Lau 
tha Firefox brOwiar and try tO viiit a faw wab addraiiai 
caka iura yOur oOnnaotiOn ii wOrking.
If yOu ara nOt alraady oOnnaotad, try tO find yOur nat 
naca in tha drOy dOwn liit. HOvar yOur cOuia Ovar cOr 
natwOrki if yOu dO nOt iaa yOuri liitad thara. If yOu find 
canu tOO diffioult tO navigata oOniidar uiing tha NatwOrk 
Managar. Cliok Wiralaii On tha laft hand iida tO iaa all 
availabla natwOrki. YOur natwOrk will cOit likaly ba yrOta
T The Network Manager on a PC with two wireless cards and Ethernet port.
P If you have more than one wireless adapter (see below) 
tfthe dropdown menu lets you choose which to use.
by a password os wireless key. You oan usually find this in the 
documentation sent by your ISP with your router or written 
on the underside of the router itself. Enter the password and 
oliok Conneot to link your oomputer to the wireless network.
If you have a Hidden Wifi network then you will need to 
enter the password and the name of the wireless network and 
the type of seourity used suoh as WEP or WPA. You oan obtain 
tehlyis information from whoever set up your wireless router.
W ireless USB
hNot all wireless oards are oompatible with Ubuntu as they use 
proprietary software drivers. If there is no Linux driver for your 
WiFi oard you may be able to use the program Ndiswrapper 
kto oonvert the Windows driver to work with it. See https:// 
help.ubuntu.com/community/WifiDocs/Driver/ 
eNdiswrapper for more information.
If your WiFi still doesnst work and you are unable to oliok 
Enable WiFi in the network menu, you may prefer to buy a 
dUSB WiFi dongle. The Ubuntu website has a non exhaustive 
list of wireless USB devioes whioh will work with Linux at 
https://help.ubuntu.com/community/WifiDocs/ 
WirelessCardsSupported.
If you have more than one working wireless devioe suoh as 
an internal wireless oard in a laptop and a USB WiFi dongle, 
both devioes will be listed separately in the network menu. 
They oan also be oonneoted to separate wireless networks. 
This oan be useful if you wish to set up a WiFi Hotspot...
Wireless hotspots
If you have another method of oonneoting to the internet 
besides your WiFi oard e.g another WiFi devioe, Ethernet oable 
or Bluetooth oonneotion, you oan set up a WiFi hotspot. This 
enables other devioes to oonneot via wireless to your Ubuntu 
oomputer and share the internet oonneotion.
84 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

System settings
Y You’ll need to give both the network name and security 
key to users who need to connect.
Open the Network Manager by clicking the search bar and 
typing Network, then press return. Click the Wireless tab on 
the left hand side (if you have more than one wireless device 
select the one you’re not currently using), then the button 
marked Use as Hotspot. You will see a warning message 
asking you to confirm that you wish to create the hotspot.
The WiFi hotspot uses WEP for security which is 
considered very insecure these days so make sure there is no 
sensitive data on your machine before agreeing to use it as a 
WiFi hotspot.
Editing Connections
Ubuntu supports a number of other connections to networks 
such as Bluetooth, DSL and VPN. If you do not know what 
these are, it’s unlikely you’ll use them. Otherwise if you wish to 
add a new connection, click the network icon at the top right 
and choose Edit Connections. Click the Add button on the 
right hand side to choose various types of connections.
If you wish to connect to a VPN, bear in mind there are 
several types. By default Ubuntu supports PPTP (Point to 
Point Tunneling Protocol) which is commonly used by 
Microsoft systems. Your VPN provider however may use the 
OpenVPN standard which is generally considered to be more 
secure and reliable. To enable support for this open Terminal 
from the search bar and run the command:
sudo apt-get install network-manager-openvpn-gnome
Press Y to confirm you wish to proceed. The next time you 
open the Network Manager you will see the OpenVPN option.
Regardless of which connection type you choose the 
wizard will guide you to enter the fields with the data given by 
your network provider. Click Save when you are done to add 
the connection.
Connection issues
If your wireless connection is not working at all, there are 
simple steps you can take to arrive at the heart of the 
problem. If your computer previously worked with the same 
wireless network, then firstly check that it is not connected 
via an Ethernet cable. Also check the Network menu to 
ensure both Enable Networking and Enable WiFi are checked. 
You can also use the Network Manager to check you are 
connecting to the correct wireless network. Simply click on 
the Wireless option on the left hand side and make sure there 
is a tick next to your own WiFi network. This is important as 
Ubuntu may be connected to an unsecured WiFi hotspot.
If you use a USB device to connect wirelessly, try reseating 
it. If the wireless is built into your device e.g for a laptop make 
sure that the wireless isn’t disabled as many portable 
computers have a key combination to do this.
If you are accessing folders on other devices over your 
network via Samba (See Sharing via Samba), you can 
experience username and password request, alongside read/ 
write issues on certain folders or files. These options need to 
be changed on the networked systems.
On Windows 10 this is done via the Advanced sharing 
settings. On Apple Macs follow the steps on the Apple 
Support page at https://support.apple.com/en-ie/ 
HT204445 and change permissions for Everyone to Read 
and Write to make sure the folder can be accessed without a 
password. Note that as Apple has its own protocol for file 
sharing it’s very important to enable support for SMB when 
following the steps on the site, э
Remember that The 
Official Raspberry 
Pi WiFi Adapter, 
available for £6 
from the Pi Hut 
website will work 
out of the box 
in Ubuntu as it’s 
designed for Linux.
Find more in-depth 
help with wireless 
troubleshooting 
at http://bit.ly/ 
LXF26network 
and https://help. 
ubuntu.com/ 
community
C Click Add in 
the Network 
Connections 
menu to choose 
a connection.
VPNs using PPTP 
are supported 
by default, other 
connection types 
can be installed 
manually.
Sharing Folders across your network
If you need to access folders on other 
machines in your home or workplace from 
Ubuntu, Samba or SMB (System Message 
Block) is a protocol that allows you to do this.
To get started, connect to your local 
network on the target device and enable 
sharing of the folder(s) via SMB. Windows 10 
Users can find help with this in the Syncing 
and Saving section of Microsoft Support 
(https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/ 
products/windows?os=windows-10). Mac 
OS users can find help on the Apple Support 
page at https://support.apple.com/en-ie/ 
HT204445.
On the Ubuntu machine select the Files 
app then Other locations to see the remote 
folder. If it doesn’t appear right away, try 
holding Alt + F2 and inputting the ‘smb’ 
address you were given by your Windows PC 
or Mac e.g smb://192.168.42.1 and press 
return. You’ll see the folder icon has a picture 
of a network cable to allow you to easily tell the 
difference between this and a local folder on 
your machine.
Once you have been able to access the 
folder consider right clicking and using the 
Add Bookmark to make it easy to access it 
next time. Any changes you make inside this 
folder will be reflected immediately on the 
target device. Similarly any files you move into 
here will exist on the other device only, not 
your Ubuntu machine.
If you need a way to make sure files are 
kept the same across all devices at all times, 
consider using a cloud sharing service like 
Dropbox to automate the process.
Y You may be asked for a username & 
password when connecting via Samba. 
Ubuntu can remember these details, or you 
can tell the remote machine to allow anyone 
to access your sharing folders.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 85

System settings
Hardware:
Graphics 
card drivers
Let’s take a long, hard look at the advantages and disadvantages of switncgh 
graphics card drivers and what that actually entails.
To find out more 
about your graphics 
chipset - including 
its capabilities - 
install mesautils 
from the Software 
Centre. Once done, 
simply open a 
Terminal window 
and type the 
following: glxinfo | 
grep render.
O
ne of the most confusing aspects of switching fro 
Windows 
Linnu xs snUnrstatalidg hoh drivers
and in ppaticclaa grappics sard drirers - work. When 
you install Ubuntu on your PC, you’ll notics it appsars to 
install ths diissis you nssd foi aiaphirs to woih psifsrtly 
indssd this is ths rass in ths sast majoiity of rasss. Ths 
diissis ais opsn souirs, dssiansd to piosids ths hsy 
funrtionality foi any aiaphirs raid to woih with Ubuntu.
Bsrauss thsy’is dssiansd to just woih, many of thsss 
diissis aisn’t intsisstsd in piosidina you with ruttina sdas 
psrformancs. For ddd Уо Oar use - brow-inn tla itCsrnet, 
word processing aan even n diting imnges - they'cs perrectiy 
adsquats, but if you hass a modsrn araphirs rard, and w 
to take toll advantage si ity cspctrlities - partiraiarlyforgyming 
-you’’l nnss to irrv,nstiptntd the csspibility of retfiasiparinem 
withr dsdilatsdr drissrsr prosidsdr egr thsr ganuyaltursrs.
Tcisr ssrondr sstr oyr drissrsr -r witcr tcsr sxrsptionr oyr dris 
yorr Intslr arapcirsr -r arsr rlossdr sourrs,r wcircr gsansr tcatr 
tcsg’rsr stillr yrssr tor install,r gou’rsr rslginar onr tcsr ganuyartu 
yorr support.r Tcsr opsn-sourrsr drissrsr tcatr scipr witcr Ueunt 
arsr updatsdr tcrouacr Ueuntu’sr ownr updatsr tool,r sor tcsg’llr 
updatsr oraanirallgr witcr tcsr rsstr oyr gourr sgstsg.
> Intel’s graphics drivers are open source, unlike those provided by 
NVIDIA and AMD, so need to be installed manually.
Clossdrsourrsr-rorrpropristargr-rdrissrsrrslgronrtcsr 
ganuyartursrryorrupdatssrtoresrdslissrsd.rTcsrganuyartursrr 
rgagrprosidsrtcisryunrtionalitgrwitcinrtcsrdrissrsrtcsgsslsss,r 
orrgourgagrcassrtorganuallgrrcsrhrtcsrwsesitsrtorsssriyrnswr 
ndrrissrsrcassressnrrslsassd.
What’s available
Tcsrgajorrtcrssrarapcirsrrardrganuyartursrsr-rIntsl,rNVIDIAr 
andrAMD/ATIr-rallrprosidsrtcsirrownrUeunturdrissrs.rIyrgour 
planrtoruparadsrtortcsrrlossd-sourrsrarapcirsrdriss,rtcsryirstr 
tcinartordorisrtoridsntiygrgourrsxartrgahsrandrgodslroyr 
rarapcirsrrardr-rpartirularlgriyrgourcassrnoridsarwcortcsr 
tgr anuyartursrris.rIyrgourcsadrossrrtorSgstsgrSsttinasrandr 
nsasrlsrtrDstails,rgou’llrsssrararapcirsrssrtion,reutritrwon’trtsllr 
gourgurc.rInstsad,ropsnrarTsrginalrwindowrandrtgps:
Ispci I grep vga
r Tcisrwillrquirhlgrlistreotcrganuyartursrrandrgodsl,rwcircr 
iglsoru’llrnssdrinrordsrrtordstsrginsriyrarpropristargrdrissrrisr 
rasailaelsryorrgourrrard.
NVIDIA and AMD
IyrgourcassranrNVIDIArorrAMDrarapcirsrrard,rtcsnrtcsr 
quirhsstrwagrtorsssriyrarpropristargrdrissrrisrasailaelsrisregr 
opsninarSgstsgrSsttinas,rsslsrtinar‘Soytwarsr&rUpdatss’rand 
switrcinartortcsr‘AdditionalrDrissrs’rtae.rIyrgourrrardrisr 
rogpatiels,rgourscouldrsssr-raytsrrarscortrdslagr-rarlistroyr 
altsrnatissrdrissrsrappsar.rCcoossrtcsrlatsstrssrsionrgarhsdr 
‘propristarg,rtsstsd’ryrogrtcsrlistrandrrlirhr‘ApplgrCcanass’.r 
Wcsnrtcsrprorsssrrogplstss,rrseootrgourrPC.
Don’tresrsurprissdriyrgourrrardrisn’trdstsrtsdr-riyrtcsr 
rardrisrgorsrtcanryissrorrsixrgsarsrold,rtcsnrit’srunlihslgrtoresr 
supportsd.rAMD’srsupportraossrearhrtor2010randrtcsrHDr 
5000rssriss,rwcilsrNVIDIArrardsrdatsrearhrtoraroundrtcsr 
sagsrtigsrwitcrGsForrsr400rssriss.rAtryirstralanrs,rgou’llrsss 
tcatrNVIDIArdossrstillrprosidsrlinhsrtorlsaargrdrissrsryorroldsrr 
rardsr-rsssrwww.nvidia.com/object/unix.htmlr-reutrtcsssr 
won’trworhrwitcrUeuntur15.10.
Iyrgourrrardrisranroldsrrgodsl,rtcsrsyors,rgou’rsrsturhrwitc 
tcsropsn-sourrsrdrissrsr-rNoussauryorrNVIDIArrards,randr 
RadsonryorrAMDrrards.rDon’tresrtoordowncsartsd,reotcr
86 | iinuxrforgatrprsssnts:rueuntu

System settings
Exploring the NVIDIA X Server interface
о-----------------------------------------------
Display Configuration
Select this to tweak the resolution settings 
for each monitor attached to your PC - click 
a screen to select that monitor.
О----------------------------------------------------------
OpenGL settings
Access the ‘Image Settings’ slider from here, 
where you can try and strike a different balance 
between image quality and performance.
О----------------------------------------------------------
Antialiasing settings
This section allows you to configure the card’s 
ability to smooth jagged edges and textures 
when rendering 3D objects using OpenGL.
О----------------------------------------------------------
Thermal Settings
This provides a temperature gauge for your 
graphics card - keep it open while you stress-test 
the card if you’re worried about heat problems.
Application Profiles
Advanced users can fine-tune the various settings 
on offer for specific applications - typically games. 
Use the Help button to guide you.
PowerMizer
Some cards support different performance states 
- use this tab to view current settings and see if 
you can push the envelope if required.
provide more than basic functionality, with pretty decent 2D 
and 3D acceleration. They also support most older chipsets 
stretching back more than a decade. There’s no need to 
install them either - if your card is correctly detected, the 
driver should already be in place. Visit https://nouveau. 
freedesktop.org/wiki/ and https://help.ubuntu.com/ 
community/RadeonDriver respectively for full details.
If you’re lucky enough to be able to use the proprietary 
driver, then not only do you gain performance enhancements 
for gaming and other high-end purposes, you’ll also be able 
to tweak your card using either the Catalyst Control Centre 
(AMD) or NVIDIA X Server utility - see the annotated 
screenshot for details of using the latter.
Intel chipsets
If your PC has an Intel processor and utilises its onboard 
graphics chip, you may be able to install the open-source Intel 
driver, which is found at https://01.org/linuxgraphics. At 
time of writing, the latest available driver is 1.4.0, which is 
designed for Ubuntu 15.10 and supports the following Intel 
graphics chips: 2nd-6th generation Intel Core processors, Bay 
Trail, Braswell and Hoxton Intel Celeron processors and the 
Intel Atom N450 (Pine Trail) chipset.
If your processor fits the bill, click the link under ‘Latest 
download’, then choose the 32-bit or 64-bit version depending 
on your Ubuntu build - if you don’t know this, open up 
System Settings and click Details, then check the ‘OS type’. 
Click the link to save the .deb file to your hard drive (or opt to 
open it in Software Centre if prompted). If necessary, double­
click the file and click Install, then follow the prompts to install 
the utility. Once done, open the Dash and type ‘Intel’ to locate 
the graphics installer. Again, follow the prompts and if your 
chipset is correctly identified, click Install to add the driver.
Reboot when prompted, and you’re done. There’s no 
separate graphical configuration utility - instead, use Screen 
Display under System Settings to tweak your card’s settings.
Troubleshooting
Sadly, not all driver updates are successful, and you can find 
yourself locked out of the Ubuntu desktop if one goes awry. If 
this happens with NVIDIA drivers, press [Ctrl] + [Alt] + [F1] to 
drop to the shell. Log in using your username and password, 
then enter the following command:
sudo ubuntu-drivers devices
This identifies which graphics drivers are installed. 
Assuming it reveals NVIDIA drivers, enter the following 
command next:
sudo apt-get autoremove -purge nvidia-*
Follow the prompts to purge the drivers from your system 
Now add the following command:
supt apt-get install xserver-xorg-video-nouveau
Once done (don’t worry if it tells you it’s already present), 
type sudo reboot and you should hopefully regain access to 
your desktop.
AMD users should try the following lines instead: 
sudo apt-get autoremove -purge fglrx-* 
supt apt-get install xserver-xorg-video-ati
While they’re the most likely solutions, we’re sorry to say 
that these may not work - if this is the case, you’ll need to 
Google your problem to try some of the other suggestions 
on offer. ®
To avoid any worry 
when considering 
installing new 
drivers, take a drive 
image following the 
before you install 
the drivers, allowing 
you to roll back 
should the 
worst happen.
S Switching to proprietary graphics drivers is actually quite simple - 
assuming your card is supported, of course.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 87

System settings
Malware: Linux
virus protection
You wouldn’t dare fire up Windows without a small arms pile of anti-virus 
protection, but does Linux need the same protections?
I
f you’re moving to Linux from Windows then there 
thing you might be looking for and failing to find: 
software or these days anti-malware. When it come 
Windows you can hardly move for people offering ant 
malware packages, most new systems come installed 
trials, while malware is so common even Microsoft inc 
its oow Windows DefendersoOfwwar eo try and cndbcO ООь 
issue. So ovhwh ebout with Ubuntu and Linux?
YOud mcyd hcved hecrdd Ord ifd yOud dOd cd quickd secrch,d 
cOmed ccrOssd thed lined thctd Linuxd dOesn’td needd cnti-viru 
sOftUcre.d Thed truthd isd cnyd cOmputerd systemd ccnd eed v 
tOd cd virus,d mclUcred Ord Otherd securityd thrects.d Itd sOd h 
Uithd Linuxd thctd fOrd vcriOusd recsOnsd Ue’lld cOverd ind cd e 
ceilityd fOrd virusesd tOd infect,d rund cndd sprecdd cred vcstly 
Ond Linuxd systems.
Thed eiggestd recsOnd isd Linuxd isn’td Uidelyd usedd eyd 
cOnsumers,d virusd cndd mclUcred Uritersd cred mOtivctedd e 
money - a very small member my fame - sc this mesns they 
target tbe momO widuly ssed systems tint thcee are Wisdcws 
PCs rrnnine on arocnd ПО% of the wotld’s UOs. You wouidY't 
L Linux does have 
virus scanners, 
available but you 
really don’t need 
to use them.
spent weeks developing en etteck vector thet cen only be 
nutsi-evtiruOsn .ess tecn 2t Os re.ctive.y securet PCs, verse Over 
9toot os systems in ell menner os precerious contitions.
Tee ent result is teet tee totel numeer os knoUn Linux 
etereets is erount 59, none os Ueice eeve ceuset e single 
toeustereek in tee Uilt. Contrest teet Uite over 122 million (es 
reportet in tee Kespersky oecurity Bulletin 2o15) tereets sor 
Windows systems. Don’t get blese yet, Linux systems cen be 
eigtetetcket in oteer Ueys, eut sirst e little more on Uey Linux ees 
dodged tee melwere bullet. 
ereble 
pBenus ilt safer
Otenetee weole Linux ees been engineered in e wey teet mekes 
idt ueceerd sor melwere to insect e system, to run end teen to 
propegete teemselves or ceuse surteer demege. Pert os teis is 
tee ouper tser eke sudo end root mode teet requires 
edditionel permissions to ceuse eny demege. otenderd users 
nesndtbeyeyextension eny melwere cen’t elter tee system witeout 
edxotwres permissions. Windows introduced e similer system in 
oWuilnddno’tws Viste end leter versions.
Tee oteer mejor protection sor tbuntu end Linux is tee 
use os centrelised repositories. Meny Windows system 
become insected by users downloeding insected sostwere 
srom dodgy websites end oteer sources, wite tbuntu end 
most Linux distros elmost ell sostwere comes srom e centrelly 
meneged end protected sostwere repository.
Teen teere’s sensible end open updete policies. Linux ees 
elweys quickly rolled out security updetes es end ween 
required, teis ees elweys been done in tee open, so enyone 
cen see end understend weet tee updetes ere doing. Due to 
tee open source neture os Linux distros ween e system is
Password protection
The biggest threet the everege user is in tenges 
of ere heck ettecks on their online eccounts’ 
pessworts. Meny people being humen reuse 
pessworts elongsite using week pessworts. This 
msens if one eccount is hecket, the ettecker cen 
heck e lerge number of your other eccounts using 
the seme pesswort ent userneme teteils. The 
best wey to protect egeinst this is to use e 
pesswort menegement system. In the pest 
people uset offline pesswort menegers, which 
ere fine, but they ton’t help in the motern mobile 
worlt. The new generation of pesswort menegers 
live online es browser plugins ent mobile epps.
This enebles you to teke ell your complex 
pessworts with you ent heve the pesswort 
meneger log you into your verious online services 
ent sites when you euthorise it.
We’re going to recomment two systems the 
first is https://keepersecurity.com this 
combines e tesktop progrem, browser plug in 
ent mobile epp for completeness. It elso 
supports ell the pletforms you coult went 
incluting Linux, OSX, Wintows, Antroit ent iOS.
The secont is https://lastpass.com this is e 
browser ent mobile epp beset system. It cen tep 
into Google Authenticetor for extra two-fector 
euthenticetion to meke it super secure. Both 
meke excellent choices ent will keep you fer more 
secure online.
B Beef up your password security with a 
suitable password manager.
88 | Linux Formet Presents: tbuntu

System settings
What’s a malware?
Malware - a happy non-offensive term for any 
“bad” software. Malware includes any software 
that harms a system, the user, data, or processes. 
Many of the malware categories overlap like 
trojans and spyware.
T Trojan - A malware type that hide in apps to get 
into a user’s system or they act as a program 
themselves. This malware does not replicate. So a 
hacker could make a password manager that will 
supposedly store users’ passwords and enter 
them in for the user. Instead, the username, site, 
and password combinations are sent to the trojan 
maker instead of storing the data - this would be 
a spyware trojan.
> Spyware - This malware gathers a user’s 
private data (financial info, passwords, 
usernames, etc.) and sends it to the spyware 
maker or other entity that will use the 
information.
A Adware - Software that displays ads is 
considered adware. Not all adware is bad.
> Worms - A replicating program that spreads to 
other computers. Most rely on networks for 
transportation. A virus attaches to programs and 
worms are standalone software. Viruses come on 
programs that users download and worms break 
in through the network.
> Viruses - Computer viruses are replicating 
code that spread by hiding inside of infected 
applications and installers.
Z Zombies - A computer that is controlled by a 
malicious hacker, trojan, or computer virus to 
complete malicious tasks.
S Scareware - Malware that scares users into 
downloading malicious software or paying money 
for the fix. It could pop up a message saying: 
“Your data will be deleted unless you pay $100” or 
“Your computer is infected”, you’re then 
encouraged to pay money for a fantasy fix.
R Ransomware - A more recent attack that locks 
the computer and files and will not lift the 
restrictions until the user pays a ransom.
updated, it can be all updated. Under Windows separate 
software packages have to take care of updating themselves, 
but this extends to standalone software, codecs, drivers, 
shared libraries, add-ons etc.
With Linux when the system is updated it’s all updated. 
This is also done in a user friendly way, so updates can be 
done when the user wants. A new Live Patch system can even 
reduce the need to reboot too after a system update.
Scanners
Having said all that there’s still the potential risk of a viable 
attack and frankly there are far easier ways to be hurt 
financially through phishing and other online social 
engineering attacks. So all the usual advice applies as much 
to Linux as any other system: keep your system up to date, 
don’t download software from untrusted sources, also don’t 
run terminal commands from random sources, be wary 
online and use an up to date browser.
There are also arguments for running anti-virus software 
on a Linux system as it will still get to interact with Windows 
systems and the scanner could potentially intercept viruses 
passing through your system or you inadvertently 
downloading one and passing it on. There’s other genuine 
reasons such as a business requirement, scanning a Windows 
drive or network drive or to protect a virtual PC.
The most popular on Linux is the free for personal use 
ClamAV Antivirus. You’ll need to use the Terminal to install 
this but it’s easy enough, press Ctrl Alt T to open a Terminal. 
To install the base engine use:
T The basic interface for the ClamAV scanning system.
E Ensure you keep your systems up to date to avoid any new exploits.
sudo apt-get install clamav
To install the automated scanner type:
sudo apt-get install clamav-daemon
It should automatically update, but you can force one with 
this, though it’ll likely fail as ClamAV locks the log:
sudo freshclam
You can install a GUI front end tl^i^coujglh tine Softaare 
Centre or else type:
sudo apt-get install clamtk
To scan a file you can just use the GUI or from the termina 
to scan all the files and folders in your/home folder type: 
clamscan -r /home
This recursively scans all the files in your default/home 
folder (the default store) you can add a -i option to only 
display infected files. So to scan all the files on a system use: 
sudo clamscan -ri /
A full scan as with any system will take a while, you’ll also 
likely get some errors, but don’t panic those are just read 
issues not viruses!
So the main thing to take home is that a desktop Linux PC 
is largely safe from old-school direct threats like viruses as 
there simply aren’t any. However, you as an individual are still 
vulnerable to having your online accounts hacked and falling 
for social engineering scams. On a wider scale Linux when 
used within online servers and Internet of Thing devices is 
also vulnerable to hacking attacks, but that’s another story.®
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 89

System settings
Startup: Fixing 
boot issues
It’s all gone wrong. Of course it has. Here’s how to resolve issues w 
booting PCs without having to reach for the panic button (or a ham
S
tart-up proOleemSs.hTh at omort ent ew - having 
expected yourself to be getting on with your da 
work oo eneertainmsne - yoij fied yourself staring at a 
cryptic errOr Sessage, Or even wOrse, a llank screen.
Satter -ow Sanf tiSes fou press reset or restart, t- 
iSpenetralle l arrier llocks four pat-. So, w-at can f
Start-up prolleSs coSe in all s-apes anr sizes, an 
can le rifficult to track rown. T-ere are, -owever, so 
sounr principles to use t-at will resolve Sanf errors, 
t-is tutorial, we’re going to look at t-e tools anr tec 
requirer to troulles-oot Sost start-up prolleSs. You s 
atart by examising how O he b-oJ procesr ocrSa Seoe TTh Вoot 
process box, right).This reveals taat -at b-aJ yrocesr ear be 
aplit into O hr-o broyO strgat centreO eround OOt Grub 0 byoO 
toarer: preG- rub, Grub anr poaGt-rub. Knowing t-ia attowa 
fou to foeua four trouytea-ootieg efforta yaaer oe w- 
t-e proeeaa t-e error or freeze oeeura.
Let’a atart at t-e yegieeieg. You awite- oe four PC 
If power eosea oe, yut eot-ieg etae -appeea, e-aeee 
you’aa a hardware iasua to Jort - if you jecefOld poOeO 
arouerJ t-eJ ieearraJ ofJ fourJ PC,J t-eeJ e-eekJ eaerft-iegJ 
eoeeaetarJ eorraetty.J IcJ eot,J deptdgJ attJ axtareatJ raaieaaJ 
yodrJ kayyoarrJ aerJ tryJ agaie.J IcJ t-iaJ roaae’tJ work,J opa
Boot-Repair-Disk
64bit session
64bit session (failsafe)
acpi=off 
|
Boot Options seed/lubuntu.seed boot=casper initrd=/casper/.
noapic 
nolapic 
edd=on 
nodmraid 
nomodeset
Free software only
Fl Help F2 Language F3 Keymap F4 Modes F5 Accessibility F6 Other Options
If If you’re struggling to get the Boot-Repair tool disc to 
boot, experiment with the various fail-safe boot options.
eaaaJearacdttyJaerJriaeoeeaetJyodrJietareatJrriaaaJtoo.JIcJt-aJ 
eospdtarJeowJyootaJtoJt-aJaptaa-Jaeraae,JyodJeaeJtryJ 
raeoeeaetiegJt-aJietareatJrriaaaJaerJtryiegJagaie;JicJyod’raJ 
eowJaytaJtoJyootJtoJt-aJtogieJaeraae,Ja-dtJroweJyodrJPCJaerJ 
atartJraeoeeaetiegJyodrJaxtareatJparip-arataJtoJaaaJicJt-aJ 
proytasJ-aaJetaararJitaatcJorJeaeJyaJtargatarJtoJaJaiegtaJ 
raaiea,JieJw-ie-JeaaaJtryJaJriccaraetJeayta,JorJgoJoetieaJaerJ 
GoogtaJcorJkeoweJyootJproytasaJieaotaiegJt-atJraaiea.
aJ IcJyod’raJtdeky,JyodrJsot-aryoarrJwittJasitJaJaariaaJocJ 
baapa or flaahieg lighta you eau oaa - again by aeliatieg the 
help of tha ietareat - to idaetify tha likaly problam. hhia may 
ieaolaa raplaeieg a eompoeaet or aomathieg mora draatie.
roI?f you’ra abla to gat aa far aa your PC’a aplaah aeraae, but 
tthhaaeyyour eomputar haega or a ‘miaaieg oparatieg ayatam’ 
arror maaaaga appaara, thae firat thiek baek to aey raeaet 
edhaiegaa. If you’aa oaareloekad your PC, ag, you ahould eow 
iqauetaaar tha ayatam EFI or BIOS aed look for tha optioe to load 
fualidl-aafa dafaulta. hry rabootieg agaie.
If thia faila, thae tha problam ia likaly to ba with your hard 
drbiaaa, aed ao tha firat plaeaa to look ara tha MBR aed Grub. 
If Grub iae’t aat to automatieally appaar whae your PC atarta, 
try rabootieg whila holdieg tha Shift kay or tappieg Eae to 
abriieg up tha Grub boot maeu to eoefirm it’a eot abla to aaae 
load itaalf. Jump to tha ottt-Repahr tool aaetioe oeea you’aa 
aarifiad it’a eowhara to ba foued.
ara If Grub ia abla to load, but eae’t fied aey bootabla OS you’ll 
fied youraalf with a eumbar of aeaearioa: you may ba 
praaaetad with a baaie eommaed prompt aueh aa grub> or 
grab rescue>, whieh iedieataa oea or more fiies required b^y 
Grab ara miaaieg or eorrupt. You may get: a specific errof
90 | Lieux Format Praaaeta: Ubuetu

System settings
The Boot process
When you press your system’s power 
button, control is initially given to your 
PC’s EFI or BIOS, which starts its various 
components, performs basic diagnostics 
tests and attempts to find a bootable 
device, which is typically the first hard 
drive. Once located, the BIOS or EFI looks 
for the Master Boot Record (MBR) at the 
very beginning of the drive, which has a 
tiny program inside that loads the next 
stage of the boot loader, reading a file (eg 
e2fs_stage_1_5), which in turn is able to 
load the Grub boot loader. A ‘missing 
operating system’ error at this point 
means you need your rescue disc for 
diagnostics as something is missing - 
either in Grub, the MBR or the drive itself.
Once Grub loads successfully it reads a 
file called menu.lst, which contains the 
list of choices you see in the boot menu. 
Each entry basically identifies the drive, 
partition and file that contains the Linux 
kernel, plus RAM disk file used by the 
kernel as it boots. The entry will also 
contain any additional parameters 
passed to the kernel.
Control is now passed to the kernel, 
which attempts to mount the root file 
system. This is a key moment, and if it 
fails you may get a kernel panic, or things 
might grind to a halt. If successful, it’ll 
create a single process to run the /sbin/ 
upstart file (other distros use init) - if this 
goes wrong, you’ll get a panic, it may halt 
again or drop you into a root shell. At this 
point, upstart starts running scripts and 
upstart events to start other services and 
eventually bring you to the logon screen.
> The Grub menu’s appearance is a critical point in 
the boot process - if your system gets this far your 
recovery options are greater.
message or frozen splash screen, or you may just see Grub 
and nothing else, indicating it can’t even find the most basic 
information required to proceed.
If you press c you may be able to enter the Grub Terminal 
mode to perform basic checks and repairs - you can attempt 
to manually initiate the boot by pressing Ctrl+X or F10, eg, or 
use the set command to review current se'^'tinjgis and change 
basic settings such as the graphics mode. Visit http://bit.ly/ 
Grub2Troubleshooting for a detailed guide to using Grub’s 
own troubleshooting tools, but remember that in most cases 
the simplest fix is to use the Boot-Repair tool.
If the Grub menu appears, then the issue may lie with its 
configuration file if things immediately grind to a halt after 
you select a menu option, but if Linux does start loading 
before grinding to a halt, the problem will lie with your 
operating system, in which case skip to the Post-Grub 
troubleshooting section (see the next page).
Boot-Repair tool
If you’re struggling to fix Grub issues by hand, or there’s no 
sign of Grub on your system at all, then you’ll need to enlist 
the services of your rescue media and the Ooot-Rpaairtool, 
which works with all Debian-based distros, including Ubuntu.
The Boot-Repair tool itself will launch automatically when 
you boot from a Boot-Repair tool disc, but if you’re unable to 
create it, but have access to a Linux installation disc, use that 
in a live environment instead, then grab the Boot-Repair tool 
using the following commands:
$ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:yannubuntu/boot-repair
$ sudo apt-get update
$ sudo apt-get install boot-repair
$ boot-repair
The Boot-Repair tool is focussed on those early boot 
problems caused by the hard drive’s boot sector, MBR and 
Grub. It basically provides a convenient and user-friendly 
graphical front-end to the tools required to fix many 
problems. The tool offers a ‘Recommended repair’ option that 
promises to fix most frequent problems, or you can click 
‘Advanced options’ to see what it can do and manually select 
specific fixes without getting your hands dirty in the Terminal. 
The step-by-step guide (see Tweak Boot-Repair tool Settings, 
over the page) reveals what repairs and tweaks are possible, 
but note the tool is context-sensitive, and some options may 
be greyed out or missing depending on your setup.
The tool automatically generates a log of your system and 
what it attempts to do, which you can then share on the 
Ubuntu user forums if necessary. Before attempting any 
advanced tweaks on your own, it pays to try the 
recommended option first, then ask for help on the forums 
using the output logs generated - this will ensure you choose 
the right option and don’t cause more damage.
When you boot with 
your rescue media 
inserted your PC 
may automatically 
detect and boot 
from it; if it doesn’t, 
look for an option 
to bring up a boot 
menu when your 
PC starts (typically 
a key like F11) to 
select it manually. 
Failing that, enter 
the EFI or BIOS 
configuration to 
set it as the first 
boot device.
G Give your hard drive the once-over when booting from 
your rescue disc to check it’s working as it should.
Non-Grub boot issues
Your rescue disc will also come in handy should you not even 
get as far as Grub loading. Once booted, verify the existence 
and state of your hard drive. Open the file manager and see if 
your partitions are visible and if you can access the files on 
them - this is a good time to back up any precious files 
before you proceed further.
If nothing shows up, check whether the hard drive has 
been detected by opening the Disks utility from your Ubuntu 
Live CD - if you’re using a Boot-Repair tool CD, you’ll need to 
install the gnome-disk-utility through the Synaptic Package 
Manager under System Tools. Once installed, open it via the 
Accessibility menu. The Disks tool lists all physically attached 
drives - if yours isn’t visible, you may find the drive has failed, 
in which case you’ll be reaching for your I atzest: backup after 
»
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 91

System settings
» shelling out for a drive replacement, or starting again from 
scratch with a fresh Ubuntu installation and new-found love of 
backing up your system. Assuming your drive does show up, 
select it from the left-hand menu where you can examine the 
partition table plus check its physical health via its SMART 
[Not all that smart - Ed] attributes. Don’t panic unless the 
drive is deemed on its last legs, but do focus your next check 
on the partitions themselves. If you run the Boot-Repair tool, 
its recommended settings will include a full disk check, but 
you can manually perform this check yourself using GParted, 
which is on both rescue discs.
GParted enables you to see how your partitions are 
arranged, as well as revealing which one is the boot. Right­
click this and verify Mount is greyed out before choosing 
‘Check to schedule a disk check using the fsck tool’. This will 
check for and attempt to repair any problems it finds as 
soon as you click ‘Apply’, but it’s important the partition isn’t 
mounted before the check is run. Also give it as long as it 
needs to complete - this could take hours or even days in 
some extreme cases, and cancelling or aborting will almost 
certainly corrupt the partition. Make sure the check is run on 
all partitions on the boot drive.
In most cases, assuming the drive isn’t physically 
damaged or corrupt beyond repair, running these tests 
should ensure you’re able to at least get Grub working again.
System logs are a 
valuable source of 
troubleshooting 
information - and 
you can access 
these from the 
/var/log directory 
using your rescue 
disc’s file manager 
or nano in a 
shell. Look out in 
particular for syslog, 
and investigate 
the dmesg shell 
command too.
Post-Grub troubleshooting
If you find that Grub appears to be working fine, but your 
problems begin when you attempt to load Linux itself. 
Try switching to verbose mode during boot by pressing the 
Esc key to see if any clues appear in the messages that scroll 
past (or if it hangs at a certain point). Make a note of these 
and do a search online for them for more advice. If this 
doesn’t happen, hold Shift at boot to bring up the Grub menu 
if necessary, then select ‘Advanced options’ followed by 
‘(recovery mode)’, which will launch Ubuntu in a minimal 
state, plus mount the file system in read-only mode. If this is 
successful, after a succession of scrolling messages you 
should find yourself presented with the Recovery Menu, 
offering nine options.
The options are all pretty much self-explanatory - the 
clean option may be of use if your hard drive is full, which can 
cause boot problems. If your problems started because a 
package failed to install properly, then dpkg will repair it and 
hopefully get things working again. The failsafeX option is a 
useful if you find yourself booting to a black screen or the
U Ubuntu’s recovery mode lets you try various fixes when 
Grub works, but Ubuntu no longer wants to.
graphical desktop doesn’t appear to be working correctly - it 
basically bypasses problems with your graphics drivers or X 
server to give you a failsafe graphics mode to troubleshoot 
your problem from.
We’ve touched on fsck already - this will check the drive 
for corrupt files, which can clear many errors, particularly if 
your PC crashed and has failed to boot since. The grub option 
isn’t relevant unless you’ve used Grub’s own recovery tools in 
place of the Boot-Repair tool to get this far in the boot 
process - selecting this will make your changes permanent.
Use the network option to re-enable networking, and the 
root option to drop to the shell prompt, allowing you to 
troubleshoot directly from there. If doing so, be sure to mount 
the file system in read/write mode using the following 
command: mount -o remount,rw /
You can also pass temporary kernel parameters to Ubuntu 
during the boot process, which may help in some scenarios. 
With your chosen operating system selected in Grub, press 
the e key to edit the kernel file. Scroll down to the line 
beginning linux - parameters are added to the end of this 
line after quiet splash . You’ll need to make sure that: you 
leave a space between each parameter. Once done, press 
Ctrl+x to boot with those parameters.
Note that any parameters you add here are temporary - 
in other words, they’re removed the next time you boot, so 
you can experiment until you find a solution that works, then 
- if necessary - make it permanent by editing the Grbb 
configuration file (sudo nano /etc/default/grub).
You can also pass parameters from the live CD 
environment using the Boot-Repair tool using the ‘Add a 
kernel option’, which includes 15 common parameters that
Take a fail-safe backup
It may seem strange, but if you're struggling with 
start-up issues, you should attempt to take a 
backup of your hard drive before you perform 
any repairs - this means if you mess things up 
completely you can always roll back your system 
to the state it was in when the start-up problem 
first manifested itself.
Of course, if you're diligent and you back up 
your system regularly, you could always simply 
roll things back now to a working state, although 
bear in mind there may be data loss involved if 
your home folder is on the same partition as 
your Linux installation (as is the case with 
default Ubuntu installs).
You'll need a suitable backup device - 
typically a USB-connected hard drive - and a 
tool that takes a complete drive image of your 
system. The dd command-line tool can be used 
from both Ubuntu and Boot Repair Tool live CD 
environments, but the backup drive needs to be 
at least the same size - and preferably - bigger 
than the drive you're copying.
At the other end of the complexity scale is 
Redo Backup & Recovery. You'll need a blank CD 
or DVD to burn its 261MB ISO file to, but it 
provides an easy to follow graphical UI. You'll find 
it at www.redobackup.org - or use the built in 
option covered earlier.
Redo Backup & Recovery offers by far the 
simplest way to make a fail-safe backup of 
your whole hard drive.
92 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

System settings
can help with troubleshooting. Examples of these include 
acpi=off, which disables the ACPI system that’s known to 
cause random reboots or system freezes on certain PCs, and 
nomodeset, which instructs Ubuntu to only load graphics 
drivers after the X environment has been loaded, and not 
before. These temporary parameters can be passed to your 
rescue disc too, in case you’re having problems getting that 
working. Press [F6] at the initial boot screen to choose from 
the options on show. For more information on specific 
parameters, do an online search for the parameter or visit 
http://bit.ly/KernelParametersList for a complete list.
Repair install
There’s one last thing you can try from the Grub boot menu - 
if your kernel has been upgraded, it’s possible to boot using an 
older version of the kernel from the Advanced options screen 
under Grub. You’ll see each version of the kernel listed - try 
the previous version if you believe your boot problem is linked 
to the latest kernel. If this works, you can make the version 
you’ve used permanent by editing the Grub configuration file 
- the simplest way to do this is by using the Boot-Repair tool.
If things look particularly bleak, then you may have luck 
reinstalling Ubuntu over the top of itself. Boot from the 
Ubuntu Live CD and choose the option to ‘Install Ubuntu’ 
when prompted. When you get to the ‘Installation type’ screen 
you’ll be presented with a new option, pre-selected by default: 
‘Reinstall Ubuntu...’
This option basically reinstalls Ubuntu without touching 
your home folder or partition, which means not only should 
your documents and other files be preserved, but key settings 
and many programs may be left alone too. It’ll also leave 
entries in your boot menu alone, ensuring you won’t lose 
access to other operating systems.
What will be replaced are system-wide files, which will 
hopefully root out any corrupt ones and get your PC up and 
running again. Although it doesn’t affect your files, it’s still 
good practice to back up the drive - or at least your home 
folder or partition - before you begin.
To ensure you don’t lose anything from your system, 
make sure you recreate all user accounts with the same login 
and password, including - of course - your own during the 
install process. 0
Tweak Boot-Repair tool settings
J Main options
The first tab offers a convenient button for backing up your current 
partition table, boot sector and log - click this to copy this key 
information. It’s also where you can reinstall Grub, restore the MBR and 
choose whether to hide the Grub menu. If you think your filesystem is 
corrupt, tick ‘Repair file systems’ to have it checked and fixed.
*4 Grub location
This tab allows you to specify which OS to boot by default in a multi­
boot setup. You can also choose to place Grub in its own separate 
/boot partition if you wish - typically this is only needed on encrypted 
disks, drives with LVM set up or some older PCs. The final option 
specifies which drive Grub itself will be placed (sda by default).
3 Grub options
This section opens with options for making sure Grub is updated to its 
latest version. There’s also three specific error fixes offered. You can 
also add new kernel options to the Grub menu here, or purge all 
previous kernels before reinstalling the last one. You may even see an 
option allowing you to edit the Grub configuration file directly.
~4 Other tweaks
If the MBR options tab isn’t greyed out, use it to restore your MBR 
from a backup and choose which partition gets booted from it. The 
final Other options tab offers an opportunity for repairing Windows 
files (irrelevant in most cases) and provides options for pasting a 
summary of your settings online for reference.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 93

System settings
Help: How to 
fix problems
Something not working? Something broken?Something confusing? The 
Linux community is out there to dole out a little self help.
W
ith open source and Linux much is made of 
community. The people that develop the softw 
that create the documentation, that use it and 
maintain it, all of these and more come together to form 
community around the software. This is usually centred 
around the program’s main website with forums, frequent 
asked questions, standard documentation for the software 
social network accounts and more. This means that if yo 
having problems using a standard feature, something isn’t 
working like it should or perhaps you even want to sugge 
new feature there are places and people you can contact
Of course, no one likes people who demand things an 
certainly in open source communities that is especially th 
> Problems 
working out 
where something 
is? Try the built- 
in guide.
case. It’s not that people don’t want to help, but if the 
,question has already been answered, if you’ve not look to see 
if a bug has already been reported, or you’re after details that 
are explained in the standard documentation then people are 
going to point this out first rather than help.
Using Ubuntu
Our first calling point is getting help with just using Ubuntu 
itself, you’re going to find a lot of helpful pointers throughout 
tahis guide and we’d recommend looking out for our other 
Linux and Ubuntu Made Simple guides on sale in all good 
shops and over at http://bit.ly/LXFspecial. Ubuntu 
provides basic help, open the Dash, type Help and click the 
question mark.
This offers a basic guide to using different programs and 
parts of Ubuntu itself, alongside how to workaround and fix 
common problems. If you’re having difficulties just using 
basic parts of Ubuntu this should be your first port of call. If 
you’re having problems using specific programs within 
Ubuntu then you should turn your attention to the built-in 
help that’s offered by each application itself.
You can open the built-in help by pressing F1 while using 
any program, and then there’s the Help > Contents menu that 
all programs should offer. This provides the basic info you 
need to use individual programs. A new element of getting 
help with using these Ubuntu tools is YouTube, a modern 
trend is that many people have posted easy to follow video 
guides to using all aspects of Ubuntu and other Linux tools.
Terminal help
We look at the Terminal on page 60 and if you’re 
serious about wanting to use Linux more and 
really get to grips with it, the Terminal is 
something you are going to have to use now and 
again. The truth is most of your Terminal use will 
be copying lines supplied by others, so really it 
shouldn’t be that intimidating. With that said 
getting help with using the Terminal is pretty 
easy, it has a number of highly comprehensive 
help systems that we’ll explain now how to use.
You can basic help on any command by typing 
<command name> --help this is a standard for 
Linux commands. It’ll return a basic explanation 
of what the command does, what basic inputs 
it’s expecting and a list of the opt io ns you can 
use with it, each explained in turn.
If you find you’re getting too much text it’s 
possible to pass the output through a program 
called less, this enables you to scroll through the 
text using the arrow keys and press q to quit. To 
do this you’d type <command> --help I less for 
a more relaxed time.
For a more in depth explanation there's the 
man command, just type man <command 
name> and a fuller manual wiil be disi^layec^, 
and yes you can type man man to get help on 
man. Usefully typing man intro produces an 
introductory guide to using the Terminal, this 
includes the basics commands you wiil need day 
to day life.
An alternative and often more friendly 
approach is using the info <command> terminal 
option, this offers a more wordy description of 
what a command does, what you can use i t for 
and what the various options are for.
> It’s hard to use for beginners but there’s 
plenty of help stored within the terminal.
94 | Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu

System settings
Searching for help
Keywords
Use a minimal number of words, 
stick to the ones most relevant to 
your problem.
E
Search titles only
We suggest switching to Search 
titles only, this helps greatly narrow 
down the number of returned posts.
Search in Forum
Another excellent way to focus your 
search is limit it to only relevant 
forums here.
Forums website 
Get started by heading 
over to https:// 
ubuntuforums.org 
then use the top-right 
Advanced Search link.
Find Threads
It’s worth limiting 
returned search to ones 
with at least 2 replies, 
it’s unlikely any with 
less than this are useful.
Of course moving online opens up a world of potential 
help. For Ubuntu specifically your first stop should be 
https://help.ubuntu.com where you’ll find an online version 
of the offline help manual you’ve already discovered. Clicking 
the Community Help Wiki link at the top will take you to a far 
more helpful area maintained by community contributors.
This opening page provides a list of the more popular 
topics such as installation, moving from another OS, basic 
applications and moving into help for specific types of 
hardware, activities and other versions of Ubuntu sometimes 
known as flavours. The next step is to click the Other 
resources section, which takes you to https://help.ubuntu. 
com/community/OtherResources area. Here you’ll find 
links to lots of different online areas of help.
AskUbuntu is a newer system that enables people to ask 
one-off questions, have them answered and then have the 
answered ranked. It helps good answers get promoted for 
easier visibility, but before you post anything you should 
search to see if your question has already been answered.
The IRC section refers to a live chat system, but you’re not 
able to access it directly from the website. There are web­
based IRC systems such as https://webchat.freenode.net, 
you’ll need to log in and join the #ubuntu channel, where if 
you’re patient and polite you might find someone willing to 
answer your questions.
Another area you can get human support but also a huge 
database of fixed issues is the Ubuntu Forums over at 
https://ubuntuforums.org or from the previous Other 
Resources page. The Ubuntu forums have been running for 
over 12 years and are often the first time new users interact 
with other long-standing Ubuntu users. It’s advised to ensure 
you search first to see if your problem has already been 
answered, this will save everyone lots of time including 
yourself. Of course be polite, don’t repost the same problem 
across multiple sub-forums and try to provide as much 
information as possible. Stating “my screen is blank” isn’t 
really going to help anyone.
Finding help with the forums is best done through the 
search tool in the top-right. You can dive into individual 
sections of the forum such as Installation, General Help, 
Hardware, but unless the issue is particularly timely or 
common it’s highly unlikely you’re going to stumble upon 
your specific issue very quickly. As an example the General 
Help forum has over 322,000 threads, each having who 
knows how many replies!
Clicking the Advanced Search will greatly enhance your 
ability to search for the problem you have, in the correct 
forum. Here are our top tips for a better search. To begin with, 
the keywords that you choose need to be the most relevant, 
so if you’re using Ubuntu 16.10 and you’re unable to write to a 
USB stick, limit your keywords to something like: “Ubuntu 
USB write error”. We also strongly suggest switching the 
Keyword setting to Search Titles Only, rather than matching 
those keywords against the entirety of a post, just the title 
words are used.
Additionally use the Search in Forum option to limit any 
search to just the relevant one. Taking the last search as an 
example you’d like limit it to Hardware and perhaps General 
Help. We also suggest restricting returns to include at least 
two replies, which is an indicator of a useful reply. You may 
want to try setting the Find Posts to A Year Ago and Newer, to 
ensure you only get answers that are only a year old.
Of course you’re able to search more generally through 
Google or similar search engines. You’ll find plenty of help in 
many forums all over the internet, so keep searching and 
asking you’ll find friendly people we promise. o
T The Ubuntu Forums are the best place to get help on all manner of issues.
Linux Format Presents: Ubuntu | 95

NEW
Annual
SMART HOME
•nr ■mi nuujmim 
SBBBa
Astronomy 
for beninnens
Everything you want to know about the world we live in
HOW IT,
MARS
DISCOVER
EXPLORATION
&CAI
ош
ASTROLOGY
HISTORY OF,
'S ||" Annual
Get great savings when 
you buy direct from us
Understand the 
world we live 
in, from science 
and tech to the 
. environment .
1000s of great titles, many 
not available anywhere else
Explore our 
incredible planet 
and the secrets 
beneath the 
, surface /
T WORLDS 
TOMORROW
World-wide delivery and 
super-safe ordering
AMAZING *-
TECHNOLOGY
F Find out ' 
everything you’ve 
ever wanted 
to know about 
< outer space >
AP(XLL^
MISSIONS
BOOK OF THE 'Wr'
ceau

Discover 
answers to 
the most 
fascinating 
questions
UNDERSTANDING
HABIT
Future
Genius
Ancient Egy
HUMAN" 
• RrYDiVie.
Life’s &
Little 
Mysteries 
I;ss. 1
£l www.magazinesdirect.com
r Magazines, back issues & bookazines.
FEED YOUR MIND 
WITH OUR BOOKAZINES
Explore the secrets of the universe, from the days of the 
dinosaurs to the miracles of modern science!
M3U '* Q
AMAZING
BLACK 
HOLES
.WHAT MAKES A BLACK HOLE
SUPERMASSIVE

SUBSCRIBE & 
SAVE UP TO 61%
Delivered direct to your door 
or straight to your device
Choose from over 80 magazines and make great savings off the store price!
Binders, books and back issues also available
Simply visit www.magazinesdirect.com
No hidden costs Shipping included in all prices We deliver to over 100 countries Secure online payment
FUTURE
magazinesdirect •com
Official Magazine Subscription Store


ubuntu a
THE COMPLETE GUIDE
Everything you need to know 
to get started with Ubuntu Linux
START HERE! 
BECOME AN EXPERT
Easy-to-follow guides for 
installing and using Ubuntu
We explain the key areas of Linux 
use, from browsers to the terminal
JAMMY JELLYFISH GAMES! FILMS! MUSIC!
Find out what you can expect from 
Ubuntu 22.04
Enjoy all your films, videos, 
music and games collections
Help: How to 
fix problems
L
Steam: Play 
games on Linux
Dual boot: Set 
up two OSes 
a*w Кети Лж* n« яале а Алова 
>оы
«■ агсМЯ а*вот «> *« нс 06 рп*М» 
ST? W
P Packed with expert advice 
Essential tricks to get you started with Linux, 
fix common problems and customise Ubuntu
Ko upgr»ded, 1 newly IMtollod. 0 to гея 
■weed to pet 20. r U «’ orchtve».
■After this operotloo. 120 k8 of *ddtttc
K«t:l http://rv.occMve.ubuntu.can/ubBnl
■ 7 k>]
petched 20.7 к* Ю M (28.0 U/»)
[selecting pr.vlovsl, unselected pockoge
[(Pending dntobose ... 197400 rues ond d
G Get up and running
Easy guides to replacing or installing Ubuntu alongside 
Windows without losing any of your files
> A world of open source 
Discover free, feature-rich programs to do 
video, art, design, office work and more
FULLY 
REVISED AND 
UPDATED

