
 Location Audio Simpliﬁ ed 

This page intentionally left blank

 Location Audio 
Simpliﬁ ed 
 Capturing Your Audio . . . and 
Your Audience 
 Dean Miles 

 First published 2015 
 by Focal Press  
 70 Blanchard Road, Suite 402, Burlington, MA 01803 
 and by Focal Press 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
 Focal Press is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
 © 2015 Taylor & Francis 
 The right of Dean Miles to be identifi ed as author of this work has been asserted by him in 
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilized in any form 
or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publishers. 
 Notices 
 Knowledge and best practice in this fi eld are constantly changing. As new research and 
experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, 
or medical treatment may become necessary. 
 Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in 
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. 
In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the 
safety of others, including   parties for whom they have a professional responsibility. 
 Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only 
for identifi cation and explanation without intent to infringe. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Miles, Dean.
 Location audio simplifi ed : capturing your audio . . . and your audience / authored 
by Dean Miles.
  pages cm
 1. Sound in motion pictures. 2. Sound—Recording and reproducing. 3. Motion pictures—
Sound effects. I. Title. 
 TR897.M55 2014
 777′.53—dc23
 2014002606
 ISBN: 978-1-138-01877-8 (pbk) 
 ISBN: 978-1-315-85846-3 (ebk) 
 Typeset in Helvetica
by Apex CoVantage, LLC 


This page intentionally left blank

 This book is dedicated to all my students. They urged me to write it, 
helped shape it, and taught me how to teach. Without them this book 
would not exist. 
Dedication

This page intentionally left blank

 Acknowledgements  
xiii
  1 
Introduction to Location Audio  
1
  
 Introduction  
1
  
 Detailing the Professional  
3
  
 What Is Location Audio?  
3
  
 What Makes a Successful Location Audio Operator?  
4
  
 More Than Just Sound  
4
  
 Companion Location Audio Online Course  
5
  2 
Choosing and Preparing a Location  
6
   
Constant Tug-of-War  
6
  
 Choosing a Location  
7
  
Five Steps for Choosing a Location  
7
  
 Preparing a Location for Recording  
17
  
 How Much Ambience Is Too Much?  
19
  
 Making a Location Move  
21
  3 
Location Audio Field Mixer  
22
  
 The Field Mixer  
22
  
 Features of the Field Mixer  
23
  
 Initial Setup Procedure for a Field Mixer  
33
  
Field Mixer Initial Setup: Four-Channel Field Mixer 
33
  
 Recording a Safety Track  
35
  
 Putting It All Together 
37
  
 Tying into the Camera  
46
  
 Connecting a Shotgun Mic  
49
  
 Connecting a Wireless System  
49
  
 Professional Impression  
50
  4 
Field Mixer Operating Techniques  
52
  
 My Guarantee to You!  
52
  
 Operating and Monitoring Techniques  
52
  
 Task #1—Assigning/Panning  
53
  
 Task #2—Dialing In  
58
  
 Task #3—Monitoring Function  
71
 Contents 

C O N T E N T S
  
 Task #4—Listening  
78
  
 Task #5—Shooting  
85
  
 Room Tone Is a Must!  
88
  5 
Shotgun Microphones  
90
  
 There Is No Other!  
90
  
 Shotgun Microphones: Characteristics and Groups  
92
  
  Group 1: Hyper-Cardioid Microphones  
92
  
  Group 2: Short Shotgun Microphones  
94
  
  Group 3: Medium Shotgun Microphones  
94
  
  Group 4: Shotgun Microphone s 
95
  
 Pick-up Pattern Width  
96
  
 Powering a Shotgun Mic  
97
  
 Low-Cut Filter on a Shotgun  
98
  
 Axis and Lobeing  
99
  
 One Final Thought  
101
  6 
How to Boom 
103
  
 A Booming Introduction  
103
  
 Prepping and Wrapping the Boom Pole  
104
  
 Operating the Boom Pole  
110
  
 Static and Motion Booming  
116
  
 One-Hand Booming  
120
  
 Never Pass Through the Axis!  
122
  
 Booming the Sweet Spot  
123
  
 Scooping  
125
  
 Booming Quick List 
126
  7 
Lavalier Microphones  
127
  
 The Lavalier  
127
  
 Lavalier Basics  
127
  
 When to Use Lavalier Microphones  
129
  
 Lavalier Design Types  
134
  
 Applying a Lavalier  
135
  
 Exposed Micing Technique  
137
  
 Hidden Micing Techniques  
143
  
 Lavalier Techniques: Micing on the Head 
153
  
Hiding a Top-Loaded Lavalier 
154
  8 
Wireless Systems  
160
  
 Wireless Introduction 
160
  
 Wireless Basics  
162
  
 Setting Up a Wireless System  
165
  
 Calibrating the Receiver to a Field Mixer  
168
  
 Calibrating the Receiver to a Video Camera  
172
  
 Wireless Hop  
174

C O N T E N T S
  9 
Video Cameras  
178
  
 Video Cameras 
178
  
 Common Video Camera Functions  
180
  
 Camera Calibration  
185
  
 The VJ Attenuator  
188
  
 Direct Microphone Input  
190
  
 Professional Field Mixer Input  
192
  
 Always Check Your First Recording!  
197
  
 Consumer and Professional Line Level  
198
  
 Label Video Tapes?  
198
  10 DSLR Cameras 
200
  
 DSLR Cameras 
200
  
 This Not a Cop-Out!  
201
  
 The DSLR Camera Mic  
201
  
 Onboard Camera Mic Setup  
203
  
 Keeping in Sync  
205
  11 The Field Recorder  
208
  
 The Field Recorder  
208
  
 Thanks DSLRs! 
209
  
 Portable Digital Audio Recorders  
209
  
 Calibrating Your Mixer to a Portable Field Recorder  
211
  
 The Future of the Field Recorder  
214
  12 The Interview 
215
  
 The Interview  
215
  
 Who’s Decision Is It?  
215
  
Here’s How You’ll Conduct the Interview Process  
216
  
 The Long Overdue Meeting  
217
  
 Nonverbal Communication  
218
  
 Be Prepared 
219
  
 Conclusion  
220
  13 Add-Ons 
221
  
 Handheld Microphone  
221
  
 Microphone Flasher  
223
  
 Wireless Monitoring  
223
  
 Must-Have Accessories  
224
  
Happy Recordings!  
226
Index 
227

This page intentionally left blank

 I wish to acknowledge my long-time video colleague and friend, Scot McDonald, who 
faithfully allowed me to road test many of my operating techniques, and whose feedback 
was invaluable. His help and guidance through the long haul of writing this book was 
unwavering. A big thanks to Matt Lapham for all his help and expertise in the video 
industry. I appreciate everything you’ve done. My friends, Shawn Mabey, Peter and Jen 
Frisk, Christabelle Kux-Kardos, Joanna Gyurkovics, and Jean Michel Landry, who all 
donated time and beautiful faces to my book. And fi nally, my loving wife, Ann, who 
encouraged and supported me every step of the way to be true to my accomplishments. 
 A special thanks to Davida Rochman and Robin Dwyer at Shure for supporting my 
efforts to teach location sound. 
 There are many location audio operators, camera operators, retailers, and co-workers 
in the various video departments I haven’t mentioned who have infl uenced my career, 
some positive and some negative. We learn, we teach, and hopefully it’s an exciting ride.  
 Acknowledgements 

This page intentionally left blank

 Introduction to 
Location Audio 
 Introduction 
 Detailing the Professional 
 What Is Location Audio? 
 What Makes a Successful Location Audio Operator? 
 More Than Just Sound 
 Companion Location Audio Online Course 
 Introduction 
 Congratulations! 
 You’ve picked up my book and are already one step 
closer to recording better audio in the fi eld. Now just buy the 
damn thing and let’s get started. 
 The new era of affordable digital video has created a boom 
in the production industry. Cameras are smaller, cheaper, eas-
ier to use, and provide amazing picture quality. However, the 
audio side of the equation is a different story. Sound tends to 
be the poor cousin to the visual image, and most manufactur-
ers give it minimal consideration at best. The actual hardware 
components are of marginal quality, controls are buried in 
submenus, and connectors are stuck onto camera bodies like 
an afterthought. The video world is littered with videographers 
and location audio operators who are being driven crazy try-
ing to produce quality sound in this environment.  
 Location Audio Simplified  will do just what it says: simplify the location audio 
process.  
C H A P T E R  1
 Figure 1.1  

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  L O C A T I O N  A U D I O
2
 Whether it’s big- budget documentaries or 
low- budget corporate videos, the principles of 
quality audio remain the same. From the basics 
of using camera, handheld, lavalier, and wireless 
microphones to camera calibration and mixer set-
ups,  Location Audio Simpliﬁ ed  helps unlock the 
secrets to clean, clear, broadcast quality audio 
no matter what challenges you’re faced with. 
Nothing will ruin a viewer’s experience faster than 
incomprehensible dialogue due to incorrect mic-
ing techniques or distracting background sound 
from a poor location choice.  
 Figure 1.2  
 Figure 1.3  
 Figure 1.4  

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  L O C A T I O N  A U D I O
3
 Detailing the Professional 
 Since 1989, I’ve been working as a professional location audio operator for major 
television networks, motion pictures, high- end documentaries, and everything in 
between. Through it all I’ve encountered every sound problem imaginable and have 
developed my own tried- and- true solutions, techniques, and easy- to- follow tricks and 
tips. 
 When I fi rst penned  Location Audio Simpliﬁ ed  in 2006 I had no idea there were so 
many location sound operators working and battling with the same sound issues as I 
was. The emails thanking, questioning, and teaching me have made the arduous task of 
writing a book worthwhile. 
 If you’re an up- and- coming location sound pro, you’ll fi nd everything you need to 
build a foundation for a successful career. If you’re a one- man- band camera operator, 
you’ll learn how to elevate your sound from average to exceptional. 
 If poor sound is plaguing your productions, this is the book for you. 
 What Is Location Audio? 
 In a nutshell, location audio is the recording of sound outside of the controlled and 
comfortable confi nes of a studio. A video location audio operator is a one- person sound 
department responsible for capturing all the required dialogue, ambience, and sound 
effects necessary to build a rich soundtrack in postproduction.  
 Figure 1.5  

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  L O C A T I O N  A U D I O
4
 What Makes a Successful Location 
Audio Operator? 
 The skills required for location audio are a mixture of technical skill, experience, com-
mon sense, and attitude. A successful operator is confi dent, professional, adaptable, 
and most importantly, a team player with a positive outlook. Simply put, if you do a good 
job and people enjoy working with you, you’ll be busy. Whatever your technical ability, if 
you’re a pain in the butt to work with your career will be short- lived. 
 Location audio involves balancing many issues, both technical and practical, and 
understanding how you affect the pace of the shooting day and even the overall experi-
ence of the talent and crew. Your primary responsibility is to capture clean dialogue and 
appropriate ambience and record it with minimum disruption to the production process. 
A job well done often means people aren’t even aware you’re doing it. Where they’ll 
notice your work is in the edit suite. 
 Making the post audio editor’s job easier goes a long way towards building 
a good name for yourself.  
 More Than Just Sound 
 Setting up lights, helping with props, loading and unloading equipment—you’ll be 
doing anything that needs to be done. By becoming an invaluable member of a produc-
tion team, clients will not only respect your skills as an audio operator and value your 
opinion but will also put your name at the top of their call list. 
 As your clientele increases, so will your opportunities, challenges, and adventures. 
You’ll be on your way to a rich and rewarding career in the production industry—not to 
mention looking extremely cool with all that gear strapped to your body like a SWAT 
team member. 
 I hope you fi nd it easy to move forward through this book and fi nd it a valuable tool 
in learning how to record quality location audio.   
 In the world of video production, location audio operators are also expected 
to pitch in and help wherever they can.  

I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  L O C A T I O N  A U D I O
5
 Companion Location Audio Online Course 
 To help learn the techniques detailed in this book, I’ve created the “Location Audio 
Simplifi ed On- Demand” course: 37 classes and over six hours of online instruction bring 
every technique, theory, concept, and skill in this book to life. Together, the  Location 
Audio Simpliﬁ ed  book and the Location Audio Simplifi ed On- Demand course will have 
you well on your way to a successful career in location sound. 
 To view the trailer and sign up for the course, go to: 
 https://vimeo.com/ondemand/locationaudiosimplifi ed. 
 Figure 1.6  

 Choosing and 
Preparing a 
Location 
 Constant Tug- of- War 
 Five Steps for Choosing a Location 
 Preparing a Location for Recording 
 How Much Ambience Is Too Much? 
 Making a Location Move 
 Constant Tug- of- War 
 Since sound joined moving pictures on location, 
the audio operator has never had a say regard-
ing location, and has had to fi ght for every inch of 
sound improvement—but that’s about to change. 
 The picture has always been the decision 
maker when it comes to choosing the location, 
even when dialogue was being recorded. I’ve 
heard the comments “Hey, it’s a visual medium,” 
and “Maybe you should work in radio,” so many 
times that I was preparing to stick their medium 
where the sun didn’t shine! Because of ADR 
(automatic dialogue replacement) and large 
post budgets, any dialogue problem could be 
repaired, and therefore you just smiled, rubbed 
your bruised audio ego, and recorded guide 
track. Well, this attitude does not work in video, 
and it surprises me that this “Old Boy” fi lm atti-
tude found a home in the video world.  
C H A P T E R  2 
 Figure 2.1  Choosing a poor location to 
record dialogue is just shooting yourself 
in the foot! 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
7
 How can anyone expect to record usable dialogue in a noisy environment! For years I was 
forced to record in locations where it just wasn’t possible. Camera operators, even interviewers 
were the decision makers when it came time to choose locations to record critical audio! 
 Why should I defer to someone who isn’t going to take the heat if the audio is  unusable! 
 IT WAS TIME FOR A CHANGE 
 Choosing a location when recording dialogue should never be based on pictures 
alone. As directors are exposed to the ramifi cations of poor location audio, priority is 
often given to the sound operator on many shots—you need to have the tools to make 
an educated decision regarding possible location sound issues. 
 INSIDE THE AUDIO GUY’S HEAD 
 “No one’s listening to a thing I’m saying.” 
 “The camera operator doesn’t care if the sound sucks!” 
 “I’m nervous about talking to the director.” 
 “Stop complaining. This is the job, just deal with it!” 
 How many times did these thoughts cross my mind? Well, quite a lot actually. But 
when I decided to take control and be responsible for any sound issues that may arise 
when I’m on set, I realized I needed some kind of information- gathering tool and a way 
to communicate these fi ndings with the person responsible for the entire production. 
 I eventually fi gured out how to overcome these fears and maneuver the shark- 
infested waters of a set—and the solution was actually quite simple. 
 Choosing a Location 
 Choosing a shooting location that works for both picture and sound is no easy task. 
For a video production to come together there needs to be compromise. 
 I’ve developed a fi ve- step fact- gathering procedure to identify and minimize sound 
issues that could cause delays during shooting and/or costly fi xes in post. 
 These facts, when presented to the decision maker in a concise, informative way 
(no complaining or whining) were quickly accepted and, to my surprise, very effective in 
solving most location sound woes! 
 The fi ve- step process that follows is absolutely vital to quality fi eld recordings!  Do not 
blow over this section—understand how to apply it. 
 Five Steps for Choosing a Location 
 1.  Understand the purpose of the material being shot. 
 2.  Determine if the sound will match the image. 
 3.  Identify potential sound problems that could cause disruptions. 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
8
 4.  Assess the general ambience of the location. 
 5.  Communicate your concerns and recommendations with the decision maker if required. 
 Be warned—most camera operators consider audio a distracting annoyance. It’s all 
about pretty pictures. 
 You need to have an understanding and a 
sense of context for the project you’re working on 
to help determine what sound issues are relevant. 
 Ask for a brief overview of the production, 
the intended audience, where it will be shown, 
how long the fi nished piece will be, etc. This helps you anticipate what will be happening 
during the course of the shoot, and you’ll know how the disjointed elements fi t together. 
 The sound can be used for many different purposes and isn’t necessarily always 
married to the image. Most importantly, it will give you a framework to decide whether 
to be obsessively picky or to just get the shot in the can. 
 Before you arrive at every location, get in the habit of asking whoever’s wearing the 
director’s cap this question: 
 Q “What are we shooting next?” 
 The answer will fall into one of the following fi ve shot types and will dictate how 
much, or how little, information gathering you’ll need to do. 
 SHOT TYPE #1. B- REEL 
 B- reel is also called b- roll, cutaways, fi ller, or pictures only. Basically, it means that 
the audio isn’t critical and will be edited with other sound tracks, music, and/or used as 
low- level ambient sound only. 
STEP 1   Ask the right questions to 
understand the purpose of 
the material being shot. 
 Figure 2.2  B- reel—always have sound on every shot. 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
9
 However, this shouldn’t mean there isn’t any audio at all—even if the camera 
operator wants to run off with the camera and “just grab a few shots.” There’s noth-
ing more unprofessional than material recorded without audio. Always give the edi-
tors something to work with. They can always delete it but can’t always recreate 
what’s not there. 
 For most b- reel shooting, the camera- mounted mic does the job just fi ne. Make the 
appropriate audio adjustments to the camera to record with the camera- mounted mic 
before they head off to shoot b- reel. And make absolute sure to recalibrate the audio 
settings on the camera when you reconnect your mixer. Don’t rely on the camera op to 
make these audio adjustments for you. 
 SHOT TYPE #2. STAND- UPS 
 Stand- up  is a term that originated in the news industry. Simply put, it’s a person 
standing there talking directly to camera. Typically, stand- ups will be an intro for a pro-
gram, a transition to a new topic or scene, or a 
quick wrap- up. 
 Since they’re generally short in length and the 
audio will never be separated from the picture, 
you can usually allow a high level of background 
noise and changes in the ambience bed, such as 
traffi c on a busy street or a crowd at a football 
game. 
 The trick is to make sure you can hear the dia-
logue clearly, and the camera is seeing what is 
creating the noise so it makes sense—more on 
this later. 
 Figure 2.3  Stand- up shot 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 0
 SHOT TYPE #3. SCENE OR SEQUENCE 
 This is when you’re shooting several shots at a location that will be edited together to 
form a seamless sequence. The entire sequence is typically called a scene. For example: 
 Shot 1 (Medium shot): A man puts on his coat and grabs his brief case inside the front 
door of his home. 
 Shot 2 (Wide shot—slow pan): From outside we see the door open, and he walks to his 
car in the driveway. 
 Shot 3 (Close- up): His keys go into the lock and the door opens. 
 Shot 4 (Medium shot): Interior of car from passenger seat as he gets in and starts the car. 
 Shot 5 (Wide shot): Man drives off in car. Car exits frame. 
 Each shot produces its own set of audio challenges. But they need to connect 
together and appear to be a continuous moment in time. Having a siren or dogs barking 
in the background on one angle but not in another will be a problem. Gathering solid 
ambience beds will dramatically improve the fl ow of the scene. 
 SHOT TYPE #4. INTERVIEW 
 We all know what an interview is. They can be short, fi ve minutes, or very long—like the 
dreaded two- hour marathon. They will probably be heavily edited and placed over b- reel.  
 It’s best to think of the interview as being primary voice- over. A great deal of the 
interview content will be used as narration over b- reel, with only an occasional shot of 
the person in the interview setting. 
 Figure 2.4  Formal sit- down interview 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 1
 Audio for interviews needs to be as clean and free of distracting background sounds 
as possible. You just don’t know where it will end up in the fi nal product—or in what order. 
 Even moderate background sounds that come and go over a long period of time can 
be problematic. For example, when an editor selects a clip from the 30- minute point of 
an interview when the air conditioner is running and tries to connect it with another clip 
from the fi rst 5 minutes when the air conditioner was off, it can be diffi cult to create a 
smooth audio edit. 
 SHOT TYPE #5. VOICE- OVER OR VO 
 Often you’ll be asked to record narration in the fi eld rather than the talent going into a 
sound studio. This is becoming more and more common, as it reduces production costs 
and saves time for the producer. It can range from small pick- ups to entire scripts, and 
the sound you record won’t be married to any picture at all. 
 Figure 2.5  A vehicle can make a great VO booth. 
 On many shoots you’ll be recording sound directly to the camera. If you use the 
camera as the recorder, it’s good practice for the camera to shoot something during the 
VO. I recommend you ask the camera operator to shoot a general wide shot of the talent 
reading the script, so there’s no mistaking what it is when the editor is digitizing. Having 
the camera operator shoot pretty fl owers or landscapes as you record your voice- over 
leads to no end of confusion in the edit suite. 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 2
 In my experience, recording voice- overs always seems to be the last thing that needs 
to be done at the end of the day. Everyone is tired and just wants to get it over with. 
You’ll need to resist the pressure to rush through it and be vigilant about getting what 
you know you need. A warning: They might get a little annoyed with you on location, but 
they’ll love you in the edit suite. 
 Because pictures aren’t important here, you have the power to choose what loca-
tion works best for sound. Recording clean, ambience- free dialogue—and I stress 
ambience- free—is the number- one priority when recording a voice- over. 
 Q “Does the sound match the shot? ”
 It will amaze you how often this simple check 
will expose one of the most common mistakes 
made by location audio operators. Take your time 
here. Be critical. It can become a major issue in post if the picture and sound are at odds. 
 Make sure that the sound of the location works with the shot the camera operator 
has framed. What a viewer sees in the frame will lead to their expectations of what they 
should be hearing. A person standing on a busy street corner makes sense with loud 
traffi c sounds. 
 If the camera is moved so that the traffi c is eliminated from the frame and the viewer 
sees only a park bench and green grass on the other side, traffi c noise is distracting 
and seems at odds with the image. Same location—completely different expectations. 
 Figure 2.6  VOs are often shot on location. 
STEP 2   Determine if the sound will 
match the image.  

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 3
 To determine whether the sound will match the shot, ask the camera operator what 
he or she has in mind for the framing, or look in the viewfi nder. With that picture in your 
mind, close your eyes and decide if what you are hearing matches what the camera will 
be seeing. 
 If you determine the sound will not match and it will be distracting, often the most 
effective solution is to discuss the situation with the camera operator. If possible, sug-
gest including the source of the background noise in the frame so everything makes 
sense. Seeing a water fountain or heavy street traffi c in the distance behind the subject 
now “justifi es” the sound.  
 When you arrive at a location you need to 
begin by evaluating the ambience. Use your eyes 
and ears, and talk to the occupant of the location 
about potential sound problems. 
 Q “Are there any extraneous sounds?” 
 Unexpected sounds that come out of nowhere will cause nothing but grief. A dog 
barking, a car’s alarm going off, a telephone ringing—all generally lead to stopping and 
disrupting the fl ow of the shoot. 
 Figure 2.7  Imagine if this shot had an ambience of children playing at school. 
STEP 3   Assess the location and 
identify potential problems 
that could cause disruptions. 
 It’s important to understand that the editors only hear and see what was shot. They 
won’t know all the variables that brought you to the location, or the reasons why the 
recorded sound is the way it is. They have no idea what was happening all around 
the framed shot. It’s your responsibility to make sure that the sound makes sense with 
the picture. 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 4
 Some things are just beyond your control and there’s not much you can do about it, but in 
my opinion the majority of extraneous sounds that occur while recording can be prevented. 
 Here’s a typical example: After we’ve arrived on location, the hellos are done, and the 
director, camera operator, and I discuss the content and context of the shoot (Step 1). 
Let’s say it’s an interview with an architect at his residence, so the camera operator and 
I scout the location for the exact position we’ll be shooting. 
 The camera operator likes the look of the living room and proposes a medium shot 
of the subject in a chair with a portion of the fi replace and a window in the background. 
I close my eyes and listen to the general ambience of the room (Step 2). I determine that 
it sounds like a warm living room setting. A slight amount of outdoor sound also works, 
as we’ll be seeing outside through the window in the shot. 
 I then break off and start collecting a list of potential problems (Step 3): a refrigerator turn-
ing on and off, a water cooler humming, a computer fan, a radio playing in the kitchen, and 
so on. Normally these can be easily solved by unplugging the refrigerator or water cooler 
then asking the subject for permission to turn off the computer, radio, and telephone. 
 TIP!  If you do turn off a refrigerator, place you car keys inside and close the door. 
When it comes time to pack up and leave, you aren’t going anywhere without 
them. “Hey, where are my keys? Oh right!” 
 Next, I see if there are any extraneous sounds coming from outside that may or may 
not be diffi cult to control. I look outside and see a bus stop and a neighbor who is mow-
ing his lawn. More often than not, I can quickly talk with the neighbor, and he’ll be fi ne 
 Figure 2.8  Didn’t see that coming! 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 5
stopping for an hour or so—problem solved. However, after talking to the architect, I fi nd 
that the bus stops right outside every 12 minutes or so. Not much I can do about the 
bus. We may have a problem with it. 
 I know I can deal with all the sound concerns except for the bus. So, I make a mental 
note that I will have to discuss it with the decision maker. I’d continue assessing the 
location with Step 4. 
 Don’t bother the decision maker with all the extraneous sounds you will deal with. 
Keep it to yourself—it’s just part of your routine. 
 Taking the time to identify extraneous sounds will go a long way in preventing disrup-
tions to the shooting day. Constant “stop- tape” interruptions while you try and fi gure 
out “where that noise is coming from” will only serve to create tension and stress for 
everyone. 
 There are locations where extraneous sounds will render the location unusable for 
recording sound. It’s better to know this before you start shooting. 
 Time for one fi nal critical listen. Take a few minutes and listen closely for subtle ambi-
ence changes: refrigerators, a CPU whirring up, a furnace or AC, outside traffi c, etc.  
 Q “Can the ambience be edited?” 
 In this fi nal step, you assess whether the ambi-
ence can produce seamless audio edits. When 
shooting an interview, scene, or sequence, it’s 
essential the ambience is constant in volume, 
consistent in sound elements, and not too loud. 
 Since you have no idea how extensively any given clip will be edited, the ambience 
needs to be stable. If the location has ambience that is constantly changing in overall 
volume or the types of sounds involved, it becomes extremely diffi cult and costly to deal 
with during postproduction. 
 For example: During an interview, a two- minute stretch of a refrigerator turning on 
could be popping in and out everywhere if the editor chops that section into smaller 
clips and intercuts it with other sections that are perfectly clean. 
 It’s not necessary to worry about subtle changes in the ambience when shooting 
b- reel or stand- ups, but Step 4 becomes critical when shooting scenes or sequences, 
or interviews. 
 It’s now time to communicate. Gather your facts and inform the decision maker of 
potential problems. 
 Knowing when and where it’s appropriate to discuss location issues is a bit of an 
art, but in time it will become just another part of your day. If you’re overzealous about 
STEP 4   Assess the quality and 
consistency of the general 
ambience of the location. 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 6
sharing every little concern or complaint about a location, you’ll be known as the typical 
whiney audio operator who hates everything. You won’t exactly be the life of the party.  
 If you do it right, you’ll be helping the shoot-
ing day move forward with fewer delays and 
in a much more relaxed way. You’ll be quietly 
working under the radar, solving problems the 
rest of the crew didn’t even know existed.  
 It’s a very rare day to fi nd a perfect location. All 
will have their quirks and challenges. Being able to 
work as part of the production team to keep the 
shooting day moving forward will be much appreci-
ated. Digging in your heels and criticizing will get you 
nowhere. 
 Here are a few tips to aid in your discussions with 
the decision maker: 
 •    Never burden the decision makers about audio 
concerns that you can and will rectify. They have 
enough on their plate. The time to involve them is 
when decisions need to be made about issues out of 
your control that are signifi cant enough to affect the 
quality of the sound. 
 Constant unexpected interruptions caused by sound will grind a shoot to a halt 
and create much frustration. 
 • Be prepared to put the problem into context. Just saying the background is noisy 
isn’t enough information. Say something like: “I can hear the dialogue clearly, but 
there is extensive background sound close to the window. The louder trucks and 
buses will defi nitely cause delays, and the cars could cause issues in post.” 
 • Never recommend or suggest a solution unless asked. Just supply the decision 
makers with the concerns and let them make a decision: “I was talking to the 
architect, and he tells me that a bus passes by or stops out front every 12 minutes. 
The dialogue will be unusable when this happens—what do you think?” 
 • Never assume you know all there is to know about a shoot. There are all kinds of 
reasons why a location may have been chosen or why a producer or director may 
STEP 5   Communicate your concerns 
and recommendations with 
the decision maker if required. 
 Figure 2.9  

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 7
choose one option over another—even if it doesn’t seem to be the best choice. Time 
factors, availability of talent, budget constraints—they all play a role, and they may 
not choose to share them with you. 
 • Keep your opinions to yourself, even if you see a train wreck about to happen! You 
are the location audio operator—remember that! This procedure, if not used wisely, 
has the potential to blow up in your face if you overstep your role as a sound operator. 
You are not the director, or the producer, or the dialogue editor. Keep your opinions to 
yourself unless asked. 
 MAKE A DIFFERENCE 
 When these fi ve steps for choosing a location are used correctly, you will be infl u-
encing a shooting day in ways that most directors will not be accustomed to, but 
they’ll be pleasantly appreciative. Your attention and concern regarding their produc-
tion, and the positive result your professionalism brings to the fi nished product, will 
be highly valued. 
 Never leave a location with questionable or unusable audio—it’s not acceptable! 
 Watch Class 1—“Choosing a Location” of the Location Audio 
Simplified online course. 
 Preparing a Location for Recording 
 You’ve probably heard the comment “We’ll fi x it in post.” If you’re on a fi lm shoot 
with a heavy audio postproduction budget, then almost anything is possible. But in 
video, what you record on location is pretty much what’s going to end up in the fi nal 
product. 
 Preparing your location is vital to recording quality tracks. Crossing your fi ngers and 
hoping your tracks will be clean will not pay off in the long run. If there’s an extraneous 
sound within your mic’s range, it’s gonna get you! 
 To prepare a location, you need to identify and deal with any extraneous sounds, 
ambiences, and potential sound problems that will compete with the dialogue you’re 
trying to capture. It’s not necessary to void the location of all noise, shoot all things 
with feathers, and create a vacuum. Your goal when prepping a location is to ensure the 
background ambience matches what the camera is seeing and unwanted sounds don’t 
create distractions. 
 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 8
BEFORE YOU BREAK OUT YOUR 
GEAR 
 First you want to take care of extraneous 
sounds that could render a location unus-
able. Then you want to eliminate or move 
away from sounds that are heavy in the fre-
quencies of the human voice—such as AC, 
fans, and traffi c. Sizzly, poppy, sharp high- 
frequency sounds like cicadas and grass-
hoppers, wind, rustling leaves—these all 
strongly compete with dialogue. You need to 
pay close attention when they are present in 
your location. Then make sure sounds that 
can be “On” and “Off” for long periods of 
time are turned off—refrigerators, comput-
ers, furnaces. 
 Sounds that are in the lower bass frequen-
cies (like a low rumble in a factory) are not as 
troublesome since you can easily cut them 
out with your audio mixer’s high- pass fi lter.  
 This ain’t rocket science, but you need to be diligent. 
 Most location sound troublemakers can easily be dealt with by unplugging, 
turning off, or removing them from the immediate location. Listen for sounds that 
require time to resolve or could be beyond your control. It’s usually possible to ask 
the neighbor across the street to put down the leaf blower for an hour, but it may 
require some subtle diplomatic skills. Most importantly, you need to determine if 
there are any major problems you can’t eliminate that will render the location use-
less. There’s not much you can do about a barking dog next door if you discover 
nobody is home. 
 After I’ve prepped the location, I’ll separate myself from the crew for one fi nal evalua-
tion. This may seem a little over the top, but I take sound disruptions to the day person-
ally! I’m not doing my job if I’m chasing a chicken down the road with all my gear on. 
 COMMON TROUBLEMAKERS  
 Nearby construction, furnaces, air conditioners, telephones, cell phones, refrigera-
tors, freezers, computers, radios, televisions, water coolers, vending machines, door 
chimes, ticking clocks, squeaky chairs, pets—there’s a long list of troublemakers ready 
to wreak havoc with your otherwise problem- free shoot. 
 Figure 2.10  

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
1 9
 Sometimes the noise- makers come with the talent—jingly jewellery, or objects in their 
hands such as pens, paper, and gum wrapper are typical offenders. Inform the talent that 
rubbing their hands on their pants or shuffl ing their feet can also cause audio problems. 
 Notify all occupants of video in progress, and place a sign on exterior and bathroom 
doors if necessary. Close all windows and doors. 
 Not dealing with these issues and hoping for the best will prove to be extremely frus-
trating and will often bring a shoot to a standstill. It’s also very unsettling for on- camera 
talent or the subject of a documentary- style interview to have to constantly stop and 
wait for the sound to clear. 
 Watch Class 2—“Preparing the Location.” 
 How Much Ambience Is Too Much? 
 Ambience is not necessarily a bad thing. It adds energy and life to a location. But 
knowing whether it’s going to ruin or enhance your recording takes time to learn. 
 Dialogue should always sit on top or be forward of the background sounds. There 
should be no competition from the ambience for the viewer’s attention. The saving grace 
with ambience is it will often take care of itself. In loud locations, people talk louder. 
When the camera is further away, talent will usually project more. So everything should 
take care of itself if you choose and prep the location properly. 
 But we know this isn’t always the case. It gets confusing when the ambience is at 
odds with your frame, or you’re trying to record as ambient- free as possible. 
 Figure 2.11  

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
2 0
 When you run into situations where there are sounds that seem too loud or there’s 
an ambience that you deem to be competing with the dialogue, you’ll need to put your 
gear on and get a mic in the shot. You want to do this before the crew starts setting up 
and readying the location to shoot. 
 Your headphones and microphone are going to complicate matters at this time by accen-
tuating some sounds and losing others. You’ll fi nd that certain sounds are louder and more 
distracting through your mic than they are to the naked ear, and vice versa. Microphones 
don’t have the ability to ignore a sound that’s unimportant to the clarity of dialogue. 
 To make sure you have enough separation between the dialogue and ambience, 
fi rst get talent to speak at performance volume and look at your meters. Make sure that 
when the talent speaks there’s a noticeable increase of level. Depending on the type of 
shot (stand- up versus interview) and the location (boardroom versus rock concert) the 
minimum acceptable separation can vary from 30dB to 16dB. 
 If I’m concerned about separation with my gear on, I’ll record some talking if I have 
my own recorder or ask the camera op to record a take and listen to a playback. 
“ Hey . . . You can't do that! We don’t have time for you to check audio! ”
 Anyone who has been on location knows this isn’t an easy task. The general indiffer-
ence by the rest of the crew towards the needs of the sound operator will result in a chorus 
of groans and rolling eyes about this request. But you’ve got to do what you’ve got to do. 
 Listen to the playback and decide whether the possible offending ambience is dis-
tracting. If I’m unsure, I won’t hesitate to ask the camera operator for his or her opinion. 
Make your decision, and prepare the location further if needed. Do not fold like a cheap 
lawn chair if you are being questioned or given that disgusted look from members of 
your crew. Get it right—your career depends on it. 
 Now, here’s the scariest thing you’ll ever do in your entire location sound career. If you 
know the location is a bust and the tracks are unusable, get the information to the decision 
maker as soon as possible and request a move.  Do it!  If it ain’t workin’, it ain’t workin’! It’s 
not going to magically fi x itself! You’re not getting paid to record unusable tracks. Don’t wait 
until setup is complete and you’ve started shooting, this will just make matters worse! Be 
proactive and bring the sound issue to the attention of the decision maker. 
 A location sound op I worked with had the perfect phrase:  “Love me now and hate 
me later, or hate me now and love me later” —it rings very true! 
 Watch Class 3—“Understanding Dialogue and Ambience Separation.” 
 ASSUME THE WORST! 
 The commitment and technical ability of video producers towards quality audio 
throughout the production process is as wildly erratic as the content of their projects. 

C H O O S I N G  A N D  P R E P A R I N G  A  L O C A T I O N
2 1
 When I talk about moving to an audio friendly location, I don’t mean taking an inter-
view from a downtown offi ce building to a farm pasture in the country. Most times a 
location move is a very subtle one: moving from one end of the kitchen to the other 
because of an echo problem; using the back yard rather than the front yard to avoid 
street noise; using a different offi ce on the same fl oor to get away from noisy air con-
ditioning that can’t be turned off. Even something as simple as having the talent face 
a different direction can make a dramatic difference. The easier the move, the more 
chance it will happen. 
 Be prepared for  “Where do you suggest we go?”  Either have another location in mind, 
or be ready to scout out another location with the camera operator. Always include the 
camera operator when scouting for another location, even if you’ve already found one. 
Involving the camera operator is a must; you’ve probably ruffl ed his or her feathers. 
 Most camera operators will be unaccustomed to having their location choice ques-
tioned, especially from a sound person. Don’t waste your breath trying to explain the 
audio problem, just describe what needs to change to solve it. 
 The decision to move a location needs to be made by the director, not by the location 
sound operator. 
 Figure 2.12  
From camera operator/producers editing on their laptops, to knock- your- socks- off edit 
suites that George Lucas would feel comfortable in, you just never know where or how 
your sound will be dealt with. Assume the worst. 
 Making a Location Move  

 Location Audio 
Field Mixer 
 The Field Mixer 
 Features of the Field Mixer 
 Initial Setup Procedure for a Field Mixer 
 Recording a Safety Track 
 Putting It All Together 
 Tying into the Camera 
 Connecting a Shotgun Mic 
 Connecting a Wireless System 
 Professional Impression 
 The Field Mixer 
 The location audio fi eld mixer is the core of every sound operator’s equipment 
package. This is not the place to cut corners or make do with a piece of gear that 
isn’t up to the task. A fi eld mixer needs to withstand an enormous amount of abuse 
and keep on performing fl awlessly. From African deserts to Alaskan ice fi elds, it just 
has to work. 
 Field mixers are in constant evolution and will continue to be as technology tries 
to make them smaller, more effi cient, and less expensive. But beware: make sure 
features like high-pass fi lters, a tone oscillator, and quality limiters are on your next 
mixer. 
 Take your time when purchasing. As with all expensive pieces of equipment, try it out 
or rent before you buy. 
 C H A P T E R  3

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
2 3
 Figure 3.1  
 Figure 3.2  
 Features of the Field Mixer 
 Mixers come in various confi gurations but they all work the same way. As you’ll see, 
some mixers are a little more complicated than others, but we’re going to keep it simple 
and focus on learning the basic functions that all fi eld mixers share. If you’re familiar with 
the fi eld mixer, you might still want to read over this section. There are a couple of things 
that might make you say, “mmm, that’s cool!” 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
2 4
 POWER SWITCH AND BATTERIES (1) 
 The power “On/Off” switch on most fi eld mixers will be a three-way switch made up 
of the following settings: 
 Internal Power—the mixer is powered by batteries you install in the mixer.  
 Figure 3.4   Mixer output section 
 Figure 3.5   Internal power supply 
 Figure 3.3   Mixer input section 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
2 5
 Off—the mixer shutdown. 
 External Power—an external battery source or AC/DC converter. 
 There are some very nice (expensive) rechargeable external battery systems that will 
power your mixer and wireless systems at the same time. But most operators tend to 
use the internal batteries. When using the internal battery system, always ensure you 
are well stocked. Running out of battery power during a shoot is just not acceptable. 
 I’m not a fan of rechargeable “AA” batteries. Changing batteries two to three 
times a day opens me up to a possible mistake. But if you’re going to use them 
I suggest NiMH rechargeable batteries. 
 Since the mixer’s sound quality is 100 percent dependent on battery power, it’s best to 
err on the side of caution when replacing batteries. Even though the mixer I use will comfort-
ably run for 14 hours (when using one phantom-powered mic), I never exceed 8 hours. On 
some mixers, as the battery power weakens the sound quality slowly degrades. The mixer 
will begin to hiss, but so gradually that you may not notice it until it’s too late. 
 CHANNEL FADER (2) 
 The channel fader is used to increase the level of signal (volume) passing through each 
channel of the mixer. Each channel has a dedicated fader that corresponds to its input. 
 Figure 3.6   External power supply 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
2 6
 Think of the channel fader as the “fi ne-tuning” of the incoming audio volume. 
Depending on the mixer, you’ll fi rst adjust the “Channel Gain” or “Pre-Amp Attenuator” 
and then fi ne-tune the signal with the channel fader. 
 CHANNEL GAIN (3) 
 The channel gain is used to increase the level of signal (volume) entering each chan-
nel of the mixer. Each channel has a dedicated gain dial that corresponds to its input. 
 The channel gain can be thought of as “coarse” tuning. You fi rst adjust the channel 
gain close to the desired amount of signal you want to enter the mixer, and then fi ne-
tune the signal with the channel fader. 
 MASTER GAIN (4) 
 The master gain is used to increase and decrease the level of signal that exits the 
mixer. On all mixers, the master gain will have a “0” setting with a détente at the mixer’s 
unity output setting to set it perfectly every time. (A  détente  is a notch so you can set 
it exactly every time.) This is a set-and-forget dial that you should avoid playing with. 
 METERS (5) 
 The meters are your visual representation of the sound as it passes through your 
mixer. They’re also the source of no end of confusion about how they should be per-
forming and where they should be peaking. Many an operator has stared at them in 
wonder—“ What the heck is going on? ” 
 Depending on the mixer, you could have one type of meter or the ability to switch and 
even mix various types of meters. 
 VU (volume units) and PPM (peak program meters) are the most common meters 
used in North America. PPM meters are very accurate and match just about every if not 
all digital cameras on the market today. VU meters were more common in the analog 
era and will give you more of an average level of the sound that is passing through your 
mixer. You’ll need to pay close attention when calibrating to today’s cameras while using 
a mixer with VU meters—I’ll touch on this later. 
 Since the early 2000s most new video cameras (prosumer to pro) have PPM meters. 
They are the industry standard for metering, and your mixer should have them. 
 PRE-AMP ATTENUATOR (PAD) (6) 
 As sound enters your mixer from a mic, you need to make sure that it’s at a level or 
volume the mixer can handle. The pre-amp attenuator or PAD function attenuates or 
decreases the incoming signal to a level that the mixer can work with effectively. 
 The PAD will have three settings: 0, –10, –20. Just by looking at the numbers you can 
tell it’s going to decrease the signal. 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
2 7
 The “0” setting won’t do anything to the sound signal: it will allow the whole or total 
signal to enter the mixer. This is what we call  wide open.  Use this setting for dynamic 
mics, wireless and hard-wired lavaliers, and shotgun mics for most normal conversation 
levels. 
 The “–10” setting will attenuate or reduce the sound signal by 10dB (dB is the abbre-
viation for decibels and refers to the measurement of volume). If you’re using very sensi-
tive mics, or when the sound entering the mixer is loud (someone talking over traffi c or 
in a factory, for example), you’d have to attenuate by –10dB to bring the volume down 
to a level the mixer can handle. 
 The “–20” setting will attenuate the sound signal by 20dB. An extremely loud location 
like a rock concert would require a –20dB PAD to control the incoming volume. 
 If your mixer uses Gain to control the input to your pre-amp you won’t have a 
pre-amp attenuator. 
 HIGH-PASS FILTER (7) 
 Most mixers will have a high-pass fi lter (HPF), also called a low-cut fi lter. There are 
two types of high-pass fi lters found on mixers, stepped or sweepable. 
 Figure 3.7   Pre-amp attenuator (PAD) 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
2 8
 A stepped HPF will most commonly be a three-way switch with set frequencies like 
20Hz, 100Hz, and 140Hz. With this type of HPF you choose the set frequency you want 
to cut at. The higher the number, the more bass you will remove.  
 Figure 3.8   Stepped high-pass ﬁ lter 
 Figure 3.9   Sweepable high-pass ﬁ lter 
 Sweepable HPFs are more accurate, since they use a rotary dial that can be increased 
or decreased at smaller increments. 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
2 9
 All mixers will have two XLR outputs (left and right) for sending the sound via two XLR 
cables to a recorder or camera. In addition, most will have a multi-pin video connector 
for a control cable that gives a second pair of outputs as well as a monitor return. I’ll 
cover the multi-pin video connector and monitor return in a bit. 
 The output select switches are used to switch the XLR outputs and the camera out 
or multi-pin video connector to “Mic” or “Line” level. What this does is choose the fi nal 
level of signal the mixer is going to send. 
 Think of this function as a matching game. If the camera or recorder requires a “Line” 
level input, you have to match it by switching the output select switches on the mixer 
to “Line” level. 
 The purpose of the HPF function is to roll off or cut low frequencies that compete 
with the dialogue. When used properly, the high-pass fi lter is a powerful tool that brings 
clarity to your recordings and helps separate the dialogue from the ambience. 
 OUTPUT STAGE (8) 
 The output stage on a fi eld mixer has two parts, the output select “Mic/Line” 
switches, and the physical connectors: XLR connectors, multi-pin video connector, and 
various 1/8-inch and TA3-type connectors for connecting to cameras, recorders, and 
wireless monitoring systems. 
 Figure 3.10   Output stage with XLR outputs 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 0
 The difference between mic level and line level is about 50dB. If you don’t match the 
mixers output select to the camera or recorder’s input select, the recording will be unus-
able. Most video cameras have an input select that is switchable between “Mic” and 
“Line” level, so matching is easy. 
 LIMITER (9) 
 Hopefully the mixer you own has a limiter. If it doesn’t, put it in a paper bag, jump 
in your car, and toss it out the window. Since most cameras today are digital, you’d be 
crazy not to have the safety net of a limiter on your mixer to prevent a sudden loud noise 
from distorting the camera’s mic pre’s and blowing the take. 
 A limiter is simply a ceiling on the level of volume. It can be inserted on the sig-
nal as it enters and/or exits the mixer. It can either be “In” the signal path, making it 
active, or “Out,” making it inactive. When a limiter is “In,” its function is to stop the 
volume signal from exceeding a set limit, thus preventing a sudden loud signal that 
enters the mixer from exiting to your recorder and possibly causing distortion. I can 
guarantee that unexpected volume increases happen all the time when recording on 
location. 
 CHANNEL PANNING (10) 
 The pan select switches or rotary panning dials are used to direct the signal from 
each channel input to a chosen output. When you plug a microphone into a channel on 
 Figure 3.11   Output stage with various outputs 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 1
your mixer, that channel will have its own pan switch or rotary panning knob so you can 
assign or route the signal to either the left XLR output, right XLR output, or if panned to 
the center, both XLR outputs. 
 XLR CHANNEL INPUTS (11) 
 There is only one way to get sound into your mixer and that is through the XLR chan-
nel inputs. Depending on the model of your mixer, it may have two, three, four, or even 
six inputs. 
 MICROPHONE POWER (12) 
 You will need to supply power to most of the microphones used for location audio. 
Your mixer will have three choices: 48V phantom, 12T power, and dynamic. 
 Set the mic power to “48V phantom” (48V PH) when using most shotgun micro-
phones and hard-wired lavaliers on the market today: 48V phantom is the industry 
standard for powering microphones. 
 • Set the mic power to “Dynamic” when using dynamic handheld microphones or 
when you are taking a feed from another mixer. I don’t use the dynamic setting; 
I leave all channels set to 48V phantom all the time.  “What?! You’re going to damage 
the mic! I’ve been told leaving phantom power on with a dynamic mic degrades the 
sound and can possibly damage the mic.” Sorry, I’ve never damaged a mic in 20 years 
of using dynamic mics, and I can’t hear any difference. Your choice. 
 • Set the mic power to “12T” when using 12T or A/B type condenser microphones. 
Older Sennheiser shotgun microphones use this type of power. 
 TIP!  If your shotgun microphone uses batteries, remove them—the 48V PH from 
the mixer will power it. One less thing to possibly screw up. 
 INPUT SELECT—MIC/LINE CHANNEL SWITCH (13) 
 This switch selects the input level “Mic/Line” for each input connector. Line level is 
about 50dB louder then mic level, so this setting must be correct for you to be able to 
record usable audio. 
 • Set your input select to “Mic” when using shotgun mics, handheld mics, hard-wired 
lavaliers, and wireless systems. 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 2
 • Set your input select to “Line” when receiving a signal from CD players or another 
mixer (DJ’s mixer, live music mixer, etc.). 
 TIP!  If the sound source looks like a microphone, set the input mode to “Mic.” 
 MONITOR/HEADPHONE VOLUME (14) 
 Most mixers will have a rotary knob that is labeled “Monitor,” “Headphones,” or 
“Phones.” This is the volume control for your headphones.  Monitor is the term used for 
listening, so the monitor volume is your listening volume. This dial turns your headphone 
volume up and down. 
 MONITOR RETURN (15) 
 The monitor return function on a mixer is used to listen to the sound returning from a 
recorder or camera. After the sound signal has left your mixer and is heading down the 
cable to be recorded you have no idea if it actually got there! The monitor return function 
on a mixer solves this by receiving the signal back from the camera so you can listen 
to it. The function will be a two-position switch with choices like “Mix/Tape,” “Direct/
Return,” “A/B.” 
 MONITOR SELECT—HEADPHONE SELECT (16) 
 The monitor or headphone select can be a rotary dial or a combination of switches 
that enables you to choose what you want to listen to in your headphones. You can 
listen to signals that are assigned to the left or right. You can listen in mono or stereo, 
and sometimes the monitor select includes the monitor return function. It is used to 
help the operator focus on a single channel’s signal without turning the other chan-
nels off. 
 SLATE MIC (17) 
 Most fi eld mixers will have a slate mic function. This is a small microphone that is 
built into the mixer along with an “On/Off” button, and its function is to identify or ID 
takes. The mic is active only when the slate mic button is depressed. 
 TONE OSCILLATOR (18) 
 The tone oscillator is used to calibrate your mixer to a recorder or camera. This 
switch is a must for calibrating a video camera. 
 Watch Class 4—“Field Mixer Basics.” 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 3
 Initial Setup Procedure for a Field Mixer 
 The fi rst step in assuring quality recordings is 
to preset your mixer properly before every shoot. 
By setting all the switches in a confi guration that 
assures correct input, routing, and monitoring, 
you’ll never be wondering what’s going on. 
 The Field Mixer Initial Setup is the foundation for 
all operating procedures that I use to gather high-
quality recordings—there’s nothing worse than turn-
ing on a piece of gear and there’s problems. Mild 
concern can escalate into a full-blown panic attack.  
 The Field Mixer Initial Setup procedure will also 
“red fl ag” real equipment issues. If the system 
check doesn’t work properly after you’ve com-
pleted the setup procedure, operator error will be 
ruled out. Your full attention can focus on trouble-
shooting cables, mics, headphones, or the worst 
case scenario, a mixer problem. 
 If you own your mixer it’s a good idea to run this setup every couple of shoots to 
ensure everything is working correctly. If you rent equipment, then this procedure is a 
must, and you’ll be thanking me for the ease of setting up the different mixers out there. 
 Initial Setup Procedure: The setup described below is for a four-channel fi eld mixer. 
If you are using a two- or three-channel mixer set up as follows: 
 • Two-Channel Field Mixer: Follow the setup procedure for the four-channel mixer but 
use only the settings for Channels 1 and 3. 
 • Three-Channel Field Mixer: Follow the setup procedure for the four-channel mixer 
but use the settings for Channels 1, 3, and 4. 
 Field Mixer Initial Setup: 
Four-Channel Field Mixer 
 1. Set the mic power switch for CH1 through CH4 to “48V Phantom” (some mixers will 
use a single switch. 
 2. Set the mic select switch for CH1 and CH2 to “PH” or “Phantom” and CH3 and 
CH4 to “DYN” or “Dynamic” (some mixers will have this option). 
 Figure 3.12  

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 4
 3. Set the input select switch for CH1 through CH4 to “Mic.” 
 4. Set the pre-amp attenuation or PAD switch for CH1 through CH4 to “0dB.” If your 
mixer uses a channel gain control, set CH1 through CH4 to “Unity.” This will be 50 
to 60 percent on the dial. 
 5. Set the limiter switch to “In” or “On.” 
 6. Set CH1 channel pan switch to “Center,” CH2 to “Left,” and CH3 and CH4 to 
“Right.” If you are using a mixer with rotary channel panning, make sure you are 
panned hard left or right (dial is completely left or right). 
 7. Set the master gain to “0” at détente. This will be the mixer’s unity output level. 
THIS IS NOT OFF! 
 8. Adjust the channel fader for CH1 through CH4 completely to the left or “Off.” 
 9. Adjust the high-pass fi lter switch or dial for CH1 and CH2 to “100Hz” and for CH3 
and CH4 to “140Hz.” 
 10. Set the monitor select switch to “Stereo.” 
 11. Set the monitor return switch to “Mix/Direct/Off.” Make sure your mixer is not set 
to listen to the return from a camera. Note: Mixers with a rotary monitor select may 
not have a separate monitor return switch. 
 12. Adjust the monitor volume to about “30 percent.” 
 13. If your mixer has any linking, ganging, or MS functions, disable them. They are 
advanced functions that can cause confusion during the system check. This is 
location audio simplifi ed not location audio extreme! 
 SYSTEM CHECK: FOUR-CHANNEL FIELD MIXER 
 After completing the Field Mixer Initial Setup, check your mixer for correct operation 
with the following system check. 
 1. Turn mixer power switch to “Int” (internal power source). 
 2. Press battery check and make sure you have full power. 
 3. Plug a set of headphones into the stereo headphone connector. 
 4. Engage the tone oscillator. Make sure that tone is indicating on both meters. You 
want both meters displaying the same reading. This assures that the meters are 
working properly. 
 5. Slowly put headphones on and adjust the monitor volume to a comfortable listening 
level. 
 6. Make sure tone is present in both left and right ear-cups. This assures that the 
monitoring section of the mixer is operating correctly and that both the right and 
left ear-cups of your headphones are working. 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 5
 7. Disengage the tone oscillator. 
 8. Plug an XLR cable and shotgun mic into XLR channel “Input 1.” 
 9. Adjust channel fader 1 to “12 o’clock” or “50 percent.” 
 10. Speak into the mic and make sure that audio is present on both meters and in both 
ear-cups of your headphones. 
 11. Connect a control cable into the multi-pin video connector or two XLR cables into 
the “Left” and “Right” XLR outputs. 
 12. Wiggle all cables and connections to the mixer and mic to ensure solid connections. 
If there are any noisy connections or cables, replace immediately. 
 13. You are ready to connect and calibrate the mixer to a camera. 
 The Field Mixer Initial Setup I’ve outlined gets most of the fi eld mixers on the market 
today ready to go. Some of the mixers use different names for the various functions, but 
with the brief description of features in the “Mixer Features” section, you should be able 
to fi gure them out easily. 
 I have used Cooper, Sonosax, PSC, Wendt, Filmtec, SQN, Audio Developments, 
Sound Devices, and Shure location audio ﬁ eld mixers. This setup works on them all. 
 Over the years, I’ve had the opportunity to use and experiment with a wide variety 
of shotgun and lavalier microphones. The settings I have outlined in the Field Mixer 
Initial Setup best suit the ones most commonly used. You’ll fi nd that by just plugging in 
your mic and operating your mixer properly, most of the time you’ll end up right back 
at the Field Mixer Initial Setup original settings. That doesn’t mean these settings work 
for every location. You should always follow the dialing-in and operating procedures in 
 Chapter 4 to obtain optimal location sound recordings. 
 Watch Class 5—“Field Mixer Initial Setup and System Check.” 
 Recording a Safety Track 
 A safety track is a duplicate track that is recorded at a lower level to give extra head-
room in the case of a sudden very loud sound. Since I like to record as close to “0” on 
the cameras meters as possible, a second recording at a lesser volume will cover my 
butt if an unforeseeable loud sound occurs. This setup works when you are using only 
a single shotgun or lavalier mic. 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 6
 If I’m recording talent who are very ballistic with their dialogue, or we’re in a loud 
location like a factory where sudden volume surges can happen, I will send the signal 
from my shotgun mic or lavalier to both CH1 and CH2 on the camera. I will adjust the 
camera’s CH2 input level 8dB lower than the original level I set when calibrating the 
 Figure 3.13   Camera initial calibration at –20 dB 
 Figure 3.14   Camera safety track calibration on CH2 at –28dB  

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 7
camera. This second track at a lower level is a duplicate of CH1 but with an extra 8dB 
of headroom. 
 Use the oscillator tone on your mixer to calibrate. 
 Putting It All Together 
 Now that the fi eld mixer is ready to go, it’s time to attach the cables, headphones, 
wireless receivers, and shotgun microphones to the mixer and mixer bag and get the 
whole unit strapped to your body. I sometimes wear my rig for two to three hours 
before taking it off, so take what may seem to be silly procedures as necessary com-
fort adjustments that could save your back. This is what works for me. Don’t hesitate 
to make changes to these suggestions if it makes wearing a mixer more comfortable 
for you. 
 COMFORT AND CONTROL—SHOULDER STRAPS AND 
HARNESSES 
 Comfort is a must. When you purchase a mixer bag it comes with a single pad-
ded shoulder strap for carrying—I wouldn’t use it for operating. Aftermarket harnesses 
that go over both shoulders and crisscross in the back are fantastic for distributing the 
weight of the mixer and all-round comfort. They’re a must if location sound is going to 
be your chosen career. They will not only save your back, they will also prevent the mixer 
from sliding to your side—which commonly occurs if you try and use the single padded 
carrying strap. 
 Figure 3.15   Single shoulder strap 
 Figure 3.16   Harness 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 8
 The fi rst thing you want to do is set the shoulder straps on your harness so that the 
bottom of the mixer is just above your belt line. Any lower, and the fi rst time you have 
to run, the mixer is going to bounce up and hit you right in the junk. It’s not a pleasant 
experience! 
 CABLING 
 If you’ve done any location audio you’re well aware of how frustrating it can be to coil 
and uncoil cables. Nothing says “amateur” faster than a mess of tangled and knotted 
cables spilling out of you. 
 First you must, yes must, know how to wrap a cable properly. Don’t say, “Oh yeah, 
I know how to coil a cable.” You’re probably the one who doesn’t! It’s time to drag your 
sorry self off the couch and master this skill. 
 Wrapping a cable in the fi eld is much harder than wrapping a typical home 
extension cord. What makes it so diffi cult is that both ends of the cables you’ll be 
 wrapping are usually connected—the mixer to the camera, and the microphone to 
the mixer. This means any small twist created while wrapping can turn into a tangled 
mess. 
 During a shooting day I’ll coil and uncoil my cables 50 to 100 times—each! 
 The coiling procedure I use is a combination of two loops that you alternate. You 
want all cables that are hanging from your mixer to have no more than a six-inch diam-
eter loop. Any larger and you’ll be getting snagged on all kinds of stuff. 
 Here’s how to do it, step by step. 
 1.  Lay out a 25-foot XLR cable on the ground and straighten it out. It makes learning 
this skill much easier if you’re not starting with a twisted up cable. 
 2.  Put one end of the XLR in your left pocket as it would be if it was attached to the 
mixer. Grab the cable about 6 inches from the end with your left hand. If you’re left-
handed, mirror the steps. See  Figure 3.17 . 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
3 9
 3.  Slide your right hand about 1 foot down the cable. See   Figure 3.18 . 
 Figure 3.17  
 Figure 3.18  

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 0
 4.  Bring the cable up towards you and lay the fi rst loop into your left hand. Do not twist 
or curl the cable. That’s the fi rst loop. See  Figure 3.19 . 
 Figure 3.19  
 Figure 3.20  
 5.  Slide your hand down the cable 1 foot again and grab it with all fi ve fi ngers. See 
 Figure 3.20 . 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 1
 7.  Place the loop on the index fi nger of your left hand. The trick is to touch the back of 
your right-hand pinkie to the top or pad of your left index fi nger as you lay the loop in 
your left hand. See  Figure 3.22 . 
 6.  This time, as you bring the cable up, turn your palm away from your body, keeping 
the cable touching all fi ve fi ngers. The cable will wrap around your right hand and all 
the pressure from the hanging end of the cable should be on your pinkie fi nger. See 
 Figure 3.21 . 
 Figure 3.21  
 Figure 3.22  

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 2
 8.  That’s the second loop. Now alternate between the two loops and you’ll be able to 
wrap a cable that is attached at both ends. See  Figure 3.23 . 
 Figure 3.23  
 Cables that are improperly wrapped for long periods of time will develop a “mem-
ory” and can be extremely diffi cult to straighten out. Often rental houses end up with 
cables like this, so look for the telltale sign of twisted and bent loops. Sometimes they’re 
beyond repair, and you’ll fi ght them every wrap. 
 Master how to wrap a cable properly before you go public. It should take no 
more than 15 seconds to wrap a 25-foot XLR cable with loops that are even 
and twist-free. 
 If you purchase new cables, make sure you wrap and store them properly by hang-
ing them or laying them fl at. If you throw them in a box all kinked up, that’s what they’re 
going to look like when you take them out. 
 A cable that’s been improperly wrapped over and over will eventually break the 
smaller wires inside, and it can’t be repaired. The very expensive control cable can have 
as many as ten smaller wires inside, making it even more fragile—a costly mistake if it’s 
damaged. 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 3
 TIP!  When letting out the full length of boom or control cable, always leave at 
least one loop in the Velcro tie. This extra loop acts as a strain relief that will 
protect the connectors on the cable and mixer.  
 BALANCING YOUR MIXER 
 Keeping your mixer in the center of your body and preventing cable tangles will be 
a major problem when you fi rst start out. Harness, Velcro ties, and properly wrapped 
cables will help, but it’s important you balance the weight that’s hanging around your 
neck. You can do this by separating the boom cable from the control cable and tying 
them to opposite sides of the mixer bag with Velcro ties. 
 VELCRO CABLE TIES 
 To attach the cables to your mixer you’ll need to purchase a set of Velcro cable ties 
with clips. They’re a bit of a specialty item, so they’re not cheap, but you’ll be glad you 
have them. Your favorite retailer of all things location audio should stock them. 
 Clip one Velcro tie on the right side and one on the left where the shoulder harness 
attaches to the top of the mixer bag. See  Figure 3.24 . 
 Figure 3.24  
 Figure 3.25  

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 4
 Since not all mixers have the inputs and outputs on the side you want, you may have 
to feed cables through the mixer bag to achieve balance. 
 If you boom primarily with your right hand on the butt end of the boom pole, attach 
the XLR for the shotgun mic to the Velcro tie on the right side of the mixer bag. See 
 Figure 3.25  . Attach the control cable, snake, or pair of XLR cables that are going to the 
camera to the Velcro tie on the left side of the mixer bag. 
 If you boom primarily with your left hand on the butt end of the boom pole, reverse 
the above procedure. 
 It doesn’t matter which side the connections are on, just make sure the cables exit 
the mixer bag and are secured on the proper side. This will prevent tangles and help 
balance the mixer. 
 HEADPHONES 
 We all know how to plug in a set of headphones and put them on. No rocket science 
here. The problems that arise with headphones in location audio are the long length of 
cable or curly-type cord that come with them. 
 The length of cable will be needed, 
but it is a bit of a pain if it’s left hanging 
out when booming or moving about. 
A simple remedy is to stuff the excess 
cable down the inside of the front of the 
mixer bag—leave only enough length 
to put them on. The excess headphone 
cable will sit inside the mixer bag and 
stay contained. 
 At times throughout the day you will 
need the full length of headphone cable, 
but I fi nd that wrapping or fastening the 
excess cable to the outside of the mixer 
bag is just another cable to get tangled with—not to mention it looks kind of messy. 
 It’s also good practice to have the headphone cable exit the top of the mixer bag on 
the same side that the cable attaches to your headphones. If the cable attaches to the 
left ear-cup of your headphones, make the cable exit the top left-hand side of the mixer 
bag. This will keep the small amount of exposed cable out of your way. 
 Figure 3.26    Sony 7506 and Sennheiser HD25 
location audio headphones  

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 5
 PICTURE PERFECT 
 Putting it all together will make a huge difference in not only how you operate but 
your overall professional appearance. The mixer will be balanced with neatly coiled 
cables on both sides of the mixer. You won’t get the two tangled, and the boom cable 
won’t be hanging in your face when booming.  
Watch Class 6 —“Putting Your Gear Together.” 
 TIP!  
If your mixer bag doesn’t have a Velcro loop for storing your headphones between 
shots, a karabiner works great. Clip it to the front of your mixer bag—it makes 
it easy to store and access your headphones. Make sure to get one big enough 
so that it doesn’t damage the headband padding on your headphones. 
 Figure 3.29   Nicely balanced ﬁ eld mixer 
 Figure 3.27  
 Figure 3.28  

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 6
 A snake is a single cable that has a pair of XLRs at each end as well as a 1/8-inch 
stereo connector to return the signal from the camera for monitoring. The third option is 
a multi-pin video connector for attaching a control cable. 
 Tying into the Camera 
 Now that the cables are attached and secured to the mixer and mixer bag, you’re 
ready to tie into the camera. Cabling your mixer to the camera is simple, but you do have 
three options for what type of cable you use. 
 All mixers will have two XLR outputs (left and right) for sending the sound via two XLR 
cables to the camera. Some mixers, in addition to the two XLR outputs, will have a moni-
tor return jack that provides a return from the camera when used with a snake cable. 
 Figure 3.30   XLR cable 
 Figure 3.31   Snake cable 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 7
 PAIR OF XLR CABLES 
 For attaching the two XLR outputs to a camera, simply plug the “Left” output of the 
mixer into the left input (or Input 1) on the camera, and the “Right” output of the mixer 
into the right input (or Input 2) on the camera using a pair of XLR cables. You can pur-
chase a single cable that has two XLRs in it or tie two separate XLRs together. It’s also a 
good idea to label the cable ends so you know which is left and which is right.  
 Figure 3.32   Control cable 
 Figure 3.33  A pair of XLR cables are connected into the mixer’s outputs. 
 If you’re going to be tying two XLRs together don’t use plastic cable ties (zap-straps). 
They’ll cut your hands up by the end of the day. Use electrical tape. I know it leaves gum 
on the cable when taken apart (although this is easy to clean with rubbing alcohol), but 
it’s fl exible for easy coiling, and it's black so it looks clean on a black XLR cable. 
 SNAKE CAABLE 
 If you are using a snake (see   Figure 3.31  ), plug the “Left” output of the mixer into the 
left input (or Input 1) on the camera, and the “Right” output of the mixer into the right 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 8
 CONTROL CABLE 
 As mentioned earlier, you may want to use the multi-pin video connector with a con-
trol cable (see   Figure 3.32  ) to tie into the camera. If your mixer has this connector, you 
want to seriously consider purchasing a control cable. The multi-pin video connector 
with a control cable works the same as the snake for connecting and monitor return, 
with the added bonus of freeing up the XLR outputs to send signal to a second camera 
if needed. One camera would have the control cable plugged into it, and the second 
camera would have two XLRs coming from the main XLR outputs plugged into it. This 
option is a must for a two-camera interview. 
input (or Input 2) on the camera. Plug the 1/8-inch stereo connector into the monitor 
return input on the mixer, and the headphone jack on the camera. The snake allows 
the sound to exit the mixer through a single cable that not only sends the sound to the 
camera but will return the sound for you to monitor. 
 Figure 3.34   Snake cable with 1/8-inch mini connecting into mixer 
 Figure 3.35   Control cable connected to mixer’s camera output 

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
4 9
 Like most things, snakes and control cables are a little pricey, but the peace of mind 
of knowing your sound is getting to the camera with the monitor return is well worth it. 
These cables usually come in 15- and 25-foot lengths. I fi nd the 25-foot length a little 
bulky for shoots where I need to be mobile with the camera operator, but I do carry one 
for when the camera op wants to be further away from talent and I need more cable. 
 Watch Class 7—“Tying into a Video Camera.” 
 Connecting a Shotgun Mic 
 For the shotgun microphone cable, it’s best to get a length of cable that is 4 feet to 5 
feet longer than your boom pole. You don’t want a 25-foot XLR if you are using a 9-foot 
boom pole. It’s just too much cable, and it will add unnecessary weight to your mixer. I 
use an 11-foot boom pole and have a 15-foot XLR cable. That’s a perfect length when 
the boom is fully extended. 
 As mentioned earlier, you may have to run the XLR cable for the boom through the 
mixer bag, so make sure you don’t make the boom cable 
too short when cutting it to length. 
 Make sure the XLR snaps in tightly to the shotgun 
mic and mixer when connecting. 
 TIP!    If you are using a pigtail (a short cloth-
covered XLR cable that is attached to the 
pistol grip of a Rycote system), make sure 
the release for the XLR connector on the 
pigtail of the pistol grip is facing outward. 
If it’s buried in the handle of the pistol grip, 
the XLR cable from your mixer can become 
detached, possibly blowing a take. See 
 Figure 3.36  .  
 Connecting a Wireless System 
 For attaching wireless receivers to your mixer, your mixer bag will have a compart-
ment designed to secure the receivers so they don’t fall out. See   Figure 3.37  . For cable 
length, you don’t want extra cable adding weight and clutter to your setup: make, or 
buy, a short length of cable that runs perfectly from the mixer bag wireless receiver 
 Figure 3.36  

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
5 0
 Professional Impression 
 How you look when you are all put together is important. Operators that look like 
they’ve just stepped out of a bar after a few too many do themselves a disservice. A 
well-put-together mixer will help in smooth, error-free operation, and you’ll look like you 
compartment to the channel input on the mixer. See   Figure 3.38  . If you’re going to use 
wireless systems, I recommend you prewire them into your mixer and test them before 
you head off to the gig. 
 Figure 3.37  
Figure 3.38 Supplied cable for wireless—nice and short!

L O C A T I O N  A U D I O  F I E L D  M I X E R
5 1
know what you’re doing. Tangled cables hanging all over 
the place and headphones choking you like a neck brace 
will not bring the client back. Take a look in the mirror: 
Would you hire this person? Does your appearance instill 
confi dence in the client that you are a professional loca-
tion audio operator? 
 Figure 3.39  

 Field Mixer 
Operating 
Techniques 
 My Guarantee to You! 
 Operating and Monitoring Techniques 
 Task #1—Assigning/Panning 
 Task #2—Dialing In 
 Task #3—Monitoring Function 
 Task #4—Listening 
 Task #5—Shooting 
 Room Tone Is a Must! 
 My Guarantee to You! 
 Learning to operate a fi eld location audio mixer can be intimidating. The reality, how-
ever, is that it’s quite simple. In fact, it’s so simple that I guarantee if you follow some 
straightforward procedures, your screw-ups will be few and far between. 
 Operating and Monitoring Techniques 
 I’ve touched on a few operating and monitoring tips when explaining the features, 
functions, and setup of the mixer, but now it’s time to get specifi c. It’s time to focus on 
the mixer controls that effect the sound of your recording, as well as on learning how 
C H A P T E R  4 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
5 3
to listen and monitor properly. Understanding how and what you are listening for is as 
important, if not more important, than knowing which dials to adjust. 
 When you’re ready to record in the fi eld, the anticipation and sometimes craziness of 
production, coupled with keeping the day moving forward, can make fi ner adjustments 
diffi cult to focus on. 
 I’ve broken down these convoluted, often confusing, procedures into four smaller 
tasks, and given them specifi c times to implement. This makes it easier to focus on the 
minute details you need to be familiar with. 
 Focus!  The next few sections are long and loaded with many “absolute musts” for 
achieving quality recordings. This will be time well spent. 
 Task #1 Assigning/Panning—Choose which output each channel’s signal will exit the mixer. 
 Task #2 Dialing In—A step-by-step procedure that will ready the mixer for recording. 
 Task #3 Monitoring Function—How to set up, calibrate, and operate the monitor. 
 Task #4 Listening—How to effectively focus your listening. 
 Task #5 Shooting—Making adjustments to the mixer during recording. 
 Task #1—Assigning/Panning 
 Choosing which channel’s signal will exit the mixer. 
 Assigning or panning on a fi eld mixer is when you determine which output (left or 
right) the sound from each input (Channels 1–4) are going to be assigned. This decision 
will determine which track on your recorder or camera (CH1, CH2, or both) the sound 
will be recorded on. 
 The assigning or panning of an audio signal on a fi eld mixer is quite straightforward. 
However, due to the placement and size of these switches on many mixers, it’s easy to 
accidentally bump or incorrectly set them. 
 Sometimes during hectic and rushed setup times, panning can get mixed up—a 
mistake that cannot be repaired. In the blistering cold with numb fi ngers, or in pitch-
black darkness, a screw-up can be hard to avoid if a microphone is added due to an 
unexpected change to the shot. Add in the pressure of  “we have to shoot right now”  and 
mistakes will happen. 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
5 4
 HOW THE PAN FUNCTION WORKS   
 Figure 4.1  Pan dial left 
 Figure 4.2  Pan dial center 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
5 5
 When you set or dial the pan function to L (“Left”), R (“Right”), or L/R (both “Left” 
and “Right”), you are assigning the sound to exit the mixer via that designated output. 
 •  If you connect a microphone to Input 1 on your mixer and set Channel 1 Pan to L, the 
sound will only exit the “Left” output on the mixer and record on the “Left” or Channel 
1 on the recorder or camera you have connected to. 
 •  If you chose L/R, or “Center,” with the Channel 1 Pan dial or switch, the sound would 
come out of both the left and right outputs. 
 •  If you chose R with the Channel 1 Pan, the sound from the microphone that is plugged 
into Input 1 on your mixer would be panned or assigned to the “Right” output. 
 •  For mixers with a rotary pan dial, turn it completely left to send the sound out of 
the “Left” output, or completely right to send the signal out of the “Right” output. 
Set the dial to the middle to send the signal out of both the “Left” and “Right” 
outputs. 
 Easy Panning Solution 
 Here’s how to preset a mixer and prewire all your mics and wireless systems so 
you are ready to tackle any situation effi ciently and accurately—and minimize the risk 
 Figure 4.3  Pan dial right 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
5 6
 Figure 4.4  
 Figure 4.5  
of panning errors. This example uses the Field Mixer Initial Setup procedure for a four-
channel fi eld mixer.  
 When I arrive at a location, my mixer is ready to go with a nicely coiled XLR cable, 
Velcro tied to my mixer bag for a shotgun microphone plugged into Input 1, and a pair 
of wireless systems plugged into Inputs 3 and 4. See  Figure 4.4 . 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
5 7
 If a shot requires only a single shotgun microphone, all I need to do is connect a shot-
gun to the XLR cable and I’m ready to go. CH1 panning is preset to the Center position 
and will send the signal out both left and right outputs to be recorded on both channels 
of the camera. See  Figure 4.5 . 
 Numerous times over the years I’ve been asked to try and ﬁ x recordings with 
panning errors. They all ended up in the trash. 
 If I need to add a wireless lavalier for a shot, I simply unplug the shotgun microphone 
from XLR Input 1 and plug it into XLR Input 2. The wireless is prewired into XLR Input 3. 
The mixer is preset to pan XLR Input 2 (now my shotgun mic) to the left output and XLR 
Input 3 (the wireless) to the right output. No chance for error! See   Figure 4.6 . 
 Figure 4.6  
 If the next shot required only a shotgun microphone, which in video is a majority of 
the time, I would simply move the XLR for the shotgun microphone from XLR Input 2 
back to XLR Input 1. 
 Say for the next shot I need two wireless mics and the shotgun. I’d simply plug the 
shotgun microphone back into XLR Input 2 (it’s panned left). The wireless systems are 
prewired into XLR Inputs 3 and 4 (panned right). 
 As you can see, by presetting the mixer and prewiring all mics and wireless systems, 
you’re effi cient and accurate, and the chance for an assigning error is minimized. 
 Now here’s some good news—you can pan two or three lavalier microphones 
together if you so choose without any problems. So, a four-channel mixer can have one 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
5 8
shotgun panned to the left output and up to three lavaliers panned to the right with no 
issues. 
 I rarely change the pan settings from the Field Mixer Initial Setup discussed earlier 
in this chapter (and outlined in detail in  Chapter 3 )—when I’m using multiple lavalier 
microphones and no shotgun, I’ll leave them plugged into XLR Inputs 3 and 4 and adjust 
Channel 3 Pan to the left. This will separate the two microphones by placing them on 
separate tracks on the camera. 
 “But I don’t want all the dialogue coming out of the left or right speaker.” 
 You’d be surprised at how many times I’ve heard this from the uninformed. The pan-
ning you choose on your fi eld mixer does not dictate the fi nal mix of the show. 
 The fi eld mixer’s pan function is used to separate and isolate the individual inputs 
from one another during recording. This makes it easier to monitor individual inputs and 
gives more fl exibility when editing the sound in post—and that’s where the fi nal decision 
for the stereo mix will be made. 
 A Little Note Regarding Mono 
 Most location audio recording using shotgun mics will be mono.  All  lavalier micro-
phones will be mono. Don’t think that by choosing L/R or setting the panning dial to 
the center position you are recording in stereo—sorry, you’re not. Just because you 
can hear the sound in both ear-cups still doesn’t mean you are recording in stereo. 
We are mono! 
 So don’t think that you are mixing in stereo when 
recording on location. This is completely wrong, so wipe 
it out of your thoughts. You are mono. 
 Task #2—Dialing In 
 A step-by-step procedure to ready the mixer for 
recording. 
 Dialing In is a step-by-step procedure that will ready 
the mixer to record. This is where you adjust the pre-
amp attenuator (PAD), channel fader, channel gain, and 
high-pass fi lter to bring clarity and richness to your 
sound.  
 Figure 4.7  Mixing 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
5 9
 This procedure will be the same every time you get ready to record. The fi nal settings 
of the various switches may differ from location to location and talent to talent, but the 
procedure for choosing mixer settings will never change. So once you’ve got this proce-
dure down, it’s just a matter of implementing it before recording. 
 Be careful—you don’t want to be changing your settings every time the camera oper-
ator hits record. Once you’ve adjusted your mixer for a scene or location, you need to 
stay close to those settings to keep the ambient sound consistent throughout. 
 THE THREE STEPS 
 The Field Mixer Initial Setup procedure has you 75 percent of the way to great record-
ings. You only need to fi ne-tune a few functions with three quick steps to achieve greatness: 
 Step One: Choose the mic and mic placement. 
 Step Two: Operate at unity. 
 Step Three: Set the high-pass fi lter. 
 STEP ONE: MIC PLACEMENT 
 With talent in position, you need to fi nd the sweet spot for booming when using a 
shotgun microphone, or attach a lavalier that’s going to send to the mixer the best sound 
possible for the chosen location. 
 Sorry for not giving all the info here, but there’s a lot to it, and I’m focusing on dialing 
in the mixer in this section. Check out  Chapter 5 , “Shotgun Microphones,” for lessons 
on how to use shotgun microphones, and  Chapter 7 , “Lavalier Microphones,” for using 
lavalier mics. 
 Figure 4.8  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 0
 For now, this information is not necessary for moving forward. So let’s move on to 
Step Two. 
 STEP TWO: OPERATE AT 
UNITY 
 Definition of Unity 
 Unity is the optimal operating level 
of a given system. 
 It’s vital that the sound entering the 
mixer, passing through the mixer, and 
exiting the mixer is at a level that best 
suits the mixer’s circuitry. This is called 
 unity , and we always want to dial in the 
mixer’s settings and operate within the 
mixer’s unity range. Operating outside 
this range can add hiss or hum to a 
recording. 
 Unity is achieved by adjusting 
channel volume, master gain, pre-amp 
attenuator (PAD), or channel gain (trim), 
and properly metering. Take your time 
here, and make sure you can operate 
your mixer at unity. 
 Figure 4.9  
 Figure 4.10  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 1
 The only time to adjust the master gain is when you engage the tone oscillator 
for calibration. Some mixers will continue to send signal from the channel inputs 
when the tone oscillator is engaged. So, by turning the master gain fully counterclock-
wise to the “off” position, any open mics will be muted, keeping tone clean for 
calibrating. Most mixers will mute all channel inputs when the tone oscillator is 
engaged. 
 Adjusting the Channel Fader 
 Each channel fader has a unity range or area that the mixer operates at its quiet-
est. On a studio console this is indicated with a shaded area on the channel fader. We 
poor souls in the fi eld have to fi gure it out for ourselves. The channel fader unity range 
is commonly found between 12 o’clock and 3 o’clock. You should operate in this area. 
See  Figure 4.12 . 
 Figure 4.11  
 Adjusting the Master Gain  
 I start here because the master gain is a “set-and-forget” dial. It will have a 
“0” setting and will probably have a détente at this spot. As you might recall from 
 Chapter 3 ,  détente is a notch so you can set it exactly every time. The “0” setting is 
not “Off” but the unity output gain of your mixer. Set it here and leave it alone. See 
 Figure 4.11  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 2
 If you operate your mixer with the channel fader below the unity range (let’s say 10 
o’clock), the recording will seem dull and the mixer may add bottom frequency hum. If 
the channel fader is set above the unity range (let’s say 4 o’clock), the mixer will start 
adding hiss as you push the mixer beyond its unity range. 
 Proper Metering 
 The meters are your visual representation of the sound as it passes through your 
mixer. You need to know where they should be reading to stay within the mixer’s unity 
range. 
 If your mixer has PPM meters (PPM meters have a “dB” symbol), you want to operate 
between –2 and +8. This is quite hot—which I’ll explain later. See   Figure 4.13 . 
 Figure 4.12  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 3
 Figure 4.13  
 Figure 4.14   Mixer with pre-amp attenuator 
 If the mixer has VU meters (VU meters have a “VU” symbol), you want to operate 
between –4 and +2—again, a very hot signal. 
 Setting the Pre-Amp Attenuator (PAD) or Channel Gain 
 With all the information necessary regarding channel unity and meter unity, we can 
fi nally start making adjustments to the mixer. As defi ned earlier, when a sound source 
enters the mixer from a mic, you need to make sure that it is at a level or volume that the 
mixer can handle. Depending on the type of mixer you are using, it will use either a pre-
amp attenuator (PAD) or channel gain (trim) to increase or decrease the level of signal 
 entering the mixer’s pre-amp. 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 4
 Mixers with a pre-amp attenuator (Pad) adjust as follows: 
 1.  Plug a mic into XLR Input 1. 
 2.  Set the master fader to “0” or Unity. 
 3.  Set CH1 PAD to “0.” 
 4.  Ask talent to speak at performance level. 
 5.  Starting with the CH1 fader at unity, slowly increase the volume until the needle is 
bouncing within the meter’s unity range (between –2 and +8 on a PPM meter). If the 
CH1 fader ends up within the channel fader unity range (12 o’clock to 3 o’clock), you 
are golden. The mixer is ready to go, and you can start operating. 
 6.  If talent starts talking and the needles are beyond the meter’s unity range, you will 
need to adjust the PAD. Switch it from “0 dB” to “–10dB.” This will decrease the 
amount of signal entering the mixer. If the addition of a –10dB PAD allows you to 
adjust CH1 fader within its unity range (between 12 o’clock and 3 o’clock), and the 
meters are between –2 and +8, you’re operating at unity and again, you’re golden. 
If you still can’t increase CH1 fader up to the channel unity range without the 
needle going beyond the meter’s unity range, you’ll need to increase the PAD to 
“–20dB.” 
 Mixers with a channel gain (trim) adjust as follows: 
 1.  Plug a mic into XLR “Input 1.” 
 2.  Set the master fader to “0” or unity. 
 3.  Set CH1 fader around 1 o’clock. 
 4.  Ask talent to talk at performance level. 
Figure 4.15  Mixer with channel gains (trim)

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 5
 Start with setting it to its lowest setting—usually 20Hz—and listen to the talent’s 
voice. Focus your listening on the low frequencies of his or her voice and not the ambi-
ence. Switch the fi lter to its next higher setting (let’s say 100Hz), and listen if the fi lter 
cuts into the low frequencies of the voice. As you increase the high-pass fi lter (20Hz 
 5.  Start with CH1 channel gain turned all the way left, and increase it until the needle is 
bouncing within the meter’s unity range (between –2 and +8 on a PPM meter). 
 Think of the channel gain as “coarse” gain adjustment. Once the coarse adjustment 
is made, use the channel fader for fi ne adjustments during recording. 
 STEP THREE: SET THE HIGH-PASS FILTER  
 The high-pass fi lter, also known as a low-cut fi lter, is a function that’s often over-
looked and dismissed by many fi eld recordists. In my opinion, it’s important to adjust 
this function properly in every location to give separation between the low frequencies of 
the location’s ambience and the low frequencies of the talent’s voice. This is not a “set-
and-forget” function—and it’s defi nitely not a function for you to dismiss. 
 The high-pass fi lter’s job is to cut low frequencies. The higher you adjust in frequency 
the less bass or low sounds you’re allowing to enter your mixer. 
 Your mixer will come with either a stepped or sweepable high-pass fi lter. They do the 
same thing, except one is a dial, the other a three-way switch. 
 To correctly adjust a high-pass fi lter follow this simple procedure. 
 Setting a Stepped High-Pass Filter 
 Figure 4.16   Stepped high-pass ﬁ lter, 20Hz to 140Hz 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 6
to 100Hz), you’re cutting or not allowing the frequencies below the selected frequency 
to be recorded. The talent’s voice will sound thinner if the high-pass is cutting into it. 
 You will ﬁ nd that for men, the cut will be around 80–100Hz, and for woman, around 
140–150Hz. Very rarely do I set the high-pass ﬁ lter to 20Hz or off. 
 Switch back and forth as many times as necessary until you clearly hear where the 
high-pass fi lter is cutting. If the voice is not being touched, switch the high-pass fi lter 
to its highest setting (let’s say 140Hz) and again listen for thinning in the voice. Set the 
high-pass fi lter just below the low frequencies of the talent’s voice. 
 When the high-pass fi lter is set correctly, the talent’s voice will seem louder and more 
“on top” of the ambience. This cutting of low frequencies that are not present in the tal-
ent’s voice will result in less competition from the ambience, giving more separation and 
clarity to the voice .
 High-pass ﬁ lter: If the voice seems to fall into the ambience when you increase 
the high-pass ﬁ lter, you have set it too high. Back it off one setting. 
 Setting a Sweepable High-Pass filter 
 Figure 4.17    Sweepable high-pass ﬁ lter, 80Hz to 240Hz  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 7
 Once again, when the high-pass fi lter is set correctly, the talent’s voice will seem 
louder and more “on top” of the ambience. This cutting of low frequencies that are not 
present in the voice will result in less competition from the ambience, giving more sepa-
ration and clarity to the voice .
 Exception to this rule! When offending low frequencies of ambience are equal to or 
louder than the voice’s low frequencies, you may fi nd it necessary to cut into the voice. 
When you do this, focus your listening on the presence of the voice. If it seems to get 
clearer and or louder, don’t hesitate to cut higher than you’d expect. 
 If you’re having a tough time hearing the high-pass fi lter, here’s a simple test you 
can do that should make it clearer. 
 1.  Plug a mic into XLR “Input 1.” Turn up the CH1 fader to 50 percent or 12 o’clock. 
 Even though the stepped high-pass fi lter works perfectly fi ne, I prefer a sweepable 
high-pass fi lter. You can be more accurate where you cut since the sweepable dial is in 
fi ner frequency increments. 
 Start with the dial completely to the left, and slowly sweep it up while listening for the 
fi lter to cut into the low frequencies of the talent’s voice. Set the fi lter just below where 
you hear the lows, or bottom, of the talent’s voice get weaker.  
 Figure 4.18   Adjusting the high-pass ﬁ lter 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 8
settings (20Hz and 140Hz), or turn the rotary dial from hard left to hard right. You 
should hear the bassy rumble of the ambience become less. That is your high-pass 
fi lter at work. This is where you need to focus your listening when you are making 
adjustments with the high-pass fi lter. 
 It’s important that you clearly hear the change in the bass or low frequencies when 
you make an adjustment to the high-pass fi lter. Don’t just sort of hear it working. Take 
the time and practice. You’ll quickly tune your listening to the frequencies that your high-
pass fi lter affects, and you’ll be able to use this function to its full potential. 
 This may sound complicated, but it’s not. You’ll soon be making the decision on 
where to set the high-pass fi lter in a matter of seconds. 
 High-Pass Filter Warning! 
 By ignoring the high-pass fi lter on your mixer, you are exposing yourself to a major 
disaster that low frequencies can infl ict on a recording. Do not think that by leaving the 
high-pass fi lter at its lowest setting (20Hz or off) you are Okay.  Wrong! 
 At its lowest setting you are allowing low frequencies to enter the mixer, possibly 
overloading or distorting the pre-amp. The worst case is something called “false meter-
ing.” This is when low frequencies that you can’t hear enter the mixer and indicate on 
the meters that you have the correct amount of input. You’ll fi nd you can’t increase the 
channel volume without distortion, even though the dialogue seems weak. I’ve been 
there, and it was a frustrated fl ip of the high-pass fi lter that fi xed the problem. 
 2.  If the mic has a bass roll-off switch, 
make sure it’s in the “Off” position. (see 
fi gure 4.19) 
 3.  Switch the high-pass fi lter to its lowest 
setting, “20Hz,” or if you have a 
sweepable rotary dial turn it completely 
left. 
 4.  Turn your monitor volume up loud enough 
so you can clearly hear the bassy, rumbly 
low frequencies of the room you are in. It 
is best if no one is talking. Focus your 
listening on the bottom or lower sounds 
of the environment.  
 5.  Switch the high-pass fi lter back and 
forth between the lowest and highest 
 Figure 4.19    Step 2: The bass roll-off is off when 
in the “—” position.  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
6 9
 In the real world, low frequency ambi-
ence is everywhere, and the high-pass fi lter 
will help you to control it. 
 You’ve now “dialed in” your mixer and 
are ready to record. With these three simple 
steps you’ve set your mixer properly for the 
location and the talent’s voice. Whether 
your mixer uses a pre-amp attenuator or 
channel gain, stepped or sweepable high-
pass fi lters, PPM or VU meters, it’s an abso-
lute must that you control the location’s low 
frequencies, allow only the perfect level of 
signal to enter your mixer’s pre-amps, and 
operate your mixer at unity. 
 ROLL OUT THE CRITICS 
 As I stated earlier, the level I suggest 
recording at is very hot! The way I record 
in the fi eld is “hard to” the mixers limiter—
meaning I keep the level of signal either 
activating the limiter (above the limiter’s 
threshold) or just barely below it. 
 I’ve received more than one email questioning this style of recording, but it works! I was 
as surprised as the next guy when I stumbled upon the benefi ts of heavy limiting. Your 
manual will indicate the threshold of the limiter, and I recommend you operate at and slightly 
above this number. On some mixers you can set the threshold level. I recommend +2 for 
PPM meters, and 0 for VU meters. The metering range that I recommend will assure that 
you’re operating hard to the limiters. This operating style is defi nitely not standard procedure 
and does get questioned, but the benefi ts of recording this way are many. 
 Some argue that the ambience bed is increased, or you can hear a pumping effect 
when the limiter kicks in and out. 
 Sure the ambience gets louder, but I make sure that my location has been properly 
prepped and all criteria for good separation are being met. Your recordings are going to 
be heavily compressed for broadcast, so I prefer to know what my recordings are really 
going to sound like—no sticking your head in the sand! Regarding the limiter pumping, 
it’s active the majority of the time, so pumping is not an issue. Also, the limiters on most 
location audio mixers are more like compressors, and the clamp-down effect of a real 
brick-wall limiter does not occur. Most new mixers have limiters that are of excellent 
quality. You’ll be hard-pressed to hear them when operating the way I recommend.  
 Figure 4.20  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 0
 Benefits of Recording Hard to the Limiter 
 1.  With digital recorders and cameras, you can never exceed 0dB. The limiter coupled 
with proper calibration will prevent this from ever happening. 
 2.  By recording hard on the limiter you minimize the amount of gain between the quietest 
and loudest signals. This gives you a tight recording that translates well for broadcast. 
The broadcasters are going to squash the hell out of your recording anyway, so you 
might as well tighten it up as much as you can in the fi eld. By tightening the recording 
in the fi eld, you’re not going to be surprised with an ambience bed that is suddenly 
too loud after the post audio engineer has increased the volume of your recording 
and compressed it for broadcast. 
 3.  You’ll have a better signal-to-noise ratio. Many of the prosumer cameras on the 
market today are quite noisy, so you want to be as close to “0” on the camera’s 
meters as possible to increase the signal-to-noise ratio. With proper calibration, the 
limiters will guarantee you achieve this without exposing yourself to distortion. 
 There are more benefi ts I could list, but I think you get the idea. If you’re still not con-
vinced, try it out for yourself. You’ll be pleasantly surprised. I’ve got a long list of satisfi ed 
clients that are more than happy with the fi nal product this operating procedure produces. 
 Figure 4.21   A good level going to the camera 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 1
 ENJOY THE RIDE! 
 As you gain experience with your location audio mixer you can try new things, but 
to be honest there are many settings on your mixer that will rarely get changed from the 
Field Mixer Initial Setup. These precise instructions for setup, dialing in, and operating 
will have you well on your way to excellent tracks. Keep it simple, and location recording 
will become a walk in the park. 
 Watch Class 8—“Roll Out the Critics.” 
 Task #3—Monitoring Function 
 How to set up, calibrate, and operate the monitor section. 
 Knowing how to operate your mixer to monitor the individual signals as they pass 
through your mixer is very important. Being able to separate and isolate incoming sig-
nals from each other makes it easier to hear what is going on when you’re recording 
with multiple mics. 
 Figure 4.22   Monitor section on a ﬁ eld mixer 
 Your mixer has the ability to send your headphones a signal from a single chan-
nel’s input and signals assigned to an individual output, to allow you to listen in 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 2
stereo or mono, and even to return the sound back from a camera or recorder for 
you to monitor. 
 There are many confi gurations for the monitoring function on the various fi eld mix-
ers. Some will have a single rotary monitor select with a PFL (pre/post-fade listen) to 
toggle through the various monitoring options, while others use a combination of moni-
tor select and headphone select functions, but the resulting listening choices are the 
same. In this section we’ll be focusing on the monitor and headphone select switch or 
dial, monitor volume, monitor return, and the PFL functions on your mixer. 
 MONITORING BASICS 
 The monitor section of your mixer works in conjunction with the individual channel 
panning functions. Basically, any channel panned to the left will be heard in your left 
ear-cup. Any channel panned to the right will be heard in your right ear-cup. Channels 
panned to the center are heard in both ear-cups. Mixers that do not have a monitor 
select function (some two- and three-channel mixers) work this way. 
 Monitor Select 
 The monitor select function can vary greatly from mixer to mixer. It will be used 
in conjunction with PFLs or a separate headphone select function for mixers without 
PFLs. Here’s where you choose how you will listen and isolate the signals to monitor 
effectively. 
 Headphone Select 
 Many older and some smaller mixers without PFLs will use a separate headphone 
select switch to listen in mono or stereo. 
 The PFL (Pre/Post-Fade Listen) 
 The PFL function on a fi eld mixer makes it easy to monitor individual channels with 
a single switch. Each channel has a dedicated PFL. When engaged, the signal to the 
selected channel is isolated and sent to your headphones. 
 The more expensive four-, fi ve-, and six-channel fi eld mixers come equipped with 
PFLs. This function is a must if you’re working in reality TV or any shoot that requires 
numerous lavaliers. 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 3
 If the location is quiet, turn them down to prevent the sound from bleeding out of the 
ear-cups. I had an embarrassing moment when my headphones were so loud that my 
shotgun mic was picking up the sound bleed. I was hearing an echo and I couldn’t fi gure 
out what was going on. It was the talent who told me my headphones were so loud she 
could hear them. She was six feet away! 
 TIP!  
If you know you are going into a loud location, put your headphones on before 
entering. Increase the monitor volume slowly over three to fi ve minutes. This 
allows your ears time to acclimatize. This could prevent injury to your ears. 
 Figure 4.23   Monitor volume, also called headphone volume 
 Monitor Volume 
 The monitor volume increases or decreases the sound to your headphones—we’re 
all familiar with an iPod, but in location sound I fi nd it’s a control that gets overlooked. It 
shouldn’t. It needs to be adjusted properly. 
 You want the volume in your headphones to be just slightly louder than the ambience 
of the location. If you’re in a loud location, you’ll need to increase the volume to your 
headphones so you are hearing the sound coming from your mixer and not sound that 
could be leaking in the sides of the headphones’ ear-cups. 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 4
 It’s vital you check your monitor return often! During a take, I’ll switch back and forth 
numerous times between listening to the mixer and listening to the monitor return to 
ensure that sound is being recorded on the camera. 
 The monitor return function is enabled only when using a snake or control cable. If 
you’re using two XLR cables or a wireless hop to tie into the camera, this function 
does not work. (I’ll cover a “wireless hop” in  Chapter 8 .) 
 Make sure you use headphones designed for location audio. Your headphones 
should be closed (the ear-cups do not have ventilation ports) and make a good seal 
around your ears. This will allow you to listen at a lower volume, preventing listening 
fatigue and sound bleed. 
 Monitor Return 
 The monitor return function on a mixer is used to listen to the returning signal you 
have sent to a recorder or camera. After the sound signal has left your mixer and is off 
to be recorded, you have no idea if it actually got there! The monitor return function on 
a mixer solves this by receiving the signal back from the camera so you can listen to it. 
This function can be part of the monitor select dial or a separate switch. It has various 
names, like “Mix/Tape,” “Direct/Return,” or “A/Off/B.” 
 Figure 4.24  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 5
 CALIBRATING THE MONITOR RETURN 
 1.  Attach the two XLRs from the snake or control cable into the camera’s input jacks, 
and the 1/8-inch mini headphone connector into the camera’s headphone jack.  
 Figure 4.26   Step 1 
 Figure 4.25  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 6
 Figure 4.27   Steps 2 and 3 
 Figure 4.28   Step 4 
 2.  Turn the camera’s monitor volume all the way up. 
 3.  If the camera has an alarm function, turn it off. 
 4.  Engage the tone oscillator on the mixer. 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 7
 5.  Switch the mixer’s monitor return function so it is receiving the tone back from the 
camera. 
 6.  Put your headphones on. 
 7.  If the camera has a monitor select, set it to “Stereo,” “1 and 2,” or “L/R”—anything 
that will send both audio tracks back to your mixer. With your headphones plugged 
into your mixer and the tone oscillator engaged, toggle the monitor return function 
back and forth so you hear tone from the mixer and then the tone returning from the 
camera. 
 8.  If the tone sounds the same when listening to the mixer and the return, you are 
calibrated. If the tone returning from the camera is louder, decrease the camera’s 
monitor volume. If it’s a lot quieter, there should be an adjustment you can make to 
the mixer’s monitor return volume (this is usually a small jeweler’s screwdriver–type 
adjustment). Don’t be surprised if the monitor return is a little quieter than the mixer’s 
headphone volume. Even with everything maxed out, it’s very common. 
 9.  Don’t Panic! If you’re not cabled into the camera or the camera is turned off, the 
monitor return will have no sound. You may see the meters bouncing around but 
can’t hear anything. Before you think your headphones have died, check the monitor 
return switch. 
 EXAMPLE OF HOW THE MONITOR FUNCTION WORKS 
 Our fi rst example is using a mixer with the monitor 
select and headphone select functions. 
 Let’s say you’ve plugged a shotgun mic into XLR Input 
2 on your mixer and it’s panned left, and you’ve plugged a 
lavalier into XLR Input 3 and it’s panned right. The monitor 
return is set to monitor the mixer, the headphone select is 
set to “Stereo,” and the monitor select on the mixer is set 
to “Center”—you would hear the shotgun mic in your left 
ear-cup and the lavalier in the right ear-cup. 
 If you switched the monitor select on the mixer to 
“Left,” you’d hear the shotgun mic in the left ear-cup and 
the lavalier would be muted (off) in the right. The lavalier 
would still be sent to the camera and recorded, but you 
wouldn’t hear it. This allows you to focus your listen-
ing on the shotgun mic without being distracted by the 
lavalier. 
 If you switched the monitor select on the mixer to “Right,” you’d hear the lavalier in 
the right ear-cup and the shotgun mic would be muted (off) in the left. You’d only hear 
the lavalier mic in your right ear-cup. 
 Figure 4.29  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 8
 Monitoring in stereo assures that the panning is correct because of the separation 
in your headphones. 
 Now some operators like to hear the sound in both ear-cups all the time. To monitor 
this way, you’d have to switch the headphone select to “Mono.” This will send both mics 
into both ear-cups. 
 When the monitor select is set to “Center” you would hear both mics in both ear-cups 
(mono). There would be no separation of the two sound signals in your headphones. If you 
switched the monitor select to the “Left,” you would hear the shotgun mic in both left and 
right ear-cups. The lavalier would be muted (off) only in your headphones. The lavalier would 
still be going to the camera, but you wouldn’t hear it. The advantage to listening in mono is 
the sound will be present in both left and right ear-cups, making it easier to focus on. 
 How you choose to monitor while recording is up to you. Try monitoring in mono and 
stereo and work at becoming profi cient at isolating channels. 
 This example uses a mixer with a monitor select and PFLs. 
 Using the same setup as the previous example: shotgun mic into XLR Input 2 panned 
left, and lavalier into XLR Input 3 panned right, with the monitor return set to monitor 
the mixer. 
 The monitor select works the same as the above example. But now you can toggle 
between listening in mono or stereo, or isolate all mics panned to the “Left” output, or 
all mics panned to the “Right” output. 
 To isolate the individual channels you’ll use the PFL function. Remember that the 
monitor select does not effect the PFL in any way. 
 If I wanted to isolate and listen to the shotgun, I’d toggle the Channel 2 PFL and the 
shotgun would be in both ear-cups (mono) and all other channels would be muted to my 
headphones. If I wanted to isolate the lavalier, I’d toggle the PFL for Channel 3. 
 On most mixers you can engage multiple PFLs to listen to several channels 
simultaneously. 
 Task #4—Listening 
 How to effectively focus your listening. 
 Knowing how to monitor or listen is just as important as learning how to operate 
your mixer. In my opinion, an operator’s ability to “listen critically” far outweighs all other 
aspects of fi eld recording. If you can’t hear past the dialogue or ignore content to focus on 
extraneous sounds, you won’t be able to make important decisions regarding sound—the 
very reason you’ve been hired! 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
7 9
 Critical listening is perhaps the hardest part of your job. Pretty much all of the crew 
is obsessed with what the shot looks like and the content of what is being delivered. 
Whether the sound is usable during recording is the responsibility of the location sound 
operator. No one wants to hear that the perfect take is unusable because of a sound 
issue. In fact, I think most of the crew members actually think it’s my fault that an ambu-
lance went by with sirens blaring. 
 So what does good location audio sound like? Well, if what you hear in your head-
phones sounds great then it probably is. If it sounds like !?#*! then it probably is. 
 Move through this section carefully. My mom always said to me, “I know you can 
hear me, but are you listening?” It’s time to learn how to listen. 
 LISTENING EFFECTIVELY 
 A common mistake made by location audio operators is that they try to listen to too 
many things at once. Your responsibility, and your job, requires you to focus your listen-
ing on the tonal quality of the voice, the ambience for fl uctuations, and for offending 
extraneous sounds—but not all at the same time! It’s impossible to focus on everything 
at once. 
 Therefore, by breaking up these vital listening areas throughout setup, rehearsal, and 
recording, it becomes easier to manage and focus on each one individually. 
 Here’s how to listen. 
 DURING SETUP: FOCUS YOUR LISTENING ON 
THE AMBIENCE OF THE LOCATION  
 The general ambience of the location is the first 
thing you should focus your listening on.  Chap-
ter 2 , “Choosing and Preparing a Location,” explains 
exactly how to handle your findings. During the hellos 
and load-in, you should focus your attention for at 
least five minutes on the ambience of the proposed 
location (without your gear). You’re listening for fluc-
tuations in the ambience that are both subtle and 
extreme. 
 After you’ve fi xed all ambience concerns, put your gear 
on and listen for at least one more minute. Critically listen 
for fl uctuations in the ambience. The ambience must be 
constant (think of a fan—its humming stays constant), con-
sistent (the types of sounds stay the same), and not too 
loud (it won’t compete with the dialogue). 
 Figure 4.30  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 0
 If the crew is being too loud during your fi nal evaluation, ask everyone to be quiet for 
a moment. Hopefully it’s a good location, and you’ve dealt with any ambience issues 
when you prepared the location, but if you hear any fl uctuations during this fi nal listen, 
this is the time to fi x it. 
 DURING REHEARSAL: FOCUS YOUR LISTENING ON 
THE TONAL QUALITY OF THE DIALOGUE AND 
SEPARATION FROM THE AMBIENCE 
 During rehearsal is the time to get the tonal quality of the dialogue sorted out. This is 
where you implement the dialing-in procedure laid out earlier in this chapter. Your critical 
listening is during mic placement (to achieve sound perspective) and the setting of the 
high-pass fi lter (to create dialogue separation from the ambience). 
 If you’ve chosen and prepared your location properly, this won’t be an issue. But if 
you fi nd the ambience is competing with the dialogue once talent starts to speak during 
rehearsal, it’s vital you bring it to the attention of the decision makers. They may want to 
change locations even though setup is complete. 
 During rehearsal you’ll be busy making very important decisions. Here are three key 
listening elements that you’ll need to accomplish before you start recording. 
 Element 1: Separation between the dialogue and the ambience. 
 Element 2: Dialogue matches the perspective of the frame. 
 Element 3: The recording has a consistent ambience bed. 
 Element 1: Separation between Dialogue and Ambience 
 A good location recording has separation between the dialogue and the location’s 
ambience. The dialogue should sit on top of an ambience bed that is rich with sounds 
that make the viewer feel like they are there. The tricky part is knowing how much ambi-
ence is enough before it starts to distract from the dialogue. 
 I use my meters to help make this decision. I like to have a minimum of 16dB between 
the ambience bed and the talent talking. So for me to operate between –2 and +8 on a 
PPM meter the ambience bed should never exceed –18dB (that’s a pretty loud ambi-
ence bed). I fi nd that in most locations where dialogue is being recorded (interviews, 
scenes) the ambience bed is down around –30dB. 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 1
 If the ambience creeps up around –12dB I’m probably recording in a loud location 
(a factory), and the talent is having to speak loudly to get over this type of ambience. 
 Element 2: Dialogue Matches Perspective of Frame 
 When focusing on the talent’s voice, it should have a tonal quality that follows the 
perspective of the frame. For example, a tightly framed shot should have little ambience, 
sound close, and tonally be very warm. Just like when you are standing close to someone. 
A medium wide shot should have more ambience, sound farther away, and be tonally 
thinner sounding (less bass). Just like when someone is standing one to two meters away. 
 You want the sound to move with the shot. It sounds great when you cut from a CU 
(close up) that sounds warm and close to a medium shot that sounds thinner and has 
more ambience. Pay attention to the framing for each shot. If the camera is zooming in, 
boom closer as the picture tightens up. Watch the camera operator’s lens or ask to see 
the LCD screen during recording. 
 You’ll see them zoom in and out, and you can follow if you’re paying attention. You’re 
not making drastic changes but subtle ones. In fact, most people won’t even notice. But 
matching tonal quality to the frame will contribute to the overall quality of your work and 
help you build a reputation of providing audio that just simply sounds better. 
 Figure 4.31   Framing: close-up, or CU 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 2
 Element 3: Consistent Ambience Bed 
 A consistent ambience bed is also a sign of good location audio. By not making 
huge changes in volume, tone, or swapping microphones during a scene, you will have 
a better chance of keeping the ambience bed consistent. Operators that are constantly 
changing mics, putting in PADs, and fl ipping through high-pass fi lters are killing the post 
audio editor, because they’re changing the ambience from shot to shot. 
 I fi nd that by choosing the proper mic and deciding on mixer settings at the begin-
ning of a scene, and staying very close to those decisions throughout the entire scene, 
the ambience bed stays consistent. I’m not saying I won’t sacrifi ce a consistent ambi-
ence bed if I’m getting killed by shouting talent entering a scene, but I fi nd that a majority 
of the time the correct mic and a properly dialed-in mixer at the beginning of a scene, 
with minor volume changes when needed, will get me through the entire scene and 
produce the most consistent ambience bed. 
 There’s a lot for you to focus your listening on during rehearsal. This isn’t the time 
to be chatting with talent or grabbing a drink. The critical listening during rehearsal will 
make or break the quality of your recordings. 
 DURING RECORDING: FOCUS YOUR LISTENING ON 
EXTRANEOUS SOUNDS 
 When you’re recording, you must be listening for extraneous sounds. Your full and 
undivided attention is required to make quick decisions every time an unwanted sound 
occurs. You must focus your listening on the ambience, not the dialogue. You’re not 
making decisions based on content—if a word is mumbled, or if talent got the dialogue 
correct—that’s the directors job. You’re focusing your listening 100 percent on the ambi-
ence, on what’s going on behind the dialogue. 
 Figure 4.32   Framing: medium 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 3
 Is a retake needed? That will be the question you’ll be asked if an extraneous sound 
occurs. You need to be prepared to answer, and you’ll base your decision on this very 
simple example. 
 If a loud sound happens on top of dialogue, the take is no good. If the same sound 
occurs in a gap between sentences or even between words, it may be possible to 
remove it during editing. 
 It’s your responsibility to listen for all extraneous sounds during recording and decide 
whether a retake is needed. 
 Make the Call 
 In my experience, it’s a close 50/50 split of extraneous sounds that can be edited 
out. You need to be 100 percent sure the take is usable. If you’re not 100 percent sure, 
ask for another take. 
 You’ll need to be strong on this request, because the director is not going to be 
happy if the take was great visually. Never let it slide, and  never  say, “It should be fi ne” 
just because you’re being questioned—don’t waffl e on your request. 
 Constant and unnecessary interruptions during a take are frustrating for everyone. If 
you ask for a retake every time a minor sound occurs, you’ll soon be labeled as a “pain 
in the butt” and you’ll end up being tuned out. 
 Learning when to step in and when to keep the shoot moving is a valuable skill. The 
more experience you have, the better you’ll get at it. There’s no quick way to learn it—it 
just takes time and 100 percent focus. 
 CONTENT OF YOUR DEMISE! 
 Allowing yourself to get caught up 
in the content of an interview or writ-
ten dialogue, no matter how fascinat-
ing, will lead to the end of your career. 
Believe me, by being distracted you’ll 
miss important sound issues vital to 
whether a shot is acceptable. You 
won’t be doing your job.  
 Figure 4.33  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 4
 If you fi nd you’re much more interested in listening to content, or following along with 
scripted dialogue, perhaps you should put down the boom pole and become a director 
or script supervisor! Remember, this is video not fi lm. There’s no rotund fellow sitting 
behind a Nagra or DAT machine reading the latest edition of  Mix  magazine making deci-
sions for you. Wow, did I just date myself! 
 TRAINING YOUR EARS 
 To train your ears and make the correct decisions to achieve quality location audio 
recordings, you’ll need to talk your way into as many editing sessions as you can. Listen 
to the good and bad of your recordings. I know most operators haven’t heard a majority of 
their  recordings—I was one of them! It’s pretty diffi cult to improve your skills if you rarely 
hear the fi nished product. Speaking from experience, this is one thing I would have done 
earlier in my career to develop my skills faster.  
 Over time, you’ll learn how the sound you are monitoring in your headphones is 
going to translate to the television, Internet, podcasts, etc. You may be surprised at what 
sounds are most problematic. If you know someone who is a post audio editor or who 
owns an edit suite with a pair of decent monitors, ask if you can bring in some record-
ings to critique. Have the editor listen to the recordings and give suggestions on what 
would help with the post work. 
 In video, large and costly post budgets are rare. The sign of a good location recording 
is one that edits together easily with the least amount of audio sweetening. 
 HEADPHONES 
 Finally, to assure you’re hearing 
what’s really going on, I strongly suggest 
you invest in a pair of high-quality head-
phones that are designed specifi cally for 
location audio. I’ve stated this earlier, but 
your headphones are providing you with 
the most important information needed 
for recording quality audio. You don't 
want to cheap out here. 
 Do not use home stereo headphones—
even if they are very expensive. Not only 
will they color the sound giving you an inaccurate representation of your recording, but 
mother nature will probably kick the crap out of them. 
 Figure 4.34   I use Sennheiser HD 25 headphones—
expensive, but worth every penny. 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 5
 Task #5—Shooting 
 Making adjustments to the mixer during recording. 
 Everything up to this point has been preparing you to record quality tracks. Your 
mixer is ready to go, you know what to listen for . . . and now you’re recording. 
 Well, I hate to rain on your mixing parade, but there’s actually not much to be done 
to the mixer once the camera is rolling. The only mixer adjustments will be to increase 
or decrease channel faders, and switching the monitor return back and forth between 
mixer and camera. That’s it! 
 Figure 4.35   Only mic adjustments when you’re working this way! 
 With a proper initial setup and dialing in, the mixer is taking care of everything, and 
your operating focus turns more to booming (mic placement) and listening than mixer 
function adjustments. 
 So let’s not get all long-winded and try ro make more out of this than necessary. 
You’ve got a couple of responsibilities now. Let’s take this time to remind you what they 
are and show you how to apply them. 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 6
 VOLUME CHANGES 
 If volume changes are necessary to bring the mixer back into unity range, make them 
quickly and try to do it between sentences. There’s nothing worse for a post audio editor 
then a slow increase in volume over a complete sentence. You won’t know if the sen-
tence will be kept in its entirety or be sliced up. A slow creep, when edited, can produce 
a whole bunch of volume changes—more work in post. 
 I fi nd that my operating volume is usually set after a couple of questions during an 
interview or a couple of rehearsals when shooting a scene. With professional talent you’ll 
fi nd they project more and often get louder—I’ll have my volume set quite quickly. 
 With nonprofessionals, you’re going to have to pay attention especially during inter-
views. Talent can get more nervous and speak softer, some will get really loud, and 
 others are up and down like a yo-yo. I fi nd it takes a little longer to get my volume correct, 
but once I’m set for a few questions, I’ll leave it alone. Don’t volume up and down during 
the entire interview—you’re not helping anyone. 
 With a scene, try and fi nd a volume that gives a little headroom to increase or 
decrease the channel volume (say 1 o’clock). Once you’ve been through a drama with 
nonprofessionals, you’ll come to love the pros—they’re way more consistent in every 
aspect of their performance when shooting. 
 CHECK MONITOR RETURN 
 As I stated earlier, I’ll fl ip between listening to the mixer and listening to the camera or 
recorder with the monitor return function many times throughout a take. In a 20-minute 
interview I’ll easily switch 10 times or more. 
 SECOND SET OF EARS 
 During thousands of hours of recording, you will miss the odd extraneous sound. I 
fi nd that if the camera operator is glancing at me with that “should I stop recording?” 
look, I may have missed something. Or if an extraneous sound occurs that borderlines 
on acceptable, and they glance at me with the “did you hear that?” look, it can help me 
make the decision for a retake. 

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 7
 By conferring with the camera operator about a possible sound problem, you are not 
deferring to the operator for a decision. You’re acquiring more information to make the 
decision. 
 This is like when the camera op shows you the video monitor, not to ask you to 
decide whether the composition or lighting is good but if anything is distracting. I’ve 
pointed out many C-stands and camera bags in the shot. 
 I will always ask the camera operator to wear headphones and monitor the sound at 
the camera. I carry a couple of inexpensive sets of earbud headphones and give them 
away to operators that don’t use or have headphones. Camera ops that aren’t used to 
wearing headphones fi nd earbuds more comfortable than full headphones. Bottom line, 
get them to wear headphones. A second opinion when you are not 100 percent sure of 
a retake can help. 
 Figure 4.36  When shooting, the more ears the better. Everyone’s wearing headphones. 
 Figure 4.37  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 8
 A video shoot is team work, so shelf the ego for the good of the production. 
 Watch Class 9—“Operating a Field Mixer.” 
 Room Tone Is a Must! 
 Room tone is a “voice-free” natural sound recording of the location that will be used 
extensively to smooth audio edits during post. Make sure to gather this ambience track 
from the same spot in the room where the recording took place. 
 If I’ve just recorded an interview, I’ll keep the talent sitting and boom as if the interview 
was still being recorded. By recording right after the interview is completed, I ensure that 
the room will be tonally the same. 
 When recording room tone  do not adjust the mixer in any way!  You want the 
room tone to match the ambience of the interview or scene in volume and tone. 
 During a shooting day, this is the one time that you, the sound operator, get to call 
the shot! Yes, you heard me right—you’ll inform the crew you’re recording room tone. 
 I’ve found that asking for room tone is usually met with a chorus of moans and the “is 
this really necessary?” look, followed quickly by “we haven’t got time.” So the solution 
 Figure 4.38  
 Some camera operators are used to wearing headphones and prefer to, stating the 
audio information often dictates the need for a push-in or widening out of the frame.  

F I E L D  M I X E R  O P E R A T I N G  T E C H N I Q U E S
8 9
is,  don’t ask . Make a statement something like this:  “Quiet please for 30 seconds of 
room tone. Camera tilt up and shoot the mic. Roll camera!” 
 You’ll be surprised how people will just follow the order. It prevents the “we don’t 
have time” conversation and gets the room tone that you need—recorded properly. 
 The reason for the camera to focus on the mic during room tone is that it’s the visual 
indicator to the editor that there is an ambience track recorded. Do not let the camera 
operator shoot cutaways or b-reel—the editor will never know the room tone is there. 
 Make sure you record a minimum of 30  uninterrupted  seconds of room tone— 
sometimes it can take 60 seconds or more. If I’ve had issues with a certain sound like a 
car, wind, or a plane in my ambience during an interview or scene, I’ll make sure I have 
some of that sound in my recording of the voice-free room tone as well. This can some-
times mean you have to record a little more than 30 seconds or wait and record that 
specifi c ambience when the location is quiet and you can take more time. 
 Always record room tone—never leave a location without it. 
 Watch Class 10—“Room Tone.” 

 Shotgun 
Microphones 
 There Is No Other!
Shotgun Microphones: Characteristics and Groups 
 Group 1: Hyper- Cardioid Microphones 
 Group 2: Short Shotgun Microphones 
 Group 3: Medium Shotgun Microphones 
 Group 4: Shotgun Microphone s
 Pick- up Pattern Width 
 Powering a Shotgun Mic 
 Low- Cut Filter on a Shotgun 
 Axis and Lobeing 
 One Final Thought 
 There Is No Other! 
 There’s nothing like the sound of a shotgun microphone. The warmth, transparency, 
sound perspective, and rich ambience beds are qualities only shotgun microphones can 
produce. 
 When used to their full potential, a single, quality shotgun microphone is all you’ll 
need for most video production shots. I use  one shotgun microphone for over 90 per-
cent of my recordings, and so can you— if you learn how to use it properly. 
 THE TRUTH ABOUT SHOTGUNS 
 I’d like to tell you they’re easy to use, but that’s not the case. You don’t just point 
them at the talent’s mouth and it sounds great— no chance. In fact, it’s quite the oppo-
site. If used incorrectly, shoguns can screw up a recording beyond repair.  
C H A P T E R  5 

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
9 1
 An untrained sound operator will struggle to produce even passable recordings 
with shotgun microphones. Not because they aren’t trying, but because they just don’t 
understand how they work and how to apply them. 
 I’ve met many frustrated location sound operators who’ve given up on shotguns and 
rely solely on lavaliers— that’s sad. 
 In this chapter I’ll defi ne the mic groups that make up our shotgun arsenal, describe their 
characteristics, limitations, and effective working area— then provide possible applications. 
 Figure 5.1  
 Figure 5.2  

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
9 2
 Figure 5.3  
 Shotgun Microphones: Characteristics and Groups 
 Shotgun microphones have evolved slowly over the years, and I’ve found most 
sound operators to be quite loyal to a specifi c brand, even a certain pick- up pattern. As 
you become comfortable with the characteristics of your shotgun microphones, you’ll 
understand where this loyalty comes from. 
 THE PICK- UP PATTERN 
 Shotgun microphones are designed to cut through ambience and hone in on the sound 
you want to record. How far the microphone will reach and how wide an area it will cover is 
determined by the microphone’s pick- up pattern. 
 With shotgun microphones, the width of the pick-
 up pattern can be determined by the cuts or ports on 
the side of the microphone, called  cancellation ports. 
The more ports the microphone has, the tighter the 
pick- up pattern will be. Consequently, there will be 
more cancellation of the near fi eld surrounding ambi-
ence, and the microphone’s ability to reach sounds 
further away increases. Fewer ports will widen the 
pick- up pattern but decrease the microphone’s range.  
 By knowing the width and range of a shotgun microphone’s pick- up pattern, you’ll 
know which microphone to choose for the shot. The following groups will help you 
choose the correct mic. 
 Group 1: Hyper- Cardioid Microphones 
 Used primarily for dialogue indoors, the hyper- cardioid 
group of mics has a very wide pick- up pattern— allowing 
you to easily record a single person as well as a group of 
people. See   Figure 5.4  . This wide pattern is very forgiv-
ing when the talent moves or turns their head away from 
the mic. Hyper- cardioid microphones will have a tight, 
warm sound when booming at their minimum range of six 
inches from the talent, and a thinner sound moving the 
talent further into the ambience when booming at the end 
of its range of about two feet. 
 Since most shots in video production are close and 
medium, you could get away with a single hyper- cardioid 
mic due to the fact that the top of frame rarely pushes the 
mic further then one foot above talent. 
 Figure 5.4    Hyper- cardioid 
microphone— very few cancel-
lation ports 

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
9 3
 The hyper- cardioid group of mics are used primarily indoors, leaving outdoor record-
ings to the Group 2 short shotgun mics. But I disagree with this pigeon- holing of the 
hyper- cards— I’ve used one for over 15 years in some of the harshest outdoor locations, 
and the recordings are nothing less then fantastic! I’m not sure where this indoor- only 
label came from, but I don’t buy it. 
 Hyper- cardioid mics also work great for following the camera’s perspective without 
physically moving the mic too drastically. Be sure to stay within the microphone’s six- 
inch to two- feet range. 
 Neumann KM 150 is a professional series hyper- cardioid microphone, and it sounds 
fantastic. These mics are pricey and 
require a full Rycote suspension, 
adding to the cost, but in my opinion 
they’re well worth it. See  Figure 5.5 . 
 For a good cost- effective alter-
native, the Sennheiser ME 64 (car-
dioid pattern) does a great job, and 
it doesn’t require a full Rycote sus-
pension. A simple doughnut shock 
mount with a softie windsock will do 
the trick, and it’s a quarter of the cost. 
See   Figure 5.6 .  
 Figure 5.5   Neumann KM 150 
 Figure 5.6   The Sennheiser ME 64 mounted on a camera 

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
9 4
 Group 2: Short Shotgun Microphones  
 Although the short shotgun group of microphones often 
have a hyper- cardioid pick- up pattern, it’s not considered 
part of the hyper- cardioid group. Even though it’s referred 
to as short, the physical size of the mic is larger than its 
smaller brother in the hyper- cardioid microphone group— 
still with me?  
 The short shotgun mic’s 
range is from six inches to 
two feet and is primarily used 
to record dialogue outside. 
 Just like the hyper- cardioid group of microphones, 
the short shotgun microphone will bring the talent 
closer to the viewer at its minimum range of six inches, 
and make the talent seem further away at the end of its 
range, two feet. 
 There are many sound ops who would say the short 
shotgun group of mics shouldn’t be used indoors. Well, 
I’m not sure what I’m doing differently, but unless I fi nd 
myself in a very live room (a lot of reverb) or close to 
walls or a low ceiling, I’ve 
had no problems recording quality tracks indoors with a 
short shotgun microphone. 
 DPA4017B, and Sennheiser MKH50 are the profes-
sional series versions, and the Shure VP89S, Sennheiser 
ME 66, and Rode NTG2 are excellent entry- level short 
shotgun microphones. 
 Group 3: Medium Shotgun Microphones  
 Figure 5.7  
 Figure 5.8   Short shotgun 
microphone 
 Figure 5.9   Shure VP89S 
 Figure 5.10  

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
9 5
 Used primarily for dialogue outside, the medium shotgun is 
needed when the shot gets too far away for the short shotgun cat-
egory of mics to reach. 
 The medium shotgun mic’s range is from 1.6 inches to 4 feet 
and will bring the talent closer to the viewer at its minimum range of 
1.6 inches, and make the talent seem further away at the end of its 
range, 4 feet. 
 Neumann KMR81i, and Sennheiser MKH60 are the professional 
series versions, and the Shure VP89M, Sennheiser ME 66, and Rode 
NTG3 are standard entry- level medium shotgun microphones. 
 The medium shotgun group of microphones are my choice for 
capturing ambience tracks as well as a medium- framed walk- and- 
talk. I like the width of the pattern at two feet to three feet, which 
allows me to stay well clear of the top of frame while giving me room 
for booming errors. 
 Group 4: Shotgun Microphones  
 The shotgun microphone has a very tight pick- up 
pattern for maximum cancellation of ambience. This 
tight pattern gives the mic excellent reach, so when a 
big wide shot is framed up you can still record crystal- 
clear dialogue. 
 If there is excessive ambience, the shotgun mic does 
an excellent job of cutting through and honing in on the 
dialogue. The shotgun group of microphones have a min-
imum range of four feet, and I’ve been successful record-
ing dialogue at ten feet. However, due to its tight pattern you 
need to be very accurate when booming. 
 The shotgun group includes big wide- shot mics 
that are more suited to slow- paced ﬁ lm- style 
shooting. 
 Neumann KMR82 and Sennheiser MKH70 are the pro-
fessional series of shotgun microphones most widely used, 
and they are quite expensive. The Shure VP89L and Rode 
NTG8 are great entry- level models. 
 Figure 5.11   Medium 
shotgun microphone 
 Figure 5.12   Shotgun microphone 
 Figure 5.13  

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
9 6
 You need to be very accurate when using a shotgun category microphone. 
 In my opinion, Group 3 shotguns are just too physically big, and the pattern is too 
tight for video production. From an operating perspective, they’re much too heavy for 
many of the booming techniques required on a nonscripted, fl ying- by- the- seat- of- your- 
pants video shoot. You’ll get burned over and over because of the mic’s extremely tight 
pattern. 
 Watch Class 11— “Shotgun Microphone Basics.” 
 Pick- up Pattern Width 
 The various mic groups have width to their pick- up pattern. The width is your saving 
grace and will allow for booming errors. A mic with a wide pattern will be more forgiv-
ing than a tighter pattern mic. Group 1 mics have the widest pattern, Group 4 mics the 
narrowest. 
 As you move closer to a shotgun mic’s maximum range, the pick- up pattern will 
be at its widest. This is vital for when you’re trying to capture unscripted conversa-
tions or groups of people. But remember, at the widest part of the pick- up pattern’s 
width, you’ll also be increasing the amount of ambience on your recording— it’s a 
balancing act. 
 SOUND PERSPECTIVE 
 An important quality you can add to your recording is sound perspective. As 
there is visual perspective for a viewer’s eyes, so there is sound perspective for 
their ears. 
 Bringing the sound closer for intimate close- ups or moving the sound further 
away for wider shots will add a wonderful dynamic to the fi nal product. You can 
maintain cohesive perspective with the picture by booming closer to the micro-
phone’s minimum range for tight shots, and closer to its maximum range for medium 
to wide shots. 
 When you are closer to the minimum range the dialogue should sound warm, have 
more bottom end, and sound like the person is close to you. When you boom closer to 
the mic’s maximum range, the dialogue should be thinner, have more mid frequencies, 
and sound like someone is a few feet away. 
 Try this out— you don’t need gear. Get a friend to read a paragraph of something. 
Stand quite close to (a foot away), then take a step or two back while your friend reads. 

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
9 7
If you focus on the tonal quality of the voice, you will notice it gets thinner and the bass 
drops off as you get further away. You’ll also notice the ambience of the room will seem 
to increase, even though it doesn’t. 
 This sound perspective is what we want to achieve as the framed shot tightens and 
widens. This maintains the relationship between sound and picture. Way cool! 
 PICK- UP PATTERN RANGE 
 I don’t know the exact minimum and maximum ranges of all the shotguns on the 
market. The ones I’ve suggested I have used extensively and found these distances to 
work well for creating sound perspective. You should do a little experimenting with your 
own mics to fi nd their ranges. 
 Here are a few situations that can change the range of any shotgun mic: 
 • When recording outdoors, the microphone’s maximum range can increase 
signifi cantly depending on the amount of ambience. In a quiet outdoor location 
like an open fi eld, where there are very few refl ections (echo, reverb), a Group 
1 short hyper- cardioid mic can sound quite tight when booming as far away as 
three feet. 
 • When recording indoors, it’s critical to stay within the mic’s maximum range. How 
“live” a room is (a live room has a lot of sound refl ections) can easily cut the maximum 
range of any mic in half. Be very aware of reverb and echo on your recordings— for 
most dialogue recording they are no good. 
 • Never jam the mic’s range when trying to get more volume from a quiet talker. By 
jamming the mic’s range (that is, booming closer than the mic’s minimum range), the 
voice can enter the cancellation ports as well as the pick- up pattern of the mic. This 
can cause all kinds of weird phasing. I’ve heard some pretty funky sound when the 
boom op jams the mic’s minimum range. 
 Watch Class 12— “Sound Perspective with Shotguns.” 
 Powering a Shotgun Mic 
 All shotgun microphones require a power source to work. So if you want to plug a 
shotgun mic directly into a camera, be sure the camera supplies power to the micro-
phone or the microphone uses batteries. You can power a shotgun mic in three ways: 
 1.  48PH— phantom power from a mixer: 48V phantom is the industry standard for 
powering microphones. All professional cameras supply it and most prosumer 
cameras will as well. All mixers will supply 48V phantom. 

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
9 8
 2.  12T power from a mixer: Early Sennheiser microphones use 12T power, and 
most mixers will have this type of mic power. I have yet to work with a camera that 
supplies it. 
 3.  A battery installed in the mic: If you want to plug a shotgun mic directly into a 
camera, you may need to have a battery powered mic. Shotgun microphones that 
use batteries can also be powered with 48V phantom. 
 If your mic uses a battery, take it out and use the 48V phantom from your mixer. 
You’ll never get burned by a drained mic battery. 
 Low- Cut Filter on a Shotgun 
 Some shotguns have a low- cut fi lter or bass roll- off on the barrel of the mic. When 
switched on, it cuts the low frequencies from the signal. 
 In location audio I fi nd this function useful for redu cing handling noise. There are 
shotguns out there that are so low- end sensitive you can barely touch the boom pole 
without causing a thumping sound. 
 To be honest, I stay away from these super- low- frequency–sensitive mics. They 
sound great if mounted on a mic stand, but I fi nd you can’t boom without the low- cut 
fi lter having to be turned on, and this negates the control I have with the high- pass/low- 
cut fi lter on my mixer. 
 The perfect application for shotguns with a low- cut fi lter is as a camera mic. With the 
low cut turned on, it gets rid of the camera operator’s handling noise, and it does a good 
job of cutting down the low rumble cause by the wind. 
 I use a Sennheiser ME 64 with the low- cut fi lter turned on as a camera mic— it’s perfect. 
 –10DB PAD ON A SHOTGUN 
 Another switch you might fi nd on a shotgun is a –10dB 
PAD. In loud locations or sounds with high SPLs (sound 
pressure levels), mics can distort from excessive levels. 
The PAD can prevent this. 
 Whenever I’m recording a loud sound like someone 
singing or shouting, or I’m working in a loud venue such 
as a concert, sporting event, or convention, I automatically 
 Figure 5.14   Shotgun with low- 
cut ﬁ lter and –10dB PAD 

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
9 9
put the –10dB PAD in— every time! This prevents distortion at the mic and reduces the 
signal to a level my mixer can easily handle. 
 Watch Class 13— “Shotgun Microphones Low- Cut Filter and PAD.” 
 Axis and Lobeing 
 Shotgun microphones have two distinct areas to their pick- up pattern: the axis and 
the lobe. 
 The  axis is a small area in the center of the pattern about ten inches wide within the 
mic’s range. The  lobe is the width of the pick- up pattern (not including the axis) within 
the mic’s range. 
 These two distinct areas of the pick- up pattern will effect the volume as well as the 
tonal quality of the sound. So where you point the mic can change the sound dramati-
cally. See  Figure 5.15 . 
 Figure 5.15  
 AXIS 
 Recording on axis (pointing the axis of the mic’s pick- up pattern directly at the sound 
source) will give the optimal gain and maximum cancellation that the mic offers. If you 
point the mic directly at the talent’s mouth, the voice will be its loudest, therefore push-
ing the ambience back. 

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 0 0
 Applying the Axis Technique 
 Recording “on axis” is a technique commonly used when working in fi lm. Mixers in 
fi lm want the dialogue to be as loud as possible with the least amount of ambience. 
See  Figure 5.16  .  
 Booming on axis requires the operator to 
be very accurate to achieve a quality dialogue 
recording. If the talent is constantly moving 
in and out of the mic’s axis and into the lobe 
portion of the pick- up pattern, there will be 
noticeable changes to the volume and tone 
of the voice. 
 Recording “on axis” can be achieved 
with scripted dialogue, but if you’re trying to 
follow a nonscripted conversation, boom-
ing this way will produce poor results. 
 The only time I record on axis 
is during a sit- down interview 
when the talent has a super- soft 
voice. 
 
LOBEING 
 Lobeing is when you point the lobe portion of the microphone’s pick- up pattern at 
the sound source. Since the lobe is the majority of the mic’s pick- up pattern, the accu-
racy needed when booming is in your favor. 
 Applying the Lobeing Technique 
 To record using the lobeing technique, I point the axis of the mic at the bottom of the 
talent’s sternum (the center of the chest, for those who are anatomy challenged). See 
 Figure 5.17  . This makes the lobe portion of the pick- up pattern focus around the talent’s 
 Figure 5.16   On axis 

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 0 1
head. Most of the unpredictable movement will 
be from the head, but the talent’s chest will move 
slowly and more predictably, making it easy to keep 
the axis of the mic focused on an area. When the 
axis of the pattern stays consistently focused on a 
single surface, it helps keep the ambience of the 
location consistent, cuts down refl ections, and 
keeps the voice tonally even— what more can you 
ask for! 
 The lobe does not have the gain that 
recording on axis does. You will get 
more ambience. 
 The Only Way to Go 
 In my opinion, lobeing is the only way to achieve consistent dialogue recordings 
when you are booming and mixing simultaneously. By keeping the mic out in front of 
talent and letting the mic do its job, booming errors will be few and far between. 
 As an added bonus, lobeing provides increased richness to the lower frequencies of 
the talent’s voice. These low frequencies resonate off their chest, resulting in a warmer, 
richer sound. 
 And to sweeten the pot a little more, by slightly moving the axis off the talent’s chest 
you can change the sound perspective from warm and close (perfect for a close- up), to 
thinner and further away (perfect for a medium shot). 
 One Final Thought 
 The cancellation ports on a shotgun are very powerful. The more you learn how to 
use them properly, the more versatile a single shotgun mic becomes. 
 Figure 5.17   Lobeing 

S H O T G U N  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 0 2
 In my opinion, there’s no reason for a video location sound operator to be carrying a 
full arsenal of shotguns mics. A Group 1 mic and Group 2 mic is all you’ll need to record 
quality tracks in video production. 
 Learn how to use the mics you own, or choose a brand and learn how to use them 
properly, and then send me a check (only 50 percent) of all the money you’ve saved by 
not buying into the “I need all these mics to be successful” hype. 
 Watch Class 14— “Shotgun Microphones: Axis and Lobeing.” 

 How to Boom 
 A Booming Introduction 
 Prepping and Wrapping the Boom Pole 
 Operating the Boom Pole 
 Static and Motion Booming 
 One-Hand Booming 
 Never Pass Through the Axis! 
 Booming the Sweet Spot 
 Scooping 
 Booming Quick List 
 A Booming Introduction 
 Learning how to operate a boom pole will be the toughest technique you need 
to master before heading out to a location. If done correctly, you’ll be amazed at the 
results. Done incorrectly, it’ll ruin your recording. As you become familiar with these 
booming techniques, you’ll quickly discover that the boom/shotgun combination yields 
the best recordings on location. 
 Figure 6.1  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 0 4
 Prepping and Wrapping the Boom Pole 
 Don’t skip over this! 
 I put this fi rst because there is nothing more embarrassing than getting tangled and 
tripping on your own cables, or having the boom pole slam down on your hands. The 
 Figure 6.2A  
 Figure 6.2B  
 Learning how to boom is no easy task. 
 If you watch professional video sound operators, they 
make it look easy. They move around like nothing is really 
going on. They’re relaxed, and the boom pole appears to be 
an extension of their arms. If you’ve never operated a boom 
pole, you’re in for a bit of a shock. 
 The mechanics of keeping the mic focused on the talent 
while operating a mixer, maybe throw in walking backwards, 
and topping it off with guiding the camera operator as he 
or she walks backwards, requires a lot of practice and skill. 
 Yes, strength is a part of it, but you don’t have to have 
superhuman arms of steel to wield a boom pole. Booming is 
more about balance and technique. 
 In this chapter, you’ll learn how to extend and collapse 
the boom pole, move fl uently with talent, and survive those long exhausting interviews. 
But fi rst we need to get you looking like a professional location sound operator. 

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 0 5
rookie location audio operator sticks out like a sore thumb largely because of boom 
pole and cable woes. A poorly wrapped cable on the boom pole will rattle against the 
pole when moving, get caught in your gear, and tangle up into a messy doughnut twist. 
An improperly prepped boom pole will have you unable to loosen or tighten the collars/
knuckles, causing nothing but embarrassment. 
 There are some easy solutions to get you looking like a pro quickly, but operating like 
one is going to take some hard work and a lot of practice. 
 If you’re just starting out, grab a boom pole and follow along. I’ll save you much 
embarrassment. If you’ve been operating for a while, read on—you might learn some-
thing new! 
 PREPPING THE KNUCKLES/COLLARS 
 To effi ciently extend and collapse the boom pole, you fi rst want to prep it. To do this, 
loosen the biggest or bottom knuckle of the boom pole fi rst. Extend the section of boom 
pole above that knuckle about 2 inches—this will be the area you need to grip to loosen 
the next knuckle. Tighten the knuckle. Do this with each section of your boom pole until 
it looks like the boom in  Figures 6.3 and  6.4 . 
 As you’ll learn, you’ll end up more than once with the knuckles turning forever and a 
boom pole you can’t seem to tighten. This prepping of the boom pole will help prevent 
embarrassment. 
 Figure 6.3  
 Figure 6.4  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 0 6
 CONTROLLING THE BOOM CABLE 
 For wrapping the boom pole, fi rst extend the boom pole 
to the desired length for the shot. Then let out a few coils of 
XLR cable and connect to the shotgun mic. Now, stand the 
boom pole straight up (if there’s enough ceiling height) and 
let out enough XLR cable so the cable runs from the mic, 
down to about four inches from the ground, then back to 
your Velcro tie. See  Figure 6.5 . 
 By letting your boom cable out this way, the cable never 
touches the ground, which is good if you’re working in a 
muddy location. Also, the length of cable from the Velcro tie 
down to your foot is the perfect length of cable when you 
raise your hands and fully extend forward—no extra cable 
getting dirty or getting in the way. 
 To wrap the XLR cable around the pole, lift the boom pole a couple of feet off the 
ground and throw the XLR cable around the butt end. Never spin the boom pole! Spin-
ning the pole will create twists in the cable. Three or four throws around an eight-foot 
boom pole is suffi cient—don’t wrap it up like a mummy. 
 Snug and secure the cable on the boom pole by pulling it tight then gripping it with 
the hand that’s on the butt end of the boom pole. See  Figure 6.6 . 
 The XLR cable must be snug the entire length of the boom pole to prevent the cable 
from rattling against it. See  Figure 6.7 . 
 Figure 6.5  
 Figure 6.6  
 Figure 6.7  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 0 7
 GRIP AND STANCE 
 To set yourself for the proper grip, hold the 
boom pole down by your waist with your right 
hand on the butt end of the pole, your palm in, and 
the left hand further up the pole about shoulder 
width apart, palm out. See   Figure 6.10  . Your arms 
should be no further than shoulder width apart or 
you’ll lose the ability to move the mic forward and 
backward. 
 EXTENDING THE BOOM POLE  
 Always extend the boom pole from the smallest or top 
knuckle fi rst. Fully extend that section before moving to the 
next knuckle. By keeping most of the weight of the boom 
pole in your hands, the pole will be much lighter. Collapse 
the pole from the largest or bottom knuckle fi rst, making 
your way back to the top knuckle of the pole—collapse it 
back into the prepped state. See   Figure 6.8  . It will be easier 
to extend again. 
 Watch Class 15—“Boom Pole Basics.”  
 Figure 6.8  
 Figure 6.9  
 Figure 6.10  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 0 8
 For added stability, place the thumb of your back hand underneath the pole. See 
 Figure 6.13 . 
 Raise the pole above your head and look straight down the pole, keeping your head 
up and your body at a 45-degree angle to the talent. See   Figure 6.11  . The boom pole 
should be directly over your head. I crank my front wrist like I’m holding a tray to allow a 
clear view of the microphone. This will help you see where the mic is pointing. 
 The shaft of the boom pole rests on the pads of your 
fi ngers. See  Figure 6.12 . 
 Figure 6.11  
 Figure 6.12  
 Figure 6.13  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 0 9
 Watch Class 16—“Booming Techniques.” 
 CHOOSING A BOOM POLE 
 Using the right boom pole for the job is important. Boom poles come in various 
lengths, from 5 feet to 20 feet, and they are made from either aluminum or carbon fi ber. 
Which pole you choose depends on the type of shooting you’re doing. 
 If you are doing ENG (electronic news gathering) or documentary shooting, you’ll 
want a four-stage boom pole that collapses down for easy packing and transport. I’d 
suggest a lighter carbon fi ber pole for one-hand booming and long interviews. It should 
also be short so you can operate in small quarters. 
 Figure 6.14  Keepin’ it clean 
 Do not put a death grip on the boom pole! Grip it gently. 
 Booming is a gentle fl uid art. Learn to relax when booming, or you’re going to have a 
tough time making it through a 2-minute shot, not to mention an unexpected 20-minute 
interview. Learn to relax. 
 TIP!  It’s good practice not to let the butt end of the boom pole touch the ground. 
The first time you work in the mud, it’s going to end up everywhere. The trick 
is to place the butt end of the pole on the toe of your right foot. This will keep 
it out of the dirt. See   Figure 6.14  . Then, by tipping your foot backwards and 
resting the shaft of the boom pole on the inside of your shoulder, both your 
hands are free to wrap and unwrap cables.  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 0
 If drama is more your focus, you’ll probably 
need two boom poles: a long 16-foot to 20-foot 
aluminum pole for the big shots, and a medium 
9-foot to 11-foot carbon fi ber pole for the rest. 
 The longer pole should be aluminum 
because it will bend less, making it easier to 
operate when fully extended. It is a bit heavier, 
so strength is required for the big shots. It’s also 
a good idea for this pole to be three-stage, to add to the rigidity (less knuckles), and it’s 
a little cheaper in cost. The second boom pole will be your workhorse pole, and it can be 
either aluminum or carbon fi ber (it’s your choice). I recommend that this pole be a four-
stage pole, so it collapses down quite small when the working area gets tight. 
 Operating the Boom Pole 
 When booming you need to be able to move the boom pole forward and backward, 
up and down, and to change the pitch of the mic as well as the angle, all fl uidly and 
accurately. When you’re stationary, these motions will greatly improve your accuracy. 
When it comes time to move your feet during a walk-and-talk or “scrum” (when news 
 The shorter the pole, the lighter the load’s going 
to be when fully extended. But don’t go too short, or 
you won’t have enough reach for a medium shot. If 
you’re a little weak in the arms, an 8-foot boom pole 
(fully extended) is the minimum length you should 
choose. I wouldn’t go any shorter. I fi nd for ENG and 
documentary-style shooting, a four-stage 11-foot 
carbon fi ber pole is perfect for the job. 
 Figure 6.15  
 Figure 6.16   Internally cabled boom pole 

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 1
reporters gather around talent for a story), these motions 
are an absolute must for getting the shotgun mic in the 
position it needs to be. 
 MOVING FORWARD AND BACK 
 The forward and backward movement of the boom 
pole, when done correctly, should add about fi ve feet 
to your reach. You need to move fl uidly, or the mic will 
bounce. Stand in one spot with the proper grip on the 
pole with your arms in this position, I call this the neu-
tral position. Your arms should make a “U” shape. See 
 Figure 6.18  . 
 When you are extended fully forward, the height of the 
boom pole should not change. Your right arm will be slightly across your face, and you 
should still be looking straight down the pole. See  Figure 6.19 . 
 When pulling the boom backwards, your left arm will travel in front of your face, still 
keeping the pole above your head at the same height, and looking straight down the 
pole. See   Figure 6.20  . Remember to keep your body at a 45-degree angle to your target.  
 Figure 6.17  My perspective 
 Figure 6.18  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 2
 Handling noise is a thumping sound that occurs when you are gripping the boom 
pole too tight—it will ruin a take and can be difﬁ cult to repair in post. 
 RAISING AND LOWERING 
 Moving the boom pole up and down is easy, but you’ll do it a lot. Extending your 
arms up is needed when you pass over the top of the camera operator or clear objects 
without changing the pitch of the mic. Bringing them down to chest height works great 
for an interview, or when the shot goes long and you need to relax your shoulders. See 
 Figures 6.21 and  6.22 . 
 Figure 6.19  
 Figure 6.20  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 3
 CHANGING THE PITCH 
 To change the pitch of the mic, you need to raise and lower the hand on the back of 
the boom pole, keeping the front hand at the same height or higher. If you lower your 
front hand, the shaft of the boom pole could possibly enter the frame, ruining the shot. 
This motion is needed if the talent starts speaking to his or her shoes and you need less 
pitch to the mic, or when you’re fully extended forward and you need more reach. See 
 Figures 6.23 and  6.24 . 
 Figure 6.21  
 Figure 6.22  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 4
 CHANGING MIC ANGLE 
 By twisting your right hand while holding the boom pole, you can change the mic’s 
angle from right to left. The pole rolls gently on the pads of your fi ngers of the front 
hand, keeping handling noise to a minimum. If you’re gripping the pole the way I have 
described, you should be able to point the mic from 4 o’clock to 8 o’clock with ease. 
See  Figures 6.25 ,  6.26 , and  6.27 . 
 Figure 6.23  
 Figure 6.24  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 5
 Figure 6.25  
 Figure 6.26  
 Figure 6.27  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 6
 Watch Class 17—“Booming Techniques.” 
 Static and Motion Booming 
 Once you have the basics down, you need to apply them to a shot. Whether you’re 
moving around chasing dialogue or trying to meld in with the walls for an interview, 
booming takes hard work and practice. 
 FIRST THINGS FIRST 
 Before I move into actually being on set, I want to address 
your dress! 
 A location sound operator is often one of the crew mem-
bers who are closest to the talent during recording. Wearing a 
bright orange shirt and shiny track pants will quickly have you 
wearing someone else’s threads. 
 Bright refl ective clothes will piss off the camera operator 
faster than getting the boom in the shot. You want to wear 
dark colors, black preferred. 
 Noisy fabrics and squeaky shoes can also lead to embar-
rassment when everyone quiets down for a shot and you’re 
squeaking and rustling away. 
 Check the volume of your attire! 
 READY FOR THE SHOT 
 You’re going to run into two kinds of shots: static and motion. Static booming will 
most likely be an interview, and motion booming will be anything that has you follow-
ing the camera operator around. Regardless of the style, 
all proper micing techniques apply, so keeping the mic 
pointed at the talent’s sternum is on the menu. 
 STATIC SHOTS 
 For static shots your priority will be comfort. Standing 
through a 45-minute interview can be excruciating and 
embarrassing if you start shaking apart. You’re going to 
need a reprise during the ordeal. Since interviews will most 
likely be the main reason you’re hired for a video shoot, it’s 
real important you get comfortable booming without too 
much moving around. In static shots, staying loose and 
comfortable without a lot of movement is your top priority.  
 Figure 6.28   Black on black! 
 Figure 6.29  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 7
 The three booming positions I use will prevent you from cramping up and getting 
fatigued. The booming positions that only use one hand are perfect if you need to make 
an adjustment to the mixer. See  Figures 6.30 ,  6.31 , and  6.32 . 
 Figure 6.30  
 Figure 6.31  
 Figure 6.32  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 8
 • When you’re readying yourself for a static shot, fi rst choose a booming position 
(where you’ll be standing) that will be the least distracting for talent. Position yourself 
on the opposite side of the key light to prevent boom shadows (the key light is the 
brightest light source hitting the talent). If the key is on the right side of the camera, 
boom from the left side of the camera. By standing away from the bright key light 
you won’t be lit up like a Christmas tree. If you’re outdoors, the key light would be the 
sun. 
 • When booming a static shot, stand at a 90-degree angle to the talent (the side of your 
body facing the talent—hopefully this is your thinner width). It’s less distracting. 
 • Use slow, gentle movements when moving between booming positions. It’s important 
during static shots that you’re not bouncing around and distracting the talent. 
 • To prevent cramping up, change booming positions every 30 to 60 seconds without 
moving your feet or mic position. 
 Figure 6.33  My perspective
 MOTION SHOTS 
 For motion shots, the gloves are off! Anything that could possibly hinder your boom-
ing position will. Boom shadows will play havoc with your mic placement. Being attached 
to the camera will force you to boom with only one hand and in awkward positions, and 
camera operators will complain about the control cable pulling on the camera. The sad 
truth is that you’re going to have to fi nesse all these things to achieve good results, and 
you’ll be the only one who knows how tough it really was to get it. 

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 1 9
 If there’s a lot of movement, I’ll let out about fi ve feet of cable and tuck a portion of it 
into the back pocket or belt loop of the camera operator to prevent any swinging of the 
control cable getting to the camera. 
 The fi nal framed shot dictates everything you’ll do, and the camera operator in most 
cases will not assist in making it easier. So don’t complain, and carry yourself profes-
sionally. Hey, you may even get a “good job” comment. 
 I actually fi nd motion booming much easier than static booming. Moving my entire 
body brings smoothness to my arm and hand movements—there’s a fl uidity to it. Obvi-
ously a 6-foot boom pole is much easier to handle then a 12-foot or 16-foot, so try and 
keep the boom pole as short as possible whenever you can. Getting yourself in the best 
position to boom from, when the camera is moving all over the place, adds another 
variable to getting and keeping the mic where it needs to be. Always face the camera 
operator during motion shots. Have them in the corner of your eye all the time and make 
sure they can see you as well—be ready to move without notice. Be ninja ready, have 
cat refl exes, be a superhero! 
 Now let’s add in being attached to the camera. It’s a necessary evil that you’ll need 
to address at the beginning of every motion shot. My main concern is that I can operate 
effectively, effi ciently, and not get tangled up—impeding my ability to record the best 
audio possible. 
 The amount of control cable—or “length of leash,” as I like to call it—will depend on 
the amount of movement. If there is minimal movement, I won’t hesitate to let the control 
cable hit the ground. 
 Figure 6.34  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 2 0
 Camera operators are a sensitive bunch so at least show concern for their 
multitude of complaints about being cabled into! Like we’re enjoying it —right! 
 Having the proper amount of cable will also prevent you and the camera operator 
from stepping on it. If you let out too much control cable it will cause nothing but grief, 
because it’ll act like a fi shing net. You’ll be dragging chairs, tables, and small children 
around with you before you know it. So pay attention to where it’s hanging.
Your last responsibility during motion shots is to look out for and guide the camera 
operator when necessary. You are his or her second set of eyes when you’re moving 
about. If you walk the camera op off a cliff, you’re going too because you’re attached. 
It’s in your best interest to guide the op safely during the shot. I use several one-hand 
booming techniques to accomplish this. It’s a real bear moving fl uidly, but it is your job. 
`` Watch Class 18—“Booming Techniques.” 
 One-Hand Booming 
 One-hand booming is another technique that is quite hard to master, but it’s an abso-
lute necessity for video location sound operators. The one-hand booming technique is 
primarily used in order to free a hand to make adjustments to the mixer and or guide the 
camera operator during motion shots. It’s used in short bursts, due to the strain it puts 
on your hand and shoulder .
 Figure 6.35  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 2 1
 Figure 6.36  
 Figure 6.37  
 Figure 6.38  I use this one a lot! 
 From the basic booming position you learned earlier in this chapter, it’s easy to move 
into all three positions shown in   Figures 6.36  ,   6.37 , and   6.38 . By gripping the pole tighter 
with the hand you’re going to boom with and dropping the other, you’re booming with 
one hand. Be prepared for the full weight of the boom pole on your wrist. The boom pole 
shouldn’t drop at all. It should stay the same height. 
 These one-hand booming techniques are much easier when the boom pole is at 
shorter lengths (5 to 7 feet)—I wouldn’t even think of trying either technique with a 
12-foot of pole out there! 

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 2 2
 The one-hand booming technique in   Figure 6.38  has become my favorite. I fi nd I can 
last the longest in this position, and it doesn’t strain my wrist. I also fi nd I can easily 
push the boom pole forward, raise and lower, and change the mic angle much easier 
then the other one-hand techniques. It’s also the easiest one-hand technique for guiding 
the camera operator. 
 Watch Class 19—“Booming Techniques.”  
 Never Pass Through the Axis! 
 When booming a motion shot, it’s imperative you keep the talent’s mouth within the 
lobe of the microphone’s pick-up pattern. For static shots this is easy, but it’s a bit of a 
challenge when booming a walking shot. 
 For a walking shot, you and the camera operator will most likely be walking back-
wards. Since your mic is pointing at the talent’s sternum (lobeing technique), they can 
easily move into the axis portion of the mic’s pick-up pattern if you’re not careful. Having 
the voice going in-and-out of the axis when using the lobeing technique will change the 
volume and tone of the dialogue. 
 I will always err on the side of booming too far in front of the talent—there’s not much 
sound coming from the top of the talent’s head or from behind them. 
 Keep the mic in front of talent and never let them pass under the mic! 
 Figure 6.39  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 2 3
 Booming the Sweet Spot 
 The sweet spot is a booming position that maximizes ambience cancellation. Each 
and every location will have an area where the ambience decreases and can even cancel 
itself out when the mic is placed there. Yes, you heard correctly. As the sounds that make 
up the ambience bounce around the room, they increase and decrease in volume in dif-
ferent areas around the room. If you position your shotgun mic in the optimal  position 
for the cancellation ports to do their job, the ambience of that room will decrease. That’s 
what I call the sweet spot! This spot could be where you’ve set up to record or not, but 
each framing will have a booming position that decreases the ambience—the amount of 
cancellation may be very slight or very considerable. 
 I’ve had locations where I’ve just about 100 percent canceled out unwanted 
ambiences just by slightly moving the mic. 
 If ambience becomes a concern, I’ll sometimes move around the room listening for 
the spot where maximum cancellation occurs. This doesn’t mean I start telling the cam-
era operator how to frame a shot because it sounds better at the other end of the room. 
But if I’m getting killed and there’s nothing I can do to prep the location further, I would 
suggest it. 
 When I’m booming, I don’t just throw the mic above the talent and consider the 
job done. I move the mic around above the talent’s head and listen for changes in the 
ambience.  
 Figure 6.40  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 2 4
 Sometimes the changes are subtle and sometimes they are quite drastic. By slowly 
moving the mic from left to right (always keeping the mic out of the shot) and changing the 
pitch (moving your back hand up and down), you can choose the best booming position 
for that location. I listen for changes in the ambience—mostly for it to decrease. Once I’ve 
found this position, that’s where I boom from. Remember, all micing techniques still apply. 
 Lighting can also dictate your booming position due to shadows, but you still 
must apply this procedure and listen closely. There is always a position for every 
framed shot that is best. 
 Figure 6.41  
 Figure 6.42  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 2 5
 Watch Class 20—“Booming Techniques.” 
 Scooping 
 Scooping is a booming technique used when there’s a lot of ambience coming from 
below the talent (walking on gravel or snow) or the lighting is causing boom shadows 
that will be seen in the shot. 
 HERE’S THE SCOOP 
 Scooping is positioning your shotgun mic below the frame and pointing the mic up 
at the talent. See   Figure 6.43  . Some location operators like to boom interviews this way, 
because they can crouch down or just dangle their arms. I’m not a fan of this booming 
style at all. It messes with the cancellation properties of the mic, shoots up the talent’s 
nose and gives a nasally quality to the voice, and puts the mic close to the talent’s body, 
accentuating clothing noise and body movements. 
 But if the ambience from below becomes a concern or the lighting is making it impos-
sible to get the mic in a decent position without casting boom shadows on the talent, I 
won’t hesitate to fl ip my mic over and point towards the sky. 
 If you compare booming from above to scooping, you’ll hear what I’m talking 
about!  
 Figure 6.43  

H O W  T O  B O O M
1 2 6
 Watch Class 21—“Booming Techniques.” 
 Booming Quick List 
 • Always face the camera operator so you can easily move with him or her. 
 • If the shot is static, turn your body 90 degrees to the talent. If there’s motion, stand 
45 degrees to the talent. 
 • If the shot is static, get comfortable and use the three static booming techniques. 
 • If the shot has motion, let out fi ve feet of control cable and be ready to follow and 
guide the camera operator. 
 • Look for boom shadows. Always boom from opposite the key light. If you’re outside, 
the sun would be the key. If you’re getting hooped by shadows, let the camera 
operator know. They can always move enough to get the shadows to fall in your 
favor. 
 • Find the sweet spot on every shot. Put the mic above the talent and move it in an arc 
listening for changes to the ambience. Make a choice that best suits the shot. 
 • Match the perspective of the shot. If it’s a tight shot, boom close to the mic’s minimum 
range. If it’s a medium to wide shot, boom closer to the mic’s maximum range. Use 
your ears. 
 • Always extend the boom pole from the smallest section fi rst. 
 • Use a one-hand booming technique to make adjustments while shooting. 
 • Use the lobeing technique for recording consistent dialogue. Point the axis of the 
mic’s pick-up pattern at the talent’s sternum. Never let the talent pass through the 
axis. 
 • Most importantly— relax. 

 Lavalier 
Microphones 
 The Lavalier 
 Lavalier Basics 
 When to Use Lavalier Microphones 
 Lavalier Design Types 
 Applying a Lavalier 
 Exposed Micing Technique 
 Hidden Micing Techniques 
 Lavalier Techniques: Micing on the Head 
Hiding a Top-Loaded Lavalier
 The Lavalier 
 In today’s world of location audio for video, the lavalier, 
or lav, has become a real workhorse. For almost all one-
man-band camera operators, lavaliers provide a quick and 
easy solution for getting usable sound to the camera. For 
many location sound operators, lavs are a safe and easy 
solution for capturing dialogue. 
 Lavalier Basics 
 We’ve all seen lavaliers on TV—usually an exposed lav on 
a news anchor or talk show host. They’re used quite exten-
sively and produce quality sound when applied properly. 
 Lavaliers do a great job of recording intelligible dialogue in noisy locations. They are 
a close-proximity microphone that can be applied to the head or chest area of the tal-
ent. Since they are applied so close to the sound source (the mouth), they do a great 
job of quelling the surrounding ambience—bringing the dialogue forward and pushing 
C H A P T E R  7
 Figure 7.1  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 2 8
 Hard-wired lavaliers are perfect for the sit-down style of interview. Since they’re 
cabled directly into the camera or recorder, you won’t have any RF hits. The disadvan-
tage of a hard-wired lav is the talent pretty much has to be stationary—not much moving 
around allowed. 
 WIRELESS LAVALIER 
 The term  wireless lavalier  is a bit misleading, since there are no lavaliers without 
wires. It refers to the combination of a wireless system and a lavalier. 
 To use a lavalier with a wireless system, the lavalier needs to be fi tted with the proper 
connector that the wireless system uses. This is done by a technician at your favorite 
retailer of all things location audio. See  Figures 7.4A ,  7.4B , and  7.4C. 
ambience back. When used with a wireless system, they can capture quality sound on 
locations that would be impossible with a shotgun. 
 HARD-WIRED LAVALIER 
 The hard-wired lav is designed for direct cabling into a mixer, camera, or recorder. It 
comes with a power supply (AA or 1.5V watch-type battery) built into an XLR barrel to 
power the mic if 48V phantom is not available. See  Figures 7.2 and  7.3 . 
 Figure 7.2  Tram TR50, hard-wired with various clips for applying 
 Figure 7.3   Lavalier 
power supply with 
1.5V watch battery 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 2 9
 The only real disadvantage of the wireless lavalier is the chance of RF hits—those 
nasty snaps and pops that come out of nowhere and ruin a perfectly good dialogue 
recording. The big advantage is the freedom for the talent to go almost anywhere. 
 When to Use Lavalier Microphones 
 I’m a bit of a shotgun snob. I prefer the sound they produce, but lavaliers do have 
their place. Here are the instances during a shoot when I would use them: 
 • Booming becomes a distraction. 
 If the location has an audience, like a speech in a theater, or a lecture in a classroom, 
any shot where booming will be distracting for the audience, I use a wireless/lavalier 
combination—even if I can reach the shot with a shotgun mic and be out of the frame. 
 • The shot is too far away to reach with a shotgun mic. 
 Figure 7.4B  
 Figure 7.4C  
 Figure 7.4A  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 0
 If the talent is impossible to follow, like someone skiing, riding a horse, or a big long-
lens walk-and-talk, I’d use a lavalier/wireless combination. Any shot that’s impossible to 
reach without getting my body, the shotgun mic, or the boom pole in the shot. 
 • The ambience of the location is too loud for a shotgun mic. 
 Lavaliers are close-proximity microphones with a reach of about 12 inches, so they 
do a great job of cutting down ambience. If I feel the ambience is too loud for the shot-
gun mic, I would detach the shotgun and only use the lavalier. If I’m in a location that has 
an ambience level that is bordering on too loud for a shotgun mic, I’ll put a lavalier on 
the talent but still boom the shot. This covers my butt in editing if the ambience on the 
shotgun track proves to be too loud. Remember, I’m a bit of a shotgun snob! 
 I NEVER USE A LAVALIER WHEN IT’S WINDY!  
 Wind is the one thing that’ll wreak havoc on the most beautifully applied lavalier. It 
only takes the slightest breeze to cause distortion. If the wind picks up when you’re 
using an exposed lav, the supplied wind sock is useless. And depending on the type of 
clothing and fabric, placement options, and strength of wind, many hidden mic tech-
niques won’t work either. 
 There are small aftermarket windjammer-type windsocks for lavaliers. Personally, I 
think they look stupid—like the talent has a gerbil curled up on their lapel. But if your 
only option is an exposed lav, then gerbil it is. 
 In windy conditions, a shotgun mic in a full Rycote system is often your only option. 
 Watch Class 22—“Lavalier Microphones.” 
 Figure 7.4D  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 1
 ENTERING SOMEONE’S PERSONAL SPACE 
 “ Hi, my name is Dean. I’m the sound guy, and I’m going to be putting a mic on you. ” 
This is a good way to start the whole uncomfortable process. Putting a lavalier on some-
one can be pretty nerve-wracking. I’ve watched seasoned location sound operators 
fumble through a simple wire job because the talent was intimidating. I’ve had my share 
of uncomfortable wire sessions that had me sweating buckets, and you’ll have yours! 
They do come to an end, and the sun will rise again. 
 Figure 7.5  
 You’re going to be touching someone you may have never met before. You may be 
touching their shirt, pants, possibly their skin and hair. You’re going to be looking right 
at a woman’s chest from a foot away and adjusting her blouse and possibly her bra. For 
you female operators this is no big deal, but for the men, the studly facade quickly turns 
into red-faced embarrassment. It’s a real invasion of someone’s personal space. So how 
do you put a lavalier on someone without embarrassing either party? How do you make 
it comfortable for the talent and for you? 
 In video, working with seasoned professional talent is more the exception then the 
norm. Most “talent” in the world of documentary, corporate, and lower-budget drama 
are not familiar with the lavalier micing process. I’ve wired hundreds of men, woman, 
and children, and I have learned a few tricks that really take the uncomfortable weird-
ness out of the whole lavalier micing experience. This is what I do.  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 2
 • Check your breath! There’s nothing worse than 
stinky breath. I carry Listerine packets in my wiring 
kit to assure I don’t melt the talent. 
 • Introduce yourself with a friendly smile and gentle 
tone in your voice. Don’t scare the hell out of them 
with a commanding lieutenant bark! Be friendly and 
calm. See  Figure 7.7. 
 • Be sure to make eye contact while you’re talking. 
Even though you’ll be touching the person’s shirt or 
blouse, don’t approach them staring at their chest. 
Man or woman, it’s rude! 
 • Don’t bring your mixer, boom pole, lav, or wireless 
system on your fi rst introduction. Some people fi nd 
the equipment unnerving. 
 • Explain what you’re going to do 
before you start checking the 
clothing for mic placement. For 
example, “ I’m going to be placing 
a small mic and transmitter on 
you so I can record what you’re 
saying. ” See  Figure 7.8. 
 Figure 7.6  
 Figure 7.7  
 Figure 7.8  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 3
 Figure 7.9  
 Figure 7.10  
 • As you examine the talent for mic placement, explain where and how you’re going to 
be attaching the mic. Make contact with the areas of the body you’ll be contacting 
during the actual micing. This gives the talent warning regarding the area(s) you’ll 
be working. I always use my thumb when I make contact during the explanation, 
never my fi ngers. The thumb is a very harmless digit compared to your pointer 
fi nger, and I always look them in the eyes during the explanation. See   Figure 7.9.  
 • Placing your hand on the shoulder of younger talent is a disarming, comforting 
contact. Children and young teens are the most uncomfortable with body micing—as 
well as the teenage girl’s mother who is hovering the whole time you’re working. 
 • When you start micing the talent, relax, be effi cient, and be professional. There will 
be time for joking, but it’s not when you have your hand in someone’s shirt!  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 4
 It should take no more then 45 seconds to complete most micing techniques. 
 • After the mic is on, take a few seconds to look at the talent’s wardrobe and straighten 
out anything you have possibly messed up. 
 • If you’re micing professional talent, most of the steps for making them comfortable 
with the micing process become irrelevant. Professional actors and actresses are 
used to being miced. The best thing you can do is be effi cient and professional. 
 TIP!  Think of what your doctor does to make you comfortable during an examina-
tion. Hand on your shoulder, eye contact, an explanation of what he or she is 
going to do, and then they go about their job efficiently and professionally. 
There’s no laughing while they’re working, no shaking or heavy breathing. 
Imagine if your doctor started giggling while examining you! I use these 
bedside manners to help put the talent at ease. 
 Watch Class 23—“Lavalier Microphones.” 
 Lavalier Design Types 
 Before we start applying lavaliers, there are a couple of different types of lavalier 
microphone to look at. 
 The most commonly used types of lavaliers are the front-loaded lav (see   Figure 7.11A ) 
and the top-loaded lav (see  Figure 7.11B ). 
 Figure 7.11A  Tram TR50 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 5
 The Sanken COS-11D is a very popular top-loaded lavalier. The capsule is positioned 
on the top of the mic head. When placed on the lapel, this type is perfect for exposed 
news-style micing. Because the mic capsule points up to the source (the mouth), the 
mic has a lot of gain—I also fi nd this design helps decrease tone changes when exposed 
on the lapel. 
 There’s been a glut of new lavaliers hitting the market lately. Some as cheap as $50! 
Some manufacturers copy the more commonly used designs, others try to bring some-
thing new and potentially industry changing. Most come with an assortment of clips for 
applying the mic. 
 A little warning, if the wireless system includes a lavalier in the kit, it’s probably not 
very good. I’d strongly recommend replacing it with an aftermarket lavalier. 
 Applying a Lavalier 
 In this section, on applying lavaliers on talent, I’ll be using both front- and top-loaded 
mics, various adhesive tapes, and the clips supplied by the manufacturers when the 
lavaliers were purchased. Here are a few tried and true techniques I use for the lion’s 
share of lavalier work I do. 
 Figure 7.11B  Sanken COS-11D 
 The Tram TR50 is one of the most commonly used front-loaded lavaliers.  Front-
loaded refers to the way the capsule lays fl at on the front of the mic. When applied to 
the body, the capsule faces forward and lays fl at to the body. I like using this type of 
lavalier when body micing. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 6
 The techniques used by professionals are as varied as the operators applying them. 
There are a few no-nos that you must avoid, but if the voice is clear and the clothing 
noise is quelled, you’re on the right track. 
 The most common area to apply a lavalier microphone is on the chest area of the tal-
ent’s body. Lavaliers can be exposed, like what you see on a newscast, or hidden, like . . . 
well, you can’t see them . . . but they’re there!  
 Figure 7.12A  
 Figure 7.12B  
 When placing a mic on the body, you want to try and 
keep it as close to the center of the body as possible, at 
approximately the height of the sternum. By keeping the 
mic closer to the center of the body, the lavalier will pro-
duce more consistent tone and volume when the talent 
moves his or her head from left to right. By placing the mic 
at sternum level, it gives the recording a looser feel (which 
is more real sounding), with the added bonus of being low 
enough that it won’t be seen on a close-up when the mic 
is exposed.  
 When placing a lavalier mic on the talent’s body, 
you’re going to have to deal with clothing noise even 
when the mic is exposed. Noisy fabric can ruin a good 
recording. Silk, nylon, and Gortex are a few fabrics that 
will cause nothing but grief. So, if you see these fabrics, 
body micing will not be an option. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 7
 If by looking at the talent’s clothing you feel there could be a potential problem, 
quickly clip-on an exposed lav and ask the talent to move around. You’ll hear whether 
the clothing noise is too loud. Don’t waste the production’s time doing a fabulous micing 
job if the wardrobe will be rendering the lavalier unusable. 
 Experience with body micing is really the only way to get good at it. Be smart, 
consider the various micing options, take your time, and learn from every job. 
 Exposed Micing Technique 
 The exposed lavalier technique is most commonly found on newscasts, talk shows, 
and shows with panels of guests—any show where you’d expect to see a microphone 
clipped to the tie or lapel of talent. 
 Exposing the lav will produce the highest quality sound these little mics offer. If the 
sound entering the mic is not being muffl ed in any way, lavaliers can actually sound 
quite good. The down side to exposed lavs is you can see them, so for drama, exposed 
techniques are rarely used. 
 When you expose a lavalier you must use the wind sock! I know it can be a little 
unsightly, but lavaliers have no wind protection at all and it takes a very small puff of 
air to distort the diaphragm of the mic. If you think you can go without the wind sock 
indoors, think again. It’ll take only one actor who’s a nose breather to change your mind. 
 When exposing a lavalier on the talent’s wardrobe, it should be nicely placed and 
symmetrical. Take a look at what they’re wearing. Placing the mic on a darker part of 
the fabric, a button hole, or even following the cut or lines in the fabric can make the lav 
less distracting. 
 The wind sock should be clean, not dented or crushed. Clips should be in perfect 
condition, the cable clean and not full of kinks. Remember, the mic is going to be seen 
on camera—don’t embarrass yourself with a nasty, worn-out lav. 
 Pet peeve! It drives me crazy when I’m watching a show and during the close-ups, 
there it is, bouncing along the bottom of my TV screen—the wind sock of the lavalier. 
Keep the lav at sternum level, just out of the close-up. 
 NEWS STYLE: TIE CLIP 
 I use the news-style micing technique just about every time I expose a mic on the 
chest area of talent. It can be used on ties, button shirts, and zipper or button jackets. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 8
 Figure 7.14  
 Figure 7.13  
 1. Choose the tie clip from the case. See  Figure 7.13 . 
 2. Place the mic in the clip. If you’re using a front-loaded lav, place it in the clip with 
the capsule facing out. If you’re using a top-loaded mic, point the mic upwards. See 
 Figure 7.14. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 3 9
 5. Unzip or unbutton the talent’s shirt in the area you are attaching the tie clip so 
you can work more effi ciently. This doesn’t mean you unbutton the whole shirt or 
blouse. One or two buttons will suffi ce. With a coat or jacket, open it up all the way 
if it’s appropriate. 
 Figure 7.16  
 Figure 7.15  
 3. Put the wind sock on. See  Figure 7.15. 
 4. Feed the cable through the clip. You’ll have to squeeze the clip to open the jaws. 
Make a one-inch loop with the cable under the clip. It’s important to have a nice 
symmetrical loop. Not too big, and not too small. See  Figure 7.16. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 0
 7. Attach the clip with the cable still in the jaws at approximately bottom sternum 
height and as close to the center of the body if possible. 
 8. Snug the clip to the edge of the shirt, tie, jacket—whatever the clothing you are 
micing. See  Figure 7.18. 
 Figure 7.17  
 Figure 7.18  
 6. Feed the excess cable through the talents clothing and out the bottom of the 
jacket or shirt. Never leave the cable exposed down the front of the clothing. See 
 Figure 7.17. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 1
 9. Flip the tie or clothing fl ap back and make a second 
loop by running the cable back through the jaws 
of the clip. Have the jaws grip the cable. Some 
clips will have an added clip to secure the loop. 
This loop and extra clip act as a strain relief to 
prevent damaging the mic from a sudden tug. See 
 Figure 7.19. 
 10. Button up the shirt or blouse and make adjustments 
to the visual appearance of the mic and clothing. 
The mic should be straight with a symmetrical 
loop, and the clothing should look like you were 
never there. This fi nal clothing and mic adjustment 
is important. Take time to step back and make 
sure it looks good. See   Figure 7.20A.  
 Figure 7.19  
 Figure 7.20A  
 
 This is what the mic in the clip looks like when not applied to the clothing. See 
 Figure 7.20B. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 2
 11. Connect the lavalier to your system. 
 • If you’re using a hard-wired lavalier, clip the power supply to the talent’s belt, 
top edge of pants or skirt, or back pocket. Run the cable (still under the clothes) 
around the talent’s body. Coil up the excess cable (make sure to leave slack 
for movement) and tuck it into the top of the talent’s pants or skirt. Connect a 
25-foot XLR cable to the lavalier’s power supply, and attach that to your mixer. 
 • If you’re using a wireless system, the most 
common place to attach the transmitter is the 
top edge of the talent’s pants or skirt at the small 
of his or her back. The transmitter will have a 
clip to make it easy. Run the cable (still under 
the clothes) around the talent’s body. Coil up 
the excess cable (make sure to leave slack for 
movement) and tuck it into the top of the talent’s 
pants or skirt. Do not cross the transmitter’s 
antenna with the cable from the lavalier. See 
 Figure 7.21.  Also check out  Chapter 8 , “Wireless 
Systems,” for more information on RF signal 
and transmitter calibration to ensure correct 
operation. 
 Figure 7.20B  
 Figure 7.21  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 3
 • To help hide the wireless transmitter and prevent it from bouncing around the 
talent’s waist, it’s good practice to spin the transmitter around and place the 
entire pack in the talent’s pants or skirt. See  Figure 7.22. 
 Figure 7.22  
 Watch Class 24—“Applying a Lavalier (Exposed).” 
 Hidden Micing Techniques 
 If you’ve ever tried to hide a lavalier microphone on talent, you’ve probably realized 
it’s a lot harder then you thought. Making it sound clear, getting rid of the clothing noise, 
and hiding it so the camera won’t see it—there’s a lot to get right. Hidden mic tech-
niques are what most operators are constantly looking for. 
 Mics in beards, hollowed out pens, even behind mirrored sunglasses—you’d be 
surprised at where the mic is sometimes hidden. I’ve experimented with a plethora of 
tapes and adhesives, built little cages and wind socks, even cannibalized clips trying to 
improve my chances for clean sound. The gloves really are off when it comes to hiding 
lavalier microphones. 
 Even though I’ve experimented and learned many micing techniques, I fi nd that I use 
the following three techniques most often when hiding mics on the body. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 4
 BUTTON SHIRTS: VAMPIRE CLIP 
 Between the buttons on a dress shirt or blouse is a perfect place to hide a lavalier. 
The mic is centered on the body, and the layered fabric hides and isolates the mic. 
 1. Choose the vampire clip from the case. See  Figure 7.23. 
 Figure 7.24  
 Figure 7.23  
 2. Place the mic in the vampire clip with the capsule facing towards the clip. See 
 Figure 7.24.  This will prevent clothing from touching the screen of the mic when it’s 
hidden. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 5
 3. 
 Make a loop in the cable and secure it with a small 
piece of tape. See   Figure 7.25.  The fi rst one to two 
inches of the lavalier’s cable closest to the head of 
the mic is very sensitive and will transmit noise to 
the microphone easily. This loop will dull the cable 
down as well as act as a strain relief. 
 4. 
 Unzip or unbutton the talent’s shirt in the area 
you’re attaching the vampire clip so you can work 
more effi ciently. This doesn’t mean you unbutton 
the whole shirt or blouse. One or two buttons will 
suffi ce. 
 5. 
 Feed the excess cable through the talent’s clothing 
and out the bottom of the jacket or shirt. See 
 Figure 7.26. 
 Figure 7.26  
 Figure 7.27  
 Figure 7.25  
 6. 
Place a one-inch piece of white camera tape on 
the underside of the section of shirt to which you 
are attaching the vampire clip. This will give rigidity 
to fl imsy material as well as prevent the pins of the 
vampire clip from damaging the talent’s clothing. 
See  Figure 7.27 . 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 6
 7. Place the clip half way between two buttons. If you 
place the lavalier close to a button the friction at 
the buttons will create noise. Be careful not to stab 
the talent with the pins of the vampire clip. Hold the 
fabric away from the talent’s skin when pinning. See 
 Figure 7.28. 
 8. Tuck the loop behind the shirt. See  Figure 7.29. 
 9. Button up the shirt or blouse and make one last 
adjustment to the visual appearance of the clothing. 
It should look like you were never there. This fi nal 
adjustment is very important. Take time to step 
back and make sure it looks good. See   Figures 7.30  
and  7.31. 
Figure 7.31
 Figure 7.28  
Figure 7.30
 Figure 7.29  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 7
 10. Connect the lavalier to your system. See the earlier section, News Style: Tie Clip, 
Step 11, for how to connect. 
 POROUS FABRIC: MOLESKIN 
 One of the ugliest micing techniques I see is the tie 
clip or vampire clip on the neckline of a T-shirt, sweater, or 
hoodie—very amateur! I understand why this occurs: the 
mic is slapped on for a quick interview and the operator 
either doesn’t know how to hide a lav, there’s no time, or 
the talent thinks he or she knows how to do it and does it, 
or the talent doesn’t want to be body miced. Well here’s the 
fi x—moleskin! 
 1.  Purchase a box of Dr. Scholl’s Moleskin at the 
pharmacy. Buy the large box that has a fi ve-by-seven-
inch solid full sheet. You’ll go through it like milk. See 
 Figure 7.32.  
 2.  With a pair of sharp scissors (very sharp, or you’ll be hacking at it for a while), cut a 
2-inch by 1.5-inch rectangle piece. Round off the corners. I always carry ten precut 
pieces for speed. See  Figure 7.33. 
 Figure 7.32  
 Figure 7.33  
 3.  Remove the paper backing from the moleskin to expose the gluey surface. 
 4.  Lay the head of a front-loaded lavalier (I use my Trams here) into the gluey surface, 
capsule out. See  Figure 7.34. Don’t stick the capsule into the glue! 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 8
 6. Untuck the clothing you are attaching the mic too for easy excess. With the mic in 
one hand, pull the clothing forward with your other hand and slide the moleskin and 
mic up under the shirt to the height of the talent’s sternum. Attach the moleskin to 
the shirt by pushing your index fi nger forward and gently releasing the edges of the 
moleskin from your thumb and second fi nger. You want the mic to be fl ush with the 
edges of the moleskin. Do not push too hard, or you’ll create an unsightly mic outline 
on the shirt. See  Figure 7.36. 
 Figure 7.34  
 Figure 7.35  
 5.  With your fi ngers, pinch the moleskin to the sides of the mic head creating a pocket 
that the lavalier will sit in. Then gently grab the edges of the moleskin with your thumb 
and second fi nger and squeeze together so the front of the mic is level with the edges 
of the moleskin. This prevents the mic from creating a bump in the fabric as well as 
making it easier to apply. See  Figure 7.35. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 4 9
 9. Connect the lavalier to your system. See the earlier section, News Style: Tie Clip, 
Step 11, for how to connect. 
 Figure 7.36  
 Figure 7.38  
 Figure 7.37  
 7.  The shirt itself will act as a windsock. Be careful with 
iron-on logos and decals. Heavy vinyl or plastic iron-on 
designs won’t let sound pass through. 
 8.  Figure 7.38  shows how the mic looks inside the T-shirt. 
Notice how the mic is completely surrounded by the 
moleskin, and the capsule is recessed into the moleskin 
and not pushing out onto the fabric. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 0
 SKIN AND CHEST AREA: LEATHER CLIP 
 Micing on the skin is most successful on people with no chest hair. So all “monkey 
men” are out unless they’re prepared to tango with a razor. Men with little or no chest 
hair and women are the best candidates. 
 Men with muscular chests (with no chest hair) and all women have the perfect place 
for body micing. With the mic placed at the sternum there is no chance of the clothing 
coming in contact with the mic, making the cleavage area the best place for body mic-
ing on the skin. 
 If I have to hide a lavalier on a woman wearing a blouse, T-shirt, or sweater (as long as 
the clothing is not too dense), the leather clip is always my fi rst choice. It sounds great 
and clothing noise is nonexistent. 
 1. Choose the leather clip from the case. See  Figure 7.39.  
 Figure 7.39  
 2. Cut a piece of double-sided tape and stick it to the rough side of the leather clip, 
big enough to completely cover the leather. Do not remove the wax paper from the 
second side of the tape just yet. See  Figure 7.40A. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 1
 3. If you are micing a man, expose the sternum area 
by unbuttoning his shirt or lifting his sweater or 
T-shirt. See  Figure 7.40B. Go to Step 7. 
  4. If you’re micing a woman wearing a button shirt or 
blouse, unbutton it in the area you are attaching 
the leather clip. This does not mean you unbutton 
the whole shirt or blouse. One or two buttons 
will suffi ce. You’ll need to expose the area you’re 
working in. 
  5. Drop the connector end down her shirt between 
her breasts, under her bra, and pull the excess 
cable out the bottom of the 
shirt or blouse. You  must 
have the cable under the 
bra! If you don’t, when the 
talent moves or takes a deep breath, the bra will pop the 
mic out of the clip. If the talent is nervous about you being 
inside her clothes, have her thread the mic through herself. 
See  Figure 7.41. 
 Figure 7.40A  
 Figure 7.40B  
 Figure 7.41  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 2
 6. With a sweater or T-shirt, have talent raise the 
clothing only in the middle to expose her sternum. 
Some women are sensitive about their tummies, 
so you’ll have to get them to chill on this so you 
can attach the mic properly. Pulling the collar of a 
T-shirt down can badly stretch it. 
 7. For both men and women, with the skin exposed 
that you’re going to work on, attach a one-inch 
piece of hypoallergenic skin tape on the talent at the 
center of his or her sternum. This is where you’re 
going to secure the leather clip. Hypoallergenic 
skin tape will prevent any possible skin irritation 
that double-sided tape can cause, and it stays put 
if the talent sweats. See  Figure 7.42. 
 8. Place the lavalier in the leather clip with the capsule facing  toward the leather clip. 
You want the capsule of the mic to be facing the body. This will prevent clothing 
from touching the screen of the mic when it is hidden. See  Figure 7.43. 
 Figure 7.43  
 Figure 7.44  
 Figure 7.42  
 9. Remove the wax paper from the double-sided tape 
on the back of the leather clip and secure the mic 
to the skin tape. See  Figure 7.44. 

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 3
 
Connect the lavalier to your system. See the earlier section, News Style: Tie Clip, 
Step 11, for how to connect. 
 Lavalier Techniques: Micing on the Head 
 Placing the lavalier mic on the talent’s head is a great option if his or her clothing is too 
noisy, or there’s a lot of physical action. I’ve had great success micing skiers, elaborate 
costumes, fi ght scenes, and bikini-clad girls (we didn’t see their backs) by moving the 
micing technique up to the head. Personally, I think lavaliers sound better up on the head 
than they do on the body. Micing on the head negates volume surges from the talent talk-
ing down, as well as tone and volume changes when the talent’s head turns left or right.   
 10. Button up the shirt or blouse and make one last adjustment to the visual appearance 
of the clothing. It should look like you were never there. This fi nal adjustment 
is very important. Take the time to step back and make sure it looks good. See 
 Figure 7.45A.  
 Figure 7.45A  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 4
 Location audio operators must know how to use lavaliers, especially if you want 
to do drama-style shooting. 
 When placing a mic on the talent’s head, hiding the cable can sometimes become 
the biggest problem. If talent is moving around and the camera is going to see the back 
of the talent’s head, you’re going to need to hide the cable as it goes down the neck. 
Long hair, a high-collar shirt, and make-up will all help conceal the cable. If you can’t 
be absolutely certain the mic and cable will be hidden, I suggest you move down to the 
body. If it’s a straight-on shot, a small piece of skin tape will do to keep the cable from 
accidentally moving out from behind the neck. 
 HATS AND BASEBALL CAPS: CAMERA TAPE OR MOLESKIN 
 When hiding a lavalier in a hat you can use either a 
front-loaded or top-loaded lavalier. Here are the tech-
niques I use. 
 For years I used a Tram TR50 front-loaded lav when 
micing a baseball cap. I started using a Sanken COS-11D 
top-loaded lav for this application and prefer the results. 
 HIDING A TOP-LOADED LAVALIER 
 1.  Cut two pieces of moleskin, 1-inch by 1/2-inch, and 
place the lav in one piece. See  Figure 7.46 .
 Figure 7.46  
 Figure 7.45B  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 5
 Figure 7.48  
 2.  Tape the lav to the inside edge of the hat with the capsule facing down, just barely 
sticking out. I like to position the mic where the talent’s hair starts at their temple. 
See  Figure 7.47.  
 Figure 7.47  
 3.  Put an extra cable inside the hat and tape it down to the back of the cap to prevent 
the cable from accidentally moving to the side of the head. 
 4. Place the hat back on the talent with the cable hanging down the back. See 
 Figure 7.48.  
 5. Run the cable down the talent’s back inside his or 
her clothing. 
 6. Have talent tip slightly forward with the head and 
secure the cable to the neck with skin tape. See 
 Figure 7.49.  
 Figure 7.49  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 6
 7. Unless the camera is on an extreme close-up and shooting up the talent’s nose, the 
camera should never see this micing technique. See  Figure 7.50.  
 Figure 7.50  
 
Connect the lavalier to your system. See the earlier section, News Style: Tie Clip, 
Step 11, for how to connect. 
 WIND SOCK EXTRAORDINAIRE 
 Even though the lav is visible to the naked eye, the chances of the camera picking it 
up are very remote. Also, with the mic tucked in tight to a person’s head, the mic is less 
susceptible to wind noise. Experiment with this micing technique in the wind—you’ll be 
surprised how much the hat and head become a wind sock. 
 GLASSES: DOUBLE-SIDED TAPE 
 Hiding a mic in a pair of glasses is quite simple, and if they’re sunglasses the camera 
will never see it. The glasses do need to have fairly wide arms for attaching and conceal-
ing, but even if the mic is a little wider than the arm, nobody will notice. 
 1. Clean the arm of the glasses with rubbing alcohol about half an inch from the lens. 
This is where you’ll be concealing the lav. See  Figure 7.51 .  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 7
 Figure 7.51  
 Figure 7.52  
 Figure 7.53  
 2. Cut a small piece of two-sided tape (clear is best), 
and stick it to the back of the lavalier microphone. 
See  Figure 7.52.  
 3. Remove the paper from the second side to 
expose the tape and attach the mic to the arm of 
the glasses. See  Figure 7.53.  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 8
 5. Place the glasses on the talent. See  Figure 7.55.  
 Figure 7.54  
 Figure 7.55  
 4. With a small piece of tape, secure the cable to the arm of the glasses where the arm 
bends around the ear. See  Figure 7.54.  

L A V A L I E R  M I C R O P H O N E S
1 5 9
 Figure 7.56   You can’t even see the mic. 
 6. Have the talent tip his or her head forward, and secure the cable to the back of the 
neck with skin tape. Make sure there is slack so moving the head isn’t a problem.   
 7. Run the cable down the talent’s back on the inside of the clothing and connect the 
lavalier to your system. See the earlier section, News Style: Tie Clip, Step 11, for how 
to connect. 
 Watch Class 25—“Applying a Lavalier (Hidden).” 

 Wireless Systems 
 Wireless Introduction 
 Wireless Basics 
 Setting Up a Wireless System 
 Calibrating the Receiver to a Field Mixer 
 Calibrating the Receiver to a Video Camera 
 Wireless Hop 
 Wireless Introduction 
 If there’s one area in the location audio world that has evolved the most, it’s the wire-
less system. Every time I step into my favorite dealer of all things location audio, there’s 
a new wireless system in the showcase. New brands boast amazing stability, and old 
ones are new and improved. It’s like buying laundry detergent! 
 Advances in technology have put wireless systems in the hands of, well, everybody. 
The price point has dropped dramatically, while the performance, features, and ease 
of operation have improved so much that you don’t need an engineering degree to get 
them to work properly. 
 I remember my fi rst forays with wires in the late 1980s, and immediately I start hyper-
ventilating! They weren’t plug- and- play by any means. 
 In today’s shooting, knowing how to calibrate a wireless system to the variety of 
cameras, recorders, and mixers is an absolute must. 
 C H A P T E R  8

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 6 1
 My biggest beef about wireless systems are those nasty static snaps that ruin 
perfectly good takes. The “RF hit” or “drop- out” will rear its ugly head at the most inap-
propriate time, creating nothing but frustration on set. If you intend on using wireless 
systems as your main micing source, I suggest you buy a diversity system or high- 
quality non- diversity system. Diversity systems use two antennas to improve the RF 
reception and minimize drop-outs— and they have a high price tag to go with them. A 
high- end non- diversity system only uses one antenna but is way more stable than an 
entry-level non- diversity wireless system. If you try and go inexpensive here, you’ll be 
plagued by RF hits until the cows come home! 
 Figure 8.1  
 Figure 8.2  

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 6 2
 Wireless systems do have their place and are necessary: when you can’t get a shot-
gun mic close enough without it entering the frame, or the talent may be too far away, 
or the camera framing is too wide. It’s not very often in video that shots get feature- fi lm 
big, but you will run into diffi culties with certain types of scenarios— a long- lens walk- 
and-talk for example. 
 If you’re working in big- budget feature fi lm, chances are you probably own multiple 
systems already. If you’re having problems with interference, my answer would be to 
throw money at the problem and upgrade your system. 
 For the rest of us in the documentary, corporate, news, and low- budget drama 
worlds, we just have to do our best with what we can afford and get the most out of it. 
 Wireless Basics 
 A wireless system has two components: the transmitter and the receiver. Both need 
to be properly set and calibrated to achieve optimal performance. 
 The transmitter (the pack that you place on the talent and plug the lavalier mic into) 
needs to be adjusted every time you place it on new talent. The receiver (the pack that 
attaches to your mixer or the camera) needs to be set up and calibrated every time you 
change the mixer or camera that it’s attached to. 
 Figure 8.3A   Shure UR5 
diversity receiver 
 Figure 8.3B   Sennheiser G2 non- diversity wireless system 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 6 3
 Figure 8.4  Wireless systems secured in mixer bag 
 TIP!  It’s good to have a system set up and cabled into your mixer before you show 
up on set. 
 RF SIGNAL 
 Wireless systems use RF (radio frequencies) to transmit the audio signal from the 
body- pack transmitter to the receiver. And just like the radio in your car, if you get too 
far from the transmitting tower or you have objects between you and the tower, you get 
interference. To let you know if the RF signal is being compromised or getting weak, 
your wireless system will have an “RF” meter on the receiver (see your manual). It’s 
important that you pay close attention to this meter when you’re preparing to shoot. It’s 
informing you if the RF signal is being compromised in any way. If the RF signal is low 
or is fl uctuating, you’ll need to remedy this before you start shooting. If you don’t, you’re 
going to get burned. 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 6 4
 A few tips that will help stabilize the RF signal and decrease RF hits: 
 •  Never cross the transmitter’s antenna with the cable 
from the lavalier microphone. This can reduce the 
range and stability of your system. See  Figure 8.6 . 
 •  Keep the transmitter’s antenna off the talent’s skin. 
Moisture from a sweating actor or actress can cause 
hits if the antenna gets damp. See  Figure 8.6 . 
 •  Never bend either the 
receiver or transmitter 
antenna. 
Keep 
them 
straight and free from 
bumping 
and 
jostling 
wherever possible. See 
 Figure 8.6 . 
 •  A wireless system is 
more stable at close range, so the closer the receiver is 
to the talent wearing the transmitter, the more stable the 
RF signal will be. If your mixing position is causing RF 
problems, use an XLR cable to move the receiver closer 
to the talent for better reception. Look at the RF meter on 
the receiver to choose its best placement. See   Figure 8.7. 
 Figure 8.7   Transmitter 
extended closer to talent with 
a 15- foot XLR cable  
 Figure 8.6  
 Figure 8.5  RF meter on a wireless receiver showing a strong signal 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 6 5
 •  A clear line of sight between the transmitter and the 
receiver will increase the system’s distance, so the fewer 
walls, cars, people, and articles of clothing you have 
between you and the talent, the further away you can be. 
 •  Whenever possible, have the transmitter’s antenna 
exposed. If you will not be seeing the talent’s back, place 
the transmitter on the outside of the clothing. 
 •  Always use fresh batteries. As the battery life decreases 
in your system, so does the system’s range and stability. 
I replace batteries that are below 75 percent of their full 
charge in a wireless system.  
 Figure 8.8  Wireless receiver 
strapped onto a shoulder 
harness for better reception 
 Figure 8.9   Replace batteries often in your wireless 
systems 
 •  If the receiver is strapped into 
my mixer’s carrying case, 
sometimes just moving my 
body or the receiver’s antenna 
can help reception. I call it 
“the RF dance” because of 
the funny positions I fi nd 
myself in trying to increase the 
RF signal strength. 
 Watch Class 26— “Wireless System Basics.” 
 Setting Up a Wireless System 
 If there’s one piece of gear I check before every shoot day, it’s my wireless system. 
 Putting in fresh batteries, making sure the lavalier cables and connectors are silent, 
and checking the performance of the complete system are daily chores. 
 CALIBRATING THE TRANSMITTER 
 For setting the proper input level, most transmitters will have an AF input meter 
and AF peak LED to help you set the proper input volume. The AF or input meter 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 6 6
 To calibrate a transmitter, simply place a lavalier 
on the person who’ll be performing, have him or her 
speak at performance level, and either increase or 
decrease the amount of signal entering the trans-
mitter with the input level control. Some transmit-
ters will have a rotary dial for adjusting the input 
level, and others will have the adjustment in their 
menu— consult the owner’s manual. If you keep it 
this simple, you won’t go wrong.  
 Don’t rush through this setup. Even though it’s 
easy, take a good 30 seconds and make sure the tal-
ent is giving you performance voice levels. 
 Calibrate the transmitter as follows: 
 •   Place a lavalier on the talent using one of the 
lavalier techniques described in  Chapter 7 . 
shows you how much signal is entering the transmitter, and will help you make 
sure you don’t set the input level too low. The AF peak LED will light up if you have 
increased the input level too much and are in danger of distorting the transmitter. 
The AF peak LED should fl ash during the loudest signal when the talent is speaking. 
If the AF peak LED is on constantly, then you have set the input level too high and 
need to back it off a bit.  
 Figure 8.10   AF meter and AF peak LED on transmitter 
 Figure 8.11   Adjusting the wire-
less transmitter’s input with talent 
speaking at performance level 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 6 7
 •  Plug the lavalier into the transmitter. 
 • Have talent speak at performance level, and adjust the input level control so the AF 
input meter is indicating between three- quarter and full. The AF peak LED should 
fl ash only during the loudest part of the performance. A good strong level into the 
transmitter means a good strong level entering the wireless receiver. This is the 
optimal gain structure for a wireless system. 
 Some entry- level transmitters are only equipped with an AF peak LED and no AF 
input meter. If your transmitter is set up like this, you’ll have to look on your receiver 
for the AF input meter to calibrate the transmitter more accurately. This meter on the 
receiver may also be called “Modulation.” 
 Watch Class 27— “Wireless System (Transmitter).” 
 THE WIRELESS RECEIVER 
 Wireless systems today are designed for use with 
consumer cameras, prosumer cameras, and professional 
video cameras, as well as location audio fi eld mixers and 
fi eld recorders. The receiver will most likely have the abil-
ity to connect and calibrate to consumer and professional 
line level products and mic level products, and will have 
a variety of output settings in between for the odd duck 
gear out there. So selecting the wireless receiver’s correct 
output for your setup can be a bit of a challenge. 
 Figure 8.12    Wireless Receiver 
built into the camera  
 Figure 8.13   Wireless receiver mounted on a DSLR camera 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 6 8
 MIXER SETUP 
 1. Set up the mixer using the “Initial Setup Procedure for a Field Mixer” found in 
 Chapter 3 :  CH3 and  CH4 are preset to receive a wireless system input. 
 2. Turn channel fader 3 to about 1:30 or at the midpoint within the channel’s unity range. 
Set the PAD to “0,” or if your mixer uses a gain control, adjust the gain to it’s unity 
level, around 12 o’clock. 
 Wireless systems are arriving on the market every day, targeting the one- man- band 
camera operator as the buyer. Many of the entry- level systems designed for camcorders 
and prosumer cameras come with all the accessories needed for quick hook- up, and 
they have default settings that make calibrating a snap. They’re nearly plug-and-play. 
Many of the new professional cameras have the option of a built- in wireless system 
receiver that requires no calibration at all, as the calibration is done in the factory. 
 With systems becoming easier to calibrate, I still strongly recommend you do a sys-
tem check to assure proper calibration. If the system is slightly out, your recordings 
could be compromised. 
 Calibrating the Receiver to a Field Mixer 
 You should always calibrate all receivers to your mixer before showing up to a shoot. 
Don’t try to fi gure this out during production time. 
 Figure 8.14   Make sure you have the proper cables for the job. Don’t 
use adaptors to jerry- rig a connection. 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 6 9
 3. Make sure Input 3 is set to “Dynamic,” “Mic” level input, and “48V Phantom” is off. 
 TRANSMITTER SETUP 
 4. Place the transmitter and lavalier on yourself and calibrate it for correct operation. 
See “Calibrating the Transmitter” earlier in this chapter. 
 RECEIVER SETUP 
 5.  Plug the receiver into XLR Input 3 on the mixer and 
power up the mixer, wireless transmitter, and wireless 
receiver. 
 6.  While speaking at the level you calibrated the transmitter 
to, watch the meters on the mixer. You want your meters 
to be bouncing within the unity range. If they are, the 
receiver is calibrated to the mixer. 
 7.  If the meters on your mixer are indicating outside the 
proper unity range— either too low (meters are barely 
moving) or too high (meters are being pinned)— you 
need to adjust the receiver’s output level. 
 Figure 8.15  
 Figure 8.16   Meter’s indication within unity range 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 7 0
 
•   Do not  insert a PAD on the mixer to decrease the input signal from the wireless 
receiver. Make sure you adjust the receiver’s output to match the mixer. Even 
though a PAD will lower the signal as it enters the mixer and have you operating at 
unity, your gain structure is being compromised. 
 •  Do not  increase or decrease the Channel 3 gain or fader on the mixer to bring 
the meters into unity. You’re calibrating the wireless receiver to the mixer, not the 
mixer to the wireless receiver. 
 8.  Due to the variety of systems on the market, the label given to the function for 
adjusting the receiver’s output level varies. Some will have it as a rotary dial on the 
receiver’s case, but for many receivers, look in the menu of the receiver for terms like 
“Output Level,” “AF Out,” or “Output Volume.” If you’re not sure where this function 
lives on the receiver, look in the manual. There are systems that have this switch in 
the battery compartment. 
 Figure 8.17   Output adjustment in menu of wireless system 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 7 1
 • If the wireless system has a “Mic” setting for the receiver’s output level, set it to 
that, and the receiver is calibrated. 
 • If the wireless system has a rotary dial or a bunch of number settings for the 
receiver’s output level (–10, +20, 0, –24), you need to do a little experimenting to 
set it correctly. 
 TIP! If you run into talent with a lot of voice sibilance, insert a –10dB PAD on the 
mixer. Make up the 10dB loss by increasing the output of the receiver by 
10dB. The PAD can help quell the highs and those nasty Ssss’s. Don't forget 
to recalibrate after you're done. 
 9. Once you’ve located the receiver’s output adjustment, you want to increase or 
decrease the level of output the receiver is sending to the mixer to bring the mixer’s 
meters within their unity range. By setting the mixer’s channel fader 3 at 1:30 when 
calibrating the receiver, you’ve given yourself room to adjust the volume from the 
wireless up or down without leaving the proper unity range of the mixer’s channel 
fader. 
 Figure 8.18    Meters indicating too low  

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 7 2
 Once you’ve calibrated the receiver to the mixer, you won’t have to adjust the 
receiver’s functions again unless you plug the wireless system into another mixer or 
camera. Any adjustments required for proper use of the wireless system will be done 
on the wireless system’s transmitter and/or the location audio fi eld mixer. The receiver 
is done! 
 Calibrating the Receiver to a Video Camera 
 Not that long ago, calibrating a wireless receiver to a video camera was pretty 
straightforward. The manufacturers, believe it or not, were kinda on the same page. 
But in the last few years, with DSLRs hitting the market and the race to be fi rst on the 
block to cater to these photo/video neophytes, all kinds of calibration issues have 
appeared. 
 I’m going to keep this very simple and focus entirely on the video camera, because 
setting up a video camera to receive a signal from a wireless system does not vary much 
from camera to camera. 
 When you add DSLRs to the mix with no metering, 1/8- inch input jack, and no head-
phone jack for monitoring, it becomes a guess- fest with way too many factors for me to 
lay out an accurate calibration procedure. 
 So, for calibrating the receiver to a video camera, the basic functions of input and 
audio select are your only concern. 
 Figure 8.19  

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 7 3
 Camera Setup  
 1. Plug the receiver into XLR jack Input 1. 
 2.  Set the input mode of Input 1 on the camera to 
“Mic.” 
 3.  Set the input select of Input 1 to “Manual.” 
 4.  Set Input 1 volume control to “50 percent.” 
 5.  Set the monitor select to “CH1.” 
 6.  Plug your headphones into the camera’s stereo 
mini headphone jack. 
 7.  Adjust the headphone monitor volume to about 
“50 percent.” 
 TRANSMITTER SETUP 
 8.  Place the transmitter and lavalier on yourself, 
and calibrate it for correct operation. See 
“Calibrating the Transmitter” earlier in this 
chapter. 
 RECEIVER SETUP 
 9. The easiest way to calibrate the receiver to a video camera is fi rst to look in the 
wireless system’s manual for the receiver’s output level. Under this function’s 
settings, you are looking for “Mic” level. If the wireless system has a “Mic” setting 
for the receiver’s output level, set it to that, and the receiver is calibrated to the 
camera. 
 • If the wireless system has a rotary dial or a bunch of number settings for the 
receiver’s output level (–10, +20, 0, –24), you need to do a little experimenting to 
set it correctly. 
 10. Increase the receiver’s output level until the meters on the camera are peaking 
around –6dB. Remember, you’re calibrating the receiver to the camera, so don’t 
increase or decrease the camera’s input volume. 
 11. Once you’ve calibrated the receiver, switch the “Input Select” on the camera to 
“Auto” to guarantee that the proper level of signal will be recorded. 
 12. Monitor the signal with your headphones to assure there is no distortion. 
 Okay, you’re probably wondering why I calibrate the camera in “Manual” and then 
switch to “Auto.” 
 Figure 8.20  

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 7 4
 This setup is for the one- person camera crew who may not have the ability to make 
adjustments to the input level on the camera during recording. 
 By fi rst calibrating the receiver with the AGC (automatic gain control) on the camera 
in “Manual,” I’m getting as close to proper gain structure as possible without a tone 
oscillator. This will improve my signal- to- noise ratio. 
 When switched to “Auto” the camera will automatically make minor adjustments to 
the incoming signal to ensure a strong audio level without going over 0dB and creating 
distortion. 
 Watch Class 28— “Wireless System (Receiver).” 
 Wireless Hop 
 “Wireless hop” is the funky name given for using a wireless system to transmit the audio 
signal from your mixer to a video camera. It’s an excellent way to get the sound from your 
mixer to the camera without cables. 
 The ability to move independently of the camera 
operator makes booming in the fi eld a whole lot eas-
ier. No more cables getting in the way, no more wrap-
ping and unwrapping the control cable, and best of 
all, no more whining from the camera operators. Not 
being attached to the camera is like getting out from 
under the oppressor or getting rid of an annoying 
acquaintance. Yes, it’s that good!  
 I’ve been going wireless for about fi ve years. 
The stability and reliability of the systems on the 
market today have given me the confi dence to 
start using wireless systems to transmit signals 
from mixer to camera. There’s no cheaping out 
on wires here. Use a diversity system, or a high- 
quality non- diversity, or a wireless hop system 
for this application to ensure all your fantastic 
tracks make it to the camera. 
 The wireless hop has many advantages but one 
major disadvantage— you have no way of knowing if the sound is getting to the camera 
free of drop- outs. The sound is only transmitted to the camera; it’s not being transmitted 
back for you to monitor. You have no idea if the sound is actually getting there.  
 Figure 8.21  

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 7 5
 Figure 8.22  
 The solution to set my mind at ease is twofold: First, the camera operator must 
always wear headphones. I make it very clear that he or she needs to pay attention 
to the audio or I’ll have to cable in. Second, I’ll record a back- up on a separate audio 
recorder, just in case the wireless feed was compromised in any way. 
 I rarely use a control cable for motion shots anymore, but I always use one for 
interviews. 
 WIRELESS HOP SETUP 
 Setting up a wireless hop can be a little tricky. There are several places where the 
calibration can go wrong. Follow closely, there’s quite a few steps. 
 Before you calibrate the wireless receiver to the camera, you must fi rst calibrate the 
camera with your fi eld mixer: 
 1.  Set up your mixer using the “Initial Setup Procedure for a Field Mixer” in  Chapter 3 . 
Use a control cable, snake, or XLR cable to connect to the camera. You’ll be 
sending “Mic” level to the camera, so make sure to set the mixer’s output to “Mic.”  

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 7 6
 2. Calibrate the camera according to the procedure under “Professional Field Mixer 
Input” in  Chapter 9 , “Video Cameras.” Make sure you calibrate the camera to 
receive a “Mic” level input. 
 
By fi rst calibrating the camera with tone generated by your mixer, you’re making 
sure the camera is set to receive a perfect “Mic” level that has not been attenuated 
in any way. The meters on the camera will be your reference level when you calibrate 
the wireless receiver. 
 3. Detach the cables from the camera. 
 4. Connect a wireless transmitter to the left XLR output on your mixer. Make sure you 
have the proper cable. Don’t use adaptors. 
 5. Connect your back- up recorder to the right XLR output on your mixer. Again, make 
sure you have the proper cable. 
 6. Set the mixer’s left output select to “Mic.” This will send a “Mic” level to your 
wireless transmitter. 
 7. Set the mixer’s right output select to “Mic.” This will send a “Mic” level to your 
back- up recorder. 
 8. Power up mixer and wireless transmitter. 
 9. Speak into your mic and make sure it is working and the signal is present on both 
meters. 
 10. Calibrate the wireless transmitter using both tone generator and voice. First, engage 
tone on your mixer and adjust the input on the transmitter so the input meter on the 
transmitter is reading about three- quarters full. Disengage tone. 
 Figure 8.23   Wireless hop to camera 

W I R E L E S S  S Y S T E M S
1 7 7
 11. Next, speak into the microphone and (if needed) fi ne- tune the AF input level on 
the transmitter until the AF peak LED fl ashes occasionally (see “Calibrating the 
Transmitter” earlier in this chapter). Make sure you’re operating your mixer at unity. 
 12. Attach the wireless receiver to the camera and plug it into input CH1. Make sure to 
use the proper cable. 
 13. Plug your headphones into the camera’s headphone jack. 
 14. Power up the camera and receiver. 
 15. Engage tone on your mixer and adjust the receiver’s output level until the camera’s 
meters are the same as when you calibrated the camera with cables and fi eld mixer 
in Step 2 (see also “Calibrating the Receiver to a Video Camera” earlier in this 
chapter). 
 16. Put on your headphones and listen fi rst to tone. Make sure it is crystal clear, the 
same as it sounds when you’re cabled into the camera. Next, listen to the mic. It 
should sound perfect as well. Look at the meters on the camera and make sure you 
have good level. 
 The mixer, camera, and wireless system are now calibrated for recording. If you want 
the onboard camera mic to be recording as well, set up CH2 according to the procedure 
under “Onboard Camera Mic” in  Chapter 9 , “Video Cameras.” 
 17. Power up your back- up recorder. 
 18. Set the input select on your recorder to “Mic.” With this setup you’ll only be sending 
a single track of audio to your recorder. 
 19. Engage the tone oscillator on your mixer. 
 20. Calibrate your back- up recorder the same as you would a digital video camera 
with PPM meters. Refer to the procedure under “Professional Field Mixer Input” in 
 Chapter 9 , “Video Cameras.” 
 21. Plug your headphones into the recorder and make sure the sound is crystal clear. 
Look at the meters on the recorder and make sure you have good levels. 
 You are ready to go! Enjoy the freedom of the wireless hop. 
 Once you hop it’s hard to stop! That’s pretty sad. 
 Watch Class 29— “Wireless Systems (Wireless Hop).” 

 Video Cameras 
 Video Cameras 
 Common Video Camera Functions 
 Camera Calibration 
 The VJ Attenuator 
 Direct Microphone Input 
 Professional Field Mixer Input 
 Always Check Your First Recording! 
 Consumer and Professional Line Level 
 Label Video Tapes? 
 Video Cameras 
 In the not- too- distant past, there were two or three industry standards for profes-
sional video cameras. In fact, I would pretty much deal with one kind of camera 90 
percent of the time. Today, it’s a whole different story. 
 Every camera known to man is being used— you never know what you’re going to be work-
ing with. Today’s cameras are incredibly cheap and offer amazing picture quality. A signifi cant 
amount of production, if not more than half, is for Web delivery, allowing camera operators to 
choose a camera to suit their creative style, not just for its “broadcast quality” technical specs. 
 They use everything from DSLRs, to small handheld cameras like the Sony EX1 or F3, 
to larger shoulder- mount cameras like the Panasonic P2 VariCam. 
C H A P T E R  9 
 Figure 9.1  

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 7 9
 CAMERA BASICS 
 Wow, things have changed! Gone are the days of shooting only with professional 
cameras. First, camcorders showed up— that was okay, they were only used for home 
videos. Then prosumer cameras— what a mess they made of the industry with their mix-
ture of professional and consumer features and functions. Now we’re into DSLRs, and 
sadly, the manufacturers have screwed sound again. 
 Well the gloves are off. As the location sound operator, it’s your responsibility to cali-
brate the plethora of cameras out there. Don’t expect the camera operator to know this 
stuff. Most of them struggle with simple camera mic settings. 
 Correct calibration is an absolute must to achieve high- quality recordings. Since the 
camera is quite often the only recorder capturing all the fi ne mixing and booming you’re 
doing, proper calibration and diligent monitoring is the only thing standing between you 
and an unusable mess. 
 To make sure you don’t get caught with your pants down, fi nd out which type of 
camera you’ll be working with. I always ask before every shoot, “ What type of camera 
are we using? ” If I’m not completely sure how to set it up, I go down to my dealer of all 
things location audio and discuss any calibration concerns.  
 Figure 9.2  
 Figure 9.3  

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 0
 Beyond these common functions, various cameras do have many features unique to 
their model. You’ll need to know how they affect calibration and recording. But to get 
you started, here are the most common functions and their settings. 
 FUNCTION: AUDIO INPUT LEVEL 
 This audio function readies the camera to receive a signal from a mixer, direct mic 
input, wireless system, and/or camera- mounted mic. 
 Common Video Camera Functions 
 There are certain basic audio functions that all video cameras require to record 
sound. Knowing what they do, and how to adjust them, makes calibrating the wide 
variety of cameras out there a lot simpler. 
 Figure 9.4  
 Figure 9.5  Input levels on the body of the camera 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 1
 Setting Choices: Line, Mic, Mic +48Vph, Mic Att, Camera Mic 
 • Set to “Line” when connecting a mixer to a video camera. 
 • Set to “Mic +48Vph” when directly connecting a shotgun microphone or hard- wired 
lavalier. 
 • Set to “Mic” when directly connecting a handheld dynamic microphone or wireless 
system to a video camera. 
 • Set to “Mic Att” (mic attenuation) when using the onboard camera mic in a 
loud or windy location. This function is found only on cameras with a built- in 
microphone. 
 FUNCTION: INPUT SELECT (1) 
 This audio function on the smaller handheld cameras is for selecting the built- in 
camera mic or an external source. 
 Setting Choices: Internal or Int Mic/External 
 • Set to “Camera Mic/Internal Mic” when you want to record using the built- in onboard 
camera mic. 
 • Set to “External” when you want the camera to record a signal plugged into the XLR 
inputs.  
 Figure 9.6   Input level on handle of a smaller video camera 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 2
 FUNCTION: AGC 
 This audio function on a camera activates the Automatic Gain Control that adjusts 
the incoming signal up or down for optimal recording level. Also called ALC, Audio 
Select, Input Mode Rec. Level— manufacturers are playing “hot potato” with what this 
function does and what to name it! 
 Setting Choices: Manual/Auto, On/Off 
 • Set to “Auto” or “On” when plugging a microphone or wireless system directly into 
the camera, or using the onboard camera mic. 
 • Set to “Manual” or “Off” when using the camera’s VJ Attenuator or connecting a 
mixer to the camera. 
 FUNTION: INPUT SELECT (2) 
 This audio function on the larger shoulder- mount cameras is for selecting the input 
that the source will be entering the camera. 
 Setting Choices: Front or Cam Mic, Rear or XLR inputs, or Wireless 
 • Set to “Camera Mic” when you want to use the onboard camera microphone. 
 • Set to “Rear or XLR Inputs” when you connect a shotgun, lavalier, mixer, or wireless 
system to the camera. 
 • Set to “Wireless” if the camera has a built- in wireless system. 
 Figure 9.8  
 Figure 9.7  Built in camera mic 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 3
 The AGC in “Auto” engages an automatic gain and limiter for the XLR and camera 
mic input(s). The automatic gain guarantees a good input level for the camera to record, 
while the limiter prevents the signal from getting too loud and causing distortion. This 
combination is great when there is no one monitoring and adjusting the input level on 
the camera. The down side is that it can create a pumping of the ambience between 
sentences and words. When talent speaks, the automatic gain adjusts the input level to 
ensure proper levels. When they stop, the automatic gain increases more to keep proper 
input levels (the ambience gets louder). When talent speaks again, the limiter of the AGC 
kicks in to prevent distortion from the new input volume, and the automatic gain adjusts 
down to compensate for the new louder input level. This constant up and down of vol-
ume and on and off of the limiter does not produce the most desirable recording, but it 
will ensure good levels with no distortion. 
 FUNCTION: AUDIO LEVEL 
 Use this function to increase or decrease the amount of signal entering the camera 
when in “Manual” mode. Also called Input Trim, Input Level. 
 • The “Audio Level” adjustment will be a pair of dials on the body of the camera in most 
cases, but on some of the smaller handheld cameras this adjustment will be in the 
camera’s menu. 
 Figure 9.9  AGC on the body of a camera 
 Figure 9.10  

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 4
 This function on a camera is used to increase or 
decrease the volume going to the camera’s head-
phone jack. The monitor volume adjustment, in most 
cases, will be a dial or buttons on the body of the camera. 
 •  Set this control to “Max” when returning the signal to a fi eld mixer via the camera’s 
headphone jack. 
 •  Set this function to a comfortable listening volume when the camera operator is 
monitoring the camera’s audio with headphones. 
 FUNCTION: MONITOR SELECT  
 FUNCTION: MONITOR VOLUME  
 Figure 9.11   Monitor volume on the body of the camera 
 Figure 9.12   Monitor volume on a 
smaller video camera 
 Figure 9.13   Monitor select on the body of the camera 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 5
 This camera function chooses which channel on the camera you want to monitor. 
Also called audio monitor, or output channel. 
 Setting Choices: CH1/CH2, CH1, CH2. 
 •  Set this function to CH1/CH2 when monitoring the camera with a fi eld mixer. 
 •  Set this function to CH1 or CH2 if the camera operator is monitoring the camera, and 
you want them to focus on a single input. 
 Watch Class 30— “Video Camera Basics.” 
 Camera Calibration 
 Calibrating today’s digital cameras has become much easier due to the commonality 
of the functions. For example, once you’ve learned how to calibrate a Sony XDCAM to 
the various mixer and mic confi gurations, you’ll be able to calibrate pretty much all the 
cameras on the market today. 
 Before you head out for a shoot, fi nd out which camera you’re using. If you’re not 
sure how to set it up, do a little research. It’ll be time well spent. How you calibrate the 
camera will depend on what you’re connecting to it. To make this easy, I’ve broken down 
the various input types and given specifi c calibration instructions. 
 Figure 9.14   Monitor select in a camera’s menu 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 6
 ONBOARD CAMERA MIC  
 Figure 9.15   Aftermarket shotgun mic with outdoor wind sock and goat! 
 The onboard camera mic has two main functions: 
 1. Record ambience for all b- reel shots and pick up the odd sound bite. 
 2. When replacing audio with sound that is recorded on a second system, it’s vital the 
track is audible. 
 B- Reel and Sound Bites 
 The onboard camera mic can be a powerful ally for your recordings. Just because 
you’re not actively recording the sound, a properly set up onboard mic will not only do 
a great job of capturing sound for b- reel, but it can also save your hide if an unexpected 
sound bite occurs. 
 Sync Track 
 When replacing audio with sound that is recorded on a second system, it’s vital the 
track is audible. So for a sync track the recording needs to be high enough quality to 
create an accurate lock during editing. 
 Most camera operators know how to use the onboard camera mic, and they won’t 
hesitate to switch over when they want to grab some b- reel. That’s all fi ne when they’re 
shooting by themselves, but when you, a location sound operator, are on set, it’s your 
responsibility to guarantee there will be sound on every shot! So keep an eye on those 
wily camera ops, they have a tendency to sneak off and grab a few shots when you’re 
not looking. 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 7
 • I’ve found that built- in camera mics on many of the smaller cameras  do not do a 
very good job recording dialogue. Because many are trying to create a stereo (I use 
the term loosely) recording, the dialogue they record does not cut well with dialogue 
recorded with a mono lavalier or shotgun microphone. 
 An aftermarket shotgun like a Sennheiser ME 64 (a great inexpensive cardioid micro-
phone) or the new MKE600, will improve the onboard camera mic recordings tremen-
dously! 
 The following setup is for an aftermarket shotgun microphone used as an onboard 
camera mic. 
 SET UP CAMERA AS FOLLOWS 
 1. Set the input level for CH1 to “Front or Mic+48V” phantom power. 
 2. Set AGC for CH1 to “Manual.” 
 3. Set the audio in for CH1 to “External Mic” or “Rear” on professional cameras (this will 
select XLR Input 1). 
 4. Adjust the audio level for CH1 to “50 percent” volume. 
 5. Adjust the VJ Attenuator on the front of the camera to “10”— not all cameras have 
this function. 
 6. While gently tapping the camera mic, look at CH1 meter for signal. 
 7. Set the monitor select to “CH1.” 
 8. Plug a set of headphones into the camera’s stereo mini headphone jack. 
 9. Speak into the camera mic, and adjust the monitor volume on the camera to a level 
where you are hearing the signal from the mic, and not sound leaking in through the 
sides of the headphones’ ear- cups. 
 By switching the input select for CH1 to “Manual,” you’ll have a track that won’t have 
the pumping effect the AGC can sometimes create. 
 • If you’re uncomfortable with the AGC being set to manual when recording onto a 
single channel on the camera, set it to “Auto” and breathe easier. 
 • If the camera has the ability to send the signal from CH1 XLR or “Front” input 
to both tracks on the camera, do it and adjust CH2 AGC to “Auto.” This will be 
your onboard camera mic safety track. If all hell breaks loose during recording, 
you’ll have peace of mind knowing that the “Auto” setting on CH2 is preventing 
distortion. 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 8
 Watch Class 31— “Video Cameras.” 
 The VJ Attenuator  
 Figure 9.16   Camera op adjusting the VJ attenuator 
 What the heck is that? When I started out I was told the VJ attenuator dial was an 
audio level control for the camera operator. Really? The last thing I want is a camera op 
messing with my levels! Well, after a couple of shoots I started to understand the good, 
the bad, and the “WTF is going on with my calibration?” to fi nally take notice of this 
little dial. 
 The interesting part about the little known VJ attenuator is that it’s hidden, easy 
to bump, and can throw your whole calibration out of whack! Yet there’s hardly any 
 mention about it. So be warned and informed: cameras with VJ attenuators need to be 
either adjusted and taped off, or used properly and paid attention to. 
 Here’s the skinny. 
 A camera operator who is comfortable with adjusting the VJ attenuation dial while 
shooting can make slight adjustments to an input source (CH1 only), avoiding the use of 
the AGC. They’re only found on shoulder- mount professional cameras, but an operator 
who’s savvy with the VJ attenuator will make you sound better. 
 SETTING UP THE VJ ATTENUATOR 
 It’s not your job to train camera operators, but if an operator wants to know, here’s 
how to set up the VJ attenuator and operate it effectively. 
 1. Connect your mixer to CH1 input on the camera. 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 8 9
 4. If the proper calibration for the mixer/camera combination you’re using is –12dB with 
the VJ attenuator adjusted to “10,” adjust the CH1 audio level dial on the camera to 
bring the meters back to “–12dB.” 
 5. If you don’t have a mixer for calibrating, set the VJ attenuator to “7,” have talent 
speak into the mic at performance level, and adjust the CH1 audio level dial on the 
camera for proper level. The increase shouldn’t be that much. 
 6. Now the camera operator can make fi ne adjustments with the VJ Attenuator while 
shooting. 
 Calibrating the VJ attenuator at “7” gives the camera operator room to increase the 
volume if the incoming level is too low, or decrease it if it is getting too strong. In the 
viewfi nder, there are input level meters. The camera operator will need to become famil-
iar with how many of the little bars need to be lit for proper audio input level. Because 
there is no consistency in metering between the various makes and models of cameras, 
and often no numbers to indicate audio level, you may need to help out the operator. A 
simple input of proper audio level (look at meters on the body of the camera) compared 
to the metering in the viewfi nder should clarify this issue. 
 2. Engage the tone oscillator on the mixer. 
 3. Set the VJ attenuator on the front of the camera to “7.” 
 Figure 9.17  VJ attenuator (labeled as “mic level”) set to “7” 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 0
 Instruct the camera operator about making adjustments. If adjustments need to be 
made with the VJ attenuator, they should be done quickly. Slow increases or decreases 
in volume with the VJ dial will change the ambience over a longer period of time, making 
clean audio edits more diffi cult. 
 TIP!  The VJ attenuator only affects the signal being recorded on CH1 of the 
camera. And don’t forget to recalibrate the camera with the VJ attenuator 
set to “10” when reconnecting your mixer. 
 Watch Class 32— “Video Cameras (VJ Attenuator).” 
 Direct Microphone Input 
 If you’re plugging a handheld microphone, hard- wired or wireless lavalier system, or 
shotgun microphone directly into the camera, follow these steps. 
 SET UP CAMERA AS FOLLOWS 
 1. Plug the microphone of your choice into XLR jack input CH1. 
 2. Set the input level for CH1 on the camera to “Mic” if you’re using a handheld or 
wireless system, “Mic+48V” phantom if using a shotgun or hard- wired lavalier. 
 Figure 9.18   Audio meters in the camera’s viewﬁ nder 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 1
 3. Set the audio in for CH1 to “External Mic” or “Rear” on professional cameras (this will 
select XLR Input 1). 
 4. Set up CH2 to record the onboard camera mic as beautifully described earlier in this 
chapter under “Onboard Camera Mic” (see “Set Up Camera as Follows”). 
 5. Set the AGC of CH1 and CH2 to “Auto.” 
 6. Set CH1 and CH2 audio level to “50 percent.” Even though the AGC function will 
override this setting, some cameras need to have the audio level control set to 
anything but “0” or “Off” to activate the input. 
 7. Set the monitor select to “CH1.” 
 8. Plug your headphones into the camera’s stereo mini headphone jack. 
 9. Adjust the headphone monitor volume on the camera to a level where you are hearing 
the signal from your mic. 
 This setup is for a single shotgun, hard- wired lavalier, wireless system, or handheld 
microphone with the onboard camera mic recording on CH2. 
 TIP!  All microphones benefit from the warming effect of a field mixer’s pre- amps. 
Therefore, always use your mixer. The direct mic input method should only 
be used by the one- person camera operator. 
 You can now begin recording. The camera will power the mic, control the amount of sig-
nal being recorded, and the camera operator can monitor the recording with headphones. 
 If the camera has a VJ attenuator and the camera operator knows how to use it, you 
could set it up and better your tracks even more because you know how to do it. 
 Figure 9.19  

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 2
 SET UP CAMERA AND MIXER AS FOLLOWS 
 1. Perform the “Initial Setup Procedure for a Field Mixer” on the mixer. See 
 Chapter 3 . 
 2. Connect the mixer to the camera: the mixer’s left output into the camera’s CH1 
input; the mixer’s right output into the camera’s CH2 input; the mixer’s mini monitor 
return cable into the camera’s headphone jack if you’re using a control cable or 
snake. 
 3. Set the input level on the camera to “Line.” Make sure the mixer’s outputs are also 
set to “Line.” 
 Watch Class 33— “Video Cameras (Direct Input).” 
 Professional Field Mixer Input 
 To prevent damaging the camera’s pre- amps, perform the camera calibration in the 
order outlined in the setup, which is descending order. This order will also prevent a pos-
sible screw up on cameras that have the ability to generate tone on their own. Also,  do 
not put your headphones on until instructed in “Monitor Setup.” 
 Figure 9.20  

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 3
 4. Set audio in to “External Mic” or “Rear” on most professional cameras.” 
 5. Set the AGC for both channels on the camera to “Manual.” 
 Figure 9.21   Input level set to “Line,” with a control cable connected to the camera’s XLR inputs 
 Figure 9.22   AGC set to “Manual,” audio in set to “Rear” XLR 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 4
 Figure 9.23   VJ attenuator set to “10” 
 7. Engage the tone oscillator on your mixer, and turn the master fader “Off.” Some 
mixers will send the sound from CH1 to CH4 out the master, corrupting the tone 
signal. Turning down the master fader will prevent this from happening. 
 8. Switch the camera setting to “Bars.” 
 9. Calibrate the camera with the two assigned audio level controls. Depending on the 
type of meters on the mixer and camera, and if the camera is analog or digital, you 
need to calibrate as follows: 
 • If you are using a mixer with VU meters and the camera is analog with VU 
meters, calibrate the camera to 0dB. 
 • If you are using a mixer with PPM meters and the camera is analog with VU 
meters, calibrate camera to − 4dB. 
 • If you are using a mixer with PPM meters and the camera is digital with PPM 
meters, calibrate camera to −12dB. 
 6. Set the VJ attenuator on the front of the camera to “10.” 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 5
 Figure 9.24   Reference tone set at –12dB 
 • If you are using a mixer with VU meters and the camera is digital with PPM 
meters, calibrate camera to − 20dB. 
 Figure 9.25   Reference tone set at −20dB 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 6
 10. Switch the camera setting to “Bars.” 
 11. Record 30 seconds of bars and reference tone. 
 12. Disengage the tone oscillator and return the master fader on the mixer to “0” or unity.  
 Figure 9.26   Alarm volume and monitor volume on camera 
 Figure 9.27  
 MONITOR SETUP 
 1. Set the monitor select on the camera to “CH1/CH2.” 
 2. Set the alarm volume control on the camera to “0” or “Off” if it has one. 
 3. Engage the tone oscillator on your mixer, and turn the master fader to “Off.” 
 4. Set the monitor return switch on the mixer to 
“Monitor/Return.” You want to be listening to the 
signal returning from the camera. 
 5. Check the monitor volume on your mixer, and 
make sure it’s not too loud. Put your headphones 
on. You might not hear anything— don’t panic! 
 6. Adjust the monitor volume on the camera to match 
the mixer’s “Mix/Direct” volume. Do this by toggling 
the mixer’s monitor return switch between “Mix/
Direct” and “Monitor/Return” and adjusting the 
monitor volume on the camera until the two levels 
are equal. If the Monitor/Return volume is lower 
when the monitor volume on the camera is maxed 
out, don’t worry. It’s fairly common.  

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 7
 CHECKING CAMERA PLAYBACK 
 1. After you’ve recorded 30 seconds of reference tone, ask the camera operator to 
rewind to the beginning of the tone recording and press play. 
 2. With the tone oscillator still engaged on your mixer, toggle the monitor return on the 
mixer to compare clarity and volume levels. Make sure they’re the same. If there’s 
any discrepancy in either clarity or volume, inform the camera operator fi rst— he 
or she may already know of the problem. Then inform the decision maker. Doing 
this before the day gets going could prevent a possible disaster and potential 
embarrassment when playback is requested and the camera’s not functioning 100 
percent. 
 3. Stop playback and have the camera operator reset the record position. Even though 
I know how to perform this check, I’ll always ask the camera operator for permission 
to perform a playback check. I’ve had a couple get their nose out of joint for messing 
with playback. After you’ve worked with the them a few times, they’ll probably be 
okay with you doing it yourself. 
 Always Check Your First Recording! 
 Depending on the crew and talent, you may get heat for this delay, but you must 
check the fi rst recording with talent. If you forget, you’re playing with fi re! 
 The camera may be the only recorder you have, and if it’s not set up and function-
ing properly, the audio could be compromised. This fi nal check will guarantee that the 
camera is calibrated properly, but even more importantly, that the camera is working 
properly. Tone can mask problems, so by checking a voice recording, you’re double- 
checking that all is as it should be. It’s rare for cameras to have only sound recording 
problems without picture problems, but it’s better to err on the side of caution. 
 I’ve been on several shoots where the camera setup and calibration was fi ne, but the 
playback was not! On two instances in my career the camera was not working properly, 
and one director (even though she was really upset) thanked me for preventing a huge 
waste of time and money. More often than not, the monitor section of the camera is not 
properly calibrated (internally), and the camera operator already knows about it. Make 
sure you check! 
 Also, equipment breaks! Even though most camera operators are diligent with cam-
era maintenance, intermittent headphone jacks, dirty playback heads, and incorrectly 
calibrated monitor pre- amps are common. 
 Most camera operators don’t pay very close attention to the audio portion of their 
camera. “Sorry, camera dudes, but most of you don’t!” You don’t want to be playing 

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 8
a take back for the director half way through the day, and fi nding out then that the 
playback function is not working correctly. Informing the decision maker of a playback 
discrepancy before the day is in full swing will prevent a very anxious and embarrassing 
moment. 
 Watch Class 34— “Video Cameras (Field Mixer Input).” 
 Consumer and Professional Line Level 
 There are two levels of “line level.” Yes, you read correctly. 
 There is consumer line level and professional line level. I’m not going to get all spec’d 
on you, so just understand that consumer line level is approximately 14dB lower then 
professional line level. This becomes an issue when you send a professional line level 
from a mixer to a consumer line level camera or recorder. 
 Many of the early digital cameras (Sony PD150, Cannon XL1) had what appeared to 
be line level inputs. After distorting a few takes I realized that the professional line level 
my mixer was sending (+4dB) was overmodulating the consumer line level inputs on the 
camera (–10dB). 
 To make this story short and give you the solution, calibrate these earlier digital cam-
eras with “Mic” level. I’ve read articles that suggest compensating for this difference— by 
decreasing the professional line level output to a level that the consumer line level equip-
ment can handle. This works . . . but not very well. Even if you calibrate low enough to 
give enough headroom to prevent distortion, the recordings sound harsh. 
 Calibrate at “Mic” level, and the recordings will sound great! 
 Label Video Tapes? 
 Labeling video tapes may soon be a thing of the past. Since hard disc and cards 
are taking over tape formats, labeling shot media with calibration level information isn’t 
possible— but you still need to provide calibration levels to the editor. Let the director 
know the level (that is, the reference tone level) you have calibrated the camera to; they 
can write it down and pass on the information to the editor. If you fi nd yourself shooting 
tape, here’s the information that needs to be on the tapes. This information is required 
to calibrate the input levels when digitizing in post. You must label every tape, and it’s 
good practice to label the tape case as well. 
 If you calibrate the camera to –20, label it as follows: “Ref Tone @ –20dB.”  

V I D E O  C A M E R A S
1 9 9
 Figure 9.28  

 DSLR Cameras 
 DSLR Cameras 
 This Not a Cop-Out! 
 The DSLR Camera Mic 
 Onboard Camera Mic Setup 
 Keeping in Sync 
C H A P T E R  1 0 
 DSLR Cameras 
 DSLRs have become the choice of many camera operators worldwide. The Internet 
is loaded with footage, good and bad, shot with these types of cameras. The pictures 
are great. The audio . . . not so much. 
 With audio being an afterthought, the ability to record quality sound with any con-
sistency is impossible. I’m having fl ashbacks to the days of the Sony PD150—decent 
pictures but crappy audio! If you’re going to shoot video with dialogue on a DSLR cam-
era, I strongly recommend recording audio on a separate recording system and syncing 
up the audio in post. 
Figure 10.1

D S L R  C A M E R A S
2 0 1
 The DSLR Camera Mic 
 Let me be blunt, the built-in camera mic on a DSLR is a piece of !?#! I think it’s 
because Canon wasn’t expecting the video function of the camera to be such a big 
hit—so the $0.49 mic makes sense. But still, you’d think they would have at least 
 I really want to help out my DSLR mates and sound ops who are being asked to 
record this way, but I have no solution for recording dialogue  onto the camera. Yes, I 
can get it there, but my ulcers would burn right through from the anxiety of knowing the 
recorded audio isn’t perfect. 
 You’re not getting paid to record barely passable audio. 
 I’ve been on many shoots with DSLRs, and the only audio recorded onto the camera 
is ambience and sync track. All dialogue is recorded onto a separate system. 
 This Not a Cop-Out! 
 Audio meters, a headphone jack, and proper XLR connectors are the bare minimums 
needed to calibrate, record, and monitor any sound recording. If someone gives you 
the “I’ve done it before, it’ll be fi ne,” or the “I’ve seen it done on YouTube” comment, 
suggest they shoot without looking in the viewfi nder—you’ve seen it done on YouTube! 
 By taking a show that has you recording dialogue onto a DSLR, you’re setting your-
self up to fail. If there’s no time or budget to run a second system, turn the gig down. 
 Figure 10.2  

D S L R  C A M E R A S
2 0 2
tried to improve it by now! Luckily, there are manufacturers who are happy to create and 
build some pretty great mics to help us out. 
 To up the quality of your ambience recordings, there are some pretty good aftermar-
ket camera-mounted mics designed specifi cally for the DSLR. They’ll improve the sound 
recorded on the camera immensely! You can buy mono and stereo mics. They come with 
an 1/8-inch connector. They’re battery-
powered to boost the signal to improve 
the camera’s signal-to-noise ratio. They 
come with a mounting bracket and 
shock mount to help isolate the mic from 
camera handling noise, and Rycote has 
even designed windjammers so you can 
record outside. And now, Shure has put 
out a mic that records on a removable 
fl ash drive, so you don’t have to worry 
about the crummy 1/8-inch connector 
going faulty. The hardware is now avail-
able for you to record quality ambience 
and sound bites. 
 Figure 10.3  Shure VP83F LensHopper 
 Figure 10.4A  

D S L R  C A M E R A S
2 0 3
 Onboard Camera Mic Setup 
 There’s not much to set up when using one of these aftermarket mics designed for 
the DSLR. I would recommend contacting the camera operator before the gig to make 
sure he or she has updated the camera’s software so you’ll have meters. 
 1.  First, and always fi rst,  check the batteries in the microphone! 
 2.  Plug the camera-mounted mic into the 1/8-inch mini input on the camera and attach 
the mic to the camera’s hot-shoe. As soon as you plug into the 1/8-inch jack the 
camera automatically switches to that input source. See  Figure 10.5 . 
 3.  Set the “Sound Rec.” on the camera to “Manual.” The AGC (Auto) on the DSLRs is 
terrible. See  Figure 10.6 . 
 4.  Set the wind fi lter to “Disable.” I’ve seen this function “grayed out” on cameras as 
soon as you plug a mic into the 1/8-inch mini. If the camera you’re setting up does 
this, omit this step. 
 5.  Turn the mic on and make sure you’ve got power. I recommend choosing a camera-
mounted mic with an “On/Off” switch and light to indicate the mic is on. It’s nice to 
know the mic is on when you’re recording. See  Figure 10.7 . 
 6.  Speak into the mic and adjust the “Rec.” level on the camera so the peaks are around 
–10dB. You can record hotter, but you’ll be exposing yourself to possible distortion. 
See  Figure 10.8 . 
 7.  Record 30 seconds of audio and then play it back. The only way to hear if the mic is 
working is to play back a recording through the crappy little built-in speaker—at least 
you’ll know something’s been recorded. 
 Figure 10.4B  

D S L R  C A M E R A S
2 0 4
 Figure 10.5  
Figure 10.6
Figure 10.7

D S L R  C A M E R A S
2 0 5
 Keeping in Sync 
 One of your main concerns when 
recording with DSLRs is sync. The sync 
track is the sound you record on the cam-
era that will be replaced in post by the 
sound you record on a second system. 
For sync to work properly, there needs 
to be either a decent quality recording of 
the audio you are replacing on the camera 
and/or a sync point, a sharp quick sound 
at the beginning of every take recorded on 
the camera. Editing software will sync the 
wave forms recorded on the DSLR with 
the wave forms recorded on the second 
system if they match—it’s pretty cool 
technology. 
 There are many ways to create sync 
sound and/or a sync point. 
Figure 10.8
Figure 10.9

D S L R  C A M E R A S
2 0 6
 For the sync point, video crews are using fi lm slates—that’s right, the slate is showing 
it’s irritating self in video, and with the latest DSLR having time code, we can enjoy sync 
slate nightmares. “Sticks,” as they are called, with the date, scene, take, and maybe 
even the director’s name, are gracing the bags of video camera and sound ops. But 
the reality is most video is a two-person crew, each wearing more then one hat, and 
the slate isn’t very practical. To be honest, it’s a real nuisance! “Did we forget to slate 
again?” and “Who’s got the dry erase pen?” 
 So how do we do it in the real world? With a clap of your hands and a verbal ID. 
When the camera op rolls, so do I. I ID the audio fi le—let’s say, “wave 52,”—the camera 
op verbally identifi es the shot if needed, and then a single hand clap and we’re off. The 
camera-mounted shotgun picks up the clap and so does my mic, so we have our sync 
point. 
 For sync sound, the sound recorded on the DSLR during the entire take needs to be 
of decent enough quality so the editing software can line up the waves of the two sound 
fi les. I like to set up a wireless hop to the DSLR to guarantee a perfect sync track, but a 
camera-mounted mic works just as well. 
 In both cases, when the show is cut together, the editor blows off the sync 
sound recorded on the DSLR and replaces it with the much better recording of the 
second system. This has worked flawlessly for me for over five years—no sync 
issues. 
 The only time it gets tricky is when the talent is far away. If the talent’s wearing 
a wire, you’re going to have to make sure you record the sync clap close enough to 
the camera op to prevent a delayed sync point. Stand close to the camera op and 
use either the slate mic function on your mixer, or simply use your shotgun mic to 
record it. 
 If you’re booming talent that’s far away from the camera (long-lens shot), boom over 
to the camera op for the sync clap (no further then six feet away to prevent sync delay), 
then back to the talent to begin the shot. 
 TIP!  It’s good practice to start your recorder and ID every time camera rolls when 
recording dialogue. If camera cuts, you should stop as well—it’s easier in 
editing when the number of sound clips and video clips are the same. 

D S L R  C A M E R A S
2 0 7
 Syncing sound and picture in post is a time-consuming process in DSLR video pro-
duction. But working with the camera operator to implement a simple yet effective way 
to identify takes and create an accurate sync point will make the editor’s job a lot easier. 
 Watch Class 35—“DSLR Cameras.”   
Figure 10.10

 The Field 
Recorder 
 The Field Recorder 
 Thanks DSLRs! 
 Portable Digital Audio Recorders 
 Calibrating Your Mixer to a Portable Field Recorder 
 The Future of the Field Recorder 
 The Field Recorder 
 I’m back in fi lm! Well that’s what it feels like with carrying around a recorder again. 
For years I enjoyed not having to “roll sound.” I liked sending sound to the camera to be 
recorded. No labeling reels, or DAT cases, no sync issues—life was all about getting the 
best quality sound into and out of my mixer. 
 C H A P T E R  1 1 
 Figure 11.1  

T H E  F I E L D  R E C O R D E R
2 0 9
 Thanks DSLRs! 
 Now we’re basically back where we started from before 3/4-inch tape. The only good 
part is the fi eld recorders are  frickin’ awesome! 
 I forgot how nice it was to be able to check my recordings whenever I felt like it, and 
to take my recordings home and critique them on something other than a set of head-
phones right after a take—I really, really like it! 
 The recorders on the market today are amazing. They sound great, most are very 
easy to operate, and there’s no camera crap cluttering up the needed audio functions. 
Best of all, there’s no tape! Just little memory cards that magically upload onto your 
computer. I’m getting all warm and fuzzy just writing about it. 
 So why do we still record on the camera, you may be wondering? Well, because we 
can, and we’ve been doing it for over 20 years. Most companies are comfortable with 
picture being married to sound in the camera, and they’re set up for it. But the times they 
are a changin’, as Mr. Dylan put it, and so must we. 
 Figure 11.2  Sound Devices 664 mixer with built-in recorder 
 Portable Digital Audio Recorders 
 There’s a variety of portable digital sound recorders on the market today. Like most 
things, you get what you pay for, but some of the lower-priced recorders sound very 

T H E  F I E L D  R E C O R D E R
2 1 0
good and work well for location audio. Most 
recorders are set up to be standalone units, 
and most tie in seamlessly with a fi eld mixer. 
Some have built-in mics that are handy for 
quick ambience recordings, while others are 
strictly recorders. 
 Many of the portable recorders I see 
being used in video production appear to be 
designed more for music recording then video 
production, but they still work fi ne. With built-
in effects, a metronome or tuner, even mixing 
capabilities, some units can be a little clut-
tered—so be aware of that when purchasing. 
 But with all this audio goodness poten-
tially clouding your judgment, there are certain 
features you’ll want to have when purchas-
ing. Here are a few features I look for in a fi eld 
recorder. You may have  others, but for loca-
tion audio these are must-haves! 
 •  XLR inputs are a must—I’m not a fan of the 1/8-inch stereo mini as an input. I want 
the connection to my recorder to click or snap or lock-in in some way. XLRs are 
professional audio connectors, and your recorder must have them. 
 •  Easy to reach and read “Rec/Stop/Play” buttons—Some recorders have too many 
buttons on the front, or not enough, and you’re constantly scrolling through menus. 
Some have needed buttons in hard-to-reach places when the recorder is in your 
mixing bag, or they’re so small you need a microscope to see them. Take a moment 
when choosing a recorder to visualize how it’ll fi t and work in your mixing bag. 
 •  Big, easy-to-read display—Maybe I’m just getting old, but some of the meters are so 
small they’re hard to read. In bright sunlight some of them disappear. Don’t be sold 
a unit if you can’t see what’s going on. Take the unit outside and make sure. Clearly 
labeled large meters are very important. 
 •  Strong construction—Location audio is tough on gear, so if your recorder is made of 
plastic it probably won’t last. Make sure the recorder can handle the rigors of being in 
the elements. Check out reviews regarding reliability in hot and cold environments—
humidity is a big killer. Do your homework! 
Figure 11.3 Zoom H4n portable recorder 
with mics

T H E  F I E L D  R E C O R D E R
2 1 1
 •  Removable storage—I don’t like having all my fi les on one card, or one drive, or one 
of anything. I use several four-gig SD cards instead of one big one. After recording 
for a couple of hours, I put in a new card, and pack the recorded card safely away. As 
soon as the shooting day is done, I dump the fi les into my computer and duplicate 
them on a separate hard drive. 
 Calibrating Your Mixer to a Portable 
Field Recorder 
 Calibrating a fi eld recorder to receive a signal from a fi eld mixer is very simple. The 
steps you learned when calibrating a fi eld mixer to a video camera are the same, except 
there’s no camera stuff getting in the way. Here’s a simple setup using a Zoom H4n: 
 1.  Connect the mixer to the recorder: the mixer’s left output into the recorder’s CH1 
input; the mixer’s right output into the recorder’s CH2 input; the mixer’s mini monitor 
return cable into the recorder’s headphone jack, if you’re using a control cable or 
snake. See  Figure 11.4 . 
 2. Engage the tone oscillator on the mixer. 
 3.  If the recorder has an input level adjustment, set it to 
“Line,” and set the mixer’s outputs to “Line.” If you 
cannot fi nd a switch or setting that reads “Input Level—
Mic/Line,” the recorder’s XLRs will most likely be a “Mic” 
input, so set your mixer’s outputs to “Mic.” Many of the 
smaller portable recorders will have a choice between 
the built-in mics and the XLRs. See  Figure 11.5 . 
 Figure 11.4  
 Figure 11.5  

T H E  F I E L D  R E C O R D E R
2 1 2
 Figure 11.6  
 Figure 11. 7 
 4.  Many of the smaller portable recorders may have features like low cut, compressor, 
AGC or auto level, phantom power, and mid side encoding—turn all these functions 
“Off.” See  Figure 11.6 . 
 Figure 11. 8 
 5.  Choose a fi le format. The higher the bit rate, the quicker the card will become full. I 
record at 48kHz/16bit. See  Figure 11.7 . 
 6.  Hit the “Rec” button to ready the recorder to receive the 
tone from your mixer. 
 7.  Calibrate the recorder with the “Rec Level” buttons set 
to –12dB. See  Figure 11.8 . 

T H E  F I E L D  R E C O R D E R
2 1 3
 
10. Record 30 seconds of reference tone. 
 
11. Disengage the tone oscillator. 
 
12. Play the fi le back. It should sound as good as it sounded when you recorded it. 
 
13. For one last check, I like to record a little bit of voice and play that back as well. Tone 
can sometimes mask hiss and hum. This is just my paranoia kicking in—I like to be 
100 percent positive everything is working properly. 
 This setup will help the beginner understand the steps necessary to connect and 
calibrate a portable recorder to a fi eld mixer. I know Sound Devices, Zaxcom, and other 
manufacturers have recorders designed to connect and calibrate seamlessly with their 
fi eld mixers. If you’re working at that level in the location audio world, you probably know 
the nuances and quirks of your setup. 
 Figure 11. 9 
 8.  Set the monitor return switch on the mixer to “Monitor/Return.” You want to be 
listening to the signal returning from the recorder. 
 9.  Adjust the “Monitor/Headphone” volume on the recorder to match the mixer’s “Mix/
Direct” volume. Do this by toggling the mixer’s monitor return switch between “Mix/
Direct” and “Monitor/Return” and adjusting the monitor volume on the recorder until 
the two levels are equal. See  Figure 11.9 . 

T H E  F I E L D  R E C O R D E R
2 1 4
 The Future of the Field Recorder 
 By the time you read this there will be more advances to the fi eld recorder. I’m pretty 
jacked right now, since moving into a fi eld mixer with built-in recorder (Sound Devices 
664). If you’re serious about location audio, the new professional will be using this type 
of system. The best part—all the techniques needed to record quality audio in the fi eld 
do not change, they just get a little easier to manage. 
 Watch Class 36—“Digital Field Recorder.”   
 Figure 11. 10 

 The Interview 
 The Interview 
 Who’s Decision Is It? 
 Here’s How an Interview Works 
 The Long Overdue Meeting 
 Nonverbal Communication 
 Be Prepared 
 Conclusion 
 The Interview 
 Having a positive impact on an interview is very important to the advancement of your 
career. Since the hiring of a sound person for a shoot is quite often dictated by interviews, 
it’s vital you are making the process easier rather than more diffi cult. I have worked with 
interviewers who were so impressed with my concern regarding the fl ow of their interviews, 
that they started to request me for all their shoots. By helping the interview move forward 
smoothly with as few disruptions as possible, you’ll quickly become their fi rst choice. 
 Who’s Decision Is It? 
 Figure 12.1  

T H E  I N T E R V I E W
2 1 6
 Interviews can be short, like the “man on the street” inter-
view, or the painful hour-long interview of “trying to draw out 
coherent statements.” Nothing gets an interviewer more upset 
than having to stop and restart during a tough interview. A frus-
trated interviewer once said to me, “At least let me get through 
the warm-up!” 
 After recording hundreds of interviews, it was clear I had no 
idea how the interview process worked. I never knew what the 
interviewer was after, or how they went about drawing out infor-
mation. 
 After years of dirty glares and having to justify my reason for 
needing another take, I fi gured out how to aid rather than hinder 
the process. I learned that a large part of an interview is “fl uff,” as the interviewer gets 
the talent to relax. Many interviews are focused around one or two main questions, and 
the more I learned the more it became clear that I, as the location sound operator, would 
never stop another interview. 
 Here’s How You’ll Conduct the Interview 
Process 
 The fi rst step in the interview process is to fi nd out the context and content of the 
interview, and then choose an appropriate location to meet these needs. You need to 
know how the interview will be used throughout the fi nal product. 
 Here’s an example: Let’s say you’re recording an interview in a computer lab. The 
ambience that defi nes the computer lab (hum from computers, fi ngers tapping keys, fl uo-
rescent light buzz, etc.) will be under and a part of the interview. Since the ambience can-
not be separated from the voice, it’s important that the content of the interview be used 
only over b-reel shot in and around the computer lab. 
 Now if we take the same interview recorded in the computer lab and place b-reel 
shots of the talent walking in a park or reading a book, the ambience from the interview 
becomes an issue. The viewer would expect birds and rustling leaves under the park 
shots and silence under reading shots, not fl uorescent light buzz, air conditioning, and 
computers. You see—or should I say, you hear—the problem? 
 Make sure you ask the decision maker how and where the interview content is going 
to be used throughout the fi nal production. If they are not totally sure how the content 
will be used, it’ll be super important to choose a location with as little ambience as pos-
sible. 
 Figure 12.2  

T H E  I N T E R V I E W
2 1 7
 The Long Overdue Meeting 
 It’s time for you to bring a new interview process to your next gig—and to have a very 
important conversation that’s going to change the way interviews fl ow when you’re the 
sound operator on set. 
 The traditional protocol for an interview is that the interviewer asks questions, the 
talent answers, the camera operator shoots, and the sound operator records the sound 
and stops the interview every time there’s an extraneous sound. Well goodbye 1995, 
and hello 2014! 
 If you’re like me, you’re probably tired of the crap that comes with extraneous sounds 
that occur during interviews—like it’s your fault, right? You caused the airplane to fl y by, 
and you deserve a stern look—you should be interrogated, and you feel shame. 
 That’s not how you’re gonna do it anymore! You can hug me 
later. You’re going to teach the interviewer how to control the entire 
interview, and they’re going to love you for it. 
 To start, you’re going to inform the interviewer that if the 
recording is being compromised in any way due to an extrane-
ous sound, you won’t be stopping or disrupting the fl ow of the 
interview. Instead, you’re going to shake your head “no” to com-
municate that the sound is unusable. You will not be stopping 
the interview! If the interviewer needs what the talent said during 
an unusable section, he or she will need to ask for it again; but 
if the issue was during an unnecessary section, the interviewer 
can move on. 
 Figure 12.3  
 Figure 12.4  A

T H E  I N T E R V I E W
2 1 8
Figure 12.6
 Nonverbal Communication 
 Most interviews in video are journalistic style, meaning the 
interviewer will not be seen or heard in the fi nal product. The 
interviewer is just there to ask questions. This type of interview 
allows for nonverbal communication. Check with the producer 
before the interview begins. 
 To communicate audio issues with a 
simple head shake or nod, you’re going 
to choose a booming or mixing position 
where the interviewer can easily see 
you. This position will always be oppo-
site the key light or main light source 
lighting the talent, and just outside the 
light’s main beam. If you’re booming, stand facing the inter-
viewer with your body 90 degrees to the talent. If you’re using a 
lavalier, position yourself in the same area even if you’re sitting. 
Figure 12.4B
Figure 12.5
 With a simple head shake, you’ve informed the interviewer that the audio is unusable, 
and there’s no debate—you’ve done your job. 
 Now think about this for a second. You will no longer be stopping interviews. You’ll no 
longer get into the “Are you sure it’s not usable?” discussion, or my favorite —“ It didn’t 
seem that loud to me.” You’re just going to shake your head “no” and leave it to them to 
decide whether to proceed or repeat the question. It’s that simple. 

T H E  I N T E R V I E W
2 1 9
 When you do nod to the interviewer, it’s done slowly. You don’t want to distract the 
talent—no bobble-head dolls. Let the interviewer know you may not look at them for 
acknowledgement, and that he or she should be discreet if and when acknowledging 
you. The interviewer should be able to see you out of the corner of his or her eye. Before 
the interview starts, position yourself and show the interviewer what you will do to com-
municate audio concerns. 
 Many interviewers will not be familiar with this communication method but will quickly 
grasp the benefi ts of working this way. 
 Be Prepared 
 Just like any shot during the day, you need to be prepared for the interview. Your 
mixer should be set up with the mic(s) you are going to use, the camera should be cali-
brated, the location should be prepped, and any information regarding possible sound 
issues should be conveyed to the decision maker. 
 But from here on the interview takes on a little different process. 
 When the talent arrives (star or not), the interviewer is going to 
take over. They’ll get talent talking right away with introductions and 
probably get them to sit down and just keep talking. The camera 
operator will start tweaking their lights (as always), and a good three 
minutes will pass. Do not waste this time chatting or moving lights 
and props for the camera op (even though it’s a really great thing 
to do, just not yet), but rather “dial in” your mixer as outlined in the 
section “Task #2—Dialing In,” in  Chapter 4 , “Field Mixer Operating 
Techniques.” It only takes 20 seconds, and you’ll be ready when 
recording begins. 
 Most interviews will have a defi nitive start—we’ve all heard, 
“Okay, whenever you’re ready,” or “action!” But I’ve been on 
many interviews where the interview starts without anyone 
calling for it—a “soft” start. This type of start to an interview tricks nonprofessional 
talent who are really nervous—they think we’re still setting up, and before they know 
it the interview is in full swing, or even over. You need to be ready, so make sure you 
take care of business relating to sound before you become a light or set dec. 
 And to fi nish off every interview, record 30 seconds of room tone as I described in 
 Chapter 4 , “Field Mixer Operating Techniques.” 
Figure 12.7

T H E  I N T E R V I E W
2 2 0
 Conclusion 
 As I ironed out this process, it became clear that all parties involved with the interview 
were benefi ting. As I became more confi dent with explaining the process, it became 
easier to sway interviewers and decision makers to work this way. 
 The interviews moved swiftly with less interruptions. But the one who benefi ted most 
from this procedure was me. No more worrying about the confl ict that would follow 
every stoppage—I was able to focus 100 percent on sound. 
 For the interviewers, they quickly realized that they would not be disrupted, and they 
had total control. If there was a sound issue, they could repeat the question without the 
talent even knowing there was a problem—something that is very unnerving for nonpro-
fessional talent. The real savvy interviewer would move in and around sound concerns 
seamlessly. A lot of love was fl owing my way—the process was a success. 
 Watch Class 37—“Interview Technique.” 
 INTERVIEW QUICK LIST 
 •  Discuss with the decision maker the context and content of the interview. 
 •  Choose a location to meet the production’s needs for the interview’s content. 
 •  Discuss nonverbal communication with the interviewer. 
 •  Be prepared—set up the mixer and camera, and choose your mics before talent 
arrives. 
 •  Choose a booming/mixing position opposite the key light. 
 •  Use the time for introductions and light tweaking to dial in your mixer. 
 •  While recording, use nonverbal communication. 
 •  Use the three booming positions for static booming to prevent fatigue. 
 •  Immediately after the interview, record 30 seconds of room tone.  

 Add-Ons 
 Handheld Microphone 
 Microphone Flasher 
 Wireless Monitoring 
 Must-Have Accessories 
 Happy Recordings! 
 Handheld Microphone 
 The handheld mic is used primarily for the “reporter on location” type of commentary 
or interview. You’ve probably all seen “streeters,” as they’re called—a reporter holding 
the mic, moving it back and forth, asking questions to passers-by and talking to cam-
era. Like any other application, there is a right and wrong type of mic for the job. Just 
because you can hold a mic in your hand doesn’t make it a handheld mic! It’s embar-
rassing when a reporter is holding an ME 66 shotgun microphone six inches away from 
his or her mouth. It looks and sounds like crap! 
C H A P T E R  1 3
 Figure 13.1  

A D D - O N S
2 2 2
 There are dynamic handheld microphones designed for this application that are very 
effective. Dynamic mics have a short pick-up range, making them perfect in loud locations. 
 Handheld mics are excellent for extremely loud locations. Even behind the stage 
of a rock concert you’ll be able to record intelligible dialogue. You’ll have to PAD 
down the signal, but the dialogue will be clear. 
 Handheld mics are available in both hard-wired and wireless versions—both work 
great. If you choose to go wireless, you can buy a separate system where the transmitter 
is built into the mic and comes with its own receiver. These mics are not as bulky as the 
transmitter plug-in adaptor that fi ts on a regular handheld. If you already own a wireless 
system, you may be able to buy an adaptor for that system. An even less expensive 
wireless option is to get a cable made up that will attach to the transmitter of the system 
you own. 
 Teach reporters how to use these handheld mics. Remind them that the audio will 
only be as good as their ability to position the mic correctly. On a few occasions, I’ve had 
inexperienced talent using it as a pointer—yikes! For best results, the mic needs to be 
pointed directly at the mouth, no further then ten inches away. The louder the location, 
the closer the mic needs to be. 
 Figure 13.2  
 Make a proper dynamic handheld mic part of your package; your retailer of all things 
location audio will have a fi ne selection. 

A D D - O N S
2 2 3
 Microphone Flasher 
 It’s a good idea to ask the producers if they’ll need a 
fl asher for the handheld mic. That’s the plastic cube-like 
thing with the logo of the broadcaster or television pro-
gram on it that fi ts onto the stem of the mic. It’s a detail 
that is often overlooked, and it shows you’re on the ball. 
The client will usually supply the fl asher. 
 Wireless Monitoring 
 A Comtec system is a wireless headphone system 
that allows the client, director, and/or producer to moni-
tor the performance if they are not close enough to hear 
the dialogue clearly. The signal is transmitted from your 
mixer to as many receivers with headphones as you 
choose. 
 Figure 13.3  
 Figure 13.4  
 Comtec is a brand name of a wireless listening system. Like Kleenex, it’s become 
the name that is used in the industry for these types of systems. They aren’t cheap 
to purchase, so if you’re not using the system on a regular basis, I suggest renting it 
from your favorite retailer of all things location audio when your client requests them. 
Make absolutely sure they supply the proper cable to connect to your mixer. 

A D D - O N S
2 2 4
 Must-Have Accessories 
 CARRYING CASE OR BACKPACK 
 There are cases and backpacks designed specifi cally for shipping and carrying your 
location audio equipment. Hard-shell cases made by Pelican are a must if you’re going 
to be doing any fl ying. Softer bags and backpacks made by companies such as Kata 
and Porta-Brace have adjustable compartments and nets, making storage a breeze, and 
preventing your equipment from getting damaged during the rigors of travel. 
 RAIN SOCK FOR A 
SHOTGUN MIC 
 When you’ve worked in the rain a 
lot (like the west coast of Canada), you 
learn to adapt. To prevent your shotgun 
mic from getting wet when it’s raining, 
there is a rain sock for your shotgun 
blimp system. Personally, I think they’re 
ridiculously overpriced! A simple, cost-
effective solution is to use quilt batting. 
What the heck is that, you ask! It’s the 
spongy white porous material used to fi ll 
quilts. It comes in a big sheet. You need 
to go to a fabric shop to purchase it. 
 Figure 13.5  
 Figure 13.6  

A D D - O N S
2 2 5
You’re going to wrap the entire Rycote or Softie with it, and use elastics to hold it on—
leave the capsule end open. Your mic ends up looking like a marshmallow on a stick, but 
it works great! The rain dissipates when it hits the batting, minimizing the impact on the 
Rycote blimp or Softie, so you don’t hear it. The batting does get wet and heavy due to 
the added water, so you have to shake it out on a regular basis, but it really works well. 
 WALKIE-TALKIES 
 They’re a pleasant surprise to the director or producer on location when communication 
over small distances (just out of shouting range) is needed. Walkie-talkies are so cheap now 
that for $50 you can get a pretty decent pair. 
 CANNED AIR 
 I go through cases of this stuff. Keeping 
your gear clean and dust-free is a must to 
guarantee the longevity of your equipment. 
Your mixer and carrying case will get dusty 
very quickly, and canned air cleans it beauti-
fully. Don’t allow any of your equipment to get 
caked with dirt; it looks very unprofessional 
and will eventually ruin it. 
 RAIN PONCHO 
 A cheap $4 rain poncho is perfect for keep-
ing you and your mixer dry. Because it covers 
the whole body with room to carry all kinds of equipment 
under it, your mixer, boom pole (collapsed), and shotgun 
mic stay dry. It’s easy to operate your mixer and pass all 
cables out through the arms or bottom, keeping everything 
dry. A hand towel is also a good addition. 
 METER OR BATTERY TESTER 
 A battery tester or meter pays for itself by prevent-
ing you from throwing out new batteries when they get 
mixed with old ones. You’ll get maximum use out of your 
batteries before recycling them. If you’re diligent, it will 
help prevent the embarrassment of your mixer dying 
during a shot because you had no idea the batteries 
were close to spent. 
 Figure 13.7  
 Figure 13.8  

A D D - O N S
2 2 6
 TOOL KIT 
 Multi screwdriver, butane sol-
dering iron and solder, wire cutters/
strippers, pliers, and a container to 
put them in. Start with these items, 
and add as you see fi t. 
 PLASTIC HAIR BRUSH 
 It is used to brush out your windjammer or softie. 
For the last few windjammers I bought, Rycote sup-
plied a very skookum collapsible brush. 
 If you allow the furry exterior of the 
windjammer to get matted, it causes all 
kinds of sound weirdness. The strang-
est distortion of sound I ever heard in 
the fi eld was caused by a windjammer 
that was so packed with dirt it created 
this hollow tunnel effect. Use the brush! 
 Happy Recordings! 
 I hope my book has you well on your way to recording excellent tracks. Keep your 
setup simple, focus on sound, and enjoy the world of location audio—maybe one day 
we’ll meet somewhere on this beautiful planet. 
 S. Dean Miles 
 Figure 13.9  
 Figure 13.11  
 Figure 13.  10

 Page numbers in  bold refer to fi gures. 
 AF input meters 165–6,  166 
 ambience: amount 19–20; from below 
the talent 125,  125 ; cancellation 123–4; 
evaluating 13–5,  14 ; interviews 216; 
location 79–80; low frequencies 67, 
68–9; microphones 95,  95 ,  96 ; quality 
15–6; recording 88–9; room tone 88–9, 
219; separation from dialogue 80–1 
 ambience beds 10, 90 
 ambience separation, and dialogue 19–20 
 appearance, professional 50–1,  51 
 audio friendly locations 21,  21 
 audio level, cameras 183 
 audio settings, cameras 9 
 audio signal, assigning/panning 53,  54 , 
55,  55 ,  56 , 57–8,  57 
 Automatic Gain Control, cameras 174, 
182 
 backpacks 224,  224 
 bass roll switch  68 , 98 
 batteries 25, 165,  165 
 battery testers 225, 226 
 boom poles: cable control 105, 106, 
 106 ; choice 109–10,  110 ; extension 
107,  107 ; grip and stance 107–9,  107 , 
 108 ; handling noise 110–1; knuckles/
collars 105,  105 ; lengths 109–10, 121; 
prepping and wrapping 104–6,  104 , 
 105 ,  106 
 booming 103–4,  104 ,  107 , 110–1, 126; on 
axis recording 100,  100 ; cable control 
105, 106,  106 ; control cable 119–20, 
 120 ; cramping 117, 118; forward and 
back movement 111,  111 ,  112 ; and 
lighting 124; mic angle change 114, 
 115 ; motion 116, 118–20,  119 ,  120 , 
122; one-hand 120–2,  121 ,  122 ; pitch 
change 114,  115 ; raising and lowering 
113,  113 ; scooping 125,  125 ; static 116, 
116–8,  116 ,  117 ,  118 ; sweet spot 59, 
123–4,  123 ,  124 
 B-reel shots 8,  8 , 186 
 cabling: control cables 46,  47 , 48–9,  48 , 
119–20 ; Lavalier Microphones 140–1, 
 140 , 145,  145 , 152, 154; memory 42; 
pigtails 49; snake cables 46,  46 , 47–8, 
 48 , 49; velcro cable ties 43,  43 ; wireless 
systems  168 ; wrapping technique 38, 
 39 , 40,  40 , 41,  41 , 42,  42 ; XLR cables 
46,  46 , 47,  47 , 49 
 camera operators 8, 87–8,  87 ,  88 , 119, 
120, 189, 197 
 camera-mounted microphones  182 , 187; 
DSLR cameras 201–2,  201 ,  202 , 203, 
 204 ,  205 
 cameras: audio settings 9; initial 
calibration 35–7,  36 ; monitor select 77; 
tying into 46–9,  46 ,  48 ,  49 ; voice-overs 
11; wireless hop setup 175–7,  176 ; 
wireless hops 174–5,  174 ,  175 ; wireless 
receiver calibration to 172–4,  172 ,  173 ; 
wireless receiver mounting 167–8,  167 ; 
wireless transmitter calibration to 173 
 cameras, DSLR 200–7,  200 ; microphone 
set up 203,  203 ,  204 ,  205 ; microphones 
 201 , 202–3,  202 ; speaker 203; sync 
205–7,  205 ,  207 
 cameras, video 178–99,  191 ,  192 ; audio 
input level 180–1,  180 ,  181 , 182; audio 
level 183,  183 ; audio meters  190 ; 
Index

I N D E X
2 2 8
automatic gain control 174, 182,  183 ; 
calibration 179,  179 , 185–7; 
direct input 190–1; fi eld mixer input 
192,  193 , 194,  194 ,  195 , 196,  196 ; 
input select (1) 181,  181 ; input select (2) 
 182 , 182; line level 198; microphones 
 181 ,  182 , 186–7; monitor select  184 , 
 184–5 ,  185 ; monitor volume 184,  184 ; 
playback checks 197–8; VJ attenuator 
182–3, 188–9,  188 ; VJ attenuator set up 
189–90,  189 
 cancellation ports 92 
 canned air 225,  225 
 carrying cases 224,  224 
 channel fader 25–6; adjustment 61–2,  62 
 channel gain 26; setting 63,  64 , 65 
 channel panning 30–1, 72, 78 
 clothing noise 137 
 comfort 37–8 
 communication 15–7,  16 
 Comtec 223,  223 
 consistency 82 
 consumer line level 198 
 control cables 46,  47 , 48–9,  48 , 119–20, 
 120 
 cramping 117, 118 
 critical listening 78–9 
 dialing in 58–9,  59 ; channel fader 
adjustment 61,  62 ; limiter settings 
69–70,  70 ; master gain adjustment 31, 
 60 ,  61 ; metering 62–3; mic placement 
59,  59 ,  60 ; PAD settings 63–5,  63 ,  64 ; 
steps 59 
 dialogue: and ambience separation 19–20; 
ambience-free 12; consistency 101; 
and framing 81–2; location recording 
6; microphones 92–3,  92 ,  93 , 95,  95 ; 
performance volume 20; separation 
from ambience 80–1; tonal quality 
80–2,  81 , 82
 directors 21 
 distortion prevention 98–9 
 distractions, avoiding 83–4 
 diversity systems 161,  162 , 175 
 DPA4017B 94 
 dress 116,  116 
 ears, training 84 
 editors 13 
 exposed lavalier technique 137–42,  138 , 
 139 ,  140 ,  141 ,  142 
 extraneous sounds 13–5, 18–9, 82,  83 , 
86–7, 217–8 
 Field Mixer Initial Setup procedure 33,  33 ; 
four-channel 33–5 
 fi eld mixers 22–51, 37; camera 
connections 46–9,  46 ,  47 ,  48 ,  49 ; 
camera input setup 192,  193 , 194–5, 
 194 ,  195 , 196,  196 ; carrying 37–8,  37 , 
43,  43 ,  45 ; choosing 23; fi eld recorder 
calibration 211–3,  211 ,  212 ,  214 ; four-
channel 33–5; headphone attachment 
44,  45 ; pan dials  54 ,  55 ; pre-amps 
191; rig 37; shotgun microphone 
connections 49,  49 ; wireless receiver 
calibration 168,  168 ; wireless receivers 
49–50,  50 , 56,  56 , 57 
 fi eld mixers, features 23,  23 ; batteries 
25; channel fader 25–6; channel gain 
26; channel panning 30–1; external 
power 25,  25 ; high-pass fi lter 28–9,  28 ; 
input section  24 ; input select—mic/line 
channel switch 31–2; internal power 
supply 24,  24 ; limiter 30; master gain 
26; meters 26; microphone power 31; 
monitor return 32; monitor/headphone 
volume 32; output section  24 ; output 
stage 29,  29 ,  30 ; power supply 
24–5,  24 ; power switch 24; pre-amp 
attenuator (PAD) 26–7,  27 ; slate mic 32; 
tone oscillator 32; XLR channel Inputs 
31 
 fi eld mixers, operating and monitoring 
techniques 52, 54; assigning/panning 
53,  54 , 55,  55 ,  56 , 57–8,  57 ; dialing in 
58–71,  58 ,  59 ,  60 ,  61 ,  62 ,  63 ,  64 ,  65 , 
 66 ,  68 ,  69 , 70 ; monitor section 70–5, 
 70 ,  71 ,  73 ,  74 ,  75 , 76–8,  76 ,  77 ; during 
shooting 85–9,  86 ,  87 ,  88 
 fi eld recorders 208–14,  208 ,  209 ,  210 ; 
calibration 211–3,  211 ,  212 ,  214 ; 
choosing 209–11 
 focus 52, 54 

I N D E X
2 2 9
 four-channel fi eld mixers 33–5 
 framing 81–2,  81 , 82
 hair brushes 226,  226 
 handheld microphones 221–2,  221 ,  222 
 handling noise, reducing 98 
 hard-wired lavaliers 128,  128 
 harnesses 37–8,  37 
 headphone select 32, 72 
 headphones 44–5,  45 , 88–9; design 73–4; 
quality  84 ; settings 78; volume 73–4,  73 
 high-pass fi lter 28–9 
 high-pass fi lters  28 ,  29 ; bass roll-off 
switch 68,  69 ; setting 65–9,  69 ; stepped 
high-pass  65 , 65–7; sweepable high-
pass fi lters  66 , 67–8,  67 ; warning 68–9 
 hyper-cardioid microphones 92–3,  92 ,  93 
 interviews 10–1,  11 , 83,  83 , 86, 116, 
215–20,  215 ,  216 ; ambience 15, 216; 
extraneous sounds 217–8; nonverbal 
communication 218–9,  218 ; retakes 
216, 218; room tone 219; start 219; 
technique 215–20,  217 ,  218 ,  219 
 karabiners 45,  45 
 labeling, video tapes 198,  199 
 Lavalier Microphones 127–58,  127 ; 
advantages 127–8, 129–30; application 
135–7,  136 ; application, exposed 
137–42,  138 ,  139 ,  140 ,  141 ,  142 ; 
application, hidden 143–59,  144 ,  145 , 
 146 ,  147 ,  148 ,  149 ,  150 ,  151 ,  152 ,  153 , 
 154 ,  155 ,  156 ,  157 ,  158 ,  159 ; cabling 
140–1,  140 , 145,  145 , 154, 159,  159 , 
151151; clothing noise 137; connection 
142–3; design types 134–5,  135 ,  136 ; in 
glasses 156–9,  157 ,  158 ,  159 ; hardwired 
128,  128 ; in hats 154–6,  154 ,  155 ,  156 ; 
on the head 153–9,  154 ,  155 ,  156 ,  157 , 
 158 ,  159 ; leather clip 150–3,  150 ,  151 , 
 152 ,  153 ; moleskin attachment 147–9, 
 147 ,  148 ,  149 ; and personal space  131 , 
132–4,  132 ,  133 ; placement 136–7,  136 , 
137, 150, 154–5; power supply  128 ; 
reach 130; skin attachment 150–3,  150 , 
 151 ,  152 ,  153 ; tie clip 137–42,  138 ,  139 , 
 140 ,  141 ,  142 ; vampire clip 144–7,  144 , 
 145 ,  146 ; in windy conditions 130,  130 ; 
wireless 128,  129 , 142–3,  142 ,  143 ; and 
women 131,  132 ,  133 , 150,  151 , 152, 
 152 ,  153 
 lighting, and booming 124 
 limiter settings 69–70,  70 
 limiters 30 
 line levels 29, 198 
 listening: critical 78–9; effectively 79; and 
headphones 84,  84 ; during recording 
82,  83 ; during rehearsal 80–2,  81, 82 ; 
during setup 79–80,  81, 82 ; training 
your ears 84 
 lobeing 100–1,  101 
 location 6; ambience 79–80; ambience 
evaluation 13–5,  14 ; ambience quality 
15–6; audio friendly 21,  21 ; changing 
21,  21 ; choice 6–17,  6 ; communication 
15–7,  16 ; loud 222; preparing 17–21; 
problems 13–5,  14 ; shots 8–12,  8 ,  9 ,  10 , 
 12 ; sound match 12–3,  13 
 location audio, defi nition 3 
 location audio operators: responsibilities 
 3 , 4; role 4 
 Location Audio Simplifi ed On-Demand 
course 5 
 loud locations 222 
 low frequencies: ambience 67, 68–9; 
cutting 65; richness 101 
 master gain 26; adjustment  60 , 61,  61 
 men, high-pass fi lter settings 66 
 metering ranges 70 
 mic level 29 
 microphone fl ashers 223,  223 
 microphones: ambience 95–6,  95 ; 
camera-mounted.  see cameras; 
dialogue indoors 92–3,  92 ,  93 ; dialogue 
outside  94 , 95,  95 ; distortion prevention 
98–9; handheld 221–2,  221 ,  222 ; 
mono recording 58; placement 59,  59 , 
 60 ; power supply 31; warming 191; 
windsocks  130 , 137, 139,  139 ,  186 ; . 
 see also Lavalier Microphones; shotgun 
microphones 

I N D E X
2 3 0
 Miles, Dean 3,  3 
 mixer bags 43,  43 
 moleskin 147–9,  147 ,  148 ,  149 
 monitor return 32, 74,  74 ; calibrating 75, 
 75 ,  76 , 77; during shooting 87 
 monitor section  71 
 monitor select function 72 
 monitor volume 73–4,  73 ; cameras 184, 
 184 
 monitor/headphone volume 32 
 monitoring function 71–2,  71 ; channel 
panning 72, 78; headphone select 72; 
listening 78–84,  79 , 80,  81 , 82,  83 ,  84 ; 
monitor return function 74,  74 ; monitor 
return function calibration 75,  75 ,  76 , 
77; monitor select 72; monitor volume 
73–4,  73 ; operation 77–8,  77 ; PFL 
function 72; in stereo 78 
 mono recording 58 
 motion booming 116, 118–20,  119 ,  120 
 motion shots 122 
 mud 109 
 multi-pin video connectors 46, 48 
 Neumann KM 150 93,  93 
 Neumann KMR82 95 
 noise-makers 18–9 
 nonverbal communication 218–9,  218 
 on axis recording 100,  100 
 one-hand booming 120–2,  121 ,  122 
 online course 5 
 operating focus 85 
 pan dials  54 
 pan function setup 53–4,  54 , 55–8, 56, 57 
 panning errors 57 
 performance volume 20 
 personal space, entering  131 , 132–4,  132 , 
 133 
 PFL (Pre/Post-Fade Listen) 72 
 pick-up pattern: axis 99,  99 , 122; lobe 99, 
 99 ; range 97; shotgun microphones 92, 
 92 , 94,  94 , 95, 96, 97, 99,  99 ; width 96 
 pigtails 49 
 post audio editors 4 
 PPM (peak program meters) 26, 62 
 pre-amp attenuator (PAD) 26–7,  27 ; 
setting 63–5,  64 ,  65 
 professional line level 198 
 quality audio, commitment to 1–2, 20–1 
 rain ponchos 225 
 rain socks 224–5,  224 
 recording, listening during 82,  83 
 recording level, limiting 69–70,  70 
 reference tone 196, 197 
 refrigerator noise 14, 18 
 rehearsals, listening during 80–2,  81 , 82
 responsibilities  3 , 4 
 retakes, calling for 83 
 room tone 88–9, 219 
 safety tracks 35–7 
 scene shots 10 
 scooping 125,  125 
 second opinions 86–8,  87 ,  88 
 Sennheiser ME 64 93,  93 
 Sennheiser MKH50 94 
 Sennheiser MKH70 95 
 sequence shots 10 
 shooting 85; extraneous sounds 86–7; mic 
adjustments  85 ; monitor return checks 
87; room tone 88–9; second opinions 
86–8,  87 ,  88 ; volume changes 86 
 shotgun microphones 31, 57, 90–1,  91 , 
95–6,  95 ,  96 ; –10dB PAD 98–9,  98 ; 
aftermarket  186 , 187; arsenal 102; axis 
99,  99 ; on axis recording 100,  100 ; 
cancellation ports 101, 123; connection 
49,  49 ; hyper-cardioid group 92–3,  92 , 
 93 ; lobe 99,  99 ; lobeing 100–1,  101 ; 
low-cut fi lter 98,  98 ; medium group 95, 
 95 , 96; mono recording 58; pick-up 
pattern 92,  92 , 94,  94 , 95,  95 , 99,  99 , 
122; pick-up pattern range 97; pick-up 
pattern width 96; power supply 97–8; 
rain socks 224–5,  224 ; short group 94, 
 94 ; sound perspective 96–7 
 shots: B-reel 8–9,  8 ; interview 10–1,  10 ; 
motion 118–20,  119 ,  120 , 122; purpose 
8; scene 10; sequence 10; sound 
match 12,  13 ; stand-ups 9,  9 ; static 

I N D E X
2 3 1
116–8,  116 ,  117 ,  118 ; voice-over 11, 
 11 ,  12 
 shoulder straps 37–8,  37 
 Shure VP89L 95 
 Shure VP89S 94,  94 
 signal-to-noise ratio 70 
 skills 4 
 slate mic 32 
 slates 206 
 snake cables 46,  46 , 47–8,  48 , 49 
 sound bites 186 
 sound match, shots 12–3,  13 
 sound perspective 96–7 
 sound sources 32 
 stand-up shots 9,  9 
 static booming 116–7, 116–8,  116 ,  117 , 
 118 
 stepped high-pass fi lters 28,  28 , 65–7 
 sweepable high-pass fi lters 28,  29 ,  66 , 
67–8 
 sync track 186–7, 205–7,  205 ,  207 
 system check, four-channel fi eld mixers 
33–5 
 tangles, preventing 44 
 tonal quality, dialogue 80–2,  81 , 82
 tone oscillators 32, 61 
 tool kit 226,  226 
 Unity 60 
 vampire clip lavaliers 144–7,  144 ,  145 ,  146 
 velcro cable ties 106 
 video producers, commitment to audio 
20–1 
 video tapes, labeling 198,  199 
 VJ attenuators 182–3, 188–90,  188 ; set up 
189–90,  189 
 voice sibilance 171 
 voice-overs 11,  11 ,  12 
 volume changes, shooting 86 
 VU meters 26, 63 
 walkie-talkies 225,  225 
 wind 130 
 windsocks 130,  130 , 137, 139,  139 ,  186 
 wireless hops 174–5,  174 ,  175 ; setup 
175–7,  176 
 wireless lavaliers 128,  129 , 142–3,  142 , 
 143 
 wireless monitoring 223,  223 
 wireless receivers 49–50,  50 , 56, 57,  57 
 wireless systems 160–77,  160 ,  162 , 
 164 ; advantages 162; antennas 164; 
batteries 165,  165 ; cabling  168 ; 
disadvantages 161; diversity systems 
161,  162 , 175; line of sight 165; 
monitoring 223,  223 ; range 164,  164 ; 
receiver calibration 162–3, 168,  168 ; 
receiver calibration to a camera 172–4, 
 172 ,  173 ; receiver output adjustment 
 170 , 171–2,  171 ; receiver setup 169–72, 
 169 ,  170 ,  171 ; receivers  165 , 167–8, 
 167 ; RF signal 163–5,  164 ; transmitter 
calibration 162–3, 165–7,  166 ; 
transmitter calibration to a camera 173; 
transmitter setup 169,  169 ; wireless hop 
setup 175–7,  176 ; wireless hops 174–5, 
 174 ,  175 
 wireless transmitters  142 , 143,  143 
 women: high-pass fi lter settings 66; and 
Lavalier Microphones 131,  132 ,  133 , 
150, 151–2,  151 ,  152 ,  153 
 XLR cables 46,  46 , 47,  47 , 49 
 XLR channel Inputs 31 

