
 Logic Pro X 

This page intentionally left blank

 Logic Pro X
Audio and Music Production   
 Mark  Cousins 
 Russ  Hepworth-Sawyer 

 First published 2014 
 by Focal Press 
 70 Blanchard Road, Suite 402, Burlington, MA 01803 
 and by Focal Press 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
Focal Press is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
 © 2014 Taylor & Francis 
 The right of Mark Cousins and Russ Hepworth-Sawyer to be identifi ed as authors of this work has been asserted by them in 
 accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or 
other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 
Notices
 Knowledge and best practice in this fi eld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our understanding, 
changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary. 
 Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using any information, 
methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their 
own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility. 
 Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identifi cation and explanation 
without intent to infringe. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
 CIP data has been applied for. 
 ISBN: 978-0-415-85768-0 (pbk) 
 ISBN: 978-0-203-79660-3 (ebk) 
 Typeset in Myriad Pro 
 Project Managed and Typeset by: diacriTech 

Bound to Create
You are a creator.  
Whatever your form of expression — photography, filmmaking, 
animation, games, audio, media communication, web design, or 
theatre — you simply want to create without limitation.  Bound 
by nothing except your own creativity and determination.
Focal Press can help.  
For over 75 years Focal has published books that support your 
creative goals. Our founder, Andor Kraszna-Krausz, established 
Focal in 1938 so you could have access to leading-edge expert 
knowledge, techniques, and tools that allow you to create 
without constraint.  We strive to create exceptional, engaging, 
and practical content that helps you master your passion.
Focal Press and you.  
Bound to create.
We’d love to hear how we’ve helped  
you create. Share your experience: 
www.focalpress.com/boundtocreate 

This page intentionally left blank

 Dedication 
 This edition of our book is dedicated to the memory of Richard “Rich T” Tolson (1973–2013), a dedicated 
music educator, friend, and colleague to many. The music world is poorer without him. 

This page intentionally left blank

ix
 Table of Contents 
About the Authors 
x
Acknowledgments 
1
Chapter 1 
The Logic Pro Concept 
3
Chapter 2 
Logic Pro X’s Interface 
11
Chapter 3 
Getting Connected 
31 
Chapter 4 
Starting a Project 
57
Chapter 5 
Audio Regions and Editing 
91
Chapter 6 
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
159
Chapter 7 
Creative Sound Design 
225
Chapter 8 
Mixing in Logic 
285
Chapter 9 
Mastering in Logic 
325
Chapter 10 Logic and Multimedia Production 
345 
Chapter 11 Optimizing Logic 
381
Index 
407

x
 About the Authors 
 Mark Cousins  works as a composer, programmer, and sound engineer ( www.cousins-saunders.co.uk ), as well 
as being a long-serving contributor to  Music Tech  magazine. His professional work involves composing music 
for some of the world’s largest production music companies – including Universal Publishing Production 
Music, among others – and he has had his music placed on major campaigns for brands such as Strongbow, 
McDonalds, Stella Artois, Hershey, BT, and Liptons as well as being used on hit shows such as The Apprentice, 
Top Gear, and CSI:NY. He has also had works performed for the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, the East of 
England Orchestra, City of Prague Philharmonic Orchestra, and the Brighton Festival Chorus. 
 Mark has been an active contributor to  Music Tech  magazine since issue one. He has been responsible for 
the majority of cover features, as well as the magazine’s regular Logic Pro coverage. As a senior writer, he has 
also had a strong editorial input on the development of the magazine, helping it become one of the leading 
brands in its field. 
 Russ Hepworth-Sawyer  is a sound engineer and producer with two decades’ experience of all things 
in audio and is a member of the Association of Professional Recording Services; a Fellow of the RSA (Royal 
Society for the encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce), and a board member of the Music 
Producer’s Guild and helped form their Mastering Group. Through MOTTOsound ( www.mottosound.co.uk ), 
Russ works freelance in the industry as a mastering engineer, writer, and consultant. Russ currently lectures 
part time for York St John University and has taught extensively in Higher Education at institutions including 
Leeds College of Music, London College of Music, and Rose Bruford College and has contributed sessions at 
Barnsley College. He has written for  MusicTech  magazine,  Pro Sound News Europe , and  Sound on Sound plus 
has written many titles for Focal Press. 

1
 Acknowledgments 
 I would like to thank my mum and dad for gifting me a Casio CZ-3000 as my Christmas present in 1987 and 
starting the whole ball rolling; my wife, Hannah, and our two kids, Josie and Fred, for their support, patience, 
and amusement over the years and for keeping me company in the studio from time to time; Russ, who has 
been a longtime and sincere friend, but whose suggestion of writing a book together I should have politely 
declined! Neil Worley, for taking me on at  Music Tech  and showing me the hallowed profession of a being a 
writer; Adam Saunders, for putting up with my lack of musical output for several months; and finally, Polly, 
Deb, and Cath for looking after Fred in those final few hectic weeks! 
 Mark Cousins
 I would like to thank my wife Jackie and sons Tom & Aaron for their continued support as another book 
 deadline loomed – thank you!; my parents-in-law Ann and John for all their help; Mark for his guidance, 
knowledge, and for being the top chap he is; Max Wilson for his endless support and forcing me to move to 
Logic in the first place … thanks boss!; Jon Miller for the use of his animation file in Chapter 10, wherever he 
is! Iain Hodge, Peter Cook, and Justin Paterson at the London College of Music; and Craig Golding, and Danny 
Cope at Leeds College of Music. Thanks too to colleagues at York St John, namely Rob Wilsmore, Ben Burrows, 
Dave Young, Andy Devine, and Andy FarThing. Thanks too to Laura for propping MOTTOsound up whilst I’ve 
been concentrating on this. Thanks also go to Barkley McKay with whom I’ve had many DAW related “discus-
sions” … Barkley McKay (one day you’ll use Logic too!), plus hello to the Hepworths, Sawyers, and Leathers 
out there – you know who you are…. 
 Russ Hepworth-Sawyer

 In this chapter 
 1.1 
Introduction 
3 
 1.2 
A Brief History of 
Logic Pro X 
3 
 1.3 
The Logical Advantage 
5 
 Knowledgebases 
 Purchasing and Installing 
Logic Pro X 
6 
 Activating Advanced Tools 
7 

3
The Logic Pro Concept 
 1.1  Introduction 
 It’s hard to imagine a more complete system for music and audio production than Logic Pro X: multitrack 
recording and editing, a full suite of virtual instruments and eff ects, and a seamless workfl ow that takes 
you from the beginning of your project right through to the delivery of the fi nal production master. Yet, 
with such a complete system comes the daunting task of understanding how the elements of Logic Pro 
X knit together to produce a professional-sounding result. For example, where do you begin to start 
writing music or making a recording in Logic? What are the virtual instruments and plug-ins used by the 
professionals to create release-quality results? And how can you transform those poorly performed band 
recordings into a polished CD? 
 So, let’s be clear from the start: this book isn’t just another instruction manual for Logic Pro X. Instead, 
we’ve taken a process-driven approach that appraises, understands, and explores the features of Logic 
Pro X in a way that matches the structure and order of the production process. We’ll do more than just 
technically describe the functions of Logic Pro X; we’ll look at how the various elements of Logic Pro X 
relate to the demands of audio and music production. With all but a few exceptions, most of the chapters 
focus on a specifi c part of the production process – whether it’s initial track laying, sound design, or 
mastering your fi nished mixes to produce the fi nal CD – highlighting the relevant parts of the application 
that guarantee a professional-sounding audio product. We’ll also look at techniques that go beyond the 
scope of the manual – practices like parallel compression, for example, that many engineers use and 
abuse on a daily basis. 
 If you’re starting off  from scratch, it’s easy to be overwhelmed by the sheer size and complexity of an 
application like Logic Pro X. However, it isn’t essential to understand the entirety of the application to 
start producing music. Get to know the components that are most relevant to your way of working and 
build from there – use plenty of presets, Apple Loops, and so on to get you kick started – and then enjoy 
the process of exploring each element that little bit further. Ultimately, Logic Pro X is a tool that will grow 
with your experience – a system that will surprise at every turn and open up new possibilities whenever 
you want to explore the software further. With this book, you’ll at least have a reference to aid you in that 
process, but don’t be afraid to experiment to fi nd out how Logic Pro X best fi ts into your unique creative 
process! 
 1.2  A Brief History of Logic Pro X 
 Like the other “old-timers” of computer-based audio production – including Cubase and Pro Tools – Logic 
Pro X is an application with a rich and long heritage in the music industry. Born from the ashes of C-Lab’s 
Notator and Creator in 1993, Notator Logic (as it was then called) was an attempt to create a visual, 
region-based production environment for MIDI sequencing. Building blocks, or regions of MIDI data – 
used to control hardware synthesizers and samplers – could be arranged on the computer screen, with a 

4
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
clear, visual representation of the structure of the arrangement. What was unique about Logic, though, 
was that the application was completely confi gurable – users could create virtual presentations of their 
studio, known as an environment, for example, or combine diff erent editor windows in a completely 
confi gurable user interface. 
 Audio functionality was added to the application in 1994, with the release of version 1.7, allowing Logic 
users to combine both digital audio and MIDI data all in the same arrangement (although initially, only 
with expensive Digidesign audio hardware). Virtual instruments followed in 2000, making the system 
a complete production environment where music could be composed, mixed, and mastered all in one 
computer, and arguably, without the need for any extra third-party software. Although revolutionary at 
the time, this method of production has now become the norm, with many musicians and engineers 
largely working entirely “in the box.” 
 Figure 1.1    Logic Pro X includes an impressive array of features, but understanding how they integrate into 
the production process might not be immediately apparent.   

5
The Logic Pro Concept
 Apple acquired the company that originally developed Logic – Emagic – in 2002, with its 
programming team joining Apple’s, and Logic Pro becoming part of Apple’s prized suite of media-
based applications, including Final Cut Studio and Aperture 2. The partnership led to many of Logic 
Pro’s technologies migrating into other Apple applications – most notably with the introduction of 
GarageBand – as well as Apple making Logic Pro an increasingly price-competitive option, with both 
the absorption of previously optional software components into the main application (like Space 
Designer, the EXS24 Sampler, and the ES2 synthesizer), and, with the release of Logic Studio, a halving 
of its retail price. 
 Over the development of Logic Pro 8, Logic Pro 9, and now Logic Pro X, Apple has made some big 
developments in respect to making the application easier and more intuitive to use, yet at the same 
time, retaining the advanced features that have made Logic so popular with professional musicians 
and sound engineers. Logic Pro X is arguably the biggest cosmetic change to date, with a completely 
refreshed user interface and plenty of powerful new features.  
 1.3  The Logical Advantage 
 Opinion and debate will always rage as to the “best” digital audio workstation, but there are a number 
of factors that give Logic Pro X the edge over alternative solutions. Certainly, if you’re trying to make a 
decision between diff erent audio applications – all with such a compelling range of features – it’s well 
worth understanding some of their main overriding benefi ts, as well as seeing whether these align with 
your intended method of working. 
 Complete Integration with Apple Hardware and Software 
 Being part of Apple, you can guarantee that Logic Pro X will make optimal use of both Apple’s computing 
hardware and the operating system that ties it all together. For example, where other developers might 
lag behind certain OS updates, Logic Pro tends to be fi rst off  the block supporting major upgrades and 
technologies such as 64-bit architecture. On top of this, Logic Pro has always stood out from the crowd 
in terms of its effi  cient use of DSP resources, suggesting a well-coded audio engine, as well as plenty 
of integrated components – for example, the EXS24 sampler or Space Designer reverb – that ensure a 
completely optimal use of your computer’s processor. 
 Exhaustive Range of Plug-Ins and Instruments 
 Logic Pro X’s integral range of instruments and eff ects is easily the most comprehensive set available 
in any off -the-shelf Digital Audio Workstation (DAW). In addition to standard studio stalwarts such as 
compression, reverb, and equalization, Logic Pro X includes a number of contemporary eff ects and 
plenty of software instruments covering everything from vintage Hammond organs to cutting-edge 
component-modeling synthesizers. Ultimately, with such a diverse collection of tools, you can easily 
produce a professional, release-quality output without having to resort to additional third-party plug-ins 
and eff ects, although, of course, there’s no reason why you can’t add these at a later point should you 
wish to do so. As the old saying goes, the only limit with Logic Pro X is your imagination. 

6
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 1 
   Purchasing and Installing Logic Pro X 
 As with a range of applications nowadays, Logic Pro X is only available through Apple’s App Store. 
Once you’ve paid for the App, there’s an initial download of around 650 MB before you can start 
using Logic Pro X. When the installation is complete, Logic Pro should appear on the Launchpad or 
you can also fi nd it via Applications folder on your hard drive. 
 Technically speaking, the initial download of Logic only covers a “bare bones installation,” with a 
large amount of additional content, particularly in respect to additional sounds and presets, found 
in a supplementary download. To activate the additional download, go to the menu item Logic Pro 
X > Download Additional Content. The following screen should then indicate both the contents 
you’ve installed and any remaining items that haven’t been downloaded. 
 If you’re trying to keep your drive usage to a minimum, there’s a lot of sense in being prudent with 
the amount of content that you’re downloading. The biggest use of space is found under the Drum 
Kit content package, although this is the data used by Drummer, which is a worthy and useful new 
feature of Logic Pro X. If you’re not interested in content compatibility with older version of Logic, 
the Legacy and Compatibility is probably worth not installing as this can save over 10 GB.   
 Figure 1.2    Once you’ve downloaded the initial install of Logic Pro X from the App store, go to the menu 
option Logic Pro X > Download Additional Content to fi nish the remaining sound content.   

7
The Logic Pro Concept
 KNOWLEDGEBASE 2 
 Activating Advanced Tools 
 To make Logic Pro X easier for newcomers, Apple has thoughtfully given the application two 
diff erent modes of operation. With the advanced tools active, Logic Pro X users have full access to the 
functionality of the program. With the advanced tools deactivated, though, Logic Pro X operates with 
a slimmed-down functionality that’s much closer to GarageBand. If you’re upgrading from an existing 
version of Logic Pro 8 or 9, or a similar version of Logic Express, the advanced tools are turned on by 
default. New users to Logic Pro X, though, will have the advanced tools turned off  by default. 
 Given that the book doesn’t make a distinction between advanced tools and a basic toolset, it makes 
sense to ensure that the advanced tools are turned on. To see the current settings, go to the menu 
item Logic Pro X > Preferences > Advanced Tools. Check the Show Advanced Tools option to have 
the full feature set, alongside a series of other additional options that can be dropped in or out 
as you see fi t. While the advanced tools might make the application slightly more daunting, their 
usefulness in the long run is worth the extra investment of time and eff ort!  
 Figure 1.3    Make sure you’ve activated the advanced tool set (Logic Pro X > Preferences > Advanced 
Tools) as this will give you full and complete access to Logic’s functionality.   

8
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Effective Combination of MIDI and Audio Editing 
 While some applications have strengths in a particular area (like MIDI or audio), Logic Pro X presents 
an eff ective hybrid solution for both MIDI-based composition and audio recording and editing, which 
probably explains why so many working composers operate completely within the realms of Logic Pro X. 
Its fl exibility also makes it possible to use Logic Pro X in a wide range of audio production environments 
including 5.1 and surround sound mixing, sound for fi lm, and other multimedia applications.   

This page intentionally left blank

 In this chapter 
 2.1 
Introduction 
11 
 2.2 
What Logic Pro 
Can Record 
11 
 2.3 
Logic Pro Main Window 
and the Tracks Area 
11 
 2.4 
Editor Areas – Mixer, Audio 
Track Editor, Piano Roll 
Editor, Score Editor, and 
Step Editor 
14 
 2.5 
The Left-Hand Side 
Part 1 – The Library 
(Keyboard Shortcut – Y) 18 
 2.6 
The Left-Hand Side 
Part 2 – Inspector 
(Keyboard 
Shortcut – I) 
19 
 2.7 
The Right-Hand 
Side – Browsers, Loops, 
List Editors, and Project 
Notes 
21 
 2.8 
Control Bar and 
Toolbar 
25 
 2.9 
Tools, Local Menus, and 
Contextual Menus 
25 
 2.10 Adjusting How You View 
the Arrangement: Zooming 
In and Out 
27 
 Knowledgebase 
 What Is a Region? 
12 

11
Logic Pro X’s Interface 
 2.1  Introduction 
 Negotiating the interface of any audio application is vital to understand how it works and the precise 
method involved in creating a fi nished audio recording. Logic Pro’s interface is no exception, providing its 
own unique slant on the production process: with a number of editor windows, mixers, media browsers, 
and so on, all used to sculpt and refi ne your audio output. Navigate Logic Pro’s interface in an informed 
way, therefore, and the application will become a seamless and enjoyable part of your audio production 
workfl ow, rather than a stumbling block to your creative exploits. 
 In this chapter, we’re going to take a look at both the overarching principles of using Logic Pro, alongside 
the specifi c components of the Logic Pro interface and how these integrate into the production process. 
From this important stepping-stone, we can then begin the process of creating our own projects and 
taking a more detailed look at Logic Pro’s role and input in audio and music production. 
 2.2  What Logic Pro Can Record 
 Logic Pro principally works with two types of data – audio and MIDI. Physical instruments and external 
sound sources are recorded directly into Logic Pro as audio sound fi les. You might, for example, plug your 
guitar straight into a DI input on your audio interface or set up a number of microphones connected 
to your interface’s mic preamps – all of which will be recorded as audio fi les directly into Logic Pro’s 
main window. Once recorded, you can edit and mix these fi les to create your fi nished track, ready to be 
burned on to CD. 
 As an alternative to audio fi les, you can also record MIDI data directly into Logic Pro using an attached 
MIDI keyboard, which, in turn, can be used to control Logic’s integral virtual instruments (or other third-
party Audio Unit instruments), as well as external hardware MIDI synthesizers and samplers. Unlike audio 
recording, MIDI production provides an unprecedented amount of scope over both the performance 
and sound of the music, although it can sometimes lack the life and energy of music performed by real 
musicians. 
 Of course, it’s highly likely that most projects in Logic Pro will use a combination of both audio and 
MIDI recordings together to create the optimal presentation of your track. In that respect, the combined 
power and functionality of the Tracks area in handling such projects makes Logic a superb production 
solution. 
 2.3  Logic Pro Main Window and the Tracks Area 
 Logic Pro’s Main Window is the nerve center of your workfl ow, providing a range of diff erent editing 
and arrangement features to piece your project together. Placed in the middle of the interface, and 
covering the majority of the screen, is the Tracks area, displaying a list of current tracks and instruments 

12
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
residing in the project (in the track list down the left-hand side of the Tracks area), alongside the various 
regions that form the structure and development of your song over time. By adding or deleting tracks or 
moving regions around the screen, we can visually build up the structure and arrangement of the song 
accordingly. 
 Figure 2.1    The Tracks area provides a visual overview of the tracks used in the project, as well as the 
arrangement of the song defi ned by the various regions.   
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 
 What Is a Region? 
 One of the principal concepts of a DAW system like Logic Pro is the notion of the nondestructive edit. 
Unlike the process of editing tape – which physically cuts the tape into two – an edit in Logic simply 
changes the proportion of data played. In that respect, we need to make an important distinction 
between the “source fi le” or recording and a “region.” In eff ect, a region is simply a window on the 
original data, playing back either a small or large part of fi le. You can also have a number of diff erent 
regions focusing on diff erent parts of the original fi le, but, ultimately, all sourced from the same 
material. Of course, all of these types of editing would be impossible to achieve with a physical, 
destructive editing medium like tape.   

13
Logic Pro X’s Interface
 Figure 2.3    Use the other areas to the side of the Main Window to access more detailed application-specifi c 
editing tools and features.   
 Figure 2.2    A region is simply a window on the original 
data, allowing you to resize the edit at any point, eff ectively 
bringing back audio or MIDI data after the original start or 
end point has been established.   
 Springing up from the sides of the Logic Pro main window are a number of other functional “areas.” 
These areas relate to activities involved in the production process and the tools of editing, arranging, and 
mixing audio and MIDI data. For example, in the initial stages of production, you might need to input 
the various signals to be recorded, checking their respective recording levels and making a suitable 

14
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
“monitor mix” – in this case, opening up the Mixer at the bottom of the Tracks area. Later on, you might 
want to import some additional audio fi les – using Project Audio Browser – or edit the timing of a MIDI 
performance using the Piano Roll.  
 The idea behind the Logic Pro main window, therefore, is that it can provide a dynamic working 
environment, optimized for the tasks you need to carry out at any point in time. Although it’s possible 
to open and shut many of these extra areas using on screen tabs, or double-clicking on regions, it’s 
well worth memorizing some of the important keyboard shortcuts so that you open them “on the fl y.” 
Importantly though, whatever additional area you decide to open up, you’ll still have some overview 
of the project’s arrangement, allowing you to keep a handle on how your edits aff ect the entirety of 
the track. 
 2.4  Editor Areas – Mixer, Audio Track Editor, Piano Roll 
Editor, Score Editor, and Step Editor 
 Opening from the bottom of the Logic Pro main window, the various editor areas within Logic allow you 
to work with and edit your project in a number of diff erent ways. You can open the editors using either 
the keyboard shortcuts described below or the corresponding icons found in the top left-hand corner 
of the control bar.   
 Figure 2.4    Use the icons at the top 
left-hand corner of the control bar 
to open the various editors in Logic.   
 Mixer (Keyboard Shortcut – X) 
 The Mixer balances the respective levels of the tracks included in your project, as well as instantiating 
diff erent signal processing plug-ins (like reverb, compression, or equalization) to process each mixer 
channel. In addition to audio mixing, the Mixer is also the primary port of call for using virtual instruments 
(like synthesizers, samplers, and vintage keyboards), allowing us to create music completely within 
the realms of Logic. Alongside the Tracks area, the Mixer is undoubtedly one of the most important 
day-to-day production tools used in Logic.   
 Piano Roll Editor (Keyboard Shortcut – P) 
 The Piano Roll Editor is the main MIDI editor in Logic Pro, used to edit MIDI information that in turn 
controls virtual instruments or external hardware synthesizers and samplers. Using an intuitive display 

15
Logic Pro X’s Interface
 Figure 2.5    The Mixer allows us to balance the mix, process tracks using audio eff ect plug-ins, and instantiate 
virtual instruments. 
of note information based on the position on the piano keyboard (on the vertical axis) and the horizontal 
axis displaying both the note’s starting point and duration, Piano Roll Editor off ers both unparalleled 
precision and ease-of-use for MIDI editing. Using the extended editing functions of the Piano Roll Editor, 
you can also transform and edit MIDI information in ways that would be extremely time-consuming (if 
not impossible) to perform by hand. 
 Figure 2.6    Piano Roll is Logic Pro’s main MIDI editor, with a range of editing tools and features dedicated to 
the precise editing of performance data.   

16
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Audio Track Editor (Keyboard Shortcut – E) 
 The Audio Track Editor provides detailed, sample-accurate audio editing of a given region in the Tracks 
area. Although a large amount of audio editing can be achieved in the Tracks area alone, the Audio 
Track Editor lets you explore one level deeper, especially with respect to Flex Pitch and Flex Time editing, 
where you can manipulate the pitch and time-based properties of your audio – whether to fi x poor 
intonation on a vocal line, for example, or quantize a drum loop. 
 Score Editor (Keyboard Shortcut – N) 
 In addition to providing a useful way of visualizing and editing MIDI information for musically literate 
users, the Score Editor is the vital conduit between your raw MIDI recordings and a fi nished printed score 
readable by real musicians! Although not everybody will want to use the Score Editor, it does illustrate 
Logic Pro’s intention to be a versatile and competent music production tool in the widest sense.   
 Step Editor 
 This fi nal form of MIDI editor off ers a more specialized solution to working with controller data – like 
volume or pan – as well as off ering an alternative means of programming and creating drum tracks. 
Information is presented within a unique series of vertical beams, allowing you to quickly draw 
controller sweeps, for example, or complicated drum patterns full of sixteenth notes. As with the Score 
Editor, the Step Editor might not be to everyone’s tastes (there are alternative ways of achieving many of 
its main applications), but it does form an interesting alternative for working with several diff erent lanes 
of controller data outside the Piano Roll editor. 
 Figure 2.7    The Audio Track Editor facilitates sample-accurate audio editing as well as accessing extended 
features like Flex Pitch and Flex Time.   

17
Logic Pro X’s Interface
 Figure 2.8    Although slightly less versatile as a MIDI editor, the Score Editor is still a useful tool for turning 
your MIDI performances into a fi nished score. 
 Figure 2.9    Hyper Editor displays its information as a series of unique vertical beams. As such, the Hyper 
Editor forms a useful solution for dealing with MIDI controller data.   
 To change the respective proportion of the screen devoted to the main Tracks area and the various editors, 
click and drag on the thin gray line between the Tracks area and bottom editor area. This allows you to 
optimize the view based on your current priority – for example, expanding the Mixer when you need full 
access to its compression and equalization settings or using a minimized Mixer (with just the main fader 
positions viewable) when you want to quickly rebalance the mix in relation to the arrangement.   

18
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 2.10    Change the relative window size (using the thin gray line between the areas) to prioritize the 
view based on your current production activity.   
 2.5  The Left-Hand Side Part 1 – The Library (Keyboard 
Shortcut – Y) 
 As you should be well aware of, Logic Pro X comes with a diverse sound library, including a range of 
playable instruments that can all be accessed via the Library on the left-hand side of the interface. Once 
you’ve opened the library you’ll be able to browse a series of patches based on the current selected 
channel strip. If you’re resting on an instrument track, for example, you’ll be able to browse a collection of 
playable virtual instruments, covering everything from piano sounds through to virtual drum machines. 
If you’re resting on an audio track, however, you’ll be able to load preset compression, EQ and FX settings 
that compliment that particular instrument.   
 When you load a Library patch be aware that Logic might instantiate several channels worth of 
information, as well as FX busses unique to each instrument. In short, the Library can soon fi ll-out a 
project with a large number of channel strips and plug-ins, which can be helpful, but can also make your 
working environment quickly cluttered. As an alternative, therefore, you can always consider loading 
individual virtual instruments and eff ects plug-ins one at a time, and then browsing the preset settings 
found within the instrument/plug-in. 

19
Logic Pro X’s Interface
 Figure 2.11  
Use the Library, on the left-hand side of 
the Tracks area, to access Logic’s integral 
sound and instrument content.   
 Later on, we’ll see how the Library also works with the Track Stacks feature, which is an important tool 
for dealing with multiple track lanes that need to be grouped together. In this example, the Library also 
becomes an important place for you to store your own settings, which you can then move between 
projects, for example, or use a means of speeding up your workfl ow.  
 2.6  The Left-Hand Side Part 2 – Inspector (Keyboard 
Shortcut – I) 
 The Inspector area – found toward the left-hand side of Logic Pro’s Tracks area – provides a quick-
and-easy access point to key parameters relating to the regions and tracks used within your project. 
The Inspector is a powerful tool for audio production work in Logic Pro, performing many essential 
tasks like quantizing on MIDI regions or fades and crossfades with audio regions, as well as being an 
excellent way of viewing smaller parts of the audio mixer. 

20
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The Inspector is divided into three principal areas, which, looked at 
from top to bottom, are the region parameters, track parameters, and 
the channel strip (see below for more information). It is possible for 
both the region and track parameters to be minimized, in which case 
you’ll need to open them (using the small arrow) to access the complete 
parameter set.  
 Region Parameters 
 Region parameters govern the playback data of a particular audio or MIDI 
region in the arrangement. For example, a MIDI region can be quantized, 
transposed, delayed, and looped, all directly from the region parameters 
box. An audio region, on the other hand, has its own unique set of 
parameters, largely in relation to the use of fades and crossfades. Besides 
being applied on a region-by-region basis, the region parameters box is 
also a powerful tool for modifying playback data across several regions at 
the same time – maybe applying a massed quantizing setting, for example, 
for all the MIDI regions in your arrangement. 
 Track Parameters 
 Track parameters establish a number of parameters in relation to the track. 
Audio tracks tend to have slightly fewer parameters, whereas MIDI and 
virtual instrument tracks present slightly more control. 
 Channel Strip 
 Not a full mixer as such, but the Inspector’s channel strip view at least 
provides some basic access to the audio mixer on a track-by-track basis. 
The second channel strip illustrates the “next step” in the channel’s signal 
path. For example, this could be the main outputs, or an aux fader, if the 
track was being fed to reverb or delay plug-in via a bus send. 
 Figure 2.12    The Inspector provides a quick access point to parameters 
relating to audio regions and tracks, as well as a track-by-track display of the 
audio mixer. 

21
Logic Pro X’s Interface
 2.7  The Right-Hand Side – Browsers, Loops, List Editors, 
and Project Notes 
 The right-hand side of Logic Pro’s main window deals with a variety of list-based information, covering 
everything from a list of all the audio fi les contained within a project, through a list of tempo changes. 
All these facets are important to the day-to-day running of Logic, as well as fi ne-tuning. 
 Browsers (Keyboard Shortcut – F) 
 The Browsers area is a window on all the fi le-based activities involved in creating a project in Logic 
Pro. To make things easier, the Browsers area is divided into three key sections – Project Audio Browser, 
Figure 2.13 
Each region has its own parameters, which can be 
viewed and edited via the Inspector.

22
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 2.14  
Use the Project Audio Browser 
to see the range of audio 
fi les and regions attached to a 
project. 
Media, and All Files. Arguably the most important part of the Browsers area is the Project Audio Browser, 
which contains a complete list of both the audio fi les and the audio regions contained within a given 
project. In the Project Audio Browser you can import new audio fi les, for example, delete or rename 
existing fi les, as well as give your project a spring clean. 
 Use the Media Browser in situations where you want to import songs from your iTunes folder or movies 
from your Movies folder. Finally, the All Files Browser is a great way of negotiating a range of fi les on 

23
Logic Pro X’s Interface
your hard drive, much like Finder, with 
the added benefit that you can also 
use it to import individual tracks, plug-
ins settings, and media fi les from other 
Logic Pro Projects. 
 Apple Loops Browser 
(Keyboard Shortcut – O) 
 Apple Loops are a range of prerecorded 
musical segments that are installed 
alongside Logic Pro X and should be 
immediately familiar to anyone who’s 
used GarageBand. Use the Apple 
Loops Browser as a means of both 
auditioning and importing these loops 
into your Logic Project. 
 Project Notes/Track Notes 
(Keyboard Shortcut – Alt + N) 
 The project/track notes features is 
a handy way of keeping track of 
information that needs to accompany 
either a project as a whole or the tracks 
within it. Use the Project Notes feature 
to keep a “things to do list” alongside 
your song, while the track notes 
can be useful as a means of storing 
recording information like the choice 
of microphone used and any effects 
written into the audio fi le. 
 List Editors (Keyboard 
Shortcut – D) 
 Although not as glamorous or intuitive 
as some of the other editors, these 
List Editors are still vital to the success 
Figure 2.15 
Use the Apple Loops Browser to select 
and import Apple Loops that you want 
to include in your project.

24
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 2.16  
The Lists area manages the various 
list-based processes in Logic – from 
the detailed viewing and editing of 
MIDI information in the Event list 
through to the Tempo list’s set of 
tempo changes. 
of the project and the fl exibility and precision of working with Logic. In total, there are four types of 
list available. Event presents MIDI information in its “raw” form, allowing you to see precise parameter 
values and positional data. Marker displays a list of locational reference points (like verse, chorus, middle 
eight, and so on), which can be an eff ective way of navigating long projects. The Tempo list manages 
a project’s tempo changes, particularly vital when working to picture, while Signature off ers a similar 
control in relation to time signature.   

25
Logic Pro X’s Interface
 2.8  Control Bar and Toolbar 
 Control Bar 
 At the top of Logic Pro’s main window you fi nd the Control Bar. The fi rst and most important part of the 
control bar is the transport controls, which can engage Logic into playback, recording, as well as being 
used to navigate the project’s timeline. Working in tandem with the transport controls is the LCD area, 
which displays the current position in the song (in bar and beats and timecode format) as well as aspects 
like the tempo and time signature. 
 To the right of LCD area is the Modes and Functions buttons covering areas like the ability to cycle 
around a given point in the song, whether the recording mode is in overdub or replace, and of course, 
the all-important metronome. The remaining buttons on the control bar govern the various views and 
editors that can be called into action. On the left-hand side, for example, we can see icons for the Library, 
Editors, and the Mixer discussed earlier. On the right-hand side of the Control bar you fi nd buttons for 
the various Browsers and List Editors. 
 Figure 2.17    Use the toolbar to access features only usually available via keyboard shortcuts or the menu.   
 Figure 2.18    Navigate your project and invoke various Mode buttons via Logic Pro’s Control Bar.   
 Toolbar 
 Popping out from underneath the Control Bar is the Toolbar, which provides a number of handy buttons 
in relation to working with regions in the Tracks areas, among other things. Many of the functions with 
the Toolbar can be initiated with keyboard shortcuts; hence, to save space on your display, it might be 
benefi cial to close the Toolbar. However, if you’re new to working in Logic, these accessible buttons are a 
good way of understanding the variety of editing techniques you can apply. 
 To match your preferred way of working, it’s worth noting that both the Control Bar and the Toolbar can 
be redesigned as you see fi t by Ctrl-clicking on part of their grayed-out surface. In both bars, you can add 
further functions or remove features that aren’t so important to you. 
 2.9  Tools, Local Menus, and Contextual Menus 
 With many of Logic Pro’s principal audio and MIDI editors, alongside the main Tracks area, you’ll fi nd a 
series of tools dedicated to carrying out diff erent activities or tasks. These tools can be confi gured for 

26
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 2.20    Each area will have its own local menu, with a range of functions that are unique 
to the activity taking place.   
the left- and right-hand mouse button using the small drop-down 
menus in top center of the respective area. For example, the Tracks 
area includes tools that relate to the manipulation of regions, as 
well as automation data. When you’re editing automation data in 
the Tracks area, therefore, it might be benefi cial to place the main 
pointer tool on one mouse button, with the Automation Curve tool 
on another. 
 Pressing the keyboard shortcut T at any point will also bring up the 
particular toolbox menu for that area, allowing you to quickly switch 
tools without having to travel to the extremes of the area’s window. 
 Alongside Logic’s global menus, you’ll also fi nd a set of local menus 
unique to each area, many of which contain powerful editing features 
and functions that go beyond what can be achieved by mouse alone. 
Although not essential, it’s worth familiarizing yourself with these 
menu features over time. 
 In many cases, it is also possible to access these features via the use 
of contextual menus, directly activated by Ctrl-clicking in the relevant 
area. As you’d expect, the precise role and content of the contextual 
menus changes between areas, but you’ll also find that the menu 
adapts given the precise part of the screen or objects you click on. For example, in the Tracks area, the 
contextual menu will diff erentiate between Ctrl-clicking in the main region area, regions themselves, 
the bar ruler, and the track list, with diff erent functions appearing each time. Although bewildering at 
fi rst, as you get more used to these features, you’ll fi nd the contextual menus a powerful and immediate 
means of accessing the real depths of Logic’s editing prowess.   
 Figure 2.19  Each area has its 
own unique set of tools, which 
can be quickly accessed via the 
keyboard shortcut T. 

27
Logic Pro X’s Interface
 Figure 2.21  
Contextual menus – activated by 
Ctrl-clicking on the screen – access 
many features that are unique to 
the area or object you click on.   
 2.10  Adjusting How You View the Arrangement: Zooming 
In and Out 
 Varying the magnifi cation of your project is essential in terms of both keeping an overview of the “macro” 
arrangement of your track and to be able to hone in on certain details, even down to sample-level 
accuracy. In the Tracks area, the two zoom controls (for the horizontal and vertical axes, respectively) can 
be found toward the top right-hand corner of the window – note that you can also use Cmd+ any of the 
arrow keys to achieve the same movement in and out of magnifi cation. You can also use the zoom tool 
to drag-enclose a specifi c portion of the screen you want to view, with a double-click taking you back to 
your original magnifi cation level. 
 As an alternative to zooming in and out, you can also use the menu option View > Auto Track Zoom 
(keyboard shortcut Ctrl + Z) to enable a track-dependent horizontal zoom. This allows you to better 
view the track that you’re currently working on, although, of course, this is only in relation to the 
horizontal rather than vertical axis.  
 Another type of magnifi cation is the waveform intensity. This eff ectively changes the volume scaling 
of the waveform display, allowing you to better see quieter, more discrete parts of the waveform that 

28
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
you usually wouldn’t be able to see. To expand the waveform, simply click and hold on the waveform 
icon next to the horizontal/vertical zoom controls, and use the slider to scale accordingly. Although 
the waveform might end up looking distorted, the meters should, in fact, confi rm that it isn’t.   
 Figure 2.23  Changing the scaling of 
the waveform will allow you to improve 
your audio editing in relation to quieter 
parts of the signal.   
 Figure 2.22  Using the various zoom 
functions allows you to understand both 
the overall structure of your arrangement 
and the smallest details within it.   

This page intentionally left blank

 In this chapter 
 3.1 
Introduction 
31 
 3.2 
USB Devices 
31 
 3.3 
FireWire Devices 
36 
 3.4 
Thunderbolt 
38 
 3.5 
PCI Express 
38 
 3.6 
Other Audio 
 Equipment 
39 
 3.7 
Integration into Logic – 
Audio Preferences 
43 
 3.8 
Hard Drives 
46 
 3.9 
Control Surfaces 
47 
 3.10 Distributed Audio 
Processing and External 
DSP Solutions 
52 
 3.11 What Is MIDI? 
53 
 3.12 Avid Hardware Integration 
with Logic 
55 
 Knowledgebases 
 Latency and Monitoring 
45 
 ReWire 
55 

31
Getting Connected 
 3.1  Introduction 
 Although it’s easy enough to produce music solely using your computer, it’s inevitable that you’ll want 
to add some additional equipment to enhance your workfl ow: whether it’s a USB controller keyboard to 
manipulate one of Logic’s many virtual instruments, an additional hard drive for storing samples, or an 
audio interface so that you can record an electric guitar. Understanding the various connections in and 
out of your computer is therefore vital to getting the best from Logic and will allow you to expand your 
setup from a basic home computer to a full-sized professional studio! 
 In this chapter, we’re going to take a closer look at the key components you might want to add to your 
existing Logic and Mac setup – understanding the pros and cons behind their selection, how they connect 
to your computer, and how these devices integrate into the Logic working environment. Of course, it’s 
important to remember that no two setups will be exactly the same, so you should select the equipment 
that is most appropriate to your budget and the type of music you want to produce. 
 3.2  USB Devices 
 While the Mac’s onboard audio facilities are respectable, they can vary from model to model. Most Mac 
laptops come with a microphone built-in, and again, while very respectable for speech recognition and 
dictation, and chatting online, it lacks the professional quality you’d want for recording music. Whatever 
the onboard input, you’ll soon want to simply plug things in and expand your Logic studio. In this 
chapter, we’ll look specifi cally at the devices that get you connected. 
 USB – An Introduction 
 Connecting devices to the Mac is an easier aff air than it once was before the advent of USB. Prior to USB, 
diff erent manufacturers tended to use varied, and often proprietary, connection protocols. USB brought 
this all together with version 1.0, essentially resulting in one connection protocol for a multitude of 
diff erent uses. 
 USB 1.0 came as a slow protocol of 12 megabits per second (Mb/s), which was ample for devices such 
as mice, keyboards, printers, MIDI interfaces, and so on. Early Macs and some devices you will come into 
contact with (such as some older audio interfaces) are still USB 1.0. However, USB 1.0 would slow quickly 
with too much traffi  c via multiple connections using a USB hub. 
 FireWire was readily available at the same time, and being 400 Mb/s, it handled many of the heavier duty 
hardware such as external hard drives and larger audio interfaces. FireWire is still the preferred choice for 
many audio professionals, with the protocol now boasting 800 Mbs/s. 
 Fortunately, USB 2.0 came along around the year 2000 and off ered a considerably faster connection 
speed of 480 Mb/s allowing the USB to be fast enough for hard drives and audio interfaces with higher 
track counts and higher data rates. 

32
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 USB 3.0 was formally ratifi ed in 2008 and has gained quite a slow prominence. This has a data rate up to 
10 times faster than USB 2.0. 
 In practice, most external devices and peripherals for computers currently are connected using USB, 
including many used for music making. USB is a fl exible system that enables multiple devices to be 
connected to one computer with the use of a USB hub. Each hub acts as a splitter/merger box and 
typically allows for between 4 and 10 devices to be connected at once. The USB limit is much larger than 
this, but is unlikely to be exceeded by most users. Let’s take a look at the types of USB devices we can 
use with Logic Pro X. 
 USB Audio Interfaces 
 Audio interfaces come in many forms, but typically, USB-based devices are self-powered and historically 
(because of USB 1.0) handle two inputs and two outputs. In some instances, there may be useful MIDI 
sockets found here too, which we’ll discuss in a little detail later in the chapter. These usually inexpensive 
units may not always off er the highest grade sound quality, lowest latency (see Knowledgebase 1), or 
the largest range of sample frequency and bit-depth options, but they are excellent solutions for where 
basic input and output (I/O) and portability are the key. Ideal uses for this type of interface are simple 
stereo-pair recordings and overdubs. A large-scale live recording would require a larger interface with a 
comprehensive I/O count, but to track up, layer-by-layer, a large work could be easily built upon with this 
type of interface using overdub techniques.  
 Figure 3.1 
   The M-Audio M-Track Plus is an 
inexpensive audio interface with 
an impressive number of features 
for musicians on the move. Image 
courtesy of M-Audio.   
 There are a huge variety of USB audio interfaces available, and choosing the right one can be diffi  cult. 
Interfaces can vary widely in price, depending on sound quality and features. Manufacturers such as 
M-Audio, Edirol, Cakewalk, and others make a wide range of excellent inexpensive interfaces for this 
purpose, such as entry-level M-Audio M-Track Plus, shown above. This unit is well built and has lots of 
features such as inputs for diff erent types of microphones (including phantom power), electric guitars, 

33
Getting Connected
and other connections. This device can handle sample rates of up to 48kHz and bit depths of up to 24. 
Additionally, it boasts both SPDIF and MIDI inputs and outputs, making this a great portable starter. 
 Apogee, a manufacturer covered in more detail later in this chapter, has introduced a number of 
audio interface solutions for the Mac specifi cally and latterly for iPad. Their strategy has been to bring 
professional quality audio to these devices. The ONE (the illustrated version is the ONE for iPad and Mac), 
which is a small USB interface, has a microphone built-in plus an input for an instrument or a favorite 
microphone. The ONE comes with the professional quality output you’d expect from Apogee. 
 The key features vary from device to device; hence, choosing the right device for you will be dependent 
on the type of music you make to some extent. If you mainly produce electronic music, it is likely that 
a two-in and two-out device will be ample. However, if you are in a band and want to track your next 
album of live performances, you’ll require something with more inputs and fl exibility. Many devices can 
handle multiple microphone inputs and also include some additional features such as software mixing 
and digital signal processing such as compression and eff ects. 
 USB version 1.0, unlikely to be adopted on many modern devices, was a very slow connection, and 
many of the stereo interfaces were restricted to 44.1 kHz and 16 bits. Most devices are now USB 2.0 
and adopt the data rate of 480 Mb/s, which is a little faster than that of FireWire 400. Therefore, while in 
theory any USB 2.0 audio interface could handle a large I/O count, there would be interruptions for other 
devices connected to the computer using the shared USB bus (mice, keyboards, printers, etc.); thus, it 
is sometimes considered a little less reliable. This is due to the data throughput originally not being 
as stable as FireWire. As such, FireWire tends to be adopted for larger audio requirements or even PCI 
Express (PCIe), which are both covered later.   
 Figure 3.2 
   Apogee has teamed up with Apple to 
produce some excellent audio devices. 
Illustrated here is the new iPad and Mac 
compatible ONE, which has a mono input 
of a built-in microphone, jack input, or 
external microphone. Image courtesy of 
Apogee Electronics Corporation.   

34
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 USB Controller Keyboards 
 To play in notes through Logic’s instruments, you will use the Musical Typing Keyboard provided by 
pressing Cmd + K on your Mac, but sooner or later, you’ll want to escalate to your own controller 
keyboard. Many keyboards come with MIDI sockets (see the MIDI section toward the end of this chapter) 
to connect to your computer, but recently, these keyboards have connected directly using USB.  
 Figure 3.3 
 RME’s Total MIX 
FX is an excellent 
example of the 
additional mixing 
features that can be 
provided specifi cally 
for RME’s audio 
interfaces. Image 
courtesy of RME.   
 Figure 3.4 
 Pressing Cmd + K 
brings forward the 
Musical Typing 
Keyboard that 
allows the Mac’s 
qwerty keyboard 
to become a useful 
tool for entering in 
music on the move.   
 The introduction of a USB controller keyboard negates the need for a dedicated MIDI interface if you 
mainly use the internal Logic Instruments. However, if you wish to use some older MIDI equipment, 
you’ll need to use a MIDI interface, and for more details on this  visit page 53  . M-Audio’s Oxygen 25 
shown on the next page is a good example of a portable and fl exible controller keyboard off ering both 

35
Getting Connected
two octaves of input in addition to some assignable controller knobs. With a keyboard like this, you can 
enter in the notes and also control some of the parameters of the Logic Instrument such as the fi lter and 
envelope settings (discussed later in this book).   
 Figure 3.5 
 M-Audio’s Oxygen25 is a 
common and practical USB 
keyboard for musicians on the 
move, off ering both a couple 
of octaves and transport and 
mappable controllers. 
 Figure 3.6 
   M-Audio Axiom 49. A four-
octave keyboard with a whole 
host of controller controls and 
drum pads for music creation.   
 Many controller keyboards are available across the product ranges, working up to some pretty hefty 
weighted numbers. The top-of-the-range controllers are often built to feel like a real piano’s action under 
your fi ngers and are solid workhorses. There are many examples in between such as the M-Audio Axiom 
49, which additionally includes controllers and drum pads. 
 Select your controller carefully depending on the music you create and the fl exibility you need. Dance 
music production would probably benefi t from a controller keyboard with assignable knobs and sliders 

36
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
to various synthesizer and sampler parameters, while a virtuoso keyboard singer/songwriter might 
prefer to ensure the feel of the keys are as close to a real piano as possible. Portability will be a key 
aspect, and this may heavily infl uence your choice. 
 3.3  FireWire Devices 
 FireWire audio devices have long been the standard for professionals on the move. The reason for 
this was due to the aforementioned speed and reliability issues of USB 1.0. As such, FireWire became 
traditionally used for the data hungry devices such as audio interfaces and hard drives. FireWire still 
remains popular as its ports are rarely shared with many other devices that could interrupt the data fl ow. 
However, Thunderbolt is gaining prominence and shall eventually supersede FireWire we suspect. 
 Meanwhile FireWire audio interfaces remain popular, ranging from the inexpensive Focusrite Pro14 
(shown below) with four analog inputs and up to six outputs (four analog and two digital) to more 
expensive units with a higher count of inputs or outputs.  
 The latter devices are ideal for the larger projects you might 
wish to get involved in. Mid-range interfaces often offer 
somewhere between four and eight microphone inputs and 
up to 10 or sometimes more analog outputs. In addition to 
this, there are often a multitude of digital connections, such 
as the ADAT lightpipe standard, which can add another 
eight inputs and outputs to the interface with a suitable 
convertor. This method of expansion is typical of many audio 
interfaces, and if paired with a digitally connected console 
or multichannel convertor unit, such as Focusrite’s OctoPre 
MkII, most of them can be made of the units full input and 
output count. 
 Apogee, introduced earlier, is a well-respected, high-end 
audio converter manufacturer who has in the past worked 
closely with Apple. A result of this cooperation saw the 
introduction of a number of professional facing audio 
devices. These Macintosh-only audio interfaces contained 
some excellent and specifi c benefi ts for Logic users. From the start, these units boasted Apogee’s reputed 
high-quality converters, which after all are a key part to the sound quality of your studio setup among 
many other key features. 
 The fi rst that was introduced was the Ensemble, now sadly discontinued, that boasted eight analog 
outputs and eight audio inputs, four of which are very low-noise, digitally controlled microphone 
preamps. This was a well-received device. 
 The smaller and more portable Duet, still in production, is essentially a two-input/two-output portable 
device. The accompanying breakout cable allows for six connections: two XLR microphone inputs, two 
jack instrument inputs, and two line-level outputs. The Duet also comes with Apogee’s Maestro software 
that interfaces between Mac OS X’s Core Audio and their hardware. This is comprehensive and off ers the 
user the ability to confi gure multiple headphone mixes and outputs plus many clocking options and 
 Figure 3.7  Focusrite’s Saffi  re Pro 14 is 
part of a series of FireWire-enabled 
audio interfaces that, with Apple’s 
FireWire converter, are fully compatible 
with Thunderbolt. Image courtesy of 
Focusrite. 

37
Getting Connected
other intricate and useful controls. The software can digitally control the microphone preamplifi ers by 
mouse using the software, but ingeniously, Apogee has also included a knob on all their interfaces, 
which they call a “precision digital encoder” for the purposes of controlling faders and knobs on screen.      
 Figure 3.8  From Focusrite larger rack-
mountable devices such as the Liquid Saffi  re 
Pro off er a considerable number of inputs 
and outputs. Images courtesy of Focusrite. 
Also illustrated is Apple’s Thunderbolt to 
FireWire convertor, which is fully compatible 
with all Focusrite FireWire interfaces.   
 Figure 3.9  
 Naturally, there are a plethora of FireWire audio devices on the market for use with Logic, which 
work with Apple’s Core Audio. However, before taking the plunge, it might be worth checking 
on the manufacturer’s website that the device you are considering is compatible with Core Audio 
and Logic. 

38
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 3.4  Thunderbolt 
 In recent years, the Thunderbolt protocol has started to take further prominence on Apple portable 
devices. As Apple’s engineers worked ever harder on the miniaturization of laptops and mainstream 
Mac computers, solutions were needed to overcome the physical size of the plugs on the side, such as 
the VGA output, FireWire 800 (which is larger than the older 400 plug) and Ethernet. Working on the 
same hub philosophy as that of USB, and less so FireWire, Thunderbolt could probably replace high data 
connectivity connections such as USB, but is most likely to be used to off er a replacement for FireWire 
and also users wishing to continue reaping the benefi ts of their PCI cards. For newer Macs, PCIe slots are 
no longer off ered and alternatives are needed, via Thunderbolt, to keep these systems running. 
 Look out for some exciting peripherals with Thunderbolt on as time goes on.  
 Figure 3.10 
 Apogee’s 
Thunderbridge 
is a useful unit to 
connect older large 
Apogee gear to the 
new Thunderbolt 
protocol. 
 3.5  PCI Express 
 Perhaps you have an existing studio with an analog console or are replacing another multitrack system 
with Logic. Either way, to obtain a truly large set of inputs and outputs, a top-fl ight system will be 
required using an earlier generation Mac Pro’s PCIe slots. 
 These types of systems bypass the FireWire and USB connections and instead connect either directly 
to a PCIe circuit board that sits within your computer or via an external chassis hosting your cards and 
connected to the computer via Thunderbolt. PCIe contains benefi ts as the cards connect directly to the 
computer’s central processing unit (CPU). This enables much faster data rates than FireWire or USB 2.0, 
therefore off ering larger track counts, higher sample rates, and larger word counts. 
 There are a few good examples of this model. One is the Mark of the Unicorn (MOTU) HD192 system, 
which can be expanded to accept 48 inputs and 48 outputs concurrently and works with a range of 
software. 

39
Getting Connected
 Figure 3.11 
   MOTU’s HD192 Series connects to the 
Mac using the PCI connections and 
off ers high sample rates and is highly 
expandable. Image courtesy of MOTU.   
 3.6  Other Audio Equipment 
 As you expand your set up, you’ll need to consider other things that connect to your audio interface. These 
devices are typically microphones, loudspeakers (called monitors in professional circles), headphones, 
and an ancillary outboard. In this section, we’ll look at these in detail. 
 Microphones 
 There are many microphones in the market, and some are indeed collectors’ items. However, you’ll need 
to know a few simple facts to fi nd the right choice for you and get them connected. Essentially, there 
are two common types of microphone, diff erent in the way in which they work internally: the dynamic 
microphone and the condenser microphone. 
 Both condenser and dynamic microphones have their own unique benefi ts, and this can be used to 
great eff ect depending on what you’re recording. 
 Condenser microphones are very sensitive, being able to capture really quiet sounds as well as handling 
loud ones too. Condenser microphones can also capture a wider range of frequencies, from very low 

40
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
bass through to the very top treble. 
The cost of these relatively fragile 
microphones was for many years out 
of reach for most people, but recently, 
a wide range of aff ordable condenser 
microphones have swamped the 
market due to Chinese production. 
Condenser microphones require a 
form of power source to operate. 
Typically this is known as phantom 
power, and it may be worth ensuring 
your audio interface can deliver this 
when making a purchasing decision. 
Phantom power sends a 48v DC signal 
down the microphone cable to power 
typically two things: the diaphragm 
and the internal preamplifi er.  
 Electret condenser microphones diff er 
slightly in that a charge is built in to 
the capsule containing the microphone diaphragm. As such, only power for the onboard preamplifi er 
is required. These can, like traditional condenser microphones above, run with phantom power, but 
electret’s main benefi t is that they have a provision for battery power onboard when no phantom power 
is readily available. A classic example of this would be the AKG C1000S shown below.   
 Figure 3.12 
 Neumann microphones 
have been an icon of 
vocal recording for some 
time, and the U87 shown 
here is a perfect example.   
 Figure 3.13    The AKG C1000 is a popular example 
of an electret condenser microphone that has 
capacity for a PP3 microphone onboard to power 
the onboard preamplifi er. 
 Figure 3.14    The SM58 from Shure is possibly 
the most common of all dynamic microphones 
off ering legendary solid construction and 
performance for vocalists live.   

41
Getting Connected
 Dynamic microphones are traditionally less expensive and thus offer users the ability to record 
anywhere. They can accept loud sounds well (close miked drums, guitar cabs, and the like), as well as 
being able to reject spill as they’re not as sensitive as their condenser counterparts. This is of great use 
when recording drums, for example, as the dynamic mic’s typical frequency range is less able to handle 
the highest of frequencies than a condenser. One other attribute is the dynamic’s sturdiness. 
 Connecting each type of microphone will be typically via the XLR connections provided on your audio 
interface. It is worth again pointing out that condenser microphones require phantom power (+48 V), 
which will need to be engaged once you’ve connected your microphone. Ensure your speaker levels are 
down as this can cause quite a large bang. 
 Monitors 
 Monitors are loudspeakers to you and me. In professional terms, they allow you to “monitor” the signal, 
hence their name. There are literally hundreds of products on the market currently and choosing a pair 
of monitors that suit your music and your budget will require a little investment of time. 
 Studio monitors can range from expensive (and often large) far-fi eld studio monitors through to smaller, 
and often cheaper, near-fi eld monitors. 
 The studio monitor market has blossomed in recent years. As a result, there are many excellent units 
to choose from. Many monitors represent exceptional value for the money, and care needs to be taken 
when choosing them. For example, if you’re doing Dubstep, you’ll probably want something that can 
handle bass well. 
 Most monitoring systems these days are what we call “active,” meaning that they come with specially 
developed amplifi ers that work best or are tuned for that loudspeaker unit. Active speakers can represent 
the best performance for the money. “Passive” monitors require you to obtain an amplifi er to power them, 
which invariably means additional expense.  
 Figure 3.15 
   Controlling volumes in studios where a 
mixing console is not necessary can be 
resolved using Logic’s Master Output Fader 
or investing in a specifi c solution such as 
Mackie’s Big Knob.   
 Some active units also come in what is known as a 2.1 confi guration. Don’t be put off  by the numbers. 
These just relate to two monitors (left and right stereo) and the “.1” refers to a subwoofer, a speaker unit 
designed to deliver bass typically below 150 Hz. It is likely that you’ve heard of 5.1, which relates to the 
surround sound format commonly used at home for surround sound. Logic can allow you to mix in 5.1 
(see  Chapter 10 ). This relates to fi ve full range speakers (left, right, center, rear left, and rear right) and the 
subwoofer “.1.” There are increasing numbers of speakers that are added to this, such as 7.1 and 10.1, for 
other surround speaker applications. 

42
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Connecting active monitors to your set up should be as simple as connecting them to your audio 
interface. However, it is worth noting that many active monitors do not provide conventional volume 
controls. As such, you will need to control the monitor level from either Logic using the master fader, 
from your audio interface (if a level control is provided), or by some other means, such as a mixing 
console if you have one. Specifi cally designed units such as Mackie’s Big Knob can off er a neat solution. 
The Big Knob is more than just a volume control. It off ers management of headphone mixes, talkback, 
and routing to other devices. 
 Headphones 
 Studio headphones (also known as “cans”) are another important element of the studio. They are really 
not very diff erent to consumer headphones that you use already at home. Often, studios will provide 
what are known as closed headphones, meaning that sound from the outside is rejected as much as 
possible and vice versa.  
 Recording acoustic music without good closed headphones can 
lead to either the headphone mix spilling out and being heard 
in the vocal recording or the loud drums or guitar stack you’re 
recording being heard over the headphone mix. 
 Additionally, how loud they operate can be an issue if you’re a 
drummer and want to hear the rest of the band in the cans, but 
good closed designs should prevent the need for too high a level. 
 A good, solid, and reliable example of a studio set of headphones 
is the Beyer Dynamic DT100 shown left, which has been used in 
studios across the world for over many decades. 
 Outboard 
 From time to time, you may wish to add an analog processor such 
as a favorite compressor or eff ects unit. Doing so in an analog 
studio is a simple matter of patching it in, but integrating one into 
Logic will require some further consideration. 
 For example, if you wish to record using your favored compressor as an insert, you may wish to see if 
your audio interface can accept inserts. Otherwise, connecting this device will be via the inputs and 
outputs of your interface, allowing you the opportunity to route the signal through the processor and 
back into the computer again. This may cause delay in the form of latency unless you’re able to use 
onboard routing software similar to Apogee’s Maestro software. 
 These inputs and outputs could also be employed as an auxiliary send and return in the case of an 
external eff ects unit. Latency should not cause too much of a problem in such instances as this may be 
masked dependent on the eff ect employed. 
 The expansion of your studio in this way will depend on the amount of analog inputs and outputs you 
have at your disposal. 
 Figure 3.16  The DT100 headphones 
from Beyer Dynamic have an 
impressive history spanning 
decades. The timeless appeal is 
due to its closed design and 
user-replaceable parts. 

43
Getting Connected
 3.7  Integration into Logic – Audio Preferences 
 Apple’s operating system contains a neat feature called Core Audio. Core Audio should mean that 
when you launch Logic, each connected audio interface appears in the audio preferences. In fact, Core 
Audio and Logic should, theoretically, allow for an interface to be connected to the system mid-session, 
or “plug-and-play” as it is known. Logic alerts you that a new interface has been added and asks you 
whether you would like to use it, as in the example below. 
 To check your interfaces and settings, simply go to Logic Pro X > Preferences > Audio, where the Devices 
tab should be present. Here you’ll be faced with the information relating to Core Audio connectivity. 
Those used to other features in previous versions of Logic will remember the ability to connect to a 
range of ProTools interfaces. This feature is no longer available in Logic Pro X. Connecting Avid ProTools 
hardware will be via Avid’s own Core Audio Manager software. This typically limits the inputs and outputs 
to their device. More information can be gleaned from www.avid.com. 
 On the Devices tab there are many parameters that can be altered to get the best from your audio 
interface(s), which are called Devices in Logic. Here you can select the Core Audio-compatible device for 
your Logic system at the time. Simply select the one you wish to use, and presto, you should be up and 
running. Core Audio makes it that simple. 
 Getting the very best from your device may mean managing the latency you experience. As we discuss 
in the Latency and Monitoring Knowledgebase, there are workarounds regarding monitoring. However, 
the computer’s driver and interface will also require time to “buff er” the information together before 
sending it out. The I/O buff er size is measured in samples, and this therefore relates to the amount of time 
the computer and device take before you hear the sound. In an ideal world, we’d want this buff er to be 
at its lowest setting of 32 samples, which at 44.1 kHz would be considerably less than a millisecond and 
a perfectly acceptable delay. Doing this will require a very powerful computer, as more of the processing 
power is needed and may result in your audio dropping out or distorting. The ideal is to fi nd a happy 
medium where the delay is not too long and the computer’s processing power enables unhindered 
audio. If latency causes problems with your recordings, you can use the Recording Delay feature to move 
the audio back or forth so that it fi ts with the rest of your music. The default for this is 0 ms but can be 
moved by 5000 ms either way.  
 Figure 3.17 
 When a new audio 
interface is added, 
Logic will notify you 
and ask you whether 
you want to use this 
device. If this does not 
appear, then it might 
be worth obtaining 
the latest drivers for 
the interface from the 
maker’s website. 

44
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Bit rates in digital audio refer to how fi ne the measurement of the amplitude, or loudness, of the audio 
signal is. CD recordings are presented at 16 bits and were considered resolute enough for the domestic 
market. However, within music production, 16 bits can be considered a little too coarse to the ear and as 
such 24 bits is now desirable, as it measures the amplitude scale in fi ner detail. Therefore, by increasing 
the detail and accuracy of the waveform, it is more representative of the original audio. To record using 
24 bits, select the 24-bit Recording check box within this pane. Remember, though, that your audio 
interface will need to respond to 24 bits to benefi t. 
 Higher bit rates than 16 bits are desirable, but come at a slight price. The data this occupies on your disk 
are larger than that of plain 16 bits and as such you should consider whether you have enough hard 
drive space before the session (discussed in this chapter). Roughly, you’ll need nearly twice as much hard 
drive space as with 16 bits. 
 Input monitoring only for focused track and record-enabled tracks’ check box acts much like the old 
“input monitor” button on a multitrack tape machine in so much as those tracks that you record-enable 
become audible rather than the signal from the tape itself. Using this feature now means that it is 
automatically enabled rather than expecting you to use the “I” button on the track headers and will open 
the focused track or record-enabled track.  
 Figure 3.18    The “I” button shown on Audio 1’s track header here permits you to switch to input 
monitoring rather than listening ‘off  tape’ as it were. The Audio Preferences pane allows you to 
permanently select Input Monitoring for focused tracks.   

45
Getting Connected
 Another key checkbox selection here is Input Monitoring Level for Record-Enabled Channel Strips. This 
essentially allows the fader on the channel to work as a level for input monitoring, which will not aff ect 
the level at which you’re recording. 
 The Process Threads selection menu off ers users the ability to override the automatic number of audio 
processing threads available to Logic. Users should, as the manual advises, keep this setting to automatic, 
but you may wish to experiment if using more audio tracks. 
 The Process Buff er Range refers to the amount of time you will allow the computer to gather and process 
information into the buff er before playing it. The lower the range, the faster the computer will respond 
and the lower the latency. However, the computer may be unable to process all the required information 
in the time specifi ed and drop out altogether. 
 ReWire, discussed later in this chapter, is like an internal audio and MIDI patch lead connection between 
two pieces of software such as Reason and Logic. ReWired Behavior refers to the type of work you are 
doing between Logic and the ReWire device and hence the burden on the computer. The choices are 
between playback and live operation. Playback assumes that the computer is being played and can use 
the buff er to its best eff ect to ensure timely playback of instruments, and this process requires less CPU 
load. However, live mode assumes that you are playing the instrument live and as such requires the 
connected device to be more timely when producing the sound; the computer needs to prioritize this, 
and therefore, more CPU load is used. 
 The Scrub speed and response will refl ect the way in which you hear audio as you use the scrub tool. You 
may choose to make some edits if your editing requires a diff erent method of operation. Experiment as 
you need to, but we suspect you’ll keep things set as they are. 
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 1 
 Latency and Monitoring 
 When recording was in the analog domain, the signals fed from the mixing console through to an 
open-reel multitrack tape recorder and back would only be delayed by an acceptable millisecond 
or so. To all intents and purposes, this was perceived as pretty much instantaneous, certainly within 
acceptable margins. As this delay increases, performers can be put off  their performances, and they 
might appear to be out of time. 
 This delay in modern digital audio is called latency and is a common side eff ect of working with digital 
audio workstations such as Logic. Latency is caused by the delay experienced as your computer, 
audio, and MIDI interfaces process the information. A common example of this is the delay between 
pressing the MIDI keyboard and the sound generated from an audio instrument in Logic. 
 Overcoming latency can often be tricky as it depends on the speed of your audio interface and 
computer. Monitoring is one major issue to overcome, and this can be achieved by employing an 
external mixer to handle your headphone mix. Many inexpensive USB interfaces combat latency 
by employing a “mix” knob on the unit, such as Digidesign’s (now Avid) original MBox. This allows 
(Continued)

46
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
you to blend the input signal with the output of the computer, which allows you to hear your input 
signal prior to any incurred latency. Some Audio Interfaces come with their own software-based 
audio mixer, which performs this monitoring duty, as well as often integrating onboard digital signal 
processing. If one of these solutions is used, then it is desirable to switch off  the Software Monitoring 
checkbox in Preferences > Audio. Another solution is to employ Logic’s Low Latency Mode. 
 Latency can be problematic when performing using a virtual instrument or monitoring a recording. 
Logic has created a neat solution called Low Latency Mode that intelligently bypasses active plug-
ins on the channel you’re working on, thus freeing up processing power. This allows for latency to be 
managed to the preset limit of delay you have chosen in the preferences. To change this limit, go to 
Logic Pro > Preferences > Audio > General. Turning on Low Latency Mode is easy as there is an icon 
directly on the transport bar. In most cases, this will alter the sound of the channel you’re working 
on, but this is only temporary for the time this feature is engaged. 
 One of the best current solutions to overcome latency with Logic is to use some hardware connected 
via PCIe or Thunderbolt to the Mac. This should boast some of the lowest latency available at the 
time of writing.  
 3.8  Hard Drives 
 Recording audio is a data-intensive exercise, and often as modern track counts, sample frequencies and 
bit depths increase, the internal, original hard drive of your Mac may start to strain under the pressure. 
As such, many Logic users have become accustomed to adding external hard drives to their Mac setups. 
 Choosing an external storage device will depend entirely on what you wish to do. For example, if you just 
want to back up your system, or your audio fi les, then the drive can be relatively low speed and perhaps 
lower cost. However, should you wish to use this addition as your dedicated audio drive, then speed and 
capacity could both become issues worth factoring in. 
 Audio fi les can take up some considerable hard drive space, and as such a large drive is welcome to 
contain all your projects. Drive speed is also an issue. It is preferable for the audio fi les to come off  the 
drive as fast as they went on, and as such many manufacturers, such as LaCie, provide an option for a 
7200 rpm drive instead of the slower speeds such as 5400 rpm. 
 Although USB 2.0, rated at 480 Mb/s, is faster than FireWire 400, its structure and ability to hub 
mean that it can share its valuable bandwidth with other devices such as mice, keyboards, cameras, 
and MP3 players. As a result USB is, at times, considered to be less reliable for data efficiency, 
throughput, and stability. Thus, FW400 has been the long-standing de facto standard despite it not 
being the fastest.  
 However, FireWire devices currently come in two fl avors: 400 Mb/s and 800 Mb/s. Most devices still utilize 
the common FireWire 400 (FW400) format due to its history, popularity, and reliability. Most hard drives 

47
Getting Connected
and devices now utilize the newer FW800 
format, which can offer very fast data 
rates and is becoming more popular for 
audio duties. 
 Hard drive manufacturers such as LaCie 
make a series of drives suitable for the 
Logic user, from portable, self-powering 
drives such as their Starck range through 
to the industry-standard d2 Quadras. The 
d2 hard drive series has, for many, been 
the professional hard drive of choice and 
now supports a multitude of interface 
formats, usually USB 2.0 (or even USB 
3.0), FW400, FW800, and the new 3-Gb/s 
eSATA connection all on the same unit. 
Naturally Thunderbolt and Thunderbolt 
2 are now making appearances too. 
 SATA and Internal Storage 
 Serial Advanced Technology Attachment (SATA) is the connection protocol between a computer and its 
internal hard drives. This is a very fast method of connection working at speeds of either 1.5 Gigabits 
per second (Gbit/s) or newer 3 Gbit/s. If working with the previous generation of MacPro computers, it 
is possible to connect up to three additional hard drives to that of your system disk. The new MacPro 
computer is a radical change and only boasts SSD storage. You’ll need to invest in an external drive if you 
choose this computer. 
For audio and multimedia, an external hard drive is an excellent way to store projects to diff erent drives 
or for back up purposes. Separating out the system drive containing Mac OS X and Logic from the audio 
allows the drives to be dedicated to specifi c tasks. However, the simple overriding benefi t is the speed of 
SATA drives for working with high data rates such as multitrack audio.  
 3.9  Control Surfaces 
 The studio was traditionally a tactile environment where physical faders, tape machines, cables, and 
instruments were the norm. As the digital revolution has taken its hold, so much of that studio has 
been pared down to the computer screen. As such, the notion of grabbing the fader for any channel to 
make an on-the-fl y adjustment becomes a little bit more involved, usually requiring several mouse clicks 
perhaps with some keyboard presses too. Computing power and software development has meant that 
the amount of features controlled from one mouse and keyboard has grown dramatically. A common 
solution to this problem is to bring back the tactile aspect of the studio in the form of an external control 
surface.  
 Figure 3.19 
   The LaCie d2 for many 
has become one of the 
industry-standard hard 
drives of choice, off ering 
both reliability and 
fl exibility (including a 
rack mount available from 
LaCie). 

48
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 3.20 
   PreSonus’ FaderPort is a simple and intuitive 
control surface allowing adjustment of one 
fader at one time, plus the usual transport 
controls. Image courtesy of PreSonus.   
 Control Surfaces come in many forms from the one fader unit such as the Presonus FaderPort to the fully 
fl edged Mackie MCU Pro and MCU Pro XT. What is common is that most come in the form of a bank of 
faders with some control for other aspects of the channel strip such as pan and auxiliary sends. As you 
navigate around the controls, Logic should also follow suit and vice versa, giving you tactile control over 
your mix. 
 Control surfaces such as Mackie’s original Control Universal were connected using the normal MIDI 
cables, although the newer versions (shown below) and other systems, such as the FaderPort, adopt the 
USB protocol. Other control surface devices are connected to the computer using USB, FireWire, and on 
occasion, Ethernet.  
 Figure 3.21 
   Mackie’s MCU Pro has been the choice of 
many Logic users due to its impressive 
integration and overall fl exibility. Image 
Courtesy of Loud Technologies Inc.   

49
Getting Connected
 Setting up a control surface is easy, provided they integrate with Logic natively using an existing or 
accompanying driver. To install a new device, go to Logic Pro > Control Surfaces > Setup …. You’ll face 
the Setup pane that has two menus at the top: Edit and New. Select New > Install from the menus 
at the top, which will open another window listing all the Logic-compatible control surfaces. You are 
encouraged to “Add,” or you can scan for attached devices. 
 Once you have added your controller, close this window and return to the controller setup page. 
Here, it is possible to select the controller from the diagram on the right-hand side and then edit any 
information about the device in the inspector-like space on the left-hand side. Within this space, you’re 
able to manage many aspects and preferences, such as what MIDI ports it is connected to and what 
feature the fader controls within Logic. 
 It is possible to add more than one model of control surface. As such, Logic makes it possible to edit what 
the controls actually operate in Logic within the setup page. In the example of more than one controller, 
duplicated buttons such as play and stop could be reassigned on one unit, while the faders could 
naturally lead on, say from Channel 8 on one device to Channel 9 on the next control surface. To get 
two control surfaces working in tandem, ensure in the Control Surface Setup window that the controller 
pictures form a horizontal row. However, should you wish for the controllers to act independently, then 
place the icons in a vertical column. 
 The way in which the Control Surface reacts and interfaces with Logic can be comprehensively edited 
using the Controller Assignments pane (Logic Pro > Control Surfaces > Controller Assignments). There 
are two views here: Easy View and Expert View. In Easy View, each command can be seen one at a time, 
and it is simple to reassign a control to another duty. To do this, simply press on the part of Logic you 
wish to control. Next, press Learn Mode to move a control or touch a button on the controller surface to 
map it accordingly. 
 To edit these modes, choose Expert View; the area to the left of the pane describes the zone of the surface, 
in this example the Mackie Control Universal. The control surface itself is split into zones such as VPots, Tracks 
(faders), Global Views, and so on. The next table refers to the modes in which each zone can operate, and 
by selecting one of the modes, the Control/Parameter list will change to show you what each control does. 
 The Controller Assignments editor is incredibly powerful as any feature of the control surface can be 
remapped to another to allow you perfect control over a particular session or mix.  
 The iPad “Logic Remote” Control Surface App. 
 New to Logic Pro X is the iOS7 Logic Remote app. This is a neat application that extends your control 
over Logic quite considerably by off ering more than most conventional control surfaces. For example, 
there are several ways to input musical data other than your controller keyboard, such as the chord strip 
interface used in the iPad’s version of GarageBand. It is quite simply more than just a remote control.      
On your iPad, download the Logic Remote app from the App Store and upon launching it should ask 
you which Mac on the local network you’d like to link with. Logic Pro will need to be launched on your 
Mac for this to happen. Once you’ve selected the correct Mac, a dialog box will appear on the computer 
asking for your permission to link your iPad. Go ahead. The two apps are now linked and you’re ready to 
get controlling Logic.

50
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
Starting out on Logic Remote, you’ll note the top left icon has fi ve squares within it. This is the menu 
button and allows you to quickly navigate between the pages of the application. Clicking on each of the 
colored tabs to the bottom of each mixer channel results in Logic Remote loading up the name from 
Logic Pro. Moving up the channel strips on the mixer you get a fader, pan pot, mute, solo, record enable, 
and automation buttons. All very handy in a remote, especially if you’re in the live room ready to put 
down your vocals the other side of the glass from your Mac. Above the channel strips is an LED style 
peak meter area. Above this is the common transport and application bar. 
 Figure 3.22 
   In this image it is 
possible to see the 
menu open and 
the fi ve diff erent 
screens off ered by 
Logic Remote. 
With a channel now selected on the mixer page, you can navigate using the top left button to another 
page. Choices here are Smart Controls and Keyboard, Chord Strip, Mixer, Key Commands, and Smart Help. 
The Smart Controls are a useful addition to Logic Pro and these are mirrored on this page alongside a 
keyboard. The keyboard itself off ers diff erent sizes for those with fatter fi ngers. Clicking the keyboard 
button to the right hand side of the page above the keys provides three options to squeeze a few more 
notes on screen. Other controls here permit the user to control many aspects of how they play their 
music into Logic. You can sustain without the need for a pedal using the sustain switch, change octaves 
using transpose keys, and also alter how the keyboard reacts to your playing using the glissando, scroll 
and pitch keys. There’s also an arpeggiator button which activates that favourite of effects, further 
enhanced by the latch switch that keeps things sustaining as you perform. 
The Chord Strip page allows you to quickly interface with string based instruments, strumming chords out in 
a similar way to playing with the right hand of a guitar. The sustain switch is also available here and is eff ective 
in making performances a little more realistic. When you select one of the drum instruments or Drummer 
itself, the iPad interface alters to a visual drum kit which is usually responsive even over a mediocre network. 

51
Getting Connected
 Figure 3.23 
 The Keyboard in 
Logic Remote is 
quite fl exible and 
can be made smaller 
to off er a few 
octaves of control. 
Note the other 
controls to assist 
your performance. 
 Figure 3.24 
   The Chord Strip is a 
quick and eff ective 
way to express 
yourself with chords 
on string based 
instruments such as 
guitars. 

52
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
Similarly, on the bottom of the menu page you can select whether you wish Logic Remote to choose the 
interface most appropriate by choosing “AUTOMATIC”, or select from guitar interface, or drum pad, or fi x 
it to be a keyboard for the duration of your session. 
The Key Commands page is a very useful addition to Logic Remote as it permits a whole host of controls 
through sliding pages. If you keep scrolling right you’ll pass through pages of controls to manage your 
Logic session, but fi nally you’ll come to a page or two with blank squares. Upon touching one of these, 
you’ll see a menu of key commands available for assignment. This feature could prove to be highly useful 
on specifi c jobs or when you’re stranded in the live room away from your Mac.
The final screen in Logic Remote is the Smart Help page. This, at first, does not look to be all that 
interesting, but when you’re deep in an editing session can be a life saver. Essentially this is Apple 
providing the PDF manual as part of the Logic Remote application, but it is fully searchable. 
 Figure 3.25 
 The Key Commands 
page is excellent, 
fully customizable 
and enables you to 
fully control Logic 
Pro from afar.   
 3.10  Distributed Audio Processing and External DSP 
Solutions 
 In the past and perhaps still now, there will come a time when the onboard processing power of the 
computer will start to strain under the pressure of plug-ins within your mix. As with Avid’s HDX ProTools 
system that employs additional DSP chips to relieve internal processing power, there is still an external 
solution to the problem for Logic users too. Distributed audio processing allows for an additional DSP to 
be made available to the computer. 

53
Getting Connected
 Using a system such as Universal Audio’s UAD-2 system, power can be unleashed from your computer 
to make for a faster and more powerful workfl ow. The audio processing is taken care of outside the host 
computer using proprietary processing to Universal Audio. As such, plug-ins can be purchased to add to 
the system, which might be more reliant on your DSP than you would desire for your computer. 
 Setting up an external processing device such as the UAD is easy and is often a matter of simply 
connecting the FireWire and installing the accompanying driver. With OS X rebooted, Logic should now 
pick up that it has the system installed. Logic may rescan its audio units and an extra line within the 
audio units menu when selecting plug-ins called UAD. For more installation guidelines, please refer to 
the manufacturer’s instructions and website. 
 SSL’s Duende used to be an external system in the similar vein to that of the UAD-2, but has turned the 
process native, using the internal processing power of the computer to emulate the plug-ins. While this 
is not strictly external processing, it does illustrate that processing power is perhaps getting to a stage 
where external DSP may become less and less necessary. 
 3.11  What Is MIDI? 
 MIDI was originally developed as a communication protocol between hardware synthesizers, samplers, 
drum machines, and of course, sequencers like the original MIDI-only version of Logic. The protocol is 
made up of a number of diff erent types of messages – including note on, note off , velocity, modulation, 
and so on – all of which can be sent to 16 available MIDI channels. In theory, the channel system was 
originally used to denote diff erent devices along a “daisy chain” of MIDI leads, with each device sifting 
its appropriate collection of message from the collective stream of MIDI data passing along. 
 Nowadays, of course, hardware MIDI devices are much less common (although you may well use a MIDI 
controller keyboard plugged into the MIDI port of the Audio Interface), but the MIDI protocol is still alive 
as an eff ective means of “internally” communicating with virtual instruments in Logic’s audio engine – a 
language if you like. Open up the Event list, for example, and you still get to see the list of familiar MIDI 
events, all with their associated channel and parameter numbers. Also, the Instrument Parameters in the 
inspector allow you to specify a MIDI channel for the instrument in question (although most default to 
ALL), and of course, instruments like the Vintage B3 use diff erent MIDI channels to diff erentiate between 
the two diff erent keyboard manuals and the bass pedals contained within the instrument.  
 So, even though you may never connect a MIDI lead again in your life, MIDI is defi nitely here to stay as an 
integral part of sequencing with Logic. It is really important to appreciate MIDI as your communication 
language when controlling instruments within Logic. 
 However, if you’re itching to use an older classic MIDI synth, you’ll need to connect this to your set up. 
As we’ve established, many audio interfaces come with a small MIDI interface and sockets included. 
However, if you do not have these or if you wish to connect a multitude of synths together, you may 
need to consider a dedicated MIDI interface, which connects to your Mac’s USB connections. 
 Many manufacturers fulfill this function. MOTU is one such manufacturer, which offers a wide range 
starting with the Fastlane (a two-in and two-out MIDI interface) all the way through to the professional-
facing MIDI Express XT (eight-in and eight-out, with many additional features, such as SMPTE timecode for 
striping). 

54
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 3.26    The MIDI information can be clearly seen within either the separate Events List window 
(Windows > Events List or Apple + 7) or the Events Pane in the Arrange window by pressing “D.” The Events 
List shows the corresponding MIDI information contained within the selected MIDI region.   
 To the rear of these interfaces lurk a variety of fi ve-pin DIN sockets known as MIDI sockets. These usually 
come labeled in three ways: IN, OUT, and THRU. As you might imagine, MIDI IN receives instructions 
from another device – for example, the sound module will receive an instruction from the MIDI OUT of 
the Apple Mac’s connected MIDI interface. If the sound module sends information back to Logic, such 
as MIDI controller data, then the MIDI OUT will need to be connected to the MIDI IN of the interface. 
These MIDI connections apply to every MIDI-
compatible device within your studio. 
 Additionally, MIDI THRU is included in the MIDI 
protocol to allow for something that is known 
as daisy chaining. In the very early days of MIDI 
(pre-Logic), it was unlikely that your hardware 
sequencer, or Atari computer, would have more 
than one MIDI output, two at the very most. As 
such, if you had more than one MIDI device, it 
was important that you could connect it to the 
sequencer with ease. Enter the MIDI THRU socket, 
which replicated the MIDI IN data and passed 
 Figure 3.27  
 Figure 3.28    Mark of the Unicorn’s (MOTU’s) Fastlane is a solid and inexpensive USB 
MIDI interface, while their MIDI Express XT is packed with additional features. Images 
courtesy of Mark of the Unicorn.   

55
Getting Connected
it through the device allowing you to connect it straight to the MIDI IN of the next device unaltered. On 
rare occasions, some MIDI devices would merge both the MIDI OUT and MIDI THRU of a device so that a 
continuous loop back to the sequencer could be made. In this day and age, multiples of MIDI INs and OUTs 
are possible using modern MIDI interfaces as discussed earlier; therefore, the MIDI THRU socket is less used.   
 3.12  Avid Hardware Integration with Logic 
 Avid, the manufacturer of ProTools, produces a number of audio interfaces that roughly fall into two 
categories. The fi rst of these are what used to be called their LE range, which is a host-based system, 
meaning that all the digital signal processing is handled within the computer’s processor. These 
plug-ins are known as a Real Time Audio Suite (RTAS). The second category is intended for professional 
applications. Avid, then Digidesign, pioneered the TDM system that makes use of the DSP power held on 
their external HD cards, leaving the host CPU to get on with the work at hand. 
 Both of these methods can be used with Logic as an audio interface using Avid’s CoreAudio Manager. 
The Digi CoreAudio Manager eff ectively bridges between the hardware and OS X’s Core Audio Services, 
allowing you to control the hardware as though you were in ProTools Hardware Setup page. When using 
the Avid CoreAudio Manager with Logic, it is worth noting that Logic and the Avid interface may not 
immediately talk to each other. Opening up Avid’s CoreAudio Manager before launching Logic should 
ensure communication. 
 It should be noted that this connection is not the best using Logic for recording as typically there can be 
signifi cant latency delays. For mixing and listening back, the Core Audio solution is perfectly workable.     
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 2 
 ReWire 
 ReWire is a system developed by Propellerhead, the makers of Reason and ReCycle. ReWire cleverly 
allows internal connections to occur between audio software packages within one computer. It is 
therefore possible to have multiple MIDI connections internally between applications and receive 
the corresponding audio signals back in return, again internally. This is an incredibly powerful and 
fl exible solution when getting the best from two applications. Setting up ReWire in Logic is very easy. 
You must ensure Logic is opened before the ReWired application is started. 
 With Logic opened, launch the ReWire application, thus ensuring that Logic knows that this is to be 
the ReWire application and will therefore make the appropriate connections for you. To use your 
ReWire instruments, fi rst begin to create an External MIDI track by pressing Cmd + Alt + N on the 
Arrange area. Next, call up the Library Tab from the Media Icon on the top right-hand side of Logic. 
Within the Library should be your opened ReWire application – in this instance, let’s say Reason. 
Clicking on the Reason folder in Logic’s library should reveal all the open Reason instruments. Simply 
click on one to map this to the selected MIDI track. 
 As you select new instruments within your ReWire application, both the MIDI and audio connections 
should be automatically made to Logic. The audio connections will appear as Auxiliary tracks on your 
Logic Mixer and can be processed using Logic’s plug-ins and blended into the mix as though they 
were another virtual instrument.  

 In this chapter 
 4.1 
Introduction 
57 
 4.2 
Assets and Projects 
57 
 4.3 
Working with Tracks 
61 
 4.4 
An Introduction to the 
Audio Mixer 
63 
 4.5 
Using the Transport 
Controls and Ruler 
66 
 4.6 
Your First Recording 
67 
 4.7 
Overdubs and Punching-In 
and -Out 
69 
 4.8 
Creating Further Tracks 
and Track Sorting 
72 
 4.9 
The Project Audio Browser 
and Importing 
74 
 4.10 Working with 
Apple Loops 
76 
 4.11 Improving What the 
Artist Hears – Headphone 
Mixes 
81 
 4.12 Monitoring through 
Eff ects 
84 
 Knowledgebases 
 What Are Assets? 
60 
 More about the 
Metronome 
68 
 Importing REX2 Files 
79 
 Plug-in Focus 
 Amp Designer 
86 

57
Starting a Project 
 4.1  Introduction 
 Laying the successful foundations at the start of your project is vital to the long-term success and 
seamless workfl ow of realizing audio and music production work in Logic. Of course, not all projects 
start the same way, but we’re going to begin by looking at the process of recording audio into Logic – in 
eff ect, using it as a modern day replacement to the multitrack tape machine. This is also an excellent 
way of covering some important essentials of working in Logic: like creating tracks, using the transport 
controls, the bar ruler, and the basic monitoring. We’ll also start to explore the various aspects of data 
management involved in working with Logic – more specifi cally, how and where you should store your 
project data, and what a Logic project is actually composed of. 
 If you’re short of inspiration or just needing something to kick-start your creative process, we’ll also take 
a look at importing and working with Apple Loops. Apple Loops – contained within the multitude of Jam 
Packs installed with Logic Pro X – are an instant resource of loops, instrument, and vocal passages, all 
copyright-free and ready to be used in your compositions. 
 Besides the basics of track laying, we’ll also review various ways with which you can make a recording 
session run even more smoothly – either providing a dedicated headphone mix for musicians, for 
example, or using plug-in eff ects to better understand how your instrument might eventually appear in 
the mix. All these factors will create a more comfortable recording experience for you and your musicians, 
allowing the musicianship, engineering, and performance qualities to become more focused. 
 Of course, this is only the starting point to your creative work in Logic, as we’ll also be looking at how 
to edit this newly recorded material in  Chapter 5  and then look towards integrating the range of virtual 
instruments and MIDI sources in  Chapter 6 . 
 4.2  Assets and Projects 
 The basic currency of Logic is a Project, which will contain all the relevant assets for the song you’re 
creating. In respect to Logic, the term “assets” corresponds to the collection of separate fi les and data that 
a song can be composed of. For example, in a song fi le, which contains all the important arrangement 
information, you could easily assemble any amount of audio fi les, sample data (for the EXS24 sampler), 
and movie fi les, all of which will reside in the main project folder. By organizing your data in this way, 
both you and Logic can keep better track of your creative process, making backing up, or moving to a 
diff erent Logic Pro X setup, for example, considerably easier. 
 The starting point of your creative process is to create a new project (File > New). Logic will then 
present you with a series of possible starting points, including some interesting options for composing 
or producing music in Logic, based on either genre or production objectives, like surround mixing, for 
example, or mastering. If any of these templates meet your particular needs, then it might be appropriate 

58
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
to select them, otherwise select the Empty Project as a suitable initialized starting point for production. 
Note that you can also automatically select this option by holding down Alt as you select New from the 
File menu. Assuming that you’ve selected an Empty Project as your starting point, Logic will prompt you 
to create an initial track to work with. To get the ball rolling, select Audio under the track Type option and 
press the Create button to insert a single track. We’ll take a deeper look at creating tracks in  Section 4.3 .  
 Figure 4.1    Creating a new project (File > New) will present a number of starting templates. Select Empty 
Project if you want a simple initialized starting point.   
 Save As … 
 Before you go any further, it’s worth saving your project, if only to allot a particular location for your 
project folder. If Logic hasn’t already opened a Save As dialog, you’ll need to do so (File > Save As …). 
Besides specifying the name of your project, you can also instruct Logic to automatically save the relevant 
assets to your project folder, under the “Copy the following fi les into your project” option. Obviously 
you need to trade off  excessive duplication of data at this point, alongside a clear data management 
strategy. If you’re unsure, there’s no harm in selecting all the options, but this will use a correspondingly 
larger amount of drive space. 
 In addition to decisions about assets, you’ll have the option to either organize the project in a Folder or 
as a so-called Package. If you want to avoid confusion and clutter, the Package option is useful, as the 
data (sound fi les, movies, EXS instruments, and so on) appear in a single combined fi le. By picking 
the Folder option, though, you get to see each fi le discretely organized into an array of diff erent folders. 
The Folder option is obviously useful if you want an overview of what’s happening in respect to data 
usage, and potentially, the option of managing some of the data usage via Finder. 

59
Starting a Project
 Although this initial project management can appear time consuming (especially if you just want to 
get on with making music!), it’s worth pointing out that good data management is a vital part of music 
making on a computer. Spending time to ensure that you know where your data is being stored will reap 
plenty of dividends in the long run, making it far easier to recall projects several months down the line, 
or indeed, work more eff ectively between diff erent computers. 
 Figure 4.2    The Save As dialog allows you to create a root folder for your project and to check what assets 
will be saved with it.   
 Alternatives 
 The fi nal layer of data management to consider is that of Alternatives. With the development of most 
songs, it’s often the case that you’ll want to pursue a diff erent creative goal at some point in the production 
process: maybe a diff erent mix to please the record company, for example, or a short, 30-second version 
of your track for use on a commercial. Although the end output is diff erent, the same pool of assets are 
common to both examples. 
 The idea with Alternatives, therefore, is that you can explore a completely diff erent version of project 
without having to save off  the project under a new name. You can fi nd the Alternatives option under 
the fi le name, where you can see both the current version of the project you’re working with alongside 
other alternative that you might have created. To create a new alternative, use the menu option File > 
Alternatives > New Alternative, and you can also use the menu option File > Alternatives > Edit Alternative 
option to name or delete existing alternatives.   

60
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 4.3 
 Alternatives 
reference the same 
assets, but allow you 
to take a completely 
diff erent approach 
with your project.   
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 1 
 What Are Assets? 
 Assets are Logic’s collective term for the various data fi les that can be associated within a project. 
Of course, the project fi le – or song – is only the beginning of the data you’ll amass over time, with 
the full set of assets including audio fi les, movie fi les, EXS24 sampler instruments, ultrabeat samples, 
and space designer’s impulse responses. Ultimately, if you don’t have some organized strategy for 
looking after these fi les, you’ll soon fi nd that a project becomes diffi  cult to manage, especially when 
it comes to either archiving a project or moving it to another system. 
 By keeping the fi les in a single folder, Logic off ers at least one way of organizing these data, although 
if you’ve got an alternative system, you can always decide to manage this yourself. Theoretically, 
this can prevent certain unnecessary fi le duplication, which can easily become an issue with large 
EXS24-based projects. To change the current project’s Asset settings at any time, select File > 
Project Settings > Assets, where you can, accordingly, switch in and out the diff erent parts of the 
asset management. By default, Logic concentrates on audio fi les, including automatic sample rate 
conversion of fi les imported that don’t match the current project settings.   
(Continued)

61
Starting a Project
 4.3  Working with Tracks 
 Assuming you’ve selected an Empty Project, the next task is to create a series of tracks to record 
your audio and MIDI information into Logic. For example, if you’re recording a band using a number 
of microphones, you’ll need to create an accompanying collection of audio tracks representing 
each instrument or microphone you’re using. If you intend to create a track largely using virtual 
instruments, with a few vocal overdubs, you’ll want to create 16 or so instrument tracks combined 
with one or two audio tracks. Of course, you can always add, remove, or reorder tracks within your 
project at any point in the production process, so don’t feel obliged to preplan your complete track 
list at this point. 
 To create a track, click on the small + sign on the top of the track list, or, if no tracks are present, Logic will 
ask you what tracks you initially want to create. The dialog box that accompanies track creation allows 
you to specify both the exact type of track that is being created, and several options for creating multiple 
tracks, output and input assignments, and so on.  
 Figure 4.4 
 Managing the assets 
related to your project will 
allow you to create better 
project archives and to 
move between diff erent 
Logic setups in a more 
eff ective way. 
 Figure 4.5 
 Create a number 
of empty tracks to 
correspond with the 
instrumentation you 
want to record. The 
New Tracks feature 
includes several 
ways of speeding up 
this process. 

62
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Audio 
 An audio track will allow you to record an audio signal being fed from a corresponding input on your 
audio interface. This is the primary focus in this chapter. 
 Software Instrument 
 Use a software instrument track if you want to record music using any of Logic’s integrated virtual instruments 
(Retro Synth, EXS24, Vintage Electric Piano, ES2, and so on), or indeed, any third-party Audio Unit instruments. 
We’ll be taking a closer look at the process of working with virtual instruments in  Chapter 6 . 
 Drummer 
 Drummer is Logic’s in-built solution for the creation of realistic drum tracks. Rather than programming 
a rhythm track from scratch, you can specify a number of performance criteria (including the 
choice of drummer) to have Logic intelligently create a drum track for you. The Drummer feature works 
in conjunction with the Drum Kit Designer plug-in, both of which we’ll explore in greater detail in 
 Chapter 6. 
 Guitar or Bass 
 The Guitar or Bass option is much the same as the audio option, although in this case Logic automatically 
opens the Library and loads a default “guitar” setting with amplifi er cabinets and eff ects pedals. In theory, 
there’s no distinct operational diff erence to that of an audio track. 
   External MIDI 
 External MIDI tracks correspond with MIDI hardware like synthesizers and samplers that you have 
externally connected to Logic (usually through a USB interface). Again, we’re going to spend more time 
looking at this functionality in Section 6.5. 
 As you’re creating your fi rst set of audio tracks, you’ll notice a couple of important options to speed up 
your workfl ow. For example, if you intend to record from the fi rst 16 inputs of your audio interface, you 
might wish to increase the number of tracks parameter to 16 and check on the Ascending option as 
part of the Input drop-down menu – that way, each subsequent track will take a diff erent input number. 
On the whole, most users tend to monitor their session from a single output, so you’ll probably want to 
leave the output setting out of its Ascending option. Whether its format is mono or stereo will depend 
on the type of signal input being fed to your audio interface – a pair of drum kit overheads, for example, 
will be stereo, whereas a vocal (recorded with a single mic) would be mono. 

63
Starting a Project
 Figure 4.6 
   Naming tracks will allow you to 
keep a better handle on your 
Logic arrangement and is being 
used to automatically name the 
audio fi le and region that you 
create. 
 With your basic tracks created, you’ll also want to lodge some initial track names. Not only this will make 
the navigation of Logic’s Tracks area and Mixer much easier, but you’ll have better chance of keeping 
track of the various project audio fi les with names like “kick drum” rather than “audio 01.” To name a track, 
simply double-click on the existing track name as part of the track list. Once named, any subsequent 
recordings on that track will adopt the name accordingly.  
 4.4  An Introduction to the Audio Mixer 
 Although we don’t need to go too deeply into mixing at this point, it is worth introducing the concept 
of the audio mixer, mainly as an alternative way of looking at the tracks you’ve created for your project. 
While the track lanes of the Tracks area work horizontally, the Mixer area shows us our current project 
in the form of a traditional vertical mixer, in which each track is represented as a diff erent channel strip. 
You can open the Mixer at any point using the Mixer tab either at the bottom of Logic’s main window or 
from the keyboard shortcut X. 
 Common to both the Mixer and Tracks area’s track list are a series of function switches, each of which 
govern how the particular track or channel is working at any given point in time.  

64
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 4.8  Input 
Monitor
 Input Monitor (I) 
 Input monitoring is a simple one-click means of directly monitoring, or listening 
to, the current selected input for that given track or channel. At fi rst, this might 
be a good initial way of establishing what’s coming into your inputs, and, using 
the meters on the channel strip, setting an initial gain on your microphone and 
line inputs. Note that in most cases, this will be done directly from the interface 
itself (or the interface’s control software, if you’re using something like the digitally 
controlled Apogee Ensemble) rather than adjusting the fader’s position. In this 
case, the fader is simply setting the monitor level, rather than any form of recording 
level as it might do on a conventional console. 
 Should you wish to change a track’s particular input, this can be done from the Mixer, 
clicking on the small Input slot halfway down the channel strip. The list presented 
should tally with the inputs available on your audio interface. For example, a typical 
USB audio interface will present two available inputs, whereas a FireWire interface 
could off er ten or more possible inputs. Clicking on the small icon button to the 
side of the Input slot will also change the input format between mono and stereo operation, with a 
corresponding change in the input selection – so that input 1, for example, would become input 1–2.  
 Figure 4.7  The Mixer window (accessible 
from the Mixer tab or by pressing X) 
displays an alternative view of your newly 
created tracks. 

65
Starting a Project
 Figure 4.9    Use the I/O box on the channel 
fader to change a track’s input status, 
with the number of inputs corresponding 
to the type of interface you’re using 
with Logic. 
 Figure 4.10  
Record Arm
 Record Arm (R) 
 Record arming a track or channel indicates to Logic that you’re about to make 
a recording. Again, you’ll be able to see your input levels accordingly and hear 
the signal routed through to your main outputs. Once you press record on the 
transport, Logic will actively record the input as a new audio fi le (more on this 
in a moment!). 
 Mute (M) 
 As you’d expect, mute silences the track or channel in question. As the controls 
between the Tracks area and the Mixer are linked, muting a track in the Tracks 
area will also mute the corresponding mixer channel strip and visa versa. 
 Solo (S) 
 Solo will play the chosen track or channel in isolation, temporarily muting 
all other tracks in the project. Note that you can also add to an existing solo 
 Figure 4.11 Mute

66
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
selection so that you hear several tracks in isolation. Alt-clicking on an existing 
solo selection will remove all the selected tracks from solo mode, returning the 
mix to normal. 
 Working between the Mixer and the Tracks area is an important part of the day- to-
day usage of Logic. For example, note how a selection in either window is mirrored 
in the other – selecting the vocal track on the Tracks area, for example, will also 
bring it up on the Mixer. 
 Figure 4.13    The control bar also includes a number of important Mode and Function 
buttons – including the Metronome and Autopunch – that are vital to the process of 
recording in Logic.   
 4.5  Using the Transport Controls and Ruler 
 As with any multitrack recorder, the Transport Controls – found as part of the control bar – provide the 
master control for recording, playing back, and looping in Logic. For example, having created your tracks 
and record-armed them, pressing Record on the transport will tell Logic to engage its playback (of any 
existing material) and record each track as an individual audio fi le. The rest of the controls (play, pause, 
rewind, fast-forward, and so on) need little introduction, although it’s worth noting how the transport 
controls are also infl uenced by settings in the Tracks area’s bar ruler. 
 On the right-hand side of the control bar, you’ll fi nd a number of diff erent Mode and Function buttons – 
like a cycle switch, tuner, solo button, and of course, the all-important Metronome. We’ll be discussing 
these in more detail as we move through the recording functions in Logic.  
 Figure 4.14    Here are two left and right markers 
defi ning the length of the cycle. Use the cycle 
feature either to loop round a portion of the 
song or to perform a series of diff erent takes. 
 Figure 4.12 Solo
 Ruler 
 The ruler – along the top of the Tracks area – provides the positional reference, or timeline, for our 
project, with the Playhead indicating the current song position. As you’d expect, there are a number 
of additional functions of the ruler, allowing you to 
specify the parts of the recording to be dropped in, 
for example, or areas to be looped around. Crucial to 
the functionality are the left- and right-hand locators, 
which are indicated by the yellow shading (assuming 
the cycle mode is active) on the ruler. If cycle isn’t 
active, you’ll still see the position of the locators – this 
time using a subtle diff erence in shading. 
 You can adjust the left and right locators in a number 
of ways, although probably the quickest and most 
logical solution is to drag from left to right (with 
the mouse button held down) in the top half of the 

67
Starting a Project
timeline. As you drag your selection, you’ll automatically place Logic into cycle mode – as illustrated 
by the yellow shading in the ruler, and the fact that the cycle mode indicator (found in the right-hand 
side on the control bar) is active. In cycle mode, you can repeat over a section of the music, and if you’re 
recording, lay down a number of diff erent passes or takes of the same musical line to be edited later on.  
 To disable cycle mode, you can either click on the yellow region in the ruler or alternatively deactivate 
cycle mode on the control bar. Even when it’s deactivated, Logic will retain the left- and right-hand 
locator settings allowing you to return to the cycle at any point. Furthermore, you could also defi ne a 
number of diff erent cycles using the Marker feature (like Verse, Chorus, and Middle Eight), which we’ll 
discuss in more detail in  Chapter 10 .  
 4.6  Your First Recording 
 Assuming you’ve created and record-enabled the appropriate amount of audio tracks, you should be 
ready to make your fi rst recording. Recording will begin in one of two places – either at the current 
position of the playhead or, if you’ve set up cycle playback, at the point the cycle begins. To provide you 
with a small amount of preroll, Logic will actually start playback a bar earlier than the current record 
point (assuming you have Count-In button engaged), allowing you to get some indication of the track’s 
speed, and existing elements of the performance that might lead up to it. 
 When you’ve fi nished your fi rst pass, take the track out of record arm mode. If you’ve got multiple tracks  record-
enabled, this can be done by Alt-clicking on any one of the active record-enabled tracks. Playing the project 
back will now allow you to audition the takes, spotting any defi ciencies or areas you might want to improve.   
 Figure 4.15  Recording the fi rst pass into Logic.   

68
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 KNOWLEDGEBASE 2 
 More about the Metronome 
 In certain situations, you might fi nd it benefi cial to adapt some of the qualities of the Metronome – 
stopping the Metronome being sent over MIDI, for example, or changing the preset Klopfgeist 
sound to something of your own liking. The Metronome settings can be accessed either through 
the project’s settings (File > Project Settings > Metronome) or directly by Ctrl-clicking on the 
Metronome icon on the control bar. The settings allow you to switch the Metronome in and out of 
MIDI playback, as well as being able to disable the software click and adjust some basic parameters 
like tonality and volume. 
 By delving deeper in to the audio mixer environment (which we’ll discuss in more detail in 
 Chapter 11 , but for now access through Window > Environment), you can also change the default 
Klopfgeist instrument assigned to the Metronome. Klopfgeist is a simple instrument, specifi cally 
designed to produce distinctive click sounds that can be audible over a mix, yet not so loud that 
they would bleed out excessively over headphones. If you’ve got the Mixer environment open, you 
should see the Klopfgeist instrument assigned to the Click object. By changing this to the EXS24 
sampler, for example, you could replace the standard Klopfgeist click with a rimshot sample from 
one of the factory kits.   
 Figure 4.16    Adapting the Metronome settings can be achieved through the menu option File > 
Project Settings > Metronome.   

69
Starting a Project
 4.7  Overdubs and Punching-In and -Out 
 Although we’d all like to think we could record perfect “one-take wonders” every time we enter the studio, 
there’s always an inevitable amount of remedial recording that needs to take place – either with fl uff ed 
notes or whole sections that need to be replaced. Logic, of course, provides a number of solutions for 
this, all of which can be further refi ned when it comes to editing your project (as we’ll see in  Chapter 5 ). 
Unlike tape, it’s worth remembering that any punch-ins or overdubs are “nondestructive” – in other 
words, the original takes remain untouched on the hard disk, with Logic simply changing or augmenting 
the fi les that it decides to playback for any given track. 
 Quickly Punching-In Material 
 One solution to repairing your recording could be simply to record over a section of the track in question. 
To do this, all you’ll need to do is place the track or tracks you want to replace into record-ready mode, 
locate the playhead at the punch-in point, and press record. Logic will then give you the usual bar preroll 
and then initiate recording, eff ectively “replacing” any previous recording you have made at that point 
 Figure 4.17    If you want to replace any section of the recording, simply locate the transport at the point 
where you want to drop in, and press record. Logic will provide a bar of preroll and then begin recording 
your new material.   

70
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
(although remember, this is nondestructive). When you press stop, you’ll eff ectively punch-out, leaving 
subsequent audio recordings untouched.  
 Recording in Cycle Mode 
 If you’ve got a specifi c section of the song you want to work on, it might be appropriate to record in 
cycle mode. In cycle mode, Logic will continually loop the portion of the song, recording each pass that 
you make. When you’ve stopped the transport, the last take will be used for playback, although all the 
various takes will have been recorded.  
 Figure 4.18    Using the cycle function is a useful way of loop-recording a number of bars until the 
part is performed correctly.   
 Autopunch 
 If you’re clear about a specifi c part of the track you want to replace, consider using the Autopunch 
feature. Autopunch can be activated through the control bar, with an additional set of locators (shaded 
red) viewable in the middle of the bar ruler. By default, Autopunch isn’t initially visible on the control 

71
Starting a Project
 Figure 4.19    If you have a specifi c part of the take you want to replace, consider using the 
Autopunch feature for an accurate, automatic drop-in and drop-out.   
bar, so you’ll need to Ctrl-click on the control bar, select Customize Control Bar and Display and enable 
Autopunch for the selection of objects. You can change the position and length of the Autopunch 
locators in the same way as the cycle locators, ideally setting the locator points to precisely match 
the portion of the track you want to replace. With the track record-enabled, and record engaged on 
the transport, Logic will playback the song and only record for the precise duration of the Autopunch 
locators.  
 Introducing Take Folders 
 Whenever you overdub onto an existing recording on an audio track, or use the Autopunch 
feature, you create what Logic refers to as a take folder. If you look closely at a take folder, it looks 
slightly diff erent to a conventional audio recording in Logic, with two triangles in the top left- and 
right-hand corners of the region. Technically, a take folder stores all your various takes in an organized 
way, with features that allow you to switch between takes or to make quick, on-the-fl y edits between 
the diff erent passes. 
 To understand how we can carry out further work with the take folders, take a look at Section 5.4.  

72
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 4.8  Creating Further Tracks and Track Sorting 
 Although we should have created the majority of tracks required for our session at the start of the 
project, it is highly likely that you’ll need to add further tracks into your session. Let’s take a look at some 
of the motivating factors and the quick steps to create and organize these tracks. 
 Creating New Tracks for the Same Instrument 
 Use the menu function Track > Other > New Track with Same Channel (or Shift + Ctrl + Return) to create 
a parallel track with the same instrument or channel assignment. This is a useful tool if you want to 
create two alternate “takes” of the track – so, rather than packing diff erent takes in a Take Folder, you end 
up with two discrete takes assigned to the same channel. Remember that only one audio recording can 
take priority at any given point in time, so you’ll need to be clear about what track you’re listening to by 
muting the unwanted takes accordingly.  
 Creating Tracks with the Next Instrument 
 Creating tracks with the next instrument or channel strip (Track > Other > New with Next Channel) is a 
great way of augmenting your existing project, adding further track lanes for each new instrument you 
might want to add into the mix. Using the keyboard shortcut, Ctrl + Return, allows you to do this quickly 
and effi  ciently without interrupting your creative workfl ow. 
 Figure 4.20  If you 
record over an 
existing region, 
Logic will create 
what is known as a 
Take Folder. A Take 
Folder will allow 
you to reposition 
and refi ne edit 
points later on in 
the production 
process. 

73
Starting a Project
 Figure 4.21 
 Creating a track 
with the same 
channel is a good 
way of negating the 
Take Folder system, 
allowing you to 
clearly visualize 
each take as it’s 
being recorded. 
 Creating Tracks with Duplicate Settings 
 If you’ve already set up some particular monitoring EQ and compression eff ects, for example, you might 
want to create new tracks with duplicate plug-in settings (Track > Other > New with Duplicate Setting, 
or Cmd + D). The newly created track will have its own unique channel assignment, but a copy of any of 
the plug-in settings as well as any fader or pan positions you’ve established on the original track. 
 Sorting and Organizing Tracks 
 As the project grows, it might become benefi cial to organize your track list into an order that better 
corresponds to the arrangement of instrumentation, as opposed to the order you recorded it in. For 
example, maybe you want to sort all the vocal tracks together with the lead vocal fi rst, or separate the 
keyboard from the guitars. Arranging the track order is as simple as clicking on a track lane and shuffl  ing 
it up or down the track list accordingly. Should the track list become increasingly confusing, you might 
also want to return it to something closer to its original arrangement. In that case, go to Track > Sort 
Tracks by > Audio Channel, for example, and have the tracks automatically reordered by their channel 
assignment. 

74
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 4.9  The Project Audio Browser and Importing 
 Although the Tracks area provides an important positional overview of the audio fi les we recorded as 
part of our project, it’s not the only way we can manage and organize the various fi les that we’ve created. 
The Project Audio Browser presents the complete list of the audio fi les included in your session and 
off ers a means of importing new audio fi les (possibly from another project, or a drum loop from an audio 
CD). To open the Project Audio Browser, select View > Show Browsers, or open the Project Audio Browser 
using the keyboard shortcut F. 
 Scrolling down the Project Audio Browser, you should be able to see all the fi les that are contained 
within your project, even the ones that might not be currently active in your Tracks area. Alongside the 
fi le name, you can also get some basic information on the audio fi le, including its sample rate, bit depth, 
and fi le size. Another important piece of information is the fi le’s location, which is displayed in the top 
line whenever a particular fi le is selected. If, as part of your asset management, you specifi ed for all fi les 
 Figure 4.22    Try sorting tracks to make their organization clearer.   

75
Starting a Project
 Figure 4.23    The Project Audio Browser provides an eff ective overview of all the audio fi les used within 
a project. 
 Importing Other Audio Files and CDs 
 To import existing audio fi les, you can also use the Project Audio Browser. Logic supports a number 
of diff erent audio fi le formats – including WAV, AIFF, SDII, CAF, MP3, AAC, SMF, and REX2 – all of which 
can happily reside together in the same project. To import a fi le into your project, go to Audio File > 
Add Audio File and browse your drives accordingly. Again, if you’ve got your assets setting established 
correctly, the fi les will be copied into your project’s Audio Files folder to keep all the media content in a 
centralized, project-specifi c location. 
 To finish the importing process, you will, of course, need to drag the audio file into your project’s 
arrangement. The precise method you choose to do this will have an eff ect on how the resultant fi le is 
played back. If you drag the fi le onto an existing audio track, the new audio fi le will be played back with 
(recorded or imported) to be stored in your project folder, then all these locations should be the same. 
If the project’s data management isn’t quite so organized, this might be an opportunity to fi nd out which 
fi les are located outside your main Audio Files folder.  

76
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
the settings on that current channel strip. However, if you drag the new region to a position in the Tracks 
area without a track assignment (this would be at the bottom of the track list), Logic will create a new 
track specifi c to the audio fi le in question.  
 Figure 4.24    Use the Project Audio Browser to import additional audio fi les into your project. These can then 
be dragged into your arrangement with a new track created accordingly.   
 4.10  Working with Apple Loops 
 Apple Loops provides a quick-and-easy source of inspiration for music and audio production, and can 
be an eff ective way of kick-starting a project. Included with the full install of Logic Studio are a number 
of Jam Packs providing everything from urban drum loops to Foley eff ects. The important point to note 
about the Apple Loops format is that the tempo and/or the key of the loop will automatically conform to 
your project’s current settings, allowing you to quickly audition a loop’s relative merits without having to 
time-stretch the fi le to fi t. Equally, if the project’s tempo changes at a later point (even midway through 
the song!), the Apple Loop will follow these changes accordingly.  
 You can access the Apple Loop browser via the control bar, or use the menu option View > Show Apple 
Loops (keyboard shortcut O). The Apple Loops browser is an extremely eff ective way of exploring 
the content installed with Logic Pro X, allowing you to specify various search tags to sift through 
the huge amount of possible sound content. The browser itself can be organized into two diff erent 
viewing styles – a Button view or a Column view. Arguably, the most intuitive of these is the Button 
view (indicated by the small musical notes), which organizes the various loops by genre (Jazz and 
Country, for example), instrument (Vibes, Strings, and so on), and sound-type “categorization” (Melodic, 
Distorted, Clean, and so on). By clicking on combinations of these tabs you should be able to arrive at 
a loop or collection of loops that best suits your needs. Pressing the Reset tab (top left) will remove any 
existing selections, allowing you to perform a new search. 

77
Starting a Project
 Figure 4.25  The Apple 
Loop browser allows 
you to quickly locate 
diff erent loops based on 
their musical qualities.   

78
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 4.26 
   The Column view provides an alternative way of 
navigating and viewing your Apple Loops sound 
content. 
 The alternative browsing method is the Column view, which sifts through the sound content in a way similar 
to the Finder in its column mode. As you’d expect, both modes can also use a search string if you’re looking 
for something specifi c in mind.  

79
Starting a Project
 KNOWLEDGEBASE 3 
 Importing REX2 Files 
 The REX fi le format was originally developed by Propellerhead as a cross-platform solution for 
transporting time-sliced audio fi les created by their popular ReCycle application. A number of 
third-party loop libraries make use of this fi le format, so it’s useful to know how Logic handles 
these fi les. 
 One option is to load the REX fi le directly into the Tracks area itself, with the slices left as a series of 
diff erent regions locked to your particular project tempo. To import the loop, go to the Browser and 
drag the REX fi le into its fi rst position in the Arrange area. Logic will then ask you to confi rm the REX 
fi le import, possibly suggesting a series of crossfades to best match the original loop tempo with 
the tempo of your session. If you confi rm, this will create a folder in the arrangement containing all 
the accompanying REX slices. 
 As an alternative to importing the slices, you can also choose to render the REX fi le as a complete 
fi le or an Apple Loop by selecting the appropriate option from the pull-down menu. Arguably, 
a rendered audio fi le is easier to manage than a collection of slices, although it won’t be able to 
follow changes in the project’s tempo. As an Apple Loop, though, the REX fi le will retain its elasticity, 
allowing it to match the project’s tempo at any point in the creative process.   
 Figure 4.27  REX fi les can be directly imported into your Logic arrangement, with a number of 
diff erent options to conform the loops to your project’s tempo setting.   
 To hear an Apple Loop, simply click on its fi le name, with Logic playing the fi le back at the same tempo 
and key as the song you’re working with. You can also use the small volume slider and the bottom of the 
loops browser to set the volume for auditioning the loop. It’s also worth checking the percentage match, 
as this will have some eff ect on the relative quality of the loop in the fi nal arrangement, with loops closer 
to the project’s tempo requiring less time compression or expansion to get them positioned correctly.  

80
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Audio Files versus MIDI Files and Instruments 
 The Apple Loop fi les format actually contains two variations – a pure audio fi le that off ers a recording of the 
loop in question and a MIDI version (also known as an Apple Loop +) that combines the raw note data with 
an accompanying software instrument and eff ects. You can see what type your Apple Loop is by looking at 
the small icon to the left-hand side of the fi le. A blue waveform icon indicates that the Apple Loop is only 
available as an audio fi le, whereas a green music note indicates the Loop is available as raw musical data (in 
other words, a MIDI version) and as an audio fi le. 
 In the long run, a MIDI-based version will provide much greater fl exibility than an audio-based Apple Loop, 
allowing you to precisely edit the musical data, instrument settings, and eff ects. However, these versions 
can, at times, make slightly larger demands on your CPU usage.  
 Figure 4.28    Here are the two Apple Loop fi le formats and how they diff er when imported into your session. 
A standard Apple Loop (top) is audio-only, but the enhanced version (bottom) contains the specifi c MIDI and 
instrument data used to create the loop.   
 Importing Apple Loops into Your Session 
 To use either of the two Apple Loop formats, all you need to do is simply drag the file into your 
arrangement. One point to be clear on, though, is the type of track you import it to, and how this has an 
eff ect on the end form of Apple Loop imported. For example, if you drag the Apple Loop onto an empty 
track lane with no track assignment, Logic will automatically create the appropriate type of track (Audio 

81
Starting a Project
or Instrument) based on the particular Apple Loop in question. By dragging the Loop to a specifi c type 
of track, though, the Apple Loop will be conformed to the track type – so, for example, MIDI-based Loop 
would be placed as its audio version on a corresponding audio track. The only exception, of course, is 
that audio-only loops can’t be converted into MIDI regions. 
 4.11  Improving What the Artist Hears – Headphone Mixes 
 Although we’ve looked the process of basic track laying in Logic from the engineer’s perspective, 
it’s worth considering what exactly the artist hears and performs to as the material is being 
recorded – in respect to either the individual headphone mix or the additioning of plug-in eff ects 
(like compression, distortion, or reverb) – that might be added during the process of recording. 
However, it should be mentioned that these subsequent techniques will push your Logic skills much 
harder than that with respect to the use of the Mixer that has been discussed in the fi rst part of this 
chapter   . 
 First off , let’s consider the two types of mixes heard in a typical tracking session in a professional studio. 
 Monitor Mix 
 The monitor mix is simply the mix that is heard in the control room and is usually based on a reasonable 
and considered balance of the material that has been recorded. In some cases, the producer or engineer 
might want to hone in on a specifi c part (usually whatever is being recorded at that point) with the rest 
of the instrumentation signifi cantly quieter. Ultimately, a good monitor mix is the only way you can 
ensure that you’re making an eff ective recording. 
 Cue Mix 
 The cue mix (also known as talent mix or headphone mix) is the balance of material that relates specifi cally 
to the performer and what they hear through their headphones. 
 Of course, a pragmatic solution to recording sometimes involves the monitor mix and the cue mix 
eff ectively being the same thing, especially if you’re recording yourself! If you’re using a USB audio 
interface, it might also be the case that the interface features some direct provision to control the mix 
between the input signals and    Logic’s mix so as to combat any latency issues (for more information on 
latency see  Chapter 3 ), again resulting in a combination of both the monitor and cue mixes. However, if 
your audio hardware supports it and you need a more refi ned monitoring system, it’s far better to create 
a separate monitor mix and cue mix directly from Logic. 
 Creating a unique headphone mix in Logic involves a more detailed use and exploration of the Mixer 
area, so as to eff ectively create two mixes at the same time. On each of the channel faders in your 
project, you should fi nd an empty box next to the Sends section. As we’ll see later on the mixing 
chapter, these bus sends, as they are called, have several diff erent applications, but for now, we’re going 
to concentrate on their role in the creation of a cue mix. To create a bus send for a particular channel 
strip, click in the Sends slot and insert a send to bus 1. Note that if you have a large number of tracks, 
you can also select multiple channels, insatiate the bus on one of the channels, and have them all 
duplicate the same action.  

82
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The next important thing to do is to set the pre/postassignment of the bus sends. Although this sounds 
complicated, all a post/preassignment means is whether the bus send is patched before or after the 
channel fader. Thinking through logically, it makes most sense to create the cue mix pre fade – so that 
any movement of the channel faders won’t immediately change the relative mix for the headphones. In 
other words, if you want to turn down the vocal in your monitor mix, the vocalist can still hear himself or 
herself loudly and clearly. The pre/post assignment can be easily switched by clicking on the bus send 
 Figure 4.29    Use the Sends box to create a bus sends for each individual channel in your 
mix. The bus sends are the controls that will be used to create your headphone mix.   

83
Starting a Project
 Figure 4.30    Switching to prefade will allow the mix to be completely independent of Logic’s channel faders. 
The color of the bus sends indicates the pre/post status, with green being prefade.   
and changing the mode from post (the default setting) to pre. If this is done correctly, the position of the 
send should switch to the left of the send slot.  
 In creating the bus send, Logic will have also created a corresponding aux master object, which will act 
as the master fader for you cue mix. To make things clearer, you could double-click on the channel’s 
strip name toward the bottom on the Mixer and change this to something like  headphones  or  cue mix . 
To build up the headphone mix, solo off  this channel and then blend the appropriate instrument using 
the bus sends on the individual channels. As a good tip, maybe start by placing the loudest possible 
instrument in at around 0 dB (you can do this by Alt-clicking the corresponding bus send pot) and then 
positioning the rest of the instrumentation around this. 
 To send the headphone mix to the specifi c physical interface output, change the output status (found 
just below the Sends section) of the aux master accordingly. 

84
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 4.12  Monitoring through Effects 
 In some cases, performing a take can sometimes be tricky without an idea of how it will sound in the 
fi nal mix. Although it is often the intention of the engineer to record “dry” sounds devoid of artifacts like 
compression or reverb (which will instead be added in a controlled way in the mix), the same cannot be 
said of what the artists themselves prefer to hear. Far from being fussy, eff ects like reverb can actively 
help a vocalist pitch themselves, equally the drive and distortion of a guitar sound is such an integral 
part of how a guitar is “played.” 
 Eff ects plug-ins can be instantiated using the small gray Inserts boxes in the Mixer’s various channel 
strips. Clicking on the box will bring up a list of Logic’s own internal plug-ins (organized into groups – like 
delay, distortion, fi lter, and so on), as well as any third-party Audio Unit plug-ins that you have installed 
on your system (organized by manufacturer). You can also activate EQ at any point by double-clicking 
on the corresponding EQ box just above the inserts. An important point to note is the order of the 
plug-ins – refl ected in the progression from top to bottom on the inserts – which will dictate the order 
in which an instrument is processed. If you’re a guitarist, for example, you might want to place certain 
eff ects before and/or after your virtual amplifi er (in this case, Amp Designer). Alternatively, a vocal track 
tends to have EQ and compression before reverb, so that the reverb isn’t equalized and compressed. 
 Figure 4.31  Recording through an eff ect plug-in will have no direct impact on what is being recorded, only 
what you and the musician hear in their mix.   

85
Starting a Project
 Figure 4.32    Using the low-latency mode will ensure 
that any  DSP -hungry eff ects plug-ins won’t create 
unacceptable amounts of monitoring delay.   
 We’ll be taking a closer look at the art of setting up plug-in eff ects on inserts, and how their order aff ects 
the processing taking place, in more detail in  Chapter 8 . 
 The point to remember with plug-ins instantiated in this way is that they have no direct impact on the 
actual signal that is recorded to disk. Although this might fi rst seem a little frustrating, it means that, if 
you change your mind later on, you can always return back to its initialized state – peel back the layers of 
distortion, on a guitar, for example, and you’ll still have the completely clean,  DI  ’d version. In eff ect, these 
plug-ins are used exclusively for monitoring purposes – they’re keeping the musician happy with what 
they hear in the monitor mix, and the engineer content with what is being printed to disk.  
 Accounting for Processing Latency 
 Although most of Logic’s own plug-in are optimized for low-latency operation, it is possible that creating 
long chains of plug-ins, as well as using certain third-party plug-ins, might start to add unacceptable 
amounts of latency for real-time recording and monitoring. If playing starts to become unresponsive, 
you might want to consider removing certain plug-ins, although these can always be reinstated once it 
comes to the mix (when latency isn’t an issue). 
 As an alternative to manually switching plug-ins in and out, try using Logic’s own low-latency mode, 
which is available directly from the control bar (although the button isn’t viewable by default, so 
you’ll need to customize the control bar fi rst), or under the General Tab of the Audio Preferences 
(Logic Pro > Preferences > Audio), where you can also modify the accepted latency limit from the 
default of 5 ms. Using the low-latency mode is an excellent way of being able to quickly move 
between tracking and mixing tasks, without having to worry about which plug-ins are causing 
latency problems.  

86
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 
 Amp Designer 
 Amp Designer is a virtual presentation of a guitar amplifi er, including the amplifi er head, speaker 
cabinet, and virtual microphone used to “record” the amplifi er’s sound. As such, Amp Designer is an 
essential plug-in if you’re recording with an electric guitar plugged directly into the instrument-level 
input on your audio interface (also known as the DI input). The plug-in transforms the otherwise 
sterile tone of a DI’d electric guitar into something far more playable – whether it’s a heavily rectifi ed 
metal guitar, or a clean Fender Twin tone. Although you “play through” the plug-in, the guitar is 
recorded in its raw state, eff ectively allowing you to modify the tone of the virtual amp at any point 
in the production process. 
 Although it’s possible to browse Amp Designer’s various presets, you can often have just as much 
fun swapping-out the various components (using the drop-down menu at the bottom of the 
interface) to create your own customized sound. An Amp Designer “Model,” as such, is a combination 
of amplifi er head, cabinet, and the most appropriate microphone. Moving between the diff erent 
models, therefore, is a good way of auditioning the principle types of tone available to you. 
 Of course, a more detailed approach allows you to mix and match the various components of Amp 
Designer – maybe matching a particularly amp head with a cabinet of your choice. Note that each 
Amp will distort in a slightly diff erent way – moving between the soft bluesy crunch of a Small 
Tweed Amp, for example, through to the rich and heavy saturation of the high octane head. The 
diff erent cabinets “color” the distortion in a variety of ways, using diff erent phase cancellations and 
high-frequency roll-off  between the diff erent designs. 
 Changing the choice and position of the microphone works in much the same way as in the real 
world – with a condenser microphone off ering the widest and most neutral tone, while the ribbon 
and dynamic mics sound slightly more colored (although this is no bad thing!). Changing the 
position of the microphone changes the tone, with a bias toward a bassier tone as you move toward 
the edge of the virtual speaker. 
 As you’d expect, Amp Designer makes a great pairing with Pedalboard, which we’ll cover in more 
detail in  Chapter 8 . 
 Figure 4.33 
 By mixing and 
matching the various 
components in Amp 
Designer, you can 
create your own 
customized guitar 
sound. 

This page intentionally left blank

 In this chapter 
 5.1 
Introduction 
91 
 5.2 
The Big Picture – 
Forming Your Basic 
Arrangement 
91 
 5.3 
Using the Inspector 
93 
 5.4 
Working with Loops, 
Copies, and Aliases 
94 
 5.5 
Precise Region Editing 
95 
 5.6 
Snapping – Understanding 
Your Editing Grid 
96 
 5.7 
Resizing and Cutting 
Regions 
98 
 5.8 
Fades and Crossfades 
103 
 5.9 
Speed Fades 
107 
 5.10 Introducing the Audio 
Track Editor 
107 
 5.11 Quick Swipe 
Comping 
108 
 5.12 Expanding the Take 
Folder and Creating Basic 
Comps 
109 
 5.13 Time Slipping a Quick 
Swipe Comp 
110 
 5.14 Flattening or Merging a 
Comp 
111 
 5.15 Flex Time Editing 
114 
 5.16 Flex View and Flex 
Time Modes 
115 

 5.17 Transient Markers and 
Flex Markers 
117 
 5.18 Quantizing Audio with 
Flex Time 
121 
 5.19 Separating Regions Based 
on Transient Markers 
123 
 5.20 Flex Pitch 
124 
 5.21 Typical Flex Pitch 
Edits 
126 
 5.22 Freezing a Flex Time Track 
to Save CPU 
129 
 5.23 Editing Multiple Tracks 
Using Edit Groups 
130 
 5.24 Drum Replacement 
132 
 5.25 Audio File Editor 
Principles 
134 
 5.26 Audio File Editor 
Applications 
136 
 5.27 Inserting and Deleting 
Sections of Your 
Song 
141 
 5.28 Working with Tempo and 
Loops 
141 
 5.29 Managing Your Audio Files 
and Regions 
147 
 5.30 Using Track Stacks, Folders, 
and Hiding Tracks 
150 


91
 5.1  Introduction 
 Editing and arranging audio regions has become an integral part of the recording process – whether 
it’s simply tidying up a few misplaced notes or creating the complex “glitch and stutter” edits that are 
common to many modern production styles. Therefore, in keeping with this increased importance of 
audio editing, Logic includes a wealth of diff erent editing features – from Quick Swipe Comping to Flex 
Time editing – all of which unite to off er an almost unprecedented amount of control (and creative 
input!) in how your eventual production sounds to the listener. 
 In this chapter, therefore, we’re going to take a detailed look at all the editing features that Logic has 
to off er. Starting off  from the basics, we’ll fi rst explore how to use simple tools within the Tracks area 
to start forming the structure of our project – bringing parts in at diff erent locations in the song, for 
example, or looping two to four bars of music to form a repetitive feature in the track. Exploring deeper, 
we’ll look at the various tools that can be used to improve an original performance – from the ability to 
“comp” a performance from a number of diff erent takes through to ways of tightening a performance 
and making it lock more tightly to a predetermined groove. 
 Of course, there’s also plenty of creative potential to be explored using audio in Logic, discovering the 
intricacies of features like the Audio File Editor, for example, or manipulating audio regions far beyond 
their original form. As you’ll soon see, Logic off ers a vast array of creative possibility in audio editing, and 
eff ective use of its editing features forms the cornerstone of contemporary music making. 
 5.2  The Big Picture – Forming Your Basic Arrangement 
 In  Chapter 4 , we explored the basic principles of getting audio regions into your Logic project – as audio 
recordings, prerecorded audio fi les, Apple Loops, or REX2 fi les. However, having acquired these assets, 
we now need to start thinking about how we can organize and edit this raw material together to form 
our fi nished song. As you’d expect, the precise way you execute this will vary given the material you’re 
presented with, so you’ll need to be conversant with the various approaches and solutions for handling 
and editing audio regions in Logic. 
 Broadly speaking, your goals will be focused on two levels of interaction. First, you’ll need to pay attention 
to the overarching structure and arrangement of the project, using the various editing tools to bring 
instruments in and out of the song. Second, you’ll need to investigate the detailed qualities within each 
performance – like the choice of diff erent takes at various points of the song, for example, through to the 
timing of each note that is played. 
 The fi rst simple technique, therefore, is the ability to start moving regions within your arrangement – 
making copies of regions, looping regions, or muting them. You can move a region simply by selecting it 
Audio Regions and Editing 

92
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 5.2    The edit tools play an important part in the editing 
and arrangement process. 
 Figure 5. 1    Forming the basic arrangement – either by dragging regions to new locations and copying them 
(by holding down the Alt key) or muting them.   
and moving it to a diff erent position in the Tracks area, either at 
a new point in the timeline or even onto a completely diff erent 
track. Holding down Alt key as you perform the drag allows you 
to create a copy of the region – maybe copying over a chorus 
vocal line, for example, or a repeated guitar motif, so that it 
appears at several diff erent points in the track.  
 As you’d expect, the Tool menu (which can be quickly accessed by 
pressing the keyboard shortcut T) plays a vital part in the editing 
process. The application of most tools should be apparent, 
although at this stage, you’ll probably want to principally work 
with the Pointer Tool (to move and copy regions), the Eraser Tool 
(for deleting regions), or the Mute Tool (to temporarily disable 
a region from playing back). We’ll be looking at the Scissors, 
Crossfade, and Marquee Tools later on in the chapter, although 
it’s worth noting their presence for now.  

93
Audio Regions and Editing
 5.3  Using the Inspector 
 In conjunction with the graphical changes made in the Tracks area, it’s also worth noting another 
important feature in Logic’s approach to audio editing – the Inspector. As we fi rst saw in  Chapter 4 , you 
can fi nd the Inspector toward the left-hand side of the Tracks area, assuming that it has been toggled 
into view by selecting View > Show Inspector or by using the keyboard shortcut I. 
 The Inspector’s Region Parameters display (seen at the top of the Inspector) shows the current text-
based information that accompanies any selected region. The exact information displayed in the 
Inspector’s Region Parameters display will vary given the type of region selected, although given that 
we’re principally working with audio regions at this stage, you should see options that relate to the 
Delay, Mute, Loop and Gain settings.  
 Figure 5.3    The Inspector’s Region Parameters display highlights the current settings for the selected regions.   
 The purpose of the Inspector’s Region Parameters box in editing is twofold. First, the Region Parameters 
box provides an extremely accurate way of interacting with a region’s current parameter settings – like 
increasing a region’s gain by +1 dB, for example, or applying a fade that lasts just a few milliseconds. 

94
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
Second, and arguably just as importantly, the Region Parameters box also proves itself useful as a way of 
applying the same edit across multiple regions – like fading-in all the regions at the start of a song, for 
example, or time-adjusting multiple percussion parts. 
 Rather than covering all the applications of the Inspector here, we’ll be dealing with various uses 
throughout the rest of this chapter. 
 5.4  Working with Loops, Copies, and Aliases 
 Many compositions feature a large number of repeated regions – like a two-bar drum loop, for example, 
or a repeated bassline – that occur throughout the duration of a song. In Logic, there’re a number of 
diff erent ways you can deal with repeated musical phrases – from the ability to create multiple “hard” 
copies to the option of creating instantaneous region loops that last the full duration of the track. 
 Making Multiple Copies 
 As an extension of the existing region duplication feature (using the Alt key, in other words), consider 
using the menu option Region > Repeat Regions (Cmd + R). This allows you to create multiple copies of 
 Figure 5.4    Use the menu option Edit > Repeat to quickly make a series of duplicate copies of a 
selected region. 

95
Audio Regions and Editing
 5.5  Precise Region Editing 
 Having established the broad structure of your song, it’s now time to start to look at some of its fi ner 
details – from the precise placement of individual notes, for example, through to the task of “comping” 
between a number of different performances. Not surprisingly, this will start to push our use and 
the selected region/s along the duration of the timeline, specifying the number of duplicates you want 
to create. 
 One point worth noting, though, is the ability to distinguish between the “hard” Copies option and an 
Alias or Clone. In most cases, you’ll want to select the Copies options, so each newly created region is a 
discrete copy in its own right – separate from the original region. With an Alias or Clone, though, Logic 
will always refer to the original region – so, if you make any subsequent physical edits to the region (like 
trimming off  the last bar, for example), all the other cloned regions will follow this edit.  
 Loops 
 As an alternative to using Copies and/or Aliases, consider using the region looping feature. You can apply 
a loop in a number of diff erent ways, including the Inspector’s Loop parameter, the keyboard shortcut 
L, or by using the unique Loop Tool that should appear at the top right-hand edge of the region. A loop 
is indicated by a grayed-out version of the region extending to the right-hand side of the original part. 
By default, a loop will last for the full duration of the song, or until it hits another region on the timeline. 
 Looping is a great way of quickly extending a song and sketching out an arrangement without having 
to create multiple duplicate regions. As you’d expect, edits that you make to the original region will 
be refl ected in the subsequent loops. This is much easier to keep track of than the region alias feature 
(thanks to the use of the shading) and can even be put to use on some interesting creative treatments. 
One of the best examples of this is creating loops within your song that don’t fall on exact bars – like a 
three-beat phrase, for example, or a fi ve-beat motif. The result creates constant movement in the song, 
especially when played against a rigid 4/4 loop.  
 Figure 5.5    Region looping – which is accessible from the Inspector – is a quick-and-easy way of repeating a 
region throughout the duration of the song (or until the region hits another object).   

96
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
understanding of Logic’s editing features much further, utilizing a greater range of editing tools (like 
Flex Time or Quick Swipe Comping), as well as our ability to handle audio regions at much fi ner division 
than just bars and beats. The result, however, will be a signifi cant improvement in the tightness of our 
performance, and the musicality of the track in general. 
 5.6  Snapping – Understanding Your Editing Grid 
 So far, the edits that we’ve made have been largely based on bar divisions – for example, duplicating 
two bars of drums throughout the duration of a song, or off setting a bass part so that it starts on bar 
fi ve. More refi ned editing through requires a fi ner grid to work from – moving from divisions based 
on bars and beats, right down to individual ticks, or even sample frames! By editing at such a detailed 
resolution, your edits will be that much more precise, allowing you to accurately position an edit to the 
most detailed timing resolution the human ear can perceive. 
 In Logic, the current editing resolution is defi ned by the Snap setting and can be found toward the top 
right-hand side of the Tracks area. Options include various diff erent timing divisions (like Bars, Ticks, 
Frames, and Samples) and an intriguing “Smart” mode that intelligently adjusts the editing grid based 
on your current zoom resolution. 
 At the start of a new project, the Snap value defaults to the Smart setting. This is an intuitive way of 
working with Snap and, to a large extent, provides you with the freedom not to worry about any current 
 Figure 5.6 
 Logic features a 
variety of Snap 
settings, although 
the “intelligent” 
Smart option is 
best for day-to-
day production 
activities. 

97
Audio Regions and Editing
Snap settings as you perform your edits. Dependent on the zoom level and the size of the region, the 
Smart mode interprets the division you require – if you’re working at a “macro” level, for example (moving 
regions around to form the structure of your track), Logic will stick to moving regions in bar increments. 
Zoom in closer, though (maybe to edit an individual note within a performance), and Logic will work at a 
correspondingly fi ner grid – whether it’s sub beats, for example, or individual frames.  
 Another important point to note in editing resolution is that Logic always attempts to keep the relative 
positions within bars, beats, and so on. Therefore, precise, nonstandard edits can remain relative to the 
“snapped” grid when moved or copied to other position in the project – a bass part, for example, that 
picks up 1/16th before the start of bar 17 retains this off set when moved a bar ahead in the track (even 
if the Snap value is set to Bar). Again, this allows you not to worry about Snap settings and region off sets 
as you go about making your arrangement, although it’s also worth remembering that just because 
a Snap setting is set to Bar, for example, doesn’t always mean that the region will always be precisely 
placed on a bar.  
 Figure 5.7    Logic tries to preserve any established “positional off sets” as you move a region around the 
arrange area. 
 Going Finer – Bypassing Snap and Nudging Regions 
 Of course, there are times when you may wish to bypass the snap constraints, even when it’s set to 
the intelligent Snap mode. This can be easily achieved by holding down Ctrl whenever you use 
a corresponding tool – like slicing a region, for example, or moving a region using the Pointer Tool. 

98
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
Another option is to use the Nudge option, which is specifi cally designed so that you can move audio 
region in small increments. A region can be nudged by selecting it, and then its position can be adjusted 
using either the left or right cursor keys combined with the Alt key. 
 As a quick way of adjusting the current Nudge value, try Ctrl-clicking on the region and selecting Move > 
Set Nudge Value from the drop-down contextual menu. By using this feature, you can quickly set the 
Nudge value to the most appropriate setting – whether it’s as fi ne as a Sample, for example, or even Bar 
and Beat settings to maneuver regions about on the timeline using a keyboard rather than a mouse.  
 Figure 5.8    Using the Nudge feature is a great way of fi ne-tuning a region’s position. Change the 
current Nudge value by opening up the contextual menu.   
 5.7  Resizing and Cutting Regions 
 Having understood how to work with diff erent snap resolutions, let’s start to explore some of the fi ner 
aspects of trimming, cutting, and resizing regions. 
 Remember that all the edits that you make on the Tracks area are nondestructive and that once you cut 
a region, it’s always possible to resize the region and restore the original information. This makes it easy 

99
Audio Regions and Editing
to audition possible edits, being confi dent that it’s always possible to return to the original recording at 
any point in the production process. 
 Cutting a Region with the Scissors Tool 
 One of the most immediate ways of editing is to use the Scissors Tool to divide one or more regions into 
two. An extra dimension to the Scissors Tool is that you can scrub across the timeline to hear where you 
are about to place an edit. Once you’ve clicked on the region/s to be edited using the Scissors Tool, simply 
hold the mouse button down, move the mouse back and forth to “scrub” the edit, and then release the 
mouse button when you’re confi dent of having found the correct location.  
 Figure 5.9    Use the Scissors Tool to divide a region in two. Remember, you can scrub the edit point to 
fi ne-tune the position of the cut.   
 Another useful addition to working with the Scissors Tool is the ability to quickly slice a region into a 
number of equally sized slices – like 1/8th or 1/16th, for example. To cut a region in this way, simply place 
an edit at the start of the region that equals the same size as the subsequent slices (like 1/16th). However, 
before you release the mouse button, hold down the Alt key, noting the small “+” icon that should be 
added to the Scissors Tool. On release, the region should now be sliced into a series of regions all of equal 
length. Try this technique as means of creating “glitch and stutter” type edits, especially using 1/16th and 
1/32nd segments of a performance strategically rearranged and looped accordingly.  

100
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Topping-and-Tailing 
 Another important editing technique with audio regions is the so-called topping-and-tailing. This ensures 
that there are accurate and clean edits at the front and end of the audio passages, thus reducing any 
unnecessary noise and other unwanted artifacts. It also allows you to set a precise length for a region, 
which is vital in situations where you want it to loop eff ectively. 
 Regions can be manipulated easily and trimmed to fi t by simply calling up the Resize Tool, which appears 
when you move the pointer to the bottom left- or right-hand extremes of any region. The pointer 
 Figure 5.11    Moving to the edge of a region will transform the Pointer Tool into the Resize Tool, allowing you 
to adjust the respective size of the region.   
 Figure 5.10    Holding down Alt as you make a cut allows you to create a series of equally sized divisions. 
This is a useful technique for glitch and stutter editing.   

101
Audio Regions and Editing
 Figure 5.12    Use the Marquee Tool to enclose a selection across one or more regions – this can then be 
separated into a new region, deleted, or muted.   
changes to an icon similar to that of a squared bracket with arrows on either side. With this tool enabled, 
simply drag the region to the desired length. As previously mentioned, this is a useful way of restoring 
an audio region to its original form if you’ve been slightly overzealous with your editing!  
 Using the Marquee Tool 
 A useful alternative to the Scissors Tool is Logic’s Marquee Tool. Rather than cutting a region into two, 
the Marquee Tool allows you to select audio events within one or more regions, and then either delete 
the off ending notes, or indeed, create a new region based on the Marquee’s boundaries. Overall, the 

102
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
Marquee Tool works best as a means of time-slipping notes, especially on a multitracked recording of 
drums – fi rst, by selecting the off ending hit in question using the Marquee Tool, separating the selection 
into a new region, and then moving the region/s accordingly. 
 Once you’ve selected the Marquee Tool, simply drag-enclose the area you want to select – whether it’s 
a few notes within a region, for example, or a portion of time across multiple regions. You can add to or 
remove from the selection at any point by Shift-clicking on your selection – adding in another track, for 
example, or increasing the size of the selection. Remember that any positional information will be set 
using the current Snap setting, so if you need your edits to be particularly precise, you’ll either need to 
zoom in on your edit or use the control modifi er to temporarily disable any snapping.  
 Figure 5.13    The Marquee Tool is a useful way of muting audio events within a region – simply enclose the area 
and press Ctrl + M.   

103
Audio Regions and Editing
 Once selected, you can simply hit the Delete key to remove the off ending selection – leaving two regions 
(and an empty space) on either side of an edit. Alternatively, press Mute (Ctrl + M) to silence the selection 
but leave the region in place. To divide the selection into a separate region, simply Ctrl-click on the 
Marquee selection, and then Logic will divide the original region into three new regions.  
 Snap to Transients 
 A useful extension of the Marquee functionality is the ability to extend the selection to transient hits 
within the region. This is a particularly good way of editing drums, allowing you to accurately defi ne a 
Marquee selection to hits within the region – this would allow you to neatly separate out a two-bar drum 
loop, for example, precisely slicing out an individual drum hit. Start by making the Marquee selection 
over the broad area you want to work with. Next, move the start or end points of the selection using 
either the left and right cursor keys to move the out-point of the enclosure or the left and right cursor 
keys with the Shift key held down to reposition the in-point of the enclosure. 
 5.8  Fades and Crossfades 
 Fades and crossfades are an important part of audio editing on many diff erent levels – whether it’s just 
top-and-tailing an audio fi le, for example, or splicing together two adjacent audio fi les without creating 
 Figure 5.14  
Use the Crossfade 
Tool as a simple, 
graphical way of 
fading a region in 
or out. 

104
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
any unnecessary clicks, or transitional discontinuities, between the two regions. In Logic, there’re three 
diff erent ways to create fades and crossfades, each of which has its own strengths and weaknesses.  
 Using the Crossfade Tool to Create Fades 
 Probably the most immediate way of applying a fade is to use the dedicated Crossfade Tool, which can 
be used to create both fades and crossfades. The advantage here is that the tool works in a graphical 
way, with the length of the fade established by the proportion of the region you enclose using the 
Crossfade Tool. This makes it easy to establish the fade in relation to the waveform – maybe fading a 
region out, for example, as the sound decays away. 
 To create a fade at the start or end of an audio region, simply drag the Crossfade Tool over the appropriate 
segment you want to fade. Logic will then update the region, displaying a shaded area to indicate the 
length of the fade. To change the fade at this point, simply drag the small vertical white line accordingly, 
moving it backward or forward to lengthen or shorten the fade. Clicking on the fade itself allows you to 
adjust the relative curve of the fade – moving between a linear fade (the default) and the exponential 
and logarithmic curves. 
 Where two regions are “butt edited” up against one another, you might want to consider placing a crossfade. 
A crossfade is designed to smooth out potential discrepancies between the two regions, so that you’re left 
with a smooth transition between the two components. For example, even if the two regions are related in 
some way, the process of butting one up against the other will result in a small click as the waveform jumps 
from one position to another. In worst-case scenarios, it might be that the two takes are radically diff erent 
from one another, possibly necessitating a longer crossfade so that the edit isn’t noticeable.  
 Figure 5.15 
 With the Crossfade 
Tool active, click 
on the white fade 
line to change 
its curvature or 
length accordingly. 

105
Audio Regions and Editing
 As an alternative to overlapping regions, Logic can also employ an automatic Crossfade Tool within the 
Drag menu, known as X-Fade. In X-Fade mode, the process of moving or resizing a part over another 
audio region will create a correspondingly sized crossfade. Therefore, by careful use of the region resize 
tool, you can quickly produce perfect crossfade edits between multiple regions – initially “butting” the 
edit to a bar, and then, resizing the inserted region/s back to create the crossfade.  
 You can create a crossfade by dragging the Crossfade Tool across two adjoining regions, with the 
respective length of the crossfade dictated by the size of the enclosure you make. Of course, in the case 
of a discrete butt edit, it might be that only a small crossfade is required, although this is usually best 
placed just ahead of a beat so as not to damage any transient information. Where the discontinuities are 
greater, though (for example, maybe the adjoining notes have slightly diff erent tuning), you’ll need to 
consider using a longer crossfade. 
 Changing the Drag Mode to Create Fades 
 Along with the various Snap modes, Logic also includes several diff erent Drag options, which can be 
found in the top right-hand corner of the Tracks area. The Drag mode defi nes how two regions interact 
when they are dragged over one another. 
 By default, regions are set to the Overlap drag mode, meaning that the regions can sit on top of one 
another, but the latter part will always take priority and mute the region that lies underneath it. This is 
a logical starting place for editing, especially when you might want to slip back and forth the crossover 
points between the two regions so that they fi t appropriately. No Overlap, however, simply means that 
the fi rst region will be edited in size to fi t.  
 Figure 5.16 
 The drag mode 
defi nes how Logic 
will behave when 
two regions are 
placed on top of 
one another. 

106
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 5.17    With the X-fade mode engaged, regions that overlap (either by resizing or 
being moved) will be crossfaded accordingly.   
 Using the Fade Parameter to Create Fades 
 The final method for applying fades is to use the Fade feature as part of the Inspector’s Region 
Parameters. Given the intuitive methods of applying fades that we’ve already seen, you’d be forgiven 
for wondering why you’d bother using the Inspector method. The fi rst signifi cant advantage with this 
approach, though, is the ability to create incredibly short fades without zooming in to the audio region/s 
in question. Second, it also provides a convenient solution where you need to apply fades to multiple 
regions at once – something that is impossible to achieve using the Crossfade Tool.  
 Figure 5.18  The Inspector off ers a precise way of entering in fade information for a 
given region. 

107
Audio Regions and Editing
 5.9  Speed Fades 
 As an extension to the fade parameter found in the Inspector, it’s also possible to create a Speed Fade. 
Technically, a Speed Fade isn’t something you’d want to apply in conventional audio-editing activities, 
although as a creative eff ect, it’s a joy to behold! In theory, a Speed Fade approximates how a DJ might 
“spin in” a record, as well as slowing it down at the end to create a dramatic tail-off . Therefore, rather than 
modifying the amplitude of a region, a Speed Fade modifi es its speed – pitching the region up across a 
“fade in,” while slowing it down over a “fade out.” 
 You can create a Speed Fade in much the same way as you create an existing fade. It probably makes 
most sense, therefore, to start by creating a traditional fade out – using the Crossfade Tool – over the 
area you want to Speed Fade. Once this has been established, turn to the Inspector and change the fade 
mode from Fade In or Fade Out to Speed Up or Speed Down, respectively. Logic should now apply the 
fade, but in the form of a Speed Fade. Any subsequent changes to the length of the fade, therefore, will 
now change the duration of the speed-changing eff ect. 
 5.10  Introducing the Audio Track Editor 
 In addition to the editing techniques we’ve described within the Tracks area, it’s also worth noting the 
presence of the Audio Track Editor. The Audio Track Editor is somewhat akin to the Piano Roll Editor’s role 
with MIDI, in that a double-clicked region will open the editor window at the bottom screen. Functionally 
speaking, much of what can be achieved on the Tracks area level can be duplicated here, although as 
we’ll see, there’re two further levels of functionality that expand on this basic premise.  
 Figure 5.19    Use the Inspector to change the fade type – this allows you to create a 
distinctive Speed Up or Speed Down fade.   

108
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The fi rst point to note is Flex Time and Flex Pitch, both of which are discussed in  5.15 and 5.20  , respectively. 
Flex Time and Flex Pitch off er a degree of pitch and time-based elasticity with your audio, allowing you 
to change the timing of a bass guitar track, for example, or fi x intonation problems on a vocal. With both 
Flex Time and Flex Pitch it’s possible to perform minor corrections from the Tracks area but if you want 
more detailed control (especially in relation to Flex Pitch) you’ll need to use the Audio Track Editor. 
 The other important point to note is that the Audio Track Editor can also take us down a level to the 
Audio File Editor. On the surface of it, the Audio File Editor looks very similar to the Audio Track Editor, 
although its role and application is diff erent. In essence, the diff erence between the Track and File editor 
is the concept of a “destructive” edit. With the Audio Track Editor all edits are nondestructive, meaning 
that the original recording data means unmodifi ed. So, even if you change the pitch or the timing of the 
audio fi le it remains as it was originally recorded. The Audio File Editor, however, modifi es the original 
data, thereby making it a “destructive” audio editor. 
 5.11  Quick Swipe Comping 
 In  Chapter 4 , we introduced the notion of cycle recording and Logic’s ability to keep these multiple 
performances – or takes – as part of a Take Folder. This is certainly an eff ective way of managing multiple 
recordings of the same performance, reducing potential clutter on screen, and allowing you to group 
 Figure 5.20    The Audio Track Editor replicates many of the features of audio editing in the Tracks area, but will 
become more important as we move into areas like Flex Time.   

109
Audio Regions and Editing
related recordings in a logical way. However, once you’ve recorded all these diff erent takes, you then 
need to decide which takes you want to use, potentially switching between several diff erent takes as 
part of the same fi nished “performance.” 
 Technically speaking, the process of editing between diff erent takes is known as comping, and Logic 
includes a dedicated feature specifi cally for this task – Quick Swipe Comping. Using this feature, you 
can quickly audition diff erent takes, as well as dynamically switching between them without having to 
use complicated editing tools and crossfades. You also have the ability to create several diff erent comps 
that allow you to experiment with diff erent treatments of the same musical part without damaging any 
existing comp decision you might have already made. 
 5.12  Expanding the Take Folder and Creating Basic Comps 
 You can expand a Take Folder to see its contents by clicking on the small arrow in the top left-hand 
corner. You should now be able to see the various takes, alongside shading to illustrate which take is 
currently being used. At this stage, you could audition each take – either by using the small drop-down 
menu in the top right-hand corner of the Take Folder or by simply clicking on each respective take. 
 The idea of Quick Swipe Comping is that you can quickly move between the diff erent takes – “swiping” 
the word, phase, or series of notes that you want to include. Adapting the quick swipe edit points 
between the diff erent takes is as simple as dragging over the respective take to change the amount of 
highlighted audio. Note how changes on one take are refl ected in another (only one take can play at any 
point in time), and how the top line displays the current edit in its complete state.  
 Figure 5.21    Once you’ve opened your Take Folder, you can quickly start to piece together a 
preferred Comp between the various takes.   

110
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Comps that you have made can be named using the drop-down Quick Swipe Comping menu, which 
is accessible to the right of the small arrow used to expand the Take Folder. Note that it’s also possible 
to Duplicate and Delete multiple diff erent Comps, allowing you to try out several diff erent editing 
strategies, and then audition the relative merits of each, by switching between the diff erent completed 
Comps (which, again, are selectable from the Quick Swipe Comping drop-down menu).  
 Figure 5.22    Comps can be named, duplicated, and deleted, allowing you to explore multiple diff erent 
versions of the same line.   
 5.13  Time Slipping a Quick Swipe Comp 
 So far, we’ve seen how we can use the Quick Swipe Comping system as a means of switching between 
diff erent takes of the same musical part. However, what we haven’t yet addressed is the need to slip 
potential edit decisions that you’ve made in time – of course, you can always move the whole Take 
Folder, but what if your concerns are with only one or two notes within one of the takes? If you attempt 
to move a region at this stage, you won’t get very far – either because of the inability to use the Scissors 
Tool or that any attempt to move the region results in the Comp itself being changed. 
 The solution to this problem is the ability to switch the Take Folder’s Quick Swipe Comping functionality 
on or off  accordingly. You can see whether Quick Swipe Comping is enabled by looking at the top left-
hand corner of the Take Folder, just to the right of the Take Folder’s drop-down menu. By disabling the 

111
Audio Regions and Editing
Quick Swipe Comping, you’ll fi nd that Logic’s original toolset – namely, the Scissors Tool and Marquee 
Tool – now work as expected. Given that the broad comping is fi nalized (this time slipping is much easier 
to achieve after you’ve swiped the takes!), you can go about slicing out the off ending notes and then 
repositioning them. 
 As we’ll see later on, though, this isn’t the only solution for time-slipping material within a comp.  
 Figure 5.23    By disabling the Take Folder’s Quick Swipe functionality (by clicking on the small icon on the 
top left-hand corner of the Take Folder), you can use the standard editing tools, particularly with respect to 
time-slipping elements of the performance.   
 5.14  Flattening or Merging a Comp 
 Finished, or even partly fi nished, comps can be handled in a number of diff erent ways. First of these is 
the option to fl atten the edits you’ve made – “unpacking” the Take Folder, and creating a single track 
with all the edits in place. Flattening has its advantages and disadvantages – on the negative side, you 
can’t return to the edits in such an intuitive way as the Quick Swipe Comping feature, but on the positive 
side, you’ll gain a “clean” edit of your chosen comp, complete with editable crossfades within each edit 
point. 
 You can choose to fl atten your edits through the Take Folder menu, with the resultant output displayed 
as a series of regions with crossfades between them. Flattened in this way, you can easily carry out any 
timing modifi cations (using an alternative approach to what we’ve seen previously), as well as adjusting 
the default crossfade times using the same processes that we’ve explored earlier on in the chapter.  

112
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 A more destructive version of the Flatten function is the Flatten and Merge option. Using Flatten and 
Merge will create a new fi le, complete with the edit points and crossfades. If you’re completely happy 
with your edits, Flatten and Merge could be an appropriate choice, especially if you want a more 
transportable version of the track to import into another DAW. Unless you choose to specifi cally delete 
the original takes, you’ll always have the option of reimporting the fi les from the Project Audio Browser 
into the Tracks area should you decide to revisit what you’ve done at a later point.  
 Figure 5.24    Flattening your comp will create a single track with all the various takes edited accordingly.   
 Figure 5.25    Flatten and Merge is a more destructive way of fi nalizing your comp – with a completely new 
audio fi le created from your editing decisions.   
 Whether you’re carrying out a Quick Swipe Comp or Flattening a Comp Logic will work with the 
current default Crossfade Time and Curve settings established under the General tab of Logic Pro X > 
Preferences > Audio. In most cases, the default setting of 20 ms is suffi  cient, although for particularly 
taxing comps, it might be the case that this has to be raised or lowered accordingly. Arguably, though, 
such fade adjustments are best applied to a fl attened comp and this preference left as is.  

113
Audio Regions and Editing
 Unpacking a Comp 
 As an alternative to fl attening your edits, it’s also possible to unpack the Take Folder, placing all the 
individual takes, as well as the various comps (complete with crossfades), onto separate tracks. Unpacking 
a Take Folder is a messy option in terms of the Tracks area and the amount of tracks it can potentially use 
up, but it does off er the best solution in terms of complete audio fl exibility. For example, an unpacked 
take can be easily moved to new tracks – maybe using some outtakes from a main vocal as backing 
vocals. Alternatively, it might also be that the remit of editing goes above and beyond what can be 
achieved in Quick Swipe Comping alone – like a vocal requiring detailed pitch correction in Melodyne, 
for example, or elements of time compression and expansion.  
 Figure 5.26    Use the General tab, found under Logic Pro X > Preferences > Audio, to change the default 
crossfade time for Quick Swipe Comping.   

114
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 As the reverse of unpacking Take Folders, you can also use the contextual menu function Folder > Pack 
Take Folders (available by ctrl-clicking on a selection of regions) to combine several existing audio 
fi les into the same folder. The option to pack Take Folders potentially solves the previously suggested 
problem of adjusting timing issues – simply unpack the folder, move the required take, and then repack 
accordingly. The feature can also be an interesting way of creatively switching between a number of 
concurrent drum loops – packing them into a shared Take Folder, and then using the Quick Swipe 
Comping to create complicated jumps between the loops. 
 5.15  Flex Time Editing 
 So far in our exploration of production process in Logic, we’ve looked at the “conventional” tools and 
techniques of audio editing – namely, the ability to slice, resize, and reposition audio regions. However, 
in the past 5 years or so, musicians and producers have grown increasingly used to having a greater 
degree of “elasticity” with their audio – either using specifi c third-party applications like Melodyne, for 
example, or an increasing amount of tempo and time-adjustable functionality directly embedded into 
a DAW of choice. Therefore, having already seen some of the tempo-elastic possibilities of Apple Loops, 
Flex Time editing transforms the potential fl exibility of audio regions within your project. 
 Why Use Flex Time? 
 As the name suggests, the principle use of Flex Time is to modify the timing properties of an audio 
region and the “events” contained within it. Of course, using conventional editing techniques, we can 
 Figure 5.27    Unpacking a Take Folder will explode all the original takes onto separate tracks, as 
well as fl attening any comps you’ve made along the way.   

115
Audio Regions and Editing
always use region slicing to create such timing moves, but this can often be a laborious task necessitating 
multiple slices and complicated crossfading to make an edit sound transparent enough to the listener’s 
ear. What’s next to impossible to achieve using standard editing techniques, though, is the ability to 
change a note’s duration, whether it’s shortening or lengthening a note to optimize its phrasing. 
 The fi rst application of Flex Time, therefore, is the ability to move notes backward and forward within 
a given region – achieving everything from the ability to “slip” a note so that it plays more in time with 
events in other audio regions, through to the ability to completely rephrase a melody line (including, 
as we’ve seen, the duration of the notes) so that each note falls in a diff erent position in the bar. As the 
audio is “intelligently” time stretched (using the currently selected Flex Time mode) no additional editing 
is required, and the transition between the edited and unedited notes remains smooth and glitch-free. 
 Another important application of Flex Time editing is the ability to quantize audio events within a 
region – making a bass play exactly in time with a drum loop, for example, or changing its groove from 
a straight 16th feel to a bassline with a subtle “swing” feel. Again, this is something that’s possible to 
achieve with conventional editing but can be achieved in Flex Time in a matter of seconds. 
 5.16  Flex View and Flex Time Modes 
 To start working with Flex Time in Logic, you’ll need to engage the Flex View mode using the menu 
option Edit > Show Flex Pitch/Time, or by clicking on the Flex View icon in the left-hand corner of the 
Tracks area. Once the Flex View mode has been engaged, you see some extra information in each of 
the track headers, allowing you to select a unique Flex mode for each track in your project. Ideally, you 
should try to match the Flex Time mode to the type of track being handled. The modes are largely self-
explanatory, but let’s take a look at their principle application in music production.  
 Figure 5.28 
   To begin working with Flex Time, you’ll need 
to engage the Flex View mode (Edit > Show 
Flex Pitch/Time). 

116
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Slicing 
 The Slicing mode is the obvious choice to use with drums and percussion sounds and makes a point 
of preserving transient details in the original recordings. Behind the scenes, the audio region is “fl exed” 
using slices, using much the same process as we’ve seen with manual editing. 
 Rhythmic 
 The Rhythmic mode is a good “catch all” solution for a range of audio fi les that contain both pitched and 
percussion elements – this might include a drum loop with some in-built bass parts, for example, or a 
rhythm guitar. Some “stretching” artifacts might be evident under closer scrutiny (or extreme settings), 
either as part of the body of the sound or the transient details. 
 Monophonic 
 If you are working with a “melodic” instrument that doesn’t play chords – like bass, vocals, or lead guitar – 
then opt for the Monophonic Flex mode. This provides a good balance between transparency and CPU 
usage. 
 Polyphonic 
 The Polyphonic mode is arguably the most CPU-intensive Flex mode and should be reserved for 
polyphonic instruments, or indeed, complex submixes, that require high-quality time stretching with 
any unnecessary artifacts kept to a minimum. Remember that you can always bounce the fi nished Flex 
Time edit (for more information, see  Section 5.19 ). 
 Tempophone 
 Definitely an inappropriate choice for smooth “flexing,” Tempophone is a Flex mode deliberately 
designed to sound obtrusive and noticeably modifi ed. Use Tempophone when you want to use Flex 
Time almost like an eff ect, with the sound appearing increasingly grainy and stretched as you move 
increasingly further away from its original duration. 
 Speed 
 As the name suggests, the Speed Flex mode modifies the speed of an audio event to account for 
changes in time. Compacting the placement of notes, for example, will speed up the playback, whereas 
stretching out notes will slow it down. This is much the same as modifying the pitch and tempo of 
track using a turntable’s varispeed control, or indeed, modifying the playback speed of tape. The Speed 
Flex mode, therefore, is best reserved as a creative eff ect, where you want audio to sound deliberately 
repitched accordingly. 
 Besides engaging the Flex mode for the track, it’s also worth to check that the Flex functionality has 
been engaged as part of Inspector’s Region Parameters box. In most cases, this will already be activated, 
but occasionally a region can have its Flex functionality removed.  

117
Audio Regions and Editing
 5.17  Transient Markers and Flex Markers 
 Flex Time makes use of two types of markers – Transient Markers and Flex Markers – to carry out the 
“fl exing” process. Transient Markers are fi rst used to divide up the audio events within a region – creating 
markers for each word on a vocal take, or the individual hits within a drum performance. Flex Markers, 
however, identify the notes you wish to modify and how the notes are handled on either side of the Flex 
edit. Although this sounds complicated at fi rst, their use and application soon becomes apparent once 
you start using Flex Time. 
 Creating Transient Markers 
 Whenever you engage a Flex Time mode, Logic will go through the regions on the selected track and 
assign a series of Transient Markers. This is a relatively quick process, and once fi nished, you’ll see a 
series of small gray hairlines to indicate their placement. Note that with Take Folders, though, the 
markers aren’t evident on the “top” level but can be viewed and modifi ed once the Take Folder has been 
expanded. 
 Flexing Multiple Audio Events 
 With a series of Transient Markers placed, you can now start to explore various applications of the 
Flex Time technology. Probably the fi rst and most immediate application is to resize a region and its 
contents accordingly. Previously, of course, the act of resizing a region would result in the “edit window” 
 Figure 5.29 
 A variety of diff erent 
Flex modes allow 
you to optimize 
the time-correction 
algorithms for 
the type of audio 
material you’re 
working with. 

118
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
being resized, rather than modifying any of its contents. In Flex Time mode, though, the events will be 
expanded or contracted accordingly. This makes it easy, for example, to conform a drum loop imported 
in at one tempo to your current project’s tempo, simply be resizing to the corresponding region 
end point. 
 Note that the expansion or contraction of any audio information within the region is always color-coded 
accordingly. Audio events that have been contracted will take on a darker hue, whereas those that have 
been expanded will take on a lighter shade. Where the stretch is too extreme, the shading changes to a 
red color, suggesting you try an alternative solution to the problem at hand!  
 Besides changing the region as a whole, Flex can also modify notes within it using a series of one or 
more Flex Markers. The art in understanding and using the Flex Marker system lies in the two contrasting 
ways Flex Markers can be placed, as indicated by the changing appearance of the Flex Marker Tool that 
appears as you fl oat over the region in question. 
 By clicking in the upper half of our waveform display, we can create a single Flex Marker, which is set 
to the nearest Transient Marker and eff ectively acts as an “anchor” to the fl exing process. By moving 
the Flex Marker in either direction, audio will be expanded or contracted on either side of the marker, 
again using green and orange color coding to indicate the qualities of expansion and contraction 
taking place.  
 Figure 5.30    Once a region has been placed in Flex mode, any attempt to resize it will result in the 
audio being expanded or contracted accordingly.   
 Figure 5.31    A single Flex Marker will expand or contract the audio events on either side of it, as 
indicated by the lighter and darker shading.   

119
Audio Regions and Editing
 Another interesting way you can apply Flex Time is to tighten notes between adjacent regions – maybe 
aligning a note on a bass guitar, for example, to precisely play in time with a hit on the kick drum. First, 
you’ll need to ensure that both tracks have been assigned a Flex mode, and the track that you want to 
lock the note (or notes) to has been shuffl  ed up or down the tracklist so that the two sit adjacent to one 
another. Again, we start to move our selected note using the “three marker” icon found in the lower half 
of the waveform display. This time, however, drag the mouse up or down the adjacent track and note 
how the Flex Time marker snaps to transients on this track (the positioning line should also change to 
yellow to indicate this is happening).  
 Flexing Single Notes 
 A far more musical way of using Flex Time is to use three adjacent Flex Markers to move a single note 
backward or forward accordingly. Although the process of creating multiple Flex Markers might sound 
complicated, it’s easy enough to execute. With the Flex Time view active, move the pointer to the lower 
half of the region and note how the icon changes from one marker to three. Now, click on the note you 
want to move and note how three markers are created – one preceding your editing point, one on your 
edit point, and one succeeding your edit point. Moving the central Flex Marker moves the desired note 
position but preserves the timing on either side of the edit.  
 Figure 5.32 
 Placing three Flex 
Markers allows you 
to move a note’s 
position without 
aff ecting the timing 
of notes on either 
side of it. 
 Figure 5.33 
 By moving to an 
adjacent track lane, 
you can snap a note 
so that it aligns with 
another part. 

120
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Deleting Flex Markers 
 In keeping with the nondestructive ethos of 
editing audio in Logic, it’s also worth noting that 
Flex Time edits can be undone at any point in the 
production process, returning the audio region 
back to its original state. One gradual way of 
achieving this is to delete individual Flex Markers, 
thereby removing any unwanted Flex Time edits, 
but retaining elements that you are happy with. 
To delete an unwanted Flex Marker, therefore, 
click on the small X icon at the top of the region.  
 When multiple Flex Markers have been 
assigned and you want them all to be removed, 
you can always Ctrl-click anywhere else on the 
region and select Reset All Flex Edits. This will 
restore the region to its original state, although 
subsequent regions on the track will retain any 
Flex Time edits that you have made. Therefore, 
to disable any Flex Time editing across the 
whole track, you can always switch the Flex 
mode back to its “off” setting to completely 
disable Flex Time editing.  
 Figure 5.34    Click on the small X to delete a Flex Marker.   
 Figure 5.35    As well as deleting individual Flex Markers, you can also delete a series of Flex Markers assigned 
to a region.   

121
Audio Regions and Editing
 5.18  Quantizing Audio with Flex Time 
 One of the standout features of Flex Time has to be the ability to quantize the events within an audio 
region. Quantizing is the process of “tightening” a performance so that notes within fall more closely 
to the divisions of a bar – something that up until the introduction of Flex Time had largely been the 
preserve of MIDI editing (discussed in detail in Section 6.8). 
 To quantize the events in an audio region, you fi rst need to select the region/s you want to quantize, 
and then pick an accompanying quantize setting from the Inspector’s Region Parameters box. There’re 
various settings to choose from, although in most situations you’ll want to select the 1/16 setting, which 
places each note to the closest 16th (or semiquaver) division of the bar. Once selected, you’ll notice that 
each note within the region has been moved slightly (unless the part was played exactly to the beat), as 
indicated by the orange and green shading. 
 From this basic quantize setting, we can then adjust various settings to change the feel and strength of 
the quantizing applied. For the sake of brevity, though, turn to Section 6.8 to understand fully what can 
be achieved here.  
 Figure 5.36    Flex Time allows you to quantize the performance of an audio region – shifting each respective 
note so that it precisely aligns to a rigid tempo grid.   
 Groove Templates between Regions 
 A handy extension of the basic audio-quantizing facilities using Flex Time is the ability to copy the groove 
of one audio region to another. In many ways, this can be a more suitable way of improving the timing 
between diff erent audio regions – allowing two diff erent parts to play tightly against one another, but 
not losing the feel of the song to a rigid 1/16th grid. 

122
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The fi rst part of the process is to extract a groove template from a suitable source region – in other 
words, the part you consider to be “in time.” To extract the groove, the track will need to be placed into 
an appropriate Flex mode (slicing is probably best) so as to create a series of Transient Markers. Once this 
has been done, highlight the region, and then select Make Groove Template from the region Inspector’s 
quantize menu. Once the groove has been created, you can choose to take the track out of its current 
Flex Time, assuming you have no need for it to be “fl exed” in any way.  
 Figure 5.37    Using the Region Parameter drop-down menu, you can add the “groove” 
of an existing region to your palette of quantize options.   

123
Audio Regions and Editing
 Figure 5.38    Having created our new groove, we can then apply it to another region in 
our song. The two parts should now play together perfectly.   
 Applying the newly created Groove Template is much the same as the example of audio quantizing 
we’ve explored earlier on in the Flex Time editing section. In this case, however, you’ll need to pick the 
particular Groove setting (rather than 1/16th, for example), which should appear at the bottom of the 
Quantize drop-down menu.  
 5.19  Separating Regions Based on Transient Markers 
 One fi nal feature made possible by Flex Time is the ability to divide a single region into multiple regions 
based on Transient Markers within it. In the case of a recording of a drum kit, for example, this could 
allow you to create individual regions for each drum hit. Given the fl exibility of Flex Time’s slicing 

124
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 5.20  Flex Pitch 
 In addition to working with the timing properties of an audio fi le, you can also adjust properties in 
relation to Pitch. The important point to note is that Flex Pitch’s assumed application is with monophonic 
tracks – in other words, musical parts that use a single melodic line, rather than a collection of notes to 
form a chord. As such, Flex Pitch is a great tool to use with vocals, fl utes, lead guitars, and so on, but 
slightly less than useful with string sections, acoustic pianos, strummed rhythm guitars, or any other 
“polyphonic” audio. 
 Enabling Flex Pitch 
 Enabling Flex Pitch is much the same process as Flex Time – simply enable the Flex View (Edit > Show Flex 
Pitch/Time or press the Hide/Show Flex icon on the top of the Tracks area) and place the desired track 
into Flex Pitch mode. Unlike Flex Time, though, you’ll want to make sure that Audio Track Editor is open 
to appreciate the fullness of what you can achieve. Even so, the Flex View in the Tracks area provides 
some indication of the part’s intonation, as well as some basic editing options via the contextual menu, 
which we’ll discuss in  Section 5.21 .  
mode (which achieves similar functionality in a more transparent way), the wisdom of applying this 
is somewhat dubious, although you might fi nd some benefi ts in having regions separated in this way. 
One useful application, though, would be to divide a recording up into a series of “one shot” audio fi les 
ready to be imported into a software sampler like the EXS24. 
 You can slice a region that has been placed into a Flex Time mode by Ctrl-clicking on the region and 
selecting Slice at Transient Markers from the drop-down menu. Of course, once sliced, you can always 
take the track out of Flex Time mode to avoid any unwanted CPU activity. Should you want the regions 
to become individual sound fi les in their own right, then highlight them, and select Convert > Convert 
Region to New Audio Files from the region’s contextual menu.  
 Figure 5.39  
Once Transient 
Markers have been 
placed, you can 
separate a single 
region into a series 
of regions using the 
Slice at Transient 
Markers feature. 

125
Audio Regions and Editing
 Figure 5. 40  
With Flex Pitch 
enable in the 
Tracks area, 
you have some 
indication as to the 
relative intonation 
of the part. 
 How to “Read” the Flex Pitch View 
 The Flex Pitch view is quite unique in that it provides a combination of a waveform overview, much 
like a traditional audio editor, as well as a piano-roll-like editor that provides the means of viewing and 
editing the region’s pitch information. The pitch of the notes is displayed much like MIDI notes in the 
Piano Roll editor, illustrated as rectangular objects along the track lane. Of course, you can assess the 
relative intonation of each word using the position relative to the piano along the left-hand side of 
the Audio Track Editor. Where a note is slightly deviant in respect to its pitch, you’ll see that the blob 
is not wholly shaded, suggesting that the pitch is either slightly fl at or sharp. 
 Within each note, you’ll also see a thin line that is used to indicate both the pitch drift and vibrato 
in the note. Many vocalists, for example, will slide up to a note or fall off  the end of a note to create 
some level of emotion and expression to the part. Likewise, vibrato within the note will mean that the 
note fl uctuates around a given pitch, rather than staying fi xed at a precise frequency. Of course, there’s 
balance to be struck between expression and a pitch-perfect performance, which is why it’s important 
to see (and edit) these small movements and variations in pitch.  
 Figure 5.41 
 The Audio Track 
Editor provides a 
detailed overview 
of the Flex Pitch 
editing feature. 

126
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 5.21  Typical Flex Pitch Edits 
 Clicking on a note within the Audio Track Editor reveals the diff erent ways a note can be edited – 
Pitch Drift, Fine Pitch, Gain, Vibrato, and Formants – as indicated by the six nodes positioned around 
the note. Clicking on any of these nodes, or the note itself, allows you to edit the performance 
accordingly. 
 Basic Vocal Intonation 
 Fixing the intonation of a vocal performance, or any other monophonic pitched instrument for that 
matter, is a relatively straightforward exercise, thanks to the contextual menu. Ctrl-click in the Audio 
Track Area away from one of the note “blobs” and select “Set all to Perfect Pitch” from the menu that 
appears. This will now automatically correct the entire vocal, so that the intonation is perfect. If you 
don’t like the results, simply pick “Set all to Original Pitch” and the performance will be restored to its 
original form. 
 In the Tracks area, note how the region displays a simplifi ed version of Flex Pitch overview, although the 
display is orientated toward showing intonation drift rather than relative pitch. The important point to 
note is that the same contextual menu (with the “Set all to Perfect Pitch” option) is also accessed from 
the Tracks area level, making it quickly fi xable from the arrangement. 
 As an alternative, you also have the option of manually adjusting each note one-by-one. This might 
be useful if the intonation is generally fi ne, but just mildy problematic on the occasional note. To adjust 
the fi ne pitch, therefore, click on the middle node on the top of the note and drag it up or down 
accordingly.  
 Figure 5.42    Ctrl-click in the Audio Track Editor and select “Set all to Original Pitch” as a quick means of fi xing 
intonation. 

127
Audio Regions and Editing
 Changing Note Pitch 
 You can change the coarse tuning of a note in semitones by clicking on the whole note rather than 
the editing nodes at the corners. Changing the coarse pitch is interesting as a means of repitching 
a melody for creative ends. Alternatively, duplicate the vocal, and you could also use the same 
technique as means of creating a vocal harmony track, with the vocal up a third (or more) from the 
main line.  
 Figure 5.43    Click and drag on the body of the note to change its coarse pitch.   
 Controlling Vibrato and Pitch Drift 
 Within the note, of course, we have both vibrato and pitch drift at either end of the note. Use the middle 
node at the bottom of the note to change the amount of vibrato – either increasing it; to add more 

128
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 5.44    Use the nodes to edit detailed aspects like Vibrato and Pitch Drift.   
dramatic intensity, or decreasing it; to make the note less dramatic. The two nodes at either end of the 
top of the note can be used to address slightly over ambitious pitch drift.  
 Editing Gain and Formants 
 Two of the more intriguing nodes are the Gain Control, found in the bottom left-hand corner, and 
Formant Shift found in the bottom right-hand corner. The Gain change is an interesting alternative 
to compression, especially on a vocal, where you might want to raise the level on certain words or 
notes that are otherwise getting lost in the mix. Changes in Gain are automatically refl ected in the 
waveform view so you can immediately see the eff ect you’re having. 
 Formants are frequency peaks in the sound spectrum that form a large part of the identity of the voice 
and stay at the same fi xed frequency irrespective of the pitch of the vocal. Shifting both the pitch and 
formants of the voice, therefore, can appear to make the voice take on a type of “‘Mickey Mouse” tone. 
Changing the formant, therefore, can be an interesting eff ect, especially if you want to subtly shift the 
gender of the vocals.  

129
Audio Regions and Editing
 5.22  Freezing a Flex Time Track to Save CPU 
 Make no mistake about it – an extensive use of Flex Time editing can have a big hit on your CPU resources, 
especially if you use some of the more CPU-intensive Flex modes like the Polyphonic option. If you feel happy 
about the Flex Time edits you’ve made, therefore, you might want to consider “freezing” the track. Freezing 
is a common process in Logic (also discussed in  Chapter 8 , KNOWLEDGEBASE 3, Saving CPU: Freezing and 
More . . .) whereby an “off -line” rendered version of the track is created (complete with any plug-in settings or 
Flex Time adjustments), which is then streamed from disk in much the same way as an audio fi le. Although 
frozen, the track looks exactly the same – even retaining its Flex Markers – although any subsequent changes 
will result in the track needing to be re-rendered, which can take a few seconds to complete. 
 To freeze a track, you’ll need to click on the Freeze icon as part of the track header. If you can’t see this, 
select Track > Confi gure Track Header, and make sure the Freeze icon is checked accordingly. Before you 
initiate the freeze, another important point to check is the current Freeze mode, which can be established 
as part of the Track Parameters box, just below the Region Parameters box in the Inspector. Ideally, it 
should be set to Source Only, so that only the Flex Time edits are rendered in the form of an offl  ine fi le. 
By comparison, the Pre Fader option renders both the source information and plug-ins – which isn’t so 
appropriate as we haven’t got around to mixing our track yet!  
 Figure 5. 45    Changing the Gain and Formants off ers precise control over instruments and vocals in Flex 
Pitch mode.  

130
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 5.23  Editing Multiple Tracks Using Edit Groups 
 Most of our edits so far have involved single-tracked instrumentation – that is to say, an instrument 
that’s recorded to a single track in either mono or stereo. However, there are plenty of examples where 
you might want to record more than one track on a single “pass”: for example, recording a drum kit; an 
orchestra using a combination of close microphones, room microphones, and a stereo pair; or a guitar 
amp using an array of diff erent microphones placed around the cabinet. In all of these examples, your 
edits will want to be achieved en masse, rather than having to individually slice each accompanying 
region every time you make an edit. 
 Creating Edit Groups 
 Logic’s Grouping function allows you to link together tracks in respect to both editing and mixing. In 
 Chapter 8 , we’re going to be looking more closely at the applications of groups in mixing, but for now, 
we’ll concentrate solely on their use in editing. 
 You can assign one of more tracks into an edit group through the Mixer area, which also provides a 
current overview of the grouping status. Each channel strip on the Mixer page has its own Group Slot, 
which you should be able to see just below the output assignment. Therefore, to assign a channel strip to 
 Figure 5.46 
 Using the Source 
Only and Freeze 
modes allows you 
to render your 
Flex Time edits 
as an offl  ine fi le, 
making a signifi cant 
saving on your CPU 
resources! 

131
Audio Regions and Editing
 Whenever you place a channel strip into a group, Logic will open the Group Settings window as part of 
the Inspector, which allows you to defi ne how each group works. The principal option we’re interested 
in at this point is the Editing (Selection) and Phase-Locked Audio check boxes, as this will facilitate our 
edits being simultaneously carried out across all the regions. If you can see these parameters, make sure 
you click on the arrow next to the Settings text to fully expand the group settings. 
 Once the group has been established, you can go about performing your edits using any of the 
techniques we’ve described – using basic editing features like the Scissors and Marquee Tools to perform 
rudimentary edits, or stepping up to features like Flex Time, where your edits need to be more detailed. 
One point to remember, though, is the choice of “master” region you use to perform your primary edits. 
In the case of a drum kit, for example, the Overheads track makes most sense as this gives an accurate 
overview of all the notes played, rather than the individual notes that relate to just one part of the kit.  
group, simply click on this box and select a corresponding group from the drop-down menu. Note that 
you can also mass-enable several channels strips by Shift-clicking to augment your existing selection, 
and then selecting an appropriate group using one of the channels strip’s group slots.  
 Figure 5.47 
 Create an edit 
group using the 
Mixer, ensuring you 
select the Editing 
(Selection) and 
Phase-Locked Audio 
check boxes. 

132
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Toggling Groups 
 Of course, once you’ve enabled a group, you’re not restricted to all subsequent edits being carried out across 
all the regions. By toggling the groups – using the so-called Group Clutch key, which is assigned to Shift + G – 
you can disable the group functionality across all the active groups. This then allows you to carry out edits on 
individual tracks as appropriate, returning the group functionality (using the Group Clutch key) once the edits 
have been made. You can see whether or not groups are active by viewing the small group slot on the Mixer 
page – when the legend is yellow, the group is active, and when it’s gray, the groups are currently disabled. 
 5.24  Drum Replacement 
 In addition to the use of edit groups and Flex Time to tighten a multitracked drum recording, you might 
want to turn to the Drum Replacement feature to either completely replace an individual drum sound 
within the kit recording or augment the existing sounds with a sample-based layer. Drum replacement 
is a common technique used in professional circles (although few actually admit it!), but has previously 
required additional software – like Drumagog – to achieve in Logic. 
 Most drum replacement tends to focus on the kick and snare drum, as this contains the majority of the 
sound energy behind the kit, but equally because it’s relatively easy to achieve. By comparison – the 
overheads would be next to impossible to replace, mainly because of the number of diff erent sounds 
(kick, snare, hi-hat, toms, and so on) occurring at the same time. In short, therefore, stick to tracks that 
have been spot microphoned to a single part of the kit, rather than tracks with more ambient microphone 
placements. 
 Figure 5.48    With the edit group active, all edits will be carried out across the associated regions. This is a 
powerful feature when used in combination with Flex Time editing.   

133
Audio Regions and Editing
 The Drum Replacement feature works in conjunction with the EXS24 sampler, and as part of the 
replacement process, you should have noted that an instance of the EXS24 has been loaded, alongside 
MIDI trigger region, and a default sample setting. Therefore, once you’ve established the threshold, you 
 To start the replacement process, select the track that you want to replace or double, and choose 
the menu option Track > Replace or Double Drum Track. A dialog box allows you to refi ne the drum-
replacement process using a few easy-to-use parameters. First, of course, you need to set the instrument 
type from the drop-down menu, which includes options for Kick, Snare, Tom, and Other. As you’d expect, 
the threshold control establishes the amount of triggers generated – if there’s lots of background noise, 
for example, you might need to raise the threshold higher, otherwise pull it down to the point where 
all the drum hits have a yellow “trigger line” attached to them. You should be able to see all the triggers 
point on the accompanying regions.  
 Figure 5.49    Once you’ve chosen a track to work with, select Track > Drum Replacement/Doubling to initiate 
the drum-replacement process.   

134
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
might want to press the Prelisten button to hear the replacement in action (both the replacement part 
and the original audio track should play together solo’ed out from the mix), as well as stepping through 
the accompanying library settings to audition diff erent EXS24 drum sounds. Once you’re happy with the 
result, hit the OK button to take you out of the Drum Replacement/Doubling dialog box, leaving the 
MIDI region and instance of the EXS24 in place. 
 Once you’ve created the basic trigger part, you can then spend plenty of time refi ning the results as you 
see fi t. Of course, at any point you can change the selected EXS24 sample, especially as you get closer 
to the fi nal mix and have a better idea of how the part should sound. It might also be relevant to take a 
closer look at the MIDI data that has been created – possibly deleting unwanted notes, for example, or 
changing the velocities to achieve the level of dynamics you require (we’ll discuss MIDI editing in more 
detail in  Chapter 6 ). As the sample is devoid of any spill, there’s also plenty of potential to add reverb, 
compression, and EQ, without the fear of what might happen to the rest of the kit.  
 Figure 5.50    Using the Drum Replacement settings you can fi ne-tune the replacement process, adjusting the 
threshold and the type of sound you want to replace. 
 5.25  Audio File Editor Principles 
 Given the exhaustive editing possibilities within the Tracks area and Audio Track Editor, you could be forgiven 
for wondering why it was necessary to have another “layer” of audio editing within Logic. The Audio File 
Editor, though, adds some important additional features to work with audio in Logic universe, some of 
which might be less useful to your day-to-day workfl ow, but still essential in getting the most from Logic. 

135
Audio Regions and Editing
 Rendered “Off-Line” Editing 
 The fi rst important point to note about the Audio File Editor is the fact that a large number of processes 
carried out within it are destructive. Rather than simply modifying playback information, therefore, many 
of the changes involve rewriting the data that are contained within an audio fi le – a gain change, for 
example, permanently modifi es the amplitude of the data itself, rather than simply playing back the fi le 
slightly louder or quieter. Likewise, a time stretch will permanently render a longer or shorter version 
of the fi le accordingly. This technique of permanently changing an audio fi le is often referred to as an 
offl  ine edit. 
 Of course, actions taken in the Audio File Editor have a degree of “undo” available to them, but it’s 
important to remember that decisions made in the Audio File Editor might irrevocably damage the 
audio fi les used in your project, not to mention the potential havoc caused by projects that share audio 
fi les among them. However, there’re many examples of situations where you want to create a permanent 
change to the fi les, especially in situations where the audio fi le becomes the fi nal “product” – like a 
sample ready to be imported into the EXS24 sampler, for example, or the fi nal mix of a song ready to be 
burned onto an audio CD. 
 Therefore, as a good safety system, it’s worth making copies of any audio regions you wish to transform 
using the Audio File Editor. This can be done by Ctrl-clicking on the appropriate region and choosing 
Convert > Convert to New Audio Files. A quick check in the Project Audio Browser should indicate the 
creation of a new audio fi le, which you can modify, safe in the knowledge that the source fi les remain 
untouched. As an alternative, the Audio File Editor also includes its own backup facility, found under the 
local menu option Audio File > Create Backup.  
 Figure 5.51    As the Audio File Editor is a destructive process, you might want to consider creating a backup 
of your audio region before you perform any edits. One way of doing this is via the contextual menu option, 
Convert > Convert Regions to New Audio Files.   

136
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Additional Functionality 
 In addition to being able to perform offl  ine editing, there are also some useful “functional” additions that 
are primarily addressed in the Audio File Editor – from the ability to edit Transient Markers, for example, 
through to creating and positioning the so-called Anchor points. Again, these might not be so important 
to your day-to-day workfl ow in Logic, but they add to the repertoire of techniques at your disposal! 
 5.26  Audio File Editor Applications 
 Although not exhaustive, we’ve compiled some of the best applications and uses of Audio File Editor. 
There’s plenty more to be found in this intriguing section of Logic, so it’s worth exploring the Audio File 
Editor further as you grow more confi dent with your abilities. 
 Accuracy 
 Although it is possible to edit to a high degree of accuracy in the Tracks area, the Audio File Editor 
remains one of the best places to edit audio information down to individual sample frames. Generally 
speaking, this happens very rarely. One possible example, though, is the ability to use the Audio File 
Editor’s pencil tool to draw out small clicks that can appear in an audio fi le (especially when it has been 
poorly edited without any crossfades!). You can also use the Audio File Editor to precisely align region 
start points so that they start exactly at the start of a note.  
 Figure 5.52    The Audio File Editor allows you to view audio data at its fi nest resolution – even down to the 
ability to “draw out” sample clicks and other unwanted information using the pencil tool.   

137
Audio Regions and Editing
 Reversing Audio 
 This is one of my favorite applications of the Audio File Editor, and it is one of the most rewarding ways 
of “twisting” a given sound – from reverse cymbals, through to backward guitar solos! Start by creating 
a duplicate audio fi le using the Convert > Convert to New Audio Files menu command (otherwise, all 
occurrences will be reversed!). Once you’ve opened up the Audio File Editor, highlight the area you want 
to reverse (usually the complete sound fi le) and then select Functions > Reverse. 
 To position a reversed region, take a look at the “Marking Anchor Points” feature outline below.  
 Figure 5.53    Use the Audio File Editor’s Reverse function to reverse a given sound – although remember this 
is a destructive offl  ine edit, so it’s best to make a copy of the region fi rst. 
 Accurate Region Resizing 
 Use the Audio File Editor to change the in and out point of your regions, potentially negating any 
unwanted sounds that might precede the fi rst note, for example, or stray sounds that occur after the last 
note. The current size of the region is indicated by the two markers at the bottom of the Audio File Editor, 
with an “in” and “out” point accordingly. Changing this won’t change any relative positional information, 
so even if you modify the start point (to remove some noise, for example), your region will still play 
perfectly in time.  
 Marking Anchor Points 
 By default, all regions are positioned using their start points. However, it is possible to create an 
alternative anchor point positioned within the audio region. A good example of this in action is on 

138
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
reversed files, where the anchor point is probably best 
marked where the sound reaches its peak, rather than at the 
start of the region. You can place an anchor point by sliding 
the anchor icon at the bottom of the Audio File Editor. Now, 
when you move the region in the Tracks area, you see the 
new anchor point being used to place the region, rather 
than the region’s start.  
 Cleaning Up Unwanted Noise 
 Small unwanted noises in-between notes can be quickly 
removed using the Audio File Editor. Simply drag-enclose 
the off ending portion of audio and select either Silence or 
Change Gain from the Functions menu. So that there are no 
abrupt changes in the signal level, it might be prudent to opt 
for the Change Gain setting and pick a setting around −10 dB 
or so. This will attenuate the noise to the point that it is 
less noticeable but will not completely remove it. Again, 
remember these edits are destructive and will permanently 
change the source audio data! 
 It is also worth noting the other “audio hygiene” options 
available under the Functions menu – from the ability to 
normalize an audio fi le (in others word, lifting its amplitude 
to hit 0 dB FS), through tools like the Invert function, 
which can be used to permanently change the phase of an 
audio fi le.  
 Figure 5.54    You can use the Audio File 
Editor to accurately resize a region down 
to sample-level accuracy.   
 Figure 5.55 
 Anchor points are 
used as the “location 
reference point” for 
placing regions in 
the Tracks area. 

139
Audio Regions and Editing
 Time and Pitch Machine 
 Although we’ve seen a large amount of “tempo elasticity” courtesy of Flex Time and Apple Loops, it’s 
also worth noting some of the “low-level” ways you can manipulate the pitch and timing of audio fi les 
using the Audio File Editor. Of course, before the introduction of Apple Loops and Flex Time, the Audio 
File Editor’s Time and Pitch Machine was the only way a Logic user could manipulate the speed and pitch 
of an audio fi le, although there’re still a number of applications that make this a valuable tool to have at 
your disposal. 
 As you’d expect, the biggest advantage of the Time and Pitch Machine is its relative accuracy – a time 
stretch, for example, can be as precise as a few samples, or in the example of a pitch transposition, as 
fi ne as a few cents. It’s also notable as one of the most fl exible ways of adjusting both pitch and time, 
primarily because it can move between the so-called free transposition, where the pitch and time are 
freely and independently adjustable, and “Classic” mode, which links together pitch and tempo/time 
changes, working in much the same way as a tape machine’s varispeed control. 
 Figure 5.56    The Audio File Editor’s Functions menu contains a number of tools to modify the source data – 
from the ability to change the gain, through to phase inversion.   

140
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The Time and Pitch Machine can work either with the region as a whole (selecting Edit > Select All 
from within the Sample Editor) or within a selected time period within the region. For example, this 
functionality allows you to individually repitch notes within a vocal line without having to separate each 
note of the performance into a series of individual regions. 
 Once you’ve selected the area to be processed and opened up the Time and Pitch Machine (Functions > 
Time and Pitch machine), you can then adjust the relevant parameters in the accompanying dialog box. 
First of all, you’ll need to set the mode – using Free mode to modify the pitch without modifying time 
(or the other way around), for example, or Classic mode when you want the feature to work much like 
varispeed (this can sound great on drums, for example). With tempo, you can either specify the change 
in tempo, a percentage, or the length of the fi le (either in samples, SMPTE, or Bars), while the amount of 
pitch change is measured in cents. You might also want to optimize the Algorithm for the material you’re 
working with, especially if the Universal setting isn’t delivering eff ective results. 
 Figure 5.57    The Time and Pitch machine provides one of the most fl exible and accurate ways of modifying 
the tempo, duration, speed, and pitch of an audio fi le. 

141
Audio Regions and Editing
 5.28  Working with Tempo and Loops 
 Throughout this chapter, we’ve seen a number of principal ways in which we can deal with the tempo-
based material in Logic, especially in relation to the application of Flex Time. However, there are a variety 
of problems that arise when dealing with tempo-based material, all of which necessitate a unique solution 
 5.27  Inserting and Deleting Sections of Your Song 
 One inevitable task of producing a song in Logic is the need to add or remove a segment of time at some 
point in the project’s arrangement – whether you need to remove an unwanted chorus, for example, or 
add several bars after the third chorus to form the middle eight. Of course, you could perform these tasks 
using some of the tools and technique we’ve discussed, or instead, you could turn to Logic’s specifi c 
“Cut/Insert Time” feature to perform this even more quickly and easily! 
 To take advantage of the Cut/Insert Time feature, you’ll fi rst need to draw the locators at the top of the 
Tracks area to indicate the part of the song you want to work with – either the area that needs time 
“inserted” into it, or the portion of the song you want to remove. Once this is done, use the menu option 
Edit > Cut/Insert Time, and choose an appropriate selection (Cut, Insert, or Repeat).  
 Figure 5.58    Use the Cut/Insert Time feature to extend or shorten your arrangement accordingly.   

142
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Time Stretching a Region to Fit 
 If your audio fi le/loop doesn’t include tempo information, there’re a number of diff erent ways to make 
it manually conform to your project tempo. First, of course, you can use the Flex Time functionality – 
engaging a Flex mode and then resizing the region so that it fi ts precisely to a number of bars. Another 
option is to use the Time Stretch option as part of the Edit menu. Once you’ve selected the region in 
question, pick either Edit >Time Stretch > Time Stretch Region Length to Nearest Bar or Edit > Time 
Stretch > Time Stretch Region Length to Locators, as appropriate. The option of stretching to Locators is 
useful if the amount of correction falls outside the “nearest bar.” In this case, use the Locators to set the 
size of the eventual time stretched region.  
 Working Out the Tempo of a Region/Loop 
 Another option to manually conform the loop is to use Logic’s Detect Tempo feature, which will then 
allow you to use the Follow Tempo functionality and have an imported loop follow your project tempo. 
to the problem in hand – whether it’s the ability to change your project’s tempo based on the tempo of 
an imported loop, or being able to Beat Map your timeline to a performance that wasn’t played to click. 
 Follow Tempo 
 Some, but not all, audio fi les will have tempo information embedded within them – this includes Apple 
Loops fi les (as we’ve already seen), but also material you record into Logic, and fi le formats like ReCycle’s 
REX. In these situations, it’s usually as simple as clicking on the Follow Tempo as part of the Region 
Parameters box so as to have the loop conform to your current project tempo.  
 Figure 5.59  If your audio fi le has tempo information embedded within it, you can use the Inspector’s Follow 
Tempo option to have the region automatically conformed to the project’s tempo.   

143
Audio Regions and Editing
With the region/s selected (in this example, Logic can work with multiple regions to extract a more 
accurate calculation) select the option Edit > Tempo > Detect Tempo of Selected Region. In the 
accompanying dialog box, Logic will provide with a series of “best guesses,” which you can select as 
appropriate, and then check on the Enable “Follow Tempo” or “Flex” to have the resultant calculation 
used to lock the loop to your project’s tempo.  
 Figure 5.60    If you can’t use the Follow Tempo feature, you can turn to manually time stretching the 
region so that it hits the nearest bar or locator point.   
 Figure 5.61    Use the menu options Audio > Detect Tempo so that Logic can calculate a “best guess” 
for the region’s BPM. This can then be “fl exed” accordingly. 

144
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Matching Your Project’s Tempo to an Imported Loop 
 Now let’s look at the problem another way around – where you want to change the project’s tempo to 
match that of an imported loop. Once you’ve imported the region, select it, and then set the Locators 
to match the required bar count – like two or four bars, for example. With this established, select Edit > 
Tempo > Adjust Tempo using Region Length and Locators. Logic will now adjust the tempo so that it 
precisely fi ts the duration of the region, and assuming you’ve set the right bar count, everything should 
now play in time with the imported loop!  
 Figure 5.62    As well as getting a loop to play in time with your project, it’s also possible to adjust the tempo 
of your project to conform to the length of your imported region.   
 Beat Mapping 
 As well as working with loops, it’s also likely that you’ll need to deal with performances that have little or 
no relation to a rigid metronome or click. In this example, you might want to “beat map” your project’s 
timeline so that it follows the tempo fl uctuations of the original performance, theoretically allowing you 
to synchronize additional loops, or even quantize MIDI parts, to the original recording. 
 Logic’s Beat Mapping feature can be found as part of the Global Tracks feature (which is covered in more 
detail in Section 10.3). You can view the Global Track by selecting Track > Global Tracks > Show Global 
Track. By default, though, the Beat Mapping track lane isn’t displayed, so you’ll select Track > Global 
Tracks > Confi gure Global Tracks, and then ensure that the Beat Mapping option is enable.  

145
Audio Regions and Editing
 Figure 5.63    Logic’s Beat Mapping function is found as part of the Global Tracks feature. To view the Global 
Track, select Track > Global Tracks > Show Global Tracks.   
 As you’d expect with Logic, there’s a variety of ways you can use the Beat Mapping feature, although in 
this example, we’re going to explore the most common application – that of relocking a prerecorded 
performance and creating a new tempo grid that follows the fl uctuations in the original track. 
 To get the process started, it helps if you fi nd the average tempo of the performance, as well as editing 
the fi rst “hit point” so that it falls at the start of your Logic project. Arguably, the best way of fi nding the 
average tempo is to use the BPM Counter plug-in, which can be found under the Metering plug-ins 
folder. Instantiate the BPM Counter plug-in either across your stereo bus or across one of the rhythm 
tracks in question. Once you’ve established the tempo, use the transport to set this as your project’s 
global tempo.  
 Now we can turn our attention to the Beat Mapping process. Expand the Beat Mapping track and 
highlight the track you feel is most appropriate to work with – which will probably be something like 
the drum overheads. In the Beat Mapping track, you should now see the waveform of the region you’ve 
selected, and if Logic had already created transient marker information, a series of white transient marker 
points. If Logic hasn’t got any transient marker information, press the Detect button as part of the Beat 
Mapping track lane.  
 Zoom in on the fi rst few bars of the performance – assuming our basic tempo is correct, most (but not 
all) of the hits should fall on the beat. However, some of the beats will be fractionally off , possibly leading 
to subsequent beats also falling “off  the grid.” Using the Beat Mapping feature, though, we can realign 

146
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
our tempo grid to that it aligns with the hit points that we feel are important (usually on the bar, for 
example, or the one of the principle off -beats). 
 To align the beat, simply click on the beat you want to align to (on the Beat Mapping timeline) and then 
align this to the accompanying transient point on the Beat Mapping display. As you’re aligning the beat 
and the transient, note how Logic draws a thin line to indicate the alignment process that is taking place. 
Also, the Tempo track (which is part of the Global Track) should have additional tempo points inserted 
into it, indicating how Logic is varying its initial tempo to stay in time with the drum performance.  
 Figure 5.64 
 To start the Beat 
Mapping process, 
align the region/s to 
the start of the project 
and fi nd the “average” 
tempo using the BPM 
Counter plug-in. 
 Figure 5.65  
Step through the 
recording and adjust 
the tempo track to 
match the transients. 
First, click on the 
required beat in 
the timeline, and 
second, drag the “beat 
mapping” line to meet 
the transient marker in 
the performance. 

147
Audio Regions and Editing
 5.29  Managing Your Audio Files and Regions 
 In these last few sections of our audio editing chapter, we’re going to review the techniques that relate to 
the “management” of your editing workfl ow – whether it’s techniques to organize region data and tracks 
on screen so as to make your editing process clearer and easier to negotiate, or techniques to manage 
the “raw” audio data that are included within your project. 
 The Project Audio Browser versus the Project Audio Window 
 As we’ve already seen in  Chapter 4 , the Project Audio Browser – found to the left of the Tracks area – 
provides a useful overview of the audio fi les included within our project, alongside basic information 
about the fi les in question, such as the sample rate, bit depth, mono/stereo information, and total size. 
Clicking on any of the accompanying arrows next to the fi le opens up the list of regions associated with 
audio fi le in question. 
 However, in addition to the Project Audio Browser, Logic also includes a dedicated Project Audio 
Window (Window > Open Project Audio), which allows you to open up the Project Audio Browser 
separate from the main window. Although many of the functions are shared between the two types of 
Project Audio Browser, it’s worth noting that the dedicated window includes several additional features 
that make it the ideal choice for more extensive fi le-based activates – including the ability to display 
full waveform views for each fi le/region, as well as an alternative means of setting a region’s anchor 
point (other than using the Audio File Editor).  
 File Management 
 Using a combination of the Project Audio Browser’s Edit menu and the Audio File menu, you can perform 
a variety of fi le management activities – whether it’s something as simple as deleting an audio fi le from 
your hard drive or moving a batch of audio fi les to a new location. 
 One of the most useful features of the Edit menu is the option to Select Unused fi les. This is a great 
way of giving your project a spring cleaning – selecting regions and audio fi les that are unused in the 
 Figure 5.66 
 Here’s a fi nished 
example of Beat 
Mapping in action, 
with the associated 
tempo changes 
to keep Logic 
in time with the 
performance. 

148
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 5.67 
 The dedicated 
Project Audio 
window provides 
an expanded set of 
region and audio 
fi le management 
options, as well 
as an improved 
graphical overview 
that includes 
waveform data. 
arrangement, which can then be potentially removed from your session using the Delete key. Of course, 
it goes without saying that you need to approach this function with some care, although its ability to 
tidy up a particularly messy collection of audio fi les and regions can be welcome, when used correctly. 
 Using the option Audio File > Move File(s) is a useful way of managing particularly large audio fi les folders. 
You can choose to use “nested” folders in a way you feel is most appropriate to a project – this could 
involve pulling all the vocal fi les into one folder, for example, or grouping all the fi les associated with a 
“take” of a song (assuming you’ve performed a simultaneous multitrack recording across multiple inputs). 
The location of audio fi les also comes in useful with some of the viewing options that we’ll see later.  
 Copy/Converting Files 
 One important task that the Project Audio Browser gets used for is the task of converting audio fi les 
between diff erent fi le formats – like AIFF, WAV, or MP3 – as well as moving between diff erent sample 
frequencies and bit rates. A good example of fi le conversion in action would be in the task of converting 
an original 24-bit uncompressed mix into MP3 format for use on the Internet. When you choose the 
conversion option (Audio File > Copy/Convert Files), Logic will present a variety of file conversion 
settings, as well as the option to re-reference the region in your project to the newly created fi les.  

149
Audio Regions and Editing
 Figure 5.68  
Use the Select Unused option 
to give your Project Audio 
Browser a spring-cleaning. 
Once selected, the unused 
regions and fi les can be 
deleted as appropriate. 
 Figure 5.69 
 The Project Audio Browser 
allows you to convert audio 
fi les between diff erent bit 
rates, sample frequencies, 
and fi le formats, including 
AIFF, WAVE, and MP3.   

150
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Viewing the Project Audio Browser and Grouping Files 
 Using the View menu, you can confi gure how the Project Audio Browser displays its list of audio fi les and 
regions. One of the most useful features of this menu, though, is the ability to create a Group, allowing 
you to organize related regions/fi les so that they appear together in the Project Audio Browser. You can 
create a Group in a number of ways – either by selecting the fi les manually and then choosing View > 
Create Group or by using one of the automatic group options. For example, you could group fi les by 
their location on your hard drive (assuming you’ve used the “nested” folder previously described), their 
fi le attributes, or the current selection in the Tracks area.  
 5.30  Using Track Stacks, Folders, and Hiding Tracks 
 In modern music production, it’s common to have a number of “related” tracks and regions – maybe the 
close and ambient microphones placed around a sing drum kit recording, for example, or the multiple 
performances that form a “chorus” of backing vocals. As these tracks and regions amass, it can get diffi  cult 
to manage the amount of material on screen, especially if you’re working on a smaller-sized monitor. 
 One solution to a busy arrangement is to use a Track Stack, which compacts a number of tracks down to 
a single track lane. As well as the Tracks area being clearer, you’ll also notice the mixer become slightly 
less cluttered. Of course, at any point in the production process, you can temporarily open the Track 
Stack to facilitate further editing or refi nement, and then simply close the stack down once you’ve 
fi nished your edits. As we’ll see in the Mixing chapter, the Track Stack concept can be taken even further 
with a Summing Stack, which provides a means for all the signals being routed to a single audio channel. 
 An alternative to the Tracks Stacks solution is the Logic’s Folder feature, which we’ve already encountered 
to some degree with the Quick Swipe Comping feature and the idea of Take Folders. As we’ve seen, a 
Take Folder can be used as a means of packing alternative takes of the same musical line (like the lead 
vocal, for example) into the same folder. Once regions are packed in a Take Folder, therefore, we can use 
Logic’s Quick Swipe Comping feature to move between the diff erent takes. 
 Figure 5.70 
 Use the Project 
Audio Browser’s 
Group Files feature 
to better organize 
how it displays 
your audio fi les and 
regions. 

151
Audio Regions and Editing
 In addition to Take Folder, though, Logic can also pack a conventional “Folder,” which should be used in 
situations where you want to pack a number of discrete and separate regions over a number of diff erent 
tracks. With the regions packed inside a folder, you can enjoy a more simplifi ed arrangement area, with 
the mass of regions now represented as a single region/folder. At any point in the production, you can 
“peer inside” and see the contents of the folder – editing its contents accordingly, but only seeing the 
regions and tracks that relate to that folder. Move back out of the folder, and you’ll fi nd yourself back to 
the “root level” of your arrangement. 
 For the new users, it can be a bit diffi  cult to discern between Tracks Stacks, Take Folders, and Folders, so 
here’s a quick summary:
   Tracks Stacks = A quick-and-easy way of merging multiple tracks lanes and regions to a single track. 
   Take Folder = A means of collating and editing a number of diff erent takes of the same instrument, 
recorded on the same track. 
   Folder = A system for merging multiple regions across multiple channels into the same folder. 
A Folder is similar to the Track Stacks feature but more diffi  cult to manage. 
 Creating a Track Stack 
 To create a Track Stack, select a number of track lanes in the Tracks area or mixer and then select Track 
> Create Track Stack. The accompanying dialogue box then asks if you want to create a Folder Stack 
or a Summing Stack. For mixing purposes, a Summing Stack is a good option (which we’ll explore in 
Section 8.4, Track Stacks and the Mixer). For editing purposes, though, it’s best to select a Folder Stack. 
Once “Stacked” you can expand the track lanes using the small arrow icon in the track list. This will also 
tally with the mixer, which will also fl atten the tracks to a single channel strip, which can be used to 
quickly control the global volume level for the Track Stack.  
 Figure 5.71 
 Use the menu command Track 
> Create Track Stack to compact 
a number of track lanes into a 
manageable version. 

152
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Packing a Folder 
 To pack a folder, fi rst select the regions you want to be include in the folder, and then choose Functions 
> Folder > Pack Folder from the Tracks area local menu. Logic will now create a new folder (which looks 
and behaves much the same as a region) as well as a folder track to play this back. Both the folder and 
track can be named as you see fi t. 
 To clear some space in the arrangement, you might also want to use the menu option Track > Delete 
Unused. This will remove the empty tracks from the Tracks area (left when the regions were placed in the 
folder), although of course, they’re still active “inside” the folder.  
 Figure 5.72 
 To organize 
complicated 
arrangements with 
multiple regions 
and tracks, use 
the menu option 
Functions > Folder > 
Pack Folder. 
 Despite containing a number of regions, a folder can be edited and copied in much the same way 
as an ordinary region – resizing it, for example, to make it shorter, or duplicating the folder so that it 
appears more than once in the song. As such, a folder is a very effi  cient way of handling multiple regions, 
especially where lots of edits have been made and there’s a risk of losing small region fragments as you 
move large selections of regions around your arrangement. 
 Take Folders, of course, are automatically created whenever you overdub onto a track lane with an 
existing recording. If you want to manually pack a Take Folder so as to make use of the Quick Swipe 
Comping feature pick Functions > Folder > Pack Folder from the Tracks area local menu. 

153
Audio Regions and Editing
 Viewing a Folder’s Contents 
 You can view the contents of a folder by double-clicking on it. Logic will then present an arrangement 
solely of the regions (and associated tracks) that are contained within it. This will also be refl ected in the 
Mixer, which will also display a slimmed-down set of tracks. To move back up to the “root level” of the 
arrangement, simply click on the back arrow in the top left-hand corner of the Tracks area. 
 Of course, at any point in the production process, you can choose to unpack the contents of the 
folder, using either the menu option Functions > Folder > Unpack Folder to New Tracks, or Functions > 
Folder > Unpack Folder to Existing Tracks accordingly.  
 Hide Tracks 
 As an alternative to packing folders, you can also choose to, temporarily, hide a number of tracks 
from the current view. The Global Hide View Button can be found in the top left-hand corner of the 
Tracks area, and when depressed a series of buttons also inscribed “H” appear on each track beside the 
record-enable button. Simply choose the tracks you wish to hide, and then click on the “H” button at 
the top of the Arrange area. The tracks you’ve selected to Hide will now be out of view (and the Global 
Hide View button illuminated orange to indicate this), allowing you to concentrate on a simplifi ed 
arrangement. When you need the tracks returned back into view, simply press the Global Hide View 
button once more.  
 Figure 5.73 
   Press the back arrow in 
the top left-hand corner 
of the Tracks area to 
move out of the folder 
and return back up to 
the root level of the 
Arrange area. 

154
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
Figure 5.74 Use the Hide Tracks feature to temporarily remove one or more 
tracks from your view.

This page intentionally left blank

 In  this chapter 
 6.1 
Introduction 
159 
 6.2 
MIDI Concepts 
159 
 6.3 
Creating Instrument 
Tracks 
159 
 6.4 
Instantiating Virtual 
Instruments and the 
Library Feature 
161 
 6.5 
Working with External 
MIDI Instruments 
167 
 6.6 
Making a MIDI 
Recording 
172 
 6.7 
Editing and Arranging 
MIDI Regions 
174 
 6.8 
Region Parameters: 
Quantizing and 
Beyond 
176 
 6.9 
The MIDI Thru 
Function 
179 
 6.10 Advanced Quantization 
Options 
179 
 6.11 Normalizing Sequence 
Parameters 
181 
 6.12 MIDI Editing in Logic 
181 
 6.13 The Piano Roll 
182 
 6.14 Typical Editing Scenarios 
in the Piano Roll 
184 
 6.15 Quantizing Inside the 
Piano Roll Editor 
189 

 6.16 Working with Controller 
Data Using MIDI 
Draw 
191 
 6.17 MIDI Draw in the Tracks 
Area 
193 
 6.18 Going Further: The Piano 
Roll’s Edit and Functions 
Menus 
194 
 6.19 Intelligent Selection: The 
Edit Menu 
194 
 6.20 Quick-and-Easy Note 
Modifi cations via the 
Functions and Edit 
menu 
197 
 6.21 Step-Time Sequencing 199 
 6.22 The Step Editor 
200 
 6.23 Score Editor 
203 
 6.24 Event List 
204 
 6.25 Creating Rhythm Tracks 
with Drummer 
205 
 6.26 Working with MIDI 
Plug-Ins 
212 
 6.27 Types of MIDI Plug-Ins 
Included in Logic 
Pro X 
213 
 6.28 Using the Arpeggiator 218 
 6.29 Using the Grid 
219 
 6.30 Advanced techniques 
219 

 Knowledgebases 
 EXS24 Virtual Memory and 
Disk Streaming 
187 
 Using Multioutput 
Instruments 
198 
 Separating MIDI Events 
202 
 EXS24 Data Management 
220 
 Plug-in focus 
 Vintage Electric Piano 
163 
 Vintage B3 Organ 
168 
 Vintage Clav 
174 
   ES E, ES P, and ES M 
177 
 EXS24 Main Interface 
182 
 Drum Kit Designer 
207 

159
MIDI Sequencing and 
Instrument Plug-ins 
 6.1  Introduction 
 Besides being a tremendously competent and versatile audio sequencer, Logic has been famed for its 
abilities at recording and manipulating MIDI data, albeit in the virtual domain – using Logic’s own virtual 
instruments and other third-party plug-ins – or in the now-dwindling world of hardware synthesizers and 
samplers. Working with MIDI in Logic off ers some of the most creative and fl exible musical production 
tools available, off ering complete control of every last musical detail in your track: from the precise time 
and placement of notes to the exact timbre and sound parts are played with. 
 In this chapter, we’re going to explore some of the key techniques of working with MIDI, from basic 
region manipulation in the Tracks area to more in-depth editing techniques using Logic’s various MIDI 
editors: the Piano Roll, Step Editing, and the Event List. We’ll also explore some of Logic’s key virtual 
instruments – including the EXS24, the CPU-light plug-ins ES1, ES E, ES M, and ES P, alongside the Vintage 
Electric Piano, Vintage B3 Organ, the Vintage Clav instruments – all tools that you’ll undoubtedly use on 
a daily basis. If you’re particularly interested in the creative application of MIDI, and the techniques of 
sound design, be sure to read  Chapter 7 , which follows on from many of the concepts dealt with here. 
 6.2  MIDI Concepts 
 MIDI recording in Logic involves working with either virtual instruments embedded within the 
application itself (like the ES2 synthesizer or the Vintage Electric Piano, a modeled electric piano) or MIDI 
equipment, like hardware samplers and synthesizers, externally connected to Logic via an appropriate 
MIDI interface. Unlike audio recordings, a MIDI recording makes an important detachment between 
musical data (in other words, the raw note information that forms a musical performance) and patch 
data (the information required to generate the sounds). Fundamentally, what this means is that within 
the MIDI sequencer, we have complete and independent control over each of these elements – we can 
change the sound or the performance in subtle or radical ways at any point in the production process.  
 6.3  Creating Instrument Tracks 
 Creating a suitable MIDI track is done via the New Tracks command (as we saw with the creation of 
an audio track), although in this example, we have the choice between a Software Instrument (which 
would be used to access any of Logic’s own virtual instruments or third-party audio units like Native 
Instruments’ Absynth or Kontakt) and an External MIDI track, in the example of accessing legacy MIDI 
hardware. 

160
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The options presented for the new track types vary to that of an audio track, with  less parameters to 
choose from. As with audio tracks, you can create multiple instances, which is handy if you know you’re 
going to require a number of diff erent virtual instruments in your session (16, for example, should 
provide an adequate starting point). If you’re using third-party software instruments like Kontakt 5 that 
features multitimbral operation (in other words, you can load multiple sounds into the instrument), you 
might want to select the multitimbral option. This will create 16 diff erent tracks, all of which are assigned 
to the same instrument and will allow you to address the 16 diff erent channels, or instrument slots, 
within it.  
 Figure 6.1 
 Unlike an audio 
region, a MIDI 
region only contains 
the note data, with 
a virtual instrument 
(or MIDI synthesizer) 
used to control the 
precise properties of 
the sound. 
 Figure 6.2 
 Use the New 
Tracks command 
to create a new 
Software Instrument 
track – for either 
Logic’s own virtual 
instruments or 
third-party audio 
unit plug-ins like 
Kontakt 5. 

161
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 6.4  Instantiating Virtual Instruments and the 
Library Feature 
 Assigning a virtual instrument to a corresponding Software Instrument track is done in one of two ways – 
either selecting from a wide palette of sounds and instruments from the Library, or selecting a specifi c 
software instrument that interests you. 
 Let’s start by taking a look at loading in a specifi c software instrument – albeit one from Logic’s integral 
instrument collection or a third-party audio unit. Possibly, the easiest way of doing this is via the Channel’s 
Inspector using the small mixer strip that appears in the bottom left-hand corner of Logic Pro’s main 
window. By clicking on the Instrument slot you’ll open the list of Logic’s integral software instruments, 
and at the bottom of the list, an option to browse AU instruments, which should have all your third-party 
audio unit instruments organized by manufacturer.  
 Once the instrument has been instantiated, its interface will be presented to you on the screen. On 
the top of the interface, you should fi nd a drop-down list of the various presets associated with the 
instrument (at the moment, this will read Factory Default), as well as two arrows to sequentially move 
backward and forward through the list.  
 Figure 6.3 
 Instantiate an 
Instrument via the 
Instrument slot on 
the mixer, or the 
Inspector’s Channel 
Strip. 
 Browsing Patches in the Library 
 As we’ve seen in previous chapter, the Library feature is the principle means of exploring Logic’s vast 
sound content, with a range of Patches that include both the choice of instrument and accompanying 

162
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 6.4 
 A variety of 
preset settings 
scan be accessed 
from the top of 
the instrument’s 
interface. 
 Figure 6.5 
 Library Patches 
provide a complete 
combination of 
instrument and 
associated eff ects. 
This is a useful 
solution for mix-
ready sounds, but 
the eff ects might 
begin to clutter 
the mix. 

163
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
eff ects and/or MIDI plug-ins. To access the Library, use the icon in the top left-hand corner of the control 
bar, or use the Keyboard shortcut Y. 
 Arguably, what you get with the Library’s Patches feature is an output that’s closer to a fi nished sound as 
it might appear in the mix, although it’s worth remembering that these particular settings might not be 
entirely appropriate to your eventual balance of sounds. Another potential downside of the extra plug-
ins is the increased drain on your CPU – for example, it might be more effi  cient for several instruments 
to share a reverb plug-in rather than each instrument having its own reverb setting. Of course, there’s 
always the option of disabling plug-ins (by Alt-clicking on them or activating their bypass control), or 
even removing them entirely, should you change your mind at a later point.   
 Plug-In Parameters versus Library Patches 
 If you haven’t clocked it already, it’s important to make the distinction between Library Patches and the 
selection of presets, or plug-in parameters, available from the instrument itself. As we’ve seen, Library 
(Continued)
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 1 
 Vintage Electric Piano 
 The Vintage Electric Piano is a virtual modeling instrument designed to replicate the classic electric 
piano sounds – like the Fender Rhodes and Wurlitzer – used throughout the 1960s and 1970s. Of all 
the vintage instrument plug-ins included in Logic, the interface is one of the easiest to comprehend, 
with a relatively simple set of parameters to work with. The most important of these is the Model 
parameter, found at the top left-hand corner of the interface, which selects a basic model from 
which to work. Models range from the classic Rhodes designs, like the Suitcase Mk1 and Suitcase V2, 
to Wurlitzers (great on rock tracks) and a Hohner Electra. 
 The parameters found under the Eff ects tab replicate the more traditional controls and features 
found at an electric piano player’s hands. EQ and Drive, for example, govern the basic tone of the 
patch – keep these relatively fl at if you want a clean DI’d sound or ramp them up if you need to 
produce the more colored tone, like the original Rhodes fed through a fender twin amp. The Tremolo 
control is also another feature integral to the sound of the original pianos, with controls to change 
the rate and intensity of the modulation. Try experimenting with the stereo phase – the 180° setting 
produces a pleasing stereo autopan, while setting the modulation progressively nearer 0° produces 
an increasingly mono Tremolo. The Chorus and Phaser are also important Rhodes-orientated eff ects 
used to great eff ect in the late 1970s on tracks like 10cc’s “I’m Not In Love.” 
 Experimenting with the model parameters found under the Details tab allows you to twist certain 
“mechanical” properties of the original instruments – variations that might have occurred with the 
condition of the instrument, for example, or in the way it was manufactured. For example, increasing 
the Tine Bell volume makes the sound closer to the bright “Dyno Rhodes” modifi cations performed 
on Fender Rhodes pianos in the early 1980s.   

164
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 6.7 
 The Library provides 
a more elegant and 
seamless way of 
stepping through an 
instrument’s plug-in 
parameters. 
 Figure 6.6    The Vintage Electric Piano remains one of the silkiest electric piano 
emulations available, with a surprisingly low CPU drain.   

165
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
Patches contain additional eff ects, and/or MIDI plug-ins, to make them a “complete” solution, whereas 
plug-in settings are just a snapshot of the instrument’s current state. You could, for example, load a 
Patch, a scroll through diff erent plug-in parameters while the eff ects remain intact, or load a completely 
diff erent Patch and have the eff ects changed with it.  
 Once you’ve made this distinction, it’s easy to use the Library to navigate both Patches and plug-in 
parameters using the small blue triangle that fl oats to the side of the Inspector’s channel strip. If the 
triangle is at the top of the channel strip, to the side of the Setting box, then the Library will be used 
to navigate Patches. If the triangle is moved down the channel strip, though, toward the instrument 
selection, then you’ll be browsing the instrument’s various parameter settings.  
 Changing the Track Parameters 
 Track Parameters are a global set of parameters associated with a particular instrument. The Track 
Parameters can be found via the Inspector, with the current selected track having its parameters 
displayed toward the middle of the Inspector – remember to open the box (using the small arrow) if it is 
minimized. Although the Track Parameters include some useful features, most users tend to leave these 
settings in their default positions, unless they’re working with external MIDI sources (see  Section 6.5  for 
more information on this).  
 Figure 6.8    The position of the small blue triangle indicates whether you load full, 
Library patches with eff ects, or simply move between diff erent plug-in parameter 
settings. 

166
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Changing an Instruments Icon 
 Icons allow you to easily distinguish between diff erent tracks in your Logic project. By default, any of 
Logic’s instruments will establish a corresponding icon to distinguish between the diff erent models 
(EXS24, ES2, and so on), although you might want to use one of Logic’s other icons to defi ne a track’s 
musical properties (strings, bass, guitar, drums, and so on). To change the icon, simply click on the icon 
setting in the Track Parameters box.  
 Figure 6.9 
 The Track 
Parameters box 
allows you to 
control a number 
of key parameters 
in relation to 
the instrument 
instantiated into a 
particular track. On 
the whole, this can 
be left in its default 
state. 
 Figure 6.10 
 Using icons will 
allow you to better 
distinguish between 
diff erent tracks and 
their various musical 
roles. 

167
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Transposition and Velocity 
 Use the transposition and velocity parameters to quickly change the way an instrument responds to 
the performance data it’s presented with. For example, if you know you want the instrument to take 
a prominent, aggressive position in the mix, it might be appropriate to use an additive value (like 120) 
for the velocity setting. All performance data sent to this instrument – whether played live from MIDI 
keyboard or from any track in the Tracks area assigned to this instrument – will be modifi ed accordingly. 
If you want more control as to when these modifi cations occur, consider applying them as MIDI edit – 
either by modifying region parameters or by using one of the MIDI editor windows, both of which we’ll 
explore in more detail later on in this chapter. 
 Key Limit 
 This feature is useful where you’re orchestrating for acoustic instruments with a known limit in their 
playable range. For example, a fi rst violin could have its lower range set to G2 to remind you not to 
play or record any MIDI data below this point. Although some of the sample instruments included 
with the EXS24, or as third-party data, might account for the natural instrument’s playable range, not 
all do. A little forethought here, therefore, could save hours of extra editing and arrangement work 
later on. 
 6.5  Working with External MIDI Instruments 
 First off , if you haven’t got any external MIDI equipment, you can skip this section and carry onto the 
next! However, if you’re lucky enough to have some external MIDI sound sources, like (proper) vintage 
synthesizers and samplers, then you’ll need to spend a few minutes adjusting a few settings to get things 
working correctly. It could also be the case that you’re also using the MIDI protocol to communicate with 
other computers in your studio, even using a network connection to connect to an additional machine 
running a software sampler in standalone mode, in which case you’ll also need to follow these basic 
confi guration steps. 
 Because we’re working with an external MIDI device, we’ll need to ensure that our track is being directed 
to the right physical MIDI output on our corresponding MIDI or audio interface. Start by selecting the 
External MIDI track in question, opening the Inspector, and looking at the Instrument Parameters. You’ll 
need to establish a Port setting to correspond to the port your MIDI device is plugged into, as well as 
setting a corresponding MIDI channel. If the instrument is multitimbral – in other words, a device that 
allows a diff erent sound to be placed on each of the 16 available MIDI channels – you might want to run 
multiple External MIDI tracks, each set to a diff erent MIDI channel. To do this, go to the Track menu and 
select Other > New with Next Channel. You can also Ctrl-click at any point on the track name to reassign 
the object to another MIDI channel accordingly.   

168
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 6.11 
 Change an External 
MIDI Instrument’s 
Port setting (as 
part of the Track 
Parameters) to 
assign it to a 
physical connection 
on your MIDI/audio 
interface. 
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 2 
 Vintage B3 Organ 
 The Vintage B3 Organ is Logic’s own virtual recreation of the classic Hammond organ. The original 
instrument used a unique tonewheel sound generation system, controlled by a series of drawbars, to 
create a surprisingly rich and varied set of organ sounds. The package was then made complete by 
the addition of a rotating speaker cabinet – otherwise known as the Leslie – providing a distinctive 
swirling movement to any sound that passed through it. 
 Like the original B3, the Vintage B3 Organ supports two manuals (or keyboards) and a set of bass 
pedals, each with its own set of drawbars. To access these, you’ll need to set the MIDI channel in 
the instrument’s parameter box to All – this way the EVB3 will be able to receive MIDI data on all 
channels, with Channel 1 being directed to the upper manual, Channel 2 to the lower manual, and 
Channel 3 to the bass pedals. Alternatively, change the mapping via the Split tab, where you can 
switch between the aforementioned Multi Mode (where each manual is accessed via a diff erent 
MIDI channel) and instead use the Split mode to have the various manuals accessible from diff erent 
octaves of your controller keyboard. 
 Shaping the tone of the Vintage B3 Organ is achieved by sliding the relative position of each 
manual’s drawbars on the Main screen. Essentially, the drawbars represent a diff erent harmonic 
from the harmonic series – try using a simple combination of just a few of the lower drawbars for a 
mellow, pure tone, or “pull out all the stops” for a fuller timbre that is rich in harmonics. The colors 
also provide some indication to their respective roles: the white drawbars being even harmonics, 
(Continued)

169
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
black drawbars containing the odd harmonics, and the brown drawbars representing the sub (an 
octave below the fundamental) and third harmonics. 
 Switching between the diff erent Leslie   settings found under the Rotor Cabinet screen (Chorale, Brake, 
and Tremolo) forms a distinctive part of the movement and progression in a Hammond performance. 
The Chorale creates a slow vibrato, the Tremolo a fast-moving vibrato, whereas the Brake stops the 
vibrato eff ect. In addition to being able to switch the settings from the interface (these could, for 
example, be recorded into MIDI), you can also use the mod wheel to move through the three settings.  
 
 Figure 6.12    The Vintage B3 Organ is Logic Pro’s take on the classic Hammond organ, 
with two manuals and a set of bass pedals, and of course, the authentic drawbar 
sound creation system.   
 How Do I Monitor MIDI Sound Sources? 
 Although you may have routed MIDI out of Logic to the device in question, there’s still no guarantee that 
you’ll be able to monitor it correctly. Unlike Audio Instruments, of course, an external MIDI instrument 
won’t have a corresponding mixer channel to monitor its output (although you do have a fader to 
remotely control the level and pan settings via MIDI). One solution is to run your main outputs from Logic 
into a physical mixer (Channels 1 and 2), with your synthesizer, sampler, or drum machine connected 
into any remaining spare channel. With this setup, however, you won’t be able to use any of Logic’s own 
eff ects on the synthesizer’s output, or indeed, use the bounce to disk mixdown functionality to create 
a complete version of the mix. 

170
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 A more appropriate solution is to plug the outputs of your MIDI hardware sound sources into spare inputs 
on your audio interface. Next, create a number of spare audio tracks (one for each device connected to 
your audio interface), with each of the audio tracks set to Input Monitor. Return to your External MIDI 
track, press a few keys on your controller keyboard, and you should now hear the sound source being 
 Figure 6.13 
 To monitor a MIDI 
synthesizer, you’ll 
need to connect it to 
your audio interface’s 
audio inputs, create 
a corresponding 
audio track, and 
place this into Input 
Monitor mode. This 
will also eventually 
allow you “print” the 
synthesizer’s output 
as an audio fi le. 

171
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
routed back into Logic’s main mix. Note that you might need to adjust the input gain on your audio 
interface to account for the levels being sent out from your sound source, and that the monitoring will, 
of course, be subject to any latency present in your system.  
 As an alternative to creating a new audio track, try using the “Use External Instrument plug-in” option 
when you’re creating a new MIDI track. The newly created track will look much like a traditional virtual 
instrument, although you’ll notice that the External Instrument plug-in has been instantiated in the 
Instrument slot. Opening up the parameters setting for that Instrument, you should fi nd options to 
specify both the MIDI destination (used to direct the MIDI performance data out from Logic) and the 
Input selection, used to return the audio signal back into Logic’s mixer. 
 The signifi cant advantage of your MIDI sound module being routed back into Logic (using either the 
manual routing technique or the External Instrument plug-in) is that you have complete control over 
how it appears in the mix, even with the possibility of adding plug-ins, like equalizers, compression, and 
reverb. If you’ve picked the manually routing option and you’re completely happy with the performance 
and sound, you can always quickly fl ick from Input Monitor to Record and have the part permanently 
stored as an audio fi le, which might off er a better long-term solution, as well as being a convenient 
means of negating any latency issues. 
 What If I Have More Than One External MIDI Device? 
 Adding further MIDI devices beyond the basic GM Device included in the basic Empty Project fi le goes 
beyond the scope of the main Tracks area interface. Instead, you’ll need to create new instrument objects 
as part of the environment, which is something we’ll cover in more detail in  Chapter 11 . If you have a 
particularly complicated MIDI setup, you might want to consider building your own Template fi le so that 
all your preexisting MIDI devices are automatically set up with each new project. Again, this is something 
we’ll specifi cally look at in  Chapter 11 . 
 My MIDI Tracks Are Playing Back Slightly Late, How Do I Rectify This? 
 As we mentioned before, it is feasible that the monitoring of External MIDI tracks via your MIDI hardware 
could be causing some minor latency issues, with the MIDI tracks appearing to play slightly behind the 
beat. To rectify this, you might want to consider applying a negative delay via the Instrument Parameters 
so as to send the MIDI data out slightly ahead of time and therefore negate any of the latency involved. 
Finding the right settings (which will probably be in the region of about – 20 or so, depending on the 
latency in your system) could be as simple as adjusting the delay parameter by ear. Alternatively record 
in a bar or so of MIDI information as an audio fi le, and then adjust the instrument’s negative delay until 
the “live” MIDI data and recorded MIDI data playback exactly in sync.  
 One important factor to note here is that once a MIDI track has been recorded as audio, the monitoring 
latency will be removed. It is important, therefore, that if you intend to record an external MIDI part into 
Logic, you ensure that the delay parameter has been reset to its zero point. 
 To throw yet another wrench in the works, it should also be pointed out that Logic’s plug-in delay 
compensation (found under Preferences > Audio > General), where used with latency – including DSP – 
acceleration systems like Universal Audio’s UAD-2, can also create additional MIDI playback latencies that 

172
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
will vary given the amount of plug-ins, and where they are placed in Logic’s mixer. The best advice here 
is to avoid applying these types of plug-ins until the mix or use the low-latency monitoring mode to 
temporarily bypass the off ending plug-ins while you are monitoring External MIDI instruments. 
 6.6  Making a MIDI Recording 
 Making a MIDI recording follows many of the same procedures explored in  Chapter 4 , although you 
might want to note a few dissimilarities. 
 Where’s the Data? 
 The MIDI data created with a recording stays within the region, rather than referencing a separate audio 
fi le, as is the case with an audio region. MIDI data takes up an incredibly small amount of memory, with 
a whole project’s MIDI resources utilizing less than about 1 MB of RAM in total. 
 Recording in Cycle Mode and Overdubs 
 Unlike an audio recording, which will create a Take Folder for parts recorded in Cycle mode, a MIDI 
recording will simply layer addition passes into the same region. The assumption with Cycle mode is that 
you use the repeating playback to record each part a layer at a time (like a kick, followed by the snare), 
without stopping the transport at any point. If you want to record diff erent takes of a keyboard solo, for 
example, consider creating a new track assigned to the same instrument (Track > Other > New Track 
 Figure 6.14 
 Adjust an 
Instrument’s delay 
settings to account 
for any monitoring 
latency. 

173
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
with Same Channel), with the previous take muted. Recording directly over the fi rst take (as you would 
with an audio overdub) will simply create regions placed on top of one another, all of which will play at 
the same time. Multiple stacked MIDI regions – unlike Take Folders – can get diffi  cult to manage, so try 
to keep on top of any layered recordings using the editing and arrangement techniques described in the 
following parts of this chapter.    
 Figure 6.15 
 Multiple MIDI 
recordings will 
simply create 
“layered” takes, 
which can get 
confusing on 
a single MIDI 
track. Consider 
creating 
duplicate 
Instrument 
tracks to better 
distinguish 
between your 
various takes. 
 Figure 6.16 
 In this example, 
a duplicate 
track has been 
used to record 
the second 
take of a MIDI 
performance, 
rather than 
layering it onto 
the original 
MIDI region. 

174
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 3 
  Vintage Clav 
 The Vintage Clav is Logic’s virtual recreation of Hohner’s “funkalicious” Clavinet. The original 
instrument worked like an electrified harpsichord, with a number of reeds plucking a series of 
strings, with the resultant vibrations being picked up by a collection of guitar-like pickups mounted 
in the unit. 
 As with the Vintage Electric Piano, the Vintage Clav divides its interface up into Main tab; with a 
series of conventional controls that you’d fi nd on the original instrument, an Eff ects tab; with various 
signal processing option, and a Details tab; for fi ne tuning the modeling parameters to adjust every 
last detail of the Vintage Clav’s output. 
 The conventional controls focus on the rocker switches toward the bottom of the interface. These 
move between basic, preset fi lter positions (brilliant, treble, medium, and soft) and diff erent pickup 
combinations. For example, by alternating the various fi lter rockers, you can move between a soft, 
almost muted tone, to a full and raspy clavinet pluck. The pickup switches produce more subtle 
transformation in the sound and are worth experimenting with to extract just the right flavor 
from the instrument. It’s also worth 
noting that you can physically move 
the pickup – using the Pickup Position 
graphic – which is an interesting 
alternative means of changing the 
tone of the instrument. 
 In keeping with the approach of many 
keyboard players in the 1960s and 
1970s, the Vintage Clav includes its 
own Eff ect section covering Distortion, 
modulation effects (Phaser, Flanger, 
and Chorus), and the infamous wah-
wah. Although the wah-wah can be 
set to track the sound’s envelope (for 
an autowah eff ect), the best solution 
is to map it to something like the 
modulation wheel (found under the 
Details tab), or a spare MIDI controller, 
to keep it as hands-on as possible.   
 Figure 6.17    Logic Pro’s Vintage Clav is a faithful recreation 
of Hohner’s “funkalicious” Clavinet – complete with the 
original controls and the number of modeling options.   
 6.7  Editing and Arranging MIDI Regions 
 Again, the process of editing and arranging MIDI regions in the Tracks area follows many of the same 
conventions as audio editing, allowing you to expand and develop your music arrangement over time. 
As we saw in the audio editing chapter, regions can be resized, cut, moved, and duplicated using the 

175
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
same tools and processes involved in audio editing. However, as with the process of recording, it’s worth 
pointing out a few diff erences with respect to working with MIDI regions. 
 Merging MIDI Regions 
 Using the glue tool allows you to merge a number of MIDI regions into a single contiguous region, 
although unlike audio data, this doesn’t result in the creation of a newly rendered audio fi le. Merging 
MIDI regions is a great way of combining any stacked MIDI regions (where regions have been stacked on 
top of one another), allowing you to see all the MIDI data in a unifi ed way. 
 Working without Fades and Crossfades 
 As you’d expect, a MIDI region doesn’t require any crossfades to be placed at edit points; therefore, it is 
impossible to apply fade-based processing to a MIDI region. To achieve the same volume contouring, 
you’ll need to turn to either Automation (for more information see Section 8.10 in  Chapter 8 ) or the MIDI 
Draw feature (covered in  Section 6.17 ). 
 Timestretching MIDI Regions 
 Although it is possible to perform a certain level of time adjustment with audio regions, it is MIDI regions 
that off er some of the greatest fl exibilities with respect to time-based properties. By Alt-dragging the 
end point of a MIDI region, for example, you can quickly time compress or expand the data that are 
contained within it. This can be an interesting way of exploring double-time or half-time treatments 
by stretching the region by 200 or 50% of its original size. Of course, as this is simply the playback of 
MIDI data you’re aff ecting, there is no loss to the sound quality of playback, which would easily become 
apparent with the same level of stretch applied to an audio fi le. 
 It should also go without saying that a MIDI region follows and responds to the project’s tempo, without 
needing to activate the Follow Tempo feature in the Region Parameters box. This also makes it feasible to 
record a MIDI region at more comfortable playing speed and then increase Logic Pro’s tempo to playback 
the region at the appropriate speed. The only issue to be aware of here, though, is accompanying audio 
tracks, which won’t necessarily follow the same tempo change. In this case, simply monitor from the 
virtual instrument or MIDI tracks accordingly.  
 Figure 6.18 
 Using the Alt key 
as you resize a MIDI 
region will allow you 
to time compress or 
expand its MIDI data 
accordingly. 

176
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 6.8  Region Parameters: Quantizing and Beyond 
 Once you’ve recorded your fi rst few bars of MIDI data, you can now start to explore some quick-
and-easy modifi cations directly from Logic Pro’s main window. One of Logic Pro’s key concepts is that 
a large number of MIDI modifi cations can be performed directly from the Tracks area, without ever 
having to go anywhere near a conventional MIDI editor (like the Piano Roll or List editor windows). 
To perform these modifi cations, simply select one or more regions and turn your attention to the 
Region Parameters box as part of the Inspector. 
 The main parameters accessible from the Region Parameters box include the region’s name, 
quantizing, loop, transposition, and velocity settings. What the Region Parameters allow you to do is 
to quickly defi ne some important overriding concepts of how the region – or group of regions – is 
played back. None of the original “recorded information” is modifi ed in this action – these parameters 
are simply “playback” criteria. For example, you could select the entirety of your MIDI composition 
and adjust the transpose option to fi nd a key that best suits your vocalist’s range. Should you decide 
to return your composition to its original pitch, simply select the regions and reset the transposition 
accordingly.  
 Figure 6.19 
 The Region 
Parameters – 
available via the 
Inspector – allow 
you to quickly 
defi ne key 
properties of 
your MIDI regions. 
 Quantize 
 Arguably, the most important function of the Region Parameters is the Quantize feature, allowing you 
to quickly tighten the rhythmic qualities of a given performance. Clicking toward the right-hand side 
of the Region Parameters box allows you to open up a list of the Logic’s available quantize options, 
ranging from various 1/8, 1/8 Triplet (1/12), and 1/16 note settings, to Swing quantizing, and combined 
16/24 options. On the whole, most conventional musical applications will adopt a simple 1/16th note 
quantizing so that any stray notes are pulled to a rigid sixteenth (or semiquaver, to give it its musical 
name) grid. A Swing quantize, on the other hand, shifts every other sixteenth, producing a distinctive 
shuffl  e eff ect commonly used in Hip-Hop or R n B productions. In Swing quantize, the various letters 
(1/16 Swing A, 1/16 Swing B, 1/16 Swing C, and so on) denote the relative amount of shuffl  e, with 1/16 
Swing A, for example, delivering a lighter shuffl  e than 1/16 Swing F.  

177
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Figure 6.20 
 Here’s a simple MIDI 
sequence before and 
after quantizing. Note 
how the timing of the 
quantized region (top) 
conforms exactly to the 
project’s tempo grid.   
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 4 
   ES E, ES P, and ES M 
 Although it’s easy to get carried away with many of Logic’s deeper and more complex software 
instruments, there’s still a lot of use to be extracted from some of its simpler synthesizers. One of 
the best qualities of these instruments is their simplifi ed user interfaces, often with a bias toward 
specifi c sound types, like pads in the case of ES E, or leads and basses in the case of ES M. 
(Continued)
 Q-Swing 
 The Q-Swing off ers a fi ner control over the swing setting than the 1/16 Swing A, 1/16 Swing B, and 1/16 
Swing C settings found in the standard drop-down Quantize menu. At 50%, the feel is straight, while 
settings either way (60% or 40%) imparting diff erent qualities of shuffl  e. If you’re particularly into the 
groove of a piece of music, then the precise control off ered here will be important in creating the right 
feel between parts. 
 Loop, Transpose, and Velocity 
 Loop – as with the same function in an audio region’s Region Parameters – can set an indefi nite loop 
of the MIDI region until either the end of the project or another sequence object is encountered. 
Transpose, of course, deals with the relative pitch of the MIDI sequence, allowing you to transpose 
a region, or group of regions, up or down by a selected amount of semitones. Finally, Velocity 
allows you to control the relative verocity that a part is played at – setting a number in the velocity 
parameter, for example, will either add or subtract a value to the current velocity levels contained 
within the part.  

178
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Arguably, the simplest synthesizer in Logic is the ES E, which is dedicated to simple pads sounds, 
all from a single oscillator. Try experimenting with some of the key parameters (in other words, 
the ones with the bigger knobs), exploring the diff erent waves on off er, and tools like cutoff  and 
resonance. The three modes of Chorus (Chorus I, Chorus II, and Ensemble) are vitally important in 
creating warmth to the pad sound, with each setting off ering a slightly diff erent fl avor. 
 ES M is a virtual instrument modeled on the simple synthesis capabilities of early monophonic 
synthesizers, like the Roland TB-303. This is a great source for “acidic” basslines, full of distortion 
and resonance, as well a simple lead synthesizer parts. The Glide parameter is an interesting 
feature – and a quintessential part of the aforementioned TB-303 bass sound – allowing the ES M to 
gliss from one note to the next whenever the fi rst note is held over. 
 The ES P off ers the most complex set of sound possibilities of the three synths and can create a 
range of diff erent synth sounds. One of the most distinctive features is the waveform mixer, which 
allows you to blend a number of diff erent waveforms to create a starting point for the rest of the 
synth. The fi rst three sliders govern basic waveform types (triangle, sawtooth, and square), while 
two of the fi nal three sliders add square waves an octave below and two octaves below that of the 
fundamental pitch. Further sound-shaping features include envelope generators, Chorus, and an 
overdrive section.  
 
 Figure 6.21    Logic Pro’s CPU-light collection of synths can be a great place 
to turn to for some simple keyboard sounds: like 1-oscillator synth basses or 
sawtooth pads. Note how each synth is dedicated to a certain range of sounds, 
making the interface uncluttered and easy-to-use.   

179
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 6.9  The MIDI Thru 
Function 
 If no region is selected in the Tracks area, you 
should notice that the Region Parameters 
box displays MIDI Thru rather than an 
appropriate region name. As innocuous as 
the MIDI Thru function may seem at fi rst, 
it is, in fact, a particularly powerful feature 
of sequencing in Logic Pro. MIDI Thru’s 
most immediate and noticeable benefi t is 
as “live” modifi er of MIDI data coming into 
Logic Pro. For example, rather than playing 
in a diffi  cult key, like C# major, you could 
choose to play in C major and use the 
transposition parameter to shift everything 
that you play up a semitone. Equally, the 
velocity parameter can be a useful way 
of increasing or decreasing the relative 
loudness as you play.  
 Another important function of the MIDI 
Thru option should also become evident 
as you make recordings into Logic Pro. In 
eff ect, the MIDI Thru function sets a default 
Region Parameter setting for everything 
you record into Logic Pro. Going back to the transposition example, you should note that a part 
recorded in with MIDI Thru set to +11 transposition will have its Region Parameter set accordingly 
(this also means you can go back to the data in its original form). This MIDI Thru functionality is 
particularly powerful with a setting like Quantize, where once set, all parts will be automatically 
quantized on-the-fl y, immediately after they’ve been recorded. 
 6.10  Advanced Quantization Options 
 In addition to the basic quantizing options we’ve covered so far, Logic Pro also includes an expanded 
set of quantizing features that facilitate a more refi ned and delicate approach to quantizing – from 
the ability to “softly” quantize a MIDI region, for example, through to creative possibilities like Flam 
quantizing. Although slightly more perplexing for novice users, Logic Pro’s advanced quantizing 
options are essential if you want to retain some of the feel of the original performance and avoid the 
overtly “robotic” sound of over-quantized music. 
 You can view the advanced quantizing options by clicking on the small “More” arrow toward the bottom 
of the Region Parameters box. Once activated, you should fi nd the Region Parameters updated to include 
a further set of options. In addition to the advanced quantizing options, you’ll also see an expanded set 
of Regions parameters covering additional areas like Delay, Dynamics, and Gate Time.  
 Figure 6.22    Using the MIDI Thru option as part of the 
Region Parameters can preset certain playback criteria – 
like quantizing or transposition, for example.   

180
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Q-Strength 
 Arguably, one of the most important options in the extended Region Parameters is the Q-Strength 
parameter. As the name suggests, this directly modifi es the “gravitational” strength of quantizing so that 
a 100% setting, for example, pulls the notes completely to their grid position, while a setting of 50% only 
brings the notes halfway. This is a great way of achieving a soft quantizing – improving the overall feel 
of the performance, without turning it into a metronomic sequence. 
 Q-Flam 
 Q-Flam avoids the sometimes-unnecessary side eff ect of a quantized chord having its notes aggressively 
bunched together. By using the Flam setting, you can “fan-out” the notes, with positive settings producing 
an upward movement and negative settings producing a downward movement. Although this won’t be 
applicable to every instrument you work with, the Flam option is a feature that works really well with 
harpsichord or acoustic guitars samples. 
 Q-Range 
 One of the more diffi  cult tools in the quantize tools set to use is the Q-Range control. Q-Range is another 
form of a soft quantizing tool, although in this case, the notion is to ignore notes closer to or on the beat, 
and instead direct the quantizing engine toward notes that stray beyond a given point. On a setting of 
zero, for example, all notes will be corrected to the current quantize settings. By decreasing the range 
into its negative setting, only notes that fall outside the range will be quantized, eff ectively creating an 
increasingly soft form of quantizing. 
 Dynamics 
 The dynamics parameter is interesting, in that it works like a MIDI compressor or expander – reducing 
or expanding the range of velocity levels that occur in the region. Indeed, couple these functions with 
an expressive virtual instrument, and you can have a surprising impact on how the instrument sits in 
your mix. 
 Figure 6.23 
 The extended 
Region 
Parameters off er 
more precise 
control over the 
groove and 
strength of quantize 
applied. Use 
these where you 
need to preserve 
important qualities 
of the original 
performance.  

181
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Gate Time 
 Gate time deals with the duration of notes – changing an elongated series of notes, for example, into 
a shorter staccato eff ect. You can achieve some interesting eff ects here on repetitive sequencer lines, 
especially where all notes are of fi xed duration. Try experimenting with the diff erent gate times and see 
how this aff ects the fi nished output. 
 6.11  Normalizing Sequence Parameters 
 Should you reach a point where you’re completely happy with your region’s parameters, you might want 
to consider making the “adaptive” edits permanent – a process known as Normalizing. Although you’ll 
lose the possibility of going back to the original performance, a normalized region might be easier to 
handle in the long run, especially if you manage to undo your perfected edits by mistake. 
 The appropriate various normalize functions can be found under the MIDI menu option when you ctrl + 
click on a MIDI region, with various options to Normalize Region Parameters or destructively apply any 
Quantize settings you’ve created.  
 Figure 6.24 
 Use the Normalize 
feature to 
permanently 
“fi x” your Region 
Parameters like 
quantizing.   
 6.12  MIDI Editing in Logic 
 Although there’s a surprising amount that can be achieved using just the Region Parameters alone, 
eventually you hit a point where you need to explore a more detailed set of editing options. 
 Editors can be opened in a number of ways. For example, double-clicking on a region will open the 
default assigned editor (Logic Pro X > Preferences > General, under the Editing tab), which is initially set 
to the Piano Roll editor. Alternatively, once one or more regions are selected in the Tracks area, you can 
also use Editors button on the control bar and the various Piano Roll, Score, or Step Editor tabs at the top 
of the editing pane to open the respective editors. Finally, using the Window menu, you can also open 
separate editing windows away from Logic Pro’s main window, which is a useful solution if you’re using 
multiple displays. 
 Delving deeper still, it’s also possible to view and edit your MIDI data in the form of a list of Event data – 
in other words, the precise note on, note off , and controller movements that your sequence is composed 

182
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
of. Although this might seem confusing at fi rst, it does off er a precise and informative view of your MIDI 
data (much the same way Logic sees it), allowing you to position MIDI notes on a tick-by-tick basis, or set 
controllers to exact parameter levels. 
 Ultimately, good MIDI editing practice in Logic is about matching the right MIDI editor with the precise 
type of modifi cation you want to achieve. For example, if your edits are generally musical, look toward the 
Piano Roll or Score Editors. If your edits involve a more intricate manipulation of control data, then either 
the Step Editor or Event List editor might be more appropriate. Not only will the right editor allow you to 
work quicker, but also might allow you to discover some interesting creative possibilities along the way. 
 6.13  The Piano Roll 
 The Piano Roll editor provides one of the most intuitive and informative ways of editing MIDI data in 
Logic and is often the fi rst choice for the majority of MIDI editing tasks. The editor can display both MIDI 
note data in the top half of the interface, with the added option of viewing controller data, like pitch 
bend and modulation toward the bottom of the editor. Notes are displayed in much the same way as 
regions in the Tracks area – with the horizontal axis indicating their timing and length, while the vertical 
axis indicates their relative pitch. In addition to the pitch, timing, and length of the notes, you can also 
see their velocity, displayed as a series of colors.   
 Figure 6.25 
 Here’s a typical MIDI 
region being edited 
in the Piano Roll 
editor, with note 
data toward the 
top of the interface 
and controller data 
toward the bottom.   
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 5 
 EXS24 Main Interface 
 As a completely integrated solution for using samples, Logic’s EXS24 is one of its most powerful 
music production tools. Compared to other software samplers, like Native Instrument’s 
Kontakt 5, the EXS24 appears a much more approachable tool, although this is largely because 
(Continued)

183
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
it makes a distinction between the front-end controls (which we’re looking at here) and the 
behind-the-scene mapping of samples (which we’ll explore in more detail in  Chapter 7 ). 
 The interface is divided into a number of key sections. Most important is the Sample Instrument 
menu, with the current selected instrument displayed in the top part of the ESX24’s interface. 
Clicking on this will call up the list of EXS24 Sample Instrument stored on your Mac, as well as 
Sample Instrument that you might have specifi cally created for the project in question. You can also 
browse through, instrument by instrument, using the small + and − buttons on either side of the 
Sampler Instrument menu. 
 Once a sound has been loaded in, you can then start to experiment with the various parameters 
settings on the interface. These include basic instrument tools – like volume, tuning, total available 
voices, and so on – as well as a number of synthesis-orientated features, like a multimode fi lter 
(just below the Sampler Instrument menu), three LFOs, two envelope generators, and a modulation 
matrix. In theory, taking the basic mapping of the samples, you can use the range of synthesis 
tools to transform the basic qualities of your sound, making its timbre darker, for example, or using 
the envelope to change the attack characteristics. We’ll be taking a more detailed look at these 
possibilities in  Chapter 7 . 
 Unlike certain other third-party software samplers, the EXS24 isn’t designed to work with multiple 
instruments in the same instance. Being directly part of Logic’s code, the EXS24 is extremely CPU-
effi  cient, with the intention that you run multiple instances for each sample instrument you require 
in the mix.  
 
 Figure 6.26    Unlike other third-party samplers, EXS24 is specifi cally designed 
so that you load multiple instances – one EXS24 for each sound, or instrument, 
you want to appear in the mix.   

184
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 6.14  Typical Editing Scenarios in the Piano Roll 
 If you’re used to editing regions in the Tracks area, you should fi nd that many of the techniques carry 
directly over to the editing in the Piano Roll editor. As with the Tracks area, this editing process is 
somewhat tied up with a series of tools, including familiar objects (like the Pointer tool, Pencil tool, and 
so on) alongside two tools that are unique to the Piano Roll – the Quantize tool and the Velocity tool. 
 To understand how the various tools work and relate to each other, let’s look at a variety of editing 
scenarios and how you might combine the various tools and techniques in the Piano Roll editor to 
rectify this situation. 
 Correcting Pitch 
 Using the pointer tool, you can move a note vertically up or down to change its relative pitch. By adding 
in a few keyboard modifi ers, you can also perform some quick modifi cations without needing to drag 
objects about. For example, press Alt + either the up or down arrows and you can move a note or 
selection of notes up or down in semitone steps. Add in shift (Alt + Shift + Up/Down) and you can move 
the same notes in octaves.  
 Figure 6.27 
   Use Alt + Shift and 
either of the up or 
down keys to move 
selected notes in 
octaves. 
 Correcting Timing by Hand 
 Although quantizing can off er a quick-and-easy route to correcting the timing problems of a particular 
MIDI sequence, sometimes it can be important to have a more precise control over the placement of 

185
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
notes in your sequence. By leaving the region unquantized, you can use the pointer tool to manually 
position single notes, or groups of notes, by hand. 
 As with audio editing, it’s important to note the use and operation of the Snap feature (found in the 
top right-hand corner of the Piano Roll) and how this interacts with the movement of the notes on the 
Piano Roll’s grid. In most cases, this is set to its Smart setting, allowing you to place the notes anywhere 
along the timeline, although with a defi nable “pull” to the grid points. If you specifi cally want the notes 
to always snap to the grid, you can change this to beat or division, for example, depending on how fi ne 
you want the resultant grid. For truly precise movements, though, it’s worth adding in a few keyboard 
modifi ers. Shift + Ctrl will switch off  any grid setting – irrespective of the current Snap setting – allowing 
you to precisely move the note in question. Alternatively, use the Nudge feature (Alt + the left or right 
arrow) to move the note tick-by-tick using the keyboard.  
 Figure 6.28 
 Holding Shift + Ctrl 
as you move a note 
allows you to negate 
any preexisting 
Snap settings and 
place each note to 
a precise tick-based 
position.   
 If you want to get creative, it’s also worth experimenting with the timing of phrases by shifting them 
about in various divisions. For example, try taking an existing phrase and moving this by 1/16th, 2/16ths, 
or 3/16ths. Notice how the feel of the phrase has changed with the notes falling in a diff erent placement. 
You can also use this to good eff ect by starting a track with a phrase that doesn’t fall on the fi rst downbeat 
of the bar, and then, as the drums come in, the listener experiences mental “shift” as they’re forced to 
relocate the bar. 
 As you’d expect, there’s also a sophisticated range of quantizing tools and options available from within 
the Piano Roll editor. This will be discussed in  Section 6.15 . 
 Duplicating a Phrase 
 By adding in the Alt modifi er as you drag your selection, you can create a copy of the note(s) in question. 
This is an eff ective way of duplicating musical material within the region. 

186
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Correcting Length Issues 
 The exact length of a note can be as important to the groove of a part as the note’s start point. The specifi c 
tool assigned to this task is the Finger tool, although you can achieve a similar result using the Pencil 
tool and Pointer tool by clicking toward the end of a note’s duration. Try selecting one or more notes 
and reducing their lengths to create a sharp, staccato-like playing style. Alternatively, try lengthening 
the notes to produce a smoother, more legato-like eff ect. Mixing and matching these diff erent length 
settings can be surprisingly eff ective on basslines.  
 Figure 6.29 
 Use the Finger tool 
to adjust the length 
of one or more 
selected notes – 
moving between a 
staccato and legato 
playing style. 
 Changing Velocity 
 Velocity – or in other words, how hard you play a note – has a big part to play in the expression in your 
music. Ideally, the best types of music incorporate a range of diff erent velocities – both from note to note 
and over the whole “emotional arc” of the piece. The Velocity tool in the Piano Roll editor allows you to 
change the velocity of any note or group of notes you click on. Simply click on the note and move the 
mouse up or down accordingly to increase or decrease the current velocity accordingly. Where a group 
of notes is selected, the velocity will keep their respective balance (in other words, some notes louder 
than other). 
 One aspect of editing where velocity really comes into play is drum programming. As you’re putting 
together a pattern, be sure to experiment with diff erent accents on the various main beats, as well as 
adding discrete ghost notes using lower velocity settings. 
 Although the Velocity tool provides one solution to changing a note’s loudness, it’s also 
possible to use the MIDI draw to also achieve the same task. Have a look at  Section 6.16  for more 
information. 

187
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Creating New Notes 
 Use the Pencil tool as a means of creating new notes in your region. As we saw in the section on changing 
length issues, the Pencil tool can also be used to defi ne the note length by clicking toward the end of the 
block. One other trick to look out for is how the Pencil tool defaults to creating a note based on the last 
edited note event. For example, if you create a note and modify to be 1/64th long with a low velocity, all 
subsequent notes created with the Pencil tool will conform to that standard. This can be a useful way of 
setting a default note type for all subsequent newly created notes to follow.  
 Figure 6.30 
 Here’s an example 
of a programmed 
drum loop making 
extensive use of 
the velocity tool to 
defi ne the accent 
and grove of the 
loop. 
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 1 
   EXS24 Virtual Memory and Disk Streaming 
 In an attempt to make a realistic recreation of acoustic instruments, many third-party sample 
libraries can make quite exhaustive demands on your RAM. For example, some Piano instruments 
can comprise multiple velocity layers, with a separate set of samples for each key on an 88-note 
piano keyboard. It’s not uncommon, therefore, for these instruments to have RAM demands between 
1 and 2 GB – something that many users’ systems will fail to cope with. 
 If you do run out of available RAM (the sampler will tell you that it has been exceeded and will 
fail to achieve a complete load), you might need to consider using the EXS24’s Virtual Memory 
(Continued)

188
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
feature. Virtual Memory works by only loading a small amount of the start of each sample, with the 
remainder streamed from your hard drive as and when required. By using Virtual Memory, you’ll be 
able to load a far greater number of these large instruments into a project and have them played 
back successfully. 
 To access the Virtual Memory feature, open up the EXS24 Options menu and select Virtual Memory 
from the list. A dialog box will allow you to set and optimize settings, balancing off  the hard drive’s 
speed with the amount of disk activity (namely, audio track streaming and recording) also happening 
at the same time. Obviously, if you’re already running a lot of audio tracks, this might begin to put 
your hard drive under an increasing amount of strain, whereas a low amount of disk activity will 
ensure optimal performance with a large amount of sample voices being playable at the same time. 
You might also want to consider using an external Fire 800 drive, or an additional Serial Advanced 
Technology Attachment (SATA) drive (internal or external), to keep certain types of data accessible 
quickly and easily. 
 In most cases, the usual “Core Audio Overload” will indicate the system being pushed too hard, 
although you might also want to listen out for longer notes tails, which can get snatched off 
by excessive disk activity. Also check out the Disk I/O Traffi  c and Not Reading from Disk in Time 
performance indicators in the Virtual Memory Dialog box. These will also indicate the eff ective, or 
problematic, use of your system resources.  
 
 Figure 6.31 
 With Virtual 
Memory engaged, 
you’ll be able to 
load a greater 
number of RAM-
hungry software 
instruments. Be 
aware, though, 
of potential 
knock-on eff ects 
on your system’s 
performance. 
 Deleting/Muting Notes 
 To remove a note from a region, use the delete tool or simply select the required notes and hit delete on 
your keyboard. However, a more strategic solution might be to use the mute tool. By muting the note 
event, it will cease to be played back from the region, but at any point, you can return to the region and 
unmute the event to hear the original note as it was once played. 

189
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 One other useful application of the muted notes feature is as an editing guide. For example, say you’re 
trying to harmonize or augment an existing sequence using a diff erent virtual instrument. By copying 
the region and muting the original notes, you can visualize what the other part is playing, while at the 
same time constructing or editing a new sequence to play over the top.  
 Figure 6.32 
 Muting notes is a 
useful alternative to 
delete them. In this 
example, a muted 
line has been used 
as a guide to create 
a harmonized part.   
 6.15  Quantizing Inside the Piano Roll Editor 
 Despite the Inspector being the fi rst port of call for quantizing tasks in Logic, it’s also interesting to note 
that another layer of quantizing exists within the Piano Roll editor itself. As fl exible as this is, this two-tier 
system can appear somewhat confusing at fi rst, so it’s well worth spending a few minutes familiarizing 
yourself with the interaction between these two layers of quantizing. 
 Figure 6.33 
 Quantize 
settings made 
in the Region 
Parameters 
box will 
automatically 
be visualized in 
the Piano Roll 
editor. 

190
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Start by recording a simple sequence into Logic and open this up in the Piano Roll editor. At this point, 
you should see the various imprecise placements of the notes to match what you originally played. Now 
move up to the Region Parameters, as part of the Tracks area Inspector, and set in Quantize setting to an 
appropriate value, like 1/16th. Glancing back at the edited part, you should now see the notes snapped 
exactly to the grid.  
 Now let’s try quantizing from directly inside the editor itself. The advantage here is that we have choice 
over what notes are quantized – we could for example, only quantize a few notes that are played in a 
particularly sloppy fashion, or make a distinction between a collection of notes quantized on a 1/16 
setting and another set of notes that should be played on a 1/16 Triplet (1/24) setting. Of course, settings 
applied in the Track area’s inspector are applied wholesale to the entirety of the region, making it an 
unselective form of quantize. 
 We can apply quantize in from within the Piano Roll using two distinct methods, although both 
techniques make use of the Local Inspector which, if closed,  can   be activate vial the local menu item 
View > Show Local Inspector (of course, you can also use this menu item to hide the local inspector, if 
you wanted some more space on a cramped screen). The local inspector includes a number of options – 
including Time Quantize, Scale Quantize, and Velocity – that can be applied to notes selected within the 
Piano Roll editor. To quantize one or more notes, therefore, select a desired quantize setting from the 
local inspector (like 1/16, for example), highlight the desired notes and press the Q button next to 
the Quantize setting. Much like regions in the Tracks area, the notes remember their assigned quantize 
setting, so you can always select a note at a later point and reassign it accordingly.  
 Figure 6.34 
 Quantizing can also 
be directly applied 
within the Piano 
Roll editor, negating 
any exiting quantize 
settings that have 
already been set 
in the Region 
Parameters box. 
This allows you to 
quantize on a note-
by-note basis. 
 As an alternative to having select notes and then assign a quantize setting, you can also use the 
Quantize tool. In this example, set the Quantize setting fi rst, Select the Quantize tool, and then click on 
the notes you want to quantize. As you’d expect, the Quantize tool is a great way of fl ying through a MIDI 
performance and quantizing just a few notes as and when you see them. 

191
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Note, however, that with both techniques the settings with the Piano Roll editor ignore any settings 
made in the Region Parameters. However, should any settings be reapplied in as part of the Region 
Parameters and then the current quantize settings (in the Piano Roll) are lost. 
 With either level of quantize – Region-level or Piano Roll-level – it’s important to remember that newer 
setting or modifi cations will overwrite existing quantize positions. So, for example, settings established 
in the Piano Roll editor will be overwritten if quantize is subsequently applied at Region-level, and vice 
versa. Operationally speaking, this is a logical solution, but it does mean that it’s worth being clear where 
and how you’re applying quantize. 
 6.16  Working with Controller Data Using MIDI Draw 
 Although the Piano Roll editor does an excellent job with note data, it doesn’t quite provide the full 
picture with respect to MIDI controller data – including dynamic movements of modulation, pitch bend, 
volume, and pan data. However, by opening up the MIDI Draw view at the bottom of the Piano Roll 
window, you’ll be able to see controller data as a series of lines with nodes along their length to edit the 
respective parameter levels. To open the MIDI Draw display, view select View > MIDI Draw (followed by 
the controller of your choice from the list) or open the window using the MIDI Draw icon toward the top 
of the Piano Roll window. 
 To better understand what can be achieved in the MIDI Draw area of Piano Roll editor, let’s take a look at 
some typical editing tasks. 
 Editing Velocity in MIDI Draw 
 Although we can edit velocity data in the conventional note display of the Piano Roll editor, there 
are several operations – like a gradual rise or decay of velocity, for example – that can be better 
 Figure 6.35 
 Editing velocity 
using the MIDI 
draw is a much 
better way of 
drawing in a 
gradual rise or fall 
of velocity. 

192
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
achieved using MIDI Draw. To edit velocity using MIDI Draw, you’ll need to select the Velocity option 
from the drop-down list accessible from the small arrow icon to the left of the MIDI Draw area. Once 
the Velocity view is active, you should be able to adjust the individual velocities, although its most 
powerful feature is creating a gradual fall or rise over time. To do this, click and hold with the mouse, 
only releasing when you fi nd a suitable “start point” for the line. Now, move the pointer over to end 
point, noticing the trail that is left behind it. When you click again, the virtual line will be drawn, 
eff ectively raising or lowering the velocities accordingly.  
 Editing Volume 
 Volume moves – like a number of other generic controllers including pan, modulation, and pitch bend – 
can also be drawn directly into the MIDI Draw area, allowing you to creatively shape an instrument’s 
sound proprieties over time. In the specifi c case of volume and pan (assuming you’re using it to control 
a software instrument), you’ll actually see the volume and pan controls on the mixer move to refl ect the 
curves you’ve drawn in the hyper view. 
 Drawing curves for these controllers can be done in two ways. The fi rst technique is to use the pencil 
and eff ectively draw in the moves “freehand,” although, in fact, Logic will actually place a series of node 
points along the duration of the part. The second technique is the pointer tool that allows you to place, 
edit, or remove the nodes one by one, which might be a better solution for more controlled movements.  
 Figure 6.36 
 MIDI Draw can 
provide an eff ective 
solution for drawing 
in more generic 
controller moves – 
like volume or pan, 
for example. 
 Editing Other Controllers, Including Filter Cutoff 
 If you can’t see the controller that you need in the pop-up list, you can always use the Other option 
to access any 1 of the 127 diff erent MIDI controller message types. For example, it might be that your 
software instrument or hardware synthesizer responds to MIDI controller message as a means of 
controlling fi lter cutoff , for example, or that it can be confi gured to work with certain controller message.  

193
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 6.17  MIDI Draw in the Tracks Area 
 Although we’re going to hop out of the Piano Roll editor for now, it’s important to note the parity between 
MIDI Draw editing in the Piano Roll and the MID Draw facilities in the Tracks area. In eff ect, the Tracks 
area provides the full range of MIDI Draw features that we fi nd in the Piano Roll editor all conveniently 
accessible via the View menu. Immediately, you should notice small previews of the moves we’ve made, 
but by selecting a region, choosing View > MIDI Draw, and selecting the controller type from the drop-
down menu, we can see and edit the controller moves as if we were in the Piano Roll editor itself.  
 Figure 6.37 
   Use the Other option to display a 
MIDI controller type outside the 
main functions like volume and pan.   
 Figure 6.38 
 Using the View > 
MIDI Draw menu 
option, you can see 
and edit moves that 
you’ve created in the 
Piano Roll editor.   
 As you’ll see, the MIDI Draw feature is very close to the functionality of Logic’s Automation system – 
something that we’ll take a closer look at in  Chapter 8 . In particular, what we’re playing here is a form of 
region-based automation – in other words, data and automation moves that are directly stored within 
the MIDI data of a region. 

194
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 6.18  Going Further: The Piano Roll’s Edit and 
Functions Menus 
 One of the quickest ways of speeding up the editing process is to explore alternative methods of selecting 
and processing note events. For example, you might only be interested in notes after a given position in 
the region, notes that have been previously muted, or notes at the top or bottom of a group of chords. 
By applying an automated selection process, you can achieve complex editing operations with relative 
speed and effi  ciency. Equally, various features within the Functions and Edit menu allow you to select 
and manipulate MIDI information in ways you wouldn’t immediately think of, but is, nevertheless, a gold 
mine of useful creative options and technical solutions to MIDI editing.     
 Figure 6.39 
 The Edit and Functions 
menu facilitates 
powerful tools both 
for the selection and 
processing of MIDI data, 
making MIDI editing 
both more effi  cient and 
more creative.   
 6.19  Intelligent Selection: The Edit Menu 
 Besides the usual cut/copy and paste options, the Edit menu contains a number of diff erent selection 
criteria. To better understand the Edit menu functions in the production process, though, let’s look at 
some key musical applications of these features. 
 Select Equal Subpositions 
 Select Equal Subpositions is a great tool for working with any rhythmic regions where the material 
spans several bars. On a hi-hat pattern, for example, we might want to accent particular beats 
across a number of consecutive bars. Start by selecting the appropriate notes in the first bar of the 
sequence and then go to the Edit > Select > Same Subposition. Having activated the function, you 
should now see the appropriate notes selected, which you can then increase the velocity of using 
the velocity tool.   

195
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Inverting a Selection 
 Invert Selection is a useful way of “toggling” selected notes in the Piano Roll editor. Say, for example, 
you’re interested in modifying a large number of notes (maybe the unaccented notes in the 
example of the hi-hat), but at the same time, leaving a few notes unmodified. In this example, 
you’ll achieve the results much quicker by selecting the notes that you don’t want to modify, then 
inverting the selection (Shift + I) to toggle the selection, leaving the actual notes you want to modify 
selected. 
 Invert Selection is a great editing function to use in conjunction with the note-muting feature. For 
example, say you want to distribute note data between two virtual instruments from the same 
“parent” region. Starting with the fi rst region, use the mute tool to remove the notes that you aren’t 
interested in hearing with this particular instrument. Now copy the region over to another instrument 
track, open it up, and select the muted notes using the Edit > Select > Muted Notes. Unmute 
the selected notes (Ctrl + M), invert the selection (Shift + I), and then mute the newly selected 
notes. From one simple selection, you should have now made two regions with an alternate set of 
active notes. 
 Figure 6.40 
 Here’s our simple 
hi-hat pattern; in 
the fi rst bar, we’ve 
selected the accent 
points that we’d like 
to pick up across 
all the bars in the 
region. 
 Figure 6.41 
 Using the Select 
Equal Subposition, 
we can add the 
corresponding notes 
in the subsequent 
bars quickly and 
easily. Now, all 
we need to do is 
raise the velocity 
to complete the 
eff ect. 

196
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Select Highest Notes, Select Lowest Notes 
 By using the keyboard shortcut Shift + Up arrow or Shift + Down arrow, you can select the top and 
bottom line of a polyphonic region (in other words, a region with multiple notes at any given point 
in time). One immediate application of this is dividing a played chord of the keyboard between three 
or more monophonic string instruments (violin, viola, and cello, for example). To do this, simply 
copy the three-part harmony over to the various instruments and use the Select Highest Notes, 
Select Lowest Notes accordingly, along with the mute function, to remove the required notes in 
each part.  
 Figure 6.42 
 Inverting and 
muting selections 
between diff erent 
instruments can 
be a useful way of 
distributing MIDI 
information across 
your arrangement. 
 Figure 6.43 
 Use the Select 
Highest Notes or 
Select Lowest Notes 
to strip out the 
top or bottom line 
of a polyphonic 
MIDI performance. 
This could then be 
assigned to diff erent 
instruments, for 
example. 

197
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 6.20  Quick-and-Easy Note Modifications via the Functions 
and Edit menu 
 Both the Functions and Edit menu includes a number of diff erent tools for both selecting notes and 
applying various transformations to MIDI data. The tools include some marvelous options for dealing 
with music arrangement, especially with orchestral samples – either to create fl uid legato passages, for 
example, or split played chords out into a series of parts. 
 Note Trimming and Force Legato 
 Various options under the Trim submenu are interesting tools to use when you’re working with instrument 
samples – like violin or clarinet, for example. Use Trim > Note to Remove Overlaps with Selected (assume 
you’ve selected the notes fi rst, that is) on a MIDI region being directed to a “monophonic” acoustic 
instrument, like an oboe or clarinet. In the real world, it is impossible for these instruments to play two 
notes at the same time, so any accidental note overruns (where one note has been held for too long) can 
aff ect the realism of the output. Removing overlaps, therefore, will remove any accidental overlapping 
of notes. 
 Alternatively, Trim > Note End to Selected Notes (Force Legato) is a great solution where you want the 
part to take on a fl uid, expressive quality – like violins playing a lead line. With a Forced Legato, all the 
notes run into each other, irrespective of their original played length, producing a smoother overall line.  
 Figure 6.44 
 Using the Force 
Legato feature – 
Trim > Note End 
to Selected Notes 
(Force Legato) – this 
MIDI region has 
had all its notes 
lengthened to meet 
the subsequent 
note. 
 Voices to MIDI Channels 
 Use the local menu option Functions > Set MIDI Channel to Voice Number feature as an intelligent, 
automatic means of splitting a polyphonic chord part into a series of unique voices. This end region will 
look the same, although on closer inspection you’ll fi nd that each voice has been assigned a diff erent 
MIDI channel. To strip the data out, go back out to the Tracks area, Ctrl click the region and choose MIDI > 
Separate by MIDI Channel. The polyphonic region should now be exploded into a number of diff erent 
regions, one for each “voice” of the original part. 

198
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Deleting Duplicates 
 Now and again it’s possible for two MIDI events, of the same pitch, to end up on top of each other. 
This usually happens as a by-product of quantization, and, if you listen carefully, can be heard as a 
slightly “airiness” or “phasing” on the note in question. If you suspect this is happening, one quick way 
of rectifying this is to use the menu option Edit > Delete MIDI Events > Duplicates option from the local 
menu. Although you might not see any immediate diff erence, Logic will have deleted these “double” 
events, with the note sounding a more natural way. 
 MIDI Transform 
 One of the most interesting and useful elements of the Functions menu is the MIDI Transform options. 
The MIDI Transform operations provide a number of radical, but nevertheless useful ways of modifying 
data that would be time-consuming to apply on a note-by-note basis. Options like Fixed Note Length, 
for example, speak for themselves, setting all note values to the same duration. The Fixed Note Length 
option is a great choice if you’re trying to transform an existing “played” performance into a sequencer-
like performance, with rigid note lengths for each step. Another useful option under the MIDI Transform 
section is Humanize, which takes an existing performance and randomizes the position, length, and 
velocity of each note, adding the subtle “imperfection” of a human performance.   
 Figure 6.45  
The MIDI Transform menu 
includes a range of unusual 
tools for MIDI editing.  
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 2 
 Using Multioutput Instruments 
 Both the EXS24 and Ultrabeat instruments are available in multioutput versions, in addition to 
their standard mono and stereo confi gurations. It’s also possible that a number of other third-party 
software instruments in your collection – like FXpansion’s BFD – might also come in multioutput 
versions. The notion of a multioutput is simply to provide additional outputs from the plug-in. 
(Continued)

199
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 6.21  Step-Time Sequencing 
 Step-time sequencing dates back to the earliest analog CV sequencers that wouldn’t technically allow 
you to record real-time musical information (as Logic does), but instead store music as a series of 16–32 
control voltages. Nowadays, however, step-time sequencing is still a valuable tool, mainly as a means of 
“stepping through” and creating a MIDI sequence piece-by-piece, rather than having to play a part by 
hand. If you’re creating sequencer-driven music – with fl owing arpeggiators and fast-moving basslines – 
then step-time sequencing arguably off ers a more eff ective means of recording a part, without the need 
to quantize and meticulously edit your original sloppy performance.  
Each output has its own fader, 
and, therefore, the possibility of 
adding additional effect plug-ins 
specifi c to the output in question, 
rather than the instrument as a 
whole. This is most often the case 
with drums, where you might 
wish to place diff erent reverb, EQ, 
and compression settings on each 
diff erent part of the kit. 
 To access the additional output, 
you’ll need to ensure that you 
instantiate the specifi c multioutput 
version of the plug-in. To add in 
additional aux channels, simply click 
on the + sign at the bottom of the 
instrument channel strip, with each 
subsequent press adding another output into the equation. To access the outputs, you’ll need to route 
the appropriate signals using the plug-in’s controls. On the EXS24, for example, the routing can be 
achieved via the EXS24 editor, while Ultrabeat’s output options can be found next to each drum voice.   
 Figure 6.46    Use the multioutput versions of instruments like 
the EXS24 and Ultrabeat so as to be able to process and mix 
individual elements from their sound output.   
 Figure 6.47 
 Here’s an example 
of sequence 
created in step 
time, with a fast-
moving sixteenth 
arpeggio eff ect. 

200
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 To engage step-time recording in the Piano Roll editor, you’ll need to activate the small MIDI In icon in 
the top left-hand corner of the window. Whenever you press a MIDI note in step-time mode, Logic will 
place one or more (if you play a chord) notes at the current song position and then advance one step 
forward at an amount defi ned by the current Snap setting. Working in this way, you can quickly create a 
fast-moving sequencer line playing each note in sequence, but without having to play in time with the 
metronome. 
 As an alternative to using a MIDI keyboard, you can also make use of Logic’s Musical Typing Keyboard 
(a feature that allows to play an instrument using your Qwerty keyboard, which can be called up via the 
menu option Window > Show Musical Typing) as well as the dedicated Step Input Keyboard found under 
Window > Show Step Input Keyboard. The Step Input Keyboard is a good solution for drawing note 
events using the mouse, with a clear horizontal representation of the musical keyboard, selectable note 
lengths, velocity settings, and so on.  
 Figure 6.48 
 Use the Step Input 
Keyboard and 
Musical Typing 
Keyboard as 
alternative methods 
of note entry for 
step-time recording. 
 6.22  The Step Editor 
 Although we’ve spent some detailed time exploring Logic’s main MIDI editor – the Piano Roll – it’s 
worth familiarizing yourself with some of the other MIDI editors and what they can individually off er 
to the MIDI editing process. The Step Editor has some comparison with MIDI Draw in that both systems 
are primarily designed as means of editing controller information – like volume, pan, or modulation. 
The specifi c benefi t of the Step Editor, though, is that we get to see a number of track lanes at the same 
time. 
 Editing and Creating MIDI Controller Data in the Step Editor 
 One quality that should become apparent about the Step Editor is that it prefers to display its controller 
data as a series of 1/16th steps (hence the name!), rather than the line + node approach of MIDI Draw. 

201
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
Technically, this creates a slightly diff erent approach to editing, although the end eff ect is much the 
same. It does, however, also make for an excellent source of pseudo-random sixteenth Sample-and-Hold 
movement, where a pattern appears to pulse up and down in time with the music. Try doing this with 
the modulation controller, for example, mapped to fi lter cutoff  on the ES2 synthesizer. 
 For more generalized movements, you can use the pencil tool to draw in a series of stepped MIDI events – 
maybe creating a quick ramping up and down of volume, for example. Using the line tool, you can also 
draw more gradual movements up and down, in the same way as the line feature in MIDI Draw.   
 Figure 6.49 
 The Hyper Editor 
is particularly 
good at stepped 
sixteenth controller 
movements. 
 Adding New Controller Types and Lane Sets 
 To add a new controller type other than the ones in the preexisting set, simply double-click in the blank 
space beneath the last controller assignment, eff ectively creating a new controller track lane. Opening up 
the Inspector, you can then defi ne parameters in relation to the controller lane, including the pen width, 
grid, and most importantly, the MIDI status type (program, controller, and so on), controller number (if 
applicable), and MIDI channel. 
 The particular arrangement and order of controller track lanes can be saved as part of your own, custom-
designed Lane sets. You could, for example, create a Lane Set that specifi cally relates to the MIDI control 
of a particular instrument plug-in or a simplifi ed set based on mixing. To create or delete a Lane Set, go 
to the Lanes menu and select the corresponding option, or alternatively, use the dedicated Lane Set 
selector (where you can also switch sets) embedded into the Inspector. 

202
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Editing Drums Using the Step Editor 
 In addition to editing controller data, the Step Editor can also be used to edit and create note data, using 
the same series of sixteenth “blocks.” As such, the Step Editor is a good solution for drum programming, 
with the height of each block providing quick-and-easy velocity adjustment, while the pencil tool 
allowing to draw in straight lines of sixteenth events. Usefully, Logic provides a preprogrammed GM 
Drum Kit Lane Set, specifi cally designed for drum programming. As most drum kits are mapped to the 
GM standard, this should be good for the majority of applications, although you can always program 
your own drum-based Lane Sets for plug-ins like BFD or Battery.  
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 3 
 Separating MIDI Events 
 The Separate MIDI Events feature is a simple way of exploding a MIDI region into its constituent parts 
– this could be based on note pitch, for example, or by the Event Channel. To Demix a region, fi rst 
select it, then choose MIDI > Separate by MIDI Channel or MIDI > Separate By Note Pitch from the 
contextual menu. The note pitch option, for example, is a good solution to use in combination with 
a MIDI drum loop, where a number of diff erent lines (hi-hat, Toms, and so on) have been sequenced 
into the same region. By separating the MIDI region, you’ll create individual parts for each part of 
the kit, which you can then label Kick Drum, or Snare, for example, accordingly. 
 The Event Channel option works well combined with the Functions > Set MIDI Channel to Voice 
Number feature in the Piano Roll, where a polyphonic part has been split into a number of diff erent 
MIDI voices.  
 
 Figure 6.50 
   Demixing allows you to explode 
a single region into a number 
of separate parts based on note 
pitch or MIDI channels.   

203
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 6.23  Score Editor 
 The Score Editor is the fi nal MIDI editor selectable from the row of tabs in the editor pane. Obviously, this 
editor is an appropriate choice if you have an ability to read printed music, although it has several key 
limitations for serious and detailed MIDI editing tasks. As a score is eff ectively “visually” quantized, the 
Score Editor provides us with a relative coarse view of a note’s placement and, while we’re at it, its length. 
This makes any change beyond pitch manipulation somewhat fl awed. 
 Of course, the real benefi t in including the Score Editor is in the preparation of a score for musicians to 
play. Music preparation, as it’s called, is a process we’ll be taking a closer look at in  Chapter 11 .  
 Figure 6.51 
 Use the GM Drum 
Kit Lane Set as 
a useful way of 
creating and editing 
drum sequences. 
Note that you can 
also create your own 
Lane sets to match 
the mapping of 
virtual instruments 
like BFD. 
 Figure 6.52 
   The Score Editor is a 
quick-and-easy way 
of editing pitch-
based information, 
but provides us 
with little control 
or information on 
positional data. 

204
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 6.24  Event List 
 The last MIDI editor that we’re going to take a look at is the Event List editor, which displays the MIDI 
information in pure “data” form. The Event List can, at fi rst, feel a little daunting and perplexing, and 
certainly not comparable to the visually driven approach to MIDI editing defi ned in the Tacks area, Piano 
Roll, Score, and Step Editor. However, there are times when it’s important to get “down-and-dirty” with 
the data – understanding precisely where an event occurs, for example (down to tick-level accuracy), or 
the exact parameter level with a controller. 
 The Event List editor can be opened as part of Logic general “list” displays – including markers, tempo, 
and time signature lists – that can be opened up on the right-hand side of Logic Pro’s main window. 
This is an eff ective solution, as often, you’ll want to combine the Event List with other MIDI editors like 
the Piano Roll or Hyper Editor. To open the Lists display, press D on your keyboard, or View > Show List 
Editors, with the Event List accessible from the Event tab at the top of the display.  
 Figure 6.53 
 The Event List 
provides an 
alternative text-
based view of 
our MIDI data. 
Combined with 
the other editors, 
the Event List can 
be an indispensable 
tool to accurately 
understand the 
content of your 
MIDI region. 
 Filtering Events 
 Given the range and quantity of MIDI data that can be included in a region, it is often necessary to fi lter 
diff erent types of MIDI data out of the Event List. By clicking on the Filter tab, you can then switch in and 
out various MIDI events, including notes, program change, controller, and so on. Using the fi lter can also 
be an interesting way of selectively deleting certain types of MIDI data. For example, you could fi lter 
note data so as to select and then delete extraneous MIDI data (controllers and so on) that you might 
not be interested in.  

205
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Modifying and Adding Events 
 Editing data in the Event List is as simple as clicking on 
the appropriate number and either dragging up and 
down or double-clicking and entering a new value 
numerically. Numerical entry can be a surprisingly 
effective way of positioning notes and other MIDI 
events both quickly and accurately. You can also add 
new events, based on the current song position and 
preassigned message type, by clicking on the + icon. 
For program changes, or static controller levels, the 
Event List shines as a quick eff ective solution with the 
minimum of fuss. 
 6.25  Creating Rhythm Tracks 
with Drummer 
 Unlike sequencing with other virtual instruments 
like the EXS24, the combination of Drummer 
(and its associated plug-in, Drum Kit Designer) 
needs special attention. In effect, “Drummer” is a 
completely different type of track (different from 
Instrument Tracks or Audio Tracks) that needs a 
unique approach. The good news, however, is that 
Drummer is specifically designed to make rhythm 
programming a speedy and intuitive task, which is 
certainly not the case if you are programming from 
scratch using a virtual instrument. 
 Creating a Drummer Track 
 As we’ve seen in the “Starting a Project” chapter, 
a Drummer track can be created via the New Track 
command. When you create a new Drummer 
track you’ll notice a couple of important things. 
First, rather than starting from an empty track, 
Logic will have created two default Drummer 
regions, distinguishable by the unique series of 
transient-like shapes that indicate the position of drum hits. In addition to this, Drummer also gets 
its own editor window found in the same position as the Piano Roll editor, which allows you to edit 
parameters on a region-by-region basis. Finally, Drummer also instantiates its own instrument – Drum Kit 
Designer – which we’ve introduced in  Plug-in Focus 6  .  
 Figure 6.54    Use the Filter tab as means of fi ltering 
out certain types of MIDI data.   

206
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Basic Rhythm Creation with Drummer 
 What’s unique about Drummer is the fact that it uses “algorithmic” techniques to create a rhythm track, 
rather than requiring you having to program each and every part of the drum pattern. In short, it works 
like a drummer – you instruct a musician to play in a certain style, with a degree of complexity and 
overall playing dynamic (loud or soft, in other words), and they come back with a pattern or groove 
for you to work with. If it isn’t right, you simply ask them to play in a diff erent way, whether it’s a little 
quieter, for example, or with more ghost notes. 
 The concept with Drummer, therefore, is that you can select a number of key criteria – the choice of 
drum kit elements, simple/complex, loud/soft, and so on – and Logic will then create a rhythm pattern 
in accordance with this. This might sound similar to preset bashing, or simply picking a loop from a 
collection of diff erent patterns, but it actually belies the complexity of what’s happening “under the 
bonnet.” In truth, what Logic outputs is an intricate human-like performance, complete with the subtle 
sonic variations, fi lls and ghost notes that a real drummer would produce.   
 Figure 6.55 
 Creating a new 
Drummer track will 
load an instance 
of Drum Kit 
Designer as well as 
opening the special 
Drummer editing 
window. 
 Figure 6.56 
 Drum patterns are 
programmed using 
simple musical criteria   

207
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 6 
 Drum Kit Designer 
 Drum Kit Designer is Logic’s virtual drumming solution, and is intended to be paired with a Drummer 
track (which we’ll explore in  Section 6.25 ) although of course, you can use it with any form of MIDI 
Sequence. 
 Opening up the plug-in reveals a pictorial version of the kit, which you can then edit and reassemble 
as you see fi t. The preset options off er various default kits to get you started (Birch Kit, Classic Sixties 
Kit, and so on), although you can also click on each kit element individually and exchange parts of 
the kit to build up your own hybrid kit – maybe pairing a Seventies Felt kick, for example, with a tight 
Modern Chrome snare. Each Kit Element also has its own series of parameters, including Tuning, 
Dampening, and Gain, which further allows you to tailor the sound as you see fi t. 
 Alongside the main stereo kits, it’s also worth noting the Producer Kits (found via the Library), which 
present the drums as a Track Stack. Although the Producer Kits are more memory intensive, they do 
allow you to access each and every part of the kit as an individual channel strip, facilitating much 
greater freedom in how the kit sounds.   
 Figure 6.57   Drum Kit Designer lets you assemble and fi ne-tune your own custom virtual 
drum kit.

208
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 To edit a Drummer performance, click on one of the two Drummer regions and then turn your attention 
to the editor at the bottom of the screen. Starting from the top left-hand corner of the interface we can 
specify the broad genre group we’re working with – whether it’s Rock, Alternative, Songwriter, or R&B. 
From within the Genre you’ll then be able to select a Drummer, each with their own musical personality 
traits and a choice of drum kit. 
 Once you’ve loaded your choice of Drummer, you can then start to play with the pattern itself. In essence, 
what they’re playing is defi ned by the X-Y pad, the choice of drum kit elements you want to work with, 
and the position of a number of parameter slides and dials. The overarching performance is defi ned by 
the X-Y pad – whether you want the pattern soft and simple, for example, or complex and loud. Next 
comes the choice of kit elements – whether drummer is using the kick, snare, and cymbals, for example, 
or just the snare and toms. Alongside each kit element is a slider, used to defi ne the musical pattern 
player by that part of the drum kit – like a basic off beat snare, for example, or a 1/2 time groove. 
 The two fi nal controls govern the relative amount and density of fi lls as well as the amount of Swing 
applied to the pattern. The relative position of all of the pattern controls can be then stored and recalled 
as part of the presets system found toward the left of the X-Y pad. The presets system is also a good 
way of quickly auditioning some radically diff erent sounding grooves, so it may well be a good place to 
actually start your rhythm programming.  
 Figure 6.58  
Use the Presets feature 
to save or load pattern 
information that 
you’ve specifi ed using 
Drummer’s controls. 
 How Regions Work with Drummer 
 If you haven’t clocked it yet, the region is an important part of the Drummer concept. First, each region 
has its own set of pattern controls (not the choice Drummer, of course, but the X-Y pad positioning, 
choice of kits elements, and so on). You’ll also notice elements like the fi lls are contoured so that they 
tally with the length of the region,  with   the fi ll only occurring over the last bar or so of the region. 

209
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Figure 6.59    With Drummer, each region has its own set of controls and therefore, a unique pattern.   
Given this behavior, it makes sense that you make a series of regions that confi rm to the overall structure 
of your song (verse, chorus, middle eight), or where you want the drums to change. Use the pencil tool 
to create new regions and resize them using the pointer tool.  
 Advanced Drummer Techniques 
 Delving deeper into Drummer, it’s worth noting some of the more advanced controls as part of the 
Details section and on the front page of the editor interface. Checking the Follow button, for example, 
instructs Drummer to adjust the pattern in relation to other musical events – locking the drums to a bass 
guitar, for example, or making the kit tightly follow a drum machine pattern.  
 Over the page, as part of the Details section you’ll fi nd control for Feel, Ghost Notes, and the Hi-Hat. Feel 
nudges the pattern forward or backward in time – Push adding an urgency to the pattern by the notes 
being played ahead of time, while Pull lets the groove sit back a little, giving it a more relaxed quality. 
Ghost Notes add a form of “color” to the loop, with the drummer playing softer notes in between the 
main beats. The Ghost Notes control sets the relative level of the drum hits, so the eff ect is either discrete 
(with Quiet notes) or a more noticeable shuffl  e, where the Ghost Notes are played louder. Finally, Hi-Hat 
can force the pattern to move between a closed and open articulation, or simply leave it on automatic to 
have it dictated by the pattern’s existing setting.  

210
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 6.61 
 Use the Details 
page to refi ne your 
pattern further. 
 Loading a Producer Kit 
 Adjusting Drummer’s performance is one part of the eventual result, but we also need to consider the 
importance of the sound produced by the kit. As we explored in Plug-in Focus, Drum Kit Designer is the 
sonic heart of Drummer, and the main place to explore if you want to swap-out parts of the kits, (like 
swapping the snare drum, for example), or changing aspects like the Drum’s tuning. In addition to this 
though, we might also want to consider how we can use signal processing plug-ins – like compression 
and equalization – to change to the sound of the kits. 
 By default, Drummer works with “stereo” Drum Kit Designer patches – in other words, the kit is largely 
premixed and simply routed to the stereo output. The so-called Producer Kits, though, facilitate access 
to each and every part of the kit, so that you can hear and modify the individual kick mic, for example, 
or listen to just room mics in isolation. In short, the Producer Kits give you the ultimate in sonic fl exibility 
over the kits, with the same degree of freedom as if you’d recorded the drums yourself.  
 Figure 6.60 
 Use the Follow option 
to have Drummer 
intelligently match the 
pattern to a part in your 
arrangement. 

211
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 You can find the Producer Kits via the Library 
browser, with a discrete folder called Producer 
Kits making them easier to find. The name of the 
Producer Kits matches the main stereo kits, although 
the addition of a “+” suffi  x makes it easy to discern 
the diff erence. Once you’ve loaded the Producer kit, 
click on the small arrow on the accompanying track 
lane to expand the Track Stack. With the Track Stack 
expanded, you see each and every part of the kit, 
allowing either to simply rebalance the mix as you 
see fi t, or  go even deeper and process each part of 
the kit in a diff erent way (which is something we’ll 
 cover   in more depth in  Chapter 8 ).  
 Using Drummer with Other Virtual 
Instruments 
 It would be easy to assume Drummer is a closed 
off  system, but it is possible to use the Drummer 
performance with an alternative virtual instrument. 
Start by creating the basic groove using the 
Drummer track and editor; once you’re finished, 
though, create a new virtual instrument track and 
copy the Drummer region over to the new track. As 
you move the region you notice it change slightly, 
from the transient-like shapes used by drummer to 
the more familiar “blobs” of MIDI data. You won’t 
be able to edit the performance again using the 
Drummer interface, but you will have its output as 
raw MIDI data. 
 Given that Drummer exports the performance using 
the GM drum mapping standard, you should fi nd 
that you can use the MIDI triggers with a range of 
other virtual drumming plug-ins, like BFD or Native 
Instruments’ Abbey Road Drums series (assuming 
you set them to an appropriate GM drums mode). 
Interestingly, you can also use many of Logic’s Drum 
Machine patches (found via the Library) in the same 
way, which can also be useful if you want to double 
Drummer’s output with something more hard 
hitting. 
 Figure 6.62    Producer Kits are expanded versions 
of the main stereo kits, with individual access to 
each and every part of the kit.   

212
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 6.64    Copy the Drummer region across to a new track will convert the sequence data into MIDI.   
 6.26  Working with MIDI Plug-Ins 
 Having explored a number of traditional ways of editing MIDI Data and controlling virtual instruments, 
let’s look at a completely radical approach – MIDI plug-ins. Rather than working with the raw data of 
a performance, MIDI plug-ins work as “live modifi ers” instantiated at a point between your original 
performance data and the virtual instrument used to playback the musical information. 
 Figure 6.63    Expanding the Track Stack facilitates access to the original mic channels used to record the kit.   

213
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Arguably the best example of the “live modifi cation” is an arpeggiator, which can be traced back to the 
days of analog synthesizers and CV sequencers. An arpeggiator works by analyzing your playing (which, 
in eff ect, forms the “input”) and then outputting a series of stepped messages at precise tempo-locked 
positions. Play a simple three-note chord, therefore, and an arpeggiator could produce swathes of 16th 
notes spanning three or more octaves, or alternatively, it could produce a chugging rhythmic sequence 
using the three notes played in a repeated fashion. 
 MIDI plug-ins are inserted directly into the audio mixer for the corresponding software 
instrument. Simply click in one of the empty slots beside the MIDI FX legend and pick from the selection 
of MIDI plug-ins. Just as with signal processing plug-ins for mixing, you can insert and instantiate 
a number of different MIDI plug-ins each adding to the results from the last plug-in in the signal 
path. Plug-ins can be deactivated by clicking on the left-hand side of the insert slot, or picked up and 
reordered. 
 Figure 6.65 
 MIDI plug-ins are 
placed directly into 
the signal path of 
the audio mixer, 
under the MIDI 
FX slot. 
 The MIDI plug-in will process all information routed to the software instrument, while the original 
performance data remains untouched. Just as with audio processing, bypassing the plug-in will restore 
the MIDI performance data to its original form. 
 6.27  Types of MIDI Plug-Ins Included in Logic Pro X 
 Arpeggiator Plug-In 
 The arpeggiator transforms one or more MIDI notes into a tempo-synced arpeggiating pattern. 
Parameters include the ability to defi ne the motion of the pattern (Up, Down, Up & Down, and so on), 
and the amount of octaves that it works over. A unique pattern mode can even turn the Arpeggiator 
into a form of CV step sequencer, which is particularly great mapped to parameters like fi lter cutoff . 
We’ll look at the Arpeggiator in more detail in  Section 6.28 . 

214
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 6.67 
 The Chord Trigger 
Plug-In.
 Chord Trigger Plug-In 
 The Chord Trigger plug-in lets you trigger a user-defi ned chord from just a single note. In Single Mode, 
a single user-assigned chord tracks the keyboard fully, which is an interesting way of creating parallel 
chord movement, especially if your keyboard technique isn’t that good! Multi Mode is interesting in 
that it permits a unique user-defi ned chord for each note, allowing you to create some complex chordal 
movement from just a few simple note triggers. 
 Figure 6.66  
The Arpeggiator 
Plug-in.

215
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Modifier Plug-In 
 Use the Modifier plug-in as a means of reassigning MIDI 
controller information on-the-fly. For example, if a virtual 
instrument only permits control of its filter on a specific 
controller, simply remap this to the modulation wheel (using 
the Input Event and Reassign to parameters). The Scale 
and Add options are useful if you want to adapt previously 
recorded controller movements, using the Scale parameter, 
for example, to make the movement more or less dramatic, 
or the Add control to simply add or subtract to the existing 
values. 
 Modulator Plug-In 
 The Modulator is an interesting plug-in because it can 
actually create new MIDI controller data in response to note 
information fed to its input. To understand the Modulator 
Plug-in it’s best to pair it with an instance of the Retro Synth, 
where the plug-in adds an additional layer of modulation possibilities. That said, the Modulator Plug-
in can also work wonder with a range of virtual instrument, especially those that map the modulation 
wheel in an expressive way. 
 Figure 6.68  The Modifi er Plug-in.
 Figure 6.69  
The Modulator Plug-in. 

216
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The Modulator plug-in contains two distinct sections – 
an LFO and an Envelope. The LFO, for example, can be 
set to “Free” mode, outputting stepped 16th controller 
movements in time with the track’s tempo. Alternatively, 
set it to Single mode, and the LFO works like a part 
of the synthesizer, triggered as you play an incoming 
note. The Env section works in a similar way to the LFO 
in Single Mode, triggered from note played on the 
keyboard, although you can also trigger in response 
to the LFO, which is great for tempo-sync’ed envelope 
movements. 
 Note Repeater Plug-In 
 The Note Repeater plug-in is the equivalent of a MIDI 
delay line, outputting delayed note messages in 
respect to its input. Specify the number of delayed 
notes using the Repeats parameter, with the delay time 
established with the Delay setting (which can be set to 
sync with your tempo, of course). Creative treatments 
can come from experimentation with the Transpose 
and Velocity Ramp. Use a +1 Transpose and Velocity 
Ramp to 73% to create an upward-spiraling effect 
where each repeat is a little quieter. It’s also well worth 
pairing the Note Repeater with the Chord Memorizer 
(placing the Note Repeater after the Chord Memorizer) 
to hear how two MIDI plug-ins can work together 
dynamically. 
 Randomizer Plug-In 
 As the name suggests, randomizer can be used to randomize 
note, velocity, pitch bend, or controller data. Arguably 
its best application is in creating small randomization to 
velocity for drum sequences that need to mimic a human 
performance. 
 Scripter Plug-In 
 Not for the fainthearted, the Scripter plug-in lets you code 
your own MIDI plug-ins using JavaScript. Some example 
presets give you a taste of what you can achieve, and it will 
be interesting to see if any third-party developers make use 
of the scripter plug-in in relation to the use and application 
of sample triggering. 
 Figure 6.70 The Note Repeater Plug-in.  
 Figure 6.71 The Randomizer Plug-in.  

217
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 Transposer Plug-In 
 As well as the oblivious transposition activities, the Transposer plug-in is also interesting as a means of 
applying scale correction, so that outputted MIDI notes correspond with a predefi ned musical scale. The 
obvious application here could be in relation to rectifying poor musical technique, but it’s also interesting 
to think about possibilities of combining the Transposer with the Randomizer plug-in, especially in 
examples where notes values are randomized but then brought back in-line with the Transposer Plug-in. 
 Velocity Processor Plug-In 
 Think of the Velocity as a form of MIDI compressor/expander, either used to restrict the range of MIDI 
velocities within your performance, or expand them. The Velocity Processor Plug-in works particularly 
well with sampler instrument that used velocity-switched samples, like Drum Kit Designer or some of the 
more expressive instruments in the EXS24 library. The plug-in works like a compressor, with a threshold 
and ratio control (for more information on compression see Plug-in Boxout 3 in  Chapter 8 ) as well as gain 
makeup. 
 Figure 6.72  
The Scripter Plug-in.

218
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 6.73  The Transposer Plug-in.
 Figure 6.74  The Velocity Processor 
Plug-in.
 6.28  Using the Arpeggiator 
 The Arpeggiator is arguably the most  musically   useful MIDI plug-in, so it’s worth detailing a few practical 
examples with it. 
  Basic Arpeggiator Effects 
 The core musicality of the Arpeggiator is defi ned in the central Note Order section. First, defi ne the Rate 
to set the speed of the Arpeggiator eff ect on musical divisions – like 1/16th notes, for example. The 
subsequent controls govern the precise shape of the movement, which includes options for playing 
the arpeggio with an upward or downward movement, as well as options to combine both upward and 
downward movements in the same pattern. Finally, use Oct Range so set how wide the arpeggio is in 
respect to octaves.  

219
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 6.29  Using the Grid 
 The Grid adds another dimension to the Arpeggiator eff ect by letting you specify a unique velocity 
for each step of the Arpeggiation. Played with just a single note, the eff ect is similar to that of a CV 
sequencer, particularly where note velocity is routed to fi lter cutoff . 
 To activate Grid mode click on the Grid legend. You can then specify a unique velocity setting for up to 
124 steps. The chord button beneath each step allows you to move the Arpeggiator between playing the 
next step of the Arpeggio (as specifi ed by Note Order) and playing the notes as a chord. Used carefully, 
the Grid can create some wonderfully complex sequencer-like eff ects, using either a single note as an 
input or full chords.  
 Figure 6.75 
 The Note Order controls 
establish the key musical 
information in relation to 
the Arpeggiator eff ect. 
 Figure 6.76 
 Use the 
Arpeggiator’s 
Grid to create CV 
Sequencer-like 
eff ects. 
 6.30  Advanced techniques 
 Many of the advanced controls for the Arpeggiator can be found under the Options tab. The Note Length 
is well worth exploring, allowing you to shorten or lengthen each note of the sequence. Short, staccato 
sequences, for example, can be really eff ects when you reduce the Note Length beneath 50%. You can 
also inject a degree of Randomness both to the aforementioned Note Length and also Velocity, which 
is a great way of creating random Sample-and-Hold movements. Finally, use Swing to create a swung 
arpeggio, which can be a good way to loosen an otherwise robotic sequence.     

220
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 6.77 
 The Options tab contains 
many of the Arpeggiator’s 
advanced features. 
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 4 
 EXS24 Data Management 
 Although it’s quite possible to operate and work with Logic without an understanding of the EXS24’s 
occasionally complex means of data management, it can become increasingly important as your own 
user-installed collection of sampler instruments begins to swell. The key to understanding where your 
data is, and how this is managed, is in diff erentiating the diff erent sources of sample instruments – 
in other words, original library data installed with Logic, user-installed and created content, and data 
that specifi cally relates to the current project. Although this can seem complicated at fi rst, a little 
time investment will allow you to better access, organize, and archive this important data. 
 Factory content that was installed with Logic can be found under the path Library/Application 
Support/Logic/Sampler Instruments, with the associated sample fi les (remember an instrument fi le 
is separate to the sample data) under Library/Application Support/Logic/EXS Factory Samples. Your 
data will be saved in your user fi le under User Name/Library/Application Support/Logic/Sampler 
Instruments. Whenever Logic is loaded, it will scan these two folders and build up an Instrument 
list based on the contents. This also means that you can actively use the Finder to organize the 
instrument files as you see fit, creating custom list of folders, for example, or even moving or 
duplicating favorite instruments into a single folder. 
 In addition to these two main folders, Logic will also take a look inside your Song folder to see if any 
EXS instruments are stored there. This may well be the case if you’ve inherited a project from another 
user who’s backed-up a complete set of assets with their project archive. It should be pointed out, 
though, that these project-specifi c instruments cannot be accessed in other projects. To do this, 
you’ll need to copy the instrument fi les into the appropriate Library folder. 
 Samples for any of these instruments can reside on any drive, in any folder, with Logic scanning 
for the appropriate samples as it loads the instruments. The two immediate implications here, 
though, are both the scattershot sample organization that can occur and the speed implication of a 
fragmented collection of samples. If possible, therefore, try to organize a large part of your sample 
data (you can leave the EXS Factory data) into a neatly separated folder, partition, or even better, 
a separate drive.  
(Continued)

221
MIDI Sequencing and Instrument Plug-ins 
 
 Figure 6.78    You can use the Finder to actively manage the organization and arrangement of your 
sampler instruments and how these appear in the EXS24 instrument menu.   

 In this chapter 
 7.1 
Introduction 
225 
 7.2 
Logic’s Synthesizers 
225 
 7.3 
Understanding 
the ES2 
228 
 7.4 
Working with 
Oscillators 
231 
 7.5 
Filters, Amplifi ers, 
and Modulators 
234 
 7.6 
Global Parameters and 
Output Eff ects 
239 
 7.7 
Retro Synth 
241 
 7.8 
Synthesis Engines 
242 
 7.9 
Retro Synth Common 
Controls 
243 
 7.10 Retro Synth’s Setting 
Page 
245 
 7.11 EFM1 and Frequency 
Modulation Synthesis 
245 
 7.12 Component Modeling: 
Sculpture 
248 
 7.13 Objects 
249 
 7.14 The String 
251 
 7.15 Waveshapers and 
Beyond 
254 
 7.16 Modulation and 
Morphing 
257 

 7.17 Creative Sampling 
261 
 7.18 The EXS24 Instrument 
Editor 
263 
 7.19 Creating a New 
Instrument and Importing 
Samples 
266 
 7.20 Changing Zone 
Properties 
268 
 7.21 Working with the EXS24’s 
Groups 
273 
 7.22 Editing EXS24 Instruments 
Using the Front Panel 
275 
 7.23 Ultrabeat 
278 
 Knowledgebases 
 Waveshapes 
229 
 Oscillator Sync 
233 
 Filter Types 
234 
 Vector Synthesis 
238 
 ES2 Filter Routing 
240 
 Wavetable Synthesis 
248 
 Bounce in Place 
253 
 Creating EXS Instruments 
from Audio Regions 
262 
 ReCycle Files and 
the EXS24 
264 


225
Creative Sound Design 
 7.1  Introduction 
 For anybody actively engaged in the more creative aspects of designing and modifying sound – say, a 
fi lm sound designer, for example, or a musician working in the realms of electronica – there can be little 
doubt that Logic represents one of the most exciting applications to work in. Right out of the box, the 
modern-day sound designer has access to a huge range or synthesizers, samplers, and signal processors 
without having to go anywhere near any third-party products. Indeed, it’s highly likely that your whole 
sound design project (whatever form it takes) could be realistically achieved entirely within the realms 
of Logic. 
 Having worked on the basics of using virtual instruments and MIDI in the last chapter, this chapter goes 
on to look at the creative applications of Logic’s virtual technology to shape and craft any number of 
interesting sounds – whether you’re using its versatile set of synthesizers (ES2, Sculpture, and so on), 
the pure sonic muscle of the EXS24, or the range of esoteric signal processors. Most important, however, 
making your own sounds (rather than just simply relying on presets) can be a real opportunity to stamp 
your own identity onto a particular audio product, and ultimately, make your work stand out from 
the crowd! 
 7.2  Logic’s Synthesizers 
 Beyond some of the basic synthesizers we looked at in  Chapter 6  – the ES E, ES P, and the ES M 
synthesizers – Logic also includes a number of other synthesizer plug-ins, each dedicated to a diff erent 
branch of synthesis and capable of an enormously wide palate of potential sounds. So, let’s take a 
look at the three remaining synthesizer plug-ins, and what particular strengths they off er to the sound 
designer. 
 ES2 
 The ES2 is Logic’s defi nitive answer to the good-old polyphonic analog subtractive synth – like Roland’s 
Jupiter 8, for example, or Sequential Circuits’ Prophet 5. However, this only forms part of the picture, as 
the ES2 has plenty of further tricks up its sleeve, namely, vector synthesis, wavetable synthesis, and a host 
of other sound design tricks borrowed from many of the classic digital synths of our time: the Waldorf’s 
Microwave, the Korg Wavestation, and the Prophet VS. Make no mistake, this a tremendously versatile 
synth – not the easiest of plug-ins to get your head around, but one that will consistently surprise you 
with what it has to off er. 

226
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Retro Synth 
 The Retro Synth shares many sonic traits of the ES2, but its simplifi ed interface and more refi ned feature 
set arguably make it a more approachable instrument to use. Arguably, Retro Synth’s most distinctive is 
the series of four diff erent modeling modes – Analog, Sync, Table, and FM – that mimic various vintage 
 Figure 7.2  
  Retro Synth’s simple controls and 
powerful sound make one of Logic’s 
fi nest synthesizers. 
 Figure 7.1  
The ES2 – arguably Logic’s most 
powerful and sonic dexterous 
synthesizer. 

227
Creative Sound Design
synthesizers from the 70s and 80s. Despite its simple controls, Retro Synth can produce some powerful 
and sonically eff ective sounds that are well worth closer inspection.  
 EFM1 
 The EFM1, although technically part of Logic’s more budget-orientated synths, is actually an interesting 
and valid example of FM synthesis in action. For those of you who remember, FM synthesis was the 
primary system for synthesis used by Yamaha in the 1980s and was at the heart of their infamous DX7. 
Although technology has moved on signifi cantly since the golden days of FM, it can still be a valid source 
of sounds impossible to achieve elsewhere.  
 Figure 7.3  
The EFM1 is a simple synthesizer 
designed to exploit the digital wonders 
of FM synthesis.   
 Sculpture 
 Sculpture is easily the most cutting-edge synthesizer in Logic’s collection and represents one of the most 
exciting developments in synthesis in the recent years – that of Component Modeling. Unlike synths like 
the ES2 and EFM1, Sculpture works on the basis of a series of complex mathematical models describing 
the precise acoustic behavior of a particular instrument. For example, rather than synthesizing the sound 
of a guitar by selecting a “similar” waveshape and approximating its behavior with fi lters and envelopes, 
Sculpture precisely predicts what happens as a string is plucked (using a variety of diff erent plucking 
mechanisms) and what happens as the sound dies away. Not surprisingly, therefore, Sculpture produces 
sounds impossible to achieve on other synthesizers.  

228
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 7.3  Understanding the ES2 
 For most conventional music and sound design activities, the ES2 will probably be your main 
synthesizer of choice, largely because of the range of subtractive synthesizer sounds it off ers that 
are so eminently useable in electronic music. Although the ES2 isn’t the easiest of synthesizer to 
 Figure 7.5 
 The ES2 can 
separated into fi ve 
distinct sections – 
Oscillators 
(A), Filters 
(B), Amplifi er 
and eff ects 
(C), Modulation 
Matrix (D) and LFOs 
and Envelopes (E).
 Figure 7.4  
Sculpture is a unique software 
synthesizer dedicated to Component 
Modeling synthesis. 

229
Creative Sound Design
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 1 
 Waveshapes 
 As you’ve seen with the oscillator section of the ES2, waveshapes can have a big eff ect on the type 
of sound you can produce. However, what defi nes the sound of each waveshape, and how best can 
they be used?  
 Of the four principal waveshapes, the sawtooth produces the richest amount of harmonics, and 
is, therefore, the most popular choice for creating many of the classic synthesizers sounds. From 
warm pads to gutsy synth basslines, the sawtooth wave can really excel, giving the sound plenty 
of presence, depth, and bite! Be warned though, overuse of the sawtooth can make a track appear 
rather stoggy and one-dimensional, so it’s worth exploring other variants and the sounds they can 
produce. 
 Compared with the sawtooth, a square wave produces a distinctive hollow and open sound to it, 
by the virtue of the fact that it only contains odd harmonics from the harmonic series (a sawtooth 
contains both odd and even). Acoustically speaking, this makes the square wave similar to the tone 
of an instrument like the clarinet; although it’s also useful for bass sounds where it can sound “big” 
without grabbing large parts of the sound spectrum (and eating up your mix, therefore) like the 
sawtooth. 
(Continued)
understand, it’s a great foundation for other instruments like Retro Synth and subtractive synthesis 
in general. 
 The full interface itself is divided into the fi ve key areas, illustrating the principal audio signal fl ow through 
the synthesizer (Oscillator > Filter > Amplifi er, from left to right) alongside the interaction of modulation 
sources like low-frequency oscillators (LFOs) and ADSR (Attack, Decay, Sustain, and Release) envelope 
generators. An additional “Macro only” mode – selectable from the bottom of the ES2 – presents a 
minimized control panel, which might be suitable if you’re only interested in tweaking presets. 
 The Oscillators (A) 
 Toward the top left-hand corner to the interface, you’ll find the controls for the three oscillators 
included within the ES2. The oscillators form the starting point of sounds created on the ES2 – the 
raw, harmonically rich waveshapes from which the fi lter gauges out harmonics, and a big part of the 
identity of the sound. Thankfully, the ES2 includes a number of diff erent principal waveshapes, and 
even a wavetable (more on this later) as well as a unique triangular vector mixer for the purpose of 
blending the oscillators together.   

230
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The pulse wave, a variation of the square wave, is created by changing the duty-cycle of a square 
wave, eff ectively producing a wave that both sounds and looks thinner and more nasal than the 
square wave. For example, the ES2’s Oscillators 2 and 3 both feature a fully variable square wave, 
allowing you to morph from a conventional hollow square wave to the thinnest of pulse waves. One 
common technique is to modulate the wave’s width using an LFO, producing an eff ect otherwise 
known as pulse-width modulation (PWM). Applied onto a pad sound, PWM can be a great way of 
adding a slash of warmth, somewhat reminiscent to the sound of chorusing. 
 A triangle wave creates the purest sound of the four types, containing just enough harmonic 
material to make it still worth putting through a fi lter. Triangle waves can be a great choice for a 
suboscillator, tuned an octave down from the main oscillator. Try this on a sawtooth bass, creating a 
woofer-shaking subsonic to the patch.  
 The Filters (B) 
 Once the waveshapes have been selected and mixed, they are passed on to the circular fi lter section. As 
previously mentioned, the fi lters subtract harmonics from the original waveshapes – making the sound 
darker or thinner depending on the exact fi lter settings. On a musical level, the fi lters are important 
for creating the “juicy” sound of analog synthesis, as best exemplifi ed in sounds like the classic TB-303 
bassline used in dance music. However, what’s unique about the ES2’s fi lter section is the fact that it 
contains two completely independent fi lters, opening up any number of diff erent eff ects only possible 
with fully modular synthesizers. 
 Amplifier and Effects (C) 
 The amplifi er section – or in other words, the volume knob – controls the level of sound leaving the ES2 
outputs. This section also includes a distortion unit (great for producing dirty, grungy, synth sounds) 
and a simple chorus/fl anger/phaser unit for warming up any lifeless pad sounds (for example, this was a 
popular trick used on many of the older Roland synthesizers). 
 Figure 7.6 
  The Square, Pulse, Sawtooth and 
Triangle waveforms are the building 
blocks of subtractive synthesis.

231
Creative Sound Design
 Modulation Matrix (D) 
 Left to their own devices, the Oscillators and Filter won’t produce much interest to the sound by virtue 
of the fact that they are static – in other words, the sound doesn’t change with time. By adding in 
modulation, however, we can start to add interest, dynamics, and movement into our patches. One 
simple example of modulation could be the process of linking keyboard velocity to the cutoff  point of 
the fi lter – now, the harder you play, the brighter (or less fi ltered) the sound will appear. Other principal 
modulation sources include envelopes, which shape the ADSR characteristics of a sound over time, and 
LFOs, which can be used to add eff ects like vibrato or wah–wah. 
 As you’d expect, the ES2 features one of the most comprehensive and fl exible modulation matrices 
going, with access to almost every facet of the ES2’s programming architecture. 
 LFOs and Envelopes (E) 
 The bottom section of the interface contains the controls for the three main modulation sources, 
including two LFOs and three envelope generators. The key concept to grasp here is that each LFO and 
envelope has a slightly diff erent design, allowing each to excel in diff erent tasks. LFO 2, for example, can 
be synched to the tempo of the song, while Envelope 1 provides quick and easy access to AD (Attack 
Decay) envelopes, which are particularly useful for percussive sounds. 
 7.4  Working with Oscillators 
 With an understanding of the overriding synthesis architecture of the ES2 under our belts, let’s take a 
closer look at creating sounds on the ES2. 
 The fi rst step in synthesizing your own sound on the 
ES2 should be to consider how you intend to deploy 
the various oscillators – do you, for example, just use 
a single oscillator, or use a number of oscillators richly 
detuned to create a thicker texture? Deactivating the 
oscillators can be quickly achieved by clicking on 
the numerical legend to the side of each waveshape 
pot, this will also have a corresponding reduction in 
the amount of CPU processing used, an important 
consideration for those using G4 processors.  
 As with many parts of the ES2, each oscillator can 
be seen as having some unique attributes, as well as 
features common to all three oscillators. Looking fi rst 
at Oscillator 1, you should see a relatively standard 
set of synthesizer waveshapes, including sawtooth, 
pulse, square, triangle, and sine waves. One of the 
more intriguing options includes the wavetable at the 
 Figure 7.7    In this example, we’ve used just a single 
oscillator to create a simple synth bass sound.   

232
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
bottom of the dial (preset to a sine wave), and a fully variable FM option (for more information on this, 
see  Section 7.7 ). To audition the various waveshapes available as part of the wavetable, try clicking on 
the name and dragging the mouse up or down to scroll through the options. 
 Oscillators 2 and 3 add furthermore interest with the addition of a fully variable pulse width – morphing 
between a hollow square wave at the top of the dial and an increasingly thin and reedy pulse as you 
move the pot clockwise. Another important addition is the provision of two synchronizable oscillators, 
using either a sawtooth or square waveshape, controlled from the “master” oscillator – Oscillator 1. Going 
further still, Oscillator 2 also includes the option to ring modulate Oscillators 1 and 2, with Oscillator 
2 carrying the ring – modulated output. Oscillators 3’s “special feature” is the provision of a noise 
waveshape – a great source for the random harmonic information so important to percussion sounds. 
 Figure 7.8    Oscillators 2 and 3 include a 
number of interesting waveshape options – 
from fully variable pulse width to ring 
modulation. 
 In situations where you’re using more than one oscillator, you’ll want to experiment with their respective 
tunings. One simple technique is to apply a slight detune, say ±4 cents, using the fi ne control on the 
left of the tuning dials. This should fatten up the sound you’re producing – the equivalent of three 
violinists, for example, playing the same musical motif. The use of semitone shifts adds furthermore 
interest and power to the patch. Try tuning an oscillator (set to triangle or square wave) down an 
octave (±12 semitones) from the main oscillators to create a subharmonic, or using third and fi fth 
intervals (±3 or ±4 for the third, ±7 for the fi fth) to create chord-like eff ects from a single note. 
 Beyond the basic detuning of the oscillators, there are a number of other features on the ES2 that can 
add width and warmth to the sound you’re working with. The Analog control, for example, emulates 
the pseudo-random pitch and fi lter-cutoff  drifts that occur within the imprecise workings of an analog 
synthesizer. Therefore, by increasing the Analog parameter, you can add an increasing amount of pitch and 
cutoff  frequency drift, eff ectively making the patch appear warmer and less sterile.  
 Activating the Unison mode, in either of the ES2’s monophonic modes (mono or legato), takes the 
“fatness” of your ES2 patches to a whole new level. As with the Unison control on a traditional analog 
synth, ES2’s Unison stacks further virtual oscillators (on top of the three usually available in a patch) to 
create a thick, detuned, chorus-like eff ect. Going back to the string analogy, Unison is the equivalent 
of going from three violin players to a whole section, creating a sound that demands your attention 
in a mix. The actual width of the eff ect is defi ned in two parameters – the number of voices assigned 

233
Creative Sound Design
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 2 
 Oscillator Sync 
 Let’s get this clear from the start: Oscillator Sync has nothing to do with synchronizing the oscillators 
to the tempo of the track, although of course, you can achieve this with the ES2’s LFO 2. Truly, Oscillator 
Sync is “synchronizing” the wavecycles of Oscillator 2, with respect to the pitch Oscillator 1 – in other 
words, the pitch of Oscillator 2 is controlled by Oscillator 1. At fi rst, this doesn’t seem that exciting – 
simply controlling the pitch of one oscillator from another – however, by freeing Oscillator 2’s tuning 
controls from conventional tuning applications, we open the lid on a whole new world of exciting 
eff ects. 
 To fully understand Oscillator Sync, we clock what exactly happens to the pitch and timbre of 
Oscillator 2 once it is placed in-sync with Oscillator 1. The eff ect is most clearly audible when the 
initial pitch of Oscillator 2 is set higher than Oscillator 1, so try initially tuning the Oscillator up 12 
or more semitones. When the oscillator is placed in sync, you’ll notice that its pitch return to that of 
Oscillator 1, although its timbre has become brighter and harsher – almost distorted, in fact. Looked 
at under the microscope of an oscilloscope (try rendering the synths output as audio fi le and taking 
a closer peek in the Sample Editor), you should see the waveshape being forcibly retriggered, even 
though it begins its oscillation at a higher pitch. Therefore, it is this periodic retriggering that we 
perceive as the fi nal pitch of the oscillator. 
 Oscillator Sync forms one of the most fascinating ways of distorting a waveshape, essentially 
creating a diff erent version of the waveshape based on the relative pitch diff erence between the 
two oscillators. Although it can be used as a static eff ect, Oscillator Sync works best when the pitch 
of Oscillator 2 is modulated in some way (try using Envelope 1 for a classic “sync sweep” lead sound), 
creating dramatic timbral sweeps even before you’ve reached the fi lter! 
 Figure 7.9 
 With Oscillator 
Sync engaged, 
notice how the 
lower waveform 
is distorted by 
the wavecycle of 
Oscillator 1.

234
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 3 
 Filter Types 
 A large part of the “sound” we associate with a synthesizer is brought about by the performance of 
its fi lter. Filters come in many shapes and sizes, or more specifi cally, types and strengths, each with 
their own characteristics and applications. 
 The fi rst thing to consider is the strength of the fi lter – which in the ES2’s case is measured in three 
diff erent decibel levels: 12, 24, and 36 dB. As you’d expect, the higher the decibel rating, the stronger 
(Continued)
to the unison and the Analog parameter discussed 
earlier. In Unison mode, therefore, Analog changes its 
role somewhat and simply sets the amount of detune 
between the “doubling” oscillators. 
 Unison, of course, is a staple feature of many of the 
expansive lead synth sounds found in trance music; 
although used in moderation, it can also be great way 
of creating some super-phat basslines. But, like all 
good things, Unison comes at a cost – namely, your 
CPU resources!  
 7.5   Filters, Amplifiers, 
and Modulators 
 With the initial pitch and timbre defined by our 
oscillators, then comes the turn of the filters and 
amplifiers to shape the raw sound into something 
that grows and develops over time. The Filter section – 
found in the large central dial of the ES2 – removes 
unwanted harmonics from the rich, waveform-only 
output from the oscillators. For example, starting with 
a “buzzy” collection of sawtooth waveshapes, you 
could apply a strong low-pass filter (LPF) to remove 
the high-end harmonics, leaving you with a soft and 
warm pad sound. Alternatively, use any one of the 
other fi lter types and fi lter-routing combinations – like 
band-pass (BP), high-pass, or peak fi lter types – and 
you can achieve a real wealth of diff erent timbres. Also, 
it’s worth noting that the ES2 actually contains two 
independent fi lters – either allowing you to layer two 
diff erent fi lter settings, or use two fi lters one after the 
other. 
 Figure 7.11    Activating the Unison control will 
layer several “virtual” oscillators on top of the 
three you’re already been using in the patch. 
This creates a thicker and warmer output to 
the ES2. 
 Figure 7.10  Oscillator 1 includes a 
full wavetable made up of a number 
of digital waveshapes. Try Ctrl-clicking on the 
waveshape name to access the list as a menu.   

235
Creative Sound Design
the fi lter’s ability to attenuate frequencies above or below the cutoff  point. Interestingly though, a 
stronger fi lter isn’t always the most desirable – most of the early Roland synths, for example, took a 
large part of their charm from the relatively “weak” 12 dB fi lters. A Moog, however, was famed for its 
steeper, 24 dB fi lter. On the whole, I tend to use the stronger fi lters on darker patches, whereas the 
classic, 12 dB fi lters work wonders on TB-303-inspired patches with lots of squelchy resonance. 
 The type of filter (Lo, Hi, Peak, band reject [BR], band-pass [BP]) defines the form of frequency 
attenuation taking place. The principal fi lter type is arguably a LPF, which attenuates frequencies 
above the frequency cutoff  point – transforming the initially bright output of the oscillators into 
a more rounded overall tone. In most musical applications, the LPF makes most sense, and there 
are strong similarities to what happens within the acoustic instruments. For example, a piano note 
will start initially bright (fi lter open) with high-frequency energy decaying as the note decays (fi lter 
gradually closes). A high-pass fi lter (HPF), however, works in reverse so that frequencies below the 
cutoff  point are attenuated. HPFs, therefore, are a great way of thinning sounds out, especially if the 
mix is starting to sound heavy and cluttered. 
 Band-pass and band-reject fi lters (labeled BP and BR on the ES2) are combination of LPFs and HPFs 
used to selectively modify a small band of frequencies. BP, for example, allows only a small band 
of frequencies to pass through, producing a characteristically small-sounding output. BR, however, 
leaves most of the audio bandwidth untouched and instead attenuates just one “small” band of 
frequencies, much the same as a tightly Q’d dip on a parametric Equalizer. Conversely, a peaking 
fi lter applies a sharp boost at the given cutoff  point, again similar to the EQ comparison, but this time 
a boost rather than a cut.   
 Figure 7.12 
 The three principle 
fi lter types of 
subtractive 
synthesis: Low-pass, 
Band-pass, 
High-pass and 
Band-reject.
 Cutoff and Resonance 
 The two main parameters with both the fi lters are Cutoff  and Resonance. Cutoff , as the name suggests, is 
the point where the fi lter begins attenuating frequencies – so, in the case of a LPF, a lowering of the fi lter 
will move the cutoff  point slowly down the audio spectrum, producing an increasingly darker output. In 
eff ect, therefore, you’re letting the low frequencies “pass,” while the higher ones are attenuated.  
 Resonance, however, creates a small boost around the point of the frequency cutoff , arguably making the 
fi lter’s attenuation more pronounced. The exact eff ect of resonance, though, can vary both between the 
fi lter types and the relative position of the cutoff . Using the example of a LPF, a high-cutoff  setting with 

236
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
some resonance applied will produce an increasing thin output (as the resonance boosts frequencies at 
the top end of the audio spectrum). Alternatively, resonance applied on a LPF down the bottom of its 
scaling will produce an output with increasing amounts of low-end – an eff ect that can often be useful 
on bass sounds. Take the resonance all the way to its maximum setting, though, and the fi lter will self-
oscillate (in other words, produce a high-pitched ringing sound almost like a sine wave) at a frequency 
defi ned by the fi lter-cutoff  position. 
 Ultimately, the point to note with the fi lter is that it provides a large part of the “character” in a synth 
sound, probably best exemplifi ed by the dripping, acidic resonance of a TB-303 fi lter in action on a 
bassline. All sounds, to a greater or lesser degree, will use the fi lter, and if you can add some dynamic 
movement or expression into the patch (maybe responding to velocity, for example, using an envelope 
and/or LFO), this character will become even more pronounced and interesting to the ear. 
 Changing Volume Over Time 
 By default, the amplifi er is controlled by Envelope 3, with the two remaining envelopes available for use 
with any other application you see fi t. Envelopes allow you to manipulate the amplitude (or any other 
parameter, for that matter) over time – raising and lowering the given level for the duration for which 
the key is held down. The progression over time is defi ned by a number of key parameters: attack, decay, 
sustain, and release. Attack, like the majority of the other ADSR parameters, is a time measurement, 
so that a low setting produces a quick attack (useful for sounds that are more percussive in nature), 
whereas a high setting produces a graduated attack that, for example, might be applied to pads. Decay 
defi nes the time taken for the note to fall down to the sustain level, while release defi nes the fi nal drop 
to silence after the key is released.  
 Figure 7.13  
 The fi lter section shapes the timbre 
of the raw output from the ES2’s 
oscillators section. The two main 
parameters to interact with are fi lter 
Cutoff  and Resonance.   

237
Creative Sound Design
 Looking at any sound in the natural world, it’s easy to see how 
we can begin to defi ne their qualities by the characteristics 
of an amplifi er envelope. A piano, for example, would have 
a quick attack, slow decay, no sustain, and a relatively quick 
release. However, a smooth, evolving string sound might have 
a slow attack, slow release, medium-to-high sustain, and a 
slow release. So, coupled with the basic waveform selection 
and the attenuation of the fi lter, we can really start to establish 
the defining properties and uniqueness of the patch we’re 
creating. 
 Of course, alongside Envelope 3, the ES2 also contains two 
other envelopes, but to understand how these are used we 
need to look at the modulation matrix. 
 Bringing It All Together: The Modulation Matrix 
 Tying all the elements together is the modulation matrix, which links a number of modulation sources in 
the ES2 (like the aforementioned Envelopes, LFOs, external MIDI controllers, and so on) to destinations 
within the synthesis architecture. The complexity and depth of the modulation matrix is what sets the ES2 
apart even from many dedicated third-party synthesizers and provides an almost unparalleled amount of 
fl exibility and creative potential for synthesis. The only catch, however, is that certain elements of the ES2’s 
control panel often need to be connected through the matrix before they have any eff ect on the sound! 
 Looking more closely at the matrix, we can see a number of different routing paths (ten in total) 
indicated by the line of blue boxes. Each routing connection will have a target parameter (which could 
be a parameter like Filter Cutoff  or Pan), a modulation source, and the amount of modulation that can 
be applied. Just a quick glance through the respective menus for both the target and source reveals 
the depth of the ES2, with over 40 program targets and over 20 possible modulation sources, with 
everything from standard modulation sources, like LFOs and envelopes, to random generators (RndNO1 
and RndNO2) and external MIDI controllers. 
 Some of the principal connections you might want to explore involve controlling the filter from 
modulators like Envelopes 1 and 2, and the two LFOs. The LFO provides a “periodic” form of modulation – 
in other words, a repeating continual shape or pattern that modulates the parameter, rather than an 
 Figure 7.14    By default, Envelope 3 is 
patched to the amplifi er, allowing you to 
shape the volume of the patch over time.   
 Figure 7.15    The ES2 modulation matrix allows us to map up to ten modulation sources (LFO, envelopes, and 
so on) to diff erent destinations (Filter Cutoff , and so on) within the synthesizer’s architecture.   

238
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
ADSR-type modulation with fi xed stages. Arguably the best example of this is vibrato – where an LFO 
would be routed to the Pitch123 target. However, LFOs can also be an excellent source of Tremolo-type 
eff ects (routed to Amp) or a wobbling wah–wah (routed to Cut 1 ± 2).    
 Figure 7.16    Each of the two LFOs can be set to a variety 
of diff erent modulation shapes, each creating a unique 
form of modulation eff ect. For example, the sawtooth 
waveshape, or the stepped sample-and-hold waveshape 
can be great for sequencer-like eff ects, especially attached 
the fi lter. In that respect, it’s worth noting that, in its 
below “DC” setting, LFO 2 can also be set to sync with the 
project’s tempo. 
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 4 
  Vector Synthesis 
 Vector synthesis, originally developed as part of the Prophet VS synthesizer, was fi rst envisaged as a 
unique system for adding movement into a patch. In the case of the Prophet VS, it used a series of 
four oscillators, or sources, labeled A, B, C, and D, which could be morphed, using a vector joystick 
control. By storing this movement as part of a vector envelope, the patch could then recall this 
dynamic movement creating timbral movement impossible to achieve elsewhere. 
 By switching the modulation matrix from Router to Vector, you can activate the ES2’s own vector-
synthesis features. The vector controls themselves work with both the triangular oscillator vector 
mixer (using three oscillators, rather than the Prophet VS’s four), but they can also make use of an 
additional vector controller in the form of the XY pad. By default, the XY pad has no assignment, but 
by using the X Target and Y Target parameters, you could, for example, assign the X- and Y-axis to 
Cutoff  and Resonance – providing complete gestural control over two parameters on the one pad! 
To create a basic vector envelope, click on any of the vector nodes and position both the oscillator 
mixer and the assigned XY pad. Now, select the other two nodes in turn, ensuring each has a 
diff erent position for the oscillator mixer and XY pad. 
 To hear the vector envelope in action you’ll need to uncheck the Solo Point switch – you should now 
hear the ES2 morphing between its various states. To add further nodes into the envelope, simply 
Shift-click on the time line. You can also set the time between any of the nodes by click-dragging 
on the various ms settings, making certain transitions quicker than others. Changing the loop mode 
will then allow the vector envelope to loop, based on the direction set and the relative position of 
the two markers – a sustain marker (where the envelope would hold, if no loop were set) back to the 
loop marker, indicating the full duration of the loop.  
(Continued)

239
Creative Sound Design
 7.6  Global Parameters 
and Output Effects 
 As part of the ES2 global parameters to the right 
of the fi lter dial we fi nd a number of useful tools 
to add further layers of interest to the sound. 
The Sine Level, for example, adds an additional 
sine wave element to sound based on the pitch 
of Oscillator 1. This is a useful tool for general 
“bass fattening,” especially if the output of 
your fi lter has left your patch sounding slightly 
weak. If you want more grit, though, the inbuilt 
distortion unit, which is switchable from hard 
to soft operation, helps in giving aggressive 
synth sounds considerably more edge. Even 
in relatively soft settings, with small amounts 
blend in, the distortion can make a patch sound 
slightly more analog than its digital origins 
would suggest! 
 By exploring some of its deeper features, you can also turn the vector envelope into a surprisingly 
eff ective source of rhythmic pads and textures. Try changing the Loop Rate from “as set” to a tempo 
division like 1/2. Now, the vector envelope appears to pulse in time with the track, a feature that 
could really be exploited with further nodes (up to 15 are allowed) and some interesting tuning and 
waveshape assignments of the respective oscillators. If you’re in any doubt as to the eff ectiveness of 
this, try listening to some of the Vector Rhythm (Curve) presets as part of ES2 Legacy folder.  
 Figure 7.17    The ES2’s vector envelope can add whole new levels of movement into your 
patch, by directly manipulating the oscillator mixer or XY pad.   
 Figure 7.18  The output eff ects are a useful means 
of adding extra warmth (using the chorus unit) or 
grunge (using the distortion) to the ES2 patches.   

240
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 5 
 ES2 Filter Routing 
 One of the most intriguing aspects of the ES2 is its immensely flexible filter-routing system. 
Essentially, the two fi lters can be connected either in series – so that sound fl ows sequentially from 
one to the other – or in parallel, where the sound is split and fed to each fi lter, individually. To switch 
between the two fi lter modes, simply click on the fi lter’s Parallel or Series switch accordingly, and 
enjoy the sight of the revolving fi lter controls! Taking this up to another level, we then have the 
Blend parameter, alongside the Drive control, both adding a whole new level of interaction based 
on the current fi lter arrangement and its relative position. 
 Looking fi rst at the Parallel routing (where sound is split and sent through to two fi lters individually), 
the Blend parameter can be seen as a simple crossfade parameter, making one fi lter’s output more 
prominent than the other in the fi nal mix. In serial mode, the concept is a little tricky to understand, 
although not impossible. In its central position, Blend creates a true serial confi guration with Oscillator 
1’s output being passed to the Oscillator 2’s. Either side of the line, however, an amount of either Filter 
1 or 2 is progressively bypassed, eff ectively creating a bias toward one of the two fi lters. Of course, at 
either extremes of the Blend parameter, the output is exclusively Filter 1 or 2, respectively. 
 The Drive parameter adds polyphonic distortion either before or during the fi lter’s operation (again, 
based on the fi lter’s routing). Polyphonic drive diff ers from the conventional distortion (available in 
the amplifi er section) in that it distorts each voice individually – in eff ect, using a diff erent distortion 
module for each note played! In short, this means that a chord can be given a little “grit,” rather 
than collapsing in intermodulate distortion, as it would in a conventional single distortion module 
setting. In Parallel routings, the drive is placed before the two fi lters, eff ectively, giving them slightly 
more harmonic material to play with. In Serial confi gurations, the Drive is generally placed after 
Filter 1 (although the exact interaction with Filter 2 varies given the Blend parameter), making the 
distortion eff ect more pronounced, especially on high resonance settings.   
 Figure 7.19    Here are two ES2 synthesizers, each set to one of the two diff erent fi lter routings – parallel 
or serial. Using the Blend and Drive parameters adds further possibilities to how you can use and abuse 
the ES2’s fi lters. 

241
Creative Sound Design
 The Modulation Eff ects section provides inbuilt chorus, fl anging, and phasing eff ects, with a variable 
intensity and speed. All of these are useful warming eff ects, adding an extra sense of depth, stereo width, 
and movement to your ES2 patch that really seems to suit pad-like sounds.  
 7.7  Retro Synth 
 If you’ve conquered the depths of the ES2, then the relative simplicity of the Retro Synth will make 
it a breeze to understand. In essence, the Retro Synth is designed with immediacy in mind, with a 
simplifi ed and direct set of user controls, much like many of the Roland synthesizers from the early 
80s. While it lacks some of the depths of the ES2 (especially with respect to modulation routings), 
it can certainly produce some powerful, sonically eff ective sounds. Equally, the “Retro” concept is 
more than a gimmick, with a four distinct synthesizer engines that make it closer to four instruments 
than one! 
 Figure 7.20    Retro Synth comes in four diff erent fl avors, thanks to a switchable “synthesis engine” parameter.   

242
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 7.8  Synthesis Engines 
 The key concept to grasp with Retro Synth is its four distinct synthesis engines, each of which mimics 
a style of synthesis from the 70s and 80s. Rather than changing the entirety of the instrument, 
though, the majority of the controls – namely, the fi lters, envelopes, and LFOs – are common to 
all the engines. As such, you can move between the diff erent engines and still fi nd a large part of 
your sound “translating” to the alternative setting. Equally, there’re some interesting serendipitous 
results that can come from randomly moving between the engines, even from just working within 
the supplied presets.  
 Analog Mode 
 The Analog mode is designed to mimic the traditional subtractive synthesizers from the 70s and 80s. The 
key components are two oscillators, which have a variety of subtractive waveforms including sawtooth, 
triangle, a fully-variable pulse wave, and noise. The controls in the oscillator section are relatively 
straightforward, therefore, with a Vibrato control, Semitone and Cent detuning, and a Mix control. With 
respect to the pulse wave, you can also use the Shape Modulation control to modulate pulse width 
using either the LFO or Filter Env.  
 Sync Mode 
 The Sync mode is almost identical to the Analog mode, although in this example there’s a hardwired 
oscillator sync control (which we covered in Knowledgebase 2). Notice that the shape modulation 
changes to a Sync Modulation control, which is most eff ective when it’s set to Filter Envelope if you want 
to replicate the classic Sync-sweep sounds from the 70s and 80s.  
 Figure 7.21  The Analog mode models 
a classic subtractive synth from the 
70s or 80s. 
 Figure 7.22    Sync Mode is almost identical 
to Analog mode with the additional of a 
hard-wired waveform sync control.   

243
Creative Sound Design
 Table Mode 
 Table Mode is based on vector synthesis (detailed in 
Knowledgebase 4). The key point to note here is that we 
have a fully variable shape control for each oscillator, 
with a range of digital waves stored in the wavetable. In 
Table Mode the modulation control is set to modulate 
the choice of waveform Shape, creating the distinctive 
“wavetable sweep” sounds heard from the PPG Wave 2.3. 
Although the extreme sweeping eff ects are interesting, 
the best results seem to come from a subtle application 
of the LFO so that the Shape modulates in a slow and 
graduated fashion.  
 FM Mode 
 FM Mode is easily the trickiest synthesis engine to 
understand, by no less immediate if you just want to start 
tweaking a few controls and having fun. In this arrangement, 
Retro Synth works as a simple two-operator FM Synthesizer, 
with one oscillator working as Modulator, the other as 
Carrier (hear the diff erence between these two by moving 
the Mix Control). In essence, adjustments to the Harmonic, 
Inharmonic, and Shape controls adjust the tuning and shape 
of the Modulator.  Changing the about of FM   sets the degree 
of “frequency modulation” applied by the Modulator to the 
Carrier. Sounds easy, right? Well, if in doubt, just fi ddle with 
the controls until you get something that sounds interesting 
to your ears!  
 7.9  Retro Synth Common Controls 
 The remaining controls on Retro Synth are common to all Synthesis engines. As a result, a large 
proportion of your sound’s shape and tone will be transferred even as you move between radically 
diff erent synthesis engines. 
 Filter 
 The filter section contains eight different modes (low-pass, high-pass, and so on) with variable 
strengths, including 6 dB, 12 dB, and 24 dB operation. Once you’ve established the cutoff and 
resonance, the main controls relate to modulation. Use the Key parameter so that the fi lter tracks 
 Figure 7.23  Wavetable mode models 
the classic  PPG   synthesizers from the 
mid 80s. 
 Figure 7.24    The FM Mode sets up an 
arrangement between a Carrier and 
Modulator, much like the EFM1.   

244
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
your keyboard position, while LFO and Env set the amount of modulation applied by the LFO and 
Filter Envelope, respectively. 
 Amp 
 The amplifi er section is rather basic, with just an overall Volume control and Sine Level. The Sine Level 
option is useful in situations where large amounts of resonance or high-pass fi ltering have removed the 
fundamental frequency.  The Sine Wave is at the pitch   of Oscillator One and avoids the fi lter by being 
routed directly to Retro Synth’s output. 
 Effect 
 The effect section contains a simple Flanger and Chorus 
effect. Both of these controls were important means of 
adding warmth and depth to classic analog synthesizers, 
and are an almost essential part of a synth pad sound.  
 LFO/Vibrato 
 The bottom half of the Retro Synth interface deals with the 
various sources of modulation, including individual LFO and 
Vibrato sections, as well as the two envelope generators. 
The LFO and Vibrato controls are almost identical, with 
Vibrato being hardwired to oscillator pitch, while the LFO 
can be routed to a number of destination including Shape 
Modulation, and the fi lter. Both the LFO and Vibrato sections feature a variety of diff erent modulation 
waveshape, variable rate, and the ability to tempo-lock the modulation using a Sync control. 
 Filter and Amp Env 
 Both the Filter and Amplifi er Envelope are hard-wired to their particular destination, with simple ADSR 
controls governing the shape of the modulation. The only important addition control to note is the Vel 
 Figure 7.25  The remaining controls of 
the Retro Synth are common to all of the 
diff erent synthesis engines.   
 Figure 7.26 
 The lower part 
of Retro Synth’s 
interface covers 
all the important 
modulation sources, 
including LFOs and 
envelopes. 

245
Creative Sound Design
control, which is used to establish the amount of Velocity control applied to the depth of modulation. In 
the case of the Filter, harder velocities could make the sound bright, while on the amplifi er velocity could 
be used to make the sound louder or quieter depending on how hard the notes are played.  
 7.10  Retro Synth’s Setting Page 
 The setting page is worth exploring if you want access to some of Retro Synth’s deeper levels of 
functionality. The Double control, for example, adds instant depth and dimension to the sound, especially 
if Stereo Spread is set to its full setting and a small amount of Voice Detune is being applied.  By default, 
Double is active  , so it’s more the case that you might want to deactivate the feature if you want a slightly 
smaller sound. 
 The Controller section is also useful if you’re intending to control the Retro Synth using your modulation 
wheel, for example, or explore some more creative opportunities in respect to velocity control. The 
modulation sources are rather limited, as are the four possible destinations, but you do get the possibility 
of exploring a greater amount of modulation options.  
 Figure 7.27 
 Access the Settings 
page to explore 
some of the deeper 
functions behind 
Retro Synth. 
 7.11  EFM1 and Frequency Modulation Synthesis 
 Subtractive synthesis and the features of the ES2 might cover a large part of the sounds used in 
contemporary music production, but there are other methods of synthesis – like frequency modulation 
(FM) – with plenty to off er. EFM1 is Logic’s solution for FM synthesis (although FM also makes some 
honorable appearance in the ES2) using the same principles carved out in Yamaha’s infamous DX range 
of synthesizers back in the 1980s. Although the EFM1 lacks some of the depth and complexity of a full-
blown seven operator DX7, or Native Instruments’ FM7, it remains a valuable insight into a unique form of 
sound creation and a valuable contrast to the sounds produced by the ES2 and Logic’s other subtractive 
synthesizers. 
 Not surprisingly, the heart of FM synthesis, and the sounds produced by the EFM1, center on the process 
of FM – but what is it, and how can it be used to produce musically useful results? The process of FM 
requires two oscillators – one oscillator acting as a Carrier, and the other oscillator acting as a Modulator. 

246
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
You can see this clearly on the EFM1 front panel, with the carrier on the right-hand side of the panel, 
and the modulator to the left-hand side. The relationship between the two is that the modulator is 
modulating the pitch, or frequency, of the carrier, with the carrier oscillator being the only oscillator 
present in the audio output. 
 In many ways, the simple modulator/carrier configuration we see as a basis of the EFM1 bears a 
fundamental similarity to an LFO modulating the frequency of an oscillator on the ES2. As the LFO is 
working below the audio spectrum (around about 6 Hz), we hear the eff ect of this modulation as vibrato, 
with stronger amounts of modulation creating an increased amount of pitch wobble. 
 However, in the case of EFM, the modulator is working right up in the audio spectrum, producing an 
eff ect quite unlike vibrato. By modulating pitch using an oscillator in the audio spectrum, we eff ectively 
distort the original waveshape, creating new harmonic components – the stronger the amount of 
modulation (set with the large central FM parameter), the greater the amount of the distortion and 
hence the richer the eventual harmonic output.   
 One of the most important relationships to understand in FM synthesis is the ratio between the pitch of the 
carrier and the modulator. On the EFM1, the tuning of the modulator and carrier is established using the 
Harmonic control on either side of the interface. Try setting the carrier to the fi rst harmonic and experiment 
with the modulator on fi rst, second, and third harmonics. With both carrier and modulator set on the fi rst 
harmonic, the sound will approximate a sawtooth, with a collection of both odd and even harmonics. 
 Figure 7.28    By increasing the amount of FM, we 
create a more harmonically rich output in much 
the same way as opening a fi lter on a conventional 
subtractive synth.   
 Figure 7.29  Changing the relative tuning 
of the modulator and carrier changes the 
resultant harmonics produced as the FM 
knob is increased.   

247
Creative Sound Design
Moving the modulator up to the second harmonic will produce a more hollow and open timbre, with an 
output largely made up of odd harmonics. Going further still, this time up to the third harmonic, the sound 
becomes more bell-like, by the virtue of the fact that you’re using an odd harmonic relationship. 
 Modulation on the EFM1 
 Okay, we’ve established the basics of a 
“static” FM sound – namely, the tuning 
ratios between the carrier and modulator, 
and FM depth – but how do we go about 
adding movement or interest into the 
patch? Let’s fi rst consider trying to create a 
basic fi lter sweep. On an analog synthesizer, 
this would be achieved using an envelope 
patched to modulate filter cutoff, with 
the envelope opening or closing the fi lter 
over time. In the EFM1’s case, we can use 
the Modulation Envelope toward the top 
of the interface in conjunction with the 
FM Depth parameter to the right of it. By 
setting up an appropriate envelope (quick 
attack, graduated decay, no sustain) with 
FM depth set to its maximum setting and 
the large FM dial set to its center position, 
the EFM1 should then gradually reduce the 
amount of FM as the key is held down.  
 Another form of modulation is the LFO, which, in the case of the EFM1, can be moved between being 
applied to pitch – to create vibrato – and being routed to the FM depth. As we’ve seen in the last 
example, routing a modulator to FM depth produces an eff ect comparable with fi lter modulation. In this 
case, therefore, routing the LFO to FM creates a form of wah–wah eff ect, with the timbre of the EFM1’s 
output wobbling over time. An entirely more chaotic form or modulation, though, is possible by routing 
the modulation envelope to the modulator pitch (using the dedicated pot). The eff ect is an extreme, and 
possibly dissonant, change in timbre, which can be greatly used in aggressive synth sweeps. 
 Refining Your EFM1 Patches 
 To further refi ne your patch, the EFM1 includes a number of diff erent parameters, which don’t diff er too 
greatly from the features found on the ES2. The Volume Envelope, for example, allows you to shape the 
amplitude over time – for example, try creating bell sounds using a quick attack, no sustain, and a slow 
decay and release. The suboscillator, as on the ES2, doubles the synthesizer’s output with a suboscillator 
an octave below, giving bass sounds a real punch. Finally, the Stereo Detune option eff ectively creates a 
complete double of your patch, slightly detuned and with a distribution (of the two engines) across the 
stereo image. Used subtly, this can be a simple solution for adding warmth, depth, and width to any of 
your EFM1 patches.  
 Figure 7.30    Use the Modulation Envelope and FM Depth 
parameter to modulate the large FM dial over time. The 
eff ect of this modulation would approximate a fi lter sweep 
on a traditional analog synthesizer.   

248
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 7.12  Component Modeling: Sculpture 
 When it comes to cutting-edge sound design, Sculpture represents one of the most exciting and 
perplexing parts of the Logic, and also a real indicator of a future development of synthesis, and a 
component that may well become increasingly dominant in sound production as a whole. Sculpture’s 
greatest strength – but equally the reason why it takes so much time to master – is that it throws out 
the conventional “rule book” of synthesis. You won’t fi nd traditional features like oscillators or amplifi ers 
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 6 
  Wavetable Synthesis 
 Wolfgang Palm originally developed the Wavetable synthesis in the early 1980s as a part of his 
groundbreaking work on the PPG wave synthesizer. The principle was that an “audio event” – like 
a fi lter opening – could be broken down and stored in a Wavetable constructed from 64 single-
cycle waves. By stepping through these wave cycles, and interpolating between the various settings, 
the PPG could create unique and interesting textures, often characterized by a glassy, shimmering 
tone. Although PPG eventually went bust in the late 1980s, Palm’s intriguing Wavetable system 
continued to live on (at least for a few more years!) courtesy of Waldorf’s Microwave and Microwave II 
synthesizers. 
 By including its own digital Wavetable, the ES2 pays homage to this late great synthesizer, and, 
thanks to its fl exible modulation matrix, can recreate many of the sounds that the PPG wave was so 
famous for. If you want to experiment with Wavetable synthesis, the trick is to select OscWaves as a 
modulation target and ensure the oscillators are each set to their Wavetable position. Choosing the 
exact type of modulation source (albeit an LFO, envelope, the modulation wheel, or something like 
keyboard velocity) will then dictate the type of movement and the sound produced. Try using a slow 
LFO (0.10 Hz, for example) and gently modulate the Wavetable portion to create a shimmering digital 
pad. Alternatively, you can create an interesting glitch-like eff ect by modulating the Wavetable using 
a fast AD envelope. 
 To add further interest into the equation, you can also modulate each of the Wavetables individually, 
possibly using a diff erent modulation source (LFO 1, LFO 2, and modwheel) on each. To do this, you’ll 
need to use OSC1Wave, OSC2Wave, and OSC3Wave destinations, respectively.   
 Figure 7.31  By modulating the Wavetables 
within the ES2, you can create some interesting 
“moving” synth sounds that are reminiscent of 
the PPG Wave 2.3.   

249
Creative Sound Design
(although fi lters do get a minor input!), but instead parameters like Media Loss and Exciter Objects, 
producing sounds that are almost impossible to achieve elsewhere! 
 Like an increasing number of virtual instrument – including Arturia’s Brass and Applied Acoustic Systems’ 
String Studio – Sculpture is built on the concept of physical modeling, or, more specifi cally, component 
modeling. The basis of all these instruments is a complex mathematical model of an instrument, with 
a precise understanding of how sonic variables (the materials the instrument is constructed from, and 
so on) and various interactions (in other words, how it is played) aff ect the sound that the instrument 
produces. In the case of Arturia’s brass, for example, the “model” is based on brass instruments like 
trumpet and trombone, whereas in the example of Sculpture, we have the multitude of possible musical 
outcomes that result from interactions with a string! 
 7.13  Objects 
 The starting point of patch in Sculpture is to consider how your instrument is constructed, and the means 
in which it will be played. Indeed, in the fi rst part of designing your sound, you will spend a lot of time 
moving between two key areas of Sculpture’s interface: the Material Pad, in the center on the control 
panel, and three diff erent Exciter Objects, all interacting with each other and having some fundamental 
impact on the type of sound being produced. 
 Let’s first look at the concept of Objects. To 
produce any note from a real instrument we need 
to introduce energy into it – for example, blowing 
across the reed of a clarinet or using a stick to hit 
a snare drum. Correspondingly, in Sculpture, we 
have a choice of up to three Objects that can be 
introduced to the string to begin creating a note: 
it could be hit, pluck, struck, or blown (to name 
but a few of our potential objects), with each 
diff erent object producing remarkably diff erent 
results. What this immediately means is that you 
need to have at least one object active to create 
any audio output whatsoever. Also, by having 
more than one object, you can create some 
weird-and-wonderful eff ects like a plucked string 
being gently dampened half way up its length, or 
complete audio chaos with a number of objects 
all playing their part at the same time! As you can 
see, the best results will come with a considered 
application of these settings, rather than just 
throwing it all “into the pot.”  
 Accompanying each exciter object, you’ll fi nd another three key parameters – Strength, Timbre, and 
Variation – that set some of the initial eff ects of the object against the string. Of course, with each 
different object model the precise impact of the three parameters varies, so it is worth spending 
 Figure 7.32    Sculpture’s string can be played in 
a number of diff erent ways, defi ned by the Type 
parameter of each object. For example, Object 1 
includes picking, bowing, and a number of other 
“interactions.” 

250
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
some time with each to understand the range of 
sounds and eff ects you can start to produce from 
them. If you’ve got the processing power, it might 
also be worth turning on the string animation 
by Ctrl-clicking on the thin green line toward the 
middle of the object controls. 
 Although you can produce some fantastic sounds 
with just the one object, the true potential 
and interest with Sculpture comes as you add 
further objects into the equation. In particular, 
you’ll notice that Objects 2 and 3 contain some 
of the more esoteric object options, like Disturb 
2-Sided, which approximates the eff ect of a ring 
placed around the string, or Mass, which places a 
large weight at some point along the string. Note 
also that you can set the object to be triggered 
in one of three ways – KeyOn, Always, and KeyOff  
– so that an object is only triggered after the key 
is released.  
 If you do use more than one object, it’s worth 
paying close attention to the relative strength 
of the various objects. For example, using all three objects at maximum strength tend to create an 
overwhelming sound with little or no character. However, picking one key object (usually using Object 1) 
and augmenting this with subtle additions of other objects seems to produce the more interesting 
hybrid eff ects. For example, you could choose to use a Strike model on Object 1, which is then lightly 
Disturbed (the eff ect of placing an object on the string) using Object 2. 
 As important as the types of object used to initiate vibrations in the string, we also need to consider 
where along the string it is played. Take, for example, a nylon string guitar being played using a small 
pick. Played partway down the length of the string, just above the sound hole, results in a pleasing, 
rounded tone. However, if we were to play right up against the bridge, the tone will change dramatically, 
becoming harsher, with a thinner overall timbre. Just as with real life, therefore, we can position each 
of the three objects along our virtual string using the Object Positioning display in the center of the 
Objects section. 
 Again, the best way of understanding how the models work, and their precise eff ect at each point along 
the string, is to experiment, although the general principle follows that a fuller sound emanates from 
the center of string, whereas the extremities tend to produce a more nasal timbre. Adding in additional 
objects makes the variables ever more complex, although again, the general rule-of-thumb is that 
objects arranged closer together tend have a more pronounced eff ect on one another. 
 As part of the same object positioning display, you’ll also find controls for each of Sculpture’s 
virtual pickups. These work in much the same way as the electromagnetic pickups on an electric 
 Figure 7.33    Objects 2 and 3 contain a number of 
diff erent string interactions, which can be used 
to enhance the basic settings established with 
Object 1 – like the string being picked and damped 
at the same time.   

251
Creative Sound Design
guitar, which of course, tend to output a diff erent sound based 
on the relative position along the guitar string. In Sculpture’s 
case, we’re presented with two pickups that can be slid along 
the virtual string, contributing to the output in a number of 
different ways. To the far right of Sculpture’s interface, you’ll 
also fi nd the stereo control, which can defi ne a stereo spread 
both for Sculpture’s key range (moving from left to right as you 
move up the keyboard) and between the two pickups. Try using 
a wide stereo with the two pickups so as to create pleasing 
width to Sculpture’s output – an eff ect especially useful on pad 
sounds.  
 Figure 7.34  The position of an 
object can have a big eff ect on the 
string’s vibrations. This interaction 
becomes even more complex with a 
greater amount of objects.   
 Figure 7.35    As with an electric guitar, the restive position of the pickups (A and B) will also infl uence 
the sound produced. Use the Spread control on the right-hand side of the interface to turn this into a 
stereo eff ect. 
 7.14 
 The String 
 Having spent so much time analyzing the objects used to excite Sculpture’s string, we’ve neglected to 
look at an equally fundamental part of creating sound in Sculpture – the design of the string itself. Again, 
relating principles back into real life, we can see that the way a string is made will have a big eff ect on 
the sound produced, as evident in the apparent diff erence between a nylon-strung acoustic guitar and 
steel-strung acoustic guitar. By adjusting properties in the central Material Pad section, therefore, we can 
fi ne-tune the properties of our virtual string – morphing the sound between glassy, bell-like textures to 
warm, woody marimba tones, and plenty more besides! 
 The central X/Y controller of the Material pad sets the relative Inner Loss and Stiff ness of the virtual 
string, although the precise qualities of this is better expressed by the small nylon, wood, steel, and 
glass legends in the four corners of the XY pad. Try moving the small control ball and listening to the 
harmonic spectra as you move around the pad – for example, listen out for the brighter tones toward 
the bottom of the XY pad against the move toward more bell-like harmonics as you move from left 
to right. As with objects placed along the string, this simple pad has one of the biggest impacts 
on the sounds you produce from Sculpture, so it’s worth getting to know the various initial sounds 
possible from it. 

252
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Around the Material pad, we can also fi nd a 
number of other key parameters in relation 
to the design of the string: Resolution, Media 
Loss, and Tension Mod. The most important 
of these is the Media Loss parameter, 
which sets the dampening applied to the 
string based on its surrounding conditions. 
A more meaningful way of understanding 
this would be the “release” of the sound, 
so that with a lower media loss setting, 
the sound will appear to decay over a long 
period of time, whereas quicker media loss 
settings tend to produce a shorter, more 
clipped sound. 
 Tension Mod corresponds to momentary 
fl uctuations in pitch as the string is excited – 
the more the Tension Mod is applied, the 
greater these pitch fl uctuations appear in 
the fi nal output. Used subtly, Tension Mod 
can add a discrete sense of the natural 
pitch shifts that occur within a real acoustic 
instrument, although care should always be 
taken not to overuse features like Tension 
Mod as it could make the instrument sound 
like it has poor intonation! Resolution, 
however, corresponds to the amount of 
harmonics used to generate Sculpture’s 
output. Try experimenting with lower 
resolution settings, as this can be an 
interesting way of creating inharmonic 
overtones (great for bell sounds) and as a 
means of reducing Sculpture’s CPU load.   
 Taking the string design up another 
level, we can also add variations to its 
design based on the relative key position, 
otherwise known as Keyscaling, and in its 
release phase. So, for example, as you play 
up the keyboard the sound could change 
from a warm, woody timbre to a bright, 
glassy string. Equally, Keyscale Media Loss 
could approximate the shortening of strings 
duration as you move up a piano keyboard, 
for example. To modify any of these settings, 
 Figure 7.36    Using the central X/Y control will allow 
you to change the material properties of Sculpture’s 
virtual string. 
 Figure 7.37    Parameters around the Material pad 
set a number of other physical considerations. 
Media Loss, for example, could be thought of as a 
form of decay or release setting, governing the loss of 
energy over time.   

253
Creative Sound Design
simply click on the Keyscale and Release 
bottom at the bottom of the Material Pad, 
and adjust the parameters (using the colored 
indicators) as appropriate. 
 As a closing thought to the Object and String 
controls, try to remember that experimenting 
in component modeling synthesis is rather 
like relearning the art of synthesis. So, rather 
than using tried and tested means of solving 
problems – like adjusting an envelope to 
change the dynamics of a sound, or a filter 
to change the timbre – you’ll need to think 
“outside the box” and discover a new palette 
of solutions available in a component-
modeling universe. Changing the amplitude 
envelope, for example, could involve a change 
or even an addition of an object onto the 
strings – a short decay, for example, made by 
physically dampening the string on the key 
off . Alternatively, adapting the string’s Inner 
Loss properties, or simply less strength on 
the exciter, could make for a darker sound. 
Ultimately, it’s all about new solutions to 
old problems. 
 Figure 7.38    Using the Keyscale and Release control, 
you can vary the properties of the string both in 
the release phase of the note and in respect to 
keyboard position. 
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 7 
 Bounce in Place 
 Rendering an audio instrument as an audio fi le has many advantages – not only saving valuable 
CPU resources, but also allowing you to safely export your project to other DAWs (or other users that 
don’t share the same Audio Unit plug-ins), as well as opening up some interesting possibilities with 
respect to manipulating the resultant audio fi le. 
 Arguably the best way of rendering an audio instrument is to use the Bounce in Place feature, which 
renders one or more regions, complete with eff ect plug-ins, to a single audio fi le. To perform the 
bounce, simply select the desired regions in the Tracks Area, and then Ctrl + click the region to bring 
out the contextual menu then Bounce > Bounce Region in Place. The accompanying dialog box will 
allow you the detail of how the bounce is made – including options to bypass and eff ect plug-ins, 
as well as the option to Normalize the fi le. Once you’ve performed the bounce, Logic will import the 
new audio fi le, place it accordingly, and assign it a new track. The source track can then either be left, 
muted, or deleted as you specify in the Bounce Regions in Place dialog box. 
(Continued)

254
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 7.15  Waveshapers and Beyond 
 Theoretically, in a true component modeling synthesizer, the object and string parameters should be 
all that is required to create your eventual output. Indeed in Sculpture’s case, it is highly likely that 
you’ll spend the majority of your time working in these sections defi ning your sound, with the fi nished 
patch simply requiring a touch of EQ, compression, and reverb to set it in the mix. Thoughtfully though, 
Sculpture also provides a number of additional features, including Waveshapers, Filters, ADSR envelopes, 
Delay lines, and EQs, to furthermore enhance and modify the eff ects you can produce within the plug-in. 
Although these aren’t necessarily integral to the concept of component modeling, they are highly useful 
additions. 
 Following the Sculpture’s internal signal path, we start with the Amplitude Envelope. The important 
thing to note here is that the amplitude envelope is post the component-modeling engine – its settings 
have no direct correlation to the sound produced and merely act as a means of modifying what’s already 
there. So, for example, extending the release phase has no eff ect if the string has stopped vibrating 
(instead, consider raising the Media Loss), but a slow attack could be a suitable solution for making a 
bowed string have an even more graduated entry. 
 The Waveshaper, which follows after the Amplitude Envelope, is one of the most useful additions to 
Sculpture’s synthesis engine, essentially applying a polyphonic distortion eff ect (much the same as 
the ES2’s fi lter-distortion eff ect). In addition to applying a suitable valve-warming eff ect (try the Soft 
 Once rendered as an audio fi le, you can now explore some of the possibilities unavailable in “virtual” 
form. Chief among these is the ability to reverse the region by entering the Sample Editor, choosing 
the File tab and then selecting Functions > Reverse.   
 Figure 7.39    Use Bounce in Place feature to render an audio instrument as an audio fi le. 

255
Creative Sound Design
 Figure 7.40 
 The amplifi er 
envelope allows 
you to change 
the volume 
characteristic 
over time, but, 
remember, this is 
initially defi ned 
by the string 
and material 
properties. 
 Figure 7.41 
 The Waveshaper 
adds grit or 
warmth to your 
Sculpture patch.   
 Figure 7.42 
 Use the fi lter as an 
additional form 
of timbre control, 
with various 
diff erent modes to 
change the relative 
eff ect achieved. 

256
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
Saturation algorithm), the Waveshaper is essential in producing synth-like tones from Sculpture, making 
the output of the component-modeling engine much closer to the buzzy, harmonically rich output of 
a subtractive synth’s oscillator. Of course, because the distortion is polyphonic (with each voice being 
distorted on an individual basis) even strong settings don’t result in the sound collapsing in piles of 
unmusical intermodulate distortion. 
 Working in close conjunction with the Waveshaper is the filter, which includes five different filter 
modes – Hi-pass, Low-pass, Peak, BP, and Notch. Given the added harmonic material created with the 
Waveshaper, you can now use the fi lter to subtract harmonics, producing synth bass sounds, and so 
on. Also the fi lter can be a useful additional way of tapering the output from the component-modeling 
engine – maybe either using a LPF to create a dark bell patch or an HPF to take the low end out of a 
steel-string guitar patch. Remember, as with a conventional subtractive synth, the fi lter is also an ideal 
destination to control using the modulation wheel, an LFO, or an envelope, as we’ll see in  Section 7.12 . 
 Three fi nal modules provide the last refi nements: a relatively simple Stereo Delay line eff ect (which isn’t 
entirely dissimilar to Logic’s Stereo Delay plug-in), a Body Equalizer, and a Limiter. The body equalizer’s 
simplest application is Low Mid Hi Model, used to cut or boost frequencies at 80 Hz, 2.5 kHz, and 12 kHz, 
respectively. More advanced treatments are possible using one of the supplied instrument models, 
which are themselves drawn from impulse response recordings of the respective instrument bodies. 
In eff ect, what you have access to here is a detailed EQ profi le of the characteristics of the instrument 
in question – it won’t, for example, turn a harp sound into a cello simply through the application of the 
Cello’s Impulse Response, but it does at least impart some of the instrument’s tonal character.  
 Figure 7.43 
 Use the Body 
EQ and the 
instrument-based 
IR to impose 
the timbral 
characteristics 
of an instrument 
onto your 
Sculpture patch. 
 Once loaded, the impulse response can be tweaked in a number of ways to best match the patch you’re 
trying to create. Lowering the Intensity, for example, can be a useful way of softening the eff ect of the 
impulse response, imparting a subtle modifi cation of tone rather than completely transforming it. Also, 
try experimenting with the Formant Shift and Formant Stretch parameters, allowing you to more carefully 
tune in the respective “lumps and bumps” of the impulse response profi le with the tonal characteristics 
of what you’re trying to create. 

257
Creative Sound Design
 7.16  Modulation and Morphing 
 As we saw in the ES2, modulation is essential for bringing a patch to life: making it more expressive 
in response to actions on keyboard, adding in LFOs to add eff ects like vibrato and tremolo, and using 
envelopes to shape the sound over time. As you’d expect, Sculpture is no exception to this rule, with 
a modulation section (toward the bottom of the interface) that rivals, if not exceeds, what is possible 
on the ES2. More important, the application of modulation on Sculpture has the potential to directly 
infl uence the specifi c properties of the instrument (string construction, object position, and so on) rather 
than using crude “signal modifi ers” (fi lters, amplifi ers, and so on) to approximate the same eff ect. 
 The bottom dark gray pane in Sculpture contains all the various controls for changing the way the 
instrument responds to a performance and behaves over time, including two LFOs, a Jitter generator, 
vibrato, velocity modulations, controller routing, two envelopes, a Morph pad, and a Morph pad vector 
envelope – enough to keep anybody happy! Pressing the various tabs allows you to step through the 
relevant sections of the basic modulators, while the Morph pad and envelopes hide some intriguing 
“contextual” menus and functions, such as recordable envelopes and patch randomization.   
 Figure 7.44    The modulation section of the Sculpture adds an additional level of dynamics and movement to 
your patch. 
 Figure 7.45 
 Routing the LFOs 
to the pickup 
position can be 
a great way of 
creating stereo 
movement in a 
patch. 

258
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Simple modulation can be accessed through the Vibrato and LFO 1 and 2 tabs. Vibrato permanently connects 
a spare LFO to the pitch of Sculpture, whereas LFO 1 and 2 can be wired to any number of destinations within 
the Sculpture patch – from the usual Filter Cutoff , and so on, to some of the more unusual component-
modeling parameters like Object Position or Pickup positioning. Exploring modulation with these parameters, 
in particular, can lead to some of the most musically useful and rewarding applications of Sculpture, with 
complex or subtle modifi cations in timbre that would be impossible to achieve on a traditional subtractive 
synthesizer. For example, try gently modulating the pickup position in a wide stereo pickup spread – the 
eff ect is a great way of adding subtle movement to a patch and palpable sense of “stereoness.” 
 For direct response from a MIDI performance, Sculpture features two controller paths – labeled Ctrl A 
and Ctrl B – which are usually assigned to the Mod Wheel (1) and Foot Pedal (4), respectively, but can 
be changed to other controllers as appropriate. Again, think about creative and expressive uses of 
these routings – one favorite technique is to use two spare MIDI-controller faders to fully modulate the 
positioning of two objects on the string. This can be a responsive way of playing Sculpture, almost like a 
guitarist subtly moving a pick to various points around the sound hole and combining this with selective 
damping or muting on the strings. 
 Figure 7.46 
 Use the external 
MIDI controller 
to manipulate 
the relative 
positioning of the 
objects on the 
string. This can 
add a surprising 
level of expression 
to your patch.   
 Figure 7.47 
 Use Jitter to add 
pseudo-random 
modifi cations and 
drifts within your 
sound. 

259
Creative Sound Design
 The Jitter, Velocity, and Note on Random modulators can also be used to add variable amounts of chaos, 
unpredictability, and expression to your sound. Jitter, for example, can create small pseudo-random 
imperfections in the patch – try adding some Jitter routed to pitch to recreate the slight pitch variations 
exhibited on some acoustic instruments. Velocity and Note on Random can also be eff ectively mapped 
to parameters in the Material pad, so that diff erent velocities, or alternate notes, produce subtle (or 
extreme) variations in the properties of the instrument. In theory, you could stack all of these modulation 
sources up, so that Sculpture responds and modulates in a multifaceted and complex way.   
 Although the modulation paths that we’ve discussed will start to bring some movement into your patch, 
probably, the best modulation features of Sculpture are to be found in the envelopes and Morph pad. The 
envelopes can be used in a conventional way (mapping to Filter Cutoff , for example), or alternatively, to 
record in modulation data – almost like an automation track within the architecture of the synth itself. To 
record an envelope into Sculpture, you’ll need to activate the small R in the top right-hand corner of the 
envelope display. This places the envelope into record-ready mode, which, by default, can be initiated into 
recording by holding down a MIDI note and wiggling the modulation wheel, accordingly. Press R again to 
stop the recording, and you should see your moves stored into Sculpture’s envelope generator. 
 In essence, the Morph pad stores a series of fi ve snapshots representing positions of the main Sculpture 
parameters (Object Strength, Inner Loss, Tension Mod, and so on), which can then be morphed using the 
central XY pad. The great thing here, from a modulation perspective, is that over 20 crucial parameters 
can be adjusted at the same time (indicated by the small red dots). Now, add the fact that you can record 
these moves into an envelope to directly form part of the patch, and you have the world’s ultimate 
vector synthesizer!  
 Figure 7.48 
 Placing the 
envelope into 
record mode 
will allow you to 
record your own 
“movements” 
into the envelope 
generator using 
the modulation 
wheel. 

260
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Arguably, the fi rst step to working with the Morph pad is to defi ne a number of diff erent parameter 
positions for each of the Morph pad’s corners (A, B, C, and D). Clicking on each respective corner, try 
to adjust the various key parameters, maybe applying diff erences in the Tension Mods, or the various 
positions of the objects on the string. The red dots provide reference to the current sound, also indicated 
by the position of the orange dot on the Morph pad itself. Note that you can also call up the Morph 
pad’s contextual menu (by Ctrl-clicking), so as to copy and paste settings between the diff erent points, 
or set the randomization destinations (initiated by the Rnd button) to have Sculpture “tweak” the various 
positions accordingly. 
 In some situations, you might fi nd it adequate enough to have hands-on control with the Morph pad, 
and morph the patch as you see fi t. Note that the MIDI-controller assignment section to the bottom 
of the interface details the standard MIDI assignment with Sculpture, allowing you to map the pad’s 
XY axis to two physical MIDI controls on your keyboard. Moving beyond that, though, you might want to 
record your own vector envelope – unique to the Morph pad – that will then be permanently embedded 
into the sound. This can especially be eff ective on pads – with each note taking on its own “wandering” 
quality as the sound slowly shifts through diff erent phases. 
 To engage the vector envelope, you’ll need to change the Morph pad’s mode from Pad to Pad and Env. 
As with the envelopes in Sculpture, you can record your own moves directly into the synthesizer. In this 
case, enable the vector envelope Record Trigger (using the small R), play a MIDI note, and wiggle the 
Morph point accordingly to record the moves in. Pressing R again will stop the recording, with the moves 
displayed on the pad to illustrate the movement between the various vector points.   
 Figure 7.49 
 Using the Morph 
pad you can defi ne 
positions for each 
of Sculptures key 
parameters, based 
on your respective 
XY positioning. 

261
Creative Sound Design
 7.17  Creative Sampling 
 Having explored some of the basics of using the EXS24 in  Chapter 6 , we now turn our attention to some 
of the more advanced creative aspects of using Logic’s integral sampler. The assumption here is that 
you’re using the EXS24 either to map samples (maybe from a sample CD or recorded into Logic), or 
alternatively, you want to explore some of the deeper mapping and synthesis options within the existing 
EXS24 instrument library. Either way, you’ll fi nd the EXS24 to be a highly developed sound-design tool, 
and an interesting way of dynamically developing audio fi les that you’ve recorded into Logic. 
 The EXS24 Hierarchy: Zones, Groups, and Editors 
 As with any sampler, it’s important to get to know the various hierarchical aspects of its operation – 
either in the form of diff erent software pages or the way in which the sampler organizes and manages 
its sample data into zones, groups, and so on. One of the principal diff erentiations to make is between 
the main plug-in window – from which you can select instruments, apply envelopes, fi lters, and so on – 
and the EXS24 instrument editor window, which is specifi cally used for the mapping of samples across 
the keyboard. For most day-to-day activities, you’ll only need to use the main plug-in window; however, 
if you intend to explore more creative applications of the EXS24 sampler, you’ll need to make more 
extensive use of the EXS24 editor. 
 Within the editor itself, Logic also makes an important distinction between zones and groups. A zone is the 
smallest piece of currency in the EXS24 editor, which essentially holds a selected sample mapped across 
 Figure 7.50 
 Recording your 
own vector 
envelope will 
allow you to 
embed Morph 
pad movements 
directly into your 
patch. 

262
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
a corresponding range of keys – like C3–D3. A group is a handy way of organizing the various layers of 
sample data that can be included in an instrument. For example, a group could be used to diff erentiate 
between diff erent velocity layers (soft and hard, for example), or two diff erent components of a hybrid 
patch (like string samples in one group, and piano in another). There’re also several interesting functional 
properties of groups – like the ability to apply diff erent “conditional” triggering options, as well as the 
option to diff erentiate alternative fi lter settings, and so on.   
 Figure 7.51  The two diff erent sides of the EXS24 sampler – the main plug-in’s interface window, and behind 
it, the EXS24 instrument editor where all the sample data are mapped.   
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 8 
   Creating EXS Instruments from Audio Regions 
 As useful alternative to building EXS24 Sampler Instruments from scratch, consider using the Convert 
Regions to New Sample Track feature. This feature can work with a number of sounds – allowing you 
to transform a live drum performance, for example, or even vocals and acoustic guitar, using the 
power of the EXS24. To convert a region into a sampler track, you’ll fi rst need to select the region in 
question, and then pick Ctrl + click > Convert Regions to New Sampler Track. Logic will then give you 
the option to create a new sampler track based either on the region’s transient markers, or the region 
as a whole. In most cases, you’ll want to pick the transient marker option.  
 Of course, moving audio regions over to a sampler track is only the start of the creative process, 
especially given the variety of tricks and techniques possible between the EXS24 and the associated 
MIDI trigger data. The fi rst option is to explore the various ways in which the source MIDI data can be 
manipulated and edited – including simple techniques like a diff erent quantize values, or even going 
so far as to build a completely new “remixed” set of trigger points. 
(Continued)

263
Creative Sound Design
 On the sampler itself, you can explore a number of diff erent techniques using the EXS24’s front 
panel – including adjustments to the fi lter, the sample’s pitch, and the envelopes. Obviously, the fi lter 
can be used to provide a static fi ltering eff ect (making the loop darker with a LPF, for example), but 
things get most interesting when some form of modulation is applied – whether it’s note velocity 
modulating cutoff , ENV 1 shaping each note of the sequence, or one of the LFOs. As Envelope 2 is 
preassigned to volume, you can create some inserting eff ects by varying the Decay time, particularly 
with respect to short “choppy” envelope settings. 
 If your original audio region contains harmonic or melodic information contained within it, the 
relative merits of adjusting the EXS24’s Tune parameter can be dubious. However, if your source 
material is percussive, or unpitched, the results can be far more interesting – transforming a clean 
drum loop, for example, into a crunchy collection of lo-fi  beats.  
 Figure 7.52    Use the Ctrl + click contextual menu option then Convert > Convert Regions to New Sampler 
Track (or Ctrl + E) as a quick way of creating new EXS Instruments from an existing recording in your 
project. 
 7.18 
 The EXS24 Instrument Editor 
 The EXS24’s sample editor can be opened using the small Edit tab in the top right-hand corner of the 
EXS24’s main plug-in window – opening up the currently selected instrument in the editor. In many 
ways, it’s a good idea to try opening an existing library instrument fi rst – both as means of getting a grip 
on how the Instrument Editor presents its mapping and also to see how Logic’s sound designers have 
gone about using the zone and group features to create their instruments. 

264
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The EXS24 editor is divided into a series of areas, allowing you to best visualize and navigate the mapping 
that you’ve created. First of all is the two main view tabs in the top right-hand corner – Zones and Groups. 
These allow you to quickly move between viewing the entirety of the sample data and its mapping – 
zones, in other words – and the “macro-level” properties of a patch organized into groups. For more 
rudimentary EXS24 patches, it might be that you only need to work in the zones view. However, as your 
programming gets more complicated, it might become easier to manage by viewing the instrument in 
both the zone and group view.  
 Figure 7.53 
 The Editor 
interface is 
organized 
into a series 
of areas, 
allowing you 
to visualize 
and edit the 
mapping of 
your samples 
in various 
ways. 
 In either view, the screen is divided into four key segments. At the top, you’ll fi nd the parameters area, 
which provides a long list of the samples or groups included within the instrument, alongside their 
associated parameters (like key range and so on) that defi ne how they function. Moving down from 
this is the velocity area, which provides a quick snapshot of how samples are placed with respect to 
velocity – it might be, for example, that a zone or group works over the full MIDI velocity range (0–127) 
or only across a specifi c set of velocities (0–40, for example). Below this is the zone/group area that 
shows the placements with respect to the MIDI keyboard, which is viewable itself in the very bottom of 
the interface window.  
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 9 
   ReCycle Files and the EXS24 
 Having seen how the Tracks area handles ReCycled fi les, it’s also worth noting the distinct benefi ts 
and diff erences in working with REX fi les in the EXS24. Put simply, the reason for using the EXS24 
over the Arrange page technique is creativity. As we’ll see, once the REX fi les are imported into the 
(Continued)

265
Creative Sound Design
EXS24, you can start to manipulate the raw data in any number of ways, as well as take advantage of 
its tempo-tracking abilities by virtue of the loop being cut into a series of slices.  
 To import the REX fi le you’ll need to be in the EXS24 editor, selecting the ReCycle convert option 
from the Instrument menu. Arguably the best solution to pick is the Extract MIDI Region and Make 
New Instrument option, which will not only make a new EXS24 instrument from the audio contained 
in the REX fi le, but also place a MIDI region fi le into your arrangement to trigger the samples in an 
appropriate way. 
 Figure 7.54  Importing REX fi les into the EXS24 is by far the most creative way of dealing with ReCycle 
fi les, facilitating a wealth of addition sound processing and resequencing options.   
(Continued)

266
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 7.19  Creating a New Instrument and Importing Samples 
 Unless you’re interested in remapping existing sample data, you’ll need to create a new, blank 
instrument to work with. You can do this through the EXS24’s Instrument Editor using the menu option 
Instrument > New. 
 Before you start to import sample data, you might want to consider some essential data management 
issues. For example, if you intend to keep your sample data in a unifi ed place (like an external FireWire 
drive or a separate partition) you’ll want to copy the sample data into an appropriate folder fi rst, before 
initiating any imports into the EXS24. Of course, it is possible for the EXS24 to reference sample data from 
any drive – so if you’re feeling lazy and have no intention of keeping your data in a unifi ed place, just go 
ahead and import! Finally, it’s also possible to store sample data as part of your project’s assets, which 
might at least facilitate a backup of the sample data, although there’s no guarantee that the backup will 
exist on the drive 3 months down the line!  
 Once imported, the world is your oyster! Using the editor itself, you could decide to experiment 
with some of the zone parameters, with some of the most distinctive treatments coming from 
the selective reversing of certain slices. On the front panel of the EXS24, you could also decide to 
experiment with some of the synthesis features, maybe using the fi lter to make the loop darker, for 
example, or changing the envelope settings – maybe using a sharper decay setting with no sustain 
to produce a choppier output. Looking at the region itself, you could decide to resequence certain 
elements (removing or retriggering certain slices, for example) or even experimenting with diff erent 
types of quantizing.  
 Figure 7.55    To build a sample mapping from scratch, select the New option from the Instrument menu.   

267
Creative Sound Design
 The importing process itself can be done in a two principal ways – either through the Zone menu 
(usually when you intend to load multiple samples in one action) or using a drag-and-drop from the 
project’s Audio Bin and/or the Browser. If you’ve invested the time in naming your samples properly, or 
indeed, chosen to import samples from a third-party collection, then the Zone > Load Multiple Samples 
is probably the quickest and easiest solution. From this option, you’ll be able to specify the samples to be 
loaded, followed by a dialog to provide some indication as to how these should be mapped. The options 
are relatively self-descriptive, but see the following text for clarity: 
 Use Auto map for a collection of keyboard samples where the samples span more than one key. In this 
case, Logic will map the sample intelligently (using the root key included in the sample’s name) running 
each zone into (but not over) the next. 
 The Drums option again auto maps the samples based on the root key in the sample’s name, although 
this will be the one and the only key the sample is mapped to. 
 The Contiguous zones is useful where you don’t have key information included with the samples, or 
simply want to ignore any existing key information included with them. Using the Contiguous zones 
option you’ll also need to specify the zone width for each zone (this could be one note, or a whole octave 
or more) as well as the start note to begin the mapping. 
 Figure 7.56    Using the mapping option might aid the quick placement of multiple samples – say from a 
sample CD. 

268
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 To build the instrument mapping up in a more gradual way, use the Browser window and drag-and-drop 
the fi les as you see fi t. The exact way the samples are mapped will vary as to the samples selected and 
how you drag them into the EXS24 instrument editor. Dragging a single sample directly into the zone 
parameters area, for example, will place the sample across the entire keyboard with its default pitch at 
C3 (unless specifi ed in the fi le name). Alternatively, drag a sample onto the MIDI keyboard on the bottom 
of the editor window, and you’ll be able to map it to a specifi c key, although the range won’t extend 
beyond that single note. Dragging onto an existing zone will also preserve the current zone parameters, 
but use the newer choice of sample.  
 Using the browser, you can also select multiple samples and import these directly into your mapping. 
As with the dialog from the Zone menu, you can also specify how Logic auto maps the samples. Note 
that by dragging the multiple samples onto a key on the MIDI keyboard, you’ll eff ectively set the starting 
point, with subsequent zones following on from this point.  
 Figure 7.57    Besides using the Import option from the Zone menu, you can also drag and drop samples into 
your EXS24 instrument directly from the browser.   
 7.20  Changing Zone Properties 
 As part of the importing process, it’s highly likely that Logic will have performed some basic zone 
parameter adjustments. Let’s take a look at the diff erent sections in the zone parameters areas and how 
you might go about using them. 

269
Creative Sound Design
 Key Range 
 As we’ve already seen with the process of drag-and-drop sample assignment, each zone is assigned its 
own unique key range, with both upper and lower settings. If you’re creating a drum-based instrument, 
it’s likely that the Lo and Hi setting will be on the same note. However, if you’re assembling a multisampled 
instrument – maybe with two or three samples for every “played” octave – you’ll need to adjust the range 
over a few consecutive notes. You can adjust the Key range through the zone parameters area, or indeed, 
by dragging the appropriate “mapping blob” in the bottom zones/groups area. 
 Pitch 
 Pitch defi nes the fundamental root position of the note – in other words, the note on the keyboard 
that plays the sample at its natural sampled pitch. In the above example of a multisample spread over 
a few notes, you’ll probably want to place the key somewhere in the middle of the zone’s range, so 
as to keep the amount of transposition at a minimum. You can also use the Coarse and Fine-tuning 
parameters to fi ne-tune the pitch of the sample – maybe the instrument has been recorded slightly 
out of tune, for example, or you want to explore some more creative aspect of tuning on drum and 
percussion samples.   
 Figure 7.58    A drum-based map will place each drum hit on a diff erent note. 

270
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Vel. Range 
 Zones can be set to work over a specifi c range of velocities, using the Vel. Range parameter. If you’ve got 
several samples taken at diff erent velocities, this might be a useful way of achieving a realistic sense of 
expression in your instrument, although you can always “fake” velocity sensitivity by some careful use of 
the amplifi er and fi lter responding to velocity. 
 For more complicated patches – where you might be dealing with several diff erent velocity layers – 
consider applying the velocity switching through the group feature. 
 Figure 7.59    A keyboard-based multisample might use one sample to cover two or three notes – in this case, 
the key range should be adjusted accordingly.   

271
Creative Sound Design
 Output 
 Output allows you to fi ne-tune some important mix-related issues with respect to your zone. Volume 
and Pan are largely self-explanatory, but what’s of particular interest is the Routing option. By default, 
each zone is set to the main outputs, but it’s also possible to force a zone out to any of the EXS24’s 
16 individual outputs. To access this, though, you will need to instantiate a Multi Output version of the 
EXS24 in your instrument channel and activate the additional Aux channels accordingly. 
 By routing a zone out in this way, you’ll be able to gain individual access to audio plug-ins as well a 
discrete channel fader for the zone(s) in question. This is particularly useful editing tool for drum-
based instruments in the EXS24 library that you might want to enhance with additional processing, like 
compression, equalization, or reverb. 
 Playback 
 Playback governs some important aspects about how the sample data is read, mainly in relation 
to triggering drum samples. For example, the Pitch parameter allows you to enable or disable pitch 
tracking with a sample, so that even if a drum sample spans several keys, for example, its pitch remains 
fi xed. 1Shot, however, focuses on the duration of the sample, so that in 1Shot mode the full length of the 
sample is played irrespective of how long the key is held down for. Again, the main application of 1Shot 
mode is with drums, where the duration of a hit isn’t “variable” as such – in other words, a cymbal will 
always decay over a number of seconds. 
 “Rvrs” (or reverse) allows you to fl ip round the playback of the sample data. Given the need to create 
new audio fi les before you can reverse region in the Arrange area, this EXS24 reverse function is a quick-
and-easy solution in creating reverse eff ects. Needless to say, the “Rvrs” feature is a great creative tool, 
sounding great on a range of instruments – from drums hits to pianos and bells. 
 Sample 
 Although most samples that you’ll import will have their edits already in place, it is possible to further 
refi ne the start and end point from within the EXS24 instrument editor. For example, it might be the 
case that you have a small portion of silence at the front of the sample or that you want to create a more 
abrupt end to the sample. Although the EXS24 instrument editor displays this numerically, you can Ctrl-
click on the sample number to open the sound fi le in Logic’s Sample Editor. If you’re running the editor 
at full-screen size, though, you’ll move the EXS24 editor out the way to reveal the Sample Editor. 
 Loop 
 The Loop feature is primarily used as means of creating an infi nite sustain on sampled instruments 
like strings, and so on. Obviously, if a sample was taken for the full-note duration, this could make an 
exhaustive drain on RAM allocation (although some third-party libraries do this), so samples are taken of 
about 5 s or so in length, with the last 3 s looped over until the notes end. 

272
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 In the case of the EXS24, you can defi ne a number of parameters in relation to loop, with the principal 
aim of creating a smooth, glitch-free loop that shouldn’t be particularly audible to the ear. The beginning 
point is always defi ning the Start and End point of the loop – ideally picking a section of the sample 
that doesn’t waver or drift too much, but instead, has a clearly defi ned sustain. Although you can defi ne 
a loop point numerically, the easiest way to do this is to open up the Sample Editor (by Ctrl-clicking 
on either the start or end parameter number) and perform this visually. Make sure that you’ve got the 
Search Zero Crossings enabled (under the Edit menu), so that any start and end points snap to a zero 
crossing point.  
 Figure 7.60    Although it is possible to set the loop numerically, opening the loop points in the sample editor 
(by Ctrl-clicking them) will allow you to better place the start and end points to match what is happening in 
the waveform. 
 Even if you do fi nd a relatively successful location to position the start and end points, it might still be 
important to use some of the EXS24’s additional loop parameters to fi ne-tune the looping to produce 
an even smoother looping eff ect. Xfade, for example, can be useful if you’re still hearing small clicks or 
jumps around the loop point, with a larger number creating a longer crossfade. E. Pwr further refi nes the 
crossfade, so that no energy is lost in the crossfade processing, while tune addresses any tuning issues 
that might have become evident in the looping process. 

273
Creative Sound Design
 7.21  Working with the EXS24’s Groups 
 As soon as you start building up instrument fi les with more than ten or so zones, it becomes essential 
to start to manage the samples in some meaningful way. Groups off er a variety of benefi ts to the EXS24 
sample list – from organizing better ways of displaying related zones, to advanced triggering options. 
Using the instrument editor you can create groups in much the same way as you might create playlist 
in iTunes – simply select the zone or zones you want to group and then drag these across to the zone 
column on the left.  
 In a rudimentary way, the zone column off ers an excellent way of navigating your instrument – either 
viewing the complete set of zones in an instrument or choosing to view the instrument group-by-group 
 Figure 7.61    Select the zones you want to place in the group then drag them over into the zone column to 
create a corresponding group.   

274
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
by clicking on the appropriate group folders in the zone column. Note that you can also name the groups 
by double-clicking on the group name. This is also an excellent way of organizing and creating hybrid 
EXS instrument – selecting diff erent layers of zones from one instrument and copying and posting them 
into another. 
 Advanced Mapping Options 
 Moving over to the groups view in the EXS24 instrument editor, you should also see a number of 
parameter options unique to groups you have created. What groups offer is a form of macro-level 
control over an instrument – so, rather than having to individually set velocity switching over hundreds 
of zones, we can place them into four respective groups and then simply alter the velocity setting of 
those individual groups. Not only are grouped velocity adjustments far quicker in the short term, but 
also for any adjustments later on, the group feature is invaluable. 
 As you’d expect, the Key Range, Vel. Range, and Output parameters function in much the same way 
as they did in the zone parameters, although of course, settings here override above what you’ve 
established in the zone (for example, if the group’s key range doesn’t extend as far as where you placed 
a zone, you won’t hear the sample). 
 The Trigger option defi nes whether a group is triggered by a Note On or a Note Off  command (known 
as Key Down and Key Release, respectively) – an eff ect more broadly referred to as Release triggering, 
which uses short samples of events that occur after the main note to create a more realistic and life-
like “musical event.” Release samples could be in the form of reverb, for example, or the small decaying 
“resonance” when a piano note is released.  
 Figure 7.62    Groups contain a unique series of mapping options – including fi lter and envelope off sets and 
various conditional triggering options – ideal for the expert EXS24 user.   
 Following on from the trigger options – although positioned over the far right-hand side of the group 
parameter – are the conditional Select Group By options. Although you can create a number of diff erent 
conditional triggering options here, probably the most well-known is the option to create a so-called 
key-switched instrument. With key switching, a number of notes down the bottom of the keyboard will 
be used to dynamically toggle between diff erent instrument articulations (like staccato and legato), all 
on the fl y. Each articulation, as such, is organized into its own group, with the group “selected by” a 
specifi c note, like C1. 

275
Creative Sound Design
 The Select Group By actually works with a number of diff erent MIDI events (Note, Controller, Pitch Bend, 
and Channel). This makes conditional triggering an incredibly fl exible feature – allowing you to use a 
modulation wheel, for example, to switch between layers. 
 The Envelope and Filter Off sets allow you to diff erentiate between the various groups and the initial 
settings on the EXS24’s front panel (which we’ll look at in more detail later). For example, although you 
might set a master fi lter cutoff  position at 50%, for example, you could use the Filter Off sets parameter 
so that one group opens the fi lter in a more open position ±50), while the other closes in down (−25). 
Although this isn’t quite the provision of a completely independent multimode fi lter per group, it does 
allow diff erent zones to use diff erent fi lter settings concurrently – in other words, while one group 
sounds fi ltered, the other is less so. 
 Following this concept further are the envelope off sets, which again work from the basic premise of the 
parameters established on the main front panel, but then adapted, negatively or positively, to match 
the specifi c needs of the group. You could, for example, have a nylon-string guitar in one group using 
the fast attack and release settings, while in another group, some string samples use softer attack and 
release settings to produce a lush background pad. 
 7.22  Editing EXS24 Instruments Using the Front Panel 
 With the samples mapped, now comes the task of adjusting and refi ning the synthesis engine of the 
EXS24’s sample playback. The settings on the front panel extend what you’ve already achieved in the 
mapping of the samples. For a simple instrument, for example, all you might need to adjust is a few key 
parameters like release, or its velocity scaling. Alternatively, you could use the front panel of the EXS24 to 
completely transform the samples way beyond their original sound – maybe using some extreme fi lter 
and drive settings, combined with a series of creative modulation-matrix settings. 
 Like the ES2, the front panel is divided into a number of key sections, including the fi lter block, the 
modulation matrix, and the LFO and envelope modulators. To understand how these parameters work, 
let’s look at a couple of diff erent editing scenarios and how these might work. 
 Basic Instrument Refinement: Velocity Scaling, Polyphony, and Envelopes 
 Not all instruments require a great deal of modifi cation away from the default settings that appear 
on the EXS24’s front panel, but there are a couple of areas worth looking at to best optimize the 
instrument in the fi nal mix. First of these has to be the volume controls over the right-hand side of 
the plug-in interface. Alongside the overall volume level (which might be worth reducing if you’re 
using a lot of sample voices simultaneously), you’ll fi nd the sampler’s scaling of level through velocity. 
Raising the bottom part of the level through velocity slider can sometimes be a useful alternative 
to compression, especially if you’ve got a multisampled instrument with “quieter” samples in its 
low velocities. 
 Adjusting Envelope 2 – which, by default, is assigned to the Amplifi er duties – is a useful way of quickly 
grabbing hold of, and shaping, an instrument’s ADSR characteristics. For example, if some of the samples 
in your instrument have reverb embedded into them, you might find it beneficial to increase the 

276
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
release time so that you hear the full decay of the room ambience. 
Alternatively, using a slower attack can be a valid sound design 
treatment to soften or disguise the initial attack transient of a sample. 
 Toward the top left-hand corner of the interface are a number of 
useful macro controls, some of which can have a big impact over 
the performance of the sampler. For example, the voices parameter 
reserves a given amount of polyphony for the instrument in question. 
Sixteen notes, for example, might be more than enough for a simple 
drum-based instrument, but should you use something like a 
multisampled piano with release samples, you might need to raise 
this up to the full 64 voices. However, with an increased voice count 
comes an increased CPU drain, so it’s often the case that you actively 
try to balance out the realistic demands of the instrument, against the 
overall needs and drain of your CPU performance. A used indicator at 
least provides some rough indication as to the total used polyphony, 
but you should also be able to hear a “maxed-out” polyphony by 
longer notes appearing “snatched off .”  
 Adding in the Filter 
 As we saw with the ES2, the fi lter has a surprisingly powerful way of 
shaping the timbre of our sound source. The filter included in the 
EXS24 is certainly no exception to this rule: with up to six diff erent 
modes of operation (including high-pass, BP, and four different 
strengths of low-pass), some fat and juicy resonance, and even a Drive 
parameter. 
 To activate the fi lter, you’ll need to press the On switch, otherwise it 
defaults to its off  position so as to save a few CPU cycles. Switching the 
modes can be done using the six tabs at the bottom of the fi lter, with 
the additional Fat button to preserve some of the low-end with high-
resonance settings on the LPFs. Remember that the precise position 
of the fi lter cutoff  and resonance can also be varied between diff erent 
groups, using this front panel setting as the initial starting point. 
 Modulation Heaven! 
 Many of the more advanced synthesis options come through the application of the modulation matrix, 
which allow you to map a variety of sources (including the LFOs and envelopes at the bottom of the 
interface) to various destinations within the EXS24’s synthesis and sampling engine. As with the ES2, 
the EXS24 uses a familiar matrix display, with a Destination parameter (like Filter Cutoff ), and amount 
of modulation and the Modulation Source including any of the EXS24 modulators (three LFOs and two 
envelope generators) or any one of the 127 standard MIDI controllers.   
 Figure 7.63  The main controls 
in relation to volume are on the 
right-hand side of the EXS24’s 
interface. Try experimenting 
with the sampler’s response 
to velocity, as well as how 
Envelope 2 changes the 
amplitude over time. 

277
Creative Sound Design
 Saving Instrument Settings 
 Confusingly, the EXS24 makes some level of distinction between the instrument settings stored with 
and without the front panel controls. To permanently store the front panel setting alongside your 
instrument mapping, you’ll need to go to the Options menu on the EXS24 and select the option 
“Save Settings to Instrument.” Now, when you return to that instrument, the mapping will be loaded 
 Figure 7.64 
 Once you’ve engaged 
the fi lter, you can use 
its variety of modes 
(low-pass, band-pass, 
and high-pass) to 
shape the timbre of 
the EXS24’s output.   
 Figure 7.65    As with the ES2, a large Modulation Matrix section allows you to route a number of diff erent 
modulations sources to targets in the EXS24’s programming architecture.   

278
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 7.23  Ultrabeat 
 Ultrabeat is Logic’s take on a contemporary drum machine, complete with a range of synthesis and 
sequencing options, as well as a handy multichannel version to allow the fl exible access to Logic’s signal-
processing features. An Ultrabeat Kit is made up of 25 diff erent drum voices – listed down the left-hand 
side of the interface complete with level controls (as the blue bars), mute, solo, pan, and an output 
selector. On selecting a drum voice, you can then edit its associated synthesis parameters in the large 
central display, or indeed, program its unique step sequence at the bottom of the plug-in. 
 In keeping with the fl exibility of the ES2 and Sculpture, the synthesis options in Ultrabeat are impressive 
to say the least! Each drum voice has access to up to three diff erent oscillators, which are then passed 
through a multimode fi lter, a ring modulator, and fi nally some EQ. Arguably, the most useful oscillator, 
though, is Oscillator 2, which features a sample playback mode as well as the phase Osc and model 
modes. On the whole, you’ll fi nd that samples off er the most quick and eff ective solution for assembling 
 Figure 7.66    If the settings on the EXS24’s front panel have become intrinsic to the instrument in question, 
consider using the Save Settings to Instrument feature under the Options menu.   
alongside any front panel settings that you’ve created. Alternatively, use the Recall Settings from 
Instrument or Recall Default EXS24 Settings if you’ve made changes to the front panel settings that 
you’re not happy with.  

279
Creative Sound Design
 Figure 7.67    Ultrabeat features up to 25 diff erent drum voices in each kit, each with their own set of synthesis 
options. 
a kit (if so, use the “blank” Drag & Drop Samples Kit from Ultrabeat’s plug-in settings), although it’s also 
good to augment these with some of the pure synthesis elements, like the noise generator. Once the 
sample mode is active, you can also drag sample fi les directly from the browser onto Oscillator 2.   
 Clicking on the Filter tab activates the fi lter, off ering a great way of coloring the samples, like a BP fi lter 
applied across a clap sample to make it sound narrower. To modulate the fi lter, you can also use any one 
of the four envelopes and an LFO, with the small blue legend beneath the cutoff  and resonance controls, 
allowing you to defi ne an appropriate modulation source. If you’re after grit, though, try activating either 
the crush or distort modes toward the bottom of the fi lter dial – both eff ects that can sound great on 
heavier kick or snare samples that you want to push to the front of the mix. 

280
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 When it comes to assembling the sequence, you can just step through each voice and create the fi nished 
pattern piece-by-piece. A much more eff ective solution, though, is to switch Ultrabeat into its Full View 
mode using the small tab in the bottom left-hand corner of the interface. In full mode, the synthesis 
controls are removed to reveal a full-sized drum grid for all of Ultrabeat’s 25 drum voices. This makes 
it far easier to gauge the interaction between the various parts, rather than having to remember their 
various hit points. Note that to hear the sequencer in action, you’ll need to activate its Power tab, with 
the transport controlled either from Ultrabeat itself (in which case it plays independent of the rest of the 
project) or from Logic’s main transport, so as to audition the pattern in the context of the song.  
 In total, you can sequence up to 24 different patterns with Ultrabeat, with the potential to switch 
between them using a MIDI keyboard. A much better solution, though, and one that makes more sense 
in the Arrange area, is to export the pattern out as a region. To do this, click-and-drag on the small 
icon next to the pattern selector, placing the resultant region on Ultrabeat track in the Arrange area. 
Exporting a number of patterns in this way, you can then revert back to Arrange area to structure your 
song accordingly, even using other MIDI editors (like Piano Roll or Hyper Editor) to further manipulate 
the data. 
 
 Figure 7.68    Use the Browser to drag and drop samples directly into Ultrabeat’s second oscillator.   

281
Creative Sound Design
 Figure 7.69    Use Ultrabeat’s Full View to sequence the complete pattern, which can then be dragged directly 
into Logic’s Arrange area.   

 In this chapter 
 8.1 
Introduction 
285 
 8.2 
Channel Strips: 
Understanding Your Virtual 
Console 
285 
 8.3 
Organizing Your Mixer: 
What You Do and Don’t 
See 
292 
 8.4 
Summing Stacks and the 
Mixer 
295 
 8.5 
Beginning a Mix 
297 
 8.6 
Adding Send Eff ects 
302 
 8.7 
Combined Processing 
Using Aux Channels 
304 
 8.8 
Using Groups 
306 
 8.9 
Working with Channel Strip 
Settings 
309 
 8.10 Automation: The 
Basics 
309 
 8.11 Track-Based Versus 
Region-Based 
Automation 
310 
 8.12 Automation Modes 
311 
 8.13 Viewing and Editing 
Automation 
314 
 8.14 The Automation Menu 
Options 
316 

 Plug-in boxouts 
 Distortion Eff ects 
287 
 Helpers … Handy Little 
Plug-Ins 
296 
 Compressor 
299 
 Channel EQ 
301 
 Convolution Reverb and Space 
Designer 
305 
 PlatinumVerb 
310 
 Using Delay 
313 
 Vocal Processing 
316 
 Pedalboard 
321 
 Plug-in focus 
   To Gate or Not to Gate … That 
Is the Question 
290 

 Knowledgebases 
 Clipping Faders: Good or 
Bad? 
294 
 Parallel Compression 
308 
 Saving CPU: Freezing and 
More … 
317 
 Compression Circuit 
Types 
319 
 Walkthrough 
 Adding Compression 
320 
 Logic tips 
 Plug-In Delay 
Compensation 
321 

285
Mixing in Logic 
 8.1  Introduction 
 Up until a few years ago, there was only one accepted way of creating a professional sounding mix: 
hiring a commercial studio facility and mixing through a traditional mixing console, like an SSL or a 
Neve. However, times have changed signifi cantly since then, and mixing “in the box” – in other words, 
mixing completely within the domain of your audio sequencer – has become a viable, and some would 
say more fl exible, alternative to the traditional console route. In truth, applications such as Logic Pro 
offer a tremendous amount of creative and technical freedom to today’s mix engineer: complete 
and instantaneous recall, compression and equalization on every channel, studio-grade reverb, full 
automation, and much more besides. 
 In this chapter, we’re going to take a closer look at the process of mixing in Logic Pro, looking at both the 
technology it has to off er to create an eff ective mix and how we can knit these elements together as part 
of the mixing workfl ow. This is also an opportunity to get to know many of Logic Pro’s essential signal 
processing plug-ins in a more informed way, as well as taking a more detailed look at how the Mixer 
area works – aspects that can actually improve the entirety of your workfl ow in Logic Pro, as much as 
the mix. Looking more closely at the process of mixing itself, we’ll explore how to use compression and 
equalization to create separation, as well as a bus processing (on aux channels), and of course, spatial 
treatments like reverb and delay that help defi ne the depth and dimension of your mix. 
 Beyond the essential signal processing tools of mixing, we’ll also take a look at features like automation, 
grouping, and folders, all of which help make your mix easier to manage, especially with the large track 
counts that most projects seem to encompass. 
 8.2  Channel Strips: Understanding Your Virtual Console 
 Before diving headlong into your fi rst mix on Logic Pro, it’s worth taking some time to distinguish among 
the various channel strips that the Mixer is comprised of and how these various elements interact with 
each other. Generally, a good mix in Logic Pro makes use of all the features of the Mixer – channel inserts, 
bus sends to aux channel strips, output masters, and so on – so it’s worth familiarizing yourself with their 
features in much the same way as an engineer would “get to know” the sections of a physical console. 
 Audio Channel Strip 
 An audio channel, as we’ve already seen in the previous chapters, governs the basic path in and out of 
Logic Pro for a recorded signal. In a mix, audio regions in the corresponding track will be sent down the 
channel strip, through the various insert processors (compression and EQ, for example) and bus sends 
(for reverb and other eff ects) to a designated output.  

286
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 8.1 
 An audio channel 
strip. 
 Figure 8.2 
 An instrument 
channel strip. 

287
Mixing in Logic
 PLUG-IN BOXOUT 1 
 Distortion Effects 
 Logic includes an impressive set of eff ects dedicated to low-fi  transformations and crunching-up 
sounds – from the digital extremes of Bitcrusher to the warmer tones possible with Distortion II to 
the detailed emulation of many favored tones emulated within Amp Designer. Besides being an 
obvious addition to guitar parts, distortion can also be a great source of color and interest on any 
number of sounds on a mix. Try using distortion to add some grit and body to a drum loop, for 
example, or a touch of drive on an aggressive vocal. 
 The fi rst choice of amp-like distortion would have to be Amp Designer, which provides immense 
fl exibility with respects to the choice of emulated head, speaker cabinet, microphone type, and its 
position. Additionally, there are a considerable wealth of presets to get you stared. Add to this the 
power off ered by the new Pedalboard plug-in off ering the guitarist endless scope. 
 Distortion, overdrive, and clip distortion come from earlier incarnations of the application and tend 
to be less suitable for applications on electric guitar. They are, however, an excellent addition to drum 
loops or acidic synth lines generated from the ES2. Both distortion and overdrive have particularly 
simple controls with just a drive and tone parameter, alongside a corresponding output reduction 
slider to avoid ripping your monitors to shreds! 
 The prize for the most bizarre distortion eff ects goes to the Phase distortion and Bitcrusher plug-
ins. Phase distortion sounds great on drum loops needing to be mashed up beyond all recognition. 
Based on a modulated delay line, it can produce tones that range from a warm fuzz to the sound of 
a FM broadcast gone considerably wrong! Bitcrusher, on the other hand, is a great source of digital 
grit – especially as you reduce down the bit slider (to around 8 bits) and start applying some heavy 
downsampling (103 and beyond).   
 Instrument Channel Strip 
 The instrument channel strip duplicates the same features as an audio channel strip; only this time 
you get to work with the signals generated by the virtual instruments in your session. In addition to 
this simple application, an instrument channel strip can also be confi gured for multichannel operation 
so that multiple outputs from the same instrument (like the EXS24 or Ultrabeat) are sent to a number 
of additional auxiliary output channels. Besides having individual level control, this also allows you to 
apply diff erent eff ects onto each output so that a snare, for example, might have diff erent equalization, 
compression, and reverb to that of a kick drum.   
(Continued)

288
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 8.4  An aux channel strip. 
 Figure 8.3    Distortion can bring plenty of color and 
grit to your mix. Try experimenting with Logic’s 
wide range of distortion eff ects to achieve anything 
from a subtle valve-like warmth through to early 
digital distortion. 
 Aux Channel Strip 
 The humble aux channel strip is one of the most useful parts of Logic Pro’s Mixer and the source of a 
number of diff erent techniques in mixing. First, it can be used as means of applying send eff ects like 
reverb or delay – anything where you want to actively control the balance of wet and dry sound using 

289
Mixing in Logic
a separate fader. In this example, the aux channel strip has the eff ect strapped across its insert path with 
instrument channel strips or audio channel strips sending signals via designated bus sends. This allows any 
number of channels to access the same reverb, for example (an essential way of preserving DSP resources), 
as well as being able to control the return of the eff ect in the same way as any other audio signal in the 
mix – in other words, it could be equalized, compressed, and controlled by movements of the fader.  
 Another less immediate, but altogether just as useful, technique is to use an aux channel strip to 
combine a number of diff erent channels (including audio and instrument channels) on a single fader. For 
example, many engineers using a traditional console will create a submix of the drums to a selected bus 
master fader (in this case, one of Logic’s aux channel strips), allowing them to quickly control the level of 
the drums relative to other instruments in the mix. Additionally, they could also make use of inserts on 
the bus faders to apply compression, EQ, and so on, to the entirety of the drums, rather than individual 
channels within it – something which can just as easily be done of Logic’s aux channel strips. 
 The fi nal important role of the aux channel strip is to operate as a means of inputting external signals 
into the mix. If your audio interface supports enough inputs, there’s no reason why you can’t patch-in 
external compressors, equalizers, synthesizers, and so on, directly into your mix. Although you might 
need to account for a small amount of latency (as discussed in  Chapter 3 ), using dedicated recording 
hardware can often supply much more character than conventional plug-ins. Of course, given the 
provision of inserts on these aux inputs, there’s no reason why you can’t also use Logic plug-ins on top 
of whatever device you’re inputting into that particular aux input. 
 Stereo Output Channel Strip 
 The stereo output channel strip represents each of the physical outputs in your Logic system. If you’re 
using a simple two-in, two-out USB audio interface, you’ll only see one of these faders. However, if you’re 
working with a multiple output FireWire or PCIe soundcard, you can increase the number of output 
 Figure 8.5 
 An output 
channel strip. 

290
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
faders corresponding to each physical output. On the whole, most mixes simply use one designated 
output (1–2) as the “destination” of the two-track mix. If you intend to render the mix directly from the 
Logic session, you’ll also need to make use of Bounce “Bnce” button, found on the output channel strip 
or File > Bounce (for more information on bouncing to disk, see  Chapter 9 ).   
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 
   To Gate or Not to Gate … That Is the Question 
 Music trends change, so it’s not a surprise that the process of recording also adapts concurrently. 
For example, just a few years ago, it was commonplace to gate the components of a drum mix 
(kick, snare, toms, and so on) to within an inch of their existence! Nowadays, it seems that listeners, 
engineers, and musicians all seem to prefer a looser sounding kit, resulting in much less use of gating. 
 Now and again, though, you may well feel the need to improve your aural hygiene – maybe a 
vocal microphone has some obtrusive background noise made worse through the application of 
compression or that one and only guitar take has a little too much noise from the amp. If you’re 
pushed for time, there’s no doubt that the noise gate plug-in remains a quick and eff ective way to 
attenuate problematic noise in between notes – although remember to gate before the compressor 
and not after it! The trick with setting the noise gate is to start with hard settings (quick Attack, Hold 
and Release, with 100 dB of reduction) to fi nd the right threshold. Although the gating sounds harsh, 
 Figure 8.6    Two choices for improved aural hygiene – the traditional noise gate or the current favourite, 
Strip Silence. 
(Continued)

291
Mixing in Logic
you’ll be better able to fi nd the “sweet spot” just above the amplitude of the noise. With this set, back 
off  some of the settings, especially Release and Reduction to soften the eff ect – surprisingly, even a 
small amount of reduction (6–10 dB) can have a big eff ect on the overall cleanliness. 
 If you’ve got a little more time, most users now tend to approach the gating issue through a few 
crafty edits. Try using Strip Silence (Ctrl + X) as a means of Logic preparing the majority of edits for 
you. As with a conventional noise gate, you’ll need to establish the right threshold to get the best 
results, although arguably this is easier to “see” on Strip Silence than it is to “hear” on the noise gate. 
However, the big advantage with the Strip Silence approach is that you can modify the edits later on, 
making sure none of the important attack transients are missed out.   
 MIDI Channel Strips 
 Arguably, MIDI channel strips should be kept distinct and separate from the audio mixing, but given 
their inclusion as part of the Mixer, it’s worth clarifying their exact role. Unlike all the other Mixer 
channels in Logic (which control the flow and qualities of audio within the application), the MIDI 
channel strips have no direct control of the “internal” properties of your mix, but instead they work as 
controllers for external MIDI hardware connected to your MIDI interface. However, in the case of the 
synths and sampler being returned via aux channel strip, these MIDI channel strips could have a direct 
eff ect on your audio mix – maybe balancing 16 MIDI channels being returned to one stereo input on 
your audio interface.  
 Figure 8.7 
 A MIDI 
channel 
strip. 

292
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Master Channel Strip 
 The master channel strip provides a quick-and-easy access point to the level of signal going to all main 
outputs and is directly linked to the “volume” control as part of the features on Logic Pro’s transport 
bar. In situations without control room monitor levels, for example, this could be used as a means of 
adjusting the monitoring level, although it should be noted that any digital bounces made in Logic will 
be subject to the master channel strip’s gain adjustments. 
 Note that you cannot insert plug-ins across the master fader in stereo mixing (instead use the Stereo Out 
strip), with the master channel simply being used as a level attenuator. In surround mixing, however, its 
role – and the role of the outputs – slightly changes, which we’ll cover in more detail in  Chapter 10 . 
 8.3  Organizing Your Mixer: What You Do and Don’t See 
 Ask any good mix engineers about the fundamental tool that helps them negotiate an eff ective mix 
workflow, and they’ll often reply “a well-organized mixer.” On a traditional console, for example, 
engineers might decide to repatch the tape returns so that the order and arrangement of the various 
channels best refl ects how they might want to carry out the mix – maybe with the drums in the fi rst 8–10 
channels, for example, while bass, guitars, and keyboards following on subsequent channels. So before 
you start diving into equalization settings and designing your soundstage, take some time to organize 
both the arrangement and track list to help navigate your way around the mix successfully. Logic Pro 
also provides a number of ways to organize and structure the appearance of your mix, for example, 
separating off  sections, hiding unwanted channels, and viewing the complete signal path. 
 Mixer Views 
 The fi rst concept to grasp with respect to using the Mixer interface eff ectively is the link between the 
Tracks area and the Mixer. By default, the Mixer is set to its Tracks view out of the three possible view 
modes at the top of the Mixer window – Single, Tracks, and All. In Track mode, the order and amount 
of channels displayed directly corresponds to the Tracks area track list. For example, you might have 
reorganized the vocals to place them on the first track lane – a decision that also impacts on the 
arrangement of the Mixer. So, one simple way of organizing your Mixer is to organize your track list!  
 Following this concept, you’ll notice that the track Hide feature that we fi rst saw in the editing chapter 
also carries through into the Mixer. Tracks hidden in the Tracks area, therefore, will be temporarily 
removed from the mixer view. 
 An alternative to the Tracks view is the All mode, which displays the entirety of audio channels in your 
Logic Pro project arranged sequentially by their assignment (Inst 1, Inst 2, and so on), rather than their 
order in the Tracks area’s track list. This is a useful way of seeing the entirety of your mix, including objects 
(like the metronome and Prelisten channel) that you wouldn’t usually have access to. However, without 
the ability to organize this view, it is easy to become disorientated, especially in bigger mixing sessions.  

293
Mixing in Logic
 Figure 8.8 and 8.9    In Arrange view mode, the Mixer area directly corresponds to the order of the 
channels in the track list. The Hide Track option can also be a useful way of removing further channels.   

294
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 1 
   Clipping Faders: Good or Bad? 
 On the whole, conventional engineering wisdom tells us to avoid situations where a signal “clips” the 
meters – in other words, whenever we see one of Logic’s channels faders or master outputs go into 
the red. However, in reality, there are some situations in Logic where this is acceptable and others 
where it demands your immediate attention! 
 In Logic, a fader registers a clip whenever it is 
presented with too much signal – this might 
be because you’ve brought up the output gain 
of the compressor too much, or that you’re 
feeding too much signal to the main output 
channels. Looking first at channel faders and 
instrument tracks, the clipping we see here isn’t 
particularly problematic, with no immediate 
chance of you hearing distortion at fi rst. This is 
all because Logic’s Mixer incorporates a degree 
of safety margin – or headroom – built in, using 
an enhanced bit-depth resolution to tolerate 
peaks in the region of 11–16 dB. 
 Moving onto the main output channel strip, 
however, things are not quite so fl exible. Any 
fi nal digital medium has a fi xed amount of level 
it can tolerate – in other words, a CD or WAV 
fi le cannot exceed 0 dBFS (0 dB on the output 
fader) without the top of the waveform being clipped or distorted. In this respect, it is important 
to ensure that the main output fader doesn’t ever go into the red when you print off  your fi nal mix 
(although the odd peak during the mixing process isn’t too disastrous). Given the amount of signals 
potentially feeding this channel, though, this is quite easy to encounter.  
 So, if your output channel does clip, what should you do to resolve this? The fi rst and easiest solution 
might be to turn down the faders contributing to the mix, which could be done by placing them 
all into a group, and then turning the group down accordingly. If it’s in the region of a few decibels, 
you could also choose to turn the master channel strip fader down; although if you’re using it in the 
realms of 2–6 to 2–10 dB, then it suggests that there is a fundamental level mismatch that needs to 
be addressed. Another option is also to put an instance of the gainer plug-in (on the master output) 
and also use this to reduce to fi nal mix level ahead of it being bounced.  
 Figure 8.10    Although clips on channel faders aren’t 
too problematic, it is advisable to avoid clipping 
the main output. 
 Viewing by Signal Path 
 One of the most interesting view modes is the so-called Single mode, which shows the complete signal 
path of a selected channel. The signal path illustrates the full journey a channel makes through Logic 
Pro’s Mixer, including all the associated bus send eff ects, any submixing via aux channel faders, and 

295
Mixing in Logic
of course, the fi nal output channel strip. Using Single mode is a great way of honing in on the specifi c 
signal-processing characteristic of one sound in the mix, especially where it’s using multiple bus sends 
(for reverb, and so on) that could be positioned well along the Mixer in the standard Tracks view. 
 Dropping Out Sections of Your Mixer 
 Using the various tabs along the top right-hand corner of the Mixer area, you can switch out various 
corresponding sections of your Mixer. For example, you might choose to remove MIDI faders given that 
they don’t directly input on the signal processing aspects of the mix. Alternatively, by removing the 
audio and instrument (Inst) from the view, you can gain quick access to the aux masters and main output 
without having to scroll across the full length of the Mixer.  
 Figure 8.11    In Single mode, you can see the complete signal path for the currently selected track.   
 8.4  Summing Stacks and the Mixer 
  As we saw in  Chapter 5   , Track Stacks are useful in keeping the Tracks area and mixer relatively clutter free. 
For example, you might decide to pack away your drum parts into an individual Track Stack, keeping the 
individual mix channels (Kick, Snare, Hi-Hat, and so on) away from the main view of the track. 

296
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 PLUG-IN BOXOUT 2 
   Helpers … Handy Little Plug-Ins 
 Sometimes the small, innocuous little plug-ins can be as vital to creating an eff ective mix as the big 
processor-hungry reverbs. Take the Gain plug-in, for example, its main application is simply to raise 
the gain of an input – surely not that useful then? Say you’ve recorded in a series of complicated 
 Figure 8.13    Many of Logic’s smaller plug-ins can aid the eff ective workfl ow of a mix – from 
the Gain plug-in to the range of metering options.   
 Figure 8.12 
   Use the folder function to 
“pack away” parts of the 
mix. This can be useful 
in projects with large 
amounts of channels or 
tracks. 
(Continued)

297
Mixing in Logic
automation moves but simply want to raise the entirety of the track by 2 dB. Usually this would 
necessitate editing or rerecording the moves. Alternatively, you could use the Gain plug-in (patched 
somewhere in the insert path) and simply select a 2 dB boost! Some of its other applications can 
also be great on stereo signals – switching the left- and right-hand sides, for example, or mono’ing 
a stereo mix (try leaving an instance across the stereo bus) to check its mono compatibility. Also, if 
you need to phase invert any microphones (a snare bottom, for example), simply activate the Phase 
Invert option.  
 The Multimeter plug-in is a great addition to any stereo bus, providing up-to-date information on the 
track’s spectral properties (using a 1/3 Octave Spectrum Analyzer), alongside phase characteristics 
courtesy of a distinctive Goniometer. Use the spectrum analyzer to get a better grasp on the spread 
and range of frequencies in your mix. If you’re using monitors with a limited bass response, the lower 
spectrum information (100 Hz and below) can be crucial to keeping an eye on any excessive activity. 
The Goniometer provides some indication of the stereophonic properties of your mix – a strong 
mono image is indicated by a clear line up in the middle of the display, while excursions into stereo 
are indicated by movement to the left and right. 
 The Correlation Meter – available as a separate plug-in or, on either of the Goniometer or Analyzer’s 
screens – indicates phase problems with the mix. If the phase is good, you should see consistent 
movement in one side of the line (usually in the 11 region). However, if the phase is bad (indicating 
problematic mono compatibility), the Correlation Meter moves between both −21 and 11 in a 
continuous fashion.  
 When it comes to creating Tracks Stack, you have the choice of either creating a Folder Stack (as we saw 
back in 5.30 Using Track Stacks, Folders, and Hiding Tracks) or a Summing Stack. For mixing purposes, 
a Summing Stack is a useful alternative to the Folder Stack as the function creates both merged 
track lanes alongside a new auxiliary buss so that the stack can be controlled from a single fader. The 
advantage of a Summing Stack, therefore, is that we can add additional processing – like compression 
and equalization – that particular group of instruments, something that we’ll explore in greater depth in 
section 8.7, Combined Processing Using Aux Channels.   
 8.5  Beginning a Mix 
 With the mechanics of understanding how Logic Pro’s Mixer works under your belt, let’s start to have 
a look at the creative and technical processes of putting the mix together. However, before you start 
instantiating various plug-ins, take time to establish a plan for what you want to achieve. Think about 
how you intend to distribute instruments across the soundstage – in respect to both left-to-right 
placement (pan) and front to rear (with the use of reverb and maybe EQ). Establish what you feel should 
be the “lead” instrumentation – in other words, the three or four instruments that really hold the track 
together – alongside the other elements that should only provide a “supportive” role. Finally, identify 
instruments that are possibly fi ghting against one another, sounds that may blur the defi nition and 
energy of the track, or parts that may get lost among other instrumentation. Ultimately, if you’re clear 
about some of these issues from the start, you’ll have a much better chance of producing a coherent 
end result. 

298
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Basic Part Leveling 
 An essential part of the mix revolves around good levelling practice – put simply, balancing parts 
without the addition of any additional processing. Although the precise technique varies from engineer 
to engineer, the intention is to get a good “working balance” of sounds, some with more dominant roles 
than others, but all without overloading the main outputs from Logic. For example, it’s easy to start 
putting a mix together, pushing channels into the 13–16 dB region only to discover that the main output 
quickly starts to distort. Instead, try to keep an eye on the main output level (usually on the output 
1–2 channel, which should sit side-by-side the instrument channel/audio channel in the inspector) and 
bring in two or three of the key instruments leaving 6–12 dB or so of headroom. Unless an instrument 
has been recorded particularly “hot,” this will probably be in the region of −24 to 0 dB. 
 Alongside the basic of part leveling, you might also want to consider panning the various channels to 
create a realistic soundstage. Think about the instrumentation arranged across the stage, creating a 
natural, well-distributed confi guration of the instrumentation, without relying too much on the extremes 
of left and right (−64 and +63, respectively) and leaving a clearly defi ned space in the center of the mix 
for important lead instrumentation like vocals (in other words, only a few channels should be left in the 
0 position). Remember that as you apply eff ects like reverb and delay (which we’ll see more of later), you 
can still pan these signals just like any other channel in the mix. 
 Figure 8.14    Try using equalization to create better separation between instruments. In this example, a 3 dB 
boost at 3.5 kHz in one guitar has been balanced out by a cut in 3 dB at 3.5 kHz on another.   

299
Mixing in Logic
 Applying Equalization and Compression 
 Two of the most important signal processors in Logic – and the cornerstone of any professional mix – 
have to be the equalization and compression plug-ins. One of the main applications of compression and 
equalization is to provide better separation between sounds – fi xing diff erent elements into specifi c 
parts of the frequency range of a track, for example, or locking a sound better into the mix’s dynamic 
properties. One common technique with EQ is to reduce clashing frequencies between sounds, allowing 
each sound to sit in its own sonic space. For example, a 200-Hz reduction on a low guitar part would 
facilitate a little more space for a bass, whereas the intelligibility of the vocal could be improved by 
a cut at 1–3 kHz on any competing instruments. Compression, on the other hand, helps iron out any 
dynamic inconsistencies – for example, rather than a vocal dipping in and out of the mix, it can remain 
consistently loud.  
 Compression and EQ both can be applied via the insert path of a selected audio channel strips, instrument 
channel strips, or aux channel strips, although the EQ can also be quickly activated by double-clicking 
in the small EQ box at the top of the channel strip. Double-clicking the selected plug-in will then open 
a fl oating dialog, allowing you to adjust the various parameters contained within the plug-in. Of course, 
bypassing eff ects is essential to establishing exactly what you have or haven’t achieved. This can be done 
 PLUG-IN BOXOUT 3 
 Compressor 
 Along with EQ, compression forms one of the fundamental tools of a mix-down and essentially 
works as a form of automated amplitude control – the compressor reacts to loud peaks in the input 
and then attenuates the level of the signal accordingly. The two key parameters in this process 
are threshold – rated in decibels and governing the point at which compression begins – and 
ratio, which sets the hardness of compression applied. For example, with a low threshold and ratio 
(−220 dB and 2:1, respectively), a slight compression would be applied, even on relatively quiet 
parts of the signal. Alternatively, a higher threshold and ratio (−25 dB and 10:1, respectively) would 
produce a stronger compression, but this would only be applied on the rare occasion the signal 
level exceeded −25 dB. 
 In addition to the key compressor settings (threshold and ratio), Logic’s compressor plug-in contains 
a number of other parameters to further refi ne the processor. Attack and Release, for example, are 
important tools for defi ning how the compressor moves in and out of gain reduction, as the signal 
exceeds the threshold. With a quick Attack and Release setting, the compressor is set in a “fast-acting” 
mode – the response to loud transients (like loud snare hits) is quick and effi  cient, and the compressor 
is quick to return to its normal state once the input reduces below the threshold. As great as this 
sounds, however, these fast movements in and out of gain reduction can have a negative eff ect on 
sound being processed, as the compressor creates a distracting “pumping” sound. Setting a slower 
Attack and Release might allow the odd loud peak to slip through the net, but you’ll end up with a 
more musical, empathetic response from your compressor.  
 Peak and root mean square (RMS) modes govern how the compressor “listens” to its input. Essentially, 
the Peak mode responds exactly to the true level of the input, while RMS responds to an averaged 
(Continued)

300
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
level, closer to how the ear perceives loudness. With a Peak detection setting, therefore, you’ll 
fi nd the compressor reacting more than on the corresponding RMS setting, although its response 
might be considered slightly less musical. The Knee of the compressor is a useful means of creating 
a more graduated transition on harder ratio settings – the ratio is slightly softer (2:1, for example) 
ahead of the threshold, only reaching its full strength (6:1) a few decibels after the threshold. 
 As the overall eff ect of compression is to reduce the dynamic range of your input (in other words, 
making the loud bits quieter), you’ll probably fi nd your corresponding output quieter than without 
compression. Increasing the output Gain (at the right of the interface) restores levels lost through 
compression. You can also use the AutoGain option of Logic to apply this automatically, although in 
some cases this can produce distortion.  
 Figure 8.15 
 Logic’s 
compressor 
is a versatile 
gain reduction 
tool, capable of 
controlling the 
precise amplitude 
and dynamic 
range of a signal 
in the mix. 
using the dedicated bypass control in the top left-hand corner of the plug-in’s interface or directly from 
the Mixer itself by option-clicking on the appropriate plug-in slot.  
 Adding in Further Plug-Ins 
 Further plug-ins can also be inserted as part of the path of plug-ins you create on the channel strip. 
Remember, though, that the order in which you insert the plug-ins can have a big eff ect on the overall 
treatment produced. Even something as simple as EQ and compression, for example, can have a subtly 
different output based on which plug-in is placed first in the chain. More extreme effects, say, for 
example, distortion followed by EQ or EQ followed by distortion, can have completely diff erent result 
given their relative position. If you need to change this order, you can use the Hand tool on the Mixer (or 
simply press Cmd + click the plug in) to reorder the inserts in any way you see fi t.  

301
Mixing in Logic
 Figure 8.16    The order in which plug-ins are inserted can have 
a big eff ect on the end output. Try using the Hand tool to 
experiment with the order of your plug-ins the channel strip.   
 One common mistake at this point is to apply too many plug-ins, possibly in a desperate attempt to 
improve apparent defi ciencies in the source recording; “at least if it’s covered in distortion and delay, 
nobody will notice that it’s out of tune!” Try to have a clear strategy in your application of eff ects – not all 
tracks necessitate the use of plug-ins, and where a more complicated series of plug-ins are used, try to 
make this a unique and identifi able “special” feature, rather than the norm.  
 PLUG-IN BOXOUT 4 
 Channel EQ 
 The Channel EQ is easily one of the most important plug-ins in any mix, controlling the precise 
spectral qualities of signals passing through it. Although the Channel EQ takes a low drain on 
available CPU resources, it is both a powerful and a fl exible tool, split into eight frequency bands 
with a cut/boost and frequency parameter for each band. As a good starting point to understanding 
your input source, try activating the Analyzer feature of the EQ. The Analyzer provides a real-time Fast 
Fourier Analysis of your signal, indicating the distribution of energy across the sound spectrum – a 
bass, for example, should produce large “humps” formed by its fundamental at 100 Hz, alongside 
additional harmonics further up the harmonic spectrum. 
 The two extreme bands – at the far right- and left-hand side of the interface – govern the controls 
for the high-pass and low-pass fi lters within the EQ. Eff ectively, these completely remove frequencies 
(Continued)

302
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
above or below the given cutoff  point – try using the high-pass fi lter, for example, to tame any 
excessive low-frequency energy. Moving inward, the next two bands correspond to the shelving 
EQs, which are somewhat comparable to the treble and bass controls on a conventional hi-fi . Use the 
shelving EQ for general sweetening activities, creating the familiar “smiling” EQ curve with a boost at 
around 80 Hz and 12 kHz, respectively.  
 The remaining bands work as traditional parametric EQs, with a cut/boost control, frequency setting, 
and a fully variable Q parameter. Q sets the width of cut and boost, and therefore the resultant amount 
of cut and boost to harmonics is near to the EQ’s selected frequency. A wide Q is a useful way of 
shaping more “general” qualities of the sound – maybe a lack of bite in the upper mids, for example, or 
an overall woolliness in the lower mids. Use a tighter Q where your frequency issues are more specifi c – 
like a boomy resonance on an acoustic guitar, for example, or prominent problem harmonics.  
 Figure 8.17  Channel EQ is one 
of Logic’s primary mixing tools: 
with four fully parametric bands, 
two shelving controls, and two 
fi lter sections. 
 8.6  Adding Send Effects 
 As tempting as it is to patch everything across a channel’s insert points, it’s really worth making a clear 
distinction between the use of true insert-based effects and the use of send effects. The use of an 
insert eff ect implies there’s no need to balance an unprocessed version and a processed version of the 
signal. EQ, therefore, is a perfect example of insert eff ect as there is little or no need to hear both an 
unequalized version and an equalized version of the sound at the same time. The same could also be 
said for compression. Reverb, on the other hand, is a clear candidate for being applied as a send eff ect, 
with the need to balance the respective levels of wet (in other words, reverberated) signal with the dry, 
unprocessed version. In theory, the greater the reverb, the more the channel appears to move toward 
the back of the mix. 
 The fi rst step to creating a send from any given channel is to double-click in one of the available send 
slots on the strip and select from one of the 64 available bus destinations. Raising the level on the small 
send pot will then bleed an amount of the channel’s signal via the bus to the appropriate aux channel 
strip. The aux channel strip should then have the corresponding plug-in (an instance of Space Designer, 

303
Mixing in Logic
 Figure 8.18  A basic confi guration of send eff ects – the keys channel has been set up to have an auxiliary 
send delivering a little of its signal through to an auxiliary channel which is confi gured with a reverb on its 
100% wet setting. 
for example) patched across its insert path so that signals entering the aux channel strip are aff ected 
accordingly. With the mix parameter on the plug-in set to 100% wet, you can now control the level of 
reverb fed back into the mix, using the aux channel strip’s fader or using further plug-ins across the aux 
channel strip to further process the sound of the reverb. 
 Both reverb and delay are important tools in defi ning the spatiality of your mix – in other words, the 
front-to-back perspective of the soundstage. Having worked carefully on your level and panning, you 
should have initially formed a good representation of your left-to-right soundstage. However, with the 
application of delays and reverb, you fi nally have a chance to set sounds forward and backward in 
the mix – a dry vocal, for example, sat squarely at the front, or a distant keyboard pad drifting toward 
the back of the soundstage. One really useful technique is to place two to three contrasting instances of 
Space Designer to establish a front, mid, and rear acoustic to in your mix. Use some of the shorter reverbs 
on close sounds, or rhythmic elements (like drums or rhythm guitar), that don’t suit long reverb settings. 
The longer settings, on the other hand, could be reserved for a few unique sounds that really benefi t for 
longer reverb tail and a more distant mix placement.   
 One important concept of the sends is whether they are confi gured for either pre- or postfade operation. 
In a mix, the most common example (and the one Logic defaults to) is to use the sends in postfade 
mode – that is, the send happens after any adjustment in level for the particular channel. If, for example, 
a fader level is brought down in the mix, its corresponding amount of reverb is also attenuated – in 
eff ect, preserving the ratio between the two sounds (dry and reverberated). Prefade sends (as we saw 
in  Chapter 4 ) are usually associated in the creation of headphone or cue mix. To adjust among prefade, 
postfade, and postpan operations, simply click and hold on the send and adjust accordingly. 

304
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 8.7  Combined Processing Using Aux Channels 
 Having seen one application for aux channel strips – that of applying send eff ects – let’s have a look at 
the other ways in which they can be applied during a mix-down. By changing the output option of any 
audio or instrument channel in the mix, you can also decide to route it to an aux channel strip ahead of 
the signal reaching any of the main, physical outputs from Logic. Used in this way, you can combine a 
number of signals – say, the various microphones positioned around a drum kit, for example – to a single 
fader, with the option to control both its level and the application of additional processing en masse.  
 The use of the so-called bus processing across aux channel strips can be a great way of locking together 
the principal components of a mix, as well as helping groups of sounds gel in an eff ective way. Many 
American rock engineers get a great deal of mileage from this technique, combining compression on a 
channel-by-channel basis, alongside compression across a collection of aux channel strips. The result is 
a mix that “pumps” in an empathetic way to the source material, providing a real intensity and sense of 
loudness brought about through the reduction of dynamic range. 
 However, if you do intend to apply a lot of compression on your mix, it’s well worth making sure that you 
use a variety of diff erent compression techniques as a means of forging the identity between diff erent 
sounds (rather than the track just sounding squashed), as well as matching the style of compression to 
 Figure 8.19    Use two or three complementary reverbs to help defi ne the front-to-back perspective in your 
mix. Additional delays can also help defi ne the “spatial” dimension.   

305
Mixing in Logic
the instrumentation you’re processing. Try using low ratios (1.5:1 to 2:1) and low thresholds as a means 
of massaging the sounds into place, whereas harder ratios and higher thresholds (6:1, −5 dB) could be 
a great way of simply slicing a few loud transients of a drum submix. With any bus compression, you’ll 
also need to pay close attention to the Attack and Release times of the compressor, with slower settings 
(especially on the release) providing a more musical result.  
 Figure 8.20    Bus processing can be achieved by sending a number of channels (via a bus) to an aux channel. 
On the aux channel, insert the required equalization or compression, for example, so as to process the 
“group” of sounds.   
 PLUG-IN BOXOUT 5 
   Convolution Reverb and Space Designer 
 Convolution has quickly become the accepted standard in producing professional-grade reverb 
treatments. The technique works by taking an acoustic sample, known as an impulse response or IR, 
from a given room or indeed, a hardware reverb unit. The process of convolution then simply takes 
the short IR fi le and mathematically “folds it over” the source signal, eff ectively recreating the eff ect 
as if the sound had been recorded in the same space or through the same reverb processor. For that 
reason, convolution reverb can sound astonishingly realistic, although this can be at the expense of 
your available DSP resources. Ultimately, therefore, it makes sense to run just a few instance of Space 
Designer, patched across bus faders, than lavish multiple instances on individual channel faders. 
 As part of the Logic Pro installation, Space Designer comes with an impressive Library of prerecorded IR 
fi les (stored under Library/Application Support/Apple/Impulse Responses). You can load these simply by 
scrolling through the presets or loading them in via the Load IR option to the right of the IR sample switch. 
(Continued)

306
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
Additionally, you could choose to make use of one of the growing number of third-party IR libraries, like 
Spirit Canyon’s Spectral Relativity, or indeed, your own custom-sampled IR fi les.  
 Like a growing number of the professional convolution reverbs, Space Designer off ers a surprising 
amount of control and fl exibility with eff ects you can achieve with it. Once an IR sample is loaded, 
you can immediately adjust both its volume envelope and its fi lter characteristics, assuming the 
fi lter is activated. Besides being able to produce some subtle modifi cations (rolling off  the high-
end, for example, with a touch of low-pass fi ltering), these tools can be great for abstract ambience 
treatments – try using the reverse setting and some extreme fi lter movements with lots of resonance! 
If you need to shorten the reverb tail, adjust the length parameter. Alternatively, to create a longer, 
darker reverb, adjust the sample rate into one of its slower settings. This can also be a great way of 
producing longer reverb times, without maxing out your DSP resources.  
 Figure 8.21  Based on unique samples 
of the original spaces, Space Designer’s 
convolution reverb engine produces some 
stunningly realistic reverb treatments. 
 8.8  Using Groups 
 As alternative to bussing sounds together via aux channel strips, you can also make use of Logic’s Group 
feature – as we’ve already introduced, with the concept of edit groups in  Chapter 5 . Taking the concept 
further, we can also use Groups to lock together collections of channels, say a group of drums, for 
example, or backing vocals. But given the aux channel strip bussing system, what use is an additional 
means of ganging faders? 
 As simple as the bussing system is, there’s one major conceptual problem – that of postfade send eff ects 
like reverb. Imagine a collection of kit sounds all being sent to an aux channel strip, with a snare also 
making use of a generic reverb (also shared by the vocals and strings) on send 8. If the level of the kit 
were then reduced on the aux channel strip fader, you’d hope the reverb level would also be reduced 
accordingly, but this is not the case. As the send happens before the aux channel strip, any subsequent 
level changes will have no eff ect on the reverb – eff ectively the snare will get “wetter” as the level of the 
kit falls. Of course, one simple solution to this would be to route the reverb to the same aux channel 
strip, but this would then have a knock-on eff ect on the vocal and strings reverb! 

307
Mixing in Logic
 So, here we see a perfect example of the application and benefi t of grouping channels as apposed 
to bussing signal via aux channel strips. Grouping retains all the important gain structures of the 
original mix – the ratios of reverb are retained, even as the level of the group is reduced. Bussing still 
has its place, though, as there’s no way to apply eff ects like compression and EQ onto the group. So, 
in theory, a good mix may well involve combination of both grouping and bussing via aux channel 
strips, grouping to “lock” collections of faders, and bussing via aux channel strips to provide grouped 
applications of eff ects!   
 Figure 8.22 
 Shared reverbs can 
make the use of 
aux channels for 
grouping purposes 
problematic; 
although the fader 
level of the drums 
group is reduced, 
the reverb level 
stays the same.   
 Figure 8.23 
 This example uses 
both groups and 
bus processing. The 
Group allows us to 
better control the 
level of the drums 
in the mix, while the 
aux channel is solely 
used for processing 
rather than level 
control. 

308
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Looking more closely at the Group Settings dialog, you can see a number of additional features that 
could potentially improve the speed and effi  ciency of your mix. Besides obvious grouping controls like 
volume and mute, you can also link the send controls (this could even be helpful in quickly modifying 
cue mixes as you’re recording), as well as any linked Automation Mode selections. However, one vital 
keyboard shortcut to use in conjunction with the Groups is the Toggle Group Clutch command. By 
default, this is confi gured onto Shift + G and can be used to temporarily disable all groups – a great way 
of quickly modifying an “internal” balance within any number of groups, without having to laboriously 
enable or disable the relevant groups.  
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 2 
 Parallel Compression 
 Parallel compression has become a real buzzword in mixing circles, but what is it, and can Logic be 
realistically used to apply it? Unlike the traditional insert-based approach to applying compression, 
which works on the assumption that you’ll only want to hear the 100% compressed signal, parallel 
compression off ers the unique possibility of hearing both compressed and uncompressed versions. 
Although parallel compression is arguably less eff ective at reducing the dynamic range of a signal, it is an 
excellent way of combining both the hyped-up sound of heavy compression, with the natural dynamics 
and “air” of an uncompressed recording – yes, to use the cliché, it really is the best of both worlds! 
 One really simple way of creating parallel compression is to copy the source track onto two adjacent 
channels. On the one channel, keep the signal uncompressed and open, while on the other, try 
setting up really juicy, pumping compression. Don’t worry about the integrity of the signal – pick a 
suitably tough ratio (6:1 or harder!), relatively quick Attack and Release, and let gain reduction pump 
well into the 6–10 dB range. Some engineers will even EQ this channel, picking out the extreme 
 Figure 8.24    In this example of parallel compression, a bus send is being used to add compression 
using the same routing technique as a reverb send. Use a heavy compression setting, and then bleed 
in the required amount compressed signal to add “body” without compromising transient detail.   
(Continued)

309
Mixing in Logic
highs and lows (80 Hz and 12 kHz), as well as applying a little tuck in the mids. With the compression 
set up, combine the two channels together, mixing in the compressed version to add “balls” and 
body to the uncompressed track. 
 Another interesting approach is to use the compressor almost like a send eff ect – blending any 
number of sounds through to the same heavy compression setting. Try doing this on a drum mix, 
sending mainly the close snare and kick drum through to the paralleled compression. Again, pick 
some suitably pumpy settings, maybe even a touch of extra ambience, and sit the bus in the mix to 
add the required amount of weight and importance.   
 8.9  Working with Channel Strip Settings 
 As you’re building up the mix, you may well fi nd that certain 
channels require similar settings to that of others – maybe 
you’ve compressed and equalized one backing vocal, and 
you want to apply the same setting to corresponding backing 
vocal track. Clicking on the small arrow to the right of the 
Insert label allows you to open up the channel strip settings 
menu. Try using the copy/paste option as a simple means of 
duplicating the channel settings on a number of channels. 
Alternatively, if you have a number of favorite channel strip 
settings – maybe a particular compression and EQ on a given 
vocalist, for example – you can also save the presets off , as you 
would any of the other plug-in presets. These favorites could 
then be recalled at any point on any given song.  
 8.10  Automation: The Basics 
 Despite the considered application of compression, you may 
still find the demands of your mix changing from verse to 
chorus and vice versa. Ultimately, although one balance may 
work at a given point in time of the song’s development, the 
same might not be true as further instrumentation enters and 
the musical qualities of the track change. In the “golden days” 
of recording – before computers stepped out of the offi  ce and 
into the studio – it wasn’t uncommon for a mix to involve “all-
hands-on-deck”: the engineer, assistant engineer, and even 
the members of the band, all frantically pushing faders up and 
down to shape the mix to the dynamic of the song. 
 Logic’s Automation provides complete control over qualities 
of the mix throughout the duration of the song – including 
basics like volume, pan, and mute and more advanced 
options like plug-in parameter automation. The golden rule 
 Figure 8.25  Use the channel strip 
settings as a quick way of moving one 
channel’s plug-in confi guration to 
another. The presets feature also allows 
us to do this between songs.   

310
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
to remember with automation is only to apply it toward the ends of a mix – once you’ve established 
the principal balance, equalization, compression, and eff ects usage, only then should you begin to turn 
to automation. The problem is that any mix changes after automation, although not impossible, can be 
quite a headache to perform – potentially requiring you to rewrite or delete existing automation moves. 
 8.11  Track-Based Versus Region-Based Automation 
 One potentially confusing aspect of automation is that Logic contains two contrasting methods for applying 
automation – track-based automation and region-based automation. In truth, region-based automation – 
where automation data is contained within the audio or MIDI region itself – is actually a throwback to the 
earlier versions of Logic and has largely been retained for the purpose of backward compatibility, although, 
to be fair, it still has its uses. Track-based automation – where automation data is recorded on separate 
multiple track lanes to that of the audio region – off ers a far more fl exible means of creating and editing 
automation data, as well has having the distinct operational benefi t of not being tied to the regions in 
questions. Editing or moving a guitar solo, for example, won’t necessarily disrupt the automation data that 
accompanies it.  
 Figure 8.26  Two diff erent approaches to automation – the old-fashioned Hyper Draw (top) and the standard 
track-based automation (bottom).   
 Thankfully, Logic does provide a means of transporting one automation type (region-based or track-
based) to another – making the combination of the two approaches quite a powerful feature. For 
example, you could write the automation using the superior track-based controls and then convert this 
information into automation data that is stored with the region. For now though, we’ll take a look at how 
track-based automation works and then consider the region-based case later on.  
 PLUG-IN BOXOUT 6 
 PlatinumVerb 
 PlatinumVerb is a valuable alternative to Space Designer, either for Logic Express users (who don’t 
have access to Space Designer) or for situations where you’re running slightly low on available 
DSP resources. In contrast to Space Designer, PlatinumVerb places a surprisingly low drain on 
(Continued)

311
Mixing in Logic
 8.12  Automation Modes 
 To engage a channel into automation, you’ll need to change automation mode according to the way in 
which you intend to write automation data into Logic. By default, all faders are set to their Off  position, 
just above the pan pot – this means that any existing automation data are ignored and the faders can 
be freely moved or repositioned (without fear of Logic snapping them back!) at any point. Engaging any 
of your faders into an automation Write mode (Write, Touch, or Latch) will allow you to begin writing 
data based on the current song position. Interestingly, though, the “recording” of automation data is 
independent of the transport’s record switch; in other words, you only need to be in Play mode for 
automation to be written. 
 First, let’s take a look at the various modes used to record automation data. 
 Write 
 Think of this mode as the most dangerous! Any fader engaged into write mode will record data onto the 
automation lanes, even if there’s existing data, so this should really be used with care. Write, however, 
can be a valid way of deleting and replacing automation data in one pass. 
the CPU, although correspondingly, you may fi nd its 
output slightly less authentic than Space Designer. 
Used carefully however – on short settings with 
drums, for example, or any instrumentation sitting 
lower down in the mix – it can produce surprisingly 
eff ective results.  
 One of the best things about “modeled” reverb, as 
apposed to convolution reverb, is that it off ers precise 
control over the sound produced in the virtual room. In 
the case of PlatinumVerb, it divides the reverb up into 
two key stages – the early refl ections, as sound initially 
bounces back from the walls, and the more diffuse 
reverb tail, as the refl ections merge together to create 
a defi nable “trailing-off ” to the sound. Try moving the 
Balance slider over each side to fully understand and 
audition the eff ects obtained in each stage. 
 Using a predominant mix of early refl ections can be a great way of thickening up drum sounds by 
producing a noticeable, distracting reverb tails. Experimenting with the room shape, stereo base, 
and room size will change the qualities of refl ections produced, either by creating a tight centralized 
reverb or by creating a wider, more expansive set of refl ections. When it comes to the reverb tail, 
try exploring the density, diff usion, and reverb time parameters. On the whole, most conventional 
reverb eff ects tend to stay within the realms of 1–2 s, and, not surprisingly, this is where PlatinumVerb 
seems to sound at its best. Density and diff usion, respectively, govern the spacing and randomness 
of the taps. Try using both in their lower setting for an eff ect like Spring Reverb (great on electric 
guitars) or use a higher setting for a smoother sounding reverb.  
 Figure 8.27    If you’re short of processing 
resources, or don’t have access to Space 
Designer, PlatinumVerb makes for an 
excellent alternative source of reverb.   

312
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Touch 
 Touch is the safer way of writing automation data, as it only engages into writing data once the fader 
has been “touched.” Release the fader – even as the track is still playing – and the fader will return the 
previous recorded position and carry on reading any existing automation data. Touch, therefore, can be 
great in creating a few strategic nips and tucks in your mix – briefl y either lifting a phrase out for a few 
seconds or pulling back any part that dominates the mix. 
 Latch 
 Latch mode is comparable to touch, in that a fader is only engaged into writing data once it has 
been touched. However, when the fader is released, it continues to write data – potentially erasing 
any existing moves – and the level it was last left at. Latch can be a useful mode when you need to 
raise or lower a level of a part and then leave it at that level for the remainder of the song without 
having to constantly “hold” the fader in place. Stopping the transport will, of course, stop the writing 
of automation data. 
 Read 
 Read is a “safe” automation mode, where any automation data is read back but no further moves can 
be written – indeed, if the fader is moved for any reason, it will promptly snap back into place! On the 
whole, most users tend to leave faders in Touch mode as they’re automating, allowing them quickly 
engage the writing of automation data without having to constantly switch modes. However, to reduce 
the risk of overwriting certain aspects of the mix, it’s best to switch all faders back to Read mode once 
you have fi nished automation.  
 Figure 8.28 
 Each of the 
four diff erent 
automation modes 
used in Logic has its 
own impact on how 
you read and write 
automation data. 
 Although the description of diff erent modes has assumed you’re working with the channels faders, it’s 
important to remember that once a channel has been placed into Write, Touch, or Latch, any movement 
in its accompanying parameters – including mute, pan, or any of the plug-in parameters – will also be 
recorded. This allows any part of the mix to be automated with the same degree of fl exibility as the 
channel faders; for example, the reverb time of a vocal reverb could be swelled going into a “larger” 
chorus, or the feedback of a tape delay unit could be modulated to create some dub-inspired delay 
treatments on the end of a line.  

313
Mixing in Logic
 PLUG-IN BOXOUT 7 
 Using Delay 
 Although most users tend to perceive reverb as the main tool for defi ning spatial qualities of a mix, 
it’s also surprising to realize just how much spatial interest can be added with something as simple 
as a delay line. Logic comes with three diff erent delay plug-ins – sample delay, tape delay, and stereo 
delay – facilitating a range of diff erent delay treatments. 
 As the name suggests, tape delay is modeled on the type of delay eff ect produced by classic tape-
based delay eff ects like Roland’s Space Echo or the WEM CopyCat delay. As these processors use tape 
to produce their delays, the eff ect has a characteristic “dark and dirty” sound to it. By default, the plug-
in works with tempo divisions – simply select the required division (semibreve, crotchet, quaver, and 
so on) and the delay will appear in time with your track, even if the song’s tempo changes. Use the 
Groove slider in the extreme settings (33% and 75%) to change the division to dotted note values. 
You can also achieve some great slap-back delays (an eff ect famously used on early rock‘n’roll vocals) 
by using a semiquaver setting and sliding the Groove parameter down into the region of 33%–50%.  
 Feedback sends a proportion of the sound back on itself, eff ectively creating a regenerative delay eff ect. 
On the tape delay, feedback settings in the region of 50%–100% will appear to “hold” the delay, with an 
increasing amount of distortion and grit on each repeat. Stereo delay works on the same principle as 
tape delay, although it deliberately avoids the tape-based coloration, in preference of a cleaner digital 
repeat. You can also set diff erent delay time for the left- and right-hand side of the stereo image. 
 In contrast to the other delay plug-ins, sample delay only deals with incredibly small delay times, 
measured in samples. As a rough guide, 44 samples equate to 1 ms of delay, so even at its maximum 
setting (4000 samples), sample delay only gives us about 90 ms to play with! So why use this plug-in? 
Well, sample delay can be benefi cial in applications fi xing minute time delays caused when microphones 
are widely space apart – applying sample delay to correct these anomalies and create a more phase-
coherent image. If you’re less technically inclined, try using a small amount of sample delay on some 
drum room microphones to simulate the eff ect of sound refl ecting further away from the kit.  
 Figure 8.29 
 Logic’s simple delay plug-
ins can be a surprisingly 
eff ective tool for mixing – 
from rhythmic delay 
eff ects to subtle forms 
of “slap-back” ambience. 

314
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 8.13  Viewing and Editing Automation 
 By default, Logic hides the display of automation data – otherwise an arrangement could soon become 
cluttered. However, once you’ve started recording a few moves, you might want to see how the mix is 
beginning to shape up. Press “A” to display the current recorded automation. This is toggled so that you 
can quickly switch automation viewing on and off . 
 With the automation view engaged, you’ll notice some important changes to both the tracks and the 
arrangement itself. Looking fi rst at the tracks, you should now see the automation mode indicated on 
them (Read, Touch, and so on) alongside the current viewable automation parameter – clicking on 
this should allow you to scroll through all the parameters available for automation. You’ll also see a 
small bar graph meter indicating the current fader position. Note that this can be freely modifi ed and 
controlled, just like the “real” fader as part of the Mixer, and can be a great way of adding in a few cunning 
automation moves. 
 Figure 8.30 
 You’ll need 
to enable the 
automation view 
mode to see or edit 
the moves you’ve 
recorded. 
 Where multiple plug-in parameters have been automated, you can also add further track lanes into the 
equation, simply by clicking the small arrow toward the bottom right-hand corner of the track name in 
the track list. Alternatively, option-clicking opens as many automation lanes as is required to display all 
the automation data currently recorded. 
 Automation data itself is displayed as a series of nodes, which can be manipulated using the usual Pen, 
Eraser, and Arrow tools. As you’d expect, the Pen tool allows to draw new automation moves, while 
the Arrow can modify existing node points, or by double-clicking add new nodes into the equation. 
Indeed, in many situations, it may be quicker and easier to draw in a couple of automation nodes than to 
laboriously write in a series of moves. Manually placing the nodes can also be a good way of setting in 
long automation events – a long fi lter sweep over 30 bars, for example – or when events, like fade-outs, 
need to happen at a precise time.  
 When two nodes are placed manually, you can also make use of the unique Automation Curve tool as a 
means of adding a degree or “curvature” to the line. Simply click and hold on the line between the nodes, 

315
Mixing in Logic
using the Automation Curve tool, and drag above or below the line, or from side-to-side, to create one 
of four diff erent adjustable curve shapes.  
 Where ranges of moves need to be moved or duplicated, you can also drag-enclose a number of nodes 
simply by holding Shift as you rubber band a group of nodes. With the nodes selected, they can then be 
moved en masse, or with the option key held down, duplicated to a new position. One other potential 
lifesaver, in case you’ve written in the automation moves but feel the need for them to be a couple of 
decibels higher or lower, is Logic’s scaling feature. To scale a track’s automation moves, use the Command 
key and drag up or down on the small bar graph meter as part of the track list. Look carefully at the 
selected values, and you should be able to spot the corresponding changes you’ve made.  
 Figure 8.31    Press the small arrow on each track lane to open up a parallel automation lane, making it clear 
to see the moves on several diff erent parameters on the same track.   
 Figure 8.32 
 Use the 
Automation Curve 
tool to create 
neat and natural 
curves between 
automation 
modes. 

316
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 PLUG-IN BOXOUT 8 
 Vocal Processing 
 Vocals can be one of the trickiest parts of a mix to get right, so it’s great to see a range of plug-ins 
suitable for vocal processing in Logic. Away from the core plug-ins that we’ve already covered – 
including EQ, compression, and reverb – you’ll also fi nd the DeEsser and Pitch Correction plug-ins 
helpful in crafting that polished vocal performance your mix requires. 
 Logic’s DeEsser is a handy way of taming any excessive sibilance (like the letters s and t) that might 
have been accentuated by a poor choice of microphone. The DeEsser works by analyzing the input 
and then applying a selective amount of gain reduction whenever problematic sibilance is heard. 
The Detector part of the interface is what should be used to spectrally locate the sibilance in the 
vocal. Set the Monitor mode to Det (detection) to tune into the specifi c frequency your signer’s 
sibilance is occurring (usually somewhere in the region of 6 kHz). Now, fl ick to the Sens (sensitivity) 
monitor setting and adjust the sensitivity so that it only fl icks on when the sibilance occurs. Moving 
the monitor to its OFF position, adjust the Suppressor parameter to the same parameter to that of 
the Detector and increase the strength to get the required amount of sibilance reduction. 
 The Pitch Correction plug-in is loosely based on the infamous Antares AutoTune plug-in and provides 
an on-the-fl y means of correcting intonation problems in a vocal – or indeed, any other monophonic – 
performance. At extremes, using the response setting on its 122 ms setting, the plug-in can be 
forced to produce the clichéd, quantized vocal eff ect so carelessly abused in the late 1990s! On softer 
sensitivity settings, however, it can be a useful way of taming any problematic pitch drifts. To achieve 
the best results with the plug-in, you’ll need to specify the key and scale the song is in. A number of 
presets for this are available, but you can also manually switch the notes in and out by clicking on 
the accompanying keyboard. 
 Figure 8.33 
 Logic’s DeEsser and 
Pitch Correction 
plug-ins can aid a 
number of problems 
in relation to your 
vocals. 
 8.14  The Automation Menu Options 
 Besides the various graphic tools for editing automation data, there’s also an accompanying automation 
menu by right clicking (or Control + Clicking) containing various options to delete moves, as well as some 
intriguing options to move data back and forth between track-based automation and region-based 

317
Mixing in Logic
automation (as previously discussed). Although it is, of course, easy enough to delete selective parts 
of automation using the eraser tool, the menu options make quick-and-easy to create “blank-slate” 
on individual automation lines, tracks, or indeed the whole song itself. Certainly, in situations where you 
might inherit a previous song fi le for a new project, this can be a great way of clearing out problematic 
automation moves.  
 Figure 8.34    The Track Automation menu includes several powerful features, 
including the ability to move automation between its native track-based form and 
the region-based solution of Hyper Draw.   
 Moving track-based automation to region-based automation is useful in situations where you’d like the 
automation permanently attached to a part, without having to continually specify for the automation 
data to be moved every time you realign or duplicate the part. Possibly the best “real-world” application 
of this would have to be the use of automation to control fi lter movements – maybe you’ve written a 
couple of distinctive fi lter movements that are as much part of the musicality in the region as the notes 
contained within the MIDI sequence. By switching the automation over to region-based (Ctrl + Click and 
then Always Move Automation With Region), you eff ectively lock the movements into the part, allowing 
yourself to forget about whether the data are moved or not. Of course, at any point, this same data can 
be brought back to track-based automation by Control Clicking and returning the feature to Always Ask 
whether to move the automation or not. 
 KNOWLEDGEBASE 3 
   Saving CPU: Freezing and More … 
 At some point in the mixing process, it’s highly likely that you’ll start to hit dreaded inevitability 
of a CPU overload. Dealing eff ectively with this problem could make the diff erence between a 
half-baked mix and a distinctive mix, using appropriate strategies to save CPU resources without 
compromising on sound quality. First, it helps if you’re clear as to which plug-ins are the real CPU 
(Continued)

318
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
monsters in your session. For example, synthesizers like the ES2 and Sculpture can take up a big 
quota of resources, while the EXS24 (assuming it not making lots of use of its fi lter) is surprisingly 
processor effi  cient. In respect to plug-ins, Space Designer can be really CPU-hungry, especially if 
you’re using longer IR fi les in excess of 2 s, while the Channel EQ is almost negligible on today’s 
Intel-powered machines. 
 Arguably the first technique, therefore, is to look for any optimizations you can apply to the 
session that might improve overall CPU effi  ciency. For example, try turning off  unused oscillators 
in the ES2, or removing excessive Space Designer use on inserts, in preference for a few instances 
on aux sends. 
 The next step is to use the track freeze option. Freezing eff ectively creates an audio bounce of the 
track in question, complete with all its inherent plug-in settings, and then deactivates the plug-ins 
accordingly. If you then try to edit any part of the track – either opening an instrument or plug-in or 
repositioning a region – Logic will remind you of its “frozen” status. If you do need to carry out the 
edits, simply unfreeze the track, make the modifi cations, and then refreeze. 
 Freezing itself is carried out with the small freeze icon as part of the track header. If you can’t see the 
icon, select Alt+T and then add the freeze button into the set of options. Note that the freeze occurs 
across the full duration of the project, so it’s worth moving back the project end marker to the real 
fi nish point of your track. 
 As an alternative, you can also carry out an audio bounce yourself, simply rendering complex virtual 
instruments as audio regions, saving off  the instrument settings, and packing away the MIDI data 
(just in case you need to go back). This can be an eff ective solution earlier in the project where you 
intend to do lots of structural rearrangement with the regions at a later point.   
 Figure 8.35 
 Use the Freeze function 
to render an off -line 
version of the track and 
so release valuable CPU 
resources. 

319
Mixing in Logic
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 4 
 Compression Circuit Types 
 The qualities of the diff erent compressors are something that tends to excite many professional 
engineers, mainly as the diff erent approaches to circuit design can achieve some radical diff erences 
in the types of compression achieved. Ultimately, this means that certain compressors tend to suit 
themselves to specifi c applications, bringing plenty of “character,” as well as gain control, to the 
input they’re processing. In the example of Logic’s compressor plug-in, therefore, we’re provided 
with Platinum, ClassA_R, ClassA_U, VCA, FET, and Opto. 
 Although the exact models from which these circuit types are derived aren’t supplied, it is worth 
noting some of the key diff erences between these diff erent options and how best to apply them. 
Opto represents the oldest compressor design, based on early models that used optical cells as part 
of their gain control circuitry. This unique design resulted in a degree of latency – both with respect 
to the Attack and Release on the compressor – that tends to deliver a more “musical” compression, 
as apposed to a harder, more aggressive gain control. The Opto circuit type, therefore, works well 
with bass sounds (that don’t suit fast Attack and Release times), vocals, or anything that you want to 
retain a degree of musicality and lightness with.  
 The FET design, on the other hand, used Field Eff ect Transistors to create a more heavy-handed 
compression, particularly good at catching transients. The FET circuit model therefore, and to our 
ears the ClassA_U, can produce some really eff ective results on drums, especially when used across 
overheads. In this application, don’t be afraid to use low threshold setting with “pumping” Attack 
and Release times for an aggressive, almost low-fi  compression sound. 
 Although this provides a theoretical background to select the circuit type, the best approach is to 
use your ears. Try confi guring some basic compression settings and then fl ick between the diff erent 
compressor models to hear the marked diff erences in how they sound.  
 Figure 8.36  The diff erent circuit types 
approximate the unique sonic behavior 
of many classic types of compressor 
like the Urei 1176 or LA-2A.   

320
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
  WALKTHROUGH 
 Adding Compression 
  Step 1: 
 Insert a compressor across the instrument you want to 
process and start by establishing some basic settings. 
Working from the default positions, try fi nding a ratio 
and threshold setting that works for the instrument 
you’re trying to process. For example, for a gentle 
compression, use a medium threshold with soft ratio 
(1.5:1 through to 2:1) yielding about 2–3 dB of gain 
reduction (another term for compression). For a harder 
compression eff ect, consider bringing up the ratio (4:1 
or more) and lowering the threshold to achieve 6 dB 
or more of gain reduction.  
  Step 2: 
 With these basic settings established, you can now 
start to refine the compression a little. Try adapting 
the Attack and Release settings to best suit the style of 
compression you want and the sound you’re trying to 
squash. Slower settings (Attack 40 ms, Release 400 ms) 
tend to create a more natural progression in and out of 
gain reduction, although you might fi nd the occasional 
loud transient slipping through the net. Faster Attack 
and Release settings (Attack 0–10 ms, Release 100 ms) 
produce a “pumping” eff ect, which tends to work well 
where you want the compression to sound more 
noticeable.  
  Step 3: 
 As compression leads to an overall loss in level, you 
need to raise the output to restore the overall signal 
to its original peak level (although, of course, the 
signal will be more compressed). Try bypassing the 
compressor, noting the meter readings, and then 
using the Gain parameter (with the compressor active 
again) to restore the original level. Listen carefully to 
the compressed sound in the mix – is there enough 
compression to sit the instrument correctly? Is 
the compression too obvious? Further fine-tuning 
(maybe increasing the ratio or softening the Attack 
and Release) optimizes the compression for the 
instrument’s position in the mix.    
 Figure 8.39 Increasing output gain  .
 Figure 8.37 Basic compression setting.  
 Figure 8.38 Refi ning the attack and release  .

321
Mixing in Logic
 LOGIC TIPS 
 Plug-In Delay Compensation 
 Any plug-in added into a channels signal path creates a small amount of delay or latency, through 
the extra processing required in producing the eff ect. Thankfully, however, Logic includes a feature to 
compensate for any delays incurred through plug-in processing, called plug-in delay compensation 
(PDC), available under the general tab of the audio preferences (Logic Pro X > Preferences > Audio). 
For users using standard audio unit plug-ins (either Logic’s own or from other developers), stick 
to the “audio tracks and instruments setting.” However, if you are running a processing-accelerator 
system like Universal Audio’s UAD-2system, you may notice delays building up when you start to use 
buses to apply UAD-2 plug-ins. In these situations, change the preference to its All setting – Logic 
should now play the entirety of the session in time.   
 Figure 8.40  Changing the PDC 
settings is important for users of 
processing-accelerator systems 
such as Universal Audio’s UAD or 
TC Electronics’ PowerCore. 
 PLUG-IN BOXOUT 9 
 Pedalboard 
 Pedalboard is an ideal companion plug-in to Amp Designer and is designed to replicate the array of 
footpedals that guitarists might use to shape the sound of their guitar. As such, you’ll probably want 
to place Pedalboard ahead of an instance of Amp Designer, although of course, you’re free to use 
it anywhere along your signal path should you see fi t. Indeed, the combination of both Pedalboard 
and Amp Designer shouldn’t just be reserved for guitars, as the two plug-ins can work wonders on a 
range of sounds – from synth basses, to low-fi  breakbeats, and vocals! 
(Continued)

322
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Pedalboard is easy to use – simply drag the required pedals from the Pedal Browser on the right-hand 
side of the interface over to the pedal area found on the left-hand side of the plug-in. The signal path 
works from left to right, with each subsequent pedal adding the previous pedal’s output. This means 
the order of the pedals can have a big eff ect on the eventual output, although it’s generally best to 
place “tone” pedals, like compressors, equalizers, and distortion pedals, earlier on in the signal path; 
with eff ects pedals, including fl ange, chorus, delay, and spring reverb later on in chain of footpedals. 
 As well as using a left-to-right “serial” routing, Pedalboard also allows you to create parallel routing 
confi gurations where you can split the signal between two separate busses and then sum the results 
at the end of the chain of footpedals. For example, this makes it possible to layer two diff erent types 
of distortion, rather than each distortion unit adding to the results of the previous pedal, or to send 
a split a sound to be processed by reverb and delay as separate entities. 
 You can assign a pedal to Bus B using the Routing area above Pedalboard – simply click on the pedal 
you want to move, and it switches to the upper Bus. Note a Mixer object now appears at the end 
of the signal path, allowing you to blend and pan the two discrete signal paths (A and B). Note that 
you can also manually insert a Splitter pedal to achieve similar result, although the added benefi t 
here is that the Splitter pedal can also divide the sound by frequency, allowing each bus to process 
a diff erent part of the frequency spectrum.   
 Figure 8.41 
 Pedalboard 
replicates 
the array of 
footpedals 
guitarists might 
use ahead of 
their amp to 
shape the basic 
sound of the 
guitar. 

This page intentionally left blank

 In this chapter 
 9.1 
Introduction 
325 
 9.2 
Diff erent Approaches to 
Mastering 
325 
 9.3 
Bounce to Disk 
327 
 9.4 
Audio Mastering in 
Logic 
332 
 9.5 
Editing Fades 
332 
 9.6 
Exporting and 
Burning 
335 
 9.7 
Creating a Red Book 
Master 
338 
 Knowledgebases 
 Premastering 
328 
 Dithering 
330 
 POW-r 
338 
 Red Book Standard CD 
Applications for the 
Mac 
338 
Disc Description Protocol 
343
 Plug-in focus 
 Linear-Phase EQ 
335 
 Multipressor and Multiband 
Compression 
339 
 Limiting 
341 
 Other Mastering Tools 
342 

325
Mastering in Logic 
 9.1  Introduction 
 If you’ve ever tried burning a few tracks onto a CD, you’ll be well aware of the challenges of producing 
a CD that sounds comparable to a commercial release. Even with a complete mastery of the production 
process, and some great-sounding final mixes, your CD could still sound weak and, comparatively, 
amateurish. Although OS X and iTunes off er integral CD creation and burning, the fact is that professional 
musicians and bands will invest a signifi cant amount of money and experience in turning their fi nished 
mixes into a fi nal product. So does this mean that users of Logic can’t enjoy the same degree of fi nesse 
and polish? Well, with a little know-how, and the audio tools of Logic, you too can produce release-
quality mastered audio. 
 The term mastering describes the process of compiling and editing several (possibly contrasting) 
recordings, applying some form of audio “sweetening,” and assembling these to produce a fi nal Red Book 
“production master” CD. Traditionally, mastering has necessitated the use of a separate facility (other 
than the music studio), specially equipped with mastering equipment perhaps including multiband 
compressors and high-end mastering EQ, and dedicated workstations like Sonic Solutions, Pyramix, or 
Sequoia. Nowadays, however, the world of media is a lot more demanding, so it’s not uncommon for 
musicians, bands, and composers to master by themselves. The bar, it appears, has been raised – and 
Logic can meet the sonic challenges! 
 9.2  Different Approaches to Mastering 
 Mastering itself can be divided into several objectives. First, of course, is the sweetening we most 
commonly associate with a commercial CD – in other words, the use of compression, EQ, and a host of 
other processes across the fi nished two-track master. Second, tracks will also need to be edited – setting 
correct start and end points for example-or placing any fade-ins or fade-outs as required. Finally, the 
fi nished fi les or regions need to be ordered for the CD, with appropriate markers to defi ne the tracks and 
index points that appear on the CD. The fi rst two objectives are easily possible within Logic, but the fi nal 
stage may require you to look at other solutions to make a Red Book CD ready master. We’ll now look at 
three techniques of getting your music onto a CD now. 
 Technique 1: iTunes 
 The fi rst technique is the idea of applying mix sweetening, edits, fade-outs, and dithering all options 
inside the main Logic application. The fi nished fi les are then rendered (using Bounce to Disk or Logic 
Pro > File > Share discussed later) and exported as 16-bit 44.1 kHz fi les ready for compilation elsewhere. 

326
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
The compilation process, however, requires the use of other software – either iTunes (Apple’s integral 
 audio-CD burning tool) or dedicated Red Book software like Jam (see knowledgebase on external 
Red Book standard CD software).  
 Figure 9.1    Audio Masters, exported from Logic, can be assembled into a fi nished CD using iTunes or any 
other suitable Red Book standard software.   
 Technique 2: Burn from Logic 
 For the quickest and the most integral solution to the mastering problem, you can burn CDs directly 
from Logic. Again, sweetening and edits can be applied directly to the main application. The burning of 
CDs, however, is carried out from the Bounce menu – rather than rendering an audio fi le, you’ll burn the 
fi nished mix onto a CD. This method is, arguably, the quickest way of creating a CD, especially with just 
one or two tracks needing to be burned, but it doesn’t off er the most fl exible solution in the long run.  
 Technique 3: Export to Another Application 
 The best technique is to employ a separate Red Book standard CD application. Apple has stopped the 
development of Waveburner, originally part of the Logic Studio package, but dropped for version X. 

327
Mastering in Logic
 Figure 9.2    For a quick CD, use Logic’s integral CD Burn feature, as part of the Bounce to Disk option. 
Although this method is an easy way of burning single tracks (a rough mix, for example), it can be too 
restrictive for professional mastering.   
Alternatives are available such as Roxio Jam and Wavelab to mention just a few. The reason for employing 
these is the important Red Book options like International Standard Recording Codes (ISRC) and CD-Text 
that are not possible directly from Logic X. 
 9.3  Bounce to Disk 
 Whether you are mastering in Logic itself or using another application, the fi rst step will be to render your 
Logic mix as an audio fi le. The temptation to apply audio sweetening or fades in the main Logic project 
can be persuasive, but this should be avoided at all costs. Ideally, if you have at least one copy of your 
song unmastered at 24 bits, then it would be more suitable to take to a professional mastering engineer 
(when the lucrative record deal arrives!) than a home-mastered, 16-bit fi le. Separate high-resolution fi les 
also aff ord you the opportunity to approach mastering your work away from the “headspace” of a mix, so 
that tracks sound correct in terms of the whole CD rather than on an individual basis. 
 The Bounce dialog window can be accessed through the Bounce, “Bnce” button, on the main output 
channel strip. Before clicking on this, you’ll need to defi ne the length of the bounce, designated by the 
current cycle length – without this, Logic will simply default to bouncing from the beginning of the 
fi rst region to the end of the last. By defi ning the length manually, you can keep the best account of a 
few crucial factors – namely, the “hangover” at the end of the track generated by reverb tails and the 
allowance of a small amount of silence at the start of the audio fi le. At this stage, it’s probably best to 
render a slightly larger fi le, rather than too small, as trying to add information later (say, for example, 
when a reverb tail gets cut off ) can be tricky, if not impossible. 
 In the Bounce window, you’ll need to specify the fi le type, resolution, and dithering options. Ideally, a 
PCM, AIFF or WAV, 24 bit, 44.1 kHz, interleaved fi le is considered the best and current “raw data” for 
mastering, unless you’ve recorded at a higher sample rate than 44.1 kHz. More important, you should 

328
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 9.3    When performing a bounce in your Logic arrangement, check that the duration of the bounce is 
slightly longer than your track and the resolution is 24 bit.    
 KNOWLEDGEBASE 1 
 Pre-mastering 
 Offi  cially, the term “mastering” refers to the process of cutting a master disc from which the records 
would be pressed in duplication. Pre-mastering originally described the process that engineers used 
to prepare the audio signal for the vinyl medium. Nowadays, the term mastering tends to be used in 
place of pre-mastering and describes the process of preparing the audio for the intended medium, 
ordering the music and also signal processing.  
check that the dithering has been set to none, as dithering is best applied at the very last stage of 
mastering when the word length is reduced to a 16-bit master. The bounce itself can be carried out in 
real time (maybe you’ve got some live synths or eff ects coming into the audio mixer) or offl  ine – a quicker 
way of rendering to fi le by temporarily devoting all your computer’s resources to the bounce process.      

329
Mastering in Logic
 Figure 9.4 
   An alternative way to distribute your 
music would be by using the Share 
feature in Logic and exporting to the 
media browser for use with either 
an external CD application or iTunes. 
Note the export to Soundcloud 
integration here. 
 Logic’s Share Menu 
 In Logic X, there is a new menu called Share (Logic Pro > File > Share) that contains three options. The 
fi rst is to export directly to iTunes to make that all important playlist of your tunes. It can be good to 
compare your masters here to other professional releases using the shuffl  e mode. You’ll soon see if your 
track sticks out or not.  
 Figure 9.5 
 Sharing with iTunes 
will reveal a window 
permitting you the ability 
to populate the basic 
fi elds about the tune 
such as the Artist, 
Composer, and Track 
Name. 

330
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The second option permits you to add the shared audio fi le into Logic’s Media Browser (and therefore 
Finder also). This feature is good if you’re at the end of your mix and wishing to bounce ready for 
mastering. Alternatively, you could be at the end of mastering and just wish to email the audio to a 
client for approval. 
 The fi nal option is sharing to Soundcloud integration. This will prove popular with Logic users who are 
increasingly using this medium as a way of expressing their audio output. 
 Figure 9.6 
   Under the Share to Media 
Browser option, the 
fi lename is the only fi eld 
available for alteration, 
and usefully Logic places 
in the time and date for 
you. It is then up to you 
to provide a name. Notice 
the options for fi le quality 
also. 
 KNOWLEDGEBASE 2 
 Dithering 
 Dithering is an essential part of the analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion process. However, the process 
of dithering a signal also refers to the process of altering the word length to suit your specifi cation. 
For example, if you bounce your Logic song as a 24-bit fi le but wish to place this on a Red Book 
CD, you will need to dither this down to 16 bits. The 24-bit recording will allow for a much more 
accurate 16-bit fi le because of the increased resolution, unlike the “dither” noise added in 16-bit A/D 
conversion. Logic employs a licensed algorithm called Psychoacoustically Optimized Wordlength 
Reduction (POW-r) from the POW-r Consortium LLC ( www.mil-media.com/docs/articles/powr
.shtml ). The POW-r algorithm is considered one of the best available dithering algorithms and is 
widely used by mastering engineers around the world.  

331
Mastering in Logic
 Figure 9.7 
   The Share to Soundcloud option initially opens 
up a log in page where you can log in using 
your Soundcloud details, Google log in, or even 
Facebook. Once logged in, you’re permitted 
to populate a number of fi elds and specify 
the quality of the audio and whether it can be 
streamed or downloaded. 

332
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 9.4  Audio Mastering in Logic 
 With the raw data of your tracks assembled, you can begin to look at mix sweetening. With the various 
songs pulled into a master Logic session, you could place each region on a diff erent track and experiment 
with various plug-ins to reach the desired sound. Ideally, the CD should present a rounded and uniform 
tone throughout, with a consistent “loudness” across the tracks – you could even try importing some 
commercial tracks as a reference to see just how far you can take things. Exactly how you achieve this 
will vary from track to track. 
 The principal tools used in mastering are well represented in Logic, with a number of dedicated mastering 
plug-ins, including phase-linear EQ, multiband compression, and limiting. Obviously, you can use any 
plug-in where appropriate, but these particular tools will be the most useful in achieving a professional 
sound. Plug-ins can be inserted either on the individual track’s insert points (for song-specifi c processing) 
or across the main master-channel strip for general application (maybe when the album needs to be 
limited as a whole, for example). As with any audio processing, the order of the plug-ins is vital for the 
end result, although the widely accepted order for mastering is EQ, followed by compression, and fi nally 
limiting. Metering (applied across the main output using the Channel EQ’s Spectrum Analyzer or the 
Multimeter plug-in) will help keep an overview of things – note, in particular, how the commercial tracks 
might meter diff erently to your own mixes. 
 9.5  Editing Fades 
 Besides preparing the sound of the tracks, it’s also important to look at some other important 
mastering details, like the exact start and end points, and any desired fade-ins or fade-outs. Having 
already mastered audio editing in  Chapter 5 , you should have no problems switching over to working 
on whole songs rather than individual regions. When you’re editing the start point, however, make 
sure you leave a small amount of silence and don’t cut right to the beat – this allows for older CD 
players to demute and stop the track from “jumping-out” at the start of playback. Also, pay close 
attention to unwanted noise at either end of the track – the easiest way to address this is to either use 
the Sample Editor’s Functions menu to “Silence” unwanted noise or use a quick fade-in and fade-out 
as appropriate. 
 Creating proper track fade-outs (i.e., fading out over the last chorus) is a little more taxing. The problem 
lies in the fact that adding a fade using Logic’s conventional method – arrangement area fade tool – 
doesn’t account for the use of mastering processors. As the fades are pre-eff ects, any corresponding 
change in the level of the track will result in a change in compression – so as the track fades out, for 
example, it slowly loosens its compression. To counteract this, try performing another bounce, this time 
with the processing in place. The new “compressed” region can then be reinserted into Logic (the old 
eff ect being disabled), and then the fade can be applied. An alternative method would be to automate 
your fader of your stereo track as this is post-eff ects. 

333
Mastering in Logic
 Figure 9.8    Mastering in Logic using a combination of channel inserts and the main stereo output’s insert 
points. 

334
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 9.9    Use Logic’s Sample Editor to perform basic “top and tailing” tasks, like silencing unwanted noise or 
creating small fades (as illustrated).   
 Figure 9.10 
   For longer fade-outs, you’ll need to render the fi le 
with eff ects and then create the fade using either 
Logic’s region fade tool (as illustrated) or the Sample 
Editor’s fade. 

335
Mastering in Logic
  PLUG-IN FOCUS 1 
 Linear-Phase EQ 
 Having looked at Logic’s standard channel EQ in the mixing chapter, let’s take a look at the mastering-
orientated Linear-Phase EQ. Being much more CPU intensive than the Channel EQ, the Linear-Phase 
EQ produces a technically superior sound by removing the phase shifts (caused as frequencies are 
cut and boosted) that occur in a conventional EQ. Even with its CPU drain, the Linear-Phase EQ is a 
welcome and sonically accurate tool for enhancing and shaping the timbre of a track in mastering. 
Operationally speaking, the Linear-Phase EQ includes the same controls as found on the Channel EQ 
and the same phenomenally useful  FFT analyzer. 
 Applying EQ in mastering requires an approach diff erent to that of mixing. On the whole, your 
approach needs to be as subtle as possible – remember everything you do will be much more 
noticeable as you’re only working with two stereo tracks! Try to keep boosts, or preferably cuts, to a 
maximum of ±3 dB with a wide bandwidth (low Q parameter) – if you’re going beyond this, you may 
well have a problem with the original mix. Overall, your track should exhibit a smooth response, with 
a gentle roll-off  of high-frequency energy. Remember though that there are other tools that can also 
have a timbral eff ect on the mix – sometimes more successful than EQ – like multiband compression 
(especially on bass) or harmonic excitement (for some top-end sparkle).  
 Figure 9.11 
 The Linear-Phase 
EQ removes any 
of the usual phase 
shifts that occur 
with conventional 
parametric 
equalization. 
 9.6  Exporting and Burning 
 Once the tracks have been processed and edited correctly, you can begin to create the fi nal exported 
16-bit masters ready to be burned, or indeed, you could burn the fi les directly from Logic. The Bounce 
dialog window again comes into action – either to create the fi nal rendered fi les or to provide access 
to the Burn feature. Given the regions of the exact fi nished song length, you can use the Region menu 
to select “Set Locators by Regions,” and in this way, the cycle length (and therefore the bounce) will be 

336
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
exactly the same length as the region. The Bounce dialog window should specify the creation of 16-bit 
fi les, which will necessitate the (fi nal) application of Dither to smooth out any quantizing noise brought 
about by moving away from 24 bits. Once exported, these fi les can be dragged straight into iTunes (or 
other suitable software) ready to be burned. 
 With burning now supported directly from the Bounce dialog window, you can also burn a CD directly 
from Logic itself. Again, where the session contains audio fi les greater than 16-bit resolution, the addition 
of dithering is essential, which can be selected from the appropriate pop-down menu in the Bounce 
window. Other pertinent options include setting the write speed (keep this low to avoid any write errors 
that degrade the audio quality on playback) and writing the disc to a multisession CD. When the “Write as 
multi-session” option is selected, you’ll be able to add further mixes to the CD at a later point; otherwise 
Logic will simply burn a single fi le onto the CD. Although adding sessions at a later point will save the use of 
CD-Rs, you might experience problems with CD players recognizing songs burned in subsequent sessions.    
 In many ways, the “Bounce and Burn” feature is best viewed as a quick fi x for creating audio CDs – especially 
if you intend to write more than one track to the CD at any given time. In this scenario, it might be, 
 Figure 9.12    Using the “Set Locators” feature in the contextual menu entitled Playback, you can set the 
locators to your selected regions, enabling you to create a bounce exactly the same length as that of your 
chosen audio. 

337
Mastering in Logic
 Figure 9.13 
 The last bounce 
will need to be 
dithered down to 
16-bit resolution, 
ready to be 
burned in another 
application. 
 Figure 9.14 
 Quick and easy CD 
creation: Logic’s Bounce 
and Burn feature.   
perfectly, legitimate to attempt some rough mastering in the actual project’s fi le, rather than a separate 
session – simply insert a Multipressor and some EQ across the main stereo outs and away you go! 

338
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 9.7  Creating a Red Book Master 
 For a fully professional CD that meets the requirements of Red Book standards, you’ll need to use an 
external application. Preparing for this will simply involve rendering your files (probably at 24-bit, 
without dither) ready to be imported into a mastering or CD compilation application. If you need to 
separate out your mastering “headspace” to that of you as the producer, then Logic can work, but it 
must be remembered that it is a dedicated production tool. Track crossfades, for example, are diffi  cult 
to create in Logic but is part and parcel of mastering applications. Additionally, mastering applications 
off er support for CD-Text, UPC/EAN barcodes, and index markers. See the knowledgebase for Red Book 
CD mastering applications for further exploration.   
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 3 
 POW-r 
 POW-r  comes with three options within Logic. One is labeled “Dithering” that employs a noise-
shaping curve to reduce noise. The remaining settings off er two types of noise shaping. The Logic 
Manual describes the first noise-shaping algorithm, which can “extend the dynamic range by 
5–10 dB.” The second noise-shaping algorithm is intended for work with speech as it can “extend 
the dynamic range by 20 dB within the 2–4 kHz range – the range the human ear is most sensitive 
to” (Apple Logic Manual). These noise-shaping curves have been developed to be sympathetic to 
the human ear and draw upon considerable research beginning with Fletcher and Munson’s Equal 
Loudness Contours (more information on Equal Loudness Contours can be found in Rumsey and 
McCormick (2002)  1 ). 
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 4 
   Red Book Standard CD Applications for the Mac 
 Apple used to provide a good application for creating Red Book standard CDs called Waveburner, 
which was part of the Logic Studio suite up until version 9.0 (not later downloadable versions of 9). 
This is now a discontinued product and will have new Logic users looking perhaps for alternatives. 
The good news is that the development that went into those specialist plug-ins are still available 
as standard in Logic Pro X. As Waveburner is not available now, we’ve taken a little time to signpost 
you to a number of alternatives depending on what you want to do and your wallet’s size currently. 
 If you’re looking to master within a new Logic session and then simply compile the audio and produce 
a DDP, a favorite is Sonoris’ DDP Creator ( www.sonorissoftware.com ). It is a professional-level compiler 
for the mastering engineer wishing to place audio together and create a DDP image for CD production. 
 For the software to prepare a Red Book standard CD with some audio editing and sweetening 
features, you might wish to look at the following. A relatively aff ordable alternative is Audio File’s new 
Triumph Software, which replaces their former Wave Editor software.  www.audiofi le-engineering.
com/triumph . It has some excellent features for audio editing, contains some iZotope code inside 
(Continued)

339
Mastering in Logic
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 2 
 Multipressor and Multiband Compression 
 Originally developed as part of Emagic’s and later Apple’s, now discontinued, Waveburner software, 
Multipressor lives on as Logic’s answer to the big multiband compressors (like the TC M6000 or 
TC Finalizer, for example) so frequently used in mastering. Unlike conventional single-band 
compression, a Multiband compressor splits an incoming audio signal into separate frequency 
(Continued)
for mastering, and is fully Red Book CD and DDP compliant. The downside is that it is quite tricky to 
get the hang of, using a proprietary method of “layers” for arranging its audio. 
 A simpler option and possibly the closest in terms of operation to Waveburner is DSP-Quattro –  www
.dsp-quattro.com . Even the panes are in similar places, and the software does very similar things for 
editing and arranging your CD. Where this software falls down is on the plug-ins. If you’ve got something 
like iZotope’s Ozone 5 or other  VST   or Audio Unit plug-ins for the job of mastering, then this is a great, 
DDP-enabled application. Note the Logic plug-ins don’t appear to work in the version we used. 
 Others may choose to explore Steinberg’s Wavelab that is certainly looking toward a fully fl edged 
mastering platform, but is pretty expensive. There’s also cheaper Wavelab Elements that can achieve 
most things but do not provide DDP support. See  www.steinberg.net  for more details. 
 Above these are the more professional alternatives such as Sequoia  http://pro.magix.com  or Pyramix 
( www.merging.com ). 
Figure 9.15 
Possibly the 
nearest thing to 
a replacement 
for Waveburner 
is DSP-Quattro.

340
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
bands before applying compression. Separated in this way, a complete mix is far easier to control 
and gel to form a fi nished master. In most cases, the greatest amount of compression will be applied 
to the bottom end of the mix – keeping the bass solid and tight – with the high-end requiring a light 
and minimal touch. 
 Multipressor features up to four bands of compression and downward expansion, although, to make 
things easier, you might just want to use three bands (low, mid, and high, respectively). One of the most 
important things is to set the right crossover frequencies for the diff erent bands, as this can have a big 
eff ect on the fi nished compression achieved. To set the crossover point, try moving the vertical borders 
on the top of the interface’s window – you could also use the Spectrum Analyzer (part of the Multimeter 
plug-in) to visually analyze the track’s constituent components, as well as the band solo feature. 
 Now, work your way through each band, adjusting the relative compression ratios, thresholds, and 
attack and release settings. On the whole, most compression ratios tend to fall way below 3:1, with 
Figure 9.16 The Multipressor allows you to compress your master using a series of diff erent 
frequency bands.
(Continued)

341
Mastering in Logic
the most productive results often achieved in the area between 1.5:1 and 2:1. Adjust your threshold 
to achieve the correct amount of gain reduction and dynamic control. Again, mastering is often 
distinguished by a lightness of touch, with typical amounts of gain reduction rarely exceeding 2–4 
dB. Attack and release times change the responsiveness of the compressor – avoid setting the release 
too fast (the compressor might start to pump) or squashing the transients too much with a fast 
attack. Finally, rebalance the bands using the Gain Make-up control. If you’ve compressed a band 
particularly hard, you might need to bring its level up to restore its position back into the mix.  
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 3 
 Limiting 
 Although Multipressor does a good job of bringing the overall dynamic range of your track more 
in-line with a commercial CD, it’s still possible that your tracks will sound at least 4–6 dB quieter 
than a professional release. This is because fast transients (often from slightly louder drum hits) have 
slipped through Multipressor’s “net” and are still dictating the overall peak level of the track – even 
though the average level is somewhat below this. Professional mastering engineers will, therefore, 
make use of a fast-acting digital limiter (sometimes known as a Brickwall Limiter) to catch these 
peaks and reduce them. With the peaks reduced, the overall track level can be lifted to match the 
loud output currently favored in mastering.  
 Logic’s Limiter presents a basic set of controls that should allow you to squash transients in no time. 
The main parameter, gain, pushes the overall mix harder toward 0 dB – where loud signals would 
then conventionally distort logic outputs, the Limiter kicks-in and applies gain reduction (indicated 
 Figure 9.17 
   The Adaptive Limiter plug-in provides that extra sense of 
loudness, although you need to be careful on how hard you 
push this addictive processor.   
(Continued)

342
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
in the top meter) to stop this from happening. In most cases, especially those that have already been 
through the Multipressor, you’ll only need to apply about 3–4 dB of gain, although you will need to 
listen carefully for any unwanted audio anomalies, especially distortion.  
 PLUG-IN FOCUS 4 
  Other Mastering Tools 
 Besides the three big mastering tools (EQ, multiband compression, and limiting), Logic also features 
other plug-ins suitable for track sweetening. Stereo Spread, an eff ect often found on hardware-
mastering processors like TC Electronics’ Finalizer, off ers the ability to extend the width of a stereo 
signal – say, for example, the mix had been made slightly too mono. Unlike certain other Stereo 
Spreaders, Logic’s mix widener avoids the use of phase in achieving extra width – instead, it uses 
a frequency distribution system to pan alternating frequencies to the left- and right-hand speaker, 
respectively. By using this frequency distribution method, Stereo Spread avoids the phase problems 
often associated when a width enhancer is put back into mono. In truth, its eff ectiveness is somewhat 
limited, and it only works best with material possessing little or no stereo information.  
 Denoiser uses some clever trickery with FFT fi ltering to produce a cleaner audio signal in situations 
where the master possesses a large amount of unwanted noise. Like a conventional noise gate, 
Denoiser needs its Threshold set carefully to make the best use of the eff ect – try locating a quiet 
section of the master, with the noise present, and set the Threshold just above this. Reduction defi nes 
the amount of Denoising taking place, although if pushed too hard the Denoising can sound almost 
as distracting as the noise itself! The Noise Type fader seems a little strange at fi rst, but it does make 
sense – in the center position, the fader is sensitive to noise across the entire audio spectrum, toward 
the top its bias is toward darker noise, and to the bottom it is more sensitive to high-frequency noise.  
 Figure 9.18 
   Although they have little everyday use, Logic’s other 
mastering plug-ins can be useful solutions to a range 
of mastering problems. 

343
Mastering in Logic
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 5 
 Disc Description Protocol 
 Logic is unable to write an image to the Disc Description Protocol (DDP). This protocol, developed by 
Doug Carson and Associates, is a way of describing the whole audio CD as simply data. Until recently, 
only top fl ight mastering applications allowed this. There are now a handful of Mac applications that 
can enable you to complete this task – see the knowledgebase for Mastering Apps. 
 DDP images can be written to a CD-R, or a DVD-R, dependent on fi le size, but can be placed in 
a folder for sending over the Internet. DDP off ers a degree of quality control that is not always 
available from a simple burned audio CD. As the DDP is essentially data, it follows high-standard 
error correction, and as such, it is unlikely to work if it is in the slightest bit corrupted. However, if 
it works, it should be perfect, and this ensures that the quality of your master reaches the pressing 
plant in perfect condition. 
 If you’re hoping to get any number of CDs pressed up in the traditional way using a glass master, 
then DDP is the fi le protocol for you.  
 For further information on mastering, consider our book  Practical Mastering: A Guide to Mastering in the 
Modern Studio , also from Focal Press –  www.masteringcourse.com    
   Note 
  1. Rumsey, F., & McCormick, T. (2002).  Sound and Recording, an Introduction. Focal  Press Oxford, UK . 

 In this chapter 
 10.1 Introduction 
345 
 10.2 Managing Movies 
345 
 10.3 Global Tracks 
348 
 10.4 Synchronizing Logic 
359 
 10.5 Score Editing and Music 
Preparation 
363 
 10.6 Surround Sound in 
Logic 
370 
 10.7 Delivery Formats 
376 
 Walkthrough 
   Creating AC3 Files Using Apple 
Compressor 
379 
 Knowledgebase 
 Surround Sound Plug-Ins 
374 

345
Logic and Multimedia Production 
 10.1  Introduction 
 Writing music to picture for fi lm and television once required a whole host of equipment from some 
form of video player synchronized to your computer sequencer and Digital Audio Workstation. However, 
Logic takes this task in its stride, and today, whole soundtracks can be written for picture from one 
application. This has been made possible by the thorough integration of a visual player and high-level 
synchronization options from the ground up. This fl exibility has meant that Logic has become one of the 
most popular products for fi lm and television music production. 
 Additionally, in the past few years, we have seen a sudden rise in other outlets for the music producer, 
such as gaming and Internet multimedia. Logic, with its integration of codecs to export audio as MP3, 
AAC, and many other formats, has positioned itself as a key production tool for many industries other 
than mainstream recording and production. 
 In this chapter, we take a movie fi le and begin integrating it into the Logic project and explore how to 
write eff ectively for fi lm and television. We’ll look at working with surround sound, markers, scoring, and 
the delivery formats expected from the industry. 
 10.2  Managing Movies 
 Logic has been at the forefront of music and audio composition for picture for sometime, and as such, 
there are many ways you can work with visuals. You can, of course, synchronize Logic to an external 
Visual Editor such as Avid or Final Cut if you so wish, but you’re more likely to obtain your video as an 
.avi or .mov fi le with embedded timecode so that you can work wholly within Logic itself.  
 Figure 10.1 
   To get started on your composition, you’ll need 
to select Open Movie from the File menu.   

346
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Before starting work on the music and audio for your visuals, you will need to import the movie into 
Logic. To begin to integrate movies within your song, go to Open Movie (File > Movie > Open Movie …). 
 Once you have located your movie in the browser, it will appear as a fl oating window, which sits neatly 
on top of Logic. This can be moved around to fi t the screen arrangement you have currently. This fl oating 
movie can be resized to suit, and this is achieved by Ctrl + clicking the video window. This produces a 
new small selection box that reveals itself to off er you the choice of an alternative size for the window 
or the Video Project Settings.   
 Figure 10.2    Ctrl + clicking the movie window opens up many options such as 
the size of the movie window itself.   
 The Video Project Settings allow you to control a number of things starting with where the movie 
presents itself in the timeline. 
 You can specify how loud the volume is from the video and whether to mute it. In other words, the audio 
from the original movie can be piped through to the main output, although you may wish to control this 
in more detail by importing the audio into the Logic project, which we’ll cover later. Other fl exibilities are 
available here, such as the movie start. For example, it is often unlikely that you’ll want the video to start 
running from 00:00:00:00, but may indeed need some preroll for any introductory credits that might not 
have come to you yet. 

347
Logic and Multimedia Production
 Additionally, you can specify that the movie follows 
the tempo, although it is suggested that you don’t 
automatically entertain this. 
 To the bottom right of the Video Project Settings 
menu, there is a “Movie Preferences …” button. Clicking 
this reveals a few settings starting with the Movie to 
Project slider which alters the start point of the movie 
in relation to the timeline. This level of fine-tuning 
can be very useful when lip syncing or making overall 
macro adjustments. 
 Next is the Movie Track section which fi rst shows the 
Cache Resolution drop-down menu. This allows you 
to set the resolution of the thumbnails used in the 
track header. Following this is the Maximum Cache 
Size slider which defi nes the very maximum amount of 
video that can be held in memory. The manual off ers 
some guidance of how to use this, but again we’d 
recommend that these settings are left alone in the 
main. 
 Finally, the Lock Movie Window When Changing 
Screensets essentially maintains the video screen’s 
position and size fl oating above each of the screensets. 
 If you’re working on a small monitor or a laptop, Logic has a neat way of monitoring what is going on 
in your movie. Close the fl oating movie window and at the top of the Inspector, there will now be a 
movie window in the inspector bar. Simply click on the triangle on the left-hand side to open up a small 
movie viewer. 
 Extracting the Movie Audio Content 
 Quite often, you might be given a visual that has integrated audio, perhaps a dialog track for the scene 
you are composing to. It will be prudent to extract this dialog track for you to be able to manage its 
level and mute throughout the writing process. In some circumstances, for example, you may wish to 
mute the dialog to ensure that you can hear your music properly before reintroducing it to see if it all 
fi ts together.  
 The quickest way to extract audio for this purpose is to select Import Audio from Movie (File > Movie > 
Import Audio from Movie). By selecting this, Logic goes to work immediately taking the audio from 
within the movie and moving the subsequent audio fi le to a track on the Logic Pro Main Window. The 
other option is to import audio from movie, which places the audio fi le in the Project Audio Browser. 
When the audio is extracted, its region will be timelocked to the position of the movie to ensure lip 
synchronization. 
 Figure 10.3    The small movie viewer in the 
Inspector can be a real space saver when 
working on a smaller screen.   

348
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 10.3  Global Tracks 
 Global Tracks are an important feature of working to picture, not only for the viewing of video stills in 
the timeline but also for the ability to change the tempo, time signature, and keep track of important 
markers in the project. Changing the pace of the music can be crucial when composing to picture, and 
Global Tracks allow you to make these adjustments eff ectively as required. 
 Accessing Global Tracks is achieved by pressing “G” while on the Logic Pro Main Window. This should 
expand to show you any number of lanes that can typically include markers, signature, and tempo. To 
add to these, we need to choose to confi gure Global Tracks. 
 For example, a common way to view the visuals you’re working with is to use Global Tracks. Video 
stills can be added to this timeline by going to pressing Alt + G or control + clicking in the Global 
Tracks area (see Fig.10.5 ). A list will present itself in which you can select the lanes you wish to see 
in Global Tracks. By selecting video, a new lane appears which can show a set of stills of your video 
against the timeline.   
 Within this lane, click on the Movie word in the header and revealed are some useful buttons. One of 
those is Open Movie, which off ers you the opportunity to load a movie to your Logic arrangement. 
However, if you’ve not yet loaded a movie to the project, then a Finder-like pane will appear to allow 
you to select a new movie. The other button is Create Marker Set from Scene Cuts, which we’ll discuss 
in a moment. 
 Figure 10.4    Importing guide audio from the movie can make 
embellishment a little easier.   

349
Logic and Multimedia Production
 Figure 10.6 
   Clicking on the word Movie, or any other Global Track 
header title, provides a contextual menu with useful 
features. 
 Figure 10.5 
 Right clicking in 
the Global Tracks 
space opens up a 
useful menu and at 
the bottom is the 
Confi gure Global 
Tracks. 
 Markers 
 As with the locators found on traditional multitrack tape machines, Logic can also off er the ability to 
return to any marked position on the timeline. This can be useful to return to any point of a project which 
is visited frequently when recording, such as the beginning of the Middle 8 or a Chorus. Additionally, this 
can have some excellent uses when working to picture.  
 Logic terms these location points as markers, and they can be seen in the time bar at the top of the 
Tracks Area but are accessed in two main ways, through either the Global Tracks or the Markers Tab in 
the List Editors pane. As you expand the Global Tracks, you will notice that the Markers Lane come into 
view. It is likely that this lane also needs to be expanded by pressing the triangle to the left of the track 
header. This lane shows any markers you may have set against the timeline.  
 To get instantly working with markers, simply place the playhead at the required position and then 
click the Create button. A new marker is created that appears to run straight to the end of the project, 
although there is no length specifi ed. This will be interrupted by the next marker you create or if you 
specify a marker length. 
 Markers can also be created on the fl y while you are playing. This can be useful to note any aspect of a 
recording or a take you wish to revisit when you listen back. By pressing Cmd + Alt + Ctrl and clicking on 

350
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
the Lane, a new marker is created, whose name awaits you to edit. Simply rename the marker and press 
return. This can be really fl exible as you label sections going through a song, or fi lm, for example. 
 Editing a marker can take place directly on the Global Track Lane by selecting the appropriate tool 
from the Click Tools Menu (”T”) and then editing the marker. Using the Text Tool to name makers is very 
fl exible and can assist your workfl ow while you play through the takes. 
 Figure 10.8    For more detailed extraction of scene changes for your markers, you might wish to use the 
menu at Options > Marker > Create Movie Scene Markers … where there are various selections to make 
scene cut detection more tailorable.   
 Figure 10.7    Scene markers are clearly seen within the Markers Tab and can be renamed and edited here.   

351
Logic and Multimedia Production
 All markers are also refl ected on the Marker tab within the Lists Pane, which can be found by pressing 
Alt + M while on the Logic Pro Main Window. Alternatively click on the Lists button to the top right of 
the Logic Pro Main Window. Next, select the Marker tab that shows all markers within your project in a 
long editable list. Here, you’ll see the markers arranged in a table with their position to the left-hand side 
and their Length to the right. Naming may appear the same as in the Global Tracks lane here but can be 
added to create a separate line within the Markers Lane, which can refl ect the part of the project. Simply 
double-click the name of the marker within the tab to reveal the marker naming area. 
 Each marker is tagged as “Marker ##” or “Scene ##,” where the “##” automatically numbers the markers in 
sequence. If you continue to write after this, then your text will be merged on the same line. But, as in the 
example below, by pressing return, the Marker Lane can produce separate lane to show your description, 
which can be very useful when working to picture. 
 Scene markers are diff erent to that of traditional markers in that they are locked to the movie fi le using 
Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers (SMPTE) timecode. They will not alter depending on 
the tempo changes or edits in the project. It is possible to convert these to normal markers and vice 
versa by selecting the Marker tab (Alt + M) and selecting the appropriate Convert … command from the 
Options menu. 
 Locating to the marker positions is simple and can be achieved fi rst within the Marker tab by using the 
Finger Tool from the Click Tools Menu (usually the alt + Click Tool is set to this automatically) to click on 
any marker. The playhead will spring back to the marker point. To wrap the locators around the marker 
length, press Cmd + U. To access the start of a marker from the Global Tracks lane, simply press Option + 
Click a marker. Key commands can be programmed to respond to marker numbers if required, but are 
not part of the default key commands set. 
 Within the Global Tracks Marker Lane, click on the word Marker to reveal a menu with “Create Markers 
From Regions” in it. This feature allows you to select pertinent regions from which markers are to be 
made. Perhaps you have diff erent folder tracks already cut to the length of your verse and chorus. In this 
instance, the markers would automatically follow suit and allow you quick access to these elements of 
the song. 
 Figure 10.9  
Alternative marker sets are available 
from the global tracks header Marker 
menu. 

352
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Alternative sets of markers can be selected within the Global Tracks Marker Lane Menu. This off ers the 
opportunity to have up to nine diff erent sets of markers. This might be very useful when working to 
picture where markers are required which represent the dialog, others can be set in an alternative for 
working against the music and perhaps another for the visuals themselves.  
 Detect Scene Changes 
 It is important to get a feel for the structure of the visuals you are working with. A script or storyboard 
may not be provided and yet you will need to break the visuals down into useful, manageable chunks. 
The best way to get a handle on the visual material you are working with is to work scene by scene. 
 “Add Scene Cuts to Marker Set” is a button on the Movie Global Track and stands for Detect Scene Cuts. 
Logic has a really useful feature in that it can detect scene changes in the video and produce markers 
for you to refer to or edit to suit. These take a little while to detect and will appear in the Marker Lane in 
Global Tracks and in the Markers List press “D” then click on the Markers Tab. 
 Scene markers are presented with a “fi lm” icon within the list and are automatically labeled as Scene 1, 
Scene 2, Scene 3, etc. Obviously, this process may not be entirely 100% accurate, and it may be necessary 
to alter, add, or delete some of these Scene Markers. To create extra markers to denote scenes that the 
process may have missed, simply create a new marker by pressing the “+” create marker button on the 
marker Global Track. This marker may need to be converted to a Scene marker as described above by 
opening the Markers Tab in the Lists area, then opening Options > Convert to Scene marker. 
 As you work through each of the Scene markers, you will need to move them to fi t the movie more 
accurately. This can be easily achieved in the Global Track, where you are automatically given the resize 
tool. Alternatively, visit the Marker tab and edit using the SMPTE timecode. 
 Working with Tempo and Signature Changes 
 Making changes to the pace of the music is often the key to writing eff ective music when writing to 
visuals. Whether it is to denote a new mood or some dramatic news that has been announced within the 
dialog, changing key and tempo, in conjunction with the accompanying visuals, could instantly move 
your audience to another emotional space. 
 Changing the tempo is very simple and can be achieved in the Global Tracks. Either select the pencil tool 
(T > 2) and click the tempo change at the desired place or choose the Tempo tab from the Lists pane, 
which can be accessed by the icon on the right-hand side of the Logic Pro Main Window.  
 Using the Pencil tool can off er you a quick method to try ideas out in the project. Clicking the Global 
Track will reveal a new tempo, which can be glided up or down to instigate a tempo change. You’ll notice 
that the way in which these tempo changes are represented look very similar to that of the automation 
lanes and as such can be manipulated in similar ways. 
 For example, you might choose to introduce the piece at a slower tempo and increase it gently. To achieve 
this is easy, simply set the two diff erent tempos at the ideal point. The jump will be instantaneous and 

353
Logic and Multimedia Production
will sound odd. There is a small point in blue at which the tempo changes from the original tempo to 
the new tempo. This fi rst point can be moved backward in time to introduce a more subtle curve to the 
tempo change, thus making it gradual. 
 The menus within the Tempo tab off er some more options to tempo management. For example, you can 
view the subtle steps that Logic has placed in the project to increase the tempo. To do this, you need to 
click on the Additional Info button to the left of the Edit menu in the Tempo tab. Prior to selecting this 
feature, only the start and end point of the tempo change can be seen. 
 With the steps expanded, it is possible to quickly edit any step to suit. As you edit the tempo of one of 
these discrete steps, the Global Track will reveal the steps graphically on screen. However, to create a 
more staggered, creative, or editable tempo change, simply choose Edit > Tempo > Tempo Operations, 
which can off er some more options to the on screen Global Track. 
 A new pane appears that allows you to edit more precise and in-depth tempo changes and alterations. 
There are many diff erent editable features here, such as the types of curves and their resolution. Within 
the Operation menu, there are a number of really useful features that could save time, such as stretching 
the curve out or simply scaling it a little.    
 Figure 10.10    Tempo changes can be altered quickly and fl exibly in the lists pane on the Logic Pro Main 
Window or by editing the Tempo Lane within the Global Tracks.   

354
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 The signature lane in the Global Tracks is split into two; the top is for the time signature and the other 
for the key. As with the Tempo lane, there are again two main methods of changing the signatures. The 
fi rst is through the lists on the right-hand side Lists window, which contain a tab dedicated to signatures. 
Within this tab, there are two buttons, one for Time Signatures (create signature) and the other to Create 
Key changes. 
 The second entry method is to click again on the lane itself with the Pencil tool (or simply double-click 
with the pointer). Whether it is for a signature or a key change, a slightly diff erent dialog box greets you. 
The fi rst of these is the time signature that not only allows you to simply select the signature you want 
but also gives you the opportunity to enable beat mapping, which we covered in  Chapter 5 . 
 Adding a key change is really useful for quick ideas and changes and will work with Apple Loops and 
any audio you have recorded in this Logic song. The key signature here will enable the Loops to alter 
 Figure 10.11    The Tempo Operations dialog gives some additional control over making tempo alterations.   

355
Logic and Multimedia Production
 Figure 10.12    The Tempo Operations dialog gives some additional control over making 
tempo alterations. 
 Figure 10.13    Adding a key change in the Global Tracks is easy by double-clicking in the lane where a dialog 
box allows you to specify the change.   

356
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
in real time to your changes. Simply select the point at which the key change is supposed to occur and 
double-click (or click one using the Pencil tool), and a dialog box will emerge requesting the desired key 
and also whether you wish to disable double fl ats and sharps. 
 Alternative Sets 
 It is often diffi  cult to be sure that the choices you make are defi nitely going to be right for the outcome 
of the visuals. Often, it is nice to make changes and try out ideas without losing the original version. 
Logic has an interesting solution that allows diff erent experiments. 
 Each Global Track has something called Sets, which off er diff erent perspectives on the same track. Similar 
in nature to alternative playlists when quick swipe comping which we covered in  Chapter 5 , the Sets 
menus in the Global Tracks allow you to make some diff erent decisions without losing your original root 
idea. Simply click on the Sets menu for each of the Global Track lanes and choose an alternative number.  
 Figure 10.14  
Global Track Sets are useful to try out 
diff erent permutations of ideas in Global 
Tracks. 
 Big Displays 
 Working to picture is always dependent on timecode, which governs the synchronization between 
diff erent cameras and audio recorders for editing purposes. Timecode typically comes in the form of 
SMPTE, which splits the time into divisions of Hours:Minutes:Seconds:Frames, and then in some cases, 
subframes. 
 The Control Bar usually always shows the SMPTE time of the playhead in the top left with the 
accompanying bars and beats below depending on the view. When spotting sounds or eff ects to fi lm, it 
will probably be necessary to see a larger, and independent, timecode display. Ctrl-clicking the Control 
Bar’s icon on the left-hand side (see  Figure 10.15 ) brings up a menu from which you can choose from the 
Bar Display or SMPTE Display. These are displays that remain within the darker section of the Control Bar. 
There are also two options to show these as separate fl oating windows by selecting the Open Giant Bar 
Display and Open Giant SMPTE Display, respectively (shown on next page).  

357
Logic and Multimedia Production
 Figure 10.15    In Logic Pro X, the Transport Bar has been renamed the Control Bar and has a slightly diff erent 
way of working, such as accessing the menu from the icon to the left-hand side of the bar.   
 Spotting Audio 
 Working to picture will from time to time mean that you will be given a spotting sheet from your clients 
listing the sound eff ects. This will tell you where all the sounds need to occur to a particular timecode 
point and may also include an out time point. These points are given in SMPTE timecode, and in Logic, 
it is easy to edit to these points. It’s worth sometimes working to a snap value of “Frames” when working 
to picture to ensure that each frame is synchronized with the audio. 
 Two main ways of spotting audio are off ered. First is by using the Move to Playhead Position feature. 
Simply set the playhead to the point you wish for the audio to be placed. This can be best achieved by 
double-clicking on the SMPTE display in the Control Bar and typing is straight in. Pointing toward the 
audio region, click with control pressed down to reveal the contextual menu and within this will be the 
Move > Move to Playhead Position command. 
 The second and more likely method is to edit using the Event tab from the Lists window on the right-
hand side of the Tracks Area. Presuming you have called up all your audio regions onto the Tracks Area, 
they should be listed here. To hone in on the parts you wish to spot, ensure that Link is on both the 
Events List and the Logic Pro Main Window, and simply click on the region you wish to view. The Events 
List Tab is naturally set to show bars and beats and will need to be changed to view SMPTE through the 
View Menu (View > Event Position and Length as Time). 

358
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 10.17    The playhead’s SMPTE position can be specifi ed by double-clicking the timecode readout in the 
Control Bar. 
 Figure 10.16    The Customize Control Bar dialog box provides considerable fl exibility in the information and 
control you have over your project.   

359
Logic and Multimedia Production
 To spot the audio, simply double-click on the position column to type in the desired timecode. The audio 
should in theory be spotted, although it might be likely that you will need to delve in further to more 
accurately ensure synchronization with the picture. Nudging the regions by frames can be a really quick 
way of making things fi t. As we mentioned before, it is often wise to work to frames for the time being, 
although there will be times where you wish to work in fi ner resolutions. To change the Nudge Value, 
right-click on any region and select Move > Set Nudge Value To. Once set, simply select the region to be 
moved and select either the Nudge Left or the Nudge Right from the region’s contextual menu or press 
Alt + Cursor Left or Alt + Cursor Right. 
 A really fast way to spot audio is to position the playhead at the desired point and select the track you 
wish the audio to be placed. Next, open the separate Project Audio Browser Window using Cmd + 8 or 
Window > Open Project Audio if you wish for a separate window view. Select the audio fi le in question 
by pressing Cmd as you double-click, and the audio fi le will be placed at the appropriate place. If you 
then select another audio fi le in this way, it will be butted up to the last audio fi le. There are a couple 
of useful key commands that can be brought in here called Pickup Clock and move Event to Playhead 
Position (key command “;” and Pickup Clock and Select Next Event (shift + “;”). 
 10.4  Synchronizing Logic 
 Working to picture or on larger projects might involve the need to link Logic to another player. For movie 
work in the past, it had been often the case that the video would be on another machine, perhaps 
tape-based, and Logic would need to synchronize to it. Similarly, there may be times when Logic needs 
to synchronize to another multitrack system, whether that be a legacy open reel 2-inch 24-track tape 
machine such as a Studer A800 and Otari MTR90 or simply another ProTools rig on another computer. 
Either way, Logic has a suite of features to cope with your synchronization needs. 
 Logic syncs in a number of diff erent ways that are industry standard. The main system used for video is 
SMPTE, and it is an audible code that can also be translated into a digital equivalent used in MIDI called 
MIDI timecode (MTC). MTC is a popular system used between MIDI devices, and in the latter example 
mentioned earlier, it is likely that this would be the protocol used to connect a ProTools rig to your Mac 
with Logic on. 
 In either case, you will require a device that understands the timecode protocol. All MIDI interfaces 
should understand MTC, but only some devices are able to translate audible SMPTE timecode to MTC 
such as MOTU’s MIDI Express XT.   
 Figure 10.18    The Sync button seen here in blue must be selected from the 
Customize Control Bar options to appear. With this selected, Logic works in 
slave mode to incoming synchronization signal.   

360
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Getting Locked Up 
 To tell Logic that it will need to slave to another timecode signal requires you to select the Customize 
Control Bar preferences by Ctrl + clicking the Control Bar. Select the Sync check box that will generate a 
button on the Control Bar, which looks like a clock with a large arrow facing into it. 
 In an ideal world, the synchronization should be as simple as selecting this button, and wait for an incoming 
sync signal to get the project moving. However, invariably you will need to edit the synchronization 
settings to suit the project you’re working on. To do this, either Ctrl + click the Sync button on the Control 
Bar and select synchronization settings or vising File > Project Settings > Synchronization. 
 Within this pane lie a number of key features for working with external synchronization sources. The 
frame rate of the synchronization is very important. Historically, frame rates diff er depending on where 
in the world you work; for example, 30 frames per second is used for television in the United States of 
America, whereas we work with 25 frames per second in the United Kingdom. This is a simple division on 
the frequency of the electricity supplies in these regions at 60 and 50 Hz, respectively. 
 Strictly speaking, we’re no longer governed in quite the same way, and Logic can work at whatever 
frame rate is required. Within this menu are considerably more frame rates than we’ve hinted to above 
and it will all depend on the project you’re working on as to what frame rate you’ll need. Safe to say, 
Logic can handle them all!  
 Within the synchronization settings pane are some opportunities to offset the timecode to the 
arrangement. These off sets are very important when working with fi lm. For example, you may wish to use a 
fresh Logic project for a Scene that is one hour into the fi lm. It would be rather silly to start the Logic project 
at 1 hour also because things like Freeze tracks would take a considerable amount of time to process! 
 Figure 10.19    Right-clicking the Sync button on the Control Bar gives you very quick 
access to the pertinent settings such as synchronization source and settings.   

361
Logic and Multimedia Production
 Setting the offset is easy. Simply select the SMPTE time at which your song should play. For 
example, Logic will open with Bar 1 playing at 01:00:00:00:00, which means 1 hour. SMPTE reads as 
Hours:Minutes:Seconds:Frames:Sub-Frames. However, there will come a time when you will need to 
alter this to suit. In the example above where we’d like to start the new Logic project at 1 hour into the 
movie, we’d need to set an off set of an extra hour. As such, we’d want the SMPTE reading here to read 
02:00:00:00:00. Logic will then off set the incoming timecode to allow Logic to start playing at 2 hours.  
 Below the main off set selection is an option to allow the bar positions to show the absolute timecode 
reference, which can be useful when working to external sources. It is important, for example, that the 
timeline you work to reads the same as the incoming timecode. Due to the off set in the example above, 
the Logic project will show a time of 00:00:00:00:00 despite being an hour into the fi lm. This can be 
changed here, so the project starts Bar 1 at 1 hour, but also shows an accurate portrayal of the timecode 
it is receiving. 
 Figure 10.20    Use the synchronization settings to select frame rates and the usual off sets needed from time 
to time. 

362
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Being the Master 
 Logic also has the ability to be the master and to allow other devices to slave to its timecode. In this 
instance, it is necessary to return to the synchronization settings as outlined above and click on the 
MIDI tab. Here, we can see a checkbox titled Transmit MIDI Clock, which refers to the tempo settings of 
the project. This clock pulse can be outputted using the MIDI protocol to connect other devices such as 
eff ects units whose delay settings can respond in time with the project. Alternatively, in rare occasions, 
this can be used in part for synchronization. 
 Below this is the Transmit MTC checkbox and output menu. Here, it is possible to select a device (or “All”) 
to send the MTC to. This will enable any device connected using MTC to follow Logic. For example, if the 
ProTools rig was to sync as a slave to Logic, then simply connect a MIDI cable between the output of 
Logic’s interface to the other computer with ProTools’ MIDI In.  
 MIDI Machine Control is a remote control protocol that enables connected equipment to be controlled 
by another device. For example, Play on the master could be engaged by controls on a remote slaved 
device. This can still be a hugely benefi cial option to employ across large studios. 
 Figure 10.21    The frame rate will need to be matched to your 
synchronization source to keep up!   

363
Logic and Multimedia Production
 10.5  Score Editing and Music Preparation 
 Although the Score editor can be used for MIDI editing activities in Logic, its most useful features lie in 
the “preparation” of music – in other words, taking the raw MIDI information that you’ve performed in the 
project and transcribing this as fi nished, musical notation. To be fair, though, Logic doesn’t compete with 
the publishing-standard output of dedicated industry-standard scoring programs like Finale or Sibelius, 
but its features are more than adequate either to produce parts for a small-scale overdub session, for 
example, or in the case of a full orchestral session, a sensible “intermediate” format to present to a proper 
orchestrator. 
 The process that we’re going to explore here, therefore, is the rudiments of taking an existing MIDI 
composition and turning that both into a full score for the conductor and parts for the musicians. Rather 
 Figure 10.22    Transmitting MTC can be engaged by selecting an output from the Transmit MTC menu, or 
leave it to send out of all available MIDI outputs.   

364
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
than being a complete exploration of the scoring features and the art of orchestration (which is a book 
in its own right!), we’re going to take a look at the essential processes and steps that guarantee readable, 
usable results in the shortest amount of time. If you want to produce even more eff ective scores, though, 
it’s well worth exploring further to see just how eff ective the Score editor can be in this task. 
 Preparing Your MIDI Files 
 As the old adage goes – garbage in, garbage out – this is never more true than in the process of creating 
a score. Although it’s easy enough to open any region in the Score editor so as to see a notation-based 
view of the music, it doesn’t guarantee that the score is legible or playable. Arguably, the clearest 
example of this is strings. In your MIDI arrangement, it’s highly likely that the entirety of the violins, 
violas, and cellos, for example, will be amassed to one generic string patch. Although this polyphonic 
approach makes sense for MIDI production, it isn’t how players expect to read a score, as in reality, each 
instrumentalist will be expected to be presented with a single line, with the full score combining all the 
single lines onto a page.  
 Figure 10.23    Here’s a typical “massed” string part, with all the violins, violas, and cellos being triggered 
from the same general MIDI track.   

365
Logic and Multimedia Production
 The fi rst step to prepare an eff ective score is to divide the music into a number of distinct lines (one for 
each player, or part) within your Logic arrangement. As we saw in  Chapter 6 , there are a number of ways 
of doing this – from simply copying the part over and deleting notes in turn to features like Functions > 
Note Events > Assign MIDI Channels based on Score Split, followed by Edit > Separate MIDI Events > by 
Event Channel. Either way, you should end up with a series of regions for each part, each of which should 
be assigned to a unique named track for each instrument you want to appear in your score (like violin I, 
violin II, viola, and cello).  
 Figure 10.24    Creating a score from a series of split parts, each assigned to a diff erent named track, will 
produce a more legible overall score, as well as facilitating the printing of individual parts.   
 With the parts split, you might also want to glance through and double check any timing issues, as well 
as the precise duration of notes. For example, in a MIDI arrangement, it’s easy to have notes fi nishing 
1/16th before the end of a bar, but this can lead to some strange looking note durations in the score, 
alongside unwanted rests. For simplicity, it’s also worth merging each part into a single region lasting the 
full length of the score, unless you want parts dropping in and out of the fi nished notation. 
 Opening the Score Editor 
 With the MIDI data prepared, you can now go and open the required parts in the Score editor, by drag-
enclosing the required instruments and opening the Score editor via the Window menu. Although, of 

366
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
course, you can also open the Score editor directly from the Logic Pro Main Window, it probably makes 
most sense to have the complete screen dominated by the scoring features. 
 On opening the Score editor, you should have something on screen that approximates music, although 
as with the raw MIDI data, this will need to be tweaked to make the notation as legible as possible. For 
example, most of the instruments will probably default to a piano stave (with both a treble clef and bass 
clef on the same line!), and it’s probably the case that the music simply runs across the full width of the 
screen, rather than being displayed on a page-by-page basis.  
 Figure 10.25    On opening the Score editor, you’ll be presented with a basic score, although this will need to 
be modifi ed to make readable.   
 The fi rst change, therefore, should be to turn the Score editor from its standard view into a page view, 
via View > View Mode > Page View (ctrl + P). Next comes the task of setting the staves. In keeping with 
the workfl ow on the Logic Pro Main Window, you’ll fi nd that each line of score has its own set of score 
parameters, available via the Inspector to the left-hand side of the Score editor window (note that this 
might be minimized at fi rst or even with the Inspector itself hidden). By clicking on each line of the score, 
therefore, you should be able to select an appropriate style for each part – maybe selecting treble for 
the violins or the bass clef for a cello part. Note that for any transposing instruments (like Horns in F), 
Logic will automatically transpose the “scored” version of the instrument, although the “played” version 
remains untouched. 

367
Logic and Multimedia Production
 Adding Expression and Score Markings 
 To add interest to the score, it is vitally important to add expression markings; otherwise, you end up 
with a sterile and lifeless recording. To help with this, the Score editor provides a part box, which allows 
you to place a series of expression markings onto your score. These could be as simple as pp, mf, or ff  
dynamic markings, right up to trills, or crescendos and diminuendos. What you should notice is that 
the score stylings are attached to a particular part or line in question (the corresponding part will be 
highlighted blue when you drop the object) so that even when we move back down to part level (rather 
than the full score), these markings will be carried with the part.  
 Figure 10.26    Adding expression markings, and so on, will make your score both clearer and 
more expressive. 

368
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Alongside expression marks, the part box also allows you to set the key of the piece (drag this to the fi rst 
bar of the score and then any subsequent bar should a key change occur), as well as text-based objects 
like the song name. 
 Shrinking to Fit: Score Settings and Score Sets 
 Changing the broader qualities and appearance of the score can be done via the score tab of the 
project’s settings, also assessable via the Layout menu. Although most of these settings (margin spacing 
and so on) will be best left in their default state, there are a number of useful functions. For example, the 
Number and Names tab allows you to change how instrument names are displayed, using either their 
Full Names throughout the entire score, for example, or an abbreviated Short Name for pages after the 
fi rst page. 
 Figure 10.27    The Score tab under the project settings allows you to defi ne some macro properties about 
how the score is laid out and printed.   

369
Logic and Multimedia Production
 Another part of the full score’s appearance is the percentage scaling of the staves on the page. For 
example, on a full score, it’s often important to see as much of the music as possible, so as to avoid 
excessive page turning, as well visualizing the entirety of the arrangement at any point in time. This is of 
particular relevance to a full orchestral score, where you might need 30–40 diff erent staves on the page 
at any one time.  
 Technically, when we selected our particular group of regions, we created what is known as a score set. 
As the name suggests, a score set assembles a group of instruments that will appear together on the 
score at the same time, theoretically letting you omit certain tracks on the Arrange pane from being 
displayed in the fi nished score. In addition to this, you can also defi ne a percentage scale of a score set, 
allowing you to shrink or expand the score’s size accordingly. Go to Layout > Score Sets … to access the 
Score Sets Window, which you’ll need to ensure has its “local” Inspector open in the window so as to 
access the Scale [%] parameter. 
 Printing the Parts 
 To print off  individual parts from the score, try double-clicking on the stave in question. This should 
drop you down one level (the equivalent of going into a folder in the Arrange pane), allowing you to 
 Figure 10.28    Use the Score Sets Window to alter the overall percentage scaling of the score.   

370
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
see a single part with its associated score markings. So as to make the part clear and legible, you might 
want to consider raising the Scale [%] parameter as part of the Score Sets controls. Remember, though, 
that with both parts and the full score, you have the option to print to a PDF (via the OS) so as to create 
a savable “hard” copy of the score for future reference, printing, or indeed, as an e-mail attachment for 
your music copyist.  
 10.6  Surround Sound in Logic 
 Surround sound, while synonymous with the fi lm industry off ering that extra dimension of realism, is 
now becoming popular in some circles for music production with many artists’ back catalogs being 
mixed for the medium. Whether working to picture or in music production, you’ll inevitably fi nd yourself 
being expected to create a surround sound mix at some point. Fortunately, Logic has a great deal of 
expertise in off ering surround sound with the inclusion of surround sound panners on each channel and 
a 5.1 Reverb plug-in among other features. 
 To work with surround sound, in this example 5.1, it is important to ensure that you have the speakers 
you require to monitor each output. You’ll need your main stereo pair of monitors, plus a center speaker, 
two surrounds (left and right) plus a subwoofer ideally. Connecting these up will usually mean a direct 
connection from your audio interface or desk to the amplifi ers or powered monitors. The connections you 
make are governed by the Surround Preferences (Logic Pro > Preferences > Audio > I/O Assignments > 
Output). Within this pane are three tabs relating to the Output, Bounce Extensions, and Input. 
 The input arrangement should follow logically the output assignments and is used for making 5.1 
recordings. The bounce extensions tab simply refers to the filename extension which is important 
when preparing for mastering. Concentrating on the Output tab, you can select how Logic shows its 
outputs. Typically, this will default to Logic’s own interpretation of 5.1. There are options for International 
Telecommunications Union’s (ITU) and WG-4’s output arrangements. The ITU’s is standard for 5.1 surround 
sound for most professionals. However, the WG-4 standard, which can be selected by the button below, 
is the choice of the DVD forum. At this stage, it is just important that the right outputs are connected to 
the correct speakers for accurate monitoring. 
 Getting Started 
 To get started with surround sound in Logic, you could either select a surround sound template from 
the chooser or alter your current stereo production to work in surround. Choosing Logic’s own template 
offers 24 surround-ready channel strips all bussed to groups including a 5.1 incarnation of Space 
Designer. This is excellent for that 5.1 project you’re about to start. 
 However, there will be times when you’ll need to alter your session to output in surround. To do this, 
simply choose the channel strips you wish to pan in surround and then visit the output assignment 
button. The drop-down menu should now show the possible output assignments, the last of which is 
Surround. Click this and notice the master channel strip alter from stereo containing two peak meters to 
a surround fader with 5 meters.  

371
Logic and Multimedia Production
 Working with Surround is very similar operationally to that of stereo except panning is diff erent. You 
will have noticed a circular panner on each channel. When double-clicked, this opens up the Surround 
Balancer pane that shows a good-sized panner showing a visual representation of the space with the fi ve 
speakers facing inward. To pan a mono signal, simply drag around the ball within the space to inform 
Logic where you’d like it to come from. Logic will calculate how much signal should come from each 
speaker. 
 For stereo signals, Logic’s Surround Balancer shows three balls. The “L” and “R” balls represent the two 
discrete mono signals that go to make up the stereo signal. These balls are linked and allow you to 
 Figure 10.29    Selecting which audio outputs from your interface are sent to which speakers can be 
an important part of setting up your surround sound studio.   

372
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
consider how wide you want the stereo signal to go within the surround space. The third ball is the 
overall pan that will alter the direction the stereo image comes from. In the larger surround panner on 
p. 373, the stereo signal is shown biased to the right. 
 Other controls on the Surround Balancer include the center level and the low-frequency eff ect (LFE) level. 
The center level refers to the image created by the center speaker. As surround sound is derived from the 
fi lm industry, the center speaker has traditionally been placed behind or around the projection screen 
and due to its focal point it contained all the dialog. As such, the music was usually omitted out of this 
speaker, leaving it to create the phantom center image it currently creates with stereo reproduction. With 
a center level control in Logic, it is possible to decide whether to allow any signal to come through the 
center speaker at all.       
 Panning stereo signals in surround can make the process of mixing somewhat complicated. With two 
speakers, it is clear where the stereo signals go and how they might be managed as they can only come 
from within the space provided between the two speakers. 
 Surround sound in its popular incarnation means that there are fi ve speakers through which the stereo 
signal can be routed. Does this stereo signal simply go to the left- and right-hand speakers and faithfully 
represent itself, or is it reinterpreted for surround and maneuvered around the sound space? In the past, 
a stereo pair on a guitar might have stayed centralized to the center, but with a multichannel set up, it is 
possible to say rotate this 90° so that the left-hand channel could be reproduced from the right monitor 
and the original right channel from the rear right monitor, hence keeping the stereo image but shifting 
it in the sound space as shown in the example below.  
 Figure 10.30  
 The Output 
Assign menu on 
each channel 
off ers you the 
ability to choose 
any available 
physical mono or 
stereo outputs, 
in addition to a 
surround mode. 

373
Logic and Multimedia Production
 Figures 10.32 and 
10.33  In this view, the 
panner can be seen 
managing a stereo 
signal. When panning 
stereo sources, there 
are extra controls to 
change the separation 
of the signals. 
 Figure 10.31 
   Clicking and holding on the button with a circle(s) in it will off er you the opportunity 
to quickly select the output mode of the selected strip.   

374
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Four further controls are available from the bottom of the 
Surround Balancer. To obtain access to these, simply click on the 
small triangle to the bottom left of the pane. Three separation 
amount figures can be adjusted to alter the separation of the 
panner. In the diagram above, the orange square represents the 
bounds of the possible separation of the panners. However, in 
some examples, it might be necessary to reduce this to reproduce 
a less wide image of the original. The three sliders correspond to 
the front left and right image (Separation XF), rear left and right 
image (Separation XR), and separation between front and rear 
(Separation Y). The fourth control sets the Level Compensation 
between “Unity Gain at Speaker,” “Unity Gain at Mid Point,” and 
“Legacy - Pre Logic 9.1.4).” 
 The LFE level, sometimes also called the low-frequency eff ect, is 
the “0.1” of 5.1. This is what is commonly known in the industry as 
a subwoofer. The LFE level control is placed within each panner 
as it is often undesirable to send everything to the subwoofer, 
when the main monitors should handle most bass information 
perfectly well. This again has come from the fi lm industry where 
the LFE is used to reproduce rumbles, explosions, and impacts. 
The 5.1 standard means that all the main five monitors should 
be full-frequency and should reproduce bass well for most 
applications. Hence, the LFE is included to add weight to the 
bass end. However, it is worth remembering when mixing that 
for many audio applications, including home cinema systems, 
the subwoofer is not included as an “eff ect” but as the only bass 
generating driver, leaving the satellites to consider only mid- to 
high-frequency ranges.  
 Figure 10.34  In this example, the 
separation has been reduced to 
limit the width of the image. Also, 
it is possible to spread circular lines 
around the circumference that 
indicate which speakers are receiving 
a signal from which channel.   
  KNOWLEDGEBASE 
 Surround Sound Plug-Ins 
 Working in surround sound requires that you think slightly diff erently when employing eff ects such 
as reverberations. You could employ a stereo plug-in or you could choose to use two in tandem 
for front and rear if need be. Logic has fortunately thought of this and produced an intuitive set of 
surround-ready plug-ins to get you instantly working. 
 These dedicated plug-ins include the renowned Space Designer whose 5.1 algorithms are superb. 
Other 5.1 dedicated plug-ins include Delay Designer, Chorus, Tremelo, Flanger, Microphaser, and 
Modulation Delay. 
 The plug-in behaves in exactly the same way as the stereo version, but the response is returned in 
5.1 as per the original impulse. To place a surround plug-in in your mix can be simply achieved by 
(Continued)

375
Logic and Multimedia Production
selecting it from the menu. Most 5.1 plug-ins can be applied to a mono track whose output will be 
converted to surround. However, these processes are best added to a 5.1 bus or output. 
 Other plug-ins do not require specifi c surround algorithms to operate with multichannel information. 
These will, therefore, work in “Multi Mono” mode for processing multichannel information. Plug-ins 
such as the compressor, which utilizes this mode, will show some banks using additional switches 
located above the main controls that are not found on its stereo or mono counterpart. The Confi gure 
switch allows you to confi gure which compressor bank is attached to which outputs. Therefore, it is 
possible to strap a compressor across the front speakers, another to the rears, and one dedicated to 
the LFE channel. Alternatively, you might wish to alter this so that the Center channel has a dedicated 
bank for use in fi lm work where the dialog is of paramount importance.        
 
 Figure 10.35    Choosing a surround plug-in can 
improve your 5.1 mix. Note how a mono track (or in 
this example a stereo track) will be processed with 
a surround sound plug-in thus changing its output 
to 5.1. 
 Figure 10.36  Space Designer comes with 
some impressive dedicated surround 
algorithms. 
(Continued)

376
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 10.37    Plug-ins that do not require specifi c surround algorithms work in Multi Mono mode such 
as the compressor. Note the selector switches above the main plug-in to select which compressor bank 
operates which output.   
 Figure 10.38  
 10.7  Delivery Formats 
 Bouncing to Stereo and Surround 
 At some point, it will be necessary to present a mixed output of your production. If you are working 
within Logic, then it will be necessary to do a bounce, and depending on the application, diff erent 
choices will need to be made. One of these choices will be of course whether to produce a stereo or 
a surround bounce. Bouncing surround mixes is achieved in the same way as traditional stereo mixes. 
 Once your surround sound mix is balanced and ready, simply select the “Bnce” button from the master 
channel strip in Logic’s Mixer. A new dialog button will emerge showing a number of options for editing. 

377
Logic and Multimedia Production
The fi rst to note is the destination for the fi les once you have bounced them. Choosing the arrow to the 
top right will open up this dialog to show more of the fi le structure of the computer.  
 Figure 10.39 
   Bouncing to surround is as simple 
as clicking the “Bnce” button on the 
master fader strip. It is important 
to select the surround bounce 
checkbox and choose whether you 
wish the fi le to be interleaved or 
separated out. 
 Moving on to the left-hand side, the Destination table can be seen, which allows you to confi gure the fi le 
type you wish to export to. For most applications, this is likely to be PCM, which means unaltered or data 
compressed information, unlike the MP3 and M4A options below it. The DVD-A option is an excellent 
option for surround sound, as it will create a disc that can be played in most DVD players connected to 
a surround sound system. 
 Below this are the range controls allowing you to specify the start and end points of your bounce. This 
might be useful in the instance that you might need to export each scene separately for a dubbing mixer. 
Additional features include whether you wish to monitor the bounce in real time or allow the computer 
to manage the event offl  ine. You are also given the opportunity to automatically normalize your audio 
as it is bounced. 
 The right-hand side of the dialog box includes a number of drop-down menus that relate to the fi le 
destination type you wish to export. First up is the option to choose the fi le type. There are three choices 
here starting with the Audio Interchange File Format (AIFF), which is generally the common format used 
on the Apple Mac. This fi le format is not subject to any data compression and is generally an accepted 
fi le format for use between software in the industry. AIFF does not contain timestamp information. 
Next is the Wave format or .wav and is perhaps the most common of audio fi le formats for exporting to 
another computer for further mixing or mastering. Finally, in the menu is the Core Audio File (CAF), which 
is an all-encompassing format that contains a wide variety of diff erent formats in one and is common for 
Apple Loops. 
 The next drop-down menu is labeled Resolution and relates to the bit depth you wish for your bounce. 
This can be set typically at 8, 16, or 24 bits. Following this is the sample rate selector where a wide variety 
can be chosen from for a wide variety of applications, which will be determined by your destination. The 
File Type box allows you to set whether you wish for the fi les to be interleaved together or split fi les for 
each channel. 

378
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Dithering is required in situations where a lower resolution bounce is required than the project’s set 
resolution – for example, when a 24-bit recording needs to be dithered down to produce a 16-bit CD 
ready fi le. Dither is a method by which the waveform is more accurately encoded for 16-bit reproduction 
and has been discussed previously. 
 The next, and perhaps most important feature for delivery of a multichannel export, is the Surround 
Bounce checkbox. This needs to be checked to enable that each channel of the surround fi eld is exported 
as a separate fi le. The extensions for which are changed in the Audio Preferences as described before. 
 Exporting to DVD 
 Logic now allows you to export a DVD-Audio ready disc directly from the bounce dialog. Within this 
window, select “Burn to CD/DVD” and the right-hand pane should alter to show you the Mode. There are 
two choices here. DVD-A which can produce a 5.1 mix for use in DVD-A players or a (HD) stereo bounce 
of 24 bits and up to a 192-kHz sample rate. The CDDA option refers to our standard Red Book CD and as 
such higher sample rates and bit depths will be dithered to 44.1kHz and 16 bit. 
 For working to DVD Video, surround sound fi les need to be compressed using Dolby Digital Professional 
(AC-3) format. To achieve this, we need to use Apple’s Compressor software which is part of Logic Studio 
or similar encoder software – see Knowledgebase. 
 Figure 10.40  Burning a DVD-A or 
CCDA can be achieved straight from 
Logic’s own Bounce window.   
  First, we need to bounce the Surround Sound mix as split fi les, meaning that each stream (left, center, 
right, left surround, right surround, and LFE) is an audio fi le in its own right. This will then allow us to 
indicate in Compressor what fi les are for which output. Before bouncing, it might be worth checking the 
bounce extensions found in the audio preferences pane as discussed earlier. 
 Exporting Video with Audio (Dubbing) 
 Either during or at the end of the writing process for the fi lm and television visual, you will be asked to 
send a copy with both the video and audio together into one fi le. This process is known in the industry 

379
Logic and Multimedia Production
as dubbing and is something that is normally handled by large postproduction houses, but for demo 
purposes, you can merge the two fi les together by selecting Export Audio to Movie from the movies 
menu (File > Movie > Export Audio to Movie …). 
 A new dialog box entitled Location and Name of New Movie will appear that allows you to choose the 
name and location for the fi le and the nature of the audio fi le. It is here that you decide upon the data 
compression format, sample rate, bit rate, and whether it should be stereo or mono. These settings are 
useful as a director or production company may wish to see your work in progress, and the best vehicle 
to deliver this to them is over the Internet via e-mail (if small) or File Transfer Protocol. It is, therefore, 
handy that the compression formats allow for a wide variety of standards to suit each and every client. 
 Once these settings are decided upon, click OK and choose the location for your fi nal fi les. It is worth 
creating a folder at this point to ensure quick and tidy fi le management as there may be more than one 
fi le given the compression format you have chosen. Next click Save and wait while Logic compiles your 
video for you. Once completed, this fi le should be readable by Quicktime.     
  WALKTHROUGH 
   Creating AC3 Files Using Apple Compressor 
 For your new 5.1 mix to be read on a DVD-V disc, it will need to be compressed to Dolby’s AC3 format. 
To achieve this using Logic Studio, you will need to export the six audio fi les (front left, center, front 
right, rear left, rear right, and LFE) using the “bnce” bounce feature. With six discreet audio fi les, it is 
now possible to compress for AC3. 
 To do this, make sure you’ve got your six audio fi les to hand. Quit Logic and search your applications 
folder for Compressor, purchasable from the App Store for £35 at the time of writing. Open this. 
You’ll note Compressor looks quite diff erent, but is a fantastic batch processing tool for all kinds of 
conversions and so on. 
 In Compressor, go to Job > New Job with Surround Sound Group. 
 A new dialog box will appear giving you options to place individual, discreet audio fi les in each 
speaker. You can add 5.1 or indeed an additional rear center channel “S” making this 6.1. 
 Also note the ability to add a movie here to compress the whole thing together for a DVD-V ready fi le. 
 Once you’ve clicked OK, you’ll be back on the main Compressor screen and it is at this point you 
need to specify what the output fi le format will be. To do this, go to Window > Settings or simply 
click Cmd+3. 
 A new Setting dialog box will open that has two tabs: one for the Destinations of compressed fi le 
and one for the Settings. We’re interested in the Settings at this point. There are a large number of 
fi le formats here to choose from, but seek out Formats > Audio > Dolby Digital Professional 5.1. Drag 
the Dolby Digital Professional 5.1 icon to the batch job in the main screen. Next press Submit on the 
bottom right to press your AC3 fi le.  

 In this chapter 
 11.1 Introduction 
381 
 11.2 Templates 
381 
 11.3 Screensets and 
Windows 
383 
 11.4 Key Commands 
387 
 11.5 The Environment 
388 
 11.6 Input/Output Labels 
404  
 Walkthrough 
   Adding New MIDI Devices to 
the Environment 
398 

381
Optimizing Logic 
 11.1  Introduction 
 Working with any music software will expect you to operate within its structure and design. Logic is 
part of that pack and off ers a number of options to personalize the way in which you work with the 
application. One of the most exciting things about Logic is its fl exibility and confi gurability to the way in 
which you need and like to work. Music production requires a fl uid workfl ow that adapts to your way of 
making music. Doing this requires some initial thought and preparation, but it will improve not only the 
results but also the speed at which you work. 
 Over the years, Logic has developed an arsenal of features, tools, and techniques to help the workfl ow 
of productions by making the best use of the computer’s interface. In this chapter, we’ll explore some of 
those features and how to tweak Logic to fi t your workfl ow. 
 11.2  Templates 
 As you launch Logic, you cannot fail to notice the chooser that allows you to get started with one of 
the program’s in-built templates. Many of these are very workable and are an excellent starting point. 
However, as you begin to work in a particular way, you’ll want your settings just so, thus saving your time 
and allowing you to be more creative. It is, therefore, worth preparing a template of your own with all 
the connections, plug-ins, windows, and other features ready to go to work. 
 It is best to spend some time thinking about the way this template will look and function. Consider the 
way in which you use Logic before setting up the ultimate template. You may need to set up diff erent 
templates for doing diff erent projects in a wide variety of genres. To do this, load up the Empty Project 
template from the “Explore” collection in the Template Chooser. Alternatively, you may just wish to alter 
a template from the chooser, which suits the way you work with your personal samples already preloaded 
into EXS24. Add to this project your external MIDI devices that you use frequently and give them tracks, 
your preferred organization of Screensets (discussed later), and then choose to save as a template (File > 
Save as Template…).  
 For example, if you do a lot of drum recording, with a guide bass, guitar, and vocals, it might be prudent 
to set up a template for this kind of recording, and perhaps, another template for working to picture. The 
benefi ts here are that all the tracks will be prelabeled and, therefore, your audio fi les too when you hit 
record. This can be extended further to consider the mix, and if you fi nd yourself using the same plug-ins 
and settings for your components of the drums, the template can have these preloaded  as in Figure 11.2  . 
It is perhaps sensible to put these into bypass mode (Alt + click) as this can save on DSP power. In this 
example, the drum outputs are all set to go to Bus 3, which in this case has been set up as a Drum Group 
or Stem. 

382
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Once you have created and saved your templates, they will appear in a new collection folder within 
the Template Chooser called “My Templates.” These should provide you with personalized and honed 
platforms upon which to move forward fast with your projects.  
 Figure 11.2 
 Creating a template for 
a recording such as this 
can save time in the long 
run. Each strip can be 
automatically set up for 
sends and some with 
plug-ins as required. 
Ready to press “R” and 
record! 
 Figure 11.1 
 Logic’s template 
chooser can save 
time when starting 
a project using a 
template of your 
own making. 

383
Optimizing Logic
 11.3  Screensets and Windows 
 Until Logic Pro 8, there were many individual windows to contend with. Each editor, mixer, list, and the 
Arrange Window were all separate and individually controllable windows. I t’s hard to believe   now with 
the redesigned (fi rst in Version 9) Main Window now updated for Logic Pro X with its “access all areas” 
philosophy. Logic’s solution to managing all those errant windows remains and is still very relevant in 
certain circumstances. 
 Working in Logic may require that a signifi cant number of windows be opened on top of each other at a 
time. The most obvious examples would be an Arrange Window and an editor opened at the same time, 
or the Arrange Window and Mixer together. Clearly, the current Logic Pro Main Window can deal with 
most of these adequately. However, if you wish to open other windows, most applications would use the 
Cmd + “ ` ” (the one to the left of the “Z” key) shortcut to allow you to toggle through the open windows 
in the program one by one. However, given the need to access so many diff erent combinations of the 
Logic Pro Main Window, editors, mixers, and so on, Logic adopts what it called Screensets to allow for 
quick and easy navigation. 
 Screensets are Logic’s ability to change what windows are viewed on the screen, or screens, at any time 
(a little like Mac OSX Spaces). On the title bar of Logic to the right-hand side of the Screenset menu, you 
will notice a number. This indicates the Screenset you have chosen, and pressing one of the numbers on 
the numeric keypad can change this, or you can click on the Screenset menu for more options. Within 
this menu, you have the opportunity to rename your Screensets, duplicate them, and delete them. The 
key additional features available within this menu are “Lock” and “Revert to Saved.” These are really useful 
when you’re using multiple monitors. 
 Lock allows you to set the way in which the screen looks so that it cannot be altered. A small bullet dot 
will appear to the left of the Screenset number to indicate this. This can be really useful when you need 
to rely on your Screensets being just so! There will be times when the Screenset changes you have made 
don’t work for you and you wish to revert to your original decisions without losing the audio recording 
and editing you have done. To do this, choose the Revert to Saved option from the Screensets menu. 
 The window combinations can be carefully thought out to maximize both your speed and screen space. 
For example, most users will keep Screenset 1 as the default Logic Pro Main Window. However, whatever 
combination of windows you choose for each Screenset is entirely up to you. One example some users 
use is to follow the key commands for each window as a guide; see Window from the main Logic menu. 
Doing this means that you can get to navigate to the Screenset, which focuses on the task you need. For 
example, Screenset 8 (in Logic and before), could be set up to be the MIDI Environment, or the Audio 
Mixer within the Environment window, which we’ll cover later in this chapter.   
 Figure 11.3 
   The Screenset menu not only 
gives you options to edit and 
work with Screensets but 
also off ers a clear indicator 
from the menu bar of which 
Screenset you’re currently 
working in. 

384
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Screensets really come into their own with two or more monitors. 
As we’ve already mentioned, the Logic Pro Main Window is a very 
comprehensive space for achieving most things in Logic, although 
there will be particular times when you’ll want to see additional 
things, perhaps in larger windows or at the same time as something 
else. As such, Screensets could allow you, if you so desired, to 
manage the second monitor’s content, while leaving the Logic Pro 
Main Window on the main monitor. Additionally, Screensets can 
also permit you to choose which editor or list is shown within the 
Logic Pro Main Window. For example, one Screenset could show 
the Sample Editor, while another shows the Markers list. 
 Should you wish to see the Mixer and the Logic Pro Main 
Window  as in Figure 11.5  , then this is absolutely fi ne. Although 
there is another more integrated way of bringing up the 
Mixer using the Environment window, Logic allows for the 
Environment window to be loaded up as a frameless fl oating 
window by selecting View > Frameless Floating Window in 
your Environment window. Before you do this, open a normal 
Environment window by going to Window > Environment, and 
change its view to “Mixer” using the arrow pointing down in the 
top left-hand side of the screen.  
 With this new fl oating Mixer window, shown below, it is possible 
to quickly navigate each track on the Logic Pro Main Window and 
the Mixer will follow as though the link control was on, making 
it an extremely fl exible and powerful way of working effi  ciently 
whether on a small, wide, or double-screen setup. To enable 
this, you need to ensure that the link icon is enabled in the main 
Environment window before making it fl oat. This might seem as 
duplication to the Inspector’s expanded feature showing two 
Mixer elements, although you can, perhaps, be more dependent 
 Figure 11.4  The Windows menu 
off ers all the other views that can 
be spread across additional screens 
should you not wish to use the 
integral panes in the Main Window.   
 Figure 11.5    In Logic X to create a fl oating Environment page, you need to select View > Frameless Floating 
Window. 

385
Optimizing Logic
on the number of monitors you have. The alternative use for this is perhaps where you might disable the 
link and focus the fl oating Environment window (as a mixer) to the Master output. Now, directly from 
the Logic Pro Main Window, we operate the focused track’s Mixer element in addition to the master bus. 
 Immediately, there are nine Screenset levels that can be accessed from the number keys on both the 
qwerty and numeric keypads. However, Logic allows you to access and make use of Screensets up to 99. 
 Figure 11.6    Two windows can be made to sit side-by-side using Screensets as shown here, but it is also 
possible to create a fl oating Environment window (a mixer layer in this instance), which can be linked to your 
actions on the Tracks Area (below).   

386
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
To key in these Screensets, you need to press Ctrl and type the number of the corresponding Screenset. 
So for 34, simply press Ctrl + 3 and then Ctrl + 4, on the numbers on the qwerty keyboard.   
 At times you may receive a fi le you have been asked to mix, which will have diff erent Screensets and 
perhaps diff erent key command settings. It is important that your workfl ow is not jeopardized and that 
you can work both effi  ciently and productively with your preferences. To import project settings from 
another Logic File, go to File > Project Settings > Import Project Settings.  
 Figure 11.7 
 It is possible 
to import your 
project working 
preferences from 
another Logic File 
using the Import 
Settings feature. 
 Link Modes 
 Link mode when mixing can be really useful so as not to overload one screen with multiple plug-ins. 
 Link has two discrete modes. The first is Same Link Level (pink chain link icon), which means that 
whatever item you click on, whether that be a region or the note, the linked windows will follow the 
same track. These diff erences are ever so subtle, and frankly, it is one of those things that if the windows 
are not linking as you need them to, then simply press Ctrl + click the link icon, change the mode, and 
see if that works the way you want it to. Nevertheless, the Link mode is a key feature of Logic as it does 
ensure that Screensets can operate fl uidly. 

387
Optimizing Logic
 11.4  Key Commands 
 Keyboard shortcuts are a useful way of improving the workfl ow with whatever software you are using 
from a word processor to an Internet browser. Logic, of course, is no diff erent, and as you’d expect, there 
are so many of them covering a vast number of the features. Throughout this book, we give you the new 
default key commands that relate to what we have covered in Logic Pro X. Most of these commands 
can be learnt by noting the writing to the right of the command in one of the menus, but the whole 
range can be viewed in their own dedicated Key Commands viewer (Logic Pro X > Preferences > Key 
Commands… or Alt + K).     
 Figure 11.8 
 (a) Key Commands are 
an important feature of 
any piece of software to 
increase productivity. 
Logic is no exception 
allowing you to carve 
out a key command for 
literally every feature. 
(b) For those not yet 
brave enough to learn 
the new shortcuts as well 
as the new software will 
be pleased to engage 
the Logic 9 keyboard 
shortcuts. 

388
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Searching for Key Commands is easy by using the Spotlight-like search bar on the top right of the pane. 
Here, simply type in the command you wish to fi nd the key command for and the possible results will 
appear under one of the main headings in the command list. Under each of these 17 headings, are all the 
key commands available for use with Logic. Not all of these commands will have a shortcut associated 
with them as there are simply too many. But as with all things in Logic, they too can be optimized or 
altered to suit your working needs. 
 Once you have selected the instruction you wish to create a key command for, select it and choose 
to either “Learn by Key Label” or “Learn by Key Position” followed by the key combination you wish to 
use. There are subtle diff erences between these buttons. Logic allows you to discern between using 
the numerical keypad and using the numbers on the main part of the keyboard. In this way, you could 
choose to assign two diff erent commands to number 9; one would be on the main keyboard and the 
other on the numerical keypad. Therefore, learning by Key Label means that using the number 1 will call 
up the same key command whether it is on the numerical keypad or above the qwerty. However, the Key 
Position option will allow you to discern between the two diff ering positions, thus giving you further key 
command possibilities. 
 There will, perhaps, come a time when you will develop your own key commands and see your 
productivity suit the way in which you work. Your templates will already preload your key commands 
with your work if you saved them, but there may come a time when you have to work on an imported 
project such as a mix that someone else put together. In this instance, it is really important that you save 
a set of your personalized key commands. 
 There will be times when you may need to impose your special and personalized changes to another’s 
Logic session and will need to have your key commands ready. To do this, we need to export our key 
commands. To do this, simply press Alt + K from anywhere in Logic to bring up the Key Commands 
dialog. Within the Options menu is a command called Export Key Commands that will allow you to save 
your key commands. These can then easily be exported into another copy of Logic using the Import Key 
Commands instruction in the same menu. These key commands can also be saved to the clipboard for 
use as a reference, or for revision. It may even be worth doing this while you’re learning to use these 
commands. 
 If, however, you have learnt Logic’s default Key Command set and import another person’s project, you 
might be at a loss as to why so many of them did not work. In this case, it would be sensible to choose 
the option of “Initialize All Key Commands,” which will reset the commands to the factory standard. 
 11.5  The Environment 
 Logic’s Environment window has an interesting reputation to the non-Logic using world. It has always 
held an almost mythical-like status, where many users have not wished to delve for the fear of it 
would mess their whole project up. Although the Environment is perhaps less used these days now 
that MIDI is not the main method of communication between the application and the sound sources, 
it is still an important tool that allows the user to experiment and perhaps optimize his or her creative 
output. The Environment window is thus the route for information into and out of Logic and as such 
is something that is worth considering especially when working with MIDI. It is here that the virtual 

389
Optimizing Logic
representation of your studio can be created, managed, and manipulated. In this section, we’ll give a 
quick overview of its core functions and its possibilities. Where you take it will be up to your creativity. 
 Layers and Windows 
 The Environment window itself could be simply looked upon as an area to organize your MIDI inputs and 
outputs and how they all connect together. However, there are some more angles, or layers, to it which 
we’ll explore a little here, such as its Audio Mixer and Global Object layers. In essence, the Environment 
should show all the connections to and from Logic, both physical and internal. 
 The fi rst layer in the list is the All Objects list, which shows you all the connections to Logic currently 
established. This includes MIDI, Audio, and internal connections such as ReWire. The next layer is Global 
Objects that allows you to specify any objects that are common to each layer. The Click and Ports layer 
refers to how the click track (metronome) is managed within the MIDI environment, and how the Ports 
connect to each MIDI input, whether that be physical through an interface (port) or the Musical Typing 
Keyboard. The MIDI Instr. or MIDI Instruments layer is to allow you to specify what each instrument is 
and to manage its operation from within Logic. The last is the Mixer layer, which allows you to create a 
customizable mixer layout to suit your way of working.   
 Figure 11.9    The Environment has a number of diff erent layers, which can be selected using the menu at the 
top left-hand side of the window.   

390
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 New layers can be created for diff erent purposes by selecting “Create Layer” from the menu. It might 
be prudent to create perhaps an additional layer if you wished to use the Environment to control an 
external MIDI synthesizer using something we call a mixermap, or a controller. This map could allow 
a physical display of the controls of that MIDI synth within a new Environment layer. The benefi t here 
is that any movements you make to the synth within Logic can be recalled and automated. What you 
 Figure 11.10 
 The Environment has a 
number of diff erent layers, 
which can be selected using 
the menu at the top left-
hand side of the window.   
 Figure 11.11 
 The Inspector 
is an important 
aspect of the 
Environment 
window and can 
be toggled in and 
out of view using 
the “I” key. 

391
Optimizing Logic
choose to use on additional layers will depend on the way you work. Additional mixer layers might be an 
idea, one for the channels and another for auxiliary tracks, for example. 
 An additional dimension to the “layout” of your windows is the opportunity to make the Environment 
window a Frameless Floating window by selecting it from the View menu. If you press link on the 
Environment window before making it frameless, it will follow the regions you select as you move around 
the project. As the Environment window can be used for so many specialized and personalized facilities, 
it might be necessary to have it open on top of other windows. In this instance, create a Frameless 
window (View > Frameless Floating Window) and place it in your Screenset next to your Logic Pro Main 
Window or however you see fi t for your session management.  
 Objects 
 Each element within a layer is known as an object, These objects and their connections make up 
the manner in which Logic works. To see the types of object available, go to the New menu within 
the Environment window where you will be greeted by a long list. The list is grouped into four. The 
first is the objects themselves; the second is a collection of processors, such as the Arpeggiator or 
Transformer. The third collection comprises simply two inputs: Physical Input and Sequencer Input. The 
Physical Input refers to the MIDI input from an external device, perhaps a master keyboard, whereas 
the Sequencer Input refers to what Logic “gets.” In other words, one could place a process such as the 
Arpeggiator between the Physical Input and the Sequencer Input. The last collection refers to Audio and 
external functionality such as new Internal connections, which include ReWire, and Audio objects such 
as auxiliary tracks.  
 Managing objects is simple as they can be moved, copied, and edited in a way similar to that of regions 
on the Tracks Area. The Environment window also has an Inspector just as the Logic Pro Main Window 
and can be toggled in and out of view using the “I” key. Selecting an object will reveal some editable 
features within the Inspector. 
 It is quite easy to create some unique layouts such as mixers, which would benefi t from being presented 
in a structured and uniform manner. When creating an environment, it is easy for the objects to not quite 
line up. As with many graphics applications, Logic’s Environment also includes a snap to grid-type facility 
called Snap Positions (in the Environment, View > Snap Positions). This will ensure that the objects you 
place can be easily managed and look smart! 
 Cables 
 Objects need to be connected to operate in many instances. Therefore, Logic provides “cables” to connect 
one object to another and can, therefore, be extremely fl exible. 
 If you navigate to the Click & Ports layer, you’ll notice that the Physical Inputs box has a number of white 
triangular arrows running down the right-hand side. These are connected to some writing that indicates 
which physical MIDI input they refer, such as Port 1, and so on. Alternatively, at the top of this box is 
a SUM of all the physical inputs (which can be really useful if your master keyboard is away from your 
computer as you could employ the Musical Typing Keyboard or another smaller keyboard) and either 
signal will be passed into Logic. 

392
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 It is likely that the SUM output of the Physical Input box has, by default, been connected to an Input 
Notes keyboard on screen, which allows you to click and preview notes as though you were playing a 
keyboard. This is usually automatically connected to what is labeled as the Input View, but is actually 
known as a Monitor Object. This shows you the MIDI information as you play the keyboard, which is 
usually a Note On message followed by a Note Off  for each key pressed. MIDI information then travels 
through the cable connected to the Sequencer Input, which connects to your chosen track on the Logic 
Pro Main Window. 
 Figure 11.12 
 There are a 
considerable 
number of 
environment 
objects available 
to you to choose 
from to control 
Logic in a fl exible 
manner. 

393
Optimizing Logic
 As a default, this is great as it allows you to see how the Environment connects, and it is at this point that 
you perhaps might wish to experiment a little. For example, try creating an Arpeggiator and another 
Monitor Object. The idea here is to place the Arpeggiator after the original Input View Monitor to create a 
new musical arrangement. This could then be outputted to another Monitor Object to see what changes 
have been made to your input. With this arrangement of objects, anything played in on any physical 
inputs will be subjected to an Arpeggiator. 
 The Arpeggiator will run at the tempo of the project, and its response and range can be altered by 
selecting it in the Environment and visiting the Inspector to the left of the screen. 
 As Click & Ports generally refers to the input side of Logic, there is so much experimentation we can do 
here. There are obviously many more options: we could try working on the output of Logic, which can be 
quickly demonstrated by moving the mixer layer and adding in a new Arpeggiator into the environment. 
Connect this to a software instrument channel at the top of the fader. This new Arpeggiator object on 
the Mixer will now be available on the Logic Pro Main Window. Create a new track and press Ctrl + click 
the track header to open up the Reassign Track Object menu. From here, select the Mixer submenu and 
you should see the word Arpeggiator written in. This will now allow you to record and play only the 
source notes, which will then be arpeggiated each time the sequence is played.   
 Figure 11.13 
 Using the 
Environment, 
it is easy to 
create unique 
and interesting 
creative aspects 
to your work. In 
the examples 
above, we 
have placed an 
Arpeggiator 
across any MIDI 
input to Logic. 
 Figure 11.14 
 The Environment 
has a number of 
diff erent layers, 
which can be 
selected using 
the menu at the 
top left-hand side 
of the window.   

394
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 It is quite possible that the cables on an environment may get so frenetic that you’ll not be in a position 
to see the objects! Within each layer is the option to view or hide the cables, thus allowing you to see 
what is going on. Simply go to the View menu and select Cables. This will hide them until the next time 
you need them. To make the workfl ow quicker, you can simply press Ctrl + C to toggle them in and out 
of view. 
 Another dimension is the ability to color your environment cables by clicking on the source, that is the 
device that is outputting to the cable, and pressing Alt + C or View > “Colors….” Change the color as 
necessary to enable quick access to the appropriate element of your environment. Remember these can 
simply get toggled out of view if it all becomes too much. 
 Setting Up MIDI Instruments in the Environment 
 The MIDI Instruments Layer is an important one as it allows you to specify the MIDI environment and 
the synths and devices you have attached to your system. For example, if you bring in a new MIDI synth 
to your setup, you could simply just tell Logic there is a new instrument connected, and this will allow 
you to select it from the track assignments, which is fi ne, but there is so much more that can be done. 
 Creating a new instrument within the MIDI Instruments layer will enable a new instrument to be located 
within the Reassign Track Object menu meaning that you can directly select the device and its channel 
from the Logic Pro Main Window. To do this, we need to create a new Environment Object, and there are 
two main alternatives for MIDI instruments. The fi rst is to create a new “Instrument” (New > Instrument). 
This means that this output will go to one MIDI channel from any port. There are some classic examples 
of MIDI instruments that are not multitimbral such as the Waldorf Pulse, which is a single MIDI-channeled 
monosynth.  
 For larger multitimbral synthesizers, we’ll need to create a “Multi-Instrument.” This can allow us to 
specify quite a lot about the device in question. As you select this, you’re confronted by a box with 
16 small buttons. These will all be crossed off . This is essentially to save your time as not all multitimbral 
 Figure 11.15 
   It is easy to view, hide, or 
protect the Environment’s 
cables by going to View > 
Protect Cabling/Positions. 

395
Optimizing Logic
synthesizers are able to use all 16 MIDI channels. Therefore, you can specify which outputs you wish to 
use. Another reason for limiting the output of certain channels might be because you may wish to use 
a channel from the same physical output, if your MIDI outputs are limited, to send to a monosynth such 
as the pulse on channel 16. 
 After creating an instrument object, you will need to connect it to an output port. To do this, simply 
select the instrument in question and visit the Inspector to the left of the Environment window. Usually, 
directly under the Icon check-box is a drop-down menu that lists all the available physical ports. Simply 
select the physical MIDI port you have connected the device to, and you can use the instrument straight 
away from the Logic Pro Main Window. This is known in Logic speak as a direct output assignment. 
 Once you have set the device using the multi-instrument object, you can double-click the object to reveal 
the Multi-Instrument Window. This immediately shows the instrument names for a General MIDI device 
(GM Device) that relate to a program change that can be sent by the sequencer. The idea is that you 
can relabel the instruments within Logic as they relate to their corresponding program change number. 
Once this has been done, you can choose the instrument name when selecting the Track Assignment in 
the Logic Pro Main Window. Although this might seem like a long-winded exercise for all your esoteric 
synths, the operation would only need to be completed once. That level of recall from the Logic Pro Main 
Window is an excellent feature and once done can speed up your workfl ow without leaving your mix 
position.   
 The Mapped Instrument Object can be useful when you wish to convert one type of MIDI input data 
to another. For example, you may have drum kit loaded in an external device, which does not follow 
the General MIDI drum convention. In that instance, it would be useful to call up a Mapped Instrument 
Object that can be double-clicked to open a chart, which allows one note to be mapped to another in 
real time. 
 Figure 11.16 
 Creating a new Multi-
Instrument in the MIDI 
Instruments layer will 
allow you to create a 
new stream of MIDI 
information intended for 
this new device. 

396
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Figure 11.17    Creating a new Multi-Instrument in the MIDI Instruments layer will allow you to create a new 
stream of MIDI information intended for this new device.   
 Figure 11.18    The Multi-Instrument window allows you to label the instruments or patches to their 
corresponding program change. This can be then selected from the Program Change menu in the Inspector.   

397
Optimizing Logic
 Figure 11.19    The Multi-Instrument window allows you to label the instruments or patches to their 
corresponding program change. This can be then selected from the Program Change menu in the Inspector.   
 Figure 11.20    The Mapped Instrument Object converts one set of MIDI notes into another and is primarily 
useful for mapping drum kit sounds.   

398
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
  WALKTHROUGH 
   Adding New MIDI Devices to the Environment 
  Step 1 
 Adding a new MIDI instrument to the Environment will allow you to select it as a distinct item from 
the Reassign Track Objects menu. First, open up the Environment window, which is Cmd + 0 or 
Windows > Environment. With the Environment open, select the layer selection menu to the top left. 
From this menu, select the MIDI Instruments layer abbreviated to “MIDI Instr.” This layer should see a 
GM Device, which is sometimes routed to the Quicktime Music Player.  
  Step 2 
 To create a new instrument, choose the New menu. There are plenty of options available here, but 
namely we’re concerned with either a new Instrument or Multi-Instrument. An “Instrument” in this 
case is an instrument that has only one MIDI channel, such as synthesizer. The Multi-Instrument 
alternative is for use with multitimbral MIDI devices such as a sound module or external sampler. It 
is important to establish which type your device is before connecting as it will make your selection 
easier from a track in the Logic Pro Main Window. When this appears, you will need to route it out of 
a physical MIDI output. To do this, select the instrument object and visit the Inspector on the left to 
select the port it will output from.  
 Figure 11.21 
 
(Continued)

399
Optimizing Logic
 Step 3 
 If you have chosen the Multi-Instrument option, a grid with 16 numbers will greet you, and they’ll 
all be crossed out. This is so that you can specify how multitimbral your device is. For example, some 
synths only can receive eight channels of MIDI, rather than the full quota of 16. In this instance, 
simply don’t deselect the last eight. This will ensure that Logic can only talk to the eight live channels. 
While you’re here, it is really handy if you label the instrument by either selecting the object and 
clicking on its name in the inspector or selecting the Text Tool from the Click Tools menu. Your device 
will be labeled and available from the track assignments in the Logic Pro Main Window.   
 Figure 11.22 
 
 Figure 11.23 
 

400
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Live MIDI with the Environment 
 Earlier, we spoke of the Arpeggiator in terms of cabling and the creative eff ects it can have. The sheer 
number of objects possible within the Environment window allows us to design some interesting and 
important facilities for working with MIDI. Whether that is an Arpeggiator or Multi-Instrument, the two 
together can make some interesting outputs. This can, of course, be extended further if the fancy takes 
you. In the couple of examples below, we look at some aspects that can make Logic a useful tool when 
working live. 
 There are some interesting elements to the software, which might be worth mentioning here. First is 
the Chord Memorizer Object whose job in life is to do a more clever version of what many lower end 
keyboards are renowned for: one-note chords. The concept is that you can detail what the input note 
will be and what chord results from it. To create this, simply visit the View menu and click on a Chord 
Memorizer Object. Next, double-click the object itself to reveal two keyboards that allow you to set 
which chord plays depending on which key would be pressed.  
 Figure 11.24 
 Chords can be memorized 
to be played using one 
key using the Chord 
Memorizer. 
 The Touch Tracks Object off ers the Logic user a range of triggers to be enabled to play certain regions 
when pressed, like one of the functions of Ableton Live. This is a process that is limited to MIDI regions 
and Folder Track Regions. Select a Touch Tracks Object from the New menu and double-click it as it 
comes into view. Another table appears to allow you to assign a region or folder region to certain keys. 
This can be incredibly fl exible when working live.  
 External Control with the Environment 
 One of the most fl exible aspects of Logic is its ability to control external equipment which responds to 
MIDI. Whether to an external analog or a digital mixer that responds to MIDI messages or a synthesizer, 
Logic can control whatever functionality it allows using something termed a “Mixermap.” This can be 
extremely fl exible to allow you to further control your equipment from the mix position. Any moves you 
make can be saved with the project as the MIDI can be saved as automation. 

401
Optimizing Logic
 To enable this, simply create a new layer, which can be renamed as the device you’re planning on 
automating. Within this layer, create a series of objects which refl ect the device and the controls you 
want to manipulate. Each object will have a diff erent function to manage in the destination device. To 
alter this, we need to select each object and alter the MIDI message type it sends out. In the example 
 on p. 392  , we wish this fader to manage a volume; hence, this should be control change 7 on MIDI 
channel 1. This would need to be repeated for each channel and message for the Mixer. 
 There will, however, be instances where the MIDI data required will need to be somewhat more complex, 
such as System Exclusive (Sys EX) which will be required for the mixermap. For these message types, 
it will be trickier to enable as this takes more knowledge of MIDI than the remit of this book, but is of 
course possible. If your external synthesizer follows General MIDI, then simply call up Logic’s own GM 
Mixer by creating a new layer and then visiting New > GM Mixer. This might be a good starting point for 
the creation of any new mixermaps. 
 When creating mixermap environments to control externally connected MIDI instruments, it is worth 
noting that these are best designed on the output side of the Environment. By “output side” we mean by 
cabling up the faders directly before introducing a physical output using an instrument object as can be 
seen  in Figure 11.26 . 
 There is a bit of a strange logic to this, but doing it this way, you immediately take control the device 
from the mixermap by connecting the fader objects through to the MIDI instrument. Logic immediately 
records any actions you make on the environment page should you wish to without the need to cable 
these object to another sequencer input. 
 Figure 11.25    Touch Tracks enables Logic users to work with a range of MIDI regions mapped to various keys. 
Great for a live performance!   

402
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 Your MIDI device, which might be a mixer as in the environment example below, may also be able to 
transmit MIDI commands as you alter its physical controls. If so, these can be, in turn, fed-back into Logic 
and be refl ected on the Environment’s mixermap, provided it is cabled correctly. This loop is necessary to 
ensure that both the physical and the virtual controls are representative of each other. Fader objects on 
the Environment will only be controlled, though, if the physical device is routed back to the mixermap. 
 To do all this, simply create a new layer and name it “Mixermap” or something similar. Create an instrument 
(New > MIDI Instrument), which will act as your “Physical Output” directly to the MIDI-controlled device, 
in this example a mixer. It is worth ensuring that the icon checkbox is unchecked for this object as this 
does not prevent the icon from showing in the environment (we’ve changed it to a MIDI Plug here), but 
it will no longer show up in the Tracks Area when selecting outputs. 
 Next select the faders and other object types that best describe how you wish to control the external 
device. Select each new object and specify its parameters, such as control change number 7 for volume 
and control change 10 for pan, if it were a GM Device. It is worth noting at this point that many MIDI devices 
use diff erent message types than you’d expect, so it’s best to visit the corresponding manufacturer’s 
manual. Alternatively, put Logic into record and move the appropriate fader on the MIDI device. Once 
recorded, simply visit the Events List (Window > Events List or Cmd + 0) to ascertain what control change 
message it transmits. Later, we’ll show another easier way to do this in the Environment window.  
 Figure 11.26 
 To change the assignment 
of the fader, simply go to the 
Inspector and select the type of 
message and the corresponding 
number. In this case, we should 
send out a volume message.   

403
Optimizing Logic
 In order for this to operate eff ectively, you need to cable up the faders and other objects to the newly 
created instrument we’ve called “Physical Output.” To the right-hand side of each object are some 
triangles that represent cable “sockets.” Simply click here and drag the mouse away to show some virtual 
cables, which can be dropped onto other objects to make a connection as in the example above. 
 These cables then need to be connected to the newly created “Physical Output” to transmit the changes 
you make on screen to the device. This should work provided the MIDI interface and MIDI device are 
operating properly. 
 However, we need to ensure that any movement on the physical controls on the MIDI device is refl ected 
on your Environment Mixermap. To do this, we need to make a connection between the physical input to 
the Environment and the Mixermap layer. First, it is necessary to add a new monitor object to the newly 
created Mixer. This Monitor object will act as both a way of visualizing the MIDI information as we would 
in the Events List and as a method of connecting layers together. Connect the Monitor’s output to the 
fi rst mixer object. 
 We then need to create a new instrument object on the Clicks & Ports environment page if you have not 
done so already for this MIDI device. In the example above, we’ve named it “Our MIDI Mixer.” If this were 
a synthesizer or sound module, then this will appear in the Tracks Area track lists as usual. 
 To get the Mixermap Environment layer to respond, we need to cable this instrument object on the 
Clicks & Ports layer to the mixermap itself. Simply select a cable output from the instrument object on 
the Clicks & Ports layer, and with both layers open simply drag and drop the cables between layers to the 
Monitor Object. An easier way would be to press Alt + click the output of the instrument object which 
reveals a menu similar to that found on the track list on the Tracks Area. This second method will only 
work, provided you have enabled the “Icon” check box which relates to the mixermap’s Monitor Object. 
 Provided all the objects are cabled correctly, your newly created mixermap should off er real fl exibility to 
control devices directly from your Mix position. The open-ended nature of the Environment allows for 
many more possibilities to control devices within your studio. 
 Figure 11.27 
 When making 
mixermaps, it is 
advisable to cable 
your fader objects 
directly to a physical 
MIDI output using 
an instrument 
object.   

404
Logic Pro X: Audio and Music Production
 11.6  Input/Output Labels 
 When working within a large studio environment that brings together a fairly big analog setup with 
many processors and a mixing console, there may be simply too many connections for you to remember 
which specifi c input relates to your prized Fairchild unit. Like with so many things within Logic, this can 
of course be labeled upon some physical inputs. To do this, select Mix > I/O Labels … A new window 
opens showing all the physical inputs and auxiliaries within the system.  
 Figure 11.28    The Input/Output (I/O) Labels within Logic can be named to improve the 
workfl ow of your session. Naming the key inputs and outputs and auxiliaries makes 
things quicker. 

405
Optimizing Logic
 Figure 11.29 
   The changes made in the 
Input/Output (I/O) Label 
dialog box makes all the 
diff erence with respect 
to quickly recognizing 
busses in the Mixer.   
 To change the names of connections, click either in the Long Name or in the Short Name boxes. The 
Long Name is your description and should be whittled down to a smaller amount of characters for the 
Short Name which will be used more frequently when accessing drop-down menus in the Mixer.    

This page intentionally left blank

407
 Index 
 Note: Boldface page numbers refer 
to fi gures.  
 A 
 accuracy, Audio File Editor principles 136 
 AC3 fi les, creating 379  
 Adaptive Limiter plug-in  341 
 ADAT lightpipe standard 36  
 A/D conversion process  see analog-to-digital conversion 
process 
 advanced quantization options 179–81 
 AIFF  see Audio Interchange File Format 
 AKG C1000, electret condenser microphone  40 
 “algorithmic” techniques 206 
 All Files Browser 21 
 All Objects layer 389  
 altering  see dithering 
 Alternatives option 59,  60 
 alternatives sets, global tracks  351, 352, 356 
 Amp Designer 86,  86, 287, 321 
 amplifi er  228, 236; and eff ects 230; envelope 254 
 Amplitude Envelope in sculpture 254 
 Analog control of oscillators 232 
 Analog mode 242,  242 
 analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion process 330 
 anchor points 136,  138 ; marking 137–8 
 Apogee 33,  33, 36, 37,  38 
 Apple 7, 338; hardware and software, integration with 5 
 Apple Compressor, creating AC3 fi les using 379 
 Apple Logic Manual 338  
 Apple Loop + 80 
 Apple Loops  57,  77,  78,  80 ; column view 76, 78,  78 ; 
importing 80–1; working with 76–81 
 Apple Loops Browser 23,  23 
 arpeggiator 213, 391, 393,  393,  400; advanced techniques 
219,  220 ; eff ects 218,  219 
 arpeggiator plug-in 213,  214 
 Arrange window 383  
 Arrow tool 314 
 assets 57–60 
 audio channel strip 285,  286 
 audio editing 95; cutting with Scissors Tool 99; eff ective 
combination of MIDI and 8; fades and crossfades 
103–6; Marquee Tool for 101–3; resizing 98–103; 
snapping 96–8; topping-and-tailing 100–1  
 audio equipment: headphones 42,  42 ; microphones 39–41, 
 40 ; monitors 41–2; outboard 42 
 Audio File Editor applications: accurate region resizing 
137,  138 ; anchor points, marking 137–8; cleaning 
up unwanted noise 138; reversing audio 137,  137 ; 
Time and Pitch Machine 139–40,  140   
 Audio File Editor principles 134,  135,  136 ; accuracy/
functionality 136; rendered “off -line” editing 135 
 audio fi les 75–6;  vs. MIDI fi les and instruments 80 
 audio fi les and regions, managing: copy/converting fi les 
148,  149 ; fi le management 147–8,  148,  149 ; 
Project Audio Browser  vs. Project Audio Window 
147; viewing Project Audio Browser and grouping 
fi les 150,  150   
 audio functionality 4 
 “audio hygiene” options 138 
 Audio Interchange File Format (AIFF) 377 
 audio interfaces: FireWire based 36; USB based 32–4 
 audio mastering 332 
 Audio Mixer 63, 389; input monitor in 64,  64 ; mute in 65, 
 65 ; record arm in 65,  65 ; solo in 65–6,  66 
 audio preferences 43–6 
 audio recording 11 
  audio regions 91; arrangement 91–2; copies 94–5; Flex 
Time editing 114–15; groove templates between 
121–3; loops 95; separating, based on transient 
markers 123–4  
 audio, reversing  see reversing audio 
 audio spotting 357–9 
 Audio Track Editor 16,  16,  125, 126,  126, 134 
 audio tracks 61, 160, 170,  170 
 Auto map 267 
 automation: basics 309–10; Curve tool 315,  315 ; latch 
mode 312; menu 316–17; modes 311–13,  312 ; read 
mode 312–13; touch mode 312; track-based  vs. 
region-based 310–11; viewing and editing 314–16; 
write mode 311 
 autopunch  66, 70–1,  71 
 aux channel strip 288–9,  288, 304–6 
 Avid CoreAudio Manager with Logic 55 
 Avid hardware, integration with logic 55 
 Avid’s HDX ProTools system 52 

408
Index
 B 
 band-pass (BP) fi lter 235,  235 
 band-reject (BR) fi lter 235,  235 
 bar ruler 66, 70 
 Beat Mapping feature 144–6,  145 – 7 
 Beyer Dynamic DT100 headphones 42,  42 
 big displays, Global Tracks 356–7 
 Bitcrusher plug-ins 287 
 bit rates in digital audio 44 
 Blend parameter 240 
 “Bounce and Burn” feature 336 
 Bounce dialog window 335–6 
 Bounce in Place feature 253,  254 
 BP fi lter  see band-pass fi lter  
 BPM Counter plug-in 145  
 BR fi lter  see band-reject fi lter  
 Brickwall Limiter 341 
 Browsers 21–3 
 browsing patches, library feature 161–3 
 buff er range process 45 
 bus processing 304,  305,  307 
 C 
 cables on Environment window 391–4,  394 
 CAF  see Core Audio File 
 Cakewalk 32 
 cans  see headphones 
 CDs: audio fi les and 75–6; burning 326, 336 
  center level, surround sound 372 
 Channel EQ 301–2,  302 
 channel faders, clipping 294,  294 
 channel strips 285; audio 285,  286 ; aux 288–9,  288, 
304–6; in inspector area 20; instrument  286, 287; 
master 292; MIDI 291,  291 ; settings 309; stereo 
output 289–90,  289 
 Chord Memorizer Object 400,  400 
 chord strip 50,  51 
 Chord Trigger plug-in 214,  214 
 Click and Ports layer 389, 403 
 clipping, channel faders 294,  294 
 closed headphones 42 
 compilation process 326 
 comping 108–9 
 component modeling, sculpture 249 
  compression 299–300; circuit types 319; parallel 308–9,  308 ; 
settings 320  
 compressor 299–300,  300 
 comps  110 ; creating 109–10; fl attening 111–14; time 
slipping 110–11; unpacking 113–14 
 computer-based audio production 3  
 condenser microphone 39, 40,  40 
 contextual menus in Logic Pro Main Window 25–6,  27 
 Contiguous zones 267 
 control bar in Logic Pro Main Window 25 
 Controller Assignments editor 49 
 controller keyboards 34–6 
 control surfaces 47–52; Mackie’s Control Universal 48,  48 ; 
setting up 49 
 convolution reverb 305–6,  306 
 Core Audio 43 
 Core Audio File (CAF) 377 
 “Core Audio Overload” 188 
 Correlation Meter 297 
 CPU-light plug-ins 177–8,  178 ; ES E 177–8; ES M 178; 
ES P 178  
 CPU resources, saving 317–18,  318 
 crossfades 103–6, 338 
 cue mix 81–3 
 Cut/Insert Time feature 141,  141 
 cutoff  parameter 235–6 
 cutting process 328 
 cutting regions with Scissors Tool 99 
 cycle mode: audio recording in 70,  70 ; MIDI recording 
in 172–3,  173 
 D 
 daisy chaining 54 
 DDP  see Disc Description Protocol 
  DeEsser 316,  316 
 delay plug-ins 313,  313 ; sample 313; stereo 313; tape 313 
 delivery formats of surround sound: bouncing to stereo 
and surround 376–8,  377 ; exporting to DVD 378; 
exporting video with audio 378–9 
  Denoiser 342 
 Detect Tempo feature 143,  143 
 Devices in Logic 43 
 Digi CoreAudio Manager 55 
 digital audio workstation (DAW) 5 
 DI input 86 
 Disc Description Protocol (DDP) 338–9, 343 
 distortion eff ects 287,  288 
 distributed audio processing 52–3 
 dithering 378; in mastering 330 
 drag mode 105,  105 
 Drive parameter 240,  240 
 dropping out sections of Mixer 295 
 Drum Kit Designer  206, 207,  207 
 Drummer track 62; advanced techniques 209, 
 210 ; basic rhythm creation with 206, 208; 
creation of 205,  206 ; loading Producer Kits 

409
Index
210–11,  211 ; with other virtual instruments 
211–12; regions work with 208–9,  209  
 drum patterns 206 
 drum replacement 132–4,  133,  134 
 Drums option 267 
 DSP-hungry eff ects plug-ins  85 
 DSP-Quattro 339,  339 
 DT100 headphones 42,  42 
 dubbing 378–9 
 Duet devices 36 
 duplicate tracks 73 
 DVD, exporting to 378  
 dynamic microphone 39,  40 
 dynamics parameter 180 
 E 
 edit groups: creating 130–1,  131,  132 ; editing multiple 
tracks 130 
 editing EXS24 instruments 275–8; fi lter activation 276; 
instrument refi nement 275–6; modulation 276,  277 ; 
saving instrument settings 277–8,  278  
 editing fades in mastering 332–3,  334 
 Edit menu functions 194–6; Invert Selection 195,  196 ; 
Select Equal Subpositions 194,  195 ; Select Highest 
Notes 196,  196 ; Select Lowest Notes 196,  196 
 eff ects plug-ins 84,  84 
 EFM1 synthesizers 227,  227 ; refi ning patches 247 
 electret condenser microphone 40,  40 
 Empty Project 58 
 Ensemble 36 
 envelope off sets 275 
 Envelope sections, Modulator plug-in 216 
 envelopes in ES2  228, 231, 236, 237; modulation on 247 
  Environment 388; adding MIDI devices to 398–9; cables 
on 391–4,  394 ; external control with 400–4; 
layers 389–91,  389,  390,  393 ; Live MIDI with 400; 
MIDI instruments setting in 394–7; mixermap 
401–3,  403 ; objects in 391,  392 ; windows 383, 
389–91,  390 
 equalization in mixing  298, 299–300 
 Equal Loudness Contours 338 
 Eraser Tool 92 
 ES E 177–8 
 ES M 178 
 ES P 178 
 ES2 synthesizers 225,  226, 228–31; amplifi er in 
 228, 230, 236; envelopes in  228, 231, 236, 
237; fi lter routing system 240,  240 ; fi lters in 
 228,  230, 234–9; global parameters in 239, 
241; LFOs in  228,  231,  238 ; modulation 
matrix in  228, 231, 237–8; oscillators in 
229, 231–4  
 Event Channel option 202 
 Event List editor 204,  204 ; fi ltering events 204; modifying 
and adding events 205 
 Events List Tab 357 
 Export Key Commands 388 
  EXS24 261–2; data management 220,  221 ; importing 
samples 266–8; instrument creation 262–3, 
266–8; Instrument Editor 263–4; interface 
182–3,  183 ; mapping options in 274–5; 
multioutput versions of 198–9,  199 ; REX 
fi les importing in 264–6; virtual memory 
and disk streaming 187–8,  188 ; working with 
273–5  
 external control with Environment window 400–4 
 external MIDI instruments: adjusting delay settings in 
171–2,  172 ; monitoring 169–71,  170 ; port settings 
167,  168 ; working with 167–72 
 external MIDI tracks 62–3 
 F 
 fades, creating by: changing drag mode 105,  105 ; 
Crossfade Tool 104–5; fade parameter 106 
 fades editing, in mastering 332–3,  334 
 fi lters in ES2  228, 230, 234–9; cutoff  and resonance 235–6; 
routing system 240,  240 
 FireWire devices 31, 36–7, 46 
 Flex Markers: audio events fl exing by 117–18; deleting 
120,  120 ; notes fl exing by 119 
 Flex Pitch: basic vocal intonation 126; changing note pitch 
127; controlling vibrato and pitch drift 127–8,  128 ; 
editing gain and formants 128; enabling Flex Pitch 
124–5,  125 ; view 125 
 Flex Time: editing 114–15; modes 115–17; quantizing 
audio with 121–3; speed fl ex 116; track to save 
CPU, freezing 129,  130 ; view 115–17 
 fl oating Mixer window 384 
 FM Mode 243 
 FM synthesis  see frequency modulation synthesis 
 Focusrite’s OctoPre MkII 36 
 Focusrite’s Saffi  re Pro 14  36 
 folders: contents viewing 153; packing 152,  152 
 Folder Stack 297 
 Follow Tempo feature 142,  142,  143 
 Formants, editing 128,  129 
 Frameless Floating window 384, 391 
 free transposition 139 
 Freeze function 317–18,  318 
 freezing track, Flex Time to save CPU 129,  130 

410
Index
 frequency distribution method 342 
 frequency modulation (FM) synthesis 245–7  
 Functions menu 194,  194 ; deleting duplicates 198; 
Force Legato 197,  197 ; MIDI Transform 
operations 198,  198 ; Note Trimming 197; 
Voices to MIDI Channels 197  
 G 
 Gain Control  128, 129 
 Gain plug-in 296,  296, 297 
 gate time parameter 180 
 General MIDI device 395 
  Ghost Notes control sets 209  
 Glide parameter 178 
 Global Hide View Button 153 
 Global Object layers 389 
  global parameters in ES2 239, 241 
 Global Tracks 348,  349 ; alternatives sets in  351, 352, 356; 
big displays in 356–7; detect scene changes in 352; 
feature 144; markers in 349–52,  350 ; signature 
changes in 354–6; spotting audio 357–9; tempo 
changes in 352–3,  353–5 
 Global Tracks Sets 356,  356 
 GM Drum Kit Lane Set 202,  203 
 Goniometer 297 
 Grid, Arpeggiator eff ect using 219,  219 
 Group Clutch key 132 
 grouping fi les, Project Audio Browser and 150,  150 
 group setting for mixing 306–9 
 guitar/bass option, tracks 62 
 H 
 hard drives 46–7 
 headphone mixes 81–3,  82 
 headphones 42 
 Hide Tracks feature 153,  154 
 high-pass fi lter (HPF) 235,  235 
 history of Logic Pro 3–5 
 HPF  see high-pass fi lter  
 Hyper Draw in Piano Roll editor: fi lter cutoff  in 192,  193 ; 
velocity in 191–2,  191 ; volume in 192,  192 
 Hyper Editor  17,  201 
 I 
 Import Key Commands 388 
 impulse response 305 
 input monitor in Audio Mixer 64,  64 
 input/output labels 404–5,  404,  405 
 inspector areas in Logic Pro Main Window 19–20 
 Inspector’s Channel Strip  161 
 Inspector’s region parameters 93,  93 
 instrument channel strips  286, 287 
 Instrument menu, New option from  266 
 instruments icon 166,  166 
 instrument tracks 61, 62; assigning virtual instrument 
to 161; creating 159–60,  160 
 internal storage 47 
  International Telecommunications Union’s (ITU’s) 
standard 370  
 iTunes 325–6,  326, 329,  329 
 ITU’s standard  see International Telecommunications 
Union’s standard 
 iZotope code 338 
 J 
 Jam software 326 
 Jitter 257,  258, 259 
 K 
 keyboards, USB controller 34–6 
 key commands 387–8,  387 ; page 52,  52 
 key limit feature 167 
 key range 269 
 Keyscaling 252 
 Klopfgeist instrument 68 
 L 
 LaCie d2  47 
 Lane Sets 201 
 large-scale live recording 32 
 latch automation mode 312 
 latency 45–6; accounting for processing 85,  85 
 layers 389–91,  389,  390,  393 
 Leslie 168 
 LFE level  see low-frequency eff ect level  
 LFOs  see low-frequency oscillators 
 library feature 161; browsing patches 161–3; instruments 
icon 166,  166 ; key limit 167; plug-in parameters  vs. 
library patches 163–5; track parameters 165,  166 ; 
transposition and velocity 167 
 library patches, plug-in parameters  vs. 163–5 
 Linear-Phase EQ 335,  335 
 Link modes 386 
  Liquid Saffi  re Pro  37 
 List Editors 23–4 
 live MIDI with Environment 400 

411
Index
 local menus in Logic Pro Main Window 25–6 
 logical advantages of Logic Pro 5–8 
 Logic Manual 337 
 Logic Pro Main Window: browsers, loops, list editors, and 
project notes 21–4; contextual menus in 25–6,  27 ; 
control bar and toolbar in 25; editor areas in 14–18; 
inspector areas in 19–20; library areas in 18–19; 
local menus in 25–6; tools in 25–6; zoom functions 
in 27–8,  28 
 Logic Remote app 49–52 
  Logic’s conventional method 332  
 Logic’s Detect Tempo feature 142 
 Logic’s region fade tool  334 
 Logic synchronizing 359–63 
 loops: audio region 95; parameters 177; tempo to 
an imported 143; time stretching a region 
to fi t 142; working with 141–6; in zone 
parameters 271–2  
 low-frequency eff ect (LFE) level 374 
 low-frequency oscillators (LFOs)  228, 231, 233, 235,  235, 
 238 ; sections, Modulator plug-in 216 
 Low Latency Mode 46 
  low-pass fi lter (LPF) 234 
 M 
 Mackie’s Big Knob  41, 42 
 Mackie’s Control Universal 48,  48 
 Mackie’s MCU Pro  48 
 MacPro computer 47 
 Mac, Red Book standard CD applications for 338 
 Maestro software 36, 42 
  Mapped Instrument Object 395,  397 
 markers 349–52,  350 
 Mark of the Unicorn (MOTU): CueMix 46; Fastlane  54 ; 
HD192 system 38,  39 
 Marquee Tools 101–3,  101,  102, 131 
 master channel strip 292 
 mastering 325,  333 ; bounces to disk 327–31,  327,  328 ; 
diff erent approaches 325–7; editing fades in 
332–3,  334 ; exporting and burning 335–7; tools 
342; in WaveBurner 338 
 M-Audio: Axiom 49 keyboard 35,  35 ; M-Track Plus  32 ; 
Oxygen 25 34,  35 
 Media Browser 21 
 Media Loss parameter 252  
 metering 332 
 Metronome 66, 68,  68 
 microphones 39–41; AKG C1000 40,  40 ; condenser 39, 
40,  40 ; connecting of 41; dynamic 39,  40 ; electret 
condenser 40,  40 ; Neumann  40 
 MIDI 53–5,  54 ; and audio editing, eff ective combination 
of 8; channel strips 291,  291 ; controller 258, 260; 
controller data 191–3, 200–1; data 172,  205 ; 
editing 181–2; fi les 80,  80, 364–5; instrument 
tracks, creating 159–60,  160 ; interface 30; 
recording procedures in 11, 159, 172–3,  173 ; 
sequence  177, 199; sound sources, monitoring 
169–71,  170 ; tracks 171–2 
 MIDI Draw: in Tracks area 193,  193 ; velocity in 191–2,  191 ; 
volume in 192,  192 
 MIDI instruments, setting in environment 394–7 
 MIDI Machine Control 362 
 MIDI plug-ins: arpeggiator plug-in 213,  214 ; Chord Trigger 
plug-in 214,  214 ; Modifi er plug-in 215,  215 ; 
Modulator plug-in 215–16,  215 ; Note Repeater 
plug-in 216,  216 ; Randomizer plug-in 216,  216 ; 
Scripter plug-in 216,  217 ; Transposer plug-in 217, 
 218 ; Velocity Processor plug-in 217,  218 ; working 
with 212–13,  213 
 MIDI regions: editing and arranging 174–5; fades 
and crossfades 175; merging 175; timestretching 
175,  175 
 MIDI Thru function 179,  179 
 MIDI timecode (MTC) 359; synchronization settings 
of 362,  363  
 Mixer 14,  15, 401, 403; All mode 292; Arrange mode  293 ; 
dropping out sections of 295; layer 389; Single 
mode 294–5,  295 ; Summing Stacks and 295–7; 
view modes 292,  293 
 mixermap 390, 401–3,  403 
 mixing 285, 297–302; adding plug-ins 300–1; aux channel 
strips application in 304–6; Channel EQ 301–2, 
 302 ; compression 299–300, 308–9,  308 ; distortion 
eff ects in 287,  288 ; equalization in  298, 299–300; 
group setting for 306–9; insert eff ect 302; part 
leveling 298; send eff ects 302–3,  303 ; vocal 
processing in 316 
 Modifi er plug-in 215,  215 
 modulation: on EFM1 247; EXS24 instruments on 276,  277 ; 
sculpture 257–61 
 modulation matrix in ES2  228, 231, 237–8 
 Modulator plug-in 215–16,  215 
 monitoring 45–6; through eff ects 84–5  
 monitor mix 81 
 monitors 41–2 
 monophonic mode 116 
 morphing in sculpture 257–61 
 Morph pad 259, 260 
 MOTU  see Mark of the Unicorn 
 movie: audio content, extracting 347–8; managing 345–8 
 MTC  see MIDI timecode 

412
Index
 multiband compression 339–41 
 Multi-Instrument 394–5,  395 – 7, 398 
 Multimeter plug-in 297 
 multiple tracks, editing 130–2,  131,  132 
 multipressor 339–41,  340 
 Musical Typing Keyboard 34,  34,  54, 200,  200, 389 
 music, preparation of 363–70 
 mute in Audio Mixer 65,  65 
 Mute Tool 92 
 N 
 naming tracks  63 
 Neumann microphone  40 
 New Tracks: command 159,  160 ; feature  61 
 noise, cleaning up unwanted 138 
 noise gate 290–1,  290 
 noise-shaping algorithm 338 
 noise-shaping curves 338 
 Noise Type fader 342 
 normalizing sequence parameters 181,  181 
 Notator Logic 3 
 note pitch, changing 127 
 Note Repeater plug-in 216,  216 
 Nudging regions 97–8 
 O 
 objects: in Environment 391,  392 ; in sculpture 249–51 
 ONE, USB interface 33 
 Options tab 219,  220 
  oscillators in ES2 229, 232, 233; Analog control 232; 
Unison mode 232, 234; working with 231–4 
 Oscillator Sync 233,  233 
 outboard, audio equipment 42  
 overdubs 69–71, 172–3,  173 ; techniques 32 
 P 
 Package 58 
 parallel compression 308–9,  308 
 PCI connections 38,  39 
 PCI express 38 
 PDC  see  plug-in delay compensation 
 Peak mode 299 
 Pedalboard 321–2,  322 
 pencil tool  136 
 Pen tool 314 
 phantom power 40, 41  
 phase distortion 287 
 Phase-Locked Audio check boxes 131,  131 
  Piano Roll editor 14–15,  15, 182,  182 ; correcting note 
length in 186,  186 ; correcting timing problems in 
184–5,  185 ; creating new notes in 187; deleting/
muting notes in 188–9,  189 ; duplicating phrase 
185; Functions menu 194,  194 ; pitch correction in 
184,  184 ; quantizing in 189–91,  189,  190 ; step-time 
recording in 200; velocity modifi cation in 186,  187  
 Pitch Correction plug-ins 316,  316 
 pitch drift 127–8,  128 
 pitch in zone parameters 269 
  Pitch Machine, Audio File Editor applications in 139–40,  140 
 PlatinumVerb 310–11 
 playback 271 
 plug-in delay compensation (PDC) 321,  321 
 plug-ins: and instruments, exhaustive range of 5; 
mastering  342 ; MIDI  see MIDI plug-ins; parameters 
 vs. library patches 163–5; surround sound 374–6, 
 375,  376 ; working with MIDI 212–13,  213 
 Pointer Tool 92 
 polyphonic mode 116 
  POW-r algorithm  see Psychoacoustically Optimized 
Wordlength Reduction algorithm 
 precision digital encoder 37 
 pre-mastering 328 
 Presets feature  208 
 PreSonus’ FaderPort 48,  48 
 Process Buff er Range 45 
 Process Threads selection menu 45 
 Producer Kits 210–11,  211 
 project 57–60 
 Project Audio Browser 21, 74–6,  75,  76, 135; and grouping 
fi les 150,  150 ;  vs. Project Audio Window 147,  148 
  project notes/track notes 23 
 Psychoacoustically Optimized Wordlength Reduction 
(POW-r) algorithm 330, 338 
 pulse wave 230,  230 
 pulse-width modulation (PWM) 230 
 punching-in and -out 69–71 
 PWM  see pulse-width modulation 
 Q 
 Q-Flam parameter 180 
 Q-Range parameter 180 
  Q-Strength parameter 180  
 Q-Swing parameters 177 
 quantizing 176,  177, 179–81; in Piano Roll editor 189–91, 
 189,  190 
 Quick Swipe Comping 108–9, 150 

413
Index
 R 
 Randomizer plug-in 216,  216 
 read, automation mode 312–13 
 real time audio suite (RTAS) 55 
 record arm in Audio Mixer 65,  65 
 recording 61, 63, 64, 66, 67,  69 ; creating template for  382 ; 
in cycle mode 70,  70 ; fi rst 67,  67 ; in MIDI 172–3,  173 
 ReCycle Files 264–6 
 Red Book standard CD applications for Mac 326, 338 
 reduction 342 
 region 12,  13, 335 
 region-based automation 310–11 
 region parameters 20, 176–7,  176 ; extended  180 ; loop 
177; Q-Swing 177; quantize feature 176,  177 ; 
transpose 177; velocity 177  
 Release triggering 274 
 resonance parameter 235–6 
 Retro Synth synthesizers 226–7,  226, 241,  241 ; controls 
243–5; setting page 245,  245 
 reverb 302–3,  303,  304,  307 
 reversing audio 137,  137 
 ReWire 45 
 REX fi les 78,  79 ; in EXS24 264–6 
 rhythmic mode 116 
 RME’s Total MIX FX  34 
 root mean square (RMS) 299 
 RTAS  see real time audio suite 
 ruler 66–7 
 S 
 Same Link level mode 386 
 sample delay 313 
 Sample Instrument menu 183 
 SATA  see  Serial Advanced Technology Attachment 
 Save As project 58–9,  59 
 sawtooth wave 230,  230,  238 
 scene markers  350, 351, 352 
 Scissors Tools 99, 131 
 Score editor 16,  17, 203,  203,  363; expression and 
markings, adding 367–8; opening 365–6; 
printing scores 369–70; score settings in 
368–9,  368  
 Screensets 383–6,  383 
 Scripter plug-in 216,  217 
 scrub tool 45 
 Sculpture 227,  228, 259; amplitude envelope in 254; 
component modeling 248–9; modulation 257–61; 
morphing 257–61; objects in 249–51; string in 
251–3; waveshapers 254–6 
 send eff ects, mixing 302–3,  303 
 Separate MIDI Events 202 
 Serial Advanced Technology Attachment 
(SATA) 47, 188 
 Share menu 329–31,  329–31 
 Single mode 294–5,  295 
 SM58  40 
 Snap Positions 391 
 Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers 
(SMPTE) timecode 356, 357,  358, 361; 
synchronization settings of 361 
 software instrument track 62,  160, 161 
 Software Monitoring check box 46 
 solo in Audio Mixer 65–6,  66 
 song, inserting and deleting sections of 141,  141 
 Sonoris’ DDP Creator 338 
 Space Designer’s convolution reverb 305–6,  306 
 Speed Fade 107 
 Speed Flex mode 116–17 
 square wave 230,  230 
 SSL Duende system 53 
 standard studio stalwarts 5 
 Steinberg’s Wavelab 339 
 Step Editor 16, 200–3; controller types and Lane Sets 
addition 201; editing drums using 202,  203 ; 
MIDI controller data in 200–1 
 Step Input Keyboard  200 
 step-time sequencing 199–200,  199 
 stereo delay 313 
 stereo output channel strip 289–90,  289 
 stereo signals 371, 372,  373 
 string in sculpture 251–3 
 Strip Silence  290, 291 
 studio monitors 41 
 subtractive synthesis  230 
 subwoofer  see low-frequency eff ect  
 Summing Stacks, Mixer and 295–7 
 Surround Balancer 371–2 
 surround sound 370–6,  371 ; delivery formats  see delivery 
formats of surround sound; LFE level 374; plug-ins 
374–6,  375,  376 
  synchronization settings: frame rate of 360,  361,  362 ; MTC 
362,  363 ; SMPTE timecode 361; Transmit MIDI 
Clock 362 
 Sync mode 242,  242 
 synthesis engines 242–3; Analog mode 242,  242 ; 
FM Mode 243,  243 ; Sync mode 242,  242 ; 
Table Mode 243  
 synthesizers 225–7; EFM1 227,  227 ; ES2 225,  226 ; Retro 
Synth 226–7,  226 ; sculpture 227,  228 

414
Index
 T 
 Table Mode 243 
 Take Folder 71,  72,  73 ; expanding 109–10; 
unpacking 113–14  
 talent mix  see cue mix 
 tape delay 313 
 TC Electronics’ Finalizer 342 
 TDM system  see  time division multiplexing system 
 templates 381–2,  382 
 tempo: to an imported loop 143; working with 141–6, 
 142,   143, 352–3,  353–5 
 Tempo List Tab 352–3 
 Tension Mod parameter 252  
 third-party Audio Unit plug-ins 84 
 Thunderbolt 36,  37, 38,  38 
 time division multiplexing (TDM) system 55 
 Time Machine 139–40,  140 
 toggling group 132 
 tools in Logic Pro Main Window 25–6 
 topping-and-tailing, editing technique 100–1 
 touch, automation mode 312  
 Touch Tracks Object 400,  401 
 Track Automation menu  317 
 track-based automation 310–11 
  tracks: audio tracks 61, 170,  170 ; creating 
72–3,  73 ; with duplicate settings 73; 
external MIDI 62–3; Global  see Global Tracks; 
instrument  see instrument tracks; MIDI 
171–2; naming  63 ; with next instrument 72; 
parameters 20, 165,  166 ; sorting 72–3,  74 ; 
working with 61–3  
 Track Stack 295; creating 151,  151 ; using 150–1 
 Transient Markers 117–20; audio regions separating 
based on 123–4 
 Transmit MIDI Clock 362 
 transport bar  66 
 Transport Controls 66 
 Transposer plug-in 217,  218 
 transposition parameters 167, 177 
 triangle wave 230,  230 
 Trigger option 274 
 Triumph Software 338 
 U 
 Ultrabeat 278–80,  281 ; multioutput versions of 198–9,  199 
 Unison mode 232, 234 
 Universal Audio’s UAD-2 system 53 
 USB devices 31–2; audio interfaces 32–4; controller 
keyboards 34–6 
 V 
 vector envelope 257 
 vector synthesis 238–9 
 velocity parameters 167, 177 
 Velocity Processor plug-in 217,  218 
 velocity range 270 
  vibrato drift 127–8,  128 
 Vintage B3 Organ 168–9,  169 
 Vintage Clav 174,  174 
 Vintage Electric Piano 163,  164 
 virtual instruments 4,  160 ; ES E 177–8; ES M 178; ES P 178; 
EXS24  see EXS24; and library feature 161–7 
  vocal intonation 126  
 vocal processing in mixing 316 
 W 
 WaveBurner 326; creating Red Book standard CDs 338; 
DSP-Quattro 339,  339 ; mastering in 338 
 Wave Editor software 338–9 
 Wave format fi le 377  
 waveshapers 254–6 
 waveshapes 230 
 Wavetable synthesis 248 
 WG-4 standard 370 
 windows 383–6, 389–91,  390 
 write, automation mode 311 
 Z 
 Zone menu 267,  268 
 zone parameters: key range 269; loop 271–2; output 271; 
pitch 269; playback 271; sample 271; velocity 
range 270 
 zoom functions in Logic Pro Main Window 27–8,  28 

