S O U R C E S I N S E M I O T I C S S E R I E S , V O L U M E I 
LOGIC, 
PHILOSOPHY, 
and 
HISTORY 
A Study 
in the Philosophy of History 
Based on the Work of R. G. Collingwood 
by 
A N T H O N Y F. RUSSELL 
with a Foreword by 
Brooke Williams 
ч П 

Copyright@1984by 
University Press of America/"1 Inc. 
4720BostonWay 
Lanham,MD20706 
3 Henrietta Street 
London WC2E 8LU England 
All rights reserved 
Printed in the United States of America 
This book is published as a volume in the 
SOURCESINSEMIOTICS 
series 
under the General Editorship of 
John Deely and Brooke WiMiams 
ISBN(Perfect): 0-8191-3779-0 
KBN (Cloth): 0-8191-3778-2 

To the Memory of 
A. M. WOODBURY 
who lit the light for this work 
and to 
RAYMOND and YVONNE FRENETTE 
who kept it burning 
iii 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author wishes to thank John Deely and Brooke Williams as 
the Editors of the Sources in Semiotics series for their encouragement 
and help. He is indebted also to Ms. Felicia Kruse who bore the brunt 
of the final copyediting, proofreading and indexing of the work, and 
made many clarifying and constructive suggestions. 
Acknowledgment is made, finaUy, to the foUowing pubHshers and 
learned societies for permission to make citations from the pubUshed 
works of the various authors referred to throughout this study: 
The British Academy, London, for citation from I. A. Richmond, " A n Apprecia­
tion of R. G. CoUingwood as an Archaeologist,'' in The Proceedings of the British Academy, 
ХХГХ (1943). 
Desclee de Brouwer, Paris, for citations fromJ.-H. Nicolas, Dieu connu comme in-
connu, 1966. 
Dover Publications, Inc., New York, for citations from the Elizabeth S. Haldane 
and G . R. T. Ross translation of The Philosophical Works of Descartes, 1955. 
Indiana University Press, Btoomington, Indiana, for citation from Louis O. Mink, 
Mind, History, and Dialectic, 1969. 
MacmiIlan PubHshing Co., mc., New York, for citations from L.-M. R£gis, Episte-
mology, 1959. β The MacrrriUan Company 1959. 
Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, The Netherlands, for citation from Herbert Spiegel-
berg, The Phenomenological Movement, 3rd edition, 1982. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, England, for excerpts from the foUowing works 
of R. G. CoUingwood: An Autobiography, 1939; An Essay on Metaphysics, 1940; An Essay 
on Philosophical Method, 1933; The Idea ofHistory, 1946; Speculum Mentis, 1924. Permis­
sion was also granted to cite from Alan Donagan, The Later Philosophy ofR. G. CoUing­
wood, 1962. 
Presses de l'Universite Gregorienne, Rome, Italy, for citations from Joseph de 
Finance, Essai sur l'agir humain, 1962. 
The Review ofMetaphysics, The Cathohc University of America, Washington, D.C., 
for citations from John Wild, "Being, Meaning and the World," vol. XVDI (1965) and 
from Oris Lee, "Dialectic and Negation," vol. I (1947). 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, Ltd., London, for pages based on and containing cita­
tions from Hans Vaihinger, The Philosophy of "As-If," trans. C. K. Ogden, 1924. 
Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, for citation from James H. Breasted, A History 
ofEgypt, 1959. Copyright 1905,1909 Charles Scribner's Sons; copyright renewed 1933, 
1937. 
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, for citations from Michael Polanyi, Per­
sonal Knowledge, 1962. β Copyright 1958, 1962 by Michael Polanyi. 
The University of North CaroHna Press, Chapel HiU, North CaroHna, for citations 
from The Nature ofHistorical Thinking by Robert Stover. Copyright 1967 by The Univer­
sity of North CaroHna Press. Reprinted by permission of the publisher. 
YaIe University Press, New Haven, Connecticut, for citations from The Logic of 
the Humanities by Ernst Cassirer, trans. Clarence Smith Howe, 1960. Copyright · 1960, 
1961 by Clarence Smith Howe. 
ν 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
V 
FOREWORD BY BROOKE WlLLIAMS 
xiii 
AUTHOR'S PREFACE 
XXI 
INTRODUCTION 
1 
PART I: EXPOSmON 
Chapter One: The Need for a New Logic of 
Question and Answer 
9 
A. The Logic of Question and Answer 
in the Works of R. G. Collingwood 
9 
B. The Status of History as a Science 
12 
C. Positive Description of Historical Inference 
22 
D. The Autonomy Proper to History as a Science: 
The Historian as His Own Authority 
29 
E. Evidence Which Is the Basis of Scientific History 
Is Always in Relation to a Definite Question 
32 
F. Summary and Comment on the Foregoing 
34 
Chapter Two: Collingwood's Identification of 
Knowledge with Question and Answer 
37 
A. Collingwood's Question and Answer Theory 
of Knowledge 
Rooted in His Opposition to the Oxford Realists 
37 
B. Origin of CoUingwood's Theory of Questioning 
v 
in His Archaeological Practice 
38 
C. Confrontation with the Oxford ReaUsts: 
Active Questioning vs. Passive Compresence 
39 
D. Meditations on the Albert Memorial 
41 
E. First Consequence: 
The Historicity of PropositionaI Meanings 
48 
F. Second Consequence: 
Philosophical Problems Reduced to Historical Problems 
To Be Solved by Historical Methods 
50 
G. CoUingwood's Conclusion from these Considerations 
58 
vu 

Chapter Three: Supposal and Questioning 
61 
A. Questioning as Supposing, the Cutting Edge of Mind 
61 
B. The Nature of Supposal as an Activity of Imagination 
72 
Chapter Four: Concrete Dialectical Rapprochement Question 
and Answer Logic versus 
Abstract Static Divisive Propositional Logic 
75 
A. The Concrete Universal versus the Abstract Universal 
75 
A.i. 
The Abstractive Character of Science 
76 
A.ii. 
Distinction between Understanding and Reason 
82 
A. iii. 
History as Concrete Thought 
82 
B. Logic of the Concrete Universal 
as Logic of Overlap of Classes 
95 
B. i . 
The Logic of Concepts 
97 
B.i.a. 
The Exdusivist Nature of the Scientific Concepts 
of the Exact and the Empirical Sciences 
97 
B.i.b. 
Mutual ImpUcation of the Species of 
Philosophical Concepts 
98 
B.i.c. 
Distinction and Opposition 
of Philosophical Concepts 
103 
B.i.d. The Scale of Forms 
104 
B.i.e. 
Philosophical and Non-Philosophical 
Understanding of the Distinction between 
Distinction and Opposition 
107 
B.i.f. 
Synthesis of Difference of Degree and 
Difference of Kind in Regard to the Scale 
of Forms 
112 
B.i.g. 
The Scale of Forms and the Overlap of Classes 
113 
B.ii. 
The Logic of Judgments 
117 
B.ii.a. Abstract and Concrete Affirmation and Negation 117 
B.ii.b. Abstract and Concrete Universality 
120 
B.ii.c. Mutual Implication of UniversaUty, Particularity 
and Singularity in Concrete Concepts 
122 
B.ii.d. UniversaUty of Concrete Universal Not 
Merely Hypothetical 
123 
B.iii. 
The Logic of Reasoning 
125 
B.iii.a. Exact Science Ruled by Supposal 
126 
B.Ui.b. Philosophical Reasoning both Categorical 
and Rigidly Coherent 
126 
B.iU.c. Extrinsic Relationship of Fact and Theory 
in Empirical Science 
131 
viii 

B.iii.d. The Rapprochement or Mutual Implication of 
Fact and Theory, Principles and Conclusions, 
Essence and Existence, Experience and 
Explanation, in Concrete Philosophical 
Reasoning 
132 
C. The Systematic Unity of the Concrete Universal 
138 
D. The Dialectical Dynamism of the Concrete Universal 
144 
E. The Concrete Universal 
and the Logic of Question and Answer 
149 
Chapter Five: Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
155 
A. Presuppositions 
and the Logic of Question and Answer 
157 
B. Presuppositions and Questions 
162 
C. Metaphysics 
as the Science of Absolute Presuppositions 
169 
D. Metaphysics as an Historical Science 
177 
E. Collingwood's Proposed Reform of Metaphysics 
as an Historical Science 
181 
F. Presuppositions as Beliefs 
190 
G. Truth and Falsity of Absolute Presuppositions 
193 
H . A Problem of Consistency 
205 
Chapter Six: History as the Science of the Mind 
209 
A. History as Knowledge of Concrete Fact 
209 
B. History as Knowledge of the Past 
210 
C. Philosophy and the Method of History 
211 
D. Socio-Cultural Need for a Sound Theory of 
Historical Methodology 
215 
E. CoUingwood's Discovery of the New Historical 
Method 
223 
F. History as Rethinking Past Thoughts 
225 
G. The Conditions of the Possibility of Historical 
Knowledge as Knowledge of Past Thought 
226 
H . Historical Knowledge as Knowledge by the Mind of 
Its Acts Which Are Identical with the Mind Itsetf 
231 
I . 
Historical Thinking as a Rapprochement between 
Thought and Action, Fact and Theory, 
History and Philosophy 
238 
J. 
The Three Ontological Levels of Consciousness 
and Their Logical Correlatives 
244 
ix 

J.i. 
The Mind's DialecticaJ. Development 
as an Explication of the Implicit 
245 
J.ii. The Ab Extra and Ab Intra Moments of 
Philosophy's Criticism of Experience 
from the Absolute Standpoint 
246 
J.iii. The Ontological Levels of Ab Intra 
Criticism and Their Logical Correlatives 
248 
K. The Archaeology of Roman Britain 
and the Development of CoUingwood's 
Logic of Question and Answer 
252 
L. Transition to Evaluation 
261 
PART П: 
EVALUATION 
Chapter Seven: Knowledge As Question and Answer 
263 
A. Criticism of CoUingwood's Attack on ReaUsm 
263 
B. Language Describing Sensations Presupposes 
Corresponding Physical Objects 
265 
C. Not AU Scientific Discoveries 
Are Answers to Questions 
268 
D. Even the Question ItseU Is not Purely an Activity 
of the Mind 
271 
E. CoUingwood's Theory of Knowledge Based on Undue 
Absolutization of the Juridical Mode of Questioning 
271 
F. Questioning not a Mere Extortion of Information 
under Duress: Questioning from Wonder and 
from Sympathetic Connaturality 
273 
G. Historical Knowledge as Farmliar Knowledge Attained 
by Friendly rather than Extortionate Questioning 
276 
H . Some Presuppositions to Questions Are Genuine 
Insights into Reality: Intuitive Reason vs. 
Constructive Reason 
279 
I . 
Distortion of the Nature of the Abstract Universal 
Arising from Exaggerating the Activity of Reason 
into Creative Activity 
284 
J. 
Nature of the Abstract Universal and Its Value 
in Knowledge 
285 
K. Abstract Universal not Merely Classificatory but 
also Penetrative of Reality 
293 
L. Being as Class Concept and as Active Presence 
294 
M . Being as a Concrete Universal of Identity in Difference 
297 
x 

N . Interim Summary 
299 
O. Instance in which Knowledge Clearly Demands 
Relation to Question 
301 
P. General Conclusion Regarding CoUingwood's 
Identification of Knowledge with the Mind's 
Questioning Activity 
306 
Chapter Eight: Logic and Questioning 
311 
A. The Awakening of Reason and the Birth of Logic 
311 
B. The Aristotelian Contribution to the Logic of 
Questioning 
318 
C. The Aristotelian Dialectical Interrogation of 
Human Knowledge 
319 
D. Aristotelian Scientific Interrogation of ReaUty 
330 
E. The Scientific Questionnaire 
for the Interrogation of Reality 
334 
F. Transition to Evaluation of Collingwood's Theory 
of the Logic of Questioning 
340 
G. CoUingwood's Basic Problem and the Logical 
Order of Questioning 
341 
H . Collingwood's Key Theses as Result of His 
Order of Questioning 
349 
Chapter Nine: Logic, Questioning and History 
355 
A. Questioning as the Method of Procedure Proper to 
History 
355 
B. Two Ways in Which the World of Experience Is 
InteUigently Meaningful 
359 
C. Natural Order InteUigibility and Intelligibility 
from the Standpoint of Living in the World 
360 
D. Man as a Historical Being 
372 
E. The Logos of the Physical Natural Order 
and of the Spiritual Moral Order 
384 
F. Expression-Perception and Thing-Perception 
393 
G. Distinction of Culture Concepts from Nature Concepts 
403 
H . History as an Inquiry Proceeding According to 
a Logic of Question and Answer 
414 
Chapter Ten: Conclusion 
433 
A. Summary of Foregoing 
433 
B. General Conclusion Regarding Collingwood's 
Logic of Question and Answer 
435 
xi 

C. Final Remarks: CoUingwood's Contribution to the 
History of PhUosophy 
Appendix One: The Nature of Supposal as an Activity 
of Imagination 
A. Imagination, Thinking and Feeling Distinguished 
B. Problem of the Distinction of Imagination from 
Sensation in the History of Modern PhUosophy 
C. Relation between Imagination and Consciousness 
D. General Theory of Imagination by Way of a 
Summary of the Foregoing 
E. Imagination and Expression 
Appendix Two: Further Elaboration of the Logic of 
Question and Answer 
A. Commitment to a Consensus: Acceptance of 
Authority: Aim of Each to be His Own Authority 
B. Relativism of World Views: 
Reality of the Whole of That Which Is 
as Arbiter between Different World Views 
C. Objectivity and Universality Guaranteed by 
Responsible Commitment 
D. The Researcher or Problem Solver Goes Beyond 
Rules and Present Achievements by Committing 
Himsetf in His Decisive Judgments 
E. Reality as Researcher's Aim 
F. UnpredictabUity of Solution: 
Emergent Character of Solution 
G. Research and Problem Solving as the BuUding Up 
of a Concrete Universal 
H . Overlap of Classes in a Scale of Forms 
BlBLIOGRAPHY 
lNDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
xii 

FOREWORD 
Whatever the cautiousness among historians concerning analysis 
by philosophers on the nature of history, R. G. CoUingwood stands 
out as a phUosopher whose influence on historians has been profound, 
and whose phUosophy of history, whatever the criticisms, remains 
highly respected after the test of time. Granted that he himsetf was 
not only a phüosopher but an historian too, what seems more signifi­
cant in explaining his lasting impact is his view of the common ground 
on which these distinct disciplines stand in his caU for a rapproche­
ment between history and phUosophy. 
Anthony F. RusseU goes a long way toward elucidating and 
evaluating the nature of CoUingwood's proposed rapprochement be­
tween history and phUosophy. At the heart of the matter is his distinc­
tion between the abstract thinking of traditional propositional logic 
whose modes of inference are induction and deduction, which are 
characteristic of science, and concrete thinking whose proper mode 
of reasoning is the logic of question and answer, which is character­
istic of history. 
RusseU explains that the latter logic is underdeveloped because 
the possibUity of such a logic was a non4juestion in the pre-historicaUy-
minded past during which the realists criticized by CoUingwood 
refused to admit the reality of becoming, with the result that they 
reduced becoming propositions into being propositions. The very 
arising of the question at hand is itsetf but a piece of a whole historical 
fabric in which historical thinking as such has come to penetrate the 
contemporary Western mind. That is, it is only in relation to this 
historical becoming that the possibiUty of rapprochement logic is revealed 
in the first place precisely as a question. 
What is revolutionary is that this rapprochement has the founda­
tional potential to unify knowledge in its diversity by means of the 
interrogatory knowledge proper to historical thought which is 
grounded in "the concrete universal." Because of an awareness of 
the historical context in which even the development of logic itself 
takes place, it can now be seen that scientific, artistic and religious 
pursuits which have been alienated from one another since the 
xiil 

xiv 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Renaissance, because of their distinct modes of thinking, need no 
longer be separated in an artificial way which cuts them off from 
human thought in its integral wholeness, wherein abstract and con­
crete, speculative and practical minking, find a common ground. This 
is not to deny the proper logic of each, but to admit the richness of 
human experience and consciousness which is at once concrete and 
universal. This is the direction in which the unexploited logic of history 
points. CoUingwood's thought on this point is pivotal insofar as he 
has marked out the precise intersection of phUosophy and history 
which integrates rather than divides knowledge. 
RusseU establishes not only the existence of this unexploited logic, 
but sheds a sympathetic yet critical light on its nature, structure, and 
modes of operation. He contrasts it with a Ufeless propositional logic 
by showing that what is quintessential about the logic of history is 
that it detects rather than dismisses the rich web of relations in human 
culture wherein the part can be understood in relation to the whole 
and the whole in relation to the part. The concrete universal cannot 
be observed from without as if the whole and the part were indepen­
dent entities whose relations to one another are only external. The 
logic of history penetrates to internal relations by way of the historian's 
participation in the inward reality of human thought as distinguished 
from its outward signs and action. It is for this reason, RusseU points 
out, that attempts to separate logic from Ufe in order to make historical 
thinking conform to the abstract mold of science always turn out to 
be aberrant. This point might have been more effectively developed 
by addressing in some depth the school of analytic phUosophers who, 
foUowing the lead of Carl Hempel, oppose Collingwood's claim. 
RusseU's comprehensive synthesis of Collingwood's position on 
the logic proper to history shows conclusively and precisely how 
historical thinking is concrete thinking. SpecificaUy, human products, 
such as culture, or war, or a city, or a Gothic cathedral, are "a web 
of factors" which are each external in appearance, but "intrinsically 
and dynamicaUy integrated by internal relations resulting from human 
thoughtful and purposeful activity." Because the whole and the part 
of such human entities are not mutuaUy exclusive, or related merely 
by externalrelations, but are, rather, interrelated, the question arises: 
" H o w do aU these things fit together?" The reader of this work wUl 
revel in the fascination of the concrete as RusseU detaUs how this 
method of inquiry is the same as that of crime detection in its con­
cern for the foUowing: the facts; the integration of facts (their "going 
together"); their manifestation as facts to the detective or historian, 

Foreword 
XV 
which itsetf is one of the facts affecting the nature of aU the other facts; 
the questioning rrvind, whose activity makes the fact evident as a fact. 
What makes this method of inquiry indeed a "method" is the inner 
logic of the concrete universal, the logic of question and answer. By 
this logic the questioning mind seeks its answers from within the con­
crete events themselves through the universality of thought as such, 
which can exist beyond local and temporal existence and which is 
therefore the prerequisite of aU inference. This delineation of method 
goes further than Sherlock Holmes' "fact-grubbing" in that CoUing­
wood emphasizes the need to use "the Uttle gray ceUs" by asking 
a dormnating question which wiU suggest what to look for and to select 
as fact in the first place. One begins, that is, not by collecting facts 
but by asking questions, thus turning the facts into evidence, as 
nothing is evidence except in relation to some definite question. 
RusseU holds that CoUingwood's claim that such an under­
developed logic exists is indeed to be admitted, though RusseU posits 
some sound reservations, which stem from the depth of his knowl­
edge of Western phUosophy, and which point the way to further 
development of the important issues he raises. The contribution of 
this book Ues in the appraisal of CoUingwood's position from the stand­
point of the criticisms offered both for and against it. Russell's own 
position is well-argued and clearly presented. The scholarship, more­
over, is both accurate and comprehensive on CoUingwood (as of the 
date completed), and the writing, even on many obscure points, is 
clear. The long synthesis of CoUingwood's position, and of others', 
is especially helpful to the non-specialist in either Collingwoodian or 
other schools of thought considered here in relation to CoUingwood 
in new ways. The book as a whole is structurally as weU as concep­
tually integrated, yet not quite as setf-evidently as it might have been. 
If the relations between the whole and the part had been made more 
explicit rather than remaining implicit, the result would have been 
a major reinterpretation of CoUingwood's position in addition to the 
already comprehensive setting of it within phUosophical tradition. 
There is therefore a further contribution of this book which lies 
between its pages in potential, and which, I wffl venture to say, when 
realized, wiU be far-reaching. RusseU seems to be on to something 
which the existing state of scholarship on CoUingwood has not yet, 
to my knowledge, made explicit, but which, if grasped, would integrate 
intrinsically the whole of this work as weU as lend greater clarity and 
significance to CoUingwood's analysis of the concrete universal. There 
seems to be, in other words, a "missing link," which is aU the more 

xvi 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
significant because it is so elusive. Russell himself might have 
shortened his lengthy volume had he found it. But in his conclusion 
he raises a promising question regarding the concrete universal: "But, 
if this linguistic unity in diversity is the logical principle, the one in 
the many, at the basis of history and of research, what can be said 
regarding its principles?" 
The historical climate today is conducive to taking on this ques­
tion as a "dominating" one in its own right if seen in the context of 
today's rising semiotic consciousness. Semiotics has now historicaUy 
come of age as an intellectual movement because, as the philosopher 
John Deely points out with a sense of history in his path-mapping 
book, Introducing Semiotic: Its History and Doctrine, the inherent inter­
disciplinary nature of semiotics can establish a rapprochement between 
speciaUzed discipHnes, now become insular, which have resulted from 
the rise of modern science. CoUingwood's call for a rapprochement be­
tween phUosophy and history, and the path of contemporary 
semiotics, converge. This convergence lies at what I wffl caU an "inter­
section" between phUosophy and history, precisely at the point at 
which semiotic doctrine can clarify the relation between what is abstract 
and what is concrete. To take one without the other severs the whole 
which participates in the part, or the part which participates in the 
whole. To do that rends asunder CoUingwood's concrete universal. 
For the first time the relation of logic to semiotics has surfaced 
from layers of history to be perceived in the light of day. Such an 
emergence weU Ulustrates CoUingwood's view of history as the 
present, for John Locke's proposal for an analysis of signs under the 
name of "semiotic" is now seen as a breakthrough which, precisely 
because it faUed to be seen as such in the past, remained in the realm 
of non-being until the present recreated it as "history." 
In the final pages of Locke's Essay of 1690, "semiotic" means quite 
precisely the foundational doctrine of signs as these underiie and struc­
ture the whole of our experience and consciousness. A semiotic logic, 
he suggests, could bring into existence "a different sort of logic and 
critic than we have been acquainted with heretofore," and one which 
puts CoUingwood's concrete universal in a new perspective, thereby 
clarifying what RusseU's work tends toward — what I call his "miss­
ing Unk." 
I wffl single out only one aspect of semiotic which shows what 
I think RusseU implicitly grasps, but would couch more effectively 
in a semiotic context, thereby rendering an inherent "unity in diver­
sity" to his entire endeavor. Semiotic transcends as weU as integrates 

Foreword 
xvii 
the traditional division of being into what is independent of the mind 
and what is dependent on it, because semiotic brings both orders into 
relation precisely through signification or the sign. Although Locke 
continues to follow Aristotle's division of knowledge into speculative 
and practical, Locke's breakthrough is now seen to be that he kept 
these branches distinct, yes, but not separate (see Deely's work). By 
way of an (arbitrary) analogy, he did not sever the connection between 
the two hemispheres of the brain; on the contrary, he shows how the 
two communicate. His "new logic"-semiotic-proposes a systematic 
study of the means whereby any knowledge is acquired, developed, 
and shared in community. Semiotic thus integrates logicaUy what is 
aheady integrated in consciousness. In so doing, semiotic opens the 
door to studying the orders of external and internal relations, or mind-
independent and mind-dependent relations, or being and non-being, 
not as if their boundaries were staked out in advance, but as constant­
ly shifting because of the interaction between the orders as the mind 
participates in what it observes through the function of signs. Semiosis 
thus structures experience so flexibly that the line between fact and 
fiction is, as it were, drawn free-hand, as any historian knows who 
has observed fiction harden into historical fact. 
Semiotic thus offers a third term in place of the tired debate be­
tween reaUsm and idealism. Set in this light, CoUingwood's proposed 
logic of history takes on its proper hue. CoUingwood was emphatical­
ly not a realist, but it has only been for want of a moreprecise term 
and owing to a false dichotomy that he has "therefore" been called 
an idealist. What he reaUy offers is a third term between realism and 
ideaUsm, which is, namely, "semiotic" without the name. RusseU's 
work, whUe a significant contribution in its present terms to existing 
CoUingwood scholarship, might also pave the way to a new genera­
tion of CoUingwood scholarship developed within an expUcitly semiotic 
perspective. 
In order to open the door to further discussion, I wffl fflustrate 
the relation of CoUingwood's logic of history to semiotic by interpret­
ing semiotically his view of the way in which the past exists in the 
present as "history." What the historian's mind does is to appropri­
ate its object as something there in itsetf as thought, yet not there in 
the immediate context of past thought. What the mediacy of the logic 
of history does, now understood to be logic as a semiotic art, is to 
enable the historian to see sign systems in the past in the perspective 
of present sign systems, insofar as aU thought is through signs. The 
relations observed between sign systems, as weU as within sign sys-

xviii 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
tems, are dependent upon the mind of the individual historian as 
observer, who, through his own semiosis, participates in the selec­
tion of what facts are significant, that is, what facts count as evidence. 
To take a classic example of the mind-dependent nature of history, 
we may question whether Charlemagne was reaUy crowned Holy 
Roman Emperor by the Pope. Some observers say he was, and some 
say he was not. The papal account has it that the Pope " w i t h his own 
hand crowned" Charlemagne, signifying thereby that this fact was 
evidence that papal authority made him Emperor. The Royal Annals, 
in contrast, report the Frankish point of view that the Pope "put the 
crown on his head," signifying thereby that the same fact was evidence 
that Charlemagne did not owe his crown to papal authority. What 
was "signified" by the external, or physical, act of the coronation has 
been a question subject to endless controversy precisely because of 
its mind-dependent status both at that time and after that time. For 
that matter the skeptic has well pointed out that the "Holy Roman 
Empire" was neither holy, Roman, nor an empire. 
Although CoUingwood's phUosophy of history is idealist in so far 
as he emphasizes the mind-dependent aspect of history, his position 
is founded on the absolute presupposition that past events existed 
in themselves independently of the observing mind re-enacting them 
through semiosis. Even though the historian as observer cannot get 
outside his own mind-set, he nonetheless observes some aspects of 
mind-independent reality. In CoUingwood's words he does observe 
"the real tree in different aspects." The actual and the ideal do con­
verge the closer the historian gets to "a real knowledge of the infinite 
world of fact." But because the infinite world of fact cannot be observed 
in aU its concreteness and universality by the finite mind, this con­
vergence is only "asymptotic." The nearer the actual comes to the 
ideal, the greater becomes the force generated by this very approach 
to prevent a stiU closer convergence. Thus, the greater the historian's 
knowledge, the more acutely he becomes aware that he wUl never 
know anything with finality, and that aU his so-caUed knowledge is 
"to an unverifiable extent erroneous," precisely because it is mind-
dependent even when observing real, or mind-independent, relations. 
Here we come to that convergence of the scientific, artistic, and 
religious pursuits of man which, understood in its precise nature as 
semiotic, offers a subtler yet more sophisticated alternative to reaUsm 
or idealism. CoUingwood sees that whUe the historian cannot escape 
his own point of view, even if he changes perspectives, his problem 
is not that there is no real tree, but that he cannotsee it from aU per-

Foreword 
xix 
spectives at once in an infinity of possible perspectives. He is caught 
in an "egocentric predicament," which is his own semiosis. Whereas 
medieval man in such a predicament contemplated "the love that 
moved the sun and the other stars," modern man contemplates their 
coUapse into "blackholes." Neither perspective is founded directly 
on the actual or the ideal, but on something between the two, that 
is, on the mediacy of the sign through which the mind structures its 
experience and consciousness of the intercommunicating universe of 
mind-independent being. 
In the perspective of semiotic, mind-independent fact and mind-
dependent fiction are distinct but not separate beings. CoUingwood's 
logic of history is semiotic in that it admits both orders of being precise­
ly as they are interrelated. Such logic uses the methods of objective 
inquiry in order that the sequence of observation/inference/conclu¬
sion may be replicated, not simply to verify coherence qua coherence 
but to get beyond coherence as such to truth ascoherence, which is 
the most probable account of what actuaUy happened in the past. The 
object of historical inquiry is thus not the actual past, but "what the 
evidence proves." In such a context history is neither actual nor ideal, 
mind-independent fact nor mind-dependent fiction, being nor non-
being, but a relation between the two orders of being established 
through the historian's interpretation of the sign. Historical thinking 
proceeds by the logic of question and answer addressed to mind-
independent traces (such as documents) which are interpreted as signs 
of mind-dependent being, or the internal relations of thought upon 
which the whole human edifice of thought and action rests. 
Looked at semioticaUy, the historian participates as observer in 
this concrete universal, which is perfused with signs. While he 
observes from the egocentric reference point of the ever-changing sign 
configuration of his own time and consciousness, he likewise parti­
cipates in the ever-changing sign configurations of past thought. In 
recreating history as the present, the historian lives in both present 
and past sign systems at once. Because of his very famUiarity with 
a sign system foreign to his own, he experiences in consciousness the 
shifting ground between mind-dependent and mind-independent 
"realities" as these constantly change places across time according 
to human design. The logic of history approaches the concrete univer­
sal фу way of the sign) from within human reality in precisely the 
way covering laws imposed from without cannot do because they 
cannot explain the concreteness of human experience as it is struc­
tured through semiosis. Herein Ues the living appeal of Collingwood's 

XX 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
philosophy of history to historians. The logic of history is a semiotic 
art which presupposes experience with life itself, and which would 
seem to explain why historians tend to mature at a later age than 
mathematicians. 
What I have here only adumbrated is the kind of study of Col­
lingwood's thought which would further develop his own insights 
in the light of the historical prise de conscience of semiotics and the con­
sequent development of a doctrine of signs. His philosophy of history 
opens the door to a common understanding of signification viewed 
not only speculatively but practicaUy as weU, as signification manifests 
itsetf in human awareness across time in the relation between thought 
and action. The coming together of phUosophy and history is funda­
mental to an anthroposemiotic view of man as a being in time whose 
transmissible history gives rise to culture. What RusseU's study points 
toward is a semiotic overview of CoUingwood's contribution to this 
understanding. 
Brooke WUliams 
Stonecliffe 
Hall 
FaU of 1983 

AUTHOR'S PREFACE 
This work was written some years ago, after I had become in­
trigued with Collingwood's idea of a hitherto undeveloped logic, a 
logic of questioning which would be adequate to deal with distinctive­
ly human problems and, as such, would be the logic proper to historical 
thought. He likened this new logic to the procedure of a detective 
solving a crime. My own habits of thought inclined me toward the 
scientific rather than the Uterary or historical, so that I tended to ideaUze 
scientific procedures, to think in inductive and deductive patterns, 
and, without realizing it, to adopt a somewhat trivializing attitude 
toward historical knowledge. 
However, it is impossible to read CoUingwood's An Autobiography 
and the Prologue to his Speculum Mentis without feeling the shock of 
the contrast he draws between the one same event, the first World 
War, as an unprecedented success for natural science and at the same 
time an unprecedented disgrace to the human inteUect. He contrasts 
the success, on the one hand, of modern European minds in controll­
ing almost any situation which involves physical bodies and physical 
forces, and, on the other hand, the inabUity of these minds to control 
situations that involve human beings and mental forces. CoUingwood 
blames disasters such as the first World War on trying to solve human 
problems with the methods of natural science instead of with the 
instrument properly adapted to such problems, which he regards to 
be history and its proper procedures. He stresses that logicians of the 
twentieth century should give serious attention to the development 
of the logic of history, which is a concrete logic of question and answer, 
of the raising and solving of problems, which activity, according to 
CoUingwood, is an activity identical with the mind itseU, since "the 
mind is what it does." 
The present work is the result of my research to find out what 
CoUingwood had to say about this logic and to take a position one 
way or another on his contention. Whüe I felt that I had to agree with 
his general position on the existence of an interrogative logic proper 
to history, something important seemed to remain undisclosed, some­
thing that the General Editor in her Preface refers to as 'a missing 
link.' CoUingwood seemed to be saying something massively impor-
xxi 

xxii 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
tant, but, like Heraclitus of old, what he said seemed as much to con­
ceal as to reveal this important aspect. The crux of the problem as 
I felt it seemed to turn on getting a handle onto cultural concepts and 
the type of understanding and reasoning that went with them. I found 
considerable help in this respect in the works of Ernst Cassirer, Robert 
Stover, John WUd and Michael Polanyi. But still something seemed 
to be missing. The natural world was stffl there in aU its briUiance, 
ffluminated by science and its abstractive, inductive and deductive 
ways, whereas the human world and its history, although in no way 
appearing to be as trivial as before, was stffl irritatingly elusive. 
During the last four or five years I have become acquainted with, 
and exposed to, the fresh winds of a newly developing discipline, 
semiotic. This movement seems to have come to recognizable seU-
consciousness in the United States at a conference on intercultural 
and interdisciplinary communication sponsored by the U.S. Office of 
Education and held at the Bloomington campus of Indiana Univer­
sity in 1962. But its advent had long since been foretold by John Locke 
in the concluding pages of his Essay Concerning Human Understanding 
in 1690. There Locke divided the sciences into three kinds: Natural 
Science, competent to explain the natural world; Ethics (in the wide 
sense of practica), competent to deal with what is right in human action; 
and a third type, which he refers to as "the doctrine of signs" and 
which he names with the Greek word Σημκοτική, which renders into 
English as Semiotic. According to Locke, this hitherto non-existent 
discipUne is concerned with the way in which the human agent relates 
the objective world to himseU by the use of signs such as words and 
ideas, and wUl "afford us another sort of logic and critic than what 
we have been hitherto acquainted w i t h . " CoUingwood's interrogative 
logic of history presents us with the human mind in dynamic inter­
action with its environing world, its world being what that mind has 
made the environment to mean for itsetf, and that mind being what 
it has made of itsetf in making the environment meaningful to it. The 
Setf and its world are strictly correlative and mutually impUcatory. 
Strains develop in this communication situation, which are responded 
to by the mind interrogating any perturbing facts that are discordant 
with other facts. The Ufe of the mind is an ongoing process of raising 
and solving problems, which is also a process of humanizing the world, 
of making its world an amenable place to live in. When CoUingwood 
refers to questions as turning facts into evidence, making raw data 
into signs, he is referring to his logic of questioning as something which 
is thoroughly semiotic and which aims at a harmonious balance be-

Author's Preface 
ххш 
tween the Self, a concrete mind as a sign-making agency, and its en­
vironing world as a meaningful whole made evident—that is, signifi­
cant, sign-bearing—through the mind's questioning activity. 
This work as it stands shows CoUingwood's thought clearly to 
be a precursor to semiotic thought. Further understanding of his pro­
posed logic, with its goal of being a service to human amelioration, 
wiU benefit enormously from the advancement of John Locke's foretold 
semiotic logic now in the process of historical unfolding. CoUingwood's 
concrete universal at the basis of his interrogative logic stands out as 
a whole-of-meaning through the signification (sign-bearing, eviden-
tiality) of the parts in relation to the whole and simultaneously of the 
whole in relation to its parts, which signifying function, or 'under-
standabUity/ derives from the mind's proper activity, the activity of 
questioning. CoUingwood's constellation of consupponible presup­
positions, including both absolute and relative presuppositions, 
represents a mind-set of structured subjectivity in dynamic inter­
communion with its environing world, each having its signification 
or meaning-bearing value or evidentiality in relation to the other. 
Semiotic as "the doctrine of signs," as Locke caUed it, provides us 
with a new tool for the interpretation of CoUingwood's position; and, 
reciprocaUy, CoUingwood's theory of the logic of questioning as the 
proper historical instrument for turning facts into significant facts, into 
evidence, provides semioticians with a unique sign-making system 
which they cannot afford to neglect. CoUingwood scholars and semioti­
cians stand to benefit from a mutual consideration of each other's work, 
and Locke's 'new logic and critic' might turn out to be very intimate­
ly connected with Collingwood's interrogative logic proper to history 
and to problem solving generally. 
In view of the growing interest of the semiotic movement in the 
nature of history, CoUingwood's contribution, seen semioticaUy, might 
weU lay the foundation for that rapprochement between the human 
disciplines that is at the heart of Collingwood's thought and of the 
semiotic movement, and especiaUy for the rapprochement between 
phUosophy and history, to the achievement of which CoUingwood 
devoted his life's work. 
Beresford 
New Brunswick, 
Canada 
August 
15, 1983 


Introduction 
R. G. CoUingwood is perhaps the most outstanding thinker of the 
EngUsh speaking world in recent years to draw attention to the deter­
mining role of history in human affairs today, and to make the point 
that as "the chief business of seventeenth-century phUosophy was 
to reckon with seventeenth-century natural science" so "the chief 
business of twentieth<entury phUosophy is to reckon with twentieth-
century history." 1 Collingwood's emphasis on the importance of 
history both for harmonious management of human affairs2 and as 
the activity which demands first priority attention of the phUosopher 
today, no doubt is ultimately traceable to his own innate predisposi­
tion towards history and its method of thinking and proceeding, just 
as Descartes had gravitated towards the mathematical mode of tMnking 
by a sort of innate predisposition. "PhUosophy" for CoUingwood "is 
1 R. G. Collingwood, AnAutobiography, London, Oxford University Press, 1939, 
pp. 78-79. 
2 In his An Autobiography (p. 90) he attributes the contrast between the war of 1914 
as "an unprecedented triumph for natural science" and at the same time "an un­
precedented disgrace to the human inteUect" to neglect of history, whose proper func­
tion, according to CoUingwood, is to provide "more understanding of human affairs 
and more knowledge of how to control them" φ. 92) just as natural science has made 
possible "the success of modern European minds in controlling almost any situation 
in which the elements are physical bodies and the forces physical forces . . . " 
1 

2 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
reflective/' 3 by which he means that "the philosophising mind never 
simply thinks about an object" but "always, while thinking about any 
object, thinks also about its own thought about that object," and is 
therefore "thought of the second degree, thought about thought." 4 
Furthermore, "philosophy is never concerned with thought by itsetf; 
it is always concerned with its relation to its object, and is therefore 
concerned with the object just as much as with the thought." 5 Now, 
the thoughts which are the relevant consideration of the philosopher 
are the predominating considerations which determine the character 
of any given historical period. Greek philosophy is characterized by 
a preoccupation with mathematics, according to CoUingwood. 
Now, our philosophical tradition goes back in a continuous line 
to sixth-century Greece, and at that time the special problem of 
thought was the task of laying the foundations of mathematics. 
Greek philosophy therefore placed mathematics in the centre of its 
picture, and when it discussed the theory of knowledge it under­
stood by it first and foremost the theory of mathematical knowledge.6 
CoUingwood then distinguishes "down to a century ago, two great 
constructive ages of European history," namely, the Middle Ages and 
the Renaissance periods, each having its own characteristic thought 
occupation which in turn gave to the phUosophy of the period its 
characteristic form. 
In the Middle Ages the central problems of thought were con­
cerned with theology, and the problems of philosophy therefore 
arose out of reflection on theology and were concerned with the rela­
tions of God and man. From the sixteenth to the nineteenth cen­
turies the main effort of thought was concerned with laying the 
foundations of natural science, and philosophy took as its main 
theme the relation of the human mind as subject to the natural world 
of things around it in space as object.7 
During these periods, people thought historically but their his­
torical thought was simple and rudimentary. But from the eighteenth 
century onwards there developed a growing concern with history. 
. . . in the eighteenth century people began thinking critically 
about history, as they had abeady learnt to think criticaUy about the 
3 R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, London, Oxford University Press, 1946, 
p. 1. 
4 ttnd. 
5 Tbid., p. 2. 
6 Tbid., p. 4; see ako Speculum Mentis, London, Oxford University Press, 1924, pp. 
164 et seq. 
7 R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, pp. 4-5. 

Introduction 
3 
external world, because history began to be regarded as a special 
form of thought, not quite Uke mathematics or theology or science. 
The result of this reflection was that a theory of knowledge pro­
ceeding on the assumption that mathematics or theology or science, 
or aU three together, could exhaust the problems of knowledge in 
general, was no longer satisfactory. Historical thought has an object 
with peculiarities of its own. 8 
CoUingwood tells us that "theories of knowledge designed to 
account for mathematical and theological and scientific knowledge thus 
do not touch on the special problems of historical knowledge" and 
furthermore if such theories of knowledge "offer themselves as com­
plete accounts of knowledge they actuaUy imply that historical knowl­
edge is impossible." 9 CoUingwood regarded his life's work as " i n the 
main an attempt to bring about a rapprochement between phUosophy 
and history." 1 0 
As a consequence of this change of preoccupation characteristic 
of contemporary Western thought, of this awakening of the historical 
consciousness in the eighteenth century, the logical types of reason­
ing which were developed to facUitate mathematical and scientific 
reasoning are no longer adequate to deal with the mode of reasoning 
characteristic of historical inquiry. The deductive syUogism, according 
to CoUingwood, was developed by the Greeks as the method of reason­
ing adequate to mathematics, 1 1 and the method of induction was 
developed at the time of the Renaissance, when deductive reasoning 
proved no longer adequate to handle the new types of problems dealt 
with by Renaissance science.12 And just as the ancient syUogistic-
deductive logic was found to be inadequate to deal with Renaissance 
experimental and observational science, so likewise neither is deduc­
tive nor inductive reasoning adequate to guide the type of investiga­
tion and inference employed by the historian in his attempts to reveal 
the past. 1 3 
Thus, according to CoUingwood, just as the awakening of the 
scientific consciousness of Western European man in the sixteenth 
century demanded a new logic to supersede the syllogistic deductive 
logic as an adequate logical instrument to handle scientific problems, 
so today the awakening of the historical consciousness of Western 
8 Jbid., pp. 4-5. 
» Md., p. 5. 
1 0 See An Autobiography, p. 77. 
1 1 See The Idea of History, p. 253. 
1 2 See ibid., p. 254. 
1 3 See ibid. 

4 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
\ 
man demands that logicians give attention to developing the type of 
inference which is proper and pecuUar to historical investigation, which 
is neither deductive nor inductive. 
The main scientific achievement of the ancient Greeks lay in 
mathematics; their main work on the logic of inference was naturaUy, 
therefore, devoted to that form of inference which occurs in exact 
science. When at the end of the Middle Ages the modern natural 
sciences of observation and experiment began to take shape, a revolt 
against Aristotelian logic was inevitable; in partiaüar, a revolt against 
the AristoteHan theory of demonstration, which could by no man­
ner of means be made to cover the technique actuaUy used in the 
new natural sciences. The text-books of logic in use today still bear 
the marks of this revolt in the distinction they draw between two 
kinds of inference, 'deductive' and 'inductive.' It was not until late 
in the nineteenth century that historical thought reached a stage of 
development comparable with that reached by natural science about 
the beginning of the seventeenth; but this event has not yet begun 
to interest those philosophers who write text-books of logic.14 
According to CoUingwood, the logic proper to historical reason­
ing is characteristicaUy a logic of question and answer 1 5 in which every 
statement is meaningful only as the answer to a definite question, 1 6 
and the mode of inference, as contrasted with inductive and deduc­
tive reasoning, is by way of an ordered series of questions and 
answers. 1 7 CoUingwood contrasts this logic of question and answer 
with what he calls the traditional propositional logic in which propo­
sitions have meaning and truth in themselves independently of any 
questions to which they might be the answer, 1 8 and whose tradition­
al modes of inference are induction and deduction. 1 9 The ultimate dif­
ference between the two logics, according to CoUingwood, is the basis 
of the difference between abstract thinking and concrete thinking, 
namely, the difference between the abstract universal and the con­
crete universal. Propositional logic is the logic proper to abstract 
14 Jbid., pp. 253-254. See also H.-I. Marrou, De k connaissance historique, Paris, Edi­
tions du SeuÜ, 1966, p. 85. (EngHsh translation, The Meaning ofHistory, p. 89). "И 
we try to account for this understanding process [characteristic of history], we can­
not make use of any transposition of the methods of the sciences of nature. Properly 
speaking, the historian does not proceed by way of deduction or induction." 
1 5 See The Idea of History, pp. 268-270; 273-275; An Autobiography, pp. 24-28; 
124-126. 
1 6 See An Autobiography, p. 33; also An Essay on Metaphysics, London, Oxford 
UniversityPress, 1940, pp. 23-25. 
1 7 See The Idea of History, pp. 273-275; An Autobiography, p. 37. 
1 8 See An Autobiography, pp. 30-39. 
1 9 See Speculum Mentis, pp. 163-169; 176-180, especially p. 179. 

Introduction 
5 
thought; the logic of question and answer is the logic proper to con­
crete or historical thought, whose proper mode of reasoning is a pro­
cess of explicating the implicit through ordered questioning. "The 
concrete universal is the daily bread of every historian and the logic 
of history is the logic of the concrete universal." 2 0 
It was noted above that CoUingwood declared his life's work to 
be that of bringing about a rapprochement between history and phUos­
ophy. 2 1 In the Prologue to Speculum Mentis he shows at great length 
that the scientific mentality, based as it is on abstract thinking, has 
resulted in the sundering of our way of life since the Renaissance into 
mutuaUy exclusive and conflicting activities: artistic, reUgious and 
scientific pursuits which are aUen to each other and result in a divided 
and inhuman way of life. CoUingwood's call for a rapprochement be­
tween history and phUosophy is also a caU for a rapprochement between 
the various forms of human activity and a harmonious human life 
which has been impossible since the Middle Ages. History is the 
science of human affairs and the study of history wUl enable us to 
regulate human affairs as natural science enables us to control the 
world of nature. The instrument of this twofold rapprochement is the 
logicof question and answer, which may also be called rapprochement 
logic, as contrasted with inductive and deductive propositionallogic 
whose abstractive mode divides and alienates the various human 
disciplines and the very mode of daUy human Uving. 
It is therefore fitting to examine CoUingwood's claim regarding 
the existence of this unexploited logic, to determine whether this claim 
can be substantiated, and to determine as far as possible the nature 
and implications of such a logic. To this end the foUowing work is 
offered as a contribution. 2 2 
2 0 Tbid., p. 221; see also ibid., pp. 217-221; p. 244; p. 286; p. 299. Collingwood's 
An Essay on Philosophical Method, London, Oxford University Press, 1933, is also an 
elaboration of thelogic of the concrete universal, especially Chapters 2 and 3. See 
below, Chapter 4, pp. 97-117. 
2 1 See above, p. 3. 
2 2 According to Louis O. Mink in his Mind, History and Diakctic, Bloornington, 
mdiana University Press, 1969, p. 131, "the logic of question and answer is not a theory 
of logic at aU, in any ordinary sense of that term, nor is it even a theory of semantics; 
it is a hermeneutics and as such it supplements but does not replace formal logic." 
This may be frue, but it seems to weaken CoUingwood's very emphatic insistence 
on the need to develop the logic appropriate to historical inquiry as something for 
which inductive and deductive logic cannot supply. Alan Donagan, in his The Later 
Philosophy ofR. G. CoUingwood, London, Oxford University Press, 1962, p. 56, goes 
so far as to say that "ColUngwood's forays into logic resemble Caesar's invasions of 
Britain: their execution was bungled, and his account of them, which unlike Caesar's 
was given in advance, did not accord with his actions. Although in his Autobiography 

6 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The method of procedure wffl be as foUows. Firstly, CoUingwood's 
theory of the logic of questioning as proper to history wiU be ex­
pounded as far as his pubUshed works permit; this wffl be done in 
chapters 1 to 6 inclusive. Then, the remaining chapters wiU attempt 
to evaluate CoUingwood's theory. 
As regards the first, expository, part, the chapters wffl be divided 
according to the main Une headings deUneated by CoUingwood himsetf 
in regard to his theory of questioning. Chapter 1 wiU present CoUing­
wood's call for the development of an interrogative logic proper to 
history and quite distinct from deductive and inductive logic, which 
logical systems, according to CoUingwood, are appropriate to exact 
(mathematical) and empirical science respectively. The principal docu­
mentary source of this subject matter wUl be CoUingwood's post­
humously pubUshed "Historical Evidence," found in the EpUegomena 
(part 5) of The Idea of History, pp. 205-282. 
Chapter 2 wUI expose CoUingwood's epistemology of question­
ing, in which knowledge is understood in terms of a question and 
answer complex, and propositional meaning is to be taken in refer­
ence to the question which the proposition is intended to answer. The 
essentiaUy historical meaning of propositions wffl appear, since every 
question is asked by a conscious subject historicaUy situated and con­
ditioned. CoUingwood's Autobiography wiU be the main source of this 
embryonic epistemology identifying knowledge with the process of 
asking and answering questions. 
The third chapter wffl elaborate on CoUingwood's emphasis on 
the active aspect of knowledge. Questioning, inasmuch as it involves 
the activity of supposing, requires that the questioning mind confront 
the objects of its knowledge in an active, dorninating way, not, as 
Positivists would have it, as a mere compresence with akeady existing 
he proclaimed himself 'in logic . . . a revolutionary' (A.52), his revolutionary mani­
festo turned out to be an embarrassment, and in what he afterwards wrote about logic 
he more and more ignored it." David Rynin remarks in his "Donagan on CoUing­
wood: AbsolutePresuppositions, Trath and Metaphysics," The Review ofMetaphysics, 
XVni (1964-1965), p. 307: "CoUingwood could, of course, be as poor a thmker as Don­
agan makes him out to be on the subject here under discussion [Metaphysics as his­
torical study of absolute presuppositions], but one wonders then what point there 
is in writing a book about these inconsistencies and confusions. In any case, I wish 
to read CoUingwood on the assumption that he is not an inteUectuaI dolt, and the 
least I can do is to seek out, if possible, some interpretation of his thought that leaves 
it not actually ridiculous and obviously mistaken, to see whether what he seems to 
be saying may not be worth saying and even Ustening to.'' This present investigation 
into CoUingwood's theory of the logic of questioning is undertaken in the same spirit 
as that expressed by David Rynin. 

Introduction 
7 
objects or 'hard facts.' Supposing involves consideration of the as yet 
non-existent, and any question involves supposed alternatives, the 
actuaUzation of one or another of which wiU provide the answer to 
the question. Chapter 3 wiU therefore expose CoUingwood's theory 
of questioning as supposing or "the cutting edge of the m i n d . " 
Speculum Mentis wffl provide much of the material of this section. The 
questioning activity of the rnind considered precisely as an exercise 
of creativity, which is the proper function of art, whose activity is 
characteristically that of supposal, wiU be deferred from Chapter 3 
to an appendix at the end of the work. Its presence as an integral part 
of Chapter 3 would disturb the flow and continuity of thought, as 
its material, drawn from an analysis of CoUingwood's The Principles 
of Art, is somewhat voluminous in detaU and turgid in treatment. 
The central core of CoUingwood's logic of questioning, his theory 
of the concrete universal, which is 'the daUy bread of every historian,' 
wUl be exposed in Chapter 4. The concrete thought of the historian, 
if it has logical value, must somehow have about it the character of 
universaUty. The universal import of concrete fact with which the his­
torian trades is shown to be a universal as concrete and fuUy determi­
nate as the facts which it proposes to make intelligibly meaningful. 
This concrete unity in diversity, and the logic of history which it 
founds, wUl be presented mainly by drawing on CoUingwood's Spec­
ulum Mentis and his Essey on Philosophical Method, the former work 
being mainly concerned with the concrete and dialectical character 
of this universal, the latter with its intelligible structure as an overlap 
of classes in a scale of forms, which structure, being at each point in-
ternaUy affected by a temporal before-and-after relationship, is essen-
tiaUy historical in nature, so that the before part is related questioning-
ly to the after part and the after part is related answeringly to the before 
part. 
Chapter 5 deals with CoUingwood's important point that relevant 
questions have their logical efficacy in presuppositions, ultimately in 
absolute presuppositions, which are characteristic of the thought pat­
terns which determine and historicaUy situate a particular culture. Col-
Ungwood advances his weU known theory that the proper subject mat­
ter of metaphysics (not sufficiently recognized by traditional meta­
physicians) is the study of these absolute presuppositions and of the 
manner in which one consteUation of presuppositions gives way to 
another consteUation and consequently to another way of viewing and 
questioning the world of experience.- ίη doing so, CoUingwood denies 
the traditional notion of metaphysics as being concerned with eter-

8 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
nal problems and regards it as a historical investigation of partictdar 
thought-principles (that is, absolute presuppositions) held by particular 
peoples at a particular time and a particular place and which are subject 
to historical development from one period to another. 
Chapter 6 examines CoUingwood's notion of history, since he has 
insisted that a logic of questioning is at the basis of historical thought. 
Here, CoUingwood's notion of history is presented as the account of 
seU-developing, seU-creating mind in accordance with his insistence 
throughout aU his works that 'mind is what it does.' Mind, as setf-
creating activity, acts and constructs itseU as an overlap of classes in 
a scale of forms by the process of 'raising and solving problems,' or 
asking and answering questions. The activity which is mind is therefore 
together radicaUy historical and radicaUy interrogative. 
Chapter 7 begins the work of evaluating CoUingwood's theory 
of interrogative logic proper to history. This chapter criticises and 
evaluates CoUingwood's theory of knowledge as identical with the 
questioning and answering process which was exposed in Chapter 
2. CoUingwood's theory that propositions are meaningful only as 
answers to questions is evaluated partially in this chapter and more 
completely in Chapter 9. Chapter 8 continues the critical work and 
takes CoUingwood to task for neglecting to recognise an already weU 
developed logic of interrogation in the Aristotelian tradition. An 
attempt is made to give the main outUnes of this theory of question-
ingas found in Aristotle's Topics and PosteriorAnalytics and developed 
by certain Aristotelian commentators. A n attempt is then made to see 
CoUingwood in relation to this AristoteUan interrogative theory. 
Chapter 9 faces the crucial question as to whether CoUingwood 
is correct or not in asserting that historical thought operates by a logic 
of questioning distinct from the deductive logic of strict science or the 
inductive logic of empirical science. A n attempt is made to separate 
out what is acceptable in CoUingwood's thought and making a genuine 
contribution to the phUosophy of history from what is unacceptable 
or requiring emendation. 
Having taken an affirmative position, subject to certain important 
qualifications, regarding Collingwood's theory of the existence of a 
logic of questioning proper to history, the tenth and conduding chapter 
wffl endeavour to indicate along what lines such a logic might be 
developed as far as documentary sources avaUable permit such indi­
cations to be made. 

PART I: EXPOSITION 
CHAPTER O N E 
The Need for a New Logic 
of Question and Answer 
A. The Logic of Question and Answer in the 
Works of R. G. CoUingwood 
Perhaps the most explicit statement of the need for a new logic 
of question and answer, and of its particular relevance to historical 
thought, is to be found in the third section of part 5 of the posthumous­
ly pubUshed (1946) The ldea ofHistory. This part of The Idea ofHistory 
is an edited coUection, made by T. M . Knox, of various works, some 
previously published, others not, such as the section headed "His­
torical Evidence," which, according to Knox, 1 was written in the spring 
of 1939 as part of a projected work, The Principles of History. It is in 
this previously unpubUshed fragment that we find CoUingwood's ex­
pressed view of the need for a new logic, a logic of question and 
answer, as the appropriate mode of inference in historical research, 
as induction is the appropriate mode of inference in the experimen­
tal sciencesand deduction the appropriate mode of inference in the 
exact, mathematical sciences. 
CoUingwood's Autobiography details fhe genesis and development 
of his original thinking on question and answer, and provides an 
1 See editor's preface to The ldea of History, Oxford University Press, 1946, p. v; 
see also A. Shalom, R. G. CoUingwood, philosophe et historien, Paris, Presses Univer-
sitaires de France, 1967, p. 157. 
9 

10 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
embryonic epistemology of the activity of questioning. 2 In this work 
we see how this theory of questioning arose as a result of his increas­
ing dissatisfaction with the realism of Cook Wilson and the Oxford 
'reaUsts,' and how this growing opposition to reaUst methods of think­
ing inevitably led him to develop a critical mode of thinking more and 
more in line with his archaeological practice of proceeding according 
to definite questions. 
Chapters 4 through 7 of An Essay on Metaphysics deal explicitly 
with the theory of questioning, and specificaUy with the presupposi­
tions from which relevant questions arise. A novel account of meta­
physics as the historical study of absolute presuppositions is presented. 
Trds aUgnment of metaphysics with historicaUy predetermined presup­
positions to scientific questions has occasioned rival interpretations 
of Collingwood's thought. Shalom and Donagan follow Knox's radi­
cal conversion theory according to which, some time after 1936, 
CoUingwood changed from thinking that phUosophy was distinct from 
history to a train of thought which culminated in An Essay on Meta­
physics, which, according to these commentators, ended in radical his-
toricism, identifying phUosophy with history. 3 On the other hand, 
Lionel Rubinoff argues convincingly for an internaUy coherent system 
throughout the whole of Collingwood's works, and explicitly refutes 
the radical conversionhypothesis and that CoUingwood's final thought 
identifies phUosophy with history. 4 
The works mentioned: "Historical Evidence," An Autobiography 
and An Essay on Metaphysics, aU written during the period 1936-1939, 
contain CoUingwood's most direct treatment of his thought on ques­
tion and answer. Important references, however, are made to it in 
other works. 
The earlier Speculum Mentis (1924) contains basic information for 
2 It is weU to note that AIan Donagan, in his The Later Philosophy ofR. G. CoUing­
wood, London, Oxford University Press, 1962, p. 1, takes seriously T. M. Knox's warn­
ing that CoUingwood's own narrative of his development is not trustworthy. 
3 See T. M. Knox's preface to CoUingwood's The Idea ofHistory, pp. x-xi; A. Don­
agan, The LaterPhilosophy ofR. G. CoUingwood, pp. 10-12; A. Shalom, R. G. CoUing­
wood, pMosophe et historien, pp. 210-215; A. Shalom, "R. G. CoUingwood et Ia meta-
physique," Les Etudes Philosophiques, X (1955), pp. 706-708. Although Shalom must 
be classed with the radical conversion theorists if this means those who maintain that 
CoUingwood's Essay on Metaphysics identifies history and phüosophy, nevertheless 
it is questionable if this dassification fits Shalom in virtue of hls conclusion that CoUing­
wood's historicist conclusion is impUcit in the principles of his eariiest works. 
* See Lionel Rubinoff, CoUingwood andtheReform ofMetaphysics, Toronto, Univer­
sity of Toronto Press, 1970, pp. 23, 213-214. Louis O. Mink, Mind, History, and Diakc-
tk, 1969, also argues for systematic continuity. 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
11 
the understanding and interpretation of CoUingwood's thought on 
questioning, ш the third section, on Art, there is inserted (p. 76, sub­
section 5) a treatment of 'Knowledge as Question and Answer' in 
which an mtimate connection is estabUshed between the activity of 
supposal and both art and questioning. In addition to this special 
reierence the work generaUy is a manifestation of the mind as a ques­
tioning and problem solving activity. 
CoUingwood's final work, The New Leviathan, being an ethico-
political work, emphasizes the practical aspect of the activity of the 
mind rather than the epistemological. However, reference is made 
to knowledge as the asking and answering of questions in the con­
text of appetite (pp. 74-79); brief reference is also made to question 
and answer in the first chapter, pp. 6-7. 
An early publication (1920), Ruskin's Philosophy,5 which was an 
address deUvered August 8th, 1919, at the Ruskin Centenary Confer­
ence, Coniston, needs mentioning, for " 'Ruskin's PhUosophy' must 
. . . be regarded as representing an important stage in the develop­
ment of CoUingwood's thought. Not only does it appear to support 
Collingwood's own claim in the Autobiography to have arrived at the 
theory of presuppositions and the logic of question and answer early 
in his phUosophical career but it is also probably the closest record 
we have of the actual views of 'Truth and Contradiction.' " 6 
The work "Truth and Contradiction," referred to here by Lionel 
Rubinoff, concerns an early work which CoUingwood teUs us, in his 
Autobiography (p. 42; p. 99), he wrote in 1917 but was unable to have 
pubUshed owing to prevaUing wartime conditions. This work, CoUing­
wood says in the Autobiography (p. 42), contained a 'writing out' of 
his thoughts untU that time on questioning activity as a phUosophical 
alternative to the realist's correspondence-passivity theory of knowl­
edge. Rubinoff argues convincingly7 that " 'Truth and Contradiction' 
was an earlier version of what later became An Essay on Metaphysics" 
(a conclusion detrimental to the Knox-Donagan radical conversion 
hypothesis previously referred to). 
In addition to the aforesaid works more or less directly referring 
to question and answer logic, An Essay on PhUosophical Method, although 
5 See R. G. CoUingwood, Ruskin's Phibsophy: An Address deUvered at the Ruskin 
Centenary Conference, August 8th, 1919, Titus Wflson and Son, Kendal, England, 
1920; reprinted in Alan Donagan's edition of Essays in the Philosophy ofArt by R. G. 
CoUingwood, Bloomington, mdiana University Press, 1964, pp. 3-41. 
6 L.Rubinoff, CoUingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 230. 
7 See ibid., p. 15; see also p. 230. 

Ύλ 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
not explicitly mentioning questioning, wiU be seen to be the logical 
theory of the concrete universal which is the basis of the dialectical 
logic of questioning. 8 This work proceeds by comparing the elements 
of traditional (i.e., genus-species abstract propositional, inductive-
deductive logic) with the elements of dialectical or interrogative logic. 
Having outUned the various sources in CoUingwood of more or 
less explicit reference to questioning and the logic of questioning, we 
may fittingly begin with "Historical Evidence" (Section 3 of Part 5 
of The Idea ofHistory) in presenting CoUingwood's theory that there 
is a distinct, as yet undeveloped logic proper to historical thought, 
a logic of question and answer which is distinct from what CoUing­
wood caUs the traditional propositional logic, whose famUiar modes 
of inference are deduction and induction. 
B. The Statu9 of History as a Science 
In the EpUegomena (Part V) of The Idea ofHistory, Section 3, en­
titled "Historical Evidence," 9 CoUingwood deals with history as a 
unique human discipline, and shows that it operates according to a 
logic quite different from the traditional logic of inductive and deduc­
tive inference. 
In what sense is it legitimate to caU history a science? It is not a 
science in the sense in which the principle of inteUigibfflty and mean­
ing is ultimately derived from abstract universal laws and principles. 
In this sense history is not a science, whereas biology, physics and 
meteorology are sciences. But history, like biology, physics and 
meteorology, is an organized and systematized body of knowledge, 
which, CoUingwood says, is a traditionaUy accepted meaning of the 
term 'science.'10 
But every science, understood as an organized body of knowledge, 
is organized in its own special way. History as an organized body of 
knowledge is organized quite differently from the ways meteorology 
8 See Lionel Rubinoff, CoUingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 160. 
9 Written during 1939 as part of a projected Principles ofHistory: see Knox's preface 
to The Idea of History, p. v. 
1 0 See The Idea of History, p. 249. See also H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning of History, 
Montreal, Palm Publishers, 1966, pp. 34-35: ". . . we must say specifically that when 
we use the word 'science' with reference to history it is not the Greek word for 
knowledge—'επιστήμη—that we have in mind but rather the idea of τέχνη, an art—or 
technical method, m other words, as opposed to the ordinary knowledge of daily ex­
perience we have reference to an elaborate knowledge set forth in terms of a systematic 
and rigorous method which has proved to be productive of the optimum measure of 
truth." 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
13 
and chemistry are organized. The body of knowledge which is mete­
orology is organized by coUecting observations concerned with cer­
tain kinds of events which can be watched as they occur though they 
cannot be produced at wiU by the scientist. And meteorologists, Uke 
astronomers, wUl undertake costly and difficult journeys to observe 
the kind of event they are interested in, which cannot be trusted to 
inexpert witnesses. Wars and revolutions, events in which the his­
torian is concerned, are not observed in the way meteorological or 
astronomical events are observed. Nor does the historian make such 
events happen under strictly controUed conditions as does the chemist 
with regard to the events which he observes and records. This is not 
because historians are less energetic or that such means are too cost­
ly, but simply because the facts which might be learnt through large 
costly expeditions or by deUberately fomenting revolutions at home 
would not teach historians what, as historians, they want to know. 1 1 
Observational and experimental sciences are aUke in that they seek 
to find the constant or recurring features in aU events of a certain kind. 
A meteorologist studies one cyclone but only in its relation to others 
so as to find out what belongs to cyclones as such. But the historian 
does not study, say, the Hundred Years' War or the Revolution of 
1688 to reach conclusions about wars as such. This is because history 
is organized in a way different from the ways in which the observa­
tional and experimental sciences are ordered. 
m the organization of history, the ulterior value of what is known 
about the Hundred Years War is conditioned, not by its relation to 
what is known about other wars, but by its relation to what is known 
about other things that people did in the Middle Ages.12 
History likewise differs from the exact (mathematical, deductive) 
sciences in its method of organization. Both agree in that they are 
inferential, going from a certain starting point through a process of 
inference to what that starting point proves. But the starting points, 
the intervening process and the resulting conclusions are diverse in 
each case. The starting points of the exact sciences are assumptions, 
traditionally expressed in the form 'Let ABC be a triangle, and let 
AB = B C ' But in history the starting points are not assumptions but 
facts coming under the historian's observation, such as that which 
is open before him in what purports to be a charter by which a cer­
tain king grants certain lands to a certain monastery. The conclusions 
1 1 See The Idea of History, pp. 249-250. 
1 2 Md., p. 250. 

14 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
in exact science are about things which are not restricted in space or 
time; if they are anywhere they are everywhere; if they are at any 
time they are at aU times. B u t i n history the conclusions are about 
events each of which has a place and date of its own; the exactitude 
with which these are known may vary, but the historian knows that 
there is such a definite time and place and within Umits he knows 
what it is. 1 3 
These differences in starting point and conclusion imply differ­
ence in the entire organization of the respective sciences. When a 
mathematician has made up his mind what the problem is which 
he desires to solve, the next step before him is tö make assump­
tions which wiU enable him to solve it; and this involves an appeal 
to his powers of invention. When an historian has similarly made 
up his mind, his next business is to place himsetf in a position where 
he can say: 'The facts which I am now observing are the facts from 
which I can infer the solution of my problem.' His business is not 
to invent anything, it is to discover something. And the finished 
products, too, are differently organized. The scheme upon which 
the exact sciences have been traditionaUy arranged depends on rela­
tions of logical priority and posteriority: one proposition is placed 
before a second, if understanding of the first is needed in order that 
the second should be understood; the traditional scheme of arrange­
ment in history is a chronological scheme, in which one event is 
placed before a second if it happened at an eariier time. History, 
then, is a science, but a science of a special kind. It is a science whose 
business is to study events not accessible to our observation, and 
to study these events inferentiaUy, arguing to them from something 
else which is accessible to our observation, and which the historian 
caUs 'evidence' for the events in which he is interested.14 
History, then, according to CoUingwood, is a science not only 
inasmuch as it is an organized body of knowledge, but also inasmuch 
as it is inferential; that is, it consists of (not merely propositions in­
ferentiaUy related, as does both exact and observational science, as 
wUl appear later, but) knowledges (which, as wUl be shown later, ac­
cording to CoUingwood include not merely propositions but the ques­
tions to which such propositions are answers) ordered among them­
selves so that one item of knowledge (a question and its answer) is 
related to another in such a way that one conditions the other, and 
itsetf is yet conditioned by a prior, together forming a systematic and 
organized whole. 
According to CoUingwood, this organization through inference 
1 3 See ibid., pp. 250-251. 
14 0>id., pp. 251-252. 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
И 
differentiates history from memory, which is not organized, not infer­
ential at aU. 1 5 To say that I remember writing a letter to someone last 
week is not an historical statement, only a statement of memory. 
However, if I add that my memory is not deceiving me because here 
is my correspondent's reply, then I am talking history because my 
statement about a past event is based on evidence. 1 6 
To say that history is inferential is to say that it is grounded in 
evidence which is available to oneseU" and to anyone else willing and 
able to foUow the demonstration of such evidence. 
The knowledge in virtue of which a man is an historian is a 
knowledge of what the evidence at his disposal proves about cer­
tain events.17 
. . . the historian is not aUowed to claim any single piece of 
knowledge, except where he can justify his claim by exhibiting to 
himself in the first place, and, secondly, to anyone else who is both 
able and wiUing to foUow his demonstration, the grounds upon 
which it is based. This is what is meant. . . by describing history 
as inferential.18 
But, different kinds of knowledge are related in different ways 
to the grounds upon which they are inferentiaUy based. CoUingwood 
criticises the conviction, which he alleges to have originated with 
Aristotle, that a study of the general nature of inference as such wUl 
enable one to evaluate correctly the inferential capacity of any piece 
of evidence solely by inspecting its form without considering the rele­
vant subject matter. 1 9 He then proceeds to distinguish deductive in­
ference and inductive inference as modes of inference differentiated 
by reason of the diverse subject matters to which each is appropriate. 
As the main scientific achievement of the ancient Greeks was in 
mathematics, so also their main contribution to the logic of inference 
was the development of deductive demonstration in the form of 
syllogistic rules. 2 0 According to CoUingwood, the chief characteristic 
of inference in the exact (i.e., mathematical) sciences is "a kind of 
logical compulsion whereby a person who makes certain assumptions 
1 5 See ibid., p. 252. 
1 6 See ibid., pp. 252-253. However, see kter in The Idea ofHistory, pp. 293 et seq., 
for identification of history with memory "but a peculiar case of memory . . . that 
special case of memory where the object of present thought is past thought. . . . " 
17 The Idea of History, p. 252. 
1 8 Md. 
19 Tbid., p. 253. Correkte with p. 49 of Speculum Mentis on the logical result of clas­
sifying reUgion and science as species of a genus as giving to logic the status of a master-
science having jurisdiction over the whole field of knowledge. 
2 0 See The Idea of History, p. 253. 

16 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
is forced, simply by so doing, to make others." 2 1 "When a mathemati­
cian has made up his mind what the problem is which he intends 
to solve, the next step before him is to make assumptions which will 
enable him to solve it; and this involves an appeal to his powers of 
invention." 2 2 Having made his original assumptions (e.g., 'Let ABC 
be a triangle in which AB = BC'), if he is to go on thinking he is under 
a compulsion to arrive at definite conclusions resulting from that 
assumption. He is free either to refrain at the beginning from making 
such assumptions, or, having made them, to stop minking at any time, 
but "what he cannot do is to make the initial assumption, to go on 
thinking, and to arrive at a conclusion different from that which is 
scientifically correct." 2 3 
But the development of the modern natural sciences at the close 
of the Middle Ages precipitated a revolt against Aristotelian syUogis-
tic-deductive science as inappropriate to the subject matter of those 
sciences.24 As the Aristotelian theory of demonstration increasingly 
manifested its unadaptability to the techniques of the new sciences, 
"by degrees, there came into existence a new logic of inference, based 
on analysis of the procedure used in the new natural sciences."25 
Inductive thinking, according to Collingwood, differs from deduc­
tive in that there is no sustained compulsion from some initial assump­
tion. The essence of the process is that a pattern is found to be made 
by several observations taken together, which pattern is then extra­
polated indefinitely. A few points on squared paper suggest a para­
bola, which can then be drawn, as much as one likes, in either direc­
tion. This is the meaning of what is technicauy described as 'proceeding 
from the known to the unknown' or 'from the particular to the uni­
versal.' Collingwood insists that the extrapolating step is essentially 
taken without any logical compulsion; the thinker who takes such a 
step is free to take it or not to take it; there is nothing about the 
2 1 R)id., p. 254. The assumptions refer to Plato's 'hypotheticals' from which, as 
principles, the mind goes to conclusions impUed by those principles; correlate with 
Essay on Philosophical Method, pp. 13-14. 
2 2 The Idea of History, p. 251. This activity of 'supposal' which dominates 
mathematics in principle, CoUingwood identifies with imaginative activity (see Speculum 
Mentis, pp. 76^50), which activity, absolutised (abstractively) by disassociating it from 
the world of fact into a self enclosed world is the activity of art (Speculum Mentis, pp. 
80-91). 
2 3 The Idea of History, p. 254; see also Speculum Mentis, pp. 163-169, for further 
elaboration of the mode of proceeding in deductive science; see also, below, Chapter 
4, pp. 75^2. 
2 4 See The Idea of History, pp. 253-254. 
25 Md., p. 254. 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
17 
suggested pattern formed by his (or someone else's) observations 
which obliges him in that particular way, or indeed obUges him to 
extrapolate at all; he freely follows a suggestion, that is aU. 2 6 Hypno-
tization by the prestige of AristoteUan logic has led people to see a 
closer resemblance between inductive and deductive thinking than 
really exists, and consequently between sciences of experiment and 
observation and exact science, h i both cases there is an initial start­
ing point and a terminal point, caUed the premises and the conclu­
sion, and in both cases the premises 'prove' the conclusion. "But 
whereas in exact science this means that they enforce the conclusion, 
or make it logicaUy obUgatory, in the sciences of observation and experi­
ment it means only that they justify it, that is, authorize anybody to 
think it who wishes to do so. What they provide, when they are said 
to 'prove' a certain conclusion, is not compulsion to embrace it, but 
only permission; a perfectly legitimate sense of the word 'prove' {ap-
prouver, probare), as there should be no need to show." 2 7 
CoUingwood says that there is a feeUng of compulsion which seem­
ingly attaches to this permission to extrapolate freely, so that one feels 
not free but under obligation to do so and to do so in certain ways: 
"obUgations which, when we inquire into their history, we find to 
have their roots in certain rehgious behefs about nature and its creator 
God." 2 8 The motivation impeUing (obligating) scientists is basically 
a religious one: "Take away Christian theology, and the scientist has 
no longer any motive for doing what inductive thought gives him per­
mission to do. If he goes on doing it at aU, that is only becausehe 
is blindly foUowing the conventions of the professional society to 
2 6 However, if this 'extrapoUtion' is as free as CoUingwood asserts it to be, it would 
seem that the astronomer Percival LoweU was fuUy justified in his inferring from the 
observed markings on the surface of the planet Mars that these markings represent 
canals constructed by inteUigent beings to irrigate the surface of the planet, in spite 
of the aknost universal opposition to this interpretation by equaUy competent observers. 
27 The Idea ofHistory, p. 255. 
2 8 Vaid. In Speculum Mentis, pp. 160-161, CoUingwood explains that the historical 
reason for the transition from exact science to observational science is the Christian 
reUgion. CoUingwood maintains that natural kws presuppose the concept of a creator-
God; see The Idea ofNature, pp. 8-9, 102-103; An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 217-227. 
See also Alan Donagan's commentary on this in his The Later Philosophy ofR. G. Colling­
wood, pp. 297-304. CoUingwood's attitude in this matter is probably influenced by 
what Kant says regarding the understanding of particular empirical laws in his third 
Critique (see ]. H. Bernard's translation of Kant's Critique of]udgement, London, Mac-
mfflan, 2nd revised edition 1931, p. 19) ". . . particuIar empirical laws . . . must be 
considered . . . as . . . if an Understanding (although not our Understanding) had 
furnished them to our cognitive faculties, so as to make possible a system of expe­
rience according to particular laws of nature." 

18 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
which he belongs." 2 9 The point Collingwood is here making is that 
any comptUsion to extrapolate from observed instances is not a logical 
compulsion, as is the compulsion to foUow through from the hypo­
theses in demonstration in exact sciences.30 He seems to mean by this 
that in demonstrative inference the mind imposes on itsetf conditions 
according to which it must think, and after having freely submitted 
to such hypotheses or assumptions it is no longer free as to how it 
wUl think or to what it wffl conclude, whereas, on the other hand, 
in inductive inference the mind retains autonomy over its thinking 
processes and thinks not as it is forced to think but only as it is jus­
tified or authorized or 'given a clearance' to thirik. 
With the development of historical thought in the nineteenth cen­
tury another logical crisis was felt simUar to the crisis felt in the 
sixteenth century with the rise of the observational sciences. History, 
as a mode of thinking with its own subject matter quite diverse from 
that of the exact or experimental sciences, gave rise to the felt need 
for the development of a mode of inference proper to itself. 
Before discussing the positive characteristics of historical inference, 
Collingwood discusses various counterfeits of the historical method 
and consequently of what he caUs 'bogus history.' 3 1 
The first type of bogus history considered by Collingwood is that 
which he caUs 'scissors-and-paste' history, in which "history [is] con­
structed by excerpting and combining the testimonies of different 
authorities." 3 2 In this type of history the historian is at the mercy of 
the testimony of others; in principle he cannot go beyond what others 
have told him in their records; his historical account wffl therefore 
be a selection made and compUed from various previous testimonies. 
The historian is passive with respect to his sources. "Scissors and paste 
history," Collingwood says, "was the only historical method known 
to the later Greco-Roman world or the Middle Ages." 3 3 
29 The ldea ofHistory, pp. 255-256. 
3 0 For further elaboration of Collingwood's views on inductive reasoning and 
experimental science, see Speculum Mentis, pp. 176-180. See also Chapter 4, below, 
pp. 75-82. 
3 1 See The ldea ofHistory, p. 256. This method of arriving at a statement as to what 
something is, derived through a consideration of what it is not, is essential to CoUing­
wood's method of procedure and is in effect an exercise in his proposed dialectical 
logic of question and answer, according to which questioning the criticising of im­
perfect forms reveals their deficiency and therefore brings to a knowledge of the more 
perfect form. The procedure of Speculum Mentis is also an example of CoUingwood's 
dialectical, questioning procedure. 
3 2 The ldea ofHistory, p. 257. 
33 The Idea ofHistory, p. 258. "CoUingwood, who does not hide his contempt for 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
19 
The second type of bogus history is what CoUingwood caUs 'criti­
cal history' "as it was worked out from the seventeenth century 
onwards, and officially acclaimed in the nineteenth as the apotheosis 
of the historical consciousness."34 Collingwood says that only when 
the post-mediaeval reform of natural science was completed in the 
seventeenth century did historians begin to feel the need also to set 
in order their own house. As a result two new movements in histor­
ical method began: one, "a systematic examination of authorities, in 
order to determine their relative credibUity, and in particular to estab­
lish principles according to which this determination shoüld be car­
ried out," 3 5 the other "a movement to broaden thebasis of history 
by making use of non-literary sources, such as coins and inscriptions 
and suchUke relics of antiquity which hitherto had been of interest 
not to historians but only to collectors of curiosities." 3 6 
The first of these movements resulted in documents being referred 
to as sources rather than authorities, indicating that they contain 
statements but without a commitment as to their value untU a sys­
tematic enquiry into the credibUity of the author had been made. 
'Critical History' recognizes that it is the historian who judges. To 
that extent the historian is not merely passive to his documents; he 
has to make the value-judgment as to the veracity of the statements 
contained therein in terms of the trustworthiness and competence of 
those who made and recorded such statements.37 
CoUingwood makes two observations about critical history: first, 
" i t is stUl only a form of scissors-and-paste history" 3 8 for, ultimately, 
after his evaluative work, the work of the historian wUl be restricted 
to repeating what he has critically extracted from the documents as 
trustworthy statements. The only improvement introduced by critical 
history, from this point of view, is that some form of test is made to 
decide whether a recorded statement is to be accepted or rejected. 
This having been done, the result is simply to "pass [it] as fit for the 
scrap-book" or to "consign [it] to the waste paper basket." 3 9 Thus, 
such a conception of 'pre-fabricated historical knowledge, needing only to be gulped 
down and then disgorged,' calls it 'history compiled with scissors and paste.' [I.H. 
246, 257.] The irony of his remark is fully deserved, for nothing could be less accurate 
than an analysis or enquiry that completely overlooks the actual proceedings of the 
historian's mind." H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning ofHistory, p. 56. 
3 4 The Idea of History, p. 259. 
35 Tbid., p. 258. 
3 6 tod. 
37 Md., p. 259. 
38 Md. 
39 tod. 

20 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
the final resmt of the historian's work gives us no more than previous­
ly made statements which are accepted or rejected. The point is that 
for aU his critical activity the critical historian is stUl tied in principle to 
ready made statements of others; there are no statements in his histor­
ical account which are properly his own made on his own authority. 
The second point is that critical history had akeady (in the 
nineteenth century) " i n principle, been superseded by something very 
different." 4 0 
CoUingwood says that many nineteenth century historians and 
even some eighteenth century historians recognized 'as a com­
monplace' that " i f in some source you found a statement which for 
some reason could not be accepted as literally true, you must not on 
that account reject it as worthless. It might be a way, perhaps a weU 
estabUshed way according to the custom of the time when it is written, 
of saying something which you, through ignorance of that custom, 
did not recognize its meaning." 4 1 
Collingwood credits Vico as being the first to point this out at the 
beginning of the eighteenth century. 4 2 According to Vico, "the impor­
tant question about any statement contained in a source is not whether 
it is true or false, but what it means."43 " A n d to ask," CoUingwood 
continues, "what it means is to step right outside the world of scissors-
and-paste history into a world where history is not written by copy­
ing out the testimony of the best sources, but by coming to your own 
conclusions."** 
Thus the movement of critical history, notwithstanding that it was 
unable to transcend successfully the limitations of scissors-and-paste 
history, yet in principle transcends it inasmuch as it introduces the 
notion that the sources are questionable. 4 5 
№Ud. 
4 1 Md., p. 259. H.-I. Marrou (The Meaning ofHistory, p. 108) provides an illustra­
tion of what CoUingwood means here: "When I was a young man I wrote a whole 
chapter trying to show that 5aint Augustine was unable to write weU. This judgment 
merely revealed my incompetence as a young barbarian, both ignorant and presump­
tuous. When I was a little better informed about classical rhetoric (that subtle and 
refined technique of which St. Augustine was an incomparable master) I reaUzed that 
what I had regarded as decadent unskUfuIness was reaUy the refinement of an art 
so perfectly sure of itsetf that it avoided quick impressions and was not reluctant to 
take the risk of deformed expression. With greater discernment I gradually perceived 
the vain pride of up-to-dateness, that pride of the barbarian who scorns whatever 
he does not know—and I understood a little better." 
4 2 See The ldea of History, p. 259. 
43 Void., p. 260, emphasis added. 
4 4 Ibid. Emphasis added. 
4 5 See ibid., pp. 260, 258, 259. 

The Need for a New Logic of (Question and Answer 
21 
The other movement which Collingwood says gave new life to 
history is the archaeological movement which "was totally hostile to 
the principles of scissors-and-paste history, and cotüd have arisen only 
when those principles were moribund." 4 6 CoUingwood explains the 
transcendence of scissors and paste methods as foUows: 
No very profound knowledge of coins and inscriptions is needed 
in order to realize that the assertions they make are by no means 
uniformly trustworthy, and indeed are to be judged more as pro­
paganda than as statements of fact. Yet this gives them an histor­
ical value of their own; for propaganda, too, has a history.47 
The next instance of 'bogus history' is that attempt found mainly 
in the nineteenth century, although also spffling over into the twen­
tieth, to 'raise history to the rank of a science' modeUed after the 
methods of the observational sciences. Reacting against the mere trans­
shipment of ready-made information from one mind into another 
which characterized aU forms of scissors-and-paste history, and feel­
ing that history might be something more than this, the analogy of 
natural sciences came to the aid of historians and suggested what this 
'something more' might be. Just as natural science since Bacon was 
commonly seen to begin by coUecting facts, then going on to construct 
theories, to extrapolate the discernible patterns in the abready coUected 
facts, so the historians sought to "put together aU the facts that are 
known to historians, look for patterns in them, and then extrapolate 
these patterns into a theory of universal history." 4 8 
Collingwood says that the acceptance of any "of these pigeon­
holing schemes . . . as a means for discovering historical truths not 
ascertainable by the interpretation of evidence" was due not to their 
intrinsic value but because it became an orthodoxy among what was 
in fact though not necessarily in name a reUgious community, such 
as was the case to some extent by Comtism and to a much greater 
extent by Marxism. Such historical schemes "proved to have an 
important magical value, as providing a focus for emotions and in con­
sequence an incentive to action." 4 9 
4 4 Orid., p. 260. 
"Md. 
4 8 Ш., 
pp. 264-265. 
49 Tbid., pp. 265-266. For CoUingwood's understanding of magic as a ritual pro­
cedure to evoke certain kinds of emotive response, see hisPrincipfes ofArt, pp. 57-77, 
especiaUy pp. 65-69. 

22 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
C. Positive Description of Historical Inference 
"The hope that scissors-and-paste history wotdd one day be re­
placed by a new kind of history that shotdd be genuinely scientific" 
without attempting to mimic the observational sciences "was a well 
grounded hope, which," says CoUingwood, "has in fact been real­
ized." 5 0 This new kind of history also fuKUled the historian's hope 
for a kind of history which "would enable the historian to know things 
that his authorities could not or would not teU h i m " : 5 1 that is, the 
hope for a history whose method would enable the historian to make 
genuine discoveries and so progress in historical knowledge beyond 
what his authorities could teU him. 
CoUingwood describes the method of reasoning proper to historical 
inference by comparing it to the procedures of crime detection. "The 
methods of criminal detection are not at every point identical with 
those of scientific history . . . " ; 5 2 " . . . in criminal detection probabU-
ity is required, of a degree sufficient for the conduct of daUy life, 
whereas in history we demand certainty. Apart from that, the parallel 
is complete." 5 3 Whereas the rules of evidence recognized in courts 
of law are affected by pragmatic needs so that "a jury has to content 
itseU with something less than scientific (historical) proof, namely with 
that degree of assurance or belief which would satisfy it in any of the 
practical affairs of daUy life." 5 4 On the other hand "the historian is 
under no obligation to make up his mind within any stated time. 
Nothing matters to him except that his decision, when he reaches it, 
shall be right: which means, for him, that it shallfollow inevitablyfrom the 
evidence."55 Thus, the manner of inferring in crime detection and in 
history is exactly the same, except that in court proceedings in 
estabUshing guUt there are ab extra restrictions on the manner of usage 
of evidence and on what may be admitted as evidence. 
To Ulustrate this distinctive mode of reasoning, Collingwood 
5 0 The Idea of History, p. 266. 
sim. 
5 2 Tbid., p. 268. 
5 3 Void., p. 270. 
5 4 Md., p. 268. 
55 Jbid., italics added. Charles Rescher and Carey B. Joynt have made a close analysis 
of "Evidence in History and in the Law," The Journal ofPhilosophy, LVI, 1959, pp. 
561-578. They discuss, among other things, restrictions courts put on admissible evi­
dence for the safeguarding of the rights of the accused; such a safeguard is not needed 
in the historian's handling of evidence; he looks merely to logical requirements of 
inference and need not have an eye to safeguarding rights. 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
23 
invents "a fable" of crime detection: "Who kiUed John Doe?" 5 6 What 
is distinctive about the mode of reasoning is that a conclusion is reached 
as to who is the murderer by a process ofordered questioning. The facts 
and investigation are as follows: Early one Sunday morning John Doe 
was found lying across his desk with a dagger through his back. 5 7 
There was a public outcry that the murderer be brought to justice; 
the poHce were hopeful of succeeding, though the only evidence they 
had was the little fresh green paint on the knife handle similar to that 
on the iron gate between the (neighboring) rector's and the murdered 
man's gardens. 
No one entertained the possibiHty that a witness would enter a 
police station and denounce the murderer, nor that the murderer 
would denounce himsetf (the aUusion is to the scissors-and-paste his­
torian's passive dependence on witnesses' testimony presupposed). 
When accusers and self-denouncers did in fact present themselves, 
elementary common sense was enough to discredit their testimony: 
an elderly neighborly spinster daiming that she kffled John Doe hersetf 
because he attempted to violate her; the local viUage poacher who said 
that he saw the squire's gamekeeper cUmbing into John Doe's study 
through the window. 5 8 Then, the rector's daughter eventuaUy, in great 
agitation, made the statement that she did it hersetf; upon which the 
village constable merely rang the local inspector reminding him that 
the girl's fiance, Richard Roe, was a medical student, presumably 
knowing well where to find a man's heart, and that he had spent the 
night at the rectory within a stone's throw from the murdered man's 
house. Upon subsequent questioning, the rectory parlormaid told the 
Inspector that Richard Roe's shoes were very wet that morning (there 
had been a heavy rainstorm between midnight and 1:00 A . M . that 
night). Questioned, Roe admitted going out, but refused to say where 
and why. 5 9 
5 6 See The Idea ofHistory, pp. 266-268, 270-273. H.-I. Marrou (The Meaning ofHis­
tory, p. 140) is unjustly unkind to CoUingwood when he refers to CoUingwood's crime-
detection illustration as "history of a very elementary kind, almost crude—because 
the event to be reconstituted (in this instance, a dagger stab) is so simple factuaUy, 
easüy recognizable and 'understandable' "; he forgets that the work of an example 
is to iUustrate, not to prove anything, and that an example is a good one accorcting 
as it weU or ill does its work of iUustrating or manifesting the point, and in doing 
this simpUcity is essential and crudity may weU be an advantage. See also Robin W. 
Winks, editor, The Historian as Detective, New York, Harper and Row, 1968, pp. 39-60. 
5 7 See The ldea ofHistory, p. 266. 
5 8 See MA., p. 266. 
5 9 See Md., p. 270. 

24 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The questioning procedure, which resulted in the disclosure of 
the murderer, takes place as follows: 
The viUage constable, (not exceptionaUy bright, but nevertheless) 
a scientific thinker (for which he need not be clever; aU he needs is 
merely to know how to do his job, that is, to know what questions 
to ask), 6 0 starts with the rector's daughter's statement that she kffled 
John Doe. He begins by using the methods of 'critical history,' tortur­
ing (that is, 'putting to the question') not her body but her statement 
that she kUled John Doe. He rejects her story, because whoever did 
the murder requires greater strength than she has together with some 
knowledge of anatomy; she is known not to have attended ambulance 
classes. 
With the rejection of her statement as untrue, the critical histor­
ian has no further interest in it; but it is precisely there that the scien­
tific historian begins to be interested. He subjects the fact that she made 
the statement to tests for reactions; and he does this by subjecting it 
to questions. Why does she lie thus? Because she is shielding some­
one? Who? Her father? . . . or her young man? Certainly not her father 
(after aU, the rector!); therefore her young man. Are her suspicions 
weU founded? Possibly; he was there at the time; he is strong enough; 
as a medical student he knows enough anatomy. 
Being not as thorough in his job as a more experienced man, the 
vUlage constable stops his questioning there. In doing so, his mistake 
was that he lost sight of the original question 'Who kUled John Doe?,' 
stopping short at the question 'Whom does this girl suspect?'61 In­
spector Jenkins, not necessarily a more clever man, but one who has 
learned his job more thoroughly, goes about the interrogation as fol­
lows: Why does the rector's daughter suspect Richard Roe? Most likely 
she knows that he was involved in something queer which happened 
at the rectory that night; he was out in the storm, which fact alone 
would be sufficient to arouse the girl's suspicions. Did he kUl John 
Doe? If so, when? After the thunderstorm broke? . . . or before? Not 
before; his tracks go both ways in the mud of the rectory garden path; 
they begin a few yards from the garden door; going away from the 
house, so that is where he was, and the direction in which he was 
going when the downpour began. Did he carry mud into John Doe's 
study? No; none there. Did he take off his shoes before entering the 
study? Impossible. What position was John Doe in when he was 
6 0 See ibid. 
6 1 See ibid., p. 271. 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
25 
stabbed? He cotdd only have been leaning right forward, either asleep 
or awake; if asleep, the murderer need only step forward and plunge 
in the dagger; if awake, only a little more caution needed. So, in either 
case, no time for removing shoes before enteringthe study. So, absence 
of mud in the study lets Richard Roe out as murderer. 
But, then, why did he go out into the garden? Something must 
have been going on out there; something queer that we do not yet 
know about. What could it have been? H the murderer came from the 
rectory (the paint on the dagger like the fresh paint on the garden 
fence suggests hß did), and if Richard Roe saw him from his window 
(the murderer got to John Doe's house before the rain fell, whereas 
Richard was caught in it ten yards from the garden door) what would 
foUow? He probably returned to the rectory afterwards. But no tracks; 
why? Because he was sufficiently famUiar with the garden, and the 
path, to stay on the grass aU the way, even in the darkness. U so, 
he knew the rectory very weU and spent the night there. 
Was it the rector himseU?62 
Why does Richard refuse to say why he went into the garden? 
It can only be to shield someone from trouble, and almost certainly 
trouble connected with the murder. Not himself, so who else? Might 
it be the rector? tf so, how would the rector have done it? Quite easUy: 
go out about midnight in tennis shoes and gloves; no gravel on the 
rectory paths to make noise whUe waUcing; reach the iron gate; does 
he know there is wet paint on it? Probably not, since it was painted 
only after tea. So he grabs it, gets paint on the glove, probably on 
the jacket too. Then he waUcs on the grass to Doe's study window. 
Doe is leaning forward in his chair, maybe asleep. No difficulty for 
a good tennis player to place his left foot inside the study window, 
right foot to the right, grab the nearby dagger-Uke instrument, left 
foot forward, then plunge it in. 
What was John Doe doing at his desk? There was nothing on it 
when the murder was discovered. Does a man sit at an empty desk? 
There must have been something there. What was it? 
What do we know about Doe from Scotland Yard records? He is 
a blackmaUer. Was he blackmaUing the rector? . . . and perhaps gloat­
ing over the letters, or whatever they were, he had? Did the rector 
not possibly find him asleep on top of them? 
But this line of questioning is taking us away from our main con­
cern, namely, 'Who kUled John Doe?,' so let us return to it. Given 
6 2 See ibid., p. 272. 

26 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
that the rector is in there, in Doe's study, what does he do to get out? 
It is now raining heavily; he has to go back through it; more paint 
picked up off the gate; waUdng on the grass avoids bringing mud into 
the house. Inside, he is aU soaked, and with paint on his gloves also. 
He wipes any paint off the door-knob and locks the door. He puts 
the letters (or whatever it was that he removed from Doe's study desk) 
and the stained gloves in the hot-water furnace; the ashes may stiU 
be in the dustbin. He puts aU clothes in the bathroom cupboard (they 
wffl be dry in the morning), but the jacket wUl be hopelessly out of 
shape when dry; if it has paint on it nothing else to do but destroy 
it (a difficult task in a house overrun with women). И no paint on it, 
he could quietly give it to a poor man. 6 3 
But is this story true or not? Two questions have to be answered 
to decide: first, can the ashes of the gloves, and their metal buttons^ 
be found? This would confirm the story; and finding a lot of writing-
paper ash would confirm the blackmail aspect also. Second, where 
is that jacket? И there is the tiniest speck of John Doe's paint on it 
the case is closed. 
In the rectory dustbin there were a lot of ashes, mostly from writing 
paper, but also including some from leather, probably from a pair of 
gloves. Among the ashes were also found metal buttons bearing the 
name of a famous Oxford glove-maker. The jacket, which the rector 
gave to a deserving parishioner on Monday morning, had John Doe's 
paint on the right cuff, and was hopelessly out of shape by a recent 
wetting. (The Detective-Inspector was later severely reprimanded for 
permitting the rector to see the direction in which his enquiries were 
leading him, thus giving the rector the opportunity to evade custody 
by suicide). 6 4 
The papers in front of John Doe at the time of the murder bore 
the address John Doe, Esq. in the rector's wife's handwriting. Doe 
had been blackmaUing the rector on the ground that the rector's 
daughter was born six months after the marriage; only then did the 
rector know who his wife's seducer was, and who was the father of 
his supposed daughter. 6 5 
Having presented this Ulustration of the process of question­
ing by his analysis of the John Doe murder case fable, CoUingwood 
then proceeds to emphasise two points about this process which, he 
6 3 See The Idea of History, pp. 272-273; 
6 4 See ibid., p. 268. 
6 5 See ibid., p. 267. 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
27 
says, "is the dominant factor in history, as it is in aU scientific 
w o r k . " 6 6 
The first point: Every step in the argument (i.e., inference; remem­
bering that Collingwood has said that it is neither inductive nor de­
ductive) depends on asking a question. 
The question is the charge of gas, exploded in the cylinder head, 
which is the motive force of every piston-stroke. But the metaphor 
is not adequate, because each new piston-stroke is produced not 
by exploding another charge of the same old mixture but by explod­
ing a charge of a new kind. No one with any grasp of method will 
go on asking the same question aU the time, 'Who killed John Doe?' 
He asks a new question every time. And it is not enough to cover 
the ground by having a catalogue of aU the questions that have been 
asked, and asking every one of them sooner or later; they must be 
asked in the right order.67 
CoUingwood here refers to "Descartes, one of the three great 
masters of the Logic of Questioning (the other two being Socrates and 
Bacon)" 6 8 as having insisted on this cardinal point of ordered in-
66 The Idea ofHistory, p. 273. Jacques Barzun's The Delights ofDetection (New York, 
Criterion Books, 1961) presents a collection of detective stories intended to highUght 
the logical and inteUectual element in crime detection which gives to it its popular 
fascination. "The Nine-Mile Walk," by Harry Kemelman, pp. 199-208 of Barzun's 
collection, could weU substitute for CoUingwood's Ulustration above. 
67 The Idea of History, p. 273. 
68 Tbid. See also The New Leviathan, London, Oxford University Press, 1942, p. 2, 
paragraph 1.19: "We of the twentieth century hold ourselves bound to the tradition 
in these matters laid down by Bacon and Descartes in the seventeenth: to speak not 
merely 'to the subject' but 'to the point'; to divide our subject into parts, to arrange 
the parts in such an order that what is said about each prepares the way for what 
is said in the next; and to say about each not aU we know but only what need be 
said for the sake of that preparation." This commitment echoes Descartes' summary 
of his Regulae as this appears in his Discourse on Method, Pt. 2 (p. 92 of Vol. 1 of 
the Haldane-Ross edition of Descartes' PhUosophical Works, ignoring paragraph breaks): 
" . . . the four [rules] which I shaU state [to be] quite sufficient, provided that I adhered 
to a firm and constant resolve never on any single occasion to faü in their observance. 
The first of these was to accept nothing as true which I did not clearly recognise to 
be so[the critical questioning character]: that is to say, carefully to avoid precipita­
tion and prejudice in judgments, and to accept in them nothing more than what was 
presented to my mind so clearly and distinctly that I could have no occasion to doubt 
it. The second was to divide up each of the difficulties [read questions for difficulties 
for CoUingwood's position] which I examined into as many parts as possible, and 
as seemed requisite in order that it might be resolved in the best manner possible. 
The third was to carry on my reflections in due order, commencing with objects 
that were the most simple and easy to understand, in order to rise little by little, or 
by degrees, to knowledge of the most complex, assuming an order, even if a fictitious 
one, among those which do not foUow a natural sequence relatively to one another 
[for reflections and objects, read questioning and questions for CoUingwood's posi­
tion; also Descartes' allowance of a fictitious order aUgns with CoUingwood's right 

28 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
terrogation in scientific method, which, CoUingwood repeats, has so 
far been ignored by modern works of logic. He accuses modern logi­
cians of conspiring "to pretend that a scientist's business is to 'make 
judgments', or 'assert propositions', or 'apprehend facts', and also 
to 'assert' or 'apprehend' the relations between them," which sug­
gests that "they have no experience whatever of scientific thinking, 
although false answer which aUows the questioning process to get ahead]. The test 
was in aU cases to make enumerations so complete and reviews so general that I should 
be certain of having omitted nothing [for CoUingwood the seried questioning is seen 
as an ordered body of knowledge in retrospect, when aU the questions have been 
asked and answered in their due order]." Further basis in Descartes' works for Col-
Ungwood's acknowledgement of him as an authority on questioning may be found 
in the last part of Rule 12 of the Regulae (p. 48 of Haldane-Ross edition, Vol. 1) in 
which Descartes gives the projected plan of this (uncompleted) work. The first (and 
completed) twelve rules concern simple propositions. "But as to 'questions' some 
of them can be perfectly weU comprehended, even though we are ignorant of their 
solution; these we shaU treat by themselves in the next twelve rules. FinaUy there 
are others [i.e., other questions] whose meaning is not quite clear, and these we reserve 
for the last twelve [rules]." Again in regard to questions @Ude 13; see p. 52, Vol. 1 
of the Haldane-Ross edition of Descartes' works) Descartes says: "However, though, 
in every 'question' something must be unknown otherwise there is no need to raise 
it, we should nevertheless so define this unknown element by means of specific con­
ditions that we shaU be determined towards the investigation of one thing rather than 
another." Descartes then proceeds to detail how the specific conditions of the unknown 
element are to be defined, and to warn of the pitfaUs to be avoided in doing this. 
CoUingwood's reference to Bacon as one of the three masters in questioning 
doubtless refers to the rules of induction (later perfected by J.S. MiU) of his new 
organon, intended to displace the AristoteUan logic as the genuine method of the new 
science of the Renaissance. The negative moment, the expurgation of the mind of 
its four idok, paraUels Descartes' methodic doubt as the preUminary step to the positive 
constructive work. The three tables, and the fourth step, the process of exclusion, 
are the rules according to which nature is to be 'put to the question' for the purpose 
of controUing nature and its forces. Bacon was a lawyer by profession and it could 
be asked how far he conceived the scientific questioning of nature in terms of the 
lawyer's cross-exarnining of a recalcitrant witness. The role of separating positive and 
negative instances, of recognizing alternatives, is central both to the Baconian method 
and to CoUingwood's notion of questioning (see Speculum Mentis, p. 78; The New 
Leviathan, p. 74, paragraph 11.ΎΣ). Negative instances assume a positive value in dialec­
tical thought such as CoUingwood's. See Bernard Bosanquet, The Essentials of Logic 
(London, MacmiUan, 1897), ch. 8, for the role of negation in thought, especiaUy pp. 
136 et seq., for the defining function of the negative, and for the highly positive value 
of the negative moment of the crucial experiment (just when x ceases, just then y 
begins), pp. 133-135. For a good treatment of the positive function of negation in dialec­
tical thinking, see Otis Lee, "Dialectic and Negation," The Review ofMetaphysics, I 
(1947), pp. 3-23. 
The inclusion of Socrates as one of the masters of questioning needs no explain­
ing. But it is surprising that CoUingwood omits reference to Aristotle's treatment of 
the order of Scientific Interrogation in his Posterior Analytics, Bk. 2, Chapters 1 and 
2 (see L.-M. R^gis, Epistemology, New York, MacmiUan, 1959, pp. 128-137, for an ex­
position of the AristoteUan scientific interrogation). This omission is doubly inexcusable 
in CoUingwood's writing, not only as a phflosopher but as one insisting on the basic 
requirement of historical accuracy in phUosophy. See below, Chapter 8, pp. 318 et seq. 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
29 
and wish to pahn off, as an account of science, an account of their 
own haphazard, unsystematic consciousness."69 
The second point to be noted about this procedure is that "these 
questions are not put to one man by another man, in the hope that 
the second man will enHghten the first man's ignorance by answer­
ing them. They are put, like aU scientific questions, to the scientist 
by himseU." 7 0 CoUingwood says that this is Plato's designation of the 
Socratic idea of thought, defined as 'the dialogue of the soul with itsetf,' 
and adds that the Platonic context makes it clear that the dialogue 
referred to was a process of question and answer. When Socrates 
taught his pupUs by asking them questions he was teaching them how 
to ask questions of themselves and showing them how the most 
obscure subjects can be amazingly Uluminated by asking onesetf in-
telUgent questions about them instead of simply gaping at them after 
the fashion of modern anti-scientific epistemologists who advocate 
that our minds should be made 'a perfect blank' so as to 'apprehend 
the facts.' The allusion is to the positivistic passive approach of the 
mind to "ready-made facts." 7 1 
D. The Autonomy Proper to History as a Science: 
The Historian as His Own Authority 
CoUingwood has pointed out that 'scissors-and-paste' history, 
even in its most refined form as critical history, depends on the 
statements of others, that is, that what has not been said by someone 
previously can never be said by the historian. Witnesses are required, 
and the critical work is to apply criteria to determine whether their 
ready-made statements are to be accepted as trustworthy or rejected 
as untrustworthy. So, at its best, 'scissors-and-paste' history is merely 
a restatement of the statements of others; there being no room for 
statements arising from the historian's own initiative, that is, for 
statements that would be authenticaUy his own. 
On the contrary, scientific history contains no ready-made state­
ments at aU. Confronted with the ready-made statement of an author­
ity, the scientific historian does not ask himsetf 'Is his statement true 
or false?', and consequently 'ShaU I incorporate it into my historical 
account of this or that subject, or not?' The question he asks himself 
is 'What does it mean that this statement is made?' This is not the 
69 The Idea ofHistory, pp. 273-274. 
70 Md., p. 274. 
7 1 See ibid. 

30 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
same as the question 'What does the one who made the statement 
mean by making it?', although this latter question wffl not be with­
out relevance to the inquiry. When he asks, 'What does it mean that 
so-and-so makes this statement?', he is asking, 'What light is thrown 
on the subject in which I am interested by the fact that this person 
made this statement, meaning by it what he did mean?' This is equi­
valent to saying that the scientific historian is interested in statements 
that are made, not precisely as they are statements, but precisely as 
they are evidence. The scientific historian thus takes ready-made 
statements not as true or false accounts of what has happened but 
"as other facts which, if he knows the right questions to ask about 
them, may throw light on those facts." 7 2 
Thus, whereas the explanation of facts in the observational and 
experimental sciences, by the process of inductive inference, in terms 
of some trans-factual (universal, ideal) order of which the explained 
facts are more or less irrelevant instances, the explanation of facts in 
historical reasoning is by means of other facts which are uncovered 
by means of the question and answer process, which discloses these 
other facts precisely as they are the explanation of the facts 'under 
question.' History as a science does not merely chronologicaUy 
catalogue facts (that is, tell that they happened and when and where 
they happened) but must explain them, that is, teU why they hap­
pened. Thus, the historian, in deaUng with facts, deals with other facts 
as their explanation. And the procedure of going from facts to other 
facts as their explanation is the work of historical inference. History 
has to be able to infer if it is to merit the title of scientific, and to infer 
is to disclose the fact or facts which explain the fact with which we 
are concerned. 
Thus, applying this to the John Doe murder fable, the rector's 
daughter makes the statement that she kUled John Doe. The critical 
historian discards the statement when he knows that it is false. But 
the scientific historian begins his proper work precisely where he stops 
considering the statement as a true or fake account of what the rector's 
daughter did, and begins treating it as a fact that she did make that 
statement (whether true or false), which fact is vouched for on his 
own authority, as 'ear-witness', and which he may be able to use to 
throw light on 'Who kiUed John Doe?' It is a fact useful to him because 
he knows what questions to ask about it, beginning with the ques­
tion 'Why does she teU this story?' It is the question he puts to it 
72 Md., p. 275. 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
31 
that turns it into evidence, that is, makes it able to murrrinate the point 
of interest. A 'scissors-and-paste' historian is interested only in the 
content of the statement, that is, 'what is said' in the statement. The 
scientific historian is interested in the fact that the statement is made, 
that is, he regards it as a fact in its own right caUing for explanation, 
which explanation can be found by questioning that fact correctly. 
When a historian reads, or hears a statement being made, he is 
simply receptive of what is said, and in no way the author of it. But 
when he makes the statement to himsetf that ' I am now reading (or 
hearing) a statement to such and such effect' he is himseH the author 
of that statement, making it on his own authority. This autonomous 
statement is the point of departure for the scientific historian. The evi­
dence from which the constable infers that the rector's daughter 
suspects Richard Roe is not her statement that she killed John Doe 
but his own statement that 'the rector's daughter tells me that she 
killed John Doe.' 7 3 
Collingwood says that not only does the historian get conclusions 
from his own autonomous statements of the fact that statements have 
been made but also that he can get conclusions even when no state­
ments at aU are made to him. This is because, being autonomous, he 
is not dependent on ready-made statements; the premisses from which 
he argues are his own autonomous statements, and it is not neces­
sary that his own autonomous statements be themselves statements 
about other statements. Thus, the premisses from whichthe Detec­
tive Inspector argued to conclude to Richard Roe's innocence were 
aU premisses which consisted of the Detective Inspector's own state­
ments, autonomous statements, resting on no authority but his own, 
not one of them being a statement about statements made by anyone 
else. The essential points in his inferential argumentation were as 
follows: First, Richard Roe got his shoes muddied whUe going away 
from the rectory, second, no mud was found in John Doe's study, 
and third, the circumstances were such as not to have aUowed him 
to stop to clean or to remove his shoes. Each of these three points 
is itsetf the conclusion of an inference, and the statements which made 
these points evident were no more statements about other people's 
statements than are the three points themselves. 
Furthermore, the ultimate case against the rector did not depend 
upon the Detective Inspector's statements about statements made by 
other persons, but depended solely upon the presence of certain 
7 3 See ibid., pp. 275-276. 

32 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
objects in a certain dustbin, and a smear of paint on the cuff of a clerical­
ly styled jacket shrunk by wetting. AU these facts, from which it was 
inferred that the rector killed John Doe, were vouched for, or author­
ized by, his own observations. 7 4 
CoUingwood then corrects a possible misunderstanding. It is not 
being denied that ready-made statements are useful to the scientific 
historian, but only that he depends on such statements. This settles 
the controversy between those who maintain that history is ultimately 
dependent on written sources and those who maintain that it can be 
constructed from unwritten sources. He adds that historians schooled 
to regard history as a scissors-and-paste affair began timidly to see 
the possibUity of something quite different. 7 5 
E. Evidence Which Is the Basis of Scientific History 
Is Always in Relation to a Definite Question 
In scientific history, sources are valuable only inasmuch as they 
can be made to function as evidence, "И history means scientific 
history, for 'source' we must read 'evidence'." 7 6 But it is not easy 
to say exactly what evidence is. "When we try to define 'evidence' 
in the same spirit in which we defined 'sources,' we find it very dif-
ficult." 7 7 There seems to be no a priori criterion to decide whether, 
say, a certain book wUl or wUl not provide evidence about a given 
subject; indeed there is no reason why evidence should be restricted 
to books or written sources. CoUingwood says that indexes and bibUo-
graphies of sources are records not of evidence but of previous dis­
cussion on a topic which the historian may or may not take as a start­
ing point for his own investigations. If they do function as evidence 
this wiU derive from what the historian himsetf does in regard to them, 
or, more exactly, what, by reason of his skUl in questioning them, 
he can make them do for him as regards Uluminating a given subject. 
In the John Doe fable there is only one obvious characteristic com­
mon to aU the items of evidence used by the Detective-Inspector in 
his investigations: they are all things which he observed by himself. But, 
if we ask what kind of things they are, it is not easy to give the answer. 
They include such things as the existence of certain footprints in cer­
tain mud, their number, position, direction, their resemblance to 
prints produced by a certain pair of shoes and the absence of any 
7 4 See ibid., p. 276; 280. 
7 5 See ibid., pp. 276-280. 
76 Md., p. 279. 
77 Tbid. 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
33 
others, the absence of mud on the floor of a certain room, the posi­
tion of a dead body, the position of a dagger in its back, the shape 
of the chair in which the body was sitting, and so on; a most variegated 
coUection. Thus, it can be safely said, says Collingwood, that no one 
could possibly know what could or could not find a place in that list 
"until he had got aU his questions not only formulated but an­
swered." 7 8 That is, the list of items constituting the evidence is a 
posteriori or post factum in relation to the process of interrogation, 
inasmuch as it is the very process of interrogation which makes such 
items function as evidence; they are not evidence in themselves but 
only in relation to the process of inquiry, and to the manner in which 
that inquiry makes use of them. " I n scientific history anything is 
evidence which is used as evidence, and no one can know what is 
going to be useful as evidence untU he has had occasion to use i t . " 7 9 
According to 'scissors-and-paste' history, aU extant statements 
about a given subject constitute potential evidence, and actual evi­
dence is that selection of those statements which the historian decides, 
after critical inquiry as to trustworthiness, etc., to incorporate into his 
account. But, " i n scientific history the idea of potential evidence dis­
appears; or, if we like to put the same fact in these other words, every­
thing in the world is potential evidence for any subject whatever." 8 0 
The mentaUty of the 'scissors-and-paste' historian is to think that before 
one can know which facts are actually to be of service one needs to 
have akeady some inventory of facts which might possibly be of 
service. But one who understands the nature of scientific thinking, 
whether historical or not, wUl not regard this as a difficulty. For when 
a historian asks a question he akeady has some provisional idea of 
what he wants as evidence. 
. . . every time the historian asks a question, he asks it because 
he thinks he can answer it; that is to say, he has already in his mind 
a preliminary and tentative idea of the evidence he wiU be able to * 
use. Not a definite idea about potential evidence, but an indefinite 
idea about actual evidence.81 
Collingwood adds that "to ask questions which you see no prospect 
of answering is the fundamental sin in science." 8 2 He says further 
that "question and evidence, in history, are correlative. Anything is 
78 Vaid., p. 280. 
79 
Md. 
№tod. 
8 1 Brid., p. 281. 
8 2 Jbid. 

34 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
evidence which enables you to answer your question—ihe question you are 
asking n o w . " 8 3 Note that CoUingwood is here saying that the actual 
criterion as to whether something is evidence or not is its abUity to 
enable you to answer your question. A question which you think you 
wUl, now or later, have evidence for answering is a sensible ques­
tion, the only type of question a scientificaUy competent man should 
ask. If you think you have the evidence here and now the question 
is an actual one, such as 'What position was John Doe in when he 
was stabbed?' But if you think you wUl have it sooner or later, the 
question is a deferred question, such as 'Who kUled John Doe?' 
FoUowing through on the analogy of historicalinquiry with crime 
detection, CoUingwood has severe criticism for the Sherlock Holmes 
approach of 'fact grubbing,' "the 'human blood-hound' who crawls 
about the floor trying to collect everything, no matter what, which 
might conceivably turn out to be a clue." 8 4 On the other hand, he 
adrnires Monsieur Hercule Poirot who insists that "the secret of detec­
tion was to use what . . . he called 'the Uttle grey cells.' " 8 5 Poirot 
means that "you can't coUect your evidence before you begin thinking 
. . . because thinking means asking questions (logicians please note), 
and nothing is evidence except in relation to some definite question." 8 6 
According to CoUingwood, the difference between Poirot and 
Holmes reflects the changed mentality in regard to the understand­
ing of historical method in the last forty years (writing in 1939), and 
the revolutionary principles which overturned 'scissors-and-paste' 
history had by now become common property. 8 7 
F. Summary and Comment on the Foregoing 
CoUingwood has insisted on the scientific character of history, by 
which he means that it is an organized body of knowledge, that is, 
that one thing foUows inferentially from another, that facts are con­
nected with other facts in a serial order of explaining to explained, 
and that the explaining fact is inferred from the fact to be explained 
by a process of reasoning which consists in a seried order of ques­
tions and answers. 8 8 
83 Brid. Emphasis added. 
8 4 Md. 
85 Bid. 
8 6 mid. 
87 mid., p. 282. 
8 8 H.-I. Marrou in The Meaning ofHistory, p. 63, likewise speaks of the "logical 
priority of the 'question' which the historian poses in the presence of the documents." 
He says that 'to lay hold of [the mysterious Past] the historian must encompass it 

The Need for a New Logic of Question and Answer 
35 
In this process of serial questioning, the mind actively confronts 
a subject or topic, not simply to 'gape' at it and passively receive im­
pressions from it or merely to 'apprehend' what is there to apprehend 
(against Positivism), but in the way in which a crime detective, or judge 
and jury, confronts a crime suspect, that is, in a questioning manner, 
by 'putting him to the question,' and by such activity of questioning 
to draw from him the evidence whereby the fact is explained. Active 
questioning turns the statements made by others, and even physical 
objects, into evidence whereby a question is answered and a fact ex­
plained. This question-answer type of inference, according to CoUing­
wood, differs from the traditionaUy recognized forms of induction and 
deduction. Deduction proceeds from a trans-factual, hypothetical prin­
ciple and concludes to the implications contained in the hypothesis; 
the principle, the process and the conclusion are therefore only inci­
dentally referred to fact if they are at aU referred to fact. Induction 
begins from fact but proceeds to find the explanation of the fact in 
a trans-factual, universal, abstract entity, of which the fact is merely 
iUustrative. But in historical inference, facts are inferentiaUy explained 
by other equally factual things or events. The explanation of or answer 
to the question 'Who kUled John Doe?' is the factual implementation 
of the rector's intention to rid himseU" of a troublesome blackmaUer 
together with aU the factual detaUs of such implementation. 
There seems to be no doubt that Collingwood recognizes an as 
yet undeveloped logic of question and answer proper to historical 
inquiry. Louis O. Mink says that Collingwood's "logic of question 
and answer is not a substitute for propositional logic but rather a theory 
of the process of inquiry; its locus is, so to speak, not logic but reflec­
tion on logic." 8 9 This statement, though dUficult to deny, seems at 
odds with Collingwood's obvious reprimand to thetextbook logicians 
for neglecting this special mode of inference. 
tightly within a network of questions . . . compelling it to reveal itsetf frankly. . . . 
Logically, the process of the elaboration of history is set in motion not by the exis­
tence of documents but by an initial step, the 'posed question' inscribed in the choice, 
deliberation and conception of the subject." 
89 Mind, History, and Dialectic, Btoomington, Indiana University Press, 1969, p. 123. 


CHAPTER T W O 
Collingwood's Identification of 
Knowledge with Question and Answer 
In his Autobiography,1 pubUshed in 1939, CoUingwood treats exten­
sively of his theory of questioning, and of his position that knowledge 
is essentially a matter of question and answer. He shows the funda­
mental character of the theory of questioning in his thought and gives 
an account of the genesis and evolution of his thought on the matter. 
A. Collingwood's Question and Answer Theory of Knowledge 
Rooted in His Opposition to the Oxford Realists 
CoUingwood's initiation into phUosophy was through the lectures 
and tutorship of his Oxford professors, E. F. Carritt, John Cook Wflson, 
etc., who were members of the movement known as English neo-
realism. 2 He was thoroughly indoctrinated in their methods and prin­
ciples, though from the start his adherence was not without reserva­
tions. His dissatisfaction with the movement was precipitated by 
G. E. Moore's article, "The Refutation of IdeaUsm." Moore, in CoUing­
wood's estimation, was the Cambridge equivalent of the Oxford 
1 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, London, Oxford University Press, 1939. 
See Pierre Fruchon, "Signification de l'histoire de k pMosophie selon rAutobiographie 
de CoUingwood," Les Etudes Phihsophiques, ХШ (1958), pp. 143-160, for a resume" and 
favorable evaluation of CoUingwood's Autobiography, referred to as "un document 
de premiere importance pour celui qui s'inte>esse aux problemes pos£s par l'histoire, 
et en particulier par l'rristoire des idees . . . " (p. 143). 
2 See An Autobiography, p. 22. 
37 

38 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
realist type. In this article, Moore in criticising Berkeley attributes to 
Berkeley a position which in fact, according to CoUingwood, is the 
very position Berkeley himsetf opposes. AU one has to do to verify 
this is to place the two texts, Berkeley's and Moore's versions of it, 
together and compare them. And he says that the same thing 
happened in Cook WUson's attacks in his lectures on positions he 
aUeges to have been Bradley's. A comparison of Cook WUson's state­
ment of Bradley's position with Bradley's statement itseU would show 
that the two did not square up. 
CoUingwood tells us that in his early student days he preferred 
to distinguish and qualify rather than, as he says he would have done 
at a more mature stage, to break his attachment to the school con­
victed of such gross errors on such important matters. He argued that 
the 'realists' were professing phUosophy and not history, and that 
their business as phUosophical critics was to show whether a certain 
doctrine was sound or not and that this could be done without regard 
to their historical inaccuracies as to whether a certain author did or 
did not hold such a doctrine. The phUosophical issue was thus one 
thing and the historical issue another. 3 
CoUingwood says that he felt logically bound to remain a realist 
untU he had satisfied himsetf either that the positive doctrines of the 
school were false, or that its critical methods were unsound. He did 
not answer these questions untU he took his degree and commenced 
working as a phUosophy teacher. Then it became clear to him that 
Cook WUson's positive teaching could not stand up beside his (Cook 
WUson's) own critical methods. 
In 1914, when his academic life was interrupted by the war, 
CoUingwood faced the three foUowing alternatives: (1) K there was 
a logical connection between the positive doctrine and the critical 
methods this was fatal for both of them. But, if there was no such 
logical connection, then, either (2) the positive teaching might be mis­
taken and the critical methods valid, or (3) vice versa, the positive 
teaching might be sound but the critical methods invalid. 4 
B. Origin of Collingwood's Theory of Questioning 
in His Archaeological Practice 
When he became a teacher of phUosophy, CoUingwood spent his 
summers studying history and archaeology. From 1913 onwards, he 
3 See An Autobiography, pp. 22-23. 
4 See ibid., p. 23. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
39 
was dkecting his own excavations. In his archaeological work he says 
that he found himsetf conducting thought experiments in the knowl­
edge laboratory. 5 The following is his account of his method of pro­
cedure in archaeological work: 
. .. I found myseif.. . at first asking mysetf a quite vague ques­
tion, such as: 'was there a Flavian occupation on this site?' then 
dividing that question into various heads, and putting the first in 
some such form as this: 'are these Flavian sherds and coins mere 
strays, or were they deposited in the period to which they belong?' 
and then considering aU the possible ways in which Ught could be 
thrown on this new question, and putting them into practice one 
by one, until at last I could say, 'There was a Flavian occupation; 
an earth and timber fort of such and such a plan was built here in 
the year a plus or minus b and abandoned for such and such reasons 
in the year x plus or minus y. Experience soon taught me that under 
these laboratory conditions onefound out nothing at all except in answer 
to a question; and not a vague question either, but a definite one. . . . 
What one learned depended not merely on what questions one was 
asking; so that a man who was asking questions of one kind learned 
one kind of thing from a piece of digging which to another man 
revealed something different, to a third something iUusory, and to 
a fourth nothing at aU.6 
CoUingwood says that in these reflections on his activity as an 
archaeologist he merely rediscovered for himself, in the practice of 
historical research, principles which Bacon and Descartes had stated 
three hundred years earlier in regard to the natural sciences. Each 
had clearly showed (i) that knowledge comes only by answering ques­
tions, and (U) these questions must be the right questions, and (Ui) 
they must be asked in the right order. 7 
C. Confrontation with the Oxford Realists: 
Active Questioning vs. Passive Compresence 
Collingwood criticises the Oxford realists for talking as if know­
ing were simple intuiting or simple apprehending of some 'datum' 
5 See ibid., pp. 23-24. E. Gilson, in his Being and Some Philosophers, Toronto, Pon­
tifical mstitute of Mediaeval Studies, 1949, p. 6, defends the usage of the term 'experi­
ment' with respect to ideas. This is intimately tied up with the theory of supposal 
which plays a large part in CoUingwood's questioning theory, as wiU be shown later. 
6 An Autobiography, pp. 24-25. Emphasis added. Note the formaUzing function of 
the question. "The same data . . . can yield a variety of different kinds of information 
depending upon the questions one asks. More importantly, if one asks no questions, 
it does not seem that the data can yield anyinformation." L. Armour, The Concept 
of Truth, Assen, Van Gorcum, 1969, p. 213. 
7 See An Autobiography, p. 25. 

40 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
confronting the mind, to which the rnind must submit itseU when it 
knows. He also criticises Moore at Cambridge for speaking of 'the 
transparency' of the act of knowing, and likewise Alexander at Man­
chester for describing knowledge as the simple 'compresence' of two 
things, one of which is a mind. All these positions regarded knowl­
edge as a simple condition or situation, devoid of diversities and 
complexes, 'nothing except just the act of knowing.' They conceded 
that there was activity in knowledge, inasmuch as a man might have 
to work in very complicated ways to put himself 'in the position' in 
which something could be 'apprehended.' But once having attained 
that position there was nothing more to do but simply 'to apprehend' 
it, or perhaps to fail to apprehend i t . 8 
In opposition to this realist attitude Collingwood says: 
The questioning activity, as I caUed it, was not an activity of 
achieving compresence with, or apprehension of, something; it was 
not preHminary to the act of knowing; it was one haH (the other hatf 
being answering the question) of an act which in its totaUty was 
knowing.9 
From these reflections, and from his estimation of Moore's 'refu­
tation' of Berkeley and Cook Wilson's 'refutation' of Bradley, he con­
cluded that Oxford philosophy stood in need of a background of 
scholarship which would form in its students such habits of mind as 
would safeguard them from such falsifications of the positions of other 
thinkers. 1 0 
The first rule to be foUowed in reading, expounding or comment­
ing on a text 1 1 is: 'never accept criticism of any author before satisfy­
ing yoursetf of its relevance.' Collingwood insisted that his pupUs 
satisfy themselves, by firsthand study of what is said or written, just 
what the speaker's or writer's philosophy is before criticising it, or 
before accepting anyone else's criticism of it. In his first lectures on 
Aristotle's De Antma, he concentrated on the question, 'What is Aris­
totle saying and what does he mean by it?,' foregoing, however aUur-
ing it may be, the question, 'Is it true?,' and leaving for other teachers 
the further business of criticising its doctrine. By this approach, he 
intended to train his pupils in a scholarly approach to a philosophi­
cal text. 
CoUingwood teUs us that, with the outbreak of the 1914 war, he 
8 See ibid., pp. 25-26. 
9 Oid., p. 26. 
1 0 See ibid., pp. 26-27. 
» See ibid., pp. 27, 74. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
41 
had not yet answered the three questions regarding the conflict be­
tween the doctrine and the method of the realist, 1 2 but he felt that 
he had made a significant step in that direction since he recognized 
that he had made himself proficient in a certain kind of research and 
found out how to use it as a laboratory testing ground for epistemo-
logical theories.13 This perfected technique, together with what he says 
might be called his 'early manner' of philosophical teaching, tended 
towards an attack on realism as a philosophy which erred through negkct-
ing history. A foreshadowing of this coming attack appeared in the 
form of such statements as the foUowing: 
You must pay more attention to history. Your positive doctrines 
about knowledge are incompatible with what happens, according 
to my own experience, in historical research; and your critical 
methods are misused on doctrines which in historical fact were never 
held by those to whom you ascribe them. 1 4 
CoUingwood remarks that the interruption of his academic life by 
the war served to focus his attention on the as yet confused issues 
so as to further clarify them; which brings us to his meditations on 
the Albert Memorial. 1 5 
D. Meditations on the Albert Memorial 
CoUingwood's war work with the Admiralty intelligence during 
the 1914-1918 war required him to waUc daUy across the Kensington 
Gardens past the Albert Memorial. He says that by degrees it began 
to obsess him. He likened it to Wordsworth's leechgatherer, and, for 
him, it took on a strange air of significance. "Everything about it was 
visibly mis-shapen, corrupt, crawling, verminous"; he says that "for 
a time I could not bear to look at it, and passed with averted eyes." 1 6 
Recovering from this nausea, he forced himseÜ" to look at it, and "to 
face day by day the question: a thing so obviously, so incontrover-
tibly bad, why had Scott done it?" 1 7 He proceeded to grope for possible 
answers. It would be mere tautology to say that Scott was a bad 
architect and an evasion by a suggestio falsi to say that there is no 
accounting for tastes. The question then subdivides into other ques­
tions. "What relation was there . . . between what he had done and 
1 2 See above, pp. 38 et seq. 
1 3 See An Autobiography, p. 28. 
14 Ibid., p. 28. 
1 5 See ibid., p. 29. 
1 6 mid. 
17 mid. 

42 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
what he had tried to do? Had he tried to produce a beautiful thing; 
a thing . . . which we should have thought beautiful?" If so he had 
of course failed. "But had he perhaps been trying to produce some­
thing different?" K this is the case he may weU have succeeded. Again: 
" I f I found the monument merely loathesome, was that perhaps my 
fault? Was I looking in it for qualities it did not possess, and either 
ignoring or despising those it did?" 1 8 
CoUingwood says that his daUy communings with the Albert 
Memorial, together with his work in archaeology, impressed upon 
him the importance of the activity of questioning in knowledge. It 
further resulted in his impossibflity of being contented with the real­
ist's intuitionist theory of knowledge (a simple inspection of a datum 
akeady there before the mind simply to be contemplated). He says 
that the effect of these considerations brought about a revolt in his 
mind against the current logical theories sirnUar to the reaction against 
the scholastic logic produced in the minds of Bacon and Descartes 
when they reflected on the experience of scientific research as this 
began to take shape in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth cen­
turies. Bacon's Novum Organum and Descartes' Discours de la methode 
began to have a new significance for him in the light of these consid­
erations. 
They [Bacon's and Descartes' works referred to] were the clas­
sical expressions of a principle in logic which I found it necessary 
to restate: the principle that a body of knowledge consists not of 
'propositions', 'statements', 'judgments', or whatever name logi­
cians use in order to designate assertive acts of thought (or what 
in those acts is asserted: for 'knowledge' means both the activity 
of knowing and what is known) but of these together with the ques­
tions they are meant to answer; and that a logic in which the answers 
are attended to and the questions neglected is a false logic.19 
CoUingwood then gives an account of how his thought on the 
relevance of questioning in the theory of knowledge developed as his 
meditations on the Albert Memorial continued. Fkst, however, he in­
terrupts to clarify terminology. He says that he proposes to use the 
word 'proposition' for the 'entity' which the idealistic logicians call 
'judgment' and the reaUsts call 'statement', and that it wUl denote a 
18 Vbid., p. 30.1 think that here is an early instance of Collingwood's later notion 
of history as a rethinking of the thoughts of another. Also, perhaps, there is the influ­
ence of Vico's insistence on the need to penetrate from inside the mentality of other 
cultures, and a foreshadowing of CoUingwood's later doctrine regarding history as 
knowledge by 'insight.' 
" tt>id., pp. 30-31. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
43 
logical, not a linguistic, entity. Collingwood's biographical account 
of his evolving thought is as foUows: 
I began by observing that you cannot find out what a man means 
by simply studying his spoken or written statements, even though 
he has spoken or written with perfect command of language and 
perfectly truthful intention. In order to find out his meaning you 
must also know what the question was (a question in his own mind, 
and presumed by him to be in yours) to which the thing he has said 
or written was meant as an answer.20 
CoUingwood stresses that in his understanding of the matter there 
is a strict correlation between question and answer, 2 1 so that a propo­
sition is not an answer, or, at any rate, not the right answer, to any 
question that might have been answered otherwise. He explains by 
stating that "a highly detailed and particularized proposition must 
be an answer, not to a vague and generalized question, but to a ques­
tion as detailed and particularized as itsekV' 2 2 A question such as 'Why 
won't my car go?' must be broken down into detailed and particu­
larized questions of which it is really only a summary, such as: 'Is 
it because No. 1 plug is not sparking?' . . . or No. 2 plug?, etc. And 
when it can be said that No. 1 plug is functioning, this is not record­
ing failure to answer the sustained question 'Why won't my car go?' 
but success in answering the question 'Is the stoppage of my car due 
to failure in No. 1 plug?' 
This 'principle of correlativity between question and answer' 
results in clarity which disposes of a good deal of claptrap, such as 
speaking of "a savage as 'confronted by the eternal problem of ob­
taining food'. But what reaUy confronts him is the problem, quite tran­
sitory like aU things human, of spearing this fish, or digging up this 
root, or finding blackberries in this w o o d . " 2 3 
CoUingwood says that his next step was to apply this to the idea 
of contradiction. The current logic accepts that two propositions, 
V 
20 An Autobiography, p. 31. See ako CoUingwood's The Principks ofArt, pp. 265-266, 
for the need to know even the tone of voice in which a speaker utters a proposition 
in order to know its meaning. 
2 1 A similar statement by the historian-philosopher E. Güson may be worth nothing 
(The Christian Philosophy of Thomas Aquinas, London, GoUancz, 1961, p. 223): "И we 
want the Thomistic solution of the problem of knowledge, it must come first from 
St. Thomas. K it is to come reaUy from him and not from Descartes or Kant, we must 
not approach it with a Cartesian or Kantian question on our hps, because philosophers' 
questions are one with their replies." (Emphasis added.) 
2 2 An Autobiography, p. 32. 
23 Tbid., pp. 32-33. See Alan Donagan's The Later Philosophy ofR. G. Collingwood, 
pp. 60-61, for his criticism of CoUingwood's strict correlation of a definite answer to 
a definite question. 

44 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
simply as propositions, might contradict one another, so that by simply 
examining them as propositions one could determine whether in fact 
they did contradict each other or not. CoUingwood opposes this posi­
tion on the ground that in order to know whether two propositions 
are in contradiction with each other one needs to know their mean­
ing, but one does not know the meaning of each without together 
knowing the question to which each is intended to be the answer. 
If you cannot teU what a proposition means unless you know 
what the question is it is meant to answer, you wiU mistake its mean­
ing if you make a mistake about that question.24 
A symptom of mistaking the meaning of a proposition is mistaking 
it to contradict another proposition which in fact it does not contradict. 
No two propositions, I saw, can contradict one another unless 
they are answers to the same question. It is therefore impossible 
to say of a man ' I do not know what the question is which he is 
trying to answer, but I can see that he is contradicting himself.'25 
CoUingwood applies his principle of the correlativity of question 
and answer to the idea of truth. H the meaning of a proposition is 
relative to the question it answers, so also is its truth. Neither (i) mean­
ing, nor (U) agreement and contradiction, nor (Ui) truth and falsehood 
belong to propositions by themselves, but only inasmuch as they are 
answers to questions, each proposition being strictly correlative as 
answer to its relevant question. 
Collingwood then criticises what he caUs 'propositional logic,' 
under which classification he groups the so-called traditional logic, 
the idealistic logic of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and the 
symbolic logic of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. AU of these 
logics are in agreement in treating truth and falsehood, which, says 
Collingwood, is the chief concern of logic, as belonging to proposi­
tions as such. In such a doctrine the proposition is regarded as the 
unit of thought, the smallest 'entity' about which truth and falsity 
can be said, which cannot be said of its parts—subject, predicate and 
copula—taken separately.26 
Collingwood attributes this position of propositional logic to the 
early Uaison of logic and grammar, according to which the logician's 
2 4 An Autobiography, p. 33. 
25 Md. 
2 6 See An Autobiography, p. 34. In Speculum Mentis (pp. 114-116) Collingwood at­
tributes to Religion the discovery of truth and its expression in propositions asserted 
to be true which are contradictorily opposed to their denial, recognized to be thereby 
fake. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
45 
proposition was regarded as a kind of ghostly double of the gram­
marian's sentence, much in the same way as primitive views regarded 
minds as ghostly doubles of bodies. Among the various kinds of verbal 
expressions (of command, of wishes, etc.) grammarians recognize that 
special kind, the indicative sentence whose function it is to express 
statements. CoUingwood says that "logicians have almost always tried 
to conceive the 'unit of thought', or that which is either true or false, 
as a kind of logical 'soul' whose linguistic 'body' is the indicative 
sentence." 2 7 
This correlation of the logical proposition with the grammatical 
indicative sentence was never entirely satisfactory. Bacon and Des­
cartes, Plato and Kant, are examples of those who saw that the true 
unit of thought was not the proposition but something more complex 
in which the proposition functioned as answer to a question. 2 8 
When Plato described thinking as a 'dialogue of the soul with 
itself, he meant (as we know from his own dialogues) that it was 
a process of question and answer, and that of these two elements 
the primacy belongs to the questioning activity, the Socrates within 
us. When Kant said that it takes a wise man to know what ques­
tions he can reasonably ask, he was in effect repudiating a merely 
propositional logic and demanding a logic of question and answer.29 
Collingwood says that the one sentence expressive of one propo­
sition, as maintained by propositional logic, does not accord with the 
way words are actually used in certain situations, as when expres­
sions of thought are 'elliptical' or 'pleonastic' Again, it is generally 
held that the indicative sentences in a work which is no more than 
a work of fiction do not express propositions. The central doctrine 
of propositional logic is that "there is, or ought to be, or in a weU 
constructed and weU used language would be, a one-one correspon­
dence between propositions and indicative sentences expressing a 
proposition, and a proposition being defined as the unit of thought, 
or that which is true or false." 3 0 
CoUingwood says that aU the weU known theories of truth presup­
pose this one-one correspondence. One school maintains that truth 
and falsity are qualities of propositions in themselves. Another school 
maintains that to call a proposition true is to assert a relation of 'cor-
27 An Autobiography, p. 34. See Alan Donagan, The Later PhUosophy ofR. G. Col­
lingwood, pp. 58-59, for a criticism of CoUingwood's interpretation here. 
2 8 See An Autobiography, p. 34. 
29 Tbid., p. 35. 
3 0 Ybid., pp. 35-36. 

46 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
respondence' or 'non-correspondence' between the proposition and 
something which is not a proposition, some 'state of things' or 'fact.' 
A third school holds that truth or falsity asserts a relationship of a 
proposition to other propositions with which it 'coheres' or 'fails to 
cohere.' According to pragmatists, to call a proposition true or false 
is to assert the utility or inutility of beUeving the proposition. CoUing­
wood rejected all these theories because they presupposed the prin­
ciple of propositional logic which he denied altogether. 3 1 
For a logic of propositions he wanted to substitute what he caUed 
a logic of question and answer. For Collingwood, truth in its proper 
sense, truth as he was familiar with it, was truth taken in the sense in 
which a phUosophical theory or historical narrative is caUed true, and 
this "was something that belonged not to any single proposition, nor 
even as the coherence theorists maintained, to a complex of proposi­
tions taken together; but to a complex consisting of questions and 
answers." 3 2 
CoUingwood accuses propositional logic of completely ignoring 
the structure of such a complex, but, he says, with a little help from 
Bacon, Descartes and others, he found himself able to hazard a few 
statements about it. He gives the foUowing as characteristics of the 
structure of his interrogative logic: First, the characteristics of Con­
text and Relevance: "Each question and each answer in a given com­
plex had to be relevant or appropriate, had to 'belong' both to the 
whole and to the place it occupied in the whole"; second, the charac­
teristic of 'arising' that accompanies a relevant question: "Each ques­
tion had to 'arise'; there must be that about it whose absence we con­
demn when we refuse to answer a question on the ground that it 
'doesn't arise' "; thirdly, the characteristic of 'rightness of the answer': 
"Each answer must be 'the right' answer to the question it professes 
to answer." 3 3 CoUingwood insists that by 'right' (answer) he does not 
mean 'true.' The right answer, according to him, is the one which 
3 1 See ibid., p. 36. 
3 2 Md., pp. 36^7. The identifications CoUingwood makes here, of truth in its proper 
sense with truth as he was famiUar with it (and his archaeological practice is to be 
kept in mind here) and with philosophical and especiaUy historical truth, are impor­
tant in evaluating Collingwood's theory. As for Descartes the paradigm of knowl­
edge was mathematics, and for Kant, Newtonian physics, so for CoUingwood the 
paradigm of knowledge, and truth, is historical knowledge and truth (to which 
phUosophy is assimUated, rather than to science). ". . . exclusive reUance on history 
as the type of aU knowledge is the exact counterpart of the positivist reliance on natural 
science and is open to much the same objections." W. H. Walsh, "R. G. CoUing­
wood's PhUosophy of History," Philosophy, ХХП (1947), p. 153. 
3 3 An Autobiography, p. 37. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
47 
enables you "to get ahead with the process of questioning and answer­
i n g . " 3 4 Cases are common, he says, in which the 'right' answer to 
a question is 'false/ As examples, he cites cases in which a thinker 
is foUowing a false scent, either inadvertently, or in order to construct 
a reductio ad absurdum. Again, Polemarchus' answer to Socrates' ques­
tion in the Republic (333B) whether in a draughts game he would prefer 
as partner a just man or one able to play draughts. The answer 'a man 
able to play draughts' is false, since it presupposes that justice and 
the abUity to play draughts are incompatible, but it is nevertheless 
'right' because it is a link, and a sound one, in the chain of questions 
and answers by which the falseness of the aforesaid presupposition 
is manifested. 
Collingwood appeals to what he regards as the ordinary meaning 
of caUing a proposition true as he understands it. Its characteristics 
are: (i) that the proposition belongs to a question-and-answer complex 
which as a whole is 'true' in the proper sense of the word; (U) within 
this complex the proposition functions as an answer to a certain ques­
tion; (Ui) the question to which it is the answer is what would com­
monly be referred to as a sensible or intelligent question, that is, it 
is a question which 'arises,' in CoUingwood's terminology, to which 
is contrasted a sUly question; (iv) the proposition is the 'right' answer 
to that question. 3 5 From this it follows that you cannot teU whether 
a proposition is true or false untU you first find out the question it 
was intended to answer. Furthermore, Collingwood adds, a propo­
sition which in fact is true can always be thought to be false by anyone 
who goes to the trouble to think out a question to which it would have 
been the wrong answer, but convinces himseÜ" that it is the question 
which it is intended to answer. 3 6 And again, a proposition which is 
in fact significant can always be thought to be meaningless by anyone 
who convinces himseU" that it was intended to answer a question 
when in fact it does not either rightly or wrongly answer the ques­
tion, in spite of the intention of the one who offers it to be such 
answer. 3 7 
3 4 "La notion fondamentale pour Collingwood est ceüe d'un ordre ä ία fois notionnel et 
historique selon lequel Us problemes se succedent et se commandent." P. Fruchon, "Signi­
fication de l'histoire de la philosophie selon l'Autobiographie de CoUingwood," Les 
Etudes Philosophiques, ΧΙΠ (1958), p. 152 (emphasis in original). 
3 5 It is questionable whether this is what is commonly meant by 'true' as CoUing­
wood claims that it is; it seems that 'ordinary usage' would rather endorse the position 
CoUingwood is opposing, namely that statements are true or fake as such. 
3 6 See An Autobiography,p. 38. 
3 7 See ibid., pp. 38-39. It is unfortunate that CoUingwood does not clarify these 

48 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Whether a given proposition is true or false, significant or mean­
ingless, depends on what question it was meant to answer; and any 
one who wishes to know whether a given proposition is true or false, 
significant or meaningless, must find out what question it was meant 
to answer.38 
E. First Consequence: The Historicity of Propositional Meanings 
Collingwood draws a far reaching consequence from his reduc­
tion of propositional meaning to its function in answering a question. 
The consequence is that the meaningfulness of propositions can only 
be determined by historical methods. History, therefore, is going to 
acquire a commanding position in any epistemological theory. For the 
question 'To what question did So-and-so intend this proposition for 
an answer?' (to which question reduces the question 'What does So-
and-so mean by this proposition?') is an historical question, and, as 
such, cannot be settled without recourse to historical methods. Col­
lingwood maintains that this is not an easy question to answer, since 
past writers always write for their contemporaries about questions that 
'everyone is asking,' and so do not go to the trouble of expUcitly stating 
what is the question that their propositions are intended to answer. 
But subsequently, when the writer has become a 'classic' the ques­
tion has become forgotten since the contemporaries who asked it are 
cases with examples; his meaning is not clear. What he says seems to argue for his 
position in one respect and against it in another respect. K one can mistakenly think 
that a proposition answers a certain question when in fact it really answers another, 
this seems to argue that the proposition^om itselfhzs some innate meaning whereby 
from its own resources it can contribute to the answering of more than one question. 
It seems to argue that the source of meaning to a proposition is not totally borne by 
the question. On the other hand, differentiation in meaning as the proposition is 
applied to answer now one, now another question certainly argues to the derivation 
of meaning to the proposition from the question. What seems to follow from this, 
and it is generaUy the position which wffl be taken in evaluating Collingwood's theory, 
is that propositions are able to draw meaning from the question to which they are 
the answer provided thatfrom themselves, as propositions, they have (at least some) meaning 
of their own. In other words, Collingwood seems to exaggerate the contextual meaning 
of the proposition into its only meaning, its meaning in use into its meaning absolutely. 
In regard to terms, logicians from mediaeval times distinguished the meaning a term 
has in its propositional context, which they called the supposition of the term, from the 
meaning it has in itself, which they called the signification ofthe term (see Jacques Mari¬
tain, Formal Logic, New York, Sheed and Ward, 1946, pp. 59-72). It would seem that 
a similar distinction should be maintained between the meaning of propositions in 
themselves and their meaning in use. Collingwood, like Wittgenstein in this respect, 
seems to reduce meaning to usage, but, further, unlike Wittgenstein, to reduce usage 
(and therefore meaning in usage) to usage in answering a question. See in this respect, 
Donagan's discussion (The Later Philosophy ofR. G. Collingwood, pp. 60-61) on the state­
ment, 'That is the Bodleian,' as able to function as answer to more than one question. 
3 8 An Autobiography, p. 39. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
49 
long since dead, and especiaUy is this so in regard to a question which 
was 'rightiy' answered, for then the writer's contemporaries would 
have ceased asking it and begun asking the next question which 
'arose.' So that "the question asked by the original writer can only 
be reconstructed historically, often not without the exercise of con­
siderable historical skill." 3 9 
CoUingwood fflustrates by comparing the work of understanding 
Plato's Parmenides with the archaeological work of distinguishing the 
various periods of construction in the remains at the south gate of 
Househeads. Just as that archaeological reconstruction requires pene­
tration into the purpose the buUders had in mind at each period, so 
the Parmenides can only be understood by understanding the ques­
tions asked at that period and understanding the statements of the 
Parmenides precisely as they are answers to those questions. 4 0 
It forcibly struck Collingwood at the time that "whereas no two 
propositions can be in themselves mutually contradictory, there are 
many cases in which one and the same pair of propositions are capable 
of being thought either that or the opposite, according as the ques­
tions they were meant to answer are reconstructed in one way or in 
another." 4 1 CoUingwood accuses critics, who regard such metaphysical 
statements as 'The world is both one and many' as setf<ontradictions, 
of ignorance of the question which it was intended to answer by those 
who made it, just as a critic of the statement 'The contents of this box 
are both one thing and many things,' accusing the one who made 
it of contradiction, thinking that two incompatible answers are being 
given to one question, 'Are the contents of this box one x or many 
x's?,' whereas, in fact, there are two questions being asked: (i) 'Are 
the contents of this box one set of chessmen or many sets?' and (ii) 
'Are the contents of this box one chessman or many chessmen?' 
According to CoUingwood, there is no contradiction between saying 
that something, whether it be the world or the contents of a box, is 
one and saying that it is many. There would be contradiction only 
if it were said that something was both one x and many x's; but in 
the original statement nothing is said about one x or many x's; this 
3 9 See An Autobiography, p. 39. 
4 0 See ibid., pp. 39^0. The analogy is very illuminating regarding CoUingwood's 
thought. Archaeological interpretation is by the very nature of the case highly con-
textuaUy conditioned, and the analogy is therefore likely to maximize this aspect at 
the expense of other aspects which in a different context might have a greater signifi­
cance than from context alone. 
4 1 An Autobiography, p. 40. 

50 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
was foisted on the statement by the critic, and the contradiction he 
protests about never existed in his victim's philosophy until the critic 
himsetf planted it there, like planting treasonable correspondence in 
his coat pockets, with the intention of obtaining a reward by denounc­
ing him. 4 2 
Thus, if a given doctrine D is criticized as self-contradictory be­
cause it is divisible into two parts E arid F, where E contradicts F, 
the criticism is vaUd only if the critic has correctly reconstructed the 
questions to which E and F were given as answers. A critic who is 
aware of this condition wiU of course 'show his working' by stating 
to his readers the evidence on which he has concluded that the 
author criticised really did formulate his questions in such a way 
that E and F in his moufh were mutuaUy contradictory. FaiHng that, 
a reader disinclined to work the problem out for himsetf wiU natural­
ly assume the criticism to be sound or unsound according as he has 
found the critic to be, in a general way, a good historian or a bad one.43 
This realization enabled CoUingwood to answer the question left 
unanswered since 1914, namely whether the realists' critical methods 
were sound. His only answer could be that they were not, since their 
method consisted only in analysing the position being criticized into 
various propositions between which they detected contradictions. 
"FoUowing the rules of propositional logic, it never occurred to them 
that those contradictions might be the fruit of their own historical errors 
as to the questions which their victims had been trying to answer." 4 4 
And he was far from being favorably impressed by the reaUsts' atti­
tude towards history. 
CoUingwood wrote out the fruits of his meditations at consider­
able length and with many fflustrations in a book caUed Truth and Con­
tradiction. War conditions, however, discouraged its publication, and 
CoUingwood tells us later in his Autobiography that he destroyed the 
manuscript of this work. 4 5 
F. Second Consequence: Philosophical Problems Reduced to 
Historical Problems to Be Solved by Historical Methods 
Collingwood insisted that in any phUosophical discussion it was 
necessary to get into the mind of the speaker to understand what 
was the problem or the question which was in his mind. Only then 
4 2 See ibid., p. 41. No doubt the aUusion is to the criticism of Berkeley by Moore 
and that of Bradley by Cook WUson referred to above, pp. 37-38. 
4 3 An Autobiography, p. 42. 
4 4 
Ш. 
4 5 See ibid., pp. 42^3; 
99. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
51 
could the position he advocated be understood, for his position was 
his answer to his question. Before criticising an opponent's position, 
then, it is necessary to attempt actively to understand the opponent's 
position in terms of his question to which his exposition is intended 
to be the answer. 4 6 
According to my own 'logic of question and answer,' a philos­
opher's doctrines are his answers to certain questions he has asked 
himself, and no one who does not understand what the questions 
are can hope to understand the doctrines. The same logic cornmitted 
me to the view that any one can understand any philosopher's doc­
trines if he can grasp the questions which they are intended to 
answer. These questions need not be his own; they may belong to 
a thought-complex very different from any that is spontaneously 
going on in his mind; but this ought not to prevent him from under­
standing them and judging whether the persons interested in them 
are answering them rightly or wrongly. 4 7 
Collingwood found it extremely valuable to follow habitually and 
take part in discussions concerning subjects and methods which were 
not his own but other people's. For " . . . developing their positions 
and applying them to topics they had not dealt with, to reconstruct 
their problems in my own mind . . . " was "a delightful task" and 
"a magnificent exercise."48 Which evoked Pritchard's exasperated com­
ment, " I wish you'd get off the fence." 
Collingwood says that this way of dealing with other people's 
thoughts had akeady become a fixed habit before he realized that it 
is formally deducible from his 'logic of question and answer.' 4 9 Think­
ing this way about the philosophies of others is to think about them 
historically, and he teUs us that as early as the age of six or seven he 
saw that the only way to tackle any historical question was to see what 
the different people involved were trying to do. 5 0 As an example, 
4 6 See ibid., pp. 53-55. 
v 
47 Jbid., p. 55. 
4 8 Md., p. 57. 
4 9 "He had . . . supreme intellectual self-confidence which prevented him from 
being taken by surprise, shocked or rattled by anything that might be said. He rarely 
contradicted or engaged in emphatic dissent. He would not rudely dismiss a state­
ment made to him, but would usually deal with it in the Socratic manner by asking 
questions often very embarrassing to the person who had raised the subject. This was 
not always agreeable to the rash and setf opinionated." R. B. McCaUum, "Robin George 
CoUingwood 1889-1943" (accompanying obituary notice), Proceedings of the British 
Academy, XXD(, 1943, p. 467. 
5 0 See An Autobiography, p. 58. CoUingwood thus acknowledges an innate pre­
disposition to think in this way, just as Descartes was innately disposed to think 
mathematically. 

52 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
he refers to the Battle of Trafalgar, since "naval history was a childish 
passion of mine, and Trafalgar my pet battle." 5 1 
History did not mean knowing what events followed what. It 
meant getting inside other people's heads, looking at their situa­
tion through their eyes, and thinking for yourserf whether the way 
in which they tackled it was the right way. Unless you can see the 
battle through the eyes of a man brought up in saüing ships armed 
with broadsides of short-range muzzle-loading guns, you are not 
even a beginner in naval history, you are right outside it. K you aUow 
yoursetf to think for a moment about the tactics of Trafalgar as if 
the ships were driven by steam and armed with long-range breech-
loading guns, you have for that moment allowed yourserf to drift 
outside the region of history altogether.52 
CoUingwood again takes up his quarrel with the reaUsts, for whom 
the problems of history are unchanging problems. 5 3 In thinking that 
Plato, Aristotle, Epicurus, the Stoics, the Schoolmen, the Cartesians, 
etc., were each giving different answers to the same recurring peren­
nial question, so that the question somehow remained outside the 
flux of time and therefore of history, they implied that the question 
itsetf had no history, that the problem discussed did not itsetf change 
from thinkerto thinker who successively took it up. He accused the 
reaUsts of thinking that the problems discussed in modern ethical 
theory are the same problems as those discussed in Plato's Republic 
or Aristotle's Ethics, and that the phUosopher's task is to ask himseU 
whether, for example, Aristotle or Kant gives 'the right answer' to 
the problems of duty. 5 4 They regarded the history of phUosophy as 
a mere cataloguing, in order and date, of the various answers given 
by successive phUosophers to the eternal (i.e., non-historical) ques­
tions of phUosophy. For them, therefore, the question 'What was 
5 1 An Autobiography, p. 58. H.-I. Marrou, in his Meaning ofHistory, pp. 37; 103-111, 
insists on the need for a sympathetic connaturality between a historian and his sub­
ject of inquiry which enables the historian to appreciate his subject 'interiorly.' This 
is important for understanding CoUingwood's theory of 'insight' into the 'inner' (i.e., 
'thought') dimension of an event which he regards as proper to history. But such 
sympathetic connaturaUty is very much in opposition to ColUngwood's 'Baconian at­
titude,' that the subject studied be treated as an unwiUing witness whose testimony 
has to be extracted by torture in the process of scientific interrogation. It may be weU 
to remember that Bacon was a lawyer, and, like Collingwood, may have carried over 
attitudes proper to his profession into other fields in an Ulegitimate universalizing 
process. Basic moral attitudes, especially sympathy and connaturality with the sub­
ject, are capital in the historian, as Marrou weU points out, and as CoUingwood con­
cords with in this example he cites. 
5 2 An Autobiography, p. 58. 
5 3 See An Autobiography, p. 59. 
5 4 See Md. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
53 
Aristotle's theory of duty?' is a historical question wholly separate 
from the question 'Is what Aristotle said true?,' which was a philo­
sophical question. 5 5 CoUingwood severely criticizes Oxford phUosoph­
ical training for which "the history of phUosophy was a subject without 
phUosophical interest," 5 6 inasmuch as Oxford phUosophy was then 
under the influence of the realists. 
One of the problems Collingwood had set himseU" to reconsider 
during the war and in the course of his Albert Memorial meditations 
was this attitude of the realists towards the history of phUosophy. 
Was it reaUy true, I asked mysetf, that the problems of philos­
ophy were, even in the loosest sense of that word, eternal? Was it 
really true that different philosophies were different attempts to 
answer the same questions? I soon discovered it was not true; it was 
merely a vulgar error, consequent on a kind of historical myopia 
which, deceived by superficial resemblances, failed to detect pro­
found differences.57 
CoUingwood compares Hobbes' treatment of the nature of the state 
in the Leviathan with Plato's in the Republic. They are obviously two 
different poUtical theories, but are they two different theories about 
the same thing? H you pressed for a definition of the state by each, 
you would find that the differences between the two widely separated 
thinkers went down to essentials and beyond mere superficiaUties. 
Collingwood allows that you can caU the two things the same if you 
so wish, but you must admit that it got diablement changi en route, so 
much so that the nature of the state in Plato's time was genuinely 
different from the nature of the state in Hobbes' time. Collingwood 
stresses that he does not merely mean the empirical nature of the state, 
but the very ideal nature; Plato's Republic is an attempt at a theory 
of one thing and Hobbes' Leviathan is an attempt at a theory of some­
thing else. "What even the best and wisest of those who are engaged 
in PoUtics are trying to do has altered." 5 8 
CoUingwood does not deny that there is some connection between 
these two things caUed by the same name, the State, by these two 
thinkers, but he wants to insist that the connection is not the one main­
tained by the reaUsts. He agrees that no one would dispute that what 
Hobbes' Leviathan and Plato's Republic are about is in some way the 
5 5 See ibid. 
5 6 An Autobiography, p. 60. 
57 Jbid., pp. 60-61. For a discussion of "CoUingwood on Eternal Problems" see 
Errol Harris, The Philosophkal Quarterly, 1 (1951), pp. 228-241. 
58 An Autobiography, pp. 61-62. 

54 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
same but in another way different. The dispute is precisely about the 
kind of sameness and the kind of difference. Whereas for the realists 
the sameness is that of a universal and the difference that between 
two instances of that universal, CoUingwood maintains that "the same­
ness is the sameness of a historical process and the difference is the 
difference between one thing which in the course of that process has 
turned into something else, and that other thing into which it has 
turned." 5 9 A traceable historical process relates Plato's polis to Hob­
bes' Absolutist state, a process by which one is turned into the other. 
Anyone who argues that the two political theories are contradictorily 
related, and that therefore one must be right and the other wrong, 
ignores that process and denies that difference between them which 
results from that process. 
Thinking along these lines forced CoUingwood to the conclusion 
that the history of political theory is not the history of different answers 
to the one same question, but is rather the history of a more or less 
changing problem whose solution was likewise changing along with 
the problem. Thus, the form of the polis is not one unchanging ideal 
of human society eternally laid up in heaven and the eternal goal of 
the efforts of aU good statesmen of every age. It was the ideal of human 
society as conceived by the Greeks of Plato's time. But by Hobbes' 
time people had changed their minds as to what they regarded as the 
ideal of social organization. The ideals in each case were different. 6 0 
59 Oid., p. 62. 
6 0 See ibid., pp. 62^S3. Notwithstanding that CoUingwood presents his thinking 
here in his Autobiography as the fraits of his own labouring mind, it is difficult not 
to see reflected in them what Croce had written in his Logica come scienza del concetto 
puro, first published in 1905: "Every definition is the answer to a question, the solu­
tion to a problem; and there would be no need to enunciate it if we did not put ques­
tions to ourselves, and did not propose problems. Why otherwise give ourselves this 
inconvenience? What need would constrain us? Definition arises, as does every men­
tal work, from a contrast, a struggle, a war which seeks a peace, from a darkness 
which seeks Ught. . . it is a question which demands an answer. Not only does the 
answer suppose a question, but such an answer supposes such a question. The answer 
must be proportioned to the question, otherwise it would not be an answer but the 
UIusion of an answer. . . . But the question, the problem, the doubt is always indivi-
duaUy conditioned: the doubt of the chUd is not the doubt of the adult; the doubt 
of the uncultured man is not the doubt of the cultured man; the doubt of the novice 
is not the doubt of the indoctrinated; the doubt of an ItaUan is not the doubt of a 
German, and the doubt of a German of 1800 is not the doubt of a German of 1900. 
Ьл fact, the doubt formulated by an individual at a determinate moment is not the 
same as that formulated by that same individual a moment later. By way of simplifi­
cation one tends [suole] to affirm that the same question has been posed as such by 
many men in many centuries and varying times. But in saying this, one makes a sim-
pUfication which amounts to an abstraction. In reaUty every question is different from 
every other, and every definition, however constant it may sound, and however cir-

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
55 
Likewise/what the Greeks meant by 'ought' in Ethics is not the 
same as what Kant means when he is discussing moral obligation. 
The ideals of personal conduct are as impermanent as the ideals of 
social organization and so have to be approached from the historical 
point of view; and even what is meant by calling them ideals is sub­
ject to similar change.61 The reaUsts erred in thinking 'ought to behave' 
has an eternal, unchanging, unique meaning about which different 
peoples at different times and places held differing views, some wrong, 
some right. But if they had merely consulted the texts on their shelves 
as to the meaning therein they would have been alerted to this, in­
stead of systematically mistranslating passages in the light of their 
mistaken preconceptions. A n acquaintance with the history of science 
should show anyone that when Einstein introduced discussion about 
relativity into philosophy, any convictions about the eternity of prob­
lems and conceptions were as unfounded as a young girl's convic­
tion that this year's hats are the only ones any sane woman would 
wear. Collingwood thus became convinced that Metaphysics, rather 
than being a futile attempt to know what lies beyond the limits of 
experience, is primarily an attempt to discover what the people of a 
given time believe about the general nature of the world, such beliefs 
being the presuppositions of aU their physics, and therefore of aU their 
(relevant) questionings into detaU. In addition, he recognized that 
Metaphysics is an attempt to discover the corresponding presupposi­
tions of other peoples at other times and to show the historical pro­
cess by which one set of presuppositions has turned into another. 6 2 
Collingwood recognizes that discovering what presuppositions 
underlie the physics of a given people at a certain time, which is the 
question metaphysicians have to answer, is a purely historical ques­
tion. He denies that it is their business to raise the further question 
whether among the various beUefs so held at different times and places, 
this or that one is true and opposed to the others as false. Such a 
question, according to CoUingwood, has consistently been found to 
be unanswerable. 
cumscribed by certain determinate words, in reaHty is different from every other, 
because the words, even when they seem to be materially the same, are effectively 
different, according to the spiritual diversity of those who pronounce them, these 
being individuals who find themselves, therefore, in new and individual circum­
stances." Translated from the work cited, appearing as Vol. II, Logica, Filosofia come 
scienza dello spirito, Bari, Gius, Laterza and Figu, 1964; see pp. 133-134. 
6 1 See An Autobiography, pp. 63-65. 
6 2 See An Autobiography, p. 66. The question of Metaphysics as being concerned 
about the presuppositions to questions win be taken up later (in Chapter 5). 

56 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
. . . if there is anything in my 'logic of question and answer' 
that is not to be wondered at, for the beliefs whose history the meta­
physician has to study are not answers to questions but only pre­
suppositions to questions, and therefore the distinction between 
what is true and what is false does not apply to them, but only the 
distinction between what is presupposed and what is not presup­
posed.63 
CoUingwood clarifies this by distinguishing what he caUs relative 
presuppositions from absolute presuppositions, which latter are the 
proper concern of the metaphysician. Some presuppositions to ques­
tions are themselves answers to prior questions. But "the beliefs which 
a metaphysician tries to study and codify are presuppositions of the 
questions asked by natural scientists, but are not answers to any ques­
tions at aU," which "might be expressed by calling them 'absolute 
presuppositions.' " 6 4 
Collingwood does not deny that the statements made by meta­
physicians are true or false, for their statements (about absolute pre­
suppositions) are answers to questions about the history of these 
presuppositions. Metaphysics can rightly lay claim to being a science, 
not in the same way as a naturaUstic science, but as an organized body 
of knowledge in which: 
on the one hand, the beliefs of a given set of people at a given 
time concerning the nature of the world are exhibited as a single 
complex contemporaneous fact.. . and on the other hand the origin 
of these beliefs is enquired into, and it is found that during a cer­
tain space of time they have come into existence by certain changes 
out of certain others.65 
CoUingwood came by degrees to recognize that no branch of 
phUosophy was exempt from the historical conditioning of its prob­
lems and solutions; the only sense in which he would admit the 
eternity of an historical fact was in the sense that it had happened 
once and for aU. 
Collingwood then grappled with the realist's distinction between 
the 'historical' question 'What was So-and-so's theory on such and 
such a matter?' and the 'phUosophical' question 'Was he right?' He 
rejected this distinction since it depended on the presupposition that 
there are permanent and eternal problems in history. 
6 3 Md., p. 66. 
6 4 An Autobiography, pp. 66-67. 
4 5 Tbid., p. 67. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
57 
If there were a permanent problem P, we could ask 'what did 
Kant, or Leibniz, or Berkeley, think about P?' and if that question 
could be answered, we could then go on to ask 'was Kant, or Leib­
niz, or Berkeley, right in what he thought about P?' But what is 
thought to be a permanent problem P is reaUy a number of transi­
tory problems pi p2 p3 . . . whose individual pecuUarities are 
blurred by the historical myopia of the person who lumps them 
together under one name P. It foUows that we cannot fish the prob­
lem P out of the hyperuranian lucky-bag, hold it up, and say 'what 
did So-and-so think about this?' We have to begin, as poor devUs 
of historians begin, from the other end. We have to study documents 
and interpret them. We have to say 'here is a passage of Leibniz; 
what is it about? what is the problem with which it deals?' Perhaps 
we could label that problem p14. 6 6 
The next question is 'Does Leibnitz deal rightly or wrongly with 
his problem?' The answer to this question is not as easy as the reaUsts 
think. tf in writing the relevant passage Leibnitz happened to be so 
confused in his own thinking as to completely mess up the job of solv­
ing his problem he would have thereby so mixed up hisown tracks 
that no reader would be able clearly to unravel exactly what his prob­
lem was. 
For one and the same passage states his solution and serves as 
evidence of what the problem was. The fact that we can identify 
his problem is proof that he has solved it; for we only know what 
the problem was by arguing back from the solution.67 
We can only discover what tactical problem Nelson set himself 
at Trafalgar by studying the tactics he pursued in the battle and argue 
back from the solution to the problem. Even if we had the original 
typescript of the coded orders to his captains a few hours before the 
beginning of the battle, this would not teU us that he had not changed 
his mind at the last moment and thought out a new plan, trusting 
to his captains to understand what he was doing and back him up. 
CoUingwood alleges that it is for this reason that naval historians give 
much consideration to Nelson's tactical plan, but notto ViUeneuve's. 
Because Nelson won the battle, we can reconstruct what his plan was, 
but no one wUl ever know what ViUeneuve's plan was because he 
did not succeed in carrying it out; one may hazard a guess at it, but 
guessing is not history. 6 8 
6 6 Brid., p. 69. 
67 Tbid., p. 70. 
68 
Ш. 

58 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
CoUingwood draws the far reaching conclusion that "there are 
not two separate sets of questions to be asked, one historical and one 
phUosophical· about a given passage in a given historical author. There 
is one set only, historical." 6 9 
From this it foUows that Plato is to be studied in exactly the same 
way as Thucydides. The study of Greek phUosophy is a historical study 
just as is the study of Greek warfare. CoUingwood does not reject the 
question 'Was Plato right to think as he did on such or such ques­
tion?,' but he points out that it is to be answered in the same way 
as the question 'Was Phormio right to row round the Corinthian's 
circle?' It is just as much history that he beat the Corinthians by doing 
it in the way he did it. CoUingwood warns against 'the ghost of Ranke' 
gibbering about 'what exactly happened?,' for he alleges that such 
an attitude ignores that victories as weU as tactical manoeuvres are 
things that happen. 
G. Collingwood's Conclusion from These Considerations 
CoUingwood tells us that these ideas, which were only partiaUy 
worked out before his return to Oxford after the (1914-18) war, became 
clear to him on his return there. Rather than discuss them with his 
Oxford colleagues, he put them into practice with his pupUs in accor­
dance with an ancient Oxford tradition of reading, expounding and 
commenting on phUosophical texts. He held that the best way of teach­
ing undergraduates exactly how the subject under consideration has 
been revolutionized is by lecturing on the old classics, whose authors 
in their day may have revolutionized the subject, and showingin one's 
commentary how their doctrine has been modified. He observes that 
this was a field of activity exactly suited to him inasmuch as his inclina­
tions led him towards detaU rather than towards generalization. 7 0 
Collingwood insisted that his students obey two rules governing 
the procedure of textual analysis before going on to the further task 
of criticising its doctrine. The first rule was that criticism of an author 
was not to be accepted before satisfactorUy establishing that the 
criticism is relevant. The second rule (from his meditations on the 
Albert Memorial) was to "reconstruct the problem," or to "never 
65 Md., p. 72. 
7 0 See ibid., p. 74. This admission alerts us to ask how far native temperament 
and acquired inclinations have played a deterrnining (and perhaps unexamined) part 
in his judgments concerning philosophical procedure, just as Descartes' natural math­
ematical bent is material in assessing his verdict on the nature of philosophical method. 

Identification of Knowledge with Question and Answer 
59 
think you understand any statement made by a philosopher until you 
have decided, with the utmost possible accuracy, what the question 
is to which he means it for an answer." 7 1 
Thus the history of philosophy.. . was no longer a 'closed' sub­
ject. It was no longer a body of facts which a very, very learned man 
might know, or a very, very big book enumerate, in their com­
pleteness. It was an 'open' subject, an inexhaustible fountain of prob­
lems, old problems re-opened and new problems formulated that 
had not been formulated until now. Above aU it was a constant war­
fare against the . . . dogmas of that putrefying corpse of historical 
thought, the 'information' to be found in text-books. For, in the 
history of philosophy, as in every other kind, nothing capable of 
being memorized, is history.72 
71 
im. 
72 Ibid., pp. 75-76. 


CHAPTER T H R E E 
Supposal and Questioning 
A. Questioning as Supposing, the Cutting Edge of the Mind 
The activity of questioning presents itself in two ways in CoUing­
wood's earUer work, Speculum Mentis (1924), in which he distinguishes 
five forms of human experience in dynamic evolution: Art, ReUgion, 
Science, History and PhUosophy. The evolutionary transformation of 
one life form into the next (in the order given above) is by way of 
a question and answer process, the lower form (e.g., Art) being related 
to its next higher (e.g., ReUgion) as a question to its answer. Each 
lower form as it tends to its own fuffiUment tends simultaneously to 
its own disintegration and transformation, inasmuch as it is in dynamic 
disequUibrium with itsetf in such a way that its hUfUlment is in another, 
higher Ufe form to which it gives way. Each life form is a system which 
makes a promise it cannot futfUl; the system thus breaks down under 
increasing strain of internal contradiction which precipitates criticism 
(i.e., questioning) of the vaUdity of that form. The answer to the ques­
tion thus internaUy provoked is provided by transition to the next 
higher life form. 
Thus, "art by its own dialectic gives rise, over against itseU", to 
criticism, which is science."1 "The point at which a chUd begins to 
1 Speculum Mentis, London, Oxford University Press, 1924, p. 101. 
61 

62 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ask whether stories are true, and passes through the crisis of learn­
ing to disbelieve in fairies . . . indicates the emergence of reUgion from 
art." 2 " I t [i.e., art] is pregnant with a message it cannot deliver." 3 
"When [language is seen to express not itsetf but thought as its mean­
ing] art and rehgion cease to exist as seH-contained and autonomous 
forms of experience and give way to a life no longer of expression 
but of thought." 4 "This revolution in the use of language [from the 
metaphorical, as in art and religion, to the literal] is the birth of 
science."5 Then "the discovery of the abstractness of science is . . . 
the birth of history." 6 "Science is a question whose answer is history." 7 
"Science is exphcit to itself as thought, but it turns out on enquiry 
to be identical with the questioning activity; that is, it reaHzes the con­
tradiction of a type of thought which is not thought precisely because 
itis thought's opposite, intuition." 8 " . . . history solves the question 
which science asks but cannot answer." 9 "This discovery [that science 
presupposes history and can never go behind history] . . . implicitly 
resolves science into history." 1 0 "History is an unstable attitude which 
leads either back into science or forward into philosophy." 1 1 "The 
transition . . . effected from history to philosophy is . . . merely the 
making explicit of what was impUcit already," namely "that in the 
last resort nothing but the knower can be k n o w n . " 1 2 
Generally speaking, then, Speculum Mentis is a phenomenology 
of human experience13 in which the dynamism throughout is a rais­
ing and solving of problems, a constant raising and answering of 
questions. 
. . . the life of the mind consists of raising and solving prob­
lems, problems in art, religion, science, commerce, poUtics, and so 
forth. The solution of these problems does not leave behind it a sedi­
ment of ascertained fact, which grows and sohdifies as the mind's 
work goes on. Such a sediment is nothing but the externahty of a 
harf-solved problem: when the problem is fuUy solved the sediment 
2 Md., p. 113. 
3 Md., p. 110. 
4 Md., p. 155. 
5 Jbid., p. 157. 
6 Vbid., p. 180. 
7 Wid., p. 186. 
8 Vbid., p. 188. 
9 Md., p. 193. 
1 0 Ш., 
p. 202. 
11 tt>id., p. 230. 
12 Tbid., pp. 245-246. 
1 3 See Lotus O. Mink, Mind, History, and Dialectic, Bloomington, mdiana Univer­
sity Press, 1969, p. 61. 

Supposal and Questioning 
63 
of information disappears and the mind is left at liberty to go on. 
Philosophy therefore, is not a prerogative kind of knowledge 
immune from this reabsorption into the mind's being: it is nothing 
but the recognition that this reabsorption is necessary and is indeed 
the end and crown of aU knowledge, the setf-recognition of the mind 
in its own mirror. 1 4 
But, in addition to this general identification of the activity of the 
mind with a questioning and answering process, Collingwood iden­
tifies questioning in a special way with the aesthetic activity charac­
teristic of that life form which is the artistic, which, according to Col­
lingwood, is the first and basic form of human experience. In the 
section of Speculum Mentis15 
entitled 'Knowledge as Question and 
Answer,' CoUingwood makes an intimate tie-up of the mind's ques­
tioning activity with the imaginative activity characteristic of art. 
What characterizes the life form of art is that "the aesthetic expe­
rience is imaginative not in the sense that its objects are fictitious but 
in the sense that it treats them indifferently, whether they are ficti­
tious or real." 1 6 So, according to Collingwood, what is characteristic 
of imaginative activity is its attitude of indifference to the reality or 
non-reality of its objects. The objects may in fact be real, or they may 
be unreal, but this aspect is of no concern to the imagination as such. 
It is the attitude "which neither asserts reality truly or falsely, nor 
denies it, but merely imagines." 1 7 Shakespeare's Hamlet, as a work 
of art, may or may not conform to real characters and incidents; this 
argues neither for nor against its merits as a work of art. CoUingwood 
notes that this mental attitude, which neither asserts nor denies reaUty, 
truth or falsity, has been given a great deal of attention by recent 
phUosophers "under the name of hypothesis, intuition, supposal, 
representation and so forth." 1 8 
14 Speculum Mentis, p. 317. 
1 5 Section 5 of Ch. 3, pp. 76-86. 
v 
16 Speculum Mentis, p. 76. 
17 Speculum Mentis, pp. 60-61; p. 76. See also The Principles ofArt, London, Oxford 
University Press, 1938 (Galaxy p/b. 1958), pp. 136-138. 
18 Speculum Mentis, p. 76. The 'philosophers' referred to no doubt include Bradley 
and Bosanquet. See for example Bradley's " O n Floating Ideas and the Imaginary," 
Mind, LX (1906), pp. 445-472 (the same is repeated as Ch. 3 of Bradley's Essays on 
Truth and Reality, Oxford, Qarendon Press, 1914). See also Bradley's The Principles 
of Logic, London, MacmiUan, 1928, Vol. I, pp. 80-90 on supposal and hypothetical 
judgments; B. Bosanquet, KnowU;dge and Reality, London, Swan and Sonnenschein, 
1892, pp. 33-58, on supposal and hypothetical judgments; pp. 287-306 for supposal, 
hypothesis and experiment in inference. See also the discussion between Professor 
G. F. Stout and Professor R. Hoernle; R. Hoernle, "Professor Stout's Theory of Pos-
sibUities, Truth, and Error," Mind, XL (1931), pp. 273-284; G. F. Stout, "Truth and 

64 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
CoUingwood criticises those phUosophers who err by isolating this 
mental attitude from the general context of human experience, thereby 
regarding it as a self-contained and autonomous phase of experience 
which would then require some sort of a bridge to make the transi­
tion to other phases, principaUy those of assertion and denial. 1 9 K the 
rnind in fact succeeded in achieving that condition in which it neither 
asserts nor denies but merely intuitively represents its object to itseU" 
it could never acquire the abUity, nor would it ever have a reason to 
pass out of that condition. It is useless to appeal to intervention of 
the concept to bridge this unbridgeable gutf from supposal to asser­
tion, for this would be merely to postulate (suppose) that the prob­
lem had been solved without facing the difficulty as to how the concept 
would be able to intervene in such a situation. But, says CoUingwood, 
this is a pseudo-problem, since the mind never operates in a vacuum 
of pure imagination or supposal. There is no bridge because there is 
solid ground aU the way between supposal and assertion. 
Supposal and assertion are not two independent chapters in the 
history of mind; they are two opposite and correlative activities 
which form as it were the systole and diastole of knowledge itseH.20 
Falsity," Mind, XLI (1932), pp. 297-310. EspeciaUy noteworthy is pp. 299-302 of Profes­
sor Stout's article on questioning and supposing. The date, 1932, precludes this mate­
rial being a source of CoUingwood's similar doctrine. Either Stout is indebted to Col-
Ungwood or both CoUingwood and Stout point to a more widespread common thinking 
going back at least to the date of Speculum Mentis. Through Stout, English phUosophy 
is injected with the thought of Brentano, Husserl and especiaUy Meinong on the status 
of objects of thought; see Passmore's A Hundred Years ofPhilosophy, London, Penguin 
Books, 1968, pp. 194-200, especially pp. 194Л95. 
1 9 See Speculum Mentis, p. 76. The aesthetic Ufe, according to CoUingwood, is a 
seU^ontradicting attempt to Uve out this attitude of supposal, which breaks down, 
and gives way to reUgious experience as the contradiction becomes felt and apparent. 
Aesthetic activity creates a world in which it is possible to Uve as an artist. But Ufe-
experience intrudes many things that cannot be meaningfully included in that world. 
Witness the struggle many artists have Uved with aU their Uves, namely, how to Uve 
the artistic life and make a Uving. The artistic world is not therefore an aU inclusive 
world; the world horizon of meaning has to give way and become expanded if cer­
tain experiences are to be meaningfuUy accounted for. 
2 0 Speculum Mentis, p. 77. This, in substance, would be CoUingwood's answer to 
the question which tormented Bradley, whether there are any Floating Ideas, " b i the 
end and taken absolutely . . . there can be no mere idea. ReaUty is always before us, 
and every idea in some sense qualifies the real. So far as excluded it is excluded only 
from some Umited region, and beyond that region has its world. To float in the abso­
lute sense is impossible. Flotation means attachment to another world, a world other 
than that sphere which for any purpose we take here as solid ground and as fact." 
F. H. Bradley, " O n Floating Ideas and the Imaginary," Mind, LX (1906), p. 451 (pp. 
35-36 of Essays on Truth and Reality). For CoUingwood, supposal and assertion are two 
sides of the one entity which is knowledge of reality. Ernst Cassirer, The Logic of the 
Humanities, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1960, p. 56, says that "aU concrete 

Supposal and Questioning 
65 
CoUingwood criticises 'a crude empiricism' which regards 
knowledge to be only a matter of assertion, for it is only in retrospect, 
by looking back over the traversed road, that a knower identifies 
knowledge with assertion. Knowledge as a past, accompUshed fact, 
such as one finds in encyclopaedias and textbooks, is indeed asser­
tion. But first hand acquaintance with knowledge, as it is an activity 
of the mind, as it is something the mind does, not just something it 
'apprehends,' shows that knowledge is a matter of voyage and 
discovery in which assertions are only answers to questions. Thus 
it was for such as Plato, Bacon and Kant: 
So, Plato described true knowledge as 'dialectic,' the interplay 
of question and answer in the soul's dialogue with itserf; so Bacon 
pointed out once for all that the scientist's real work was to inter­
rogate nature, to put her, if need be, to the torture as a reluctant 
witness; so Kant mUdly remarked that the test of an inteUigent man 
was to know what questions to ask. . . . 2 1 
Collingwood caUs questioning "the cutting edge of knowledge" 
and assertion "the dead weight behind the edge that gives driving 
force." 2 2 Questioning apart from information and information apart 
from questioning are valueless. 
Questions undirected by positive information, random ques­
tions, cut nothing; they faU in the void and yield no knowledge. 
Information, when it is not ground to the keen edge of inquiry, is 
not knowledge but mere pedantry, the talent buried in the earth.23 
CoUingwood allows that textbooks and encyclopaedias are inval­
uable as a body of information which directs further questioning, but 
he regards them as contemptible if considered to constitute and exhaust 
knowledge. "Information may be the body of knowledge, but ques­
tioning is its soul." 2 4 
Collingwood then identifies questioning with the activity of sup­
posal, which is the activity characteristic of the imagination and 
aesthetic activity. 
spiritual events, aU genuine 'history' is only the reflection . . . of this continuaUy renew­
ing process, this 'systole' and 'diastole', this separation and reintegration." 
2 1 Speculum Mentis, p. 77. 
2 2 Speculum Mentis, p. 78. Compare The Idea ofHistory, p. 237 (on Historical Evi­
dence): "The question is the charge of gas, exploded in the cylinder head, which is 
the motive force of every piston-stroke." See above, Chapter 1, p. 27. 
23 Speculum Mentis, p. 78. See ako B. Bosanquet, Knowkdge and Reality, p. 36: "The 
guide of research is the body of existing knowledge, and it is this that endows the 
wUl to observe which in ignorance must be the servant of caprice, with aims properly 
subordinated to the discovery of truth." 
24 Speculum Mentis, p. 78. 

66 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Supposal and questioning are at bottom the same thing; or 
rather, supposal when seen in its proper perspective as an integral 
element in knowledge turns out to be questioning.25 
This questioning aspect of knowledge, inasmuch as it is an activ­
ity other than asserting, since it is supposing, is a puzzle to empiricists, 
for whom something has to really exist, and therefore be an object 
of assertion, if it is to be an object of knowledge, for they regard knowl­
edge as the imprint forced on our mind by a reaUy existing object 
demanding our attention. 2 6 But, contrary to this, asking a question 
always means, to some extent at least, envisaging alternatives of which 
one only can exist. 2 7 Because questioning thus always to some degree 
contemplates the non-existent it is essentiaUy a suspension of the ac­
tivity of asserting, and this is precisely how aesthetic experience or 
imagination is defined. 
But, whereas for aesthetic experience this suspension of assertion 
seems to be an end in itself, not looking forward to its own negation 
in the renewal of assertion, true questioning on the other hand is a 
suspension of assertion which looks forward to a renewal of this assert­
ing activity in the shape of an answer. 
Art, as pure imagination, imagination without assertion, may 
be paradoxically defined as a question which expects no answer: 
that is, a supposal.28 
2 5 Speculum Mentis, p. 78. See also B. Bosanquet, KnowledgeandReality, p. 36: "The 
differentia of supposal which it shares with experiment as such is the replacement 
of intellectual by arbitrary choice." 
2 6 Applied to history, this means that for the positivist facts are 'hard facts' with 
an identity of their own, independent of the mind's questioning activity, 'out there' 
for the mind to apprehend. 
2 7 See also The New Leviathan, p. 74, par. 11.12: "Asking a question impUes con­
templating alternatives. A question that offers no alternatives is a bogus question"; 
pp. 74-75, par. 11.22 " . . . a proposition is an answer to a question and a question 
offers alternatives." However, Herbert Butterfield in his Man on His Past (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1955, pp. 171-201), shows that the historical problem 
of the Saint Bartholomew massacre was solved finaUy by admitting the coexistence 
of the alternatives. Whether Rome was to be considered guilty or not depended on 
whether there was premeditation or not. Both sides were vigorously defended by op­
ponents, till finally it was agreed that the evident premeditation was not the 
precipitating cause of the uprising. And, similarly, LesHe Armour (The Concept of Truth, 
Assen, Van Gorcum, 1969, p. 181) writes: "tf we are considering more general historical 
theses [than whether or not Charles I was beheaded], we may not be so sure that 
there is a single right answer or that two answers, which conflict in important ways 
may not be both right." 
2 8 Speculum Mentis, p. 79. See also B. Bosanquet, Knowledge and Reality, p. 36: "Sup­
posal as such excludes the affirmation of what is supposed in the sense that an act 
which is supposal is not qua supposal, also affirmation." 

Supposal and Questioning 
67 
But just as questioning looks beyond itself to assertion, having 
no end in itsetf, so neither does it have an absolute beginning in itsetf. 
The supposals, either of questioning or of aesthetic experience, both 
of which are acts of imagining, cannot be themselves absolute begin­
nings. There is no pure act of imagining and there is no pure ques­
tioning. 2 9 Even the siUiest or most irresponsible question prerequires 
some information already to hand, and therefore presupposes asser­
tion as a condition of itself. A pure question would ask nothing; it 
would be no more than the empty form of questioning, a mere inter­
rogation mark with nothing preceding i t . 3 0 But even the empty form 
of questioning, signified by the question mark (?) implies that there 
is information (and therefore assertion) available. 
Any act must start somewhere and a pure act of imagination 
just because it is completely divorced from fact, would have nowhere 
to start from and would therefore have no reason for determining 
itsetf in one way rather than any other.31 
Collingwood is saying here that every question is a determinate 
question, a fully determined act. But it would not be so determined 
except by the existence of available information. A question, there­
fore, seems, according to CoUingwood's explanation here, to be a form 
which (previously asserted) information can be given by the imagina­
tive activity whereby that information is (imaginatively) made to im­
plicate (imagined) alternatives, one or other of which alternatives wUl 
be determined by assertion and thereby become the answer to the 
question. The form in question, whereby past information becomes 
a question, the form which, when applied to that information, is the 
'cutting-edge' of the mind, seems to be the form of the imagination 
(i.e., one of the forms which the mind's activity takes; for Colling­
wood the imagination is not a faculty, a department of a fixed entity, 
but a mode of the activity which is the mind) with a dynamic thrust 
pointing towards information to be had by way of an answer, some­
thing like an arrow directed to a target. Already possessed factual in­
formation (past assertions), knowledge of the textbook or encyclo-
2 9 See Speculum Mentis, p. 79. 
3 0 See also S. Lupasco, Du devenir logique et de l'affectivili, Paris, Vrin, 1935, t. 2, 
pp. 83^5, on the impossibility of reduction of radical doubt to pure questioning activ­
ity. See also K. Rahner, Spirit in the WoM, Montreal, Palm Publishers, 1968, pp. 57-77, 
for a discussion of the being of man as a questioning being. ". . . in human existence 
the question is that fact which absolutely refuses to be replaced by another fact, to be 
reduced back to another fact. . . ." But this questioning, identified with the being 
of man, is absolute as a fact, that is, only inasmuch as its own existence is presupposed-
affirmed (i.e., asserted to be a fact) by and indeed in the very questioning itseLf. 
3 1 Speculum Mentis, p. 79. 

68 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
paedia variety, is taken as a material by the mind and formed into 
a question. 3 2 These previous assertions, congealed (encapsulated?) as 
available information, are then given an imaginative non-assertive form 
by being given imaginative implicatory reference to possible alterna­
tives, neither of which is presently asserted to be the real or true state 
of affairs, the mind being simultaneously under dynamic tension to 
resolve the alternative possibüities one way or another. 3 3 But, which 
of the visuaHzed alternatives is to be asserted, and thus function (not 
just as an abstract proposition, but) as answer to the question, is to 
be decided and determined by reference to further facts to be sought 
precisely in order to answer the question (e.g., the clues for which 
the detective looks). Thus, already available factual information pro­
vokes questions, and these questions in turn call forth the ascertain­
ment of further information (asserted fact) in order that they may be 
answered. 
Thus, questioning and artistic activity, being aU imaginative ac­
tivity, is itself embedded in a matrix of concrete fact; it begins from 
there; it thrives there and in concrete fact asserted it results. 
Even if art is pure imagination it must spring from a sou of 
concrete fact; the artist must reaUy exist in a real world, and his 
works of art are necessarüy a kind of sublimated version of his 
experience as a real person, however unconscious of this fact he may 
be. 3 4 
Even though the imaginative work, as imaginative, is indifferent 
to reaUty and to truth, nevertheless it is not just imaginatively imagined; 
it is really imagined, and therefore by a real person in a real situation. 3 5 
The artist, engrossed in his artistic, imaginative work as such knows 
nothing of the reality of that work or of the reaUty of the situation in 
which he works. Everything is imagined to be put into the work ex­
pressed, even his whole setf and his whole world of reality. Never­
theless that very aU-absorption presupposes the reality of that activity 
3 2 This 'available information' is nothing other than man's past. Thus history pro­
vides the mind with 'the weight' on which the mind wiU 'grind' the cutting edge 
of inquiry and thrust forward to hitherto unknown information; the future would 
seem to be nothing other than 'the dynamic direction' of this activity to be brought 
into the present (and subsequently into the past, to become itseLf part of history) by 
this dynamism of questioning. Questioning therefore is the very dynamism of history, 
the activity of the mind, and the mind is what it does. 
3 3 This is how I read CoUingwood's aUgnment of questioning with desire in his 
New Leviathan, Chapter 11. 
3 4 Speculum Mentis, p. 79. 
3 5 See K. Rahner quote, p. 67 note 30 above. 

Supposal and Questioning 
69 
and the reakty of the artist situated in the world of fact quite distinct 
from the artistic work. 
The work of art is an imaginative cutting edge to a mind whose 
soHd backing of factual experience may be forgotten for the moment, 
but is none the less very real; or rather, it is not forgotten but dis­
tilled into the work of art, present to the mind in this form and no 
other.36 
That is, the artist, in the act of imagining, has imaginatively 
translated his whole world of lived experience into that one activity 
which, for him, presents to him the whole meaning of the world and 
of himsetf as something not distinguishable from that world. This 
seems to imply that the work of artis the concrete universal attained 
obscurely and confusedly (a 'felt' identity in difference, prior to media­
tion by thought in the concept), which, when the level of philosophical 
reflection is attained, wiU be revealed distinctly as a whole of identity 
in difference. 
But that act of imagining would not be done if the artist did not 
draw on his Uved experience and the concrete facts of his daUy life. 
Thus the imaginative activity of art is itself supported and sur­
rounded by a medium of fact; but the essence of the purely aesthetic 
frame of mind is that this medium or background is overlooked.37 
But, if the artist, in his artistic activity, may overlook this real matrix 
of fact, the phUosopher is not excused from doing so. A purely imaginal 
phUosophy would be basicaUy unsound. Whereas reality and truth 
and fact is ignored by the artist, it belongs to the phUosopher's stock 
in trade. "Imagination does not exist in the free state, and itself re­
quires a basis of fact." 3 8 
But the other side of the picture is that: 
This basis of fact in turn requires a basis of imagination, for no , 
fact can be known until it has been sought by the imaginative act 
of questioning, and this question itsetf requires a further basis of 
fact, and so on ad infinitum.39 
Thus, just as imagination is fact-based, so also fact is imagina­
tion-based; each mediates the other, and, in turn, is mediated by the 
other. Fact is not something 'out there' to be apprehended, as realist 
3 6 Speculum Mentis, p. 79. 
37 Md., p. 80. 
» Bid. 
*>Md. 

70 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
empiricists would have us beUeve.40 The very facticity of a fact already 
involves the stabilizing work of the imagination working on the flux 
of sensation, since it, that is, fact, is an object of consciousness and 
consciousness is always of something, of some definite object, never 
pure, undifferentiated, mdeterrninate sensation.41 The 'sense-data' of 
empiricists are already interpretations, not only of imagination, but 
even of the understanding, for the term involves their relationships 
to one another. 4 2 The objects of imagination also are interpretations 
of sensation, not interpretations at the level of understanding, involv­
ing conceptual and differentiation and interrelation, but imaginative 
interpretation. So, the work of imagination is involved in every fact. 
But, conversely, the work of imagination is not only implied by, 
but itself implies, a preexistent basis of fact. Collingwood asks, 'Does 
this involve us in an infinite regress of fact dependent upon imagina­
tion and imagination dependent on fact, and so on?' His answer is 
'No': 
. . . only because the two moments, question and answer, are 
not actuaUy separate. Their distinction is an ideal distinction only, 
and the presupposition of each by the other is only a way of stating 
their inseparability.43 
Collingwood then states that: 
the process of knowledge is therefore, strictly speaking, not so 
much an alternation of question and answer as a perpetual restate­
ment of the question, which is identical with a perpetual revision 
of the answer.44 
Anticipating the objection that this reduces aU the diversity of 
knowledge to a bare identity in which there is only one judgment judg­
ing one truth, Collingwood replies: "Our answer—to be given in fuU 
later—wUl be that this identity contains aU diversity within itsetf." 4 5 
4 0 That is, there are no 'hard facts'; see G. BuchdahI, "Logic and History (An 
Assessment of R. G. CoUingwood's Idea of History)," Australasian Journal ofPhilo&-
ophy, XXVI (1948), p. 95. 
4 1 See The Principles ofArt, p. 203: "The place which Hume's ideas inhabit is the 
empty room of Locke, progressively furnished with what 'the busy and boundless 
Fancy of man' provides. And it is imagination, not sensation, to which appeal is made when 
empiricists appeal to 'experience.' " (Emphasis added.) 
4 2 See Principles of Art, p. 214. 
43 Speculum Mentis, p. 80. 
4 4 Odd. 
4 5 Tbid. ColUngwood's own thought has been followed here as closely as possible, 
for this, and his immediately preceding statements, are of the highest importance for 
the interpretation of his thought. 

Supposal and Questioning 
71 
This 'identity which contains within itself aU diversity' wUl be 
shown later to be the key concept of ColUngwood's whole thought, 
especiaUy in regard to the logic of question and answer; it is the notion 
of the concrete universal which Collingwood inherits from the British 
Idealists, especiaUy Bradley and Bosanquet.46 
The interpretation of CoUingwood's treatment of the totality of 
the life of the mind in Speculum Mentis in the light of what he says 
in this particular section (pp. 76-80) of Speculum Mentis can be iUustra-
tively summarized by imagining the mind's activity as a moving hand 
on the face of a clock. И we imagine the fuU sweep of the hand around 
the face of the clock from 6 o'clock position back to 6 o'clock position 
through the 12 o'clock position and aU the intervening positions, we 
may regard the begmning, 6 o'clock, position of the hand as represent­
ing experience devoid as yet of any explanation, and the terminating 
6 o'clock position as representing fiffly explained experience, the inter­
vening positions representing the various moments of the movement 
of the activity of explanation. The 12 o'clock position of the hand would 
represent the greatest elongation (abstraction) of explanation from the 
experience it purports to explain. This would represent that of abstract 
mathematical or exact science in which pure expUcative thought is max-
imaUy independent of experienced actuality. Art, then reUgion, would 
be located somewhere on the passage from 6 o'clock to 12 o'clock; 
experimental science and then history would be represented some­
where along the return sweep from 12 o'clock back to 6 o'clock accord­
ing as greater and greater account is taken of fact. PhUosophy may 
be regarded as the central position on the face from which the hand 
radiates in its sweep around the dial; it is concerned with aU respec­
tive positions. History in its culmination at the 6 o'clock position is 
at the same time the recognition of the clock as a chck, that is, the 
fully expUcit recognition of what the overaU phUosophical view mani-
4 6 This "identity" which "contains aU diversity in itseU" is "the absolute object 
[which] is individuality, for individuaUty is concreteness," that is, fully determined. 
(Speculum Mentis, p. 218.) It is a 'concrete universal' which, in the tradition of British 
Idealism, is the basis of logic and inteUigibUity. The interpretation of CoUingwood 
has therefore to be made against the background of Bradley's and Bosanquet's (especial­
ly the latter's) teaching on the concrete universal. Likewise, the identification of 
conscious awareness with one sustained judgment is necessary to understand what 
CoUingwood says here; see B. Bosanquet, The Essentials ofLogic, London, MacmiUan, 
1897, pp. 21Al, especiaUy p. 33. Whereas, for Bosanquet, consciousness is identified 
with one sustained affirmative judgment, for CoUingwood consciousness is a sustained 
('restatement') answer to a sustained ('restated') question. This is how I read his in­
sistence on phUosophy as being a constant return to its beginnings; see his An Essay 
on Phihsophical Method, pp. 22-23, 168. 

72 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
fests in regard to aU particular aspects, the view of the whole as a whole 
in relation to aU its parts. 
H we, then, imagine ourselves seated somewhere at the pointing 
end of the moving hand we may imagine ourselves looking either in 
the backward direction from which the hand has travelled or in the 
forward direction towards which it is traveUing. H we adopt the back­
ward looking aspect what we wUl see has the aspect of avaUable infor­
mation, or answers to questions. But if we take the forward looking 
aspect what we see takes on the aspect of questioning. Thus, any point 
indicated by the moving hand is both a questioning and an answering 
position (]ust as at any moment the hand is together moving away from 
the 6 o'clock position and back towards the 6 o'clock position); it aU 
depends on whether you regard the one same concrete actuality of 
movement in relation to what it has left behind or in relation to what 
it is approaching. A n anti-clockwise sweep of the mind's eye round 
the dial sees everything as answers, whereas a clockwise sweep of 
the mind's eye around the clock face wUl see everything as questions. 
If this helpful Ulustration is kept in mind, many of the texts just 
analysed become extremely Ulurninating in their relation to Colling­
wood's global position and to many of its detaUs. Reconsider, for in­
stance, CoUingwood's statement47 that supposal and assertion are not 
two independent chapters in the mind's history but two opposite and 
correlative activities forming the systole and diastole of knowledge, 
and, again, his statement that it is only in retrospect, by looking back 
over the road travelled, that knowledge comes to be identified with 
assertion, with accompUshed past fact, such as encyclopaedia knowl­
edge. 
CoUingwood's statement that "the progressive alienation of the 
mind from its object is in history complete" 4 8 would seem to argue 
against locating mathematics and exact science at the 12 o'clock posi­
tion of the above clock-face Ulustration as the position of greatest 
elongation of abstractive distancing from experience, located at the 
6 o'clock position. But what CoUingwood says repeatedly (especiaUy 
in Speculum Mentis, pp. 163-169), seems rather to qualify exact science 
for the occupancy of this position of abstractive extremity. 
B. The Nature of Supposal as an Activity of the Imagination 
As stated above 4 9 Collingwood aligns the activity of questioning 
4 7 See p. 64, this chapter, above. 
4 8 See Speculum Mentis, p. 238. 
4 5 This chapter, p. 63. 

Supposal and Questioning 
73 
with the imaginative activity of supposal whose proper characteristic 
is that it treats objects indifferently as to whether they are real or not. 
И absolutized as a distinct life form and thus Uved for its own sake 
this imaginative activity of supposal is the same as the aesthetic activ­
ity of art. In order more fully to understand this activity of supposal 
so relevant to questioning it wiU be necessary to analyse what CoUing­
wood says regarding the nature of art and try to disengage those 
aspects of his theory of art which throw light on the nature of sup­
posal as this latter applies to the theory of questioning. This wUl re­
quire an analysis of Collingwood's The Principles ofArt (1938). Since 
the relevant material is somewhat involved, it is considered advis­
able to move this whole section to an appendix, rather than disturb 
the continuity of thought in analysing CoUingwood's theory of ques­
tioning. Having dealt with the nature of questioning as supposal or 
the active thrust of the mind in transforming experience into rational­
ly meaningful experience, the next consideration, and the most basic 
consideration from the logical point of view, is that of the type of 
universal according to which experience is structured when it is the 
experience of a questioning mind. This is the concrete universal which 
is the basis of concrete and historical minking as opposed to the abstract 
genus species logic based on the abstract universal proper to scien­
tific thinking. The treatment of Collingwood's theory of art as this 
bears on his theory of questioning wUl be found in an appendix at 
the end of this work. 
s. 


CHAPTER FOUR 
Concrete Dialectical Rapprochement 
Question and Answer 
Logic 
versus 
Abstract Static Divisive 
Propositional 
Logic 
A. The Concrete Universal vs. the Abstract Universal 
According to R. G. C. Mure, 1 the doctrine of the concrete univer­
sal originates in Hegel's rejection of Kant's explanation of the moment 
of individual reality in human knowledge. Rejecting Kant's passive 
sense-intuition of an alien thing-in-itsetf, "Hegel sets his own inter­
pretation on the original unity of thought and being adumbrated in 
Kant's unity of apperception." 2 " . . . the Notion . . . contains within 
itsetf, and itsetf sets forth, the Negation which determines it. Inasmuch 
as its significant negation is its own activity, nothing outside it deter­
mines it. And that is to say that it is the Universal—the Universal deter­
mining itsetf as Individual." 3 "Here . . . originates the doctrine of 
the concrete universal which has inspired British nineteenth century 
idealism and found perhaps its most consistent expression in Bosan-
quet's Gifford lectures." 4 
1 A Study ofHegel's Logic, London, Oxford University Press, 1950. 
2 Tbid., p. 165. See alsoJames E. Griffiss, Jr., "The Kantian Background of Hegel's 
Logic," The New Schokstkism, XLJR (1969), pp. 509-529, especially pp. 5^-513; 518-520; 
522-523. 
3 R. G . C. Mure, op. cit., p. 165. 
4 Lbid., p. 166. Bosanquet's most significant treatment of the concrete universal 
is his second lecture, The Gifford Lectures for 1911 at the University of Edinburgh, 
pubHshed as The Pnncipte ofIndividuality and Value, London, MacmiUan, 1927, pp. 31^$1 
(abstract of lecture 2, pp. xix-xxi.) 
75 

76 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Lionel Rubinoff says5 that "CoUingwood's conclusion . . . con­
cerning the nature of historical explanation is clear and unequivocal" 
when he (CoUingwood) asserts6 that " . . . the concrete universal is 
the daUy bread of every historian, and the logic of history is the logic 
of the concrete universal." Ji, as Collingwood elsewhere argued, 7 the 
logic of history is distinctively a logic of question and answer, it foUows 
that this logic of question and answer is a logic of the concrete univer­
sal. This logic is quite distinct from the abstract, formal logic which 
characterises scientific thought. 
Formal logic, whether in its scholastic or mathematical form, is 
not only reflection upon thought in the special sense of scientific 
thought, but in the special sense of scientific reflection; and this is 
the fact which divides formal logic from that dialectical logic whose 
point of view is the point of view not of science but of phUosophy, 
and whose object is not the abstract thought of science but the con­
crete thought of history and philosophy.8 
A.i. The Abstractive Character of Science 
Collingwood constantly contrasts the abstract universal, which 
is the basis of the logic operative in science, with the concrete univer­
sal, which is the basis of the logic operative in history and phUos­
ophy. 
The abstraction characteristic of science derives from its origin in 
religion. 
In religion the mind is accustomed to regard the unity of God 
as standing in perfectly self-contained independence over against 
the pluraUty of empirical fact; the one and the many, the universal 
and its particulars are thrown outside one another and regarded not 
as correlative aspects of a single concrete whole but as independent 
concrete beings. This is a consequence of the imaginative nature of 
reUgion which inevitably personifies abstractions or presents ideal 
distinctions in the guise of concrete objects.9 
This abstraction, which characterizes science as a hangover from 
reUgious transcendence, results in the logic of science being a logic 
of external relations. 
5 Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 
1970, p. 160. 
6 Speculum Mentis, p. 221. See this chapter, below, pp. 89-90. 
7 See "Historical Evidence," The Idea ofHistory, pp. 249-282. See also Chapter 1, 
above, pp. 22^4. 
8 R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 195. 
»Urid., p. 159. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
77 
Once we have, by that relic of religious transcendence which 
infects aU science, divorced the world of thought from the world 
of sensation, the mutual externaUty of these two worlds reproduces 
itsetf ad infinitum within science itseU, and gives rise to that logic 
of external relations which is just the mark of science's failure to 
free itsetf altogether from the domination of a reUgious habit of 
mind. 1 0 
Externality may thus be regarded as the a priori form of the ob­
jects of science, using Kant's terminology. 
Abstraction, according to Collingwood, is the error (characteris­
tic of the scientific mode of thought, subsequently resulting in its setf-
transcendence) of separating in thought what is not separated in 
reality. 
To abstract is to consider separately things that are inseparable: 
to think of the universal, for instance, without reflecting that it is 
merely the universal of its particulars, and to assume that one can 
isolate it in thought and study it in this isolation. This assumption 
is an error. One cannot abstract without falsifying. To think of them 
as they are not and to plead that this initial severance makes no 
essential difference to their inner nature is only to erect falsification 
into a principle.11 
Science is the affirmation of the abstract concept as real. As abstract 
it is apprehended by abstract thought without any aid from sensa­
tion. A scientist merely has to think; sensuous experience is unneces­
sary to him. 1 2 
Mathematics is a priori or deductive science par excellence;13 it is 
buUt up by simply drawing out the implications of a merely asserted 
abstract concept independently of aU reference to sensuous experi­
ence. 1 4 The only reaUy a priori concept is the concept of class as such, 
since any difference between one class and another isempirical. 
Mathematics, as a pure science, is simply the theory of classificatory 
order as such, that is, structure in its most abstract form. 1 5 
The assertion of the abstract concept, by which the scientific con­
cept comes into being, marks aU science with the three inseparable 
10 Tbid., p. 166. 
11 Brid., p. 160. See also A. J. M. Milne, The Social Philosophy of English Idealism, 
London, AUen & Unwin, 1962, Chapter 1, pp. 15-22. 
1 2 See Speculum Mentis, pp. 163-164. 
1 3 See ibid., pp. 164-166. 
1 4 See ibid., p. 164. 
1 5 See ibid., p. 165. See also A. J. M. Mime, The Social Philosophy ofEnglish Idealism, 
pp. 16-17. 

78 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
characters of mathematics, mechanism and materiaUsm. These are pro­
ducts of the classificatory frame of mind, as coroUaries of the fact that 
this frame of mind arbitrarily separates the universal and the parti­
cular in asserting the universal in its barren and rigid self-identity. 1 6 
MateriaHty means abstractness and subjection to the formulae of 
mechanical determination and mathematical calculation, which sub­
jection is imposed by the arbitrary act of abstraction which falsifies 
the object's nature by sundering what in fact is united. 1 7 
As long as science remains rigidly a priori, mathematics is the only 
possible science. But other sciences are possible if empirical elements 
are admitted into science, or if science is aUowed to indulge in 
hypotheses. Thus, Euclidean geometry may be obtained either as a 
systematic account of actual empirical space, or as a pure deduction 
from the whoUy a priori hypothesis that Euclidean space exists. In the 
first case, science would not be pure (as adrmtting data from the world 
of sensation), and in the second case it would not be true faeing based 
on a hypothesis, not on concepts asserted as constituting the real 
world). 1 8 
But, the concept of reality, as a concept of pure, a priori science, 
is absolutized externahty, absolutized exclusiveness, and thus is a class 
with no members. It turns out to be thought thinking about nothing 
real. 
The serf-identity of the concept, in abstraction from the difference 
of the sensible world, collapses into nothingness and leaves us with 
the empty form of a thought which thinks nothing. 1 9 
Thus, pure deductive science collapses under the strain of this 
internal contradiction. 
Pure deductive science breaks down because its object turns out 
to be a chimera, a structure Which is the structure of nothing, a law 
with no instances.20 
Ьл opposition to the barrenness of pure a priorism, the Renaissance 
scientists fought for the recognition of facts. They insisted that obser­
vation and experiment are the true process of scientific knowledge. 
They saw that the purely abstract or deductive ideal of science gives 
birth to mathematics and to nothing more. But they also saw that, 
1 6 See Speculum Mentis, p. 167; p. 293. 
1 7 See ibid., p. 168. 
1 8 See ibid., pp. 168-169. 
19 Jbid., p. 169. 
2 0 Ш., 
p. 176. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
79 
in an atmosphere of pure deduction, mathematics cannot survive. Con­
crete reality can only be an element in the totality of science if the 
deductive element is supplemented and reinforced by an inductive 
or empirical element. They did not seek to supplant mathematics by 
empirical elements, since mathematics represents the ideal of science, 
but they sought to give the ideal real content by supplementing it with 
empirical elements derived from observation and experiment. 2 1 
Greek biology, astronomy, etc., were not purely mathematical, 
but their empirical element was implicit only. The Renaissance battle 
with Aristotle explicitated the implicitly empirical element in Greek 
thought. This had far-reaching results, both theoretical and practical. 
The result was on the theoretical side the substitution of induc­
tive logic for deductive; on the practical side, an immense expan­
sion and consolidation of scientific thought, which, because freed 
from the false ideal of pure deduction, could now for the first time 
realize its true nature as based on the empirical study of fact.22 
But the emergence into explicitness of the empirical character does 
not make science cease to be science, mductive logic stands over against 
deductive logic in an ambiguous relationship. On the one hand, obser­
vation and experiment are presupposed by a priori deduction. 
Inductive logic does not reaUy supersede deductive; it stands 
over against it as at once a friend and an enemy. Observation and 
experiment do not supersede a priori deduction; rather they are said 
to underUe and be presupposed by it, every deductive process 
resting on a previous induction. Thus the theory arose of which MiU 
is the great representative, that science proceeds by an alternating 
rhythmical process of which induction is the first moment and 
deduction the second.23 
On the other hand, induction itsetf is found to presuppose the 
very same deductive principles which it is supposedly in search of. 
This theory [of МШ, that induction and deduction are alternate * 
moments of the scientific process] breaks down on discovering that 
induction itsetf rests on a principle, variously described as the unifor­
mity of nature, the law of universal causation, and so forth, which, 
just because induction rests upon it, induction is powerless to 
estabUsh. Thus the whole of induction faUs to the ground because 
it is found to assume that of which it is ostensibly in search. 
This principle of uniformity, which induction assumes, is also 
the principle which deduction assumes, namely the existence of 
2 1 See ibid., p. 177. 
2 2 Jbid., p. 178. 
23 Tbid., pp. 178-179. 

80 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
abstract concepts in general; for uniformity is nothing but the 
abstractness of the concept, its indifference to the variations of its 
own instances. Thus induction does not overcome the fundamen­
tal abstractness of deduction but simply reasserts it, and this fun­
damental assertion in which both agree is nothing but the defini­
tion of the scientific consciousness. Both deductive and inductive 
logic are therefore developed out of the definition of science as 
such.24 
On account of its postulatory abstraction, science is caught in a 
vicious circle from which it cannot escape, save by denying the postu­
late that the universal and particular are not distinct things but mere­
ly two distinct elements of one whole. But such a recognition is the 
very denial of science itsetf. It therefore alternates between induction 
and deduction in an attempt to operate within its own arbitrarily setf-
imposed duaUty. 
Therefore science is bound to maintain both at once, and to do 
what it can towards sandwiching the deductive and inductive 
accounts of itsetf in slices as thin as possible but never actuaUy fused 
together. If this fusion took place, which is the only possible solu­
tion of the problem of logic, science would cease to exist, for the 
distinction between induction and deduction would have vanished, 
and this would imply the denial of any distinction between the 
process from particular to universal and that from universal to par­
ticular, and this again would involve the discovery that the univer­
sal and the particular are not separate things, but only distinct 
elements of a whole which even in thought is not divisible. This 
recognition is the death of science as such, because science is the 
assertion of the abstract concept.25 
CoUingwood says that the realization of this led scientists 
themselves away from the nineteenth century conviction that science 
discovered the laws of nature to the present day schools of thought, 
some of which maintain that the object of science is the possible, not 
the real, and others which maintain that science is not true but useful. 2 6 
A large number of eminent men, and apparently pragmatists main­
taining the utUity of science, hold the position which regards science 
as hypothesis. 2 7 This means that science asserts not what is true but 
what would be true if some condition were supposed. It remains in 
the hypothetical order, never dealing with the real order of actuality 
and fact. It is pure implication with nothing asserted. 
24 Jbid., p. 179. 
25 Tbid., pp. 179-180. 
2 6 See ibid., pp. 180-181. 
2 7 See ibid., p. 182. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
81 
Science asserts, not the actual truth, but what would be true 
if something were true which is laid down as an hypothesis. It 
asserts, never that S is P, but that if there were an S it would be 
P. Its procedure therefore consists, first, in making an assumption, 
secondly in deducing the consequences of that assumption. Through­
out this process it never makes an assertion, in the sense of a 
categorical judgement, at aU. Its judgements are hypothetical from 
beginning to end.. . . Science is a pure tissue of implications, none 
of which are asserted as facts. The scientist may frame any 
hypothesis he Ukes; the freedom of untrammeUed supposal is his; 
he must merely suppose something, and then work out the conse-
quences—aU equally matter of supposal, never of assertion—which 
it entaUs.28 
Science never reaUy grasps the individual, or historical fact, which 
is the concrete basis presupposed by aU scientific abstraction. The 
Renaissance scientists explicated this implicit presupposition in 
discovering that science is an abstraction from the concrete reality of 
history. Scientists recognize fact indeed, but "a scientific fact is a fact 
purged of its crude and scientifically scandalous concreteness,"29 and 
isolated from its historical setting by being reduced to the mere instance 
of a rule. The concrete fact has been tumed from an individual into 
a particular. 
The facts with which empirical science concerns itseU are facts 
thus de-individuaUzed, de-factuaUzed, and this is what distinguishes 
the sense in which even the most empirical science uses the word 
'fact' from the sense it bears in history.30 
CoUingwood concludes that science is therefore expUcitly supposal, 
which is identical with questioning, the cutting edge of the mind, 
implying behind it a body of information or assertion. The body of 
science is therefore not in a scientific form but in the form of history. 
Every scientist knows this in acknowledging that only the possession 
of an ordered body of facts enables him to frame the hypotheses which 
are the very essence of the scientific life. CoUingwood's conclusion, 
therefore, is that: 
Science is the question whose answer is history. To ask that 
question implies that history is abeady in existence; and thus we 
get a process of history—science—history. But history on its first 
appearance is implicit; it is not known for what it is, and is indeed 
despised as the mere world of empirical or sensuous reaUty. It is 
28 Tbid., p. 183. 
» Tbid., p. 186. 
3 0 Jbid., p. 186. 

82 
Logic, Phüosophy, and History 
only when it has been distiUed into terms of science and then re­
stored to itseÜ" in the form of concepts or laws that it is recognized 
for what it reaUy is. 3 1 
The paradox of science may be expressed by calling it intuitive 
thought, mtuition is the questioning, immediate side of experience: 
thought is the asserting, explanatory side. Science is expUcit to itsetf 
as thought, but it turns out on inquiry to be identical with the ques­
tioning activity; that is, it realizes the contradiction of a type of 
thought which is not thought precisely because it is thought's 
opposite, intuition. 3 2 
But, however erroneous science may be in abstracting the universal 
from its instances, it is a necessary stage in human development. It 
has the character of a utUitarian good, as the Pragmatists weU recog­
nize, first, in providing us with the material needs of life, and, second, 
in freeing us from subjection to our mythologizing imagination. 
As art and religion lift man above the level of the beasts, science 
lifts the civüized man above the level of the savage. The material 
utility of science, its service in feeding and clothing and sheltering 
us, carrying us from place to place and providing us with comforts, 
is the least part of its importance. Its real gift is simply the end of 
drearning and the promise of a waking life. It sweeps aside with 
a ruthless hand aU mythology, aU symbols that are heavy with un­
realized meanings and dark with the terrors of dreamland, and bids 
the mind face the world's mystery armed with nothing but its five 
senses and the sling of its wit. 3 3 
A.ii. Distinction between Understanding and Reason 
CoUingwood says that " . . . the revolt against science . . . is 
summed up in the antithesis of understanding and reason. Under­
standing is abstract thought, the 'faculty of concepts', thought spon­
taneously originating concepts or categories out of itsetf with no assis­
tance from the world of fact." 3 4 Plato's concepts were postulated as 
seU-subsistent entities, and the Baconian concepts were allegedly the 
actual structure of the world of fact, discovered embedded in that world 
by the mind. CoUingwood says that the Platonists and Baconians err 
in overlooking the original act of abstraction which severed the univer­
sal from its particulars. The universal, which is the object of the 
understanding, is the universal torn away from its particulars by an 
act of abstraction and not the universal in its true actuality. 
3 1 Vbid., pp. 186-187. 
3 2 Jbid., p. 188. 
3 3 Tbid., p. 194. 
3 4 Speculum Mentis, pp. 195-196. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
83 
But, whereas understanding is abstract thought, reason is con­
crete thought, whose object is a universal which deals with facts as 
they are, respecting the differences which are organic to that univer­
sal itseU. Reason, therefore, deals with things in terms of their internal 
relations and their necessary mutual implication. 
Reason is concrete thought, thought which does not arbitrarily 
create to itsetf, by abstraction, any object it pleases for the sake of 
ease in thinking it, but sets out to study facts as they are, and to 
conceive a universal which is truly the universal of its own parti­
culars. Hence reason thinks the concrete universal, not the bare setf-
identity of science which leaves aU difference outside itsetf, but the 
identity to which difference is organic and essential. Understand­
ing hypostatizes the concept into an object of intuition by itseU, out­
side its own particulars; and this object is nothing real, but simply 
the fruit of an error. Reason finds the concept in the particulars, form­
ing with them an inseparable unity. 3 5 
Reason, therefore, has as its object the concrete universal, which 
is the immanent structure of the world of experience, not an indepen­
dent and isolated entity extrinsic to its particulars. 
The concept is not something outside the world of sensuous ex­
perience: it is the very structure or order of that world itself. The 
arrangement and the material arranged are only distinguished by 
an abstract and arbitrary distinction within the indivisible whole. 
The universal is only real as exemplified in the particular, the par­
ticular as informed by the universal.. .. The meaning [of a Unguistic 
symbol] or concept or universal is not a separate object of con­
sciousness other than the world of sense; not something seen 
through a vefl of sense, but the structure of that veil itsetf. This is 
the point of view of concrete thought.36 
Whereas the unity of the abstract universal is unity in spite o/dif-
ferences, a unity to which diversity is extrinsic, the unity of the con­
crete universal is a unity because of its differences, a unity to which 
the differences are relevant. It is a unity which demands diversity 
within it, a true unity of opposites, a unity in and through difference, 
a unity which essentiaUy requires its differences. The concrete universal 
is thus a unity of universal and particular, it is the universal o/its par­
ticulars and they are the particulars of their universal. 
The characteristic of reason is the unity of universal and parti­
cular, or in general the unity of opposites. The concrete reaUty of 
3 5 Md., p. 196. 
3 6 Tbid., p. 159. "The recognition of this logical form [the concrete universal, unity 
in diversity] as the true type of universaUty is the key to aU sound philosophy." B. 
Bosanquet, The Principte o{lndvoiduality and Value, London, MacmiUan, 1927, p. 39. 

84 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
any one opposite is its union with the other; not a bare indistin­
guishable identity but a union in which the two sides can be dis­
tinguished but not separated.37 
The identity of the concrete universal is, therefore, not the abstract 
seU4dentity usuaUy expressed by the formula A is A, which is iden­
tity in indistinction, but is coincident identity of opposites. Whereas 
the abstract principle of identity rules thought in the form of under­
standing, the concrete principle of identity, the principle of coinci­
dence of opposites, rules thought in the form of reasoning. 
The identity, in the sense of an indistinguishable identity, of 
opposites is not the principle of reason but a disease, endemic and 
mortal, of understanding. From the violent and arbitrary separation 
of two opposites, the assertion that A shaU be only A and not-A 
only not-A, it necessarUy results that A, now falsely asserted as a 
setf-subsistent concrete reality, generates a not-A within itself and 
the not-A conversely generates an A. Thus each of the terms, A and 
not-A, produces its own opposite, and when that has happened they 
cannot be any longer distinguished. This is the coincidentia crpposi-
torum which always dogs the footsteps of abstract or scientific think­
ing. Matter and mind, affirmation and negation, good and evil, truth 
and falsehood, universal and particular, are no sooner resolutely 
separated than they turn into each other. Hold up a stick, and 
distinguish its top and bottom: there you have a concrete synthesis 
of opposites in an individual whole. Take a knife and cut it in two 
in the middle, into a top haU" and a bottom half. You have now 
separated the opposites. But the instant the separation is complete, 
the top haU has its own bottom and the bottom haH its own top. 
The top haif is no longer simply a top and the bottom haU no longer 
simply a bottom; each is at once a top and a bottom, each is indis­
tinguishable from the other. Your opposites have now coincided. 
Abstract thought fends off the coincidentia oppositorum by deUberate-
ly ignoring the bottom of the top haU and the top of the bottom haU, 
and in defiance of facts simply (that is, abstractly and falsely) call­
ing the one haU aU top and the other haU aU bottom. Thus 'the 
universal' as such is a particular universal, and 'the particular' as 
such is nothing but the universal of particularity; but formal logic 
conceals this fact and makes its very living by the pretence that it 
has not hypostatized (particularized) the universal.38 
37 Speculum Mentis, pp. 196-197. See also B. Bosanquet, The Principle ofIndividual-
ity and Value, p. 37. 
3 8 Speculum Mentis, pp. 197-198. See also B. Bosanquet, The Principle oflndividual-
ity and Value, pp. 36-38; 47-50. The objection of the British Idealists, mainly Bradley 
and Bosanquet, to the formulation of the law of identity as A is A is that it is unsuit­
able for expressing any judgment. Any assertion, to be meaningful at aU beyond 
tautology, requires that subject and predicate be in some way different. The formula 
A is A uses the same symbol for the predicate as it does for the subject, and, as 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
85 
The antithesis or mutual externality of understanding and reason 
is the same as the antithesis of science and history, and is the work 
of the understanding and scientific thought. Reason repudiates this 
separation of reasoning from the understanding by repudiating the 
abstraction that sunders them and recognizes the concrete identity 
of understanding and reasoning itself. Understanding, the scientific 
consciousness, is committed to the error of denying its own identity 
with history, whereas history overcomes that error and sees itsetf as 
science transcending science, seeing itsetf (i.e., history) as a concrete 
universal of which science is one of its moments. 3 9 
A.iii. History as Concrete Thought 
Collingwood attributes the revelation that the hypotheses or ab­
stractions of science rest on the knowledge of fact to Descartes' dis­
covery that all science rests upon the one indubitable certainty that 
I think, therefore I exist. The thought and the existence spoken of by 
Descartes were not abstractions. What Descartes said, and meant, was 
that the concrete historical fact, the fact of my actual present aware­
ness, is the root of science. CoUingwood says that Descartes was only 
going a step beyond Bacon when he saw, more profoundly, that before 
a scientist can make use of any fact he must observe it, and his 
observing of it is the fact that reaUy matters in the last resort. Des­
cartes' formula is the deepest and most fruitful expression of the dis­
covery that science presupposes history and can never go behind 
history. And this discovery implicitly resolves science into history. 4 0 
In perception there is found the identical process of reconstruc­
tion from data which constitutes the essence of history, namely, to 
grasp the object as a whole in a synthesis of front and back, top and 
bottom, past, present, and future. 4 1 The historian's business is with 
fact; history is the affirmation of fact. The business of history is to 
state what happens and has happened, and that only. And the true 
historian is not content with stating facts, but endeavours to under-
such, fails to bring out the essential of any judgment which is the assertion of an iden­
tity in a diversity. See H. B. Acton, "The Theory of Concrete Universals," Mind, XLV 
(1936), p. 427. "Identity without difference (which is caUed abstract identity), would 
make judgment impossible. . . . K, then, judgment is possible, there must be some 
other sort of identity, which is caUed identity in difference or concrete identity." (Md., 
p. 428.) "The reason why, according to idealists, there can be no difference without 
identity, is that difference is a relation, and no terms can be related unless they are 
identical in some respects." (ibid., p. 429.) 
3 9 See Speculum Mentis, p. 198. 
4 0 See ibid., p. 202. 
4 1 See ibid., p. 212. 

86 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
stand them. He seeks to know not only what happened but why it 
happened. 4 2 
Fact is by definition concrete, and the historical fact in its fuU con-
creteness aheady contains its explicative causes and motives within 
itsetf; for the historian to know what happened is to know why it hap­
pened; its relations to its context of fact are not extrinsic but intrinsic 
to it. To know the fact is to know it in its relations to other facts. So, 
whereas science knows in terms of external relations, history knows 
in terms of internal relations, that is, relations that make the fact be 
the kind of fact it actually is. 
To understand the facts is to affirm them not in arbitrary isola­
tion but in their actual relation to their context. The reason why an 
event happened is sought by the historian not in an abstract scien­
tific law but in facts, and facts again. The cause of an event in history 
is its mtrinsic relation to other events in history, and the causal nexus 
is not external to them but lies in their very nature. The motives 
of historical personages are not psychical forces brooding above the 
flow of historical events: they are elements in these events, or rather, 
they are simply these events themselves as purposed and planned 
by the agents.43 
4 2 See Md., p. 217. 
4 3 Jbid., p. 218. It may be noted in passing the Ught that this throws on CoUing­
wood's assertion that history gives 'insight' into events (see An Autobiography, p. 101). 
The scientist is external to the objects he studies, and they are externai one to the 
other, and the abstract universal, the principle of unity and inteUigibUity in science, 
is external to its particulars. The form of externality rules the mode of knowing en­
tirely; aU that is known scientificaUy is known 'exteriorly' and 'in its externals.' But 
the historian must penetrate to the 'inside' of events, to know them not in their ex­
ternal relations to one another, but in their internal relations whereby they are essen-
tiaUy interrelated according to what they are. The historian is immanent to his facts 
and situates himseU so that he sees events 'from the inside,' that is, according to their 
internal relations. But the inner side of events is thought, namely human motives 
and purposes. To know the thought within the event is to know together what hap­
pened and why it happened. This is to have 'insight' into the event, to know it 'from 
the inside' according to its internal relations to contextual events. Thought has the 
mode of 'insidedness' or 'interiority to seU' or concreteness, whereas science and its 
object, nature, have the mode of exteriority, which sets up the relationships of other 
to other, whose unity can then only be that of mere external relatedness. So, accord­
ing to CoUingwood, whereas science proceeds by way of induction based on obser­
vation and experiment which provide the facts, history proceeds by way of 'insight.' 
According to Bernard Bosanquet, The Principle of Individuality and Value, pp. 74-77, 
the natural order, which is characterised by spatial exteriority, is subordinated to and 
ultimately reduced to the inwardness of the spiritual order. External relations are to 
be explained ultimately in terms of internal relations, or science in terms of human 
consciousness. "Inwardness, when meant to be the equivalent of Individuality or the 
character of spirit, should be taken as a type of experience superior to externaUty and 
mduding it." (Tbid., p. 74.) "Externality can subsist only as subordinated to inward­
ness, but inwardness can subsist only in the conquest of externaUty." (ftid., p. 76.) 
When scientific facts, derived from observation and experimentation, and their uni-

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
87 
Whereas art ignores reality and religion ignores thought and 
science ignores fact, there is no feature of experience nor attitude of 
mind towards its object that history ignores. The recognition of fact 
as fact is the recognition of whatever in any sense is real. And the 
historicaUy determined fact is the absolute object whose distinctive 
mark is individuality, which is concreteness.44 That is, the meaning 
of a fact as a fact is its impUcation of and implication by every other 
fact. The world of meaning by which a fact is mediated to know the 
meaning of that fact is the all inclusive world of everything that is, 
including that fact itsetf. It is a systematic whole to which that indi­
vidual fact, together with every other individual fact, is essential, or 
relevant. 
The object as individual is the whole of what exists, and this 
is concretely articulated into parts each of which is again individual, 
and so to infinity. Within the cycle of this infinite articulation of the 
absolute object the historical spirit moves freely in aU directions, 
never finding anything that is not individual and unique, never find­
ing anything that is not, on the one hand, composed of individual 
and unique parts, and, on the other, itself a part of an individual 
formities expressed in the different laws of nature, are systematised into the organic 
totaUty and seen as members of a world or cosmos, the external relations of the natural 
order are reduced to the internal relations of a conscious totality. Collingwood, con­
trary to Bosanquet, would say that the external relations according to which science 
totalises experience are ultimately to be reduced to the internal relations according 
to which the historical consciousness totalises by means of historical 'insight,' rather 
fhan through scientific systematisation. For Bosanquet, on the contrary, concrete totaUty 
is found in scientific systematisation when science achieves a cosmic or world view 
of its object (ttnd., pp. 35-37). But, given CoUingwood's identification of historical knowl­
edge with the inner side of events, and what he caUs 'insight,' the reduction of exter­
naUty to spiritual inwardness of Bosanquet becomes CoUingwood's reduction of 
abstract, scientific knowledge to concretehistorical knowledge. Thus he says (Specu­
lum Mentis, p. 293) that "aU externaUty is imaginary, for externaUty—a mutual out-
sidedness in the abstract sense of the denial of a mutual insidedness—is as such abstrac­
tion, and abstraction is always intuition or imagination." CoUingwood seems to be 
much more logical than Bosanquet in accepting history as the science of concrete in-
dividuaUty and universality par excellence. Bosanquet's depreciation of history in this 
respect is found in his The Principk ofIndividuality and Value, pp. 32-33 and 78^51, where 
he alleges that the best examples of a concrete universal are to be found in Art, Reli­
gion and PhUosophy, which "take us far beyond the spatio-temporal externaUty of 
history" (p. 80). "History is a hybrid form of experience, incapable of any considerable 
'degree of being or trueness' " (pp. 78-79). CoUingwood remarks (The Idea ofHistory, 
p. 143) that "Dr. mge . . . foUows Bosanquet in conceiving the proper object of knowl­
edge PlatonicaUy as a timeless world ofpure universaUty." However, see below, this 
chapter, p. 136, n. 228, for impUcations within Bosanquet's same work for amend­
ment of his aUegedly static timeless notion of concrete totality in line with CoUing­
wood's notion of factual, historical concreteness. Correlate with the treatment of 'in­
sight' in chapter 6, below, pp. 216-221 and n. 45 of p. 221. 
4 4 See Speculum Mentis, p. 218. 

88 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
and unique whole. The object, as a system of fact so organized, is 
objective throughout, for every part is a true microcosm, and is truly 
infinite. 4 5 
The concreteness and individuality which is finaUy attained by 
the historical consciousness, was what the earlier forms of conscious­
ness were searching for. But each grasped it in such a way as to destroy 
that individuality. 
The aesthetic consciousness expresses itsetf in a single work of 
art. Here it finds a cosmos which like the world of history is indi­
vidual and unique, whose organization is a systematic structure of 
parts each displaying the same individuaUty, the same uniqueness, 
in its indispensable contribution to the whole. But it is only by an 
abstraction that the single work of art is a cosmos. Outside it are 
other works of art, each a cosmos in itserf, and these do not com­
bine into a totaUty which is itsetf a single aU-embracing work of art. 
Thus the aesthetic consciousness, instead of systematic, is monadic; 
and the monads, being windowless, are not so much reflections of 
the whole universe as rival claimants to be the whole universe. This 
rivalry is fatal to aU the claims aUke. Art is thus even within its own 
Umits a false form of individuality. 
ReUgion goes a step farther and finds exactly the same individu­
ality in God. God is the monad of monads, a cosmos whose struc­
ture is that of the absolute object. But God always stands over against 
a world whose very nature is to be outside him, and thus God for­
feits his own absoluteness. As long as the world stands over against 
him, his own individuaUty is unattained. And because reUgion is 
conscious of this, its search for objectivity is confessed to be vain. 
In science the attempt is made to bridge the guU between God 
and the world. Instead of God we find the concept of law, which 
because it is the law of the world no longer stands outside the world. 
Here what was transcendent has become immanent. But in this very 
success, failure is revealed; for it becomes plain that the immanence 
is a false immanence. The world is not a world of individuals but 
45 Brid., pp. 218-219. H. B. Acton says that, according to Bradley, the abstract univer­
sal is nothing but an adjective, a shadow which is nothing divorced from its body 
and, as such, cannot exist. "What Bradley . . . means by a concrete universal . . . [is] 
an individual, and his reason for holding that individuals are universal is that they 
are entities which preserve an identity amidst differences." H. B. Acton, "The Theory 
of Concrete UniversaIs," Mind, XLV (1936), p. 421. "Bradley's theory then is that what 
exist or are real are individuals, and individuals, being identities in difference, are 
universals." (Md., p. 422.) "bi [IdeaUsts'] terminology, 'individuals', 'concrete identi­
ties', and 'concrete univerals', aU stand for the same thing." (R>id., Mind, XLVI [1937] 
p. 1). Acton cites Bosanquet (Principle ofIndividuality and Value, p. 40) as saying that 
the most convenient example of a universal is not a quaUty such as redness, but a 
person, such as JuUus Caesar. "Julius Caesar is a universal because he is the same 
individual, although engaged in different activities, such as fighting in Gaul, marching 
into Italy, and so on. Abstracted from his various activities he is nothing; they are 
the differences which are required to make him the identity he is." (Md., p. 1.) 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
89 
a world of particulars, and because the concept is indifferent to the 
various particulars in which it is embodied, their diversity remains 
meaningless and the world is to that extent a chaos. What is indi­
vidual and organized as a system of individuals is not the world but 
only the concept, so that the failure of religion is repeated and the 
quest for immanence ends in transcendence, but an abstract trans­
cendence more intolerable than the concrete transcendence of reli­
gion. 
Thus the work of art, God, and the abstract concept are aU 
attempts on the part of thought to reach the organized individual­
ity of history. Art comes nearest to success; reUgion fails more open­
ly, and science most openly of aU. But this order of relative faUure 
is due to an inverse order of seriousness in facing the problem. Art 
ignores the real world altogether, and constructs an arbitrary cosmos 
of its own; reUgion contents itseU with a cosmos outside the world; 
and science alone tries to bring the concrete world into the unity, 
but destroys its concreteness in the attempt. But because aU are 
agreed that the real object must be an absolute individual, their 
faUure is whoUy redeemed by the success of history, which actuaUy 
achieves the idea of an object beyond which there is nothing and 
within which every part truly represents the whole. 4 6 
CoUingwood then gives a very clear description of what he means 
by the concrete universal and of its relevance to history and to the 
logic of history. 
This absolute whole is the concrete universal; for concrete uni­
versaUty is individuality, the individual being simply the unity of 
the universal and the particvdar. The absolute individual is universal 
in that it is what it is throughout, and every part of it is as individual 
as itseU. On the other hand it is no mere abstraction, the abstract 
quaUty of individuamess, but an individual which includes aU others. 
It is the system of systems, the world of worlds. Everything in it 
is determined by its place in the whole, but this is not determinism 
because every part deterrnines the whole and therefore by impUca-
tion every other part: so that each part taken separately may be re- 
v 
garded as the crucial determinant of everything else, just as every 
separate link bears the whole responsibflity for keeping the chain 
together. Everything in it is as unique as the whole, and the unique­
ness of every part is based upon the uniqueness of every other. The 
principle of its structure is not classification, the abstract concept, 
but the concrete concept, which is relevance, or impUcation. The 
only reason why this notion of a concrete universal is thought puz-
zUng or paradoxical is that our attempts at phüosophical theory suffer 
from the obsession of regarding science as the only possible kind 
of knowledge. For the concrete universal is the daUy bread of every 
46 Speculum Mentis, pp. 219-220. 

90 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
historian, and the logic of history is the logic of the concrete uni­
versal.47 
This identification of individuality with concrete universality by 
CoUingwood was already weU elaborated by Bernard Bosanquet in 
his ThePrinciple oflndividualityand Value, and Collingwood's thought 
is greatly ffluminated by a brief consideration of what Bosanquet says. 
Individuality, according to Bosanquet, means full determination, 
the determination whereby something not only 'is' but is fuUy 'what 
it is.' Whatever exists, exists as fuUy determinate; there is no mean­
ing in 'it is' apart from 'it is what it is.' Both Plato and Hegel agree 
that this fuU determination of each thing involves somehow the unity 
of 'is' and 'is not,' as, for instance, what is when a man is is not the 
same as what is when a horse is; the 'being' of a man is the simul­
taneous 'not-being' of a horse. Anything which involves together 'is' 
and 'is not' so far faUs to maintain itseU, and its maintenance in being 
is therefore to be referred to some other, which fuUy maintains itself 
in being without together faUing to do so. This is what is meant by 
a whole, by an individual, and especially by the primary instance of 
individual wholeness which one finds, according to Bosanquet, in a 
world or cosmos. A world or cosmos is that which contains aU dif­
ferences within itseU, and itself is not differentiated from anything 
else which is not itself. That is, outside itseU there is nothing; within 
itseU is everything. It is that to which aU things affected by otherness, 
relativity or negation in their being look for their maintenance and 
reason in being and in being what they are, that is, through their deter­
minate differences. 4 8 
. . . in as far as "is" affirms a certain determinate setf-main-
tenance, and "is not" affirms a different one, or the character of 
otherness in general, so far to attach the two as predicates to the 
same point of being is to allege that in its seU-maintenance itfaUs 
to maintain itself. This is so far to destroy the character of being as 
an expression for any positive experience. It is to posit and to annul 
in the same act. In so far, then, as an experience presents an ap­
pearance of this kind, a combination of "is" and "is not" (or "is 
other") without any distinction in the subject of affirmations, it faUs 
short of the character of being. . . . It undoes itself, and faUs to con­
serve itseU in any actual character. In as far, on the other hand, as 
the appearance of hostiUty to itself is removed, by transforming the 
content of the experience in question into what is relatively a sys­
tem, such as to accept both this and the other as cooperative and no 
47 Vbid., pp. 220-221. See also B. Bosanquet, The PrincipU ofIndividuality and Value, 
lect. 2, pp. 37^1 and p. 77. 
4 8 B. Bosanquet, The Principle ofIndividuality and Value, pp. 44^5. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
91 
longer conflicting members, the experience "is" in a higherdegree; 
its setf maintenance includes more reaUty; and is pro tanto less Ukely 
to be confronted with external facts beyond its power to assimilate.49 
Dynamic seU<ontainment and seU-maintenance in being without 
essential reference to other, is therefore the mark of truth, individu­
aUty and wholeness. The more self-contained a whole is the truer it 
is, and the greater is its capacity to maintain and so account for itseU 
and its members who are maintained through containment in it. This 
"appeal to the whole is not a detached or arbitrary procedure, but 
the same thing with the principle otherwise known as the principle 
of non-contradiction." 5 0 Doubt presupposes this whole of "aU that 
is," for itseU, fhat is the activity of doubting, exists as something within 
that whole, and is unable to advance anything against it. Any attempt 
to advance a contrary is already to agree that "something is" and this 
"something which is" is akeady contained in the system against which 
the doubter reacts. In other words, the doubter, in doubting, locates 
himseU within a system of totality which makes that activity of doubt­
ing meaningful. 5 1 Truth cannot be contradicted because it leaves 
nothing outside itsek (the whole of aU that is) upon which a contra­
diction could be grounded. 5 2 
IndividuaUty is the ultimate completeness of that character of 
wholeness and non-contradiction which we first generalized under 
the name of logical stabUity.53 
It makes no dUference whether one says that the criterion of ulti­
mate reaUty is wholeness, or individuaUty, or non-contradiction. Each 
is a name for "that which must stand . . . which has nothing without 
to set against it, and which is pure seU-maintenance."54 The tendency 
of our fullest experience is to ultimate individuality, or the absolute.55 
The whole effort of rational experience is to unfold that experience 
so that it is the experience of a rational being, fuUy conscious of what 
its experience means, and able to give a fuU account to itself of its 
experience. It is the fuU manifestation of experience as an ordered total­
ity, a passage from 'that it is' to 'what it is' made from within the 
resources of the experience itself, that is, by transforming the experi-
49 Md., p. 45. 
5 0 Md., p. 44. 
5 1 Md., pp. 43-44. 
5 2 Md., p. 41. 
53 Md., p. 68. 
54 Jbid., p. 68. 
5 5 Md., p. 69. 

92 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ence from being merely experienced, or felt, to an experience fuUy 
accounted for, that is, an experience explained. 5 6 It is what CoUing­
wood caUs a passage from the implicit to the expUcit as warranted 
by the logical potentiality of the concrete universal, whose logical 
potentiality consists in relevance or implication, as was said above. 5 7 
When CoUingwood says here that the principle of the structure 
of the concrete universal is relevance or implication I understand him 
to be referring to the constitution of fact by internal relations whereby 
fact is related to fact essentially or internally, or 'relevantly or imph-
catively.' The logical operation, then, is explication of the implicit, 
and unfolding of those internal relations whereby fact impUcating other 
facts together implicates the totality of fact in which each fact has its 
reason and intelligible meaning. This, according to Collingwood, is 
a logical operation quite distinct from either deduction or induction 
in which there is movement from something known to something other 
not previously known, not previously implicated, but added and 
related to prior knowledge by extrinsic relations. This latter type of 
inference is characteristic of abstract or classUicatory logic. 5 8 
I understand the foregoing to mean the foUowing. Science deals 
with units of intelligibUity which have their intelligibUity in themselves; 
their relations to concrete facts of experience are by means of extrin­
sic superadded relations which leave those unit intelligibUities un­
affected in themselves. The universals which are the objects of science 
are intelligible in themselves, and their relations to the facts which 
they make intelligible are extrinsic to them. This is the doctrine of real­
ism which Collingwood constantly combats. 5 9 Positivistic history, or 
history proceeding according to the mode of science, regards histor­
ical facts as atomic units, intelligible absolutely in themselves, and 
contextualized with other facts by means of external relations. The 
whole, constituted by such externaUy related units, is something secon­
dary to those related units themselves, the relation whereby they are 
related falling between them, not within them. 
But the reason sees the parts as made intelligible through and in 
the whole. The whole and the parts are in mutual inter-implication; 
5 6 Refer to clockface illustration, Chapter 3, pp. 71-72 above. 
5 7 See above, this chapter, pp. 86, 89. 
5 8 See this chapter, p. 86 n. 43 above, and Speculum Mentis, p. 218. 
5 9 "The theory of the concrete universal is presupposed throughout the whole 
of CoUingwood's phUosophy. It is . . . the basis upon which he launched his Ufelong 
attack on phUosophical realism and the theory of the abstract universal." L. Rubin­
off, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 154. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
93 
the relationship of the part to the whole defines the part, and it is 
inteUigible only through its relationship to every other part and, with 
every other part, to the whole of which it is the part. 6 0 
Central to the understanding of CoUingwood's rapprochement 
logic is the notion of system. 6 1 Concreteness does not mean atomic 
unity, as it does for the Positivists, but systematic unity, the unity 
of a system. And central to the notion of systematic unity is the notion 
of a standard or criterion. Even the artist proceeds according to some 
standard or criterion whereby he makes choices as he proceeds to the 
completion of his artistic work. But this standard or criterion, which 
is not expUcit to the artist, refers to wholeness or integrity which gives 
meaning to the artist's work and is the means whereby he judges 
throughout the execution of his work. The artist grasps the concrete 
universal of unity in diversity not in an inteUigible, systematized con­
cept, but at the level of expressed feeling. 6 2 
Likewise, the historian chooses his facts in accordance with some 
criterion, so that "no historian, however innocent, can proceed whoUy 
without a system of Quellenkritik, because his very Ufe as an historian 
is the perpetual exercise of some such criterion." 6 3 
The achievement of this concrete or historical point of view is 
together the recognition and transcendence of the abstractness of the 
scientUic point of view. 6 4 
6 0 L. Rubinoff, op. cit., p. 156, writes: "The important thing about the concrete 
universal is that it treats differences as essential. Each 'moment' of a concrete univer­
sal expresses a different yet identical aspect of the whole, and in so far as it is dif­
ferent contributes essentially to the unity of the whole." H. B. Acton, "The Theory 
of the Concrete Universal," Mind, XLV, 1936, p. 431, says: "IdeaUsts beUeve literally 
that nothing can be identical with itseU unless it is different from itseU." Acton says 
that this is what Bosanquet caUs the paradox at once of reaUty and of inference and 
that it is upon this contention that the theory of concrete universals rests. 
6 1 See this chapter, beIow, pp. 138 et seq. 
6 2 See Speculum Mentis, pp. 63-66, 71, 94, and especiaUy pp. 98-102. According 
to A. J. M. MUne in The Social Philosophy of English Idealism, the concrete universal, 
which is the central notion of nineteenth century IdeaUsm, is bound up with a theory 
of rational activity and can only be understood in the light of that theory (p. 15). It 
is neither an empirical nor a linguistic theory (p. 22) but precisely "a theory of the 
rationaUty of rational activity, of what acting rationally is. It is criteriological rather 
than logical in the technical sense, being an attempt to give an account of the criterion 
or standard, namely, rationality. It starts from the assumption that rational activity 
is going on and that we have a working practical knowledge of it . . . as a theory 
its aim is to take what we aUeady have a working knowledge of, and to try to get 
to know it better" (p. 22). This says in other words that the logical operation in deal­
ing with the concrete universal is expUcitating the already impUcit; see this chapter, 
above, pp. 86-87 and pp. 91-93. 
63 Speculum Mentis, p. 213. 
6 4 See ibid., p. 222. 

94 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The doctrine of the concrete universal is thus a necessary pre­
supposition of every genuine theory of history. It is in fact one of 
the criteria which historiography must employ in order to distin­
guish history from nature; for the difference between historical and 
scientific thinking (in general) is precisely the difference between 
thinking about the concrete and thinking about the abstract uni­
versal.65 
Concrete thinking is contextual thinking, that is, thinking to which 
the context of the object is essential. 
. .. history is nothing but conceiving the object as concrete fact, 
fact to which its context is not irrelevant but essential.66 
That is, everything, to the historical consciousness, is what it is 
precisely because of what everything else making up its context does 
to it, precisely through being its relevant context. This involves denial 
of the traditional doctrine of fixed substances implied in the dictum 
which states that "everything is what it is and not another thing" 
and in the Positivist doctrine of "hard facts." 
For CoUingwood, error is understood as a lapse from concrete­
ness into abstraction, and aU abstraction is dogmatism. Dogmatizing 
is the reason of error and it consists in faUure to criticize our assump­
tions and consequent faUure to recognize them as assumptions.67 "Our 
enemy is abstraction," 6 8 and "abstract knowledge is the same as 
error." 6 9 
Rejection of this synthesis of opposites, according to CoUingwood, 
is at the heart of realism, whose logic is the logic of abstraction. 7 0 
The modern realism (i.e., of Cook WUson, etc.) is a confused running 
to and fro between two principles, the abstract concept and the con­
crete fact. Kant saw that these two opposites existed only by implicit 
assumption of the one by the other, but he erred in attributing the 
unity of sensation and thought to consciousness in general, which 
is a lapse into abstraction, being a faUure on Kant's part to identify 
6 5 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 159. 
6 6 Speculum Mentis, p. 234. 
" See ibid., p. 288. 
68 Tbid., p. 268. 
69 Tbid., p. 313. For CoUingwood, error plays an essential part in the rnind's dynamic 
stracturing of itseU into a fuUy seU-conscious, seU consistent whole. It is error, through 
abstraction, that gives rise to the mind's immanent restlessness impeUing it to tran­
scend its present unsatisfactory condition and achieve seM-equüibrium in a fuller and 
more integrated expression of itseU. 
7 0 See Speculum Mentis, p. 285. See also Speculum Mentis, p. 310: "The synthesis 
of opposites . . . is the Ufe of concrete thought." 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
95 
the empirical and transcendental ego, or mind in its immediacy with 
mind in its ideal perfection. 7 1 
B. Logic of the Concrete Universal as Logic of Overlap of Classes 
According to Lionel Rubinoff, "the logic of the concrete univer­
sal, referred to in Speculum Mentis, is no other than the logic of the 
overlap of classes which is systematically expounded in An Essay on 
Philosophical Method (1933)."72 This logic, underlying the scale of forms 
displayed in Speculum Mentis, is developed in An Essay on Philosoph­
ical Method by way of contrasting the logic of the concrete universal, 
a logic of overlapping classes, with the classificatory logic of the abstract 
universal. 
The classificatory logic of genus and species, which plays a use­
ful and vital role within the boundaries of natural science, and is even 
a conditio sine qua non of the validity of its methods, 7 3 has for its object 
the abstract universal. Its aim is to guarantee the complete autonomy 
of each part of the classificatory whole, that is, each species of the 
genus. 7 4 
Provided that the logical doctrine of classification and division re­
mains within the boundaries of the natural sciences no serious error 
is involved. Serious difficulties arise when this method is applied to 
deal with concepts belonging more properly to philosophy. The 
attempt to classify a song or an opera as either poetry or music con­
sidered as species of the genus art is frustrated from the start. 7 5 
The essential difference between the logical structure of scientific 
concepts and the logical structure of philosophical concepts makes 
impossible, without contradiction, the appUcation of classificatory divi­
sion into genus and species to philosophical thought. 7 6 Philosophical 
species are not mutuaUy exclusive; they overlap. 7 7 
An Essay on Philosophical Method, in which CoUingwood unfolds 
the logical characteristics of the concrete universal, which is the object 
of phUosophy as the abstract universal is the object of science,78 
develops in the context of answering the question "What is PhUos-
7 1 See ibid., p. 285. 
72 Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 160. 
7 3 Tbid., p. 162. 
74 Md., p. 161. 
7 5 See ibid., p. 163. 
74 Md. 
77 mid. 
78 Md., p. 161. 

96 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ophy?" 7 9 Collingwood shows throughout the course of this work that 
the answer to that question cannot be given, without destroying the 
very nature and distinctiveness of philosophy, by distinguishing 
thought, as a classificatory genus, into a number of species and sub­
species and locating philosophy as an autonomous, exclusive species 
or sub-species of the common genus, thought. To proceed thus would 
be to absolutize logic "as a master science having jurisdiction over 
the whole field of science" 8 0 and falsely absolutize abstract thought 
and the abstract universal which is the principle of aU classificatory, 
hence scientific, thinking. 
The doctrine of dassificatory genus and species gets into difficulties 
and soon becomes unmanageable when appUed to "the species of 
a phUosophical concept such as the life of spirit or rnind," 8 1 "to the 
classification of the sciences in general," 8 2 "to the explanation of ethical 
behaviour [as] provided in the New Leviathan"83 and to moral con­
cepts, 8 4 "to the solution of the problem of evU," 8 5 and generaUy 
"simUar difficulties arise when we attempt to apply this doctrine to 
those concepts pertaining to human nature and the human condi­
t i o n , " 8 6 including history, of which the view according to CoUing­
wood 8 7 "sees everything in that history as having its own raison d'etre 
and corning into existence in order to serve the needs of the men whose 
minds have corporately created i t . " The principle whereby these 
entities are made intelligible is not the abstract universal, but a uni­
versal of another kind, a concrete universal of identity in dUference 
in which the differentials are intimate to the common genus, and the 
members thereof are related, not by the external relations of mutual­
ly exclusive, seU" autonomous species, but by internal relations of 
mutual implication and dependence. 
An Essay on Philosophical Method develops the contrast of the logi­
cal aspects of phUosophical thought with that of scientific thought with­
in the framework of the traditional division of logic into the consid-
7 9 See An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. v and pp. 1-2. 
8 0 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 161; see also Speculum 
Mentis, p. 49. 
8 1 L. Rubinoff, op. cit., p. 165. 
8 2 Jbid., pp. 161, 162. 
83 nrid., p. 168. 
84 Vbid., p. 164. 
85 VM., p. 172. 
86 Ш., p. 163. 
87 The Idea ofHistory, p. 77; see also L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of 
Metaphysics, pp. 170-171. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
97 
eration of concepts, judgments and reasonings. He first contrasts the 
logic of concepts, showing how the logical behaviour of concepts differs 
in their philosophical usage when compared with their scientific usage, 
which latter usage has been the exclusive concern of the traditional 
logical treatment of concepts. 
B.i. The Logic of Concepts 
Collingwood begins by contrasting the exclusivist characteristic 
of concepts in science with their mutual implicatoriness in philosophy, 
and concludes by showing that philosophical concepts constitute an 
overlap of classes in a scale of forms, as contrasted with the isolation­
ist classificatory nature of genus-species conceptualization which 
defines the scientific way of conceiving. 
B.i.a. The Exclusivist Nature of the Scientific Concepts 
of the Exact and the Empirical Sciences 
In regard to concepts, CoUingwood first shows the exclusivist char­
acter of concepts as these are considered by traditional logicians in 
their doctrine of classification and division. A generic class is divided 
into species which are further subdivided into sub-species. Individual 
instances are then classUied under the generic concept in such a way 
that each individual appears as a member of one specific class only. 8 8 
Thus, every individual present in the generic class wiU be present 
in one and only one, of the spedfic classes, which are thus exclu­
sive in relation to each other and exhaustive in relation to the generic 
class.89 
In general, the concepts of the exact sciences conform to the rules 
of classffication and division as laid down by logicians 9 0 and the same 
general conformity appears in the concepts of empirical science.91 At 
every stage in the division which Natural History makes, of organ­
isms into animals and vegetables, the animal kingdom into vertebrates 
and invertebrates, vertebrates into mammals, birds, reptiles and fishes, 
etc., there occurs a division of one concept, a logical genus, into others, 
its logical species, which are mutually exclusive and together exhaust 
the genus. Doubtful cases leave the classificatory system intact in 
principle. 
8 8 See An Essay on Philosophical Method, pp. 26-28. 
89 Vbid., p. 28. 
9 0 Md., p. 29. 
91 Ibid., p. 30. 

98 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
B.i.b. Mutual Implication of the Species of Philosophical Concepts 
But this traditional theory of classification and division, though 
a true account of scientific concepts, whether of exact or empirical 
science, is found to be inapplicable without some modification to 
philosophical concepts. The mutual exclusiveness characteristic of the 
species of a generic class is not characteristic of philosophical concepts. 
The specific classes of a philosophical genus do not exclude one 
another, they overlap one another. This overlap is not exceptional, 
it is normal; and it is not negligible in extent, it may reach formidable 
dimensions.92 
The predicates unity, goodness and truth are assigned to every 
being, and if, with Aristotle, we reject their equivocity we must say 
that they are concepts of a peculiar kind which defy any classifica­
tory system. 
Just as Aristotle showed that the concept of good overlaps or 
transcends or diffuses itseU across the divisions of the categories, 
so according to this traditional formula there is a similar overlap or 
transcendence or diffusion in the concepts of unity and reality.93 
Some terms admit of both a philosophical and scientific usage, 
but they undergo a change of meaning in passing from one sphere 
to another. The concept of matter is an instance of this. 
The difference between the two phases of the concept is that 
in Newtonian physics matter is the name of a certain class of things 
separate from other classes of things, such as minds, and appear­
ances like colours or sounds depending for their existence on the 
mind to which they appear; in materialistic metaphysics it is the 
name of reaUty as a whole, and every distinction Uke that between 
so-caUed matter and so-caUed rnind is reduced to a distinction within 
matter itself.94 
SimUarly, mind, for the scientific psychologist, is the name for 
something outside other things regarded as material, but for the 
spirituaUstic phUosopher it is a name for all reality. 9 5 
It appears from these instances that when a concept has a dual 
significance, phUosophical and non-phUosophical, in its non-phUo-
sophical phase it qualUies a limited part of reality, whereas in its 
phUosophical it leaks or escapes out of these limits and invades the 
9 2 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 31. 
9 3 Tbid., p. 33. 
9 4 Tbid., p. 34. 
95 Tbid. Correlating with what has been noted elsewhere, scientific concepts con­
ceive their object exclusively and in terms of external relations, philosophical con­
cepts conceive their object inclusively and in terms of internal relations. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
99 
neighbouring regions, tending at last to colour our thought of real­
ity as a whole. As a non-philosophical concept it observes the rules 
of classification, its instances forming a class separate from other 
classes; as a philosophical concept it breaks these rules and the class 
of its instances overlaps those of its coordinate species.96 
CoUingwood then shows that the attempt to deal logicaUy with the 
concept "thought" as a genus divided into the species judgment and 
inference and the attempt to deal ethically with "good" as a genus 
divided into the species the pleasant, the expedient and the right, soon 
breaks down. Judgments turn out to implicate inference, and infer­
ences to impUcate judgments, the useful can be pleasant, and the useful 
and pleasant can be right, and the right can be either useful or plea­
sant or both. 9 7 
Then again, the attempt, in phUosophy, to treat logic and ethics 
as two distinct wholes independent of one another also breaks down. 
We can consider thought (in logic) and action (in ethics) as distinct 
in essence as much as we like, but in their concrete existent instances 
they are so connected that an instance of one is an instance of the 
other. The same mutual impUcation is found in metaphysics, aesthetics 
and the other phUosophical sciences.98 
. . . this type of structure in which spedfic classes overlap, is 
so deeply rooted in the subject-matters with which phUosophy has 
always been concerned, that to set one's face against it means ab­
juring any attempt to think seriously about matters of that kind. 9 9 
If phUosophical concepts have a peculiar type of logical structure 
in which the spectfic classes overlap, no method can be used i n 
phUosophy which presupposes that species as such are mutuaUy exclu­
sive. We cannot phUosophicaUy study the specific forms of the generic 
concept action the way a scientist coUects instances of a generic con­
cept (say roses) and sort them into specific, mutuaUy exclusive classes. 
K we thus sorted actions into those done from duty, those done from 
interest, those done from inclination, and then proceeded to examine 
each species in turn, before long we would find ourselves confronted 
by an overlap; certain actions done from interest would be right, cer­
tain actions done from duty would be pleasant, and so on. The mutual 
exclusiveness characteristic of the specific classes of a common genus 
would break down. The mutuaUy exclusive external relationships of the 
96 Jbid., p. 35. 
9 7 See ibid., pp. 36^3. 
9 8 See ibid., pp. 43^4. 
99 Md., pp. 44-45. 

100 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
different classes with respect to each other would surreptitiously give 
way to a system of internal relationships according to which instances 
of one kind would be found simultaneously to be instances of another 
kind. 1 0 0 
We can begin to see that what is forcing itseU upon our attention 
when we come to look at things philosophicaUy, as cUstinct from look­
ing at them scientificaUy, is that behind the diversity recognized by 
science there is a more fundamental and basic unity-in-diversity which 
is the object of philosophical thought. Scientific thought operates 
through dispersal and diversification of its objects whereas philosoph­
ical thought operates by bringing aU things back to their fundamental 
unity. The movement of phUosophy is thus a movement, not of dis­
sipation in speciaUzation, but of rapprochement or return to reestabUshed 
unity and harmony, the need for which CoUingwood underscored 
heavUy in his Speculum 
Mentis.101 
CoUingwood distinguishes two faUacies committed by anyone who 
persists in using classificatory, scientific logic beyond the domain of 
inquiry into the natural world in asserting the autonomy of coordi­
nated species.102 
The first is the fallacy of precarious margins, 1 0 3 which falsely sup­
poses, owing to undue commitment to classUicatory logic, that 
The overlap which has ab:eady affected a certain area of the class 
in question can be trusted not to spread, and that beyond its limit 
there Ues a marginal region in which the instances exhibit only one 
of the specific forms, uncontaminated by the presence of the other.104 
This is precarious, CoUingwood says, because, once adrmtting the over­
lap in principle, there is no reason to assume that it wUl stop at any 
given point. 1 0 5 
The second fallacy, which implicates and is mutuaUy implicated 
by the first, is the faUacy of identified coincidents, 1 0 6 which states that 
every instance of a concept belongs to that concept in exactly the same 
way; the essence of each instance wUl then be the same (abstract) 
1 0 0 See ibid., pp. 42^3; 46-48. 
1 0 1 Pp. 25-36. Thus, p. 36: ". . . we now recognize the nature of our disease. What 
is wrong with us is precisely the detachment of these forms of experience—art, reU­
gion, and the rest—from one another. . . . " 
1 0 2 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 162. 
1 0 3 See An Essay on Philosophical Method, pp. 48-49. 
104 Tbid., p. 48. 
105 ibid. 
1 0 6 See ibid., pp. 48-49; see also L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMeta-
physics, p. 162. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
101 
characteristic, so that in the end the instances cannot really be sep­
arated. 
I propose to caU the faUacy of identified coincidents . . . the false 
principle . . . that where there is no difference in the extension of two 
concepts, there is no distinction between the concepts themselves.107 
These two fallacies are alternative appUcations of one single prin­
ciple which is false in philosophy, however true it may be in science, 
namely that when a generic concept is divided into its species there is 
a corresponding division of its instances into mutuaUy exclusive classes. 
I caU this the faUacy of false disjunction, because it consists in 
the disjunctive proposition that any instance of a generic concept 
must faU either in one or in another of its specific classes; and this 
is false because since they overlap, it may faU in both. 1 0 8 
ColUngwood then explains that this has a positive and a negative 
application. 
AppUed positively, this yields the faUacy of precarious margins: 
namely that, since there admittedly is a distinction between two 
concepts, there must be a difference between their instances. Ap­
pUed negatively, it yields the faUacy of identified coincidents: namely 
that, since the instances can admittedly not be separated, there is 
no distinguishing the concepts.109 
CoUingwood summarizes this into "the first rule of phUosophical 
method," which is: 
. . . to beware of false disjunctions and to assume that the specific 
classes of a phUosophical concept are always liable to overlap, so 
that two or more specifically dtffering concepts may be exempUfied 
in the same instances. . . . The rule may be put. . . by saying that 
any distinction in phUosophy may be a distinction without a differ­
ence; or, alternatively, that where two phUosophical concepts are 
cUstinguished Aristotle's formula [for the overlap of classes—the two 
concepts 'are the same thing'—the traditional way of referring to v 
this principle is to speak of 'a distinction without a difference', that 
is, a distinction in the concepts without a difference in the instances] 
may hold good, that the two are the same thing but their being is 
different.110 
PhUosophy, therefore, cannot definitively dassify its subject matter 
the way a naturalist or botanist arranges species of plants or animals. 
107 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 49. 
108 Ybid., p. 49. 
109 Brid. 
110 Jbid., pp. 49-50. 

102 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
tf the philosopher does employ classification of the genus-species type 
it is only provisional and as looking forward to something more fun­
damental. We may indeed classify actions as those done from duty 
and those done from inclination, but we must be ready to recognize 
that instances of one may also be instances of the other. 
We may use the classification merely as a means to fixing our 
situation on the specific pecuUarities of acting from duty as such and 
acting from inclination as such. The true work of philosophy wiU 
be the distinguishing of concepts Uke these coexisting in their 
instances.111 
But this existential coexistence, on the other hand, will not be 
simply enumerative, for there wül be logical relations between the 
members. 
In an empirical concept like man, there is no apparent connexion 
between such elements as having ten toes and having the power 
of speech, but in a philosophical concept there cannot be this 
looseness of structure and the various elements must be somehow 
interrelated. Hence no object of philosophical thought can be right­
ly conceived as a mere aggregate, whether of logicaUy distinguished 
elements or of spatial or temporal parts . . . either of these would 
imply that the connexions between the parts are accidental whereas 
they must in reality be essential.112 
This means that what from the aspect of a classificatory system 
is considered to be a collection of specificaUy distinguished elements, 
externaUy related and differentiated by differences extrinsic to their 
common, abstract genus, when philosophicaUy considered as existen-
tially realized, are seen to be internally connected, that is, connected 
by internal relations in the realization of a concrete universal to which 
they as its participants or members are intrinsic, essential and rele­
vant, there being no understanding of the universal apart from the 
instances, or of the instances apart from the universal. 
A consequence of operating with such intrinsically related in­
stances is that philosophy brings along with it its starting point which 
is constantly revised in the process of philosophizing. 1 1 3 Philosophiz­
ing is simply the elaboration of that starting point in terms of intel­
ligible and meaning giving factors that are intrinsic to it, the work of 
1 1 1 Rrid., p. 51. 
1 1 2 ttrid., pp. 51-52. That is, logical imphcations are intrinsic to the phUosophical 
existent. As Bosanquet says in The Principle ofIndividuality and Value, p. 44, "There 
is no meaning in 'it is' apart from 'it is what it is.' " That is, the phUosophical exis­
tent is fuUy determined, and this, as wUl be shown later, is through significant nega­
tion. See below, section D of this chapter, especiaUy pp. 146-147. 
1 1 3 Correlate with p. 71, n. 46 of Chapter 3, above. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
103 
philosophy being to bring that starting point (lived experience) from 
a state of implicit mtemgjbüity to explicit intelligibility by etching into 
it the relevant distinctions which will bring it from mere experienced 
actuality to an unfolded actuality, seen in terms of the intelligible 
distinctions within it whereby it is an inteUigible and rational experi­
ence without in any way stepping outside the experience, but rather, 
working within the experience and elaborating and clarifying it from 
within. 1 1 4 Thus, in a sense, the starting point is never left (as science 
starts from experienced fact, but steps outside it, into the world of 
abstract, hypothetical, universals for its explanation, which explana­
tion always remains extrinsic to the instances of the experience that 
it purports to explain). 
Thinking philosophically, whatever else it means, means con-
stantiy revising one's starting point in the Ught of one's conclusions 
and never allowing oneseU to be controUed by any cast-iron rule 
whatever.115 
B.i.c. Distinction and Opposition of Philosophical Concepts 
Collingwood then asks, what is the kind of difference that exists 
between the species of a phUosophical concept that makes such an 
overlap possible?116 
Subdividing the question, by distinguishing dUferences into dif­
ferences of degree and dUferences of kind, he asks whether one or 
the other of these kinds of difference can explain the overlap. 
Mere differences of degree are rejected, since the crucial point at 
which any spedfic class ended would be the point at which another 
began, hence mutuaUy exclusive of each other reckoned from that 
point. 1 1 7 
Mere differences of kind are also excluded as impotent to account 
for the overlap of classes typical of phUosophical concepts. Sensation 
differentiated solely according to kind, as into seeing, hearing, smeU-
ing, etc., simply divides up the genus into the separate species, which 
are then aUocated to different discipUnes (Psychology, Physiology, etc.) 
for mvestigation. The species are thus cüversified away from each other 
rather than seen as overlapping. 1 1 8 
Ji, then, neither dUferences of degree nor dUferences of kind taken 
separately can explain the overlap of phUosophical classes, can it be 
1 1 4 Refer to cIockface ülustration, Chapter 3, pp. 71-72, above. 
115 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 54. 
1 1 6 See ibid. 
1 1 7 See ibid. 
1 1 8 See ibid., pp. 55-56. 

104 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
explained by some combination of difference of degree with differ­
ence of kind? 1 1 9 
B.i.d. The Scale of Forms 
In such a system of specifications, in which difference of degree 
is compounded with difference of kind, 
the two sets of differences are so connected that whenever the 
variable, increasing or decreasing, reaches certain critical points on 
the scale, one specific form disappears and is replaced by an­
other. .. . A system of this kind I propose to caU a scale of forms. 1 2 0 
Instances of farmUar experience are a breaking strain, freezing and 
boUing points, the maxima and minima of taxation brackets, etc. 
Distinction is next made between a non-phUosophical scale of 
forms, in which the variable is something extraneous to the generic 
essence,121 and a phUosophical scale of forms, in which the variable 
is identical with the generic essence itseU. 1 2 2 
Thus, in the case of water, the various forms, soUd, Uquid, gaseous, 
form a non-phUosophical scale of forms, since heat, the element differ­
entiated in degree, is not included in the formula H2O which expresses 
the essence of water and is applicable without dUferentiation to the 
different forms of water. Each of the three forms of water embodies 
the generic essence equally and unchanged; each is unqualifiedly 
water. There is here concurrence of dUference of degree (in tempera­
ture) with difference in kind in the water that leaves the waterness 
of the water unchanged throughout the dUferent forms which the 
water takes at dUferent temperatures. 
But it is otherwise when, as for Plato, knowledge is presented as 
a scale of forms from nescience through opinion to knowledge, or again 
from conjecture, through opinion and understanding to reason, or 
again from poetry, through mathematics to dialectic, or when being 
is presented as a scale of forms extending from nothing, through hatf-
being to true being, or pleasures are graduated through those of the 
body and those of the soul, or the forms of political institutions are 
graduated, or, again, when Aristotle 
recognizes the same type of logical structure, for example when 
he distinguishes the vegetable, animal, and human 'souls' as three 
"» See ibid., p. 56. 
120 Jbid., p. 57. 
1 2 1 See ibid., p. 59. 
1 2 2 See ibid., p. 60. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
105 
forms of life arranged on a scale so that each includes its predeces­
sor and adds to it something new. 1 2 3 
Here 
the variable [is] identified with the generic essence. The result 
of this identification is that every form, so far as it is low in the scale, 
is to that extent an imperfect or inadequate specification of the 
generic essence, which is realized with progressive adequacy as the 
scale is ascended.124 
Before answering whether such a scale of forms, in which the 
variable is identified with the differentiated generic essence, can ex­
plain the overlap characteristic of philosophical concepts, CoUingwood 
faces the difficulty that such a conception "faUs to the ground, con­
demned as a tissue of contradiction, a logician's nightmare," 1 2 5 which 
dUficulty "proceeds from the assumption that the doctrines concern­
ing the structure of the concept, which are expressed in elementary 
textbooks of logic, must be accepted without question and applied 
without modUication as principle of phUosophical method." 1 2 6 
Collingwood resolves this dUficulty by a cUstinction deriving from 
123 VtAd., pp. 58-59. 
124 Jbid., p. 61. At this stage of the exposition, one familiar with the traditional 
moderate reaUstscholastic doctrine of the analogy of proper proportionaUty wiU imme­
diately recognize that both are talking about the same thing. Yves Simon in The Great 
Dialogue ofNature and Space, New York, Magi, 1970, writing (p. 64) of "the great analogy, 
that did not acquire a distinct name untiT very late, the so-called analogy of proper 
proportionality . . . " says (p. 65), "considering . . . being as divided into 'being in 
act' and 'being in potency,' note that in the case of 'being in act' the common ground, 
being, is purely asserted, m the second case, in the case of being in potency, the com­
mon ground, namely, being, is asserted, indeed, but also negated. This is the secret 
of analogical thinking. fri the case of the second analogate you have an assertion of 
the common ground coupled with a negation of the common ground . . . an associa­
tion of assertion and negation which concerns the common ground. H the common 
ground were a genus, assertion and negation would concern only the differential fac­
tor . . . the association of assertion and negation concerns the differential. With 
analogates the association of assertion and negation concerns the common ground." 
Again (p. 82): "The general criterion which distinguishes a unity of analogy from 
univocity is that when you move from one term to the other, there is in the first an 
assertion of the common ground which receives a quaUfied negation in the other term." 
And (p. 84): " I n the positive sciences, and especiaUy in mathematics, we are con­
cerned with understanding, distinguishing and relating to each other various species 
of objects. Consequently, univocal concepts are best suited for these areas. Philos­
ophy, however, since it is concerned with providing an overaU synthetic view of reaUty, 
has to use terms in extended and analogous senses because it is only in this way that 
it can deal with the relative unity of essentiaUy diverse kinds of things." For a fuU 
discussion of analogy of proper proportionaUty see Y. Simon's " O n Order in Analog­
ical Sets," The New Scholasticism, XXXTV (1960), pp. 1^2. See also Chapter 7, below, 
pp. 297-299. 
125 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 62. 
126 Md., p. 63. 

106 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Croce, 1 2 7 between opposites and cUstincts, and to the question "wheth­
er the idea of a scale of forms [in which lower and higher species are 
lesser and more perfect expressions of the generic essence] serves to 
i27 William M. Johnston, in The Formative Years ofR. G. Collingwood, The Hague, 
Nijhoff, 1967, p. 74, says that "in this work [Saggio sullo Hegel, 1906], Croce advances 
a notion which is crucial to his critique of Hegel and which wiU serve as the basis 
for the total revision of the Logica in its second edition of 1909. This notion is the distinc­
tion between two types of opposition: opposites and what Croce caUs 'distincts.' Op­
posites are concepts which exclude each other, like hot and cold. Distincts are con­
cepts, which though contrary, yet imply each other, Uke one and many or body and 
spirit. To use CoUingwood's terms, the distincts are 'distinct but not separate.' Croce 
contends that Hegel erred in constructing his dialectic because he treated aU forms of 
opposition as opposites. This led him toforced conclusions about the relationship of 
concepts which are reaUy distincts. Hegel failed to see, says Croce, that the one and 
the many comprise a single whole, just as do the spirit and body. This notion of con­
cepts which form distinct yet inseparable parts of a larger whole comprises the basic 
logical doctrine of Collingwood's Speculum Mentis" (see p. 170 for the phrase "dis­
tinct but not separate"). James ColUns, in "The Role of Monistic Idealism in Croce's 
Esthetic," The New Schoksticism, XVH (1943), pp. 34-35, writes: "mstead of the HegeUan 
triad of Logos, Nature and Spirit, Croce substituted the theoretical and the practical 
as the basic divisions in his PhUosophy of the Spirit. This modification was made in 
the Ught of his criticism of the Hegelian dialectic, which so emphasized the opposi­
tion between thesis and antithesis that the resultant synthesis could unite these 
moments only by emptying them of aU significance. To overcome this untenable dual­
ism of opposites, Croce proposed a conjunction of distinct factors or aspects of the con­
crete concept. In this way phUosophical investigation can be limited to the manifesta­
tions of the spirit alone, banishing from the provenance of true knowledge such a 
pseudo-concept as 'an external universe or objective reaIity.' When this is opposed to 
the notion of internal spiritual reality, both terms of the opposition are reduced to 
abstract concepts which can never be synthesised. The triadic scheme must be repkced 
by the doctrine of the grades of the Spirit, in which both moments are concrete and 
need not be overcome. 'For those degrees, considered in their distinction, are the con­
cept of the spirit in its determinations, and not the universal concept of spirit con­
sidered in its dialectic of synthesis of opposites.' [What Is Living and What Is Dead of 
the Philosophy ofHegel, pp. 92-93]. Within the theoretical sphere are found art and 
phUosophy: the knowledge of individuals through images and the knowledge of the 
universal through the pure concept. The individual spirit passes constantly from one 
manifestation to the other, although the dissatisfaction which engenders this oscUla¬
tion does not spring from either form considered as distinct." It seems, however, that 
CoUingwood, in An Essay on Philosophical Method, inverts the terminology whUe re­
taining the doctrine of Croce. In What L· Living and What Is Dead of the Philosophy of 
Hegel (Douglas AinsUe's translation of Croce's Saggio sullo Hegel), Croce (p. 11) says: 
"It is impossible to confuse the two series, distincts and opposites. . . . Now, if distinc­
tion do not impede, if indeed it rather render possible the concrete unity of the 
phUosophic concept, it does not seem possible that the same should be true of opposi­
tion. Opposition gives rise to deep fissures in the bosom of the phUosophic universal 
and of each of its particular forms, and to irreconcUable dualisms. Instead of finding 
the concrete universal, the organic whole of reaUty which it seeks, thought seems 
everywhere to run against two universak, opposing and menacing each other." Clear­
ly, for Croce opposites are the externalizing repellants and distincts the unifying con-
cretisers, whereas for CoUingwood it is just the reverse; distincts are mutuaUy exclu­
sive and non-phUosophical concepts, whereas opposites are mutuaUy impUcatory and 
the proper object of concrete philosophical consideration. This is very clear when, 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
107 
explain the overlap between the species of a philosophical genus," he 
answers: "Yes, if these species are opposites: no, if they are dis­
tincts."128 
Actions, for example, may be divided into good actions and bad 
actions, and, as so divided, are divided into opposites, that is, into 
opposite species, which can be arranged on a scale with infinity at 
one end and zero at the other and the variety of intermediate forms in 
between, partaking of both opposites, each being more and less good 
than another, more and less bad than another. The extremities, abso­
lute good and absolute bad, are pure abstractions faUing outside the 
scale itself. But actions may be specified not only by division into op­
posites, good and bad, but also into distincts, such as just, generous 
and courageous actions. 
Opposite species Uke good and bad would then belong to the 
philosophical phase of their genus and provide the appropriate subject 
matter for philosophical thought, whereas distinct species would 
belong to the non-philosophical phase of the concept. 1 2 9 
K this were the case, CoUingwood says, we would have a straight­
forward and simple rule of phUosophical method, namely: 
. . . since phüosophical specification is into opposites and non-
phUosophical into distincts, any distinctions found in a phUosoph­
ical subject-matter must be either banished from it as aUen to the 
sphere of phUosophy or else interpreted so as to appear cases of 
oppositions.130 
B.i.e. Philosophical and Non-Philosophical Understanding of the 
Distinction between Distinction and Opposition 
But this simple, straightforward solution becomes threatened when 
it retroacts over the principle of the solution, namely the distinction 
of relations into distincts and opposites. 
The solution, that "phUosophical spedfication is into opposites 
and non-phUosophical [spedfication is] into distincts" so that "any 
distinctions found in a phUosophical subject-matter must be either 
banished from it as alien to the sphere of phUosophy or else inter-
following the citation above, CoUingwood adds: "It is not enough to show that these 
distinctions contain in themselves an element or aspect of opposition; that wffl not 
save them; the element of distinction must be completely eUrninated and nothing except 
pure opposition aUowed to remain." I can offer no explanation for CoUingwood's 
apparent reversal of term usage. 
128 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 63. 
1 2 9 See ibid., p. 64. 
130 Md., p. 65. 

108 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
preted so as to appear cases of opposition" 1 3 1 irnmediately precipitates 
the question as to whether "the relation between philosophical speci­
fication by opposites and non-philosophical specification by cUstincts 
[is] itsetf a case of distinction or of opposition." 1 3 2 
The critical moment of this question is immediately apparent. If 
the dichotomy between opposites and distincts is an ultimate and 
radical dichotomy, that is, if the distinction itsetf is an instance of 
distinction and not of opposition, as it is if opposites and distincts 
are two mutuaUy exclusive species of a classificatory genus, then non-
phUosophical thinking predominates in human thought, and phUo­
sophical thought becomes subordinated to non-phUosophical thought 
as just another species of thought alongside and competing with other 
forms of thought, e.g., scientific and historical. On the other hand, 
if that distinction into opposites and distincts is an instance of oppo­
sition then "phUosophical logic as the logic of opposites has triumphed 
over non-phUosophical logic as the logic of distincts, and with this 
triumph it has destroyed the distinction between itsetf and its 
opponent." 1 3 3 
This requires, quite consistently with CoUingwood's notion of 
phUosophical inquiry, that we go back and revise our starting point 
in the Ught of the conclusion reached, 1 3 4 that the distinction between 
opposites and distincts has to account for both phUosophical and non-
phUosophical thinking without absorption ofone into the other, or oblitera­
tion of one by the other. 
tf, in order to avoid the absorption of either form of thought by 
the other, it is said that the relation between distinction and opposi­
tion is itsetf an instance neither of distinction nor of opposition but 
some third kind of relation, then not only has the dualism been re­
jected, since a third term intervenes, but also the question is immedi­
ately raised as to whether phUosophical spedfication is by pure oppo­
sition or by this postulated third prindple. 1 3 5 
Preliminary to answering this crucial question, CoUingwood asks 
us to reconsider the examples of differences of degree when we say 
that one action is better than another and when we say that one body 
is hotter than another. The dtfference between these two is that the 
heat in a body is measurable, whereas the goodness of a man or of 
1 3 1 Brid., p. 65. 
1 3 2 Md., p. 68. 
1 3 3 Tbid., p. 68. 
1 3 4 See ibid., p. 69; p. 160. 
1 3 5 See ibid., pp. 68-69. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
109 
an action is not, just as it is also impossible to measure the degrees 
of beauty, truth, pleasantness or any other phüosophical concept, tf 
one book is estimated to be higher than another by measurement, it 
can be said that it is twice or three times higher, or so many inches 
or feet higher. But it is meaningless to say of some pleasant experi­
ence, estimated to be more pleasant than another, that it is twice or 
ten times or so many inches or feet more pleasant. At the most, one 
is using quantitative terms to express something non-quantitative but 
quaHtative when one says that a certain person is more inteUigent than 
another. Measurements of inteUigence, or of degrees of painfulness 
or pleasantness of some stimulus, and even of light intensity, where 
numbered scales of some kind are used, simply place the members 
according to more or less in an order with respect to each other. A n in­
crease of heat as felt is a change in the kind of experience, from a faint 
warmth felt through a decided warmth, first pleasant, then slightly 
painful, then noticeably painful, then sharply painful. The addition 
of each degree is also the addition of a different kind. CaUing them dif­
ferences of degree is using the physicists' thermometer language, but 
it is used metaphoricaUy to name something quite different. 1 3 6 All dif­
ferences of degree among philosophical concepts are never merely 
differences of degree but imply concomitant differences of kind; they 
are at once differences of degree and differences of kind. 
.. . this is the real basis of the distinction between a philosoph­
ical scale of forms and a non-philosophical: in a non-phUosophical 
scale there are differences of degree, and coordinated with them dif­
ferences of kind; in a philosophical scale there is only one set of dif­
ferences having this peculiar double character.137 
CoUingwood draws attention to the fact that, though pecuUar, this 
type of difference is quite famUiar, both in its phUosophical and non-
phUosophical phase. We farnUiarly speak of degrees of kindred and 
affinity, degrees of punishment, structural degrees in society such as 
those of nobUity and gentry, university degrees, degrees of gram­
matical comparison and so forth. Such dUferences fuse dUferences 
of degree with dUferences in kind. 
DUferences of degree and dUferences of kind, non-phUosophical-
ly considered, are mutuaUy exclusive species of a genus, but phUo-
sophicaUy considered they must overlap in a form of dUference which 
1 3 6 The question regarding the meaning of quantitative terms appHed to quaHties 
is considered by P. Hoenen in his Cosmologia, Rome, Gregorian University Press, 1936, 
Vol. 2, pp. 468^78. 
137 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 73. 

110 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
shares the nature of both, m the case of water, there are two concur­
rent types of difference, one in degree of heat, the other in physical 
structure which gives rise to mutuaUy exclusive spedfications coor­
dinated with the varying degrees of heat. In its non-phUosophical 
phase, opposition is a relation subsisting between a positive term and 
its own mere negation or absence; the physicist understands cold as 
a lack of heat. But cold as we feel it is not a mere hck of thefeeling of 
heat, but another kind offeeling which has its own positive character. 
But the feeling of cold and the feeUng of hot are not merely two distinct 
feeUngs but eiso two opposite feeUngs. Physical cold is related to physical 
heat of which it is the negation by a relationship of mere opposition. 
But felt cold is related to felt heat as at once opposed to it and distinct 
from it, opposition and distinction being fused into a single rehtion. 
In general the kind of opposition which is found among phUo­
sophical terms is at once opposition and distinction, and subsists 
between terms each having a definite character of its own and yet 
forming together a true pair of opposites.138 
.. . Differences of degree and differences of kind, which in non-
phUosophical thought can be disentangled from one another, are 
in phUosophy fused into a new type of dUference uniting the char­
acteristics of both. Distinction and opposition, which in non-phUo­
sophical thought are two mutuaUy exclusive kinds of relation, in 
philosophy coalesce into one, so that what seems at first sight a mere 
opposition—the relation, that is, between a term and its own absence— 
turns out to be ako a distinction between two terms, and vice versa.139 
With this in mind, CoUingwood returns to the dUficulty encoun­
tered above (pp. 107-108), namely, that a spedfic form must either 
embody the generic essence completely or be completely outside such 
essence. The cUfficulty arises from forcing upon the facts of phUosoph­
ical thought an interpretation in which the terms difference of degree 
and dUference of kind bore the special meanings proper to them in a 
non-phUosophical context. A work of art said to be more beautiful 
than another is ateo beautiful in a different way; it is not merely an ex­
cess over the other in beauty but an excess which has its own pecuUar 
kind of beauty. The same is true of pleasure, goodness and the other 
concepts belonging to the sphere of phUosophy. Superficially these 
appear to obey the traditional rules of spectfication modtfied by an 
overlap of classes, but closely scrutinized they reveal the characteris­
tic fusion of differences in degree with differences in kind. When we dis-
1 3 8 Md., pp. 75-76. 
139 Md., p. 76. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
111 
tinguish different kinds of goodness, as distinct from merely differen­
tiating classes of good things, these kinds are more truly goodness 
than others. 1 4 0 
I understand this solution of CoUingwood in the foUowing way. 
The principle that relations are divisible into opposites and distincts 
may be taken either non-phUosophicaUy or pMosophicaUy. И it is taken 
non-phUosophicaUy, then phUosophy itseU is a species of the dassifica-
tory genus, thought, alongside other species, such as science and his­
tory. But it may also be taken, as it is taken in phUosophy, as a phUo­
sophical distinction, in which case the division wUl be understood as 
a mode of opposition in which distincts and opposites overlap, and 
phUosophical thinking is a mode of thinking which overlaps with other 
forms, such as sdence and history (as in Speculum Mentis). This means 
that, according to the phUosophical understanding of the principle, 
distinction and opposition are not merely concurrent, and that specifica­
tion and graduation by degrees are not merely together, but are together 
in such a way that the graduation of the generic term is intrinsically the reason 
of its division into species. Pleasure, as graduated, is itseU dUferent in 
definition and species according to the graduations. Knowledge, as 
graduated through conjecture, opinion and certitude is dUferent in kind, 
and differently defined at each grade on the scale, whereas the definition 
of water remains unchanged throughout its dUferent forms on the 
temperature scale. 
When attempts are made not merely to differentiate dasses of 
good things but to distinguish kinds of goodness, it is constantly 
found that some of these kinds are more truly goodness than others.141 
That is, dUferentiation in those cases comes pom inside the differen­
tiated term, the common genus, not from outside, as in the case of the 
dasstficatory division of a common genus. The dUference adds quali­
tatively and internally, not merely quantitatively and externaUy. 
rastinction and opposition are two species of relation; and where 
the term relation is applied to a pMosophical subject-matter it ac­
quires the spedal colouring proper to phUosophical concepts, that 
is .. . it denotes a generic concept whose specific dasses overlap. In 
phUosophical thought, therefore, distinction and opposition wiU 
necessarUy combine into a pecuUar type of relation which is neither 
mere distinction nor mere opposition, but partakes of both these 
characters; a rektion which subsists between terms at once opposed 
and distinct.142 
1 4 0 See ibid., p. 78. 
1 4 1 Vbid. 
1 4 2 Tbid., p. 76. 

112 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The differences of degree found in philosophical concepts are 
therefore not of the same type as differences of degree found in non-
philosophical concepts. The gradations of a scale of pleasures, and of 
inteUigence by I.Q. tests, cannot be handled mathematicaUy; to attempt 
to do so is to commit the faUacy of calculation. The faUacy of indUfer-
ence is committed by attending to the degree of variation, ignoring the 
buUt-in dUference of kind. Both faUacies are based on the false disjunc­
tion that a difference of degree cannot also be a dUference of kind. 1 4 3 
B.i.f. Synthesis of Difference of Degree and Difference 
of Kind in Regard to the Scale of Forms 
The fusion of distinction and opposition also modifies the cor­
responding idea of a scale of forms. If the variable is identical with 
the generic essence, the zero end forms no part of the scale, since 
at the zero end the generic essence would be altogether absent; the 
lower end of the scale is thus a unit of rnirdmal reaUzation of the generic 
essence. 
The lowest member of the scale is a genuine realization of the 
generic essence, and as the Umiting case at the lower extreme it is 
an opposite relatively to the other members on the scale.144 The badness 
of a bad moral act is nothing other than its low degree and kind of 
goodness in relation to the degrees and kinds above i t . 1 4 5 Even the 
minimal case of goodness, which in relation to higher kinds is bad, 
is good. There is no purely bad act that does not appear to the one 
who does it as somehow good. 1 4 6 Considered in itseU it is good, but 
aU changes when it is related to higher cases.147 Pleasure is good in 
itseU as far as it goes, but in relation to the pursuit of duty it is com­
parable as not merely less good but as positively evU. Thus, the lowest 
case in the scale of goodness compared with the next above it acquires 
the character of badness, and, as lowest on the scale, becomes identi­
cal with evU in general in which the abstract idea of evU finds con­
crete embodiment. And the same relation which obtains between the 
lowest member of the scale and the next above it reappears between 
any two adjacent forms. Each is good in itself, but bad in relation to 
that above i t . 1 4 8 
1 4 3 See ibid., pp. 80-81. 
1 4 4 See ibid., p. 82. 
1 4 5 See ibid. 
1 4 6 See Md., p. 83. 
1 4 7 See ibid., p. 84. 
1 4 8 See ibid., p. 84. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
113 
B.i.g. The Scale of Forms and the Overlap of Classes 
CoUingwood then clarifies how the scale of forms thus understood 
accounts for the overlap of classes which characterizes phUosophical 
concepts. 1 4 9 The lower of any two adjacent terms is good in itseU but 
bad in relation to its neighbour above it. The same is true of a scale 
of beauty and ugUness, true and false, simple and complex 1 5 0 or any 
such pair of polar opposites. 1 5 1 
The lower (good, or true, or simple, or beautiful) is not only such 
(good, etc.) in general but is such in a specific way. When compared 
with its above neighbour it loses not only its goodness or truth in 
general but its specific kind of goodness or truth at that level. And the 
higher term in comparison with the lower possesses not only that kind 
of goodness belonging to it in its own right but also retains, though 
modtfied, the kind of goodness which belonged to the lower in itself 
in its own right. It not only surpasses its neighbour in degree (of good­
ness, beauty or truth) but exceeds it on its own ground. The lower 
promises more than it can perform; in professing to exhibit a certain 
kind of goodness it faUs to do so save approximately and inadequately. 
Thus, each term, which in itseU is simply one specUic form of 
goodness, has also a double relation to its neighbours: in compari­
son with the one below it is what that professes to be; in comparison 
with the one above, it professes to be what that is. 1 5 2 
The lower promises what the higher performs; the higher is the 
reaUty of which the lower is the appearance; the higher is the ideal 
to which the lower is the approximation; the higher is the truth of 
which the lower is a perversion or distortion. But these metaphors 
are inteUigible only in the light of the presupposed relation which 
explains them. 
It is a purely logical relation . . . [as such] it is a synthesis of 
the four relations . . . dUference of degree, difference of kind, rela­
tion of distinction, and relation of opposition. The higher term is 
a species of the same genus as the lower, but it differs in degree 
as a more adequate embodiment of the generic essence, as weU as 
in kind as a spedficaUy different embodiment; it foUows from this 
that it must be not only distinct from it, as one spedfication from 
another; but opposed to it, as a higher spedfication to a lower, a 
relatively adequate to a relatively inadequate, a true embodiment 
of the generic essence to a false embodiment; as true, it possesses 
"» See ibid., p. 86. 
1 5 0 See ibid., p. 85. 
1 5 1 See ibid., p. 86. 
152 Md., p. 87. The relations obtaining between the forms of experience as expbined 
in Speculum Mentis is a good instance of this. 

114 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
not only its own specific character, but also that which its rival falsely 
claimed.153 
The affirmational and negational relationship between the 
members on the scale, which CoUingwood goes on to assert, is im­
portant for the understanding of the dynamic, dialectic nature of the 
genus of a scale of forms. 
The higher thus negates the lower, and at fhe same time re­
affirms it: negates it as a false embodiment of the generic essence, 
and reaffirms its content, that specific form of the essence, as part 
and parcel of itseU.154 
This logical presentation of a scale of forms in which a higher beats 
the lower on its own ground is famUiar in regard to a phUosophical 
scale of forms. K justice and expediency are adjacent on a scale of moral 
values, expediency finds its fulfiUment in going beyond mere expe­
diency to the level of justice, so that justice is not merely justice but 
also expedient. This leads to the next important point in understand­
ing the dialectical nature of the phUosophical scale of forms: "Each 
term in the scale . . . sums up the whole scale to that point." 1 5 5 
Just as the zero form was eUminated from the scale as also an 
eUnunation of the generic essence, so ako the infinity form is eUminated 
since any concretely realized spectfic form is the generic concept itseU 
sofaras our thought has yet conceived it, always aUowing for further seU-
transcendence in higher forms of embodiment of the generic essence. 
AU [the] lower stages in the scale are telescoped into this 
[presentiy achieved] situation. They are in fact summed up in it twice 
over: once falsely, in the proximate specification, which misinter­
prets their significance and combines them into a fake unity, and 
once truly, in the cuhninating form. 1 5 6 
The denial of absolute opposites at either end of a scale of forms 
is extremely important in CoUingwood's theory. What is found at either 
end of a scale is not something that is first posited as something in 
itself and then the intermediate members constituted by a dUferential 
combination of these opposites. What is given concretely is this or 
that particular member, which, U analysed, analyses into two opposite 
respects, one respect towards a prior term or terms, another respect 
towards a subsequent term or terms, much in the same way as an 
astrophysicist analyses starlight by spraying it out into a band, along 
153 An Essay on PhUosophical Method, pp. 87-88. 
154 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 88. 
155 Ш., 
p. 89. 
1 5 6 Orid., pp. 89-90. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
115 
a graduated scale which points in two directions. What is given is star­
light, and the polar opposites, red and blue colours, are the result of 
an analytical operation on that concrete entity analysed. This is true 
of a scale of forms since no member is considered as something abso­
lutely in itsetf, for that would be precisely the position of classifica­
tory species; rather each is what it is by reason of its position on the 
scale with respect to its neighbours in two opposite directions. This 
foUows, as wffl be clear after the dynamic, dialectical consideration 
of a scale of forms is made, from the basically active, rather than sub­
stantive or entitative nature of the members of a scale of forms. In 
other words, since, for Collingwood, becoming, or identity in differ­
ence, is more basic than being, whatever is conceived as becoming 
can only be conceived as doubly relative, once to a prior condition 
from which it comes, and secondly, although simultaneously, to a pos­
terior condition towards which it is becoming. Historical events, which 
are more properly processes than events (which term savours rather 
of classificatory thought) are thus understood as overlapping classes 
on a scale of forms, for any member, that is, any specific "event" 
dynamicaUy considered in process, has to be understood relatively 
to what went before, namely its past, from which it came, and relatively 
to that into which it developed, namely its future. Thus, past and 
future are the opposites into which some "present" "spectroanalyses" 
when it is historicaUy analysed and explained. Past and future are 
not things in themselves, as realist philosophy would say, but are 
aspects, relationships built into the very essence of some actuality. 
Thus is explained the overlap of classes in a philosophical genus: 
The higher of any two adjacent forms overiaps the lower because 
it includes the positive content of the lower as a constituent element 
within itsetf. It only fails to include the lower in its entirety because 
there is also a negative aspect of the lower, which is rejected by the 
higher: the lower, in addition to asserting its own content, denies 
that the generic essence contains anything more, and this denial con­
tains its falsehood.157 
Thus also appears the role of significant negation in dialecticaUy 
relating the members on a philosophical scale of forms. The Umita-
tion intrinsic to the lower member is a negation of its own intrinsic 
futfiUment. The negation of this negation of the lower by the higher 
overcomes the urnitation in the futfiUment of the lower by and in the 
higher form. Utilitarianism rightly affirms expediency as a form of 
moral goodness but falsely denies that there is anything in higher forms 
An Essay on Phihsophkal Method, p. 90. 

116 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
not explainable in terms of expediency. Duty rejects expediency inas­
much as expediency refuses to accept duty as a legitimate, let alone 
higher, form of goodness. But duty reaffirms expediency through sub­
jecting it to its own principles as a constituent element of duty itsetf. 
Duty and expediency thus overlap; a dutiful action has its own kind 
of expediency, and an expedient action thus partakes of the nature 
of duty. Thus: 
The lower overlaps the higher in a different sense than that in 
which the higher overlaps the lower: it does not include the higher 
as part of itserf, it adopts part of the positive content of the higher 
while rejecting another part. 1 5 8 
These explanations, says CoUingwood, show "clearer than before 
what exactly this overlap i s . " 1 5 9 The higher takes the lower up into 
itsetf adding something; the lower rejects this added element in the 
higher. 
The overlap consists in this, that the lower is contained in the 
higher, the higher transcending the lower and adding to it some­
thing new, whereas the lower partiaUy coincides with the higher, 
but dtffers from it in rejecting this increment.160 
The overlap, says CoUingwood, is not an overlap of extension be­
tween classes but an overlap of intension between concepts, each con­
cept, in its own degree, being a specification of the generic essence, 
but embodying that generic essence more fuUy and adequately. That 
is, the dUferences, differentiating a higher from a lower, are "addi­
tions" obtained from within the generic essence, an intensUication 
of that generic essence, not an addition of a dUference extrinsically, 
from outside thegeneric essence. It is something Uke the growth of 
an organism from a single ceU. A subsequent state arises from a prior 
state by division and resulting addition from within. Individuality is 
progressively acquired with increasing determination arising from setf-
constructive dUferentiation. And so it is with aU dialectical activity; 
setf-identity is acquired by medium of setf-dUferentiation and simul­
taneous setf-reintegrarion.161 Such a process is expUcable as an overlap 
of classes in a scale of forms. The same whole (generic essence) is pre­
sent identically throughout; its identity is an identity in a dUferentia­
tion of forms and its totahty is the totaUty of its dUferent forms, not 
juxtaposed one on top of the other from outside each other, but as 
158 Md., p. 90. 
159 Ш., 
p. 91. 
160 Vaid. 
1 6 1 This point is developed at length in Chapter 9, below, pp. 398 et seq. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
117 
overlapping in a mutually implicating, setf-transcending fashion, the 
final form gathering together within itsetf in a summary fashion aU 
the previous forms that lead up to it, just as a man's Ufe at any moment 
is the summation of aU the setf-perfecting dUferentiation which took 
place since he first appeared as a fertUized ovum. Relating this to the 
process of question and answer we might say that the question is the 
dUferentiation, and bUurcation into alternatives, the internal opposi­
tion of setf to setf, and the answer the reintegration, or reestablish¬
ment of harmony at a higher level. 1 6 2 And, U in adopting the Crocean 
theory of the distinction of opposites and distincts, Collingwood is 
also adopting the Crocean reason for making that distinction, namely 
the substitution of a two-term dialectic of opposites (which Croce 
however caUs distincts; see n. 127, p. 106 above) for the classical three 
term thesis, antithesis, synthesis dialectic, we may further say that 
a moment of present actuality, which in relation to its past has the 
aspect of information avaUable, or answers to questions, is the answer, 
the synthesis of opposites arising from and in past questions, and 
together the question, the antitheses, the contemplated alternatives, 
with respect to future answers or syntheses. The totaUty at any moment 
is present actuaUty. The understanding of this present actuaUty of Uved 
experience consists in being able to see it as answeringly synthesis¬
ing with respect to past questions and at the same time questioningly 
antithesising within itself its past (summarized in the present actual­
ity) with respect to anticipated answers in the future. Thus, by medium 
of Croce's reason for distinguishing distincts from opposites, we can 
see how CoUingwood can together identUy the dialectical activity of 
the mind with the process of questioning and answering on the one 
hand, and with the historical bUurcation of present actuality into past 
and future respects on the other hand. 1 6 3 
B.ii. The Logic of Judgments 
v 
Having exposed the type of concept characteristic of phUosophical 
thought, CoUingwood goes on to consider judgments and then reason­
ings as these are found in phUosophy. 
B.ii.a. Abstract and Concrete Affirmation and Negation 
Judgments are traditionally divided into affirmative and negative. 
1 6 2 See below, Chapter 9, pp. 401 et seq. 
1 6 3 This point is brought out weU by the clockface iUustration in Chapter 3, above, 
pp. 71-72. 

118 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The relation between affirmation and negation is pecuUarly intimate 
in regard to philosophical statements. Dissent from the statement of 
a philosophical position is not simply to deny it but to counteract it 
with our own view which "need not be on the tip of our tongue: it 
may be something with which our mind, as Socrates would say, is 
pregnant, and which needs both skill and pains to bring it f o r t h . " 1 6 4 
Without this feeling of its being "quick within us" we should not 
meddle with the discussion in question. This is a corollary of the 
Socratic principle that philosophy is never a transition from sheer ig­
norance to sheer knowledge but a progress in which we come to know 
better what we already knew. In philosophy every negation impUes 
an affirmation, which rule is "the principle of concrete negation" and 
its neglect is "the faUacy of abstract negation." 1 6 5 
Correlative to this there is "a principle of concrete affirmation" 
and a corresponding "faUacy of abstract affirmation." 1 6 6 ш a phUo­
sophical affirmative judgment there is a peculiar intimacy in the rela­
tion to the negative elements implicated by the affirmative. The 
negative elements make precise the affirmations by pointing out exact­
ly what those affirmations, as affirmations, intend to deny. Every 
phUosophical affirmation rejects some definite proposition regarded 
as erroneous. This is not necessarUy the case regarding non-phUo­
sophical thought. The phUosophical statement that the species of a 
phUosophical genus overlap intends to deny the proposition that they 
are mutually exclusive. 
. . . where the generic concept predicated by a judgment is 
phUosophical, spedfied in a scale of forms of which the judgment 
is intended to affirm the highest. . . its denial of aU the inferior forms 
is summarized in one detail, namely that of the proximate form; since 
each summarizes the whole scale up to that point, and the denial 
of that involves the denial of aU that it summarizes. 1 6 7 
The truth in the proximate lower form, and so in aU the lower 
forms, is retained in the highest form, so, the contrast of the prox­
imate form with the highest is a compendium of aU the errors which 
the assertion of the highest form intends to deny. It is a principle of 
method, not merely a statement of observed fact in phUosophy, that 
"a phUosophical assertion whenever it affirms something definite also 
denies something definite." 1 6 8 
164 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 103. 
185 Void., p. 106. 
166 
Ш. 
167 Tbid., p. 108. 
168 Tbid., p. 108. This is the dialectical character found in aU concrete thinking. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
119 
The principle of concrete affirmation may be appUed to one's own, 
or another's, thought. Applied to one's own thought it means that 
if one wants to be clear about one's assertions one has to be clear about 
what one is denying. Applied to the comprehension of another's 
thought it means that one who is reading or Hstening to a philosopher 
must never be content to ask oneseU what the philosopher intends 
to affirm, without together asking what he means to deny. Ji we do 
not know the doctrines Plato or Parmenides meant to deny in their 
affirmations we can be sure we do not understand what they intend 
to affirm. 1 6 9 This is both difficult and of great importance, since the 
works of the great philosophers of the past have formed their own 
views by criticizing their predecessors whose works may not have come 
down to us except insofar as we can construct them from these same 
criticisms. The rejected view need not have been an actuaUy main­
tained position, but need only seem plausible to the one who rejects 
it. The controversy of rejecting it is then one within the mind of a 
single philosopher, what Plato caUed a dialogue of the soul with 
itseU. 1 7 0 
Thus, whereas outside phUosophy a judgment is either affirma­
tive or negative, affirmation and negation being two distinct species 
of the classtficatory genus, judgment, " i n phUosophy there is such 
a balance of the two that no properly weighed and considered judg­
ment is more affirmative than negative, or more negative than af­
firmative." 1 7 1 What makes a judgment properly phUosophical is "the 
peculiar intimacy of the relation between its affirmative and negative 
elements." 1 7 2 This relationship is such that where P and Q are equal­
ly definite and alternative specUic answers to the question 'What is 
S?' P cannot be validly affirmed of S whUe Q is left indeterminate, 
nor can Q be vaUdly denied of S whUe P is left mdeterrninate. A precise 
question detaUs the alternative possibüities and a precise answer 
169 Tbid., p. 109. The importance of this for questioning may be noted. Plato or 
Parmenides had certain questions in mind, which questions specified certain alterna­
tive positions on certain matters. Their position is understood as an answer which 
affirms one of the alternatives while rejecting the others. An understanding of the 
philosopher's position, therefore, means understanding the alternatives affirmed and 
denied. But this means understanding his statements as determinative of alternatives, 
that is, understanding his statements not merely as statements, but as answers to 
questions. 
1 7 0 In other words, the questioning of a position requires not that it be maintained 
as affirmed but only that it be supposed. 
171 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 110. 
172 Md., p. 110. 

120 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
affirms one of the alternatives and together denies the other alterna­
tives. 1 7 3 
B.ii.b. Abstract and Concrete Universality 
In regard to the traditional logical division of judgments into 
universal, particular and singular, CoUingwood next asks whether the 
term universal may not have a special shade of meaning in the judg­
ments of phUosophy. 1 7 4 
The terms universal, particular and individual name three elements 
common to aU judgments, which naturaUy overlap, rather than three 
species of judgment. The universal judgment 'aU men are mortal' does 
not exclude but includes the judgment that some men are mortal and 
that this man (Socrates) is mortal. Even U we consider it as a univer­
sal judgment, the three elements of universality, particularity, 
singularity, introduce dUferentiations into its significance. The univer­
sal judgment, in relation to each of these three elements may be 
taken diversely. As a pure universal it means that man as such is mortal, 
as a universal of particulars it means that every kind of man is mortal, 
as a universal of singulars it means that every individual man is 
mortal. 1 7 5 
1 7 3 See An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 110. See also ColUngwood's Speculum 
Mentis, p. 78, and The New Leviathan, p. 74, par. 11.12. Speaking of the disjunctive 
judgment as clearly delineating alternatives, B. Bosanquet, Essentials of Logic, Lon­
don, MacmiUan, 1897, p. 125, has the following to say: "The disjunction seems to 
complete the system ofjudgments, including all others in itself . . ." (emphasis added), 
and " . . . disjunction in itself implies a kind of individuaUty which is beyond mere 
fact and mere abstract truth, although allied to both; and aU inteUigible negation is 
under, not of, a disjunction." Again (p. ^3): "The Disjunctive Judgment in its perfect 
form . . . is appropriate to the exposition of a content as a system . . . " And (p. 124): 
"The peculiar point of the Disjunctive is that it makes negation positively significant." 
(Emphasis added.) If we are impatient at this stage and ask what aU this has to do 
with "Who kiUed John Doe?" we can foresee in some way what the result wUl be. 
The answer to that question wUl depend upon our ability to grasp a global situation, 
defined by the question, which divides a horizon of relevance from that which is ir­
relevant (that is, has no bearing on the case); the global situation wUl be in the nature 
of a concrete universal. The work wUl then be, by a process of discriminate question­
ing, to etch in the relevant disjunctions so as to see how the parts (the detaUed facts 
of the case) clearly enmesh. The investigator continuaUy asks himseU, 'How does this 
fact tie in with that fact in the overall picture?' An indication that further investiga­
tion (questioning) is caUed for is the observation that "this fact does not 'fit' with 
this fact or with these other facts, when we view the whole situation." Crime detec­
tion, as also historical research, is somewhat Uke solving a jigsaw puzzle; fitting together 
the pieces in the whole picture. See this chapter, below, pp. 137-138 on rational ex­
perience and pp. 151-153 on the relevance of the concrete universal to the logic of 
questioning. 
1 7 4 See An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 68. 
175 n>id., p. 111. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
121 
But these three elements are related in different ways to the dif­
ferent types of universal judgment. 
One kind of thought bears on the singular as its determining ele­
ment. By an examination of each individual instance of an S we find 
it to be P, and, by necessity of thought, we reject this as mere coin­
cidence and feel justified in thinking that aU the S's are P because 
they are S. That is, S as such, is P. This is common sense generaHza-
tion. 
Here the singular element is primary, the universal secondary. 
A universal judgment of this kind is caUed a generaUzation.176 
A second type of thought begins from particulars rather than sin­
gulars, and judges that each kind of S is P, from which it goes on to 
judge that S as such is P. The mind here bears on the specific difference 
between the instances. 
This is the type of universal judgment which is normal in 
empirical science where the importance of the plurality of instances 
towards establishing a universal proposition lies not in their 
numerical dUference, as in generalization proper, but in the spedfic 
differences between them. 1 7 7 
In a third type of thought the universal is of primary interest. From 
thinking that S as such is P we see that any specific kind of S is P and 
that each instance of S is P. "This is the type of universal judgment 
which obtains in exact mathematical science." 1 7 8 The assertion of the 
property of a triangle rests only on those features which belong to 
it as a triangle, and not on its individual or particular features. 
In phUosophical judgments these three elements are present but 
none of the above three types of structure are adequate to it. The fram­
ing of "a universal judgment in phUosophy by generalization from 
instances is to commit the faUacy of identUied coincidents." 1 7 9 Selec­
tion of the instances so as to avoid this results in "the fallacy of 
precarious margins." 1 8 0 
Empirical science looks for a generic essence as something com­
mon to its variously distinguished species as indUferently present in 
them aU. CoUingwood says that phUosophers instinctively avoid this 
way of proceeding since they feel that the fuU nature of what is being 
176 Jbid., p. 
m. 
177 Tbid. 
178 Brid. 
179 Brid., p. 113. See also above, this chapter, p. 101. 
1 8 0 See An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 113. See also above, this chapter, 
pp. 100-101. 

122 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
investigated is exemplified only in the highest forms of it and what­
ever there is in the lower forms is only a minimum form of the generic 
essence, not its completion. 
Nor can they proceed as in exact science from a knowledge of the 
generic essence in itsetf as implicating certain properties, attempting 
to know the properties of its various particulars and individuals. The 
difficulty is that "any statement about a generic concept which is true 
as applied to one of its specific forms is likely to require modification 
before it can be applied to any other." 1 8 1 What is true of knowledge 
as inteUectual wffl need modification before it can be applied to knowl­
edge as sensitive. 
B.ii.c. Mutual Implication of Universality, Particularity 
and Singularity in Concrete Concepts 
To avoid the above three fallacies we need not look for a fourth 
way of arranging the three elements but to find a method that uses all 
these three methods at once, by a process of checking each by means of the 
others. A philosophical judgment embodies aII three types of struc­
ture. "Philosophy can and does generalize, or assert of the concept 
as such what is found in its single instances, but subject to the pro­
vision that, by itsetf, this is only a clue towards answering its ques­
tion, and not a substantive answer." 1 8 2 And, "like empirical science, 
philosophy can and does argue that if different species of a concept 
agree in a certain respect this should be a feature belonging to the 
generic essence; b u t . . . they must be checked by arranging the species 
in a scale and showing that the features of the generic essence shine 
out more clearly as the scale reaches its culrnination." 1 8 3 Furthermore, 
"phüosophy Uke exact science aims at determining a priori the 
characteristics which belong of necessity to its concepts as such in their 
true universality." 1 8 4 But such statements in philosophy are tentative 
until verified by reference to facts. " [ A ] philosophical theory must 
show that what it claims as necessary in the concept is possible in 
every specification of the concept and actual in its instances." 1 8 5 
To assert a proposition in mathematics does not require beUef in 
the actual existence of the subject of discourse, aU that is required is 
to suppose it. The mathematician frames a supposition and sees what 
1 8 1 An Essay on Phihsophick Method, pp. 114-115. 
1 8 2 Jbid., p. 115. 
\ 
183 Jbid., pp. 116-117. 
X 
184 Md., p. 117. 
1 8 5 n>id. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
123 
foUows from it. The body of mathematics is composed of this complex 
which logic caUs the hypothetical proposition. 1 8 6 
The empirical scientist deals with facts, not abstractions, but he 
ignores the facts in their multiform variety and is especiaUy concerned 
to find a certain framework into which his facts can be fitted. With­
out such a framework which enables him to group the facts around 
fixed points, as loci for his thought, there is no science. The scientist 
studying the facts of tuberculosis looks for what belongs in the tuber­
cular character, treating the disease itself as an entity, ignoring the 
peculiarities of its instances which merely exemplify it. The empirical 
scientist deals with the notion of a specific disease as he deals with 
the notion of a specific plant. It is the specUicity that interests him 
primarily, and the instances are of interest to him only as they embody 
the spedfic character. 
The universal propositions of empirical science therefore are some­
what Uke mathematics in that they have a hypothetical character. State­
ments about tuberculosis in medical textbooks refer only to the 
standard case from which it does not foUow that the standard case 
exists. 1 8 7 
. . . the body of scientific knowledge is expressed in proposi­
tions that are logically intermediate between these two orders of 
categoricals, the statements of fact which are its data and the state­
ments of fact which are its appUcations; and this body itseU con­
sists of hypothetical propositions.188 
B.ii.d. Universality of Concrete Universal 
Not Merely Hypothetical 
PhUosophical thought dtffers both from mathematics and empir­
ical science in that its body or substance is composed of propositions 
which are not merely hypothetical but in essence and fundamental 
intention categorical. 1 8 9 By categorical Collingwood explains that he 
uses the word in the logician's sense190 and that he means that a state­
ment is categorical which itseU actualizes an instance of what is 
asserted. 1 9 1 
One cannot study logic or ethics without a commitment to the 
1 8 6 See ibid., pp. 117-118. 
1 8 7 See ibid., pp. 118-Ш. 
188 Tbid., p. 121. 
189 
Md. 
1 9 0 Md., p. 122. 
1 9 1 tod., pp. tt3-134. 

124 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
view that the subject matter being studied actually exists. 1 9 2 The body 
of geometrical science is heterogeneous with its subject matter, but 
in logic it is homogeneous and even identical therewith. 
The propositions of which logic consists must conform to the 
rules which logic lays down, so that logic is actuaUy about it­
setf. . . . It foUows that logic cannot be in substance merely hypotheti­
cal. 1 9 3 
Geometry can afford to be mdifferent to the existence of its subject 
matter; it suffices that it merely supposes it. But logic is not thus in-
dUferent. By thinking logicaUy and propounding logical propositions 
logic generates an actually existing subject matter to itseU. There are 
thus no logical propositions about a merely supposed object; U logic 
is being exercised its very object is thereby existentialized. In saying 
that 'aU squares have equal diagonals' there is no assertion that any 
squares or diagonals exist. But to say that 'aU universal propositions 
distribute their subject' is not only to talk about universal proposi­
tions but to produce an actual instance of the thing under discussion. 
Logic contains as weU as discusses reasonings. A logician cannot 
therefore deny the existence of any actual reasoning without thereby 
disowning himseU as a logician. 1 9 4 Logic, therefore, is such that the 
very conception of its subject matter, namely thought, is at the same 
time the existential instancing of that subject matter. 1 9 5 The proposi­
tions constitutive of the subject matter of logic cannot be merely hypo­
thetical, as likewisethesubject matter of ethical thought must be con­
ceived as something wnbse essence involves its existence.196 Ethics 
discusses not merely ideas about action divorced from the action itseU 
but the moral consciousness. It is therefore both normative and descrip­
tive, describing something that is akeady somewhat what it ought 
to be. 1 9 7 This holds generally of the subject matter making up the 
body of any phUosophical science. It consists of categorical proposi­
tions unUke that of the exact and empirical sciences whose subject 
1 9 2 lbid., p. 128. 
1 4 3 Md., p. 129. 
1M Md., p. 130. 
" 5 Poid., p. 131. 
196 Hrid., p. 133. Just as to the religious consciousness God cannot be beUeved except 
as existing, as the Ansehnian argument expresses, so the philosophical consciousness 
in every philosophical science, logic, ethics and metaphysics, "stands committed to 
maintaining that its subject-matter is no mere hypothesis, but something actuaUy 
existing," that is, phUosophy is "a form of thought in which essence and existence 
. . . are conceived as inseparable"; see An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. ΥΣΙ. 
1 , 7 See ibid., p. 132. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
Ύ25 
matter consists merely of hypothetical propositions. 1 9 8 Thus, whereas 
in exact and empirical science categorical and hypothetical are mutual­
ly exclusive species of the genus 'proposition,' in philosophy they 
overlap; the propositions of philosophy being together categorical and 
hypothetical. Thus, the universal judgments of science can be purely 
hypothetical whereas those forming the body of philosophy cannot 
be purely hypothetical but must be categorical at the same time. But, 
furthermore, the togetherness of these two characteristics in philosoph­
ical propositions is mutuaUy implicatory, each demands the other for 
itself to be present. 1 9 9 
. . . in the case of phUosophical judgments the overlap [is] 
pecuUarly mtimate; the categorical element is no longer something 
external to the hypothetical, even if necessary to it; both elements 
are aUke of the essence of phUosophy as such. 2 0 0 
Thus, whereas according to a classtficatory system, hypothetical 
and categorical are names for two specificaUy distinct and mutuaUy 
exclusive kinds of statement, in the concrete thought of phUosophy 
they are two aspects of the one same kind of thought, the hypothetical 
aspect being the questioning aspect, the categorical aspect being the 
answering aspect, the "systole and diastole" of aU knowledge, as 
Collingwood expresses i t . 2 0 1 Question and answer, therefore, accord­
ing to classUicatory logic are two dUferent species of mental activity, 
but according to the logic of overlap they are two forms in which the 
one same thing, knowledge, is realized; two modalities, as it were, 
that go together in the constitution of the one concrete activity which 
is knowledge. Knowledge, therefore, as concretely 
experienced, 
"spectro-analyses" in its explanation, into a questioning moment and 
an answering moment, neither existing as something in itself inde­
pendently of the other, as classUicatory logic would have it. 
V 
B.iii. The Logic of Reasoning 
Collingwood then goes on 2 0 2 to enquire into the natüre of reason­
ing in phUosophy, which he does by comparing it with deductive and 
inductive reasoning. 
In aU inference there are three things: data from which we argue, 
198 Tbid., p. 133. 
199 Tbid., p. 134. 
200 Tbid. 
2 0 1 See Speculum Mentis, p. 77. See also Chapter 3, above, p. 64. 
2 0 2 An Essay on Philosophical Method, pp. 151-154. 

T26 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
principles according to which we argue and the conclusions to which 
we argue. 
B.iii.a. Exact Science Ruled by Supposal 
The data of exact science consist of suppositions, namely the prin­
ciples or axioms of the science. The conclusions are inferred demon­
stratively, as foUowing with perfect logical rigor from those principles. 
There are two kinds of axioms in exact science. First, there are axioms 
belonging to logic, which are principles according to which demon­
stration as such must proceed; they are necessary to the exact science 
but not part of it; they are thus presuppositions ofthe science, although 
not mere suppositions in themselves absolutely. It is the work of logic 
to inquire into these principles, not that of the science itseU. That is, 
they are not answers tc*questions which the science itseU asks, al­
though they are answers tb questions asked elsewhere, namely in logic. 
The second kind of axioms form part of the science, but in a dis­
tinctive way. The older view of exact science regards these axioms as 
seU-evident, not themselves requiring demonstration. Exact science, 
thus, has two kinds of certamly true propositions, the indemonstrable 
or special axioms and the demonstrated conclusions. CoUingwood pro­
ceeds 'on the assumption'(?) that the special axioms of exact science 
are not known, but only assumed to be true. But, he says, the logical 
axioms cannot be merely assumed, since being phUosophical proposi­
tions they are always categorical, for one cannot proceed in thinking 
merely as U the principles of thinking were true; if they were not true 
one would not be thinking. But since we may regard the special axioms 
as mere assumptions we may also regard the whole science as consist­
ing of mere assumptions, the axioms as primary or fundamental as­
sumptions and the conclusions as secondary or derivative assumptions. 
Characteristic of exact science, then, is a certain irreversibUity, ac­
cording to which aU logical dependence is of conclusions upon axioms, 
there being no reciprocal dependence of axioms on the conclusions. 
The results to which the axioms lead us have no effect on our atti­
tude to these axioms; our acceptance of the conclusions is totaUy 
dominated by our commitment to the axioms. This irreversibUity goes 
necessarily with exact science. There is only forward argument, from 
principles to conclusions, never backwards argument, from conclu­
sions to principles. 
B.iii.b. Philosophical Reasoning both Categorical 
and Rigidly Coherent 
PhUosophical reasoning resembles that of exact science in its 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
127 
demand for close and cogent reasoning. Each demands valid and suf­
ficient reason to be given for its conclusions. But philosophical reason­
ing does not entirely resemble that of mathematics. 
Firstly, there is no division of axioms into those of the special 
science and those properly belonging to logic. Logic is a branch of 
philosophy not separable from its other branches; one cannot investi­
gate an ethical problem entirely setting aside logical points; these must 
be faced sooner or later. So, whereas other sciences can neglect their 
own presuppositions, philosophy cannot do so. Philosophy has only 
one kind of axiom, that kind which forms part of its own body. 
Secondly, because its axioms are philosophical propositions, they 
must be categoricaUy asserted, never mere supposals or assumptions. 
This second difference suggests that these axioms are setf-evident 
propositions forming the first principles of an irreversible deductive 
system of thought. CoUingwood now asks whether this is true of 
phUosophical reasoning. 
Ji we turn to the great mathematician-phUosophers of the seven­
teenth century, in whom we would expect to find such an attitude— 
for instance, Descartes, "when we forget his theory of method and 
turn to his practice," for "Descartes was far too good a phUosopher 
to neglect the necessary dUferences between phUosophical and math­
ematical reasoning"-we wUl find that "his first principle, ' I think, 
therefore I am', is neither a setf-evident truth nor an assumption." 2 0 3 
Although this assertion is a starting point for his metaphysical reason­
ing it is established by aproof in the passage in which he enunciates 
it. But it is a pecuUar kind of proof, one which Kant wUl later caU a 
transcendental deduction. 
In Kantian language, the principle cogito ergo sum is in this 
passage transcendentaUy deduced, that is, shown to be the condi­
tion on which experience as it actuaUy exists, in this case the expe­
rience of systematic doubt, is alone possible. U I did not exist as a 
thinking being, I could not doubt. Even doubt of my own existence 
is therefore a guarantee of my existence.204 
Here Descartes touches in practice on the dUference between the 
mathematical and phUosophical methods of inquiry, whatever his 
explicit theory may have been. Notwithstanding his advocacy of clear 
and distinct perception of the principles of the mathematical method, 
he recognizes that " o n the contrary, nothing in metaphysics causes 
2 0 3 An Essay on Philosophical Method, pp. 155-156. 
2 0 4 Tbid., pp. 156-157. 

128 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
more trouble than the making the perception of its primary notions 
clearanddistinct." 2 0 5 
^ 
Descartes' successors interpreted his precepts in the light of his 
practice. When Spinoza lays down what purports to be the first defini­
tion of his Ethics, 'By cause ofitselfl understand that whose essence 
involves existence, and whose nature cannot be conceived except as 
existing,' he is not merely defining terms moregeometnco, for "his state­
ment is not a definition but a theorem: a phüosophical position . . . 
an arguable and argued position." 2 0 6 Leibnitz's Monadologybegns with 
two clauses which taken together state the conception of an inextended 
and indivisible substance which appears to be an axiomatic defini­
tion. Collingwood says, however, that Leibnitz, like Spinoza, knew 
that he "was beginning his treatise not by defining his terms like a 
mathematician but by laying down a whole metaphysical system in 
a nutshell, and not by stating a setf-evident axiom but by affirming 
a highly controversial theorem." 2 0 7 
Kant, subsequently, laid it down that there are no axioms in 
philosophy, for its first principles required proof, but proof of a special 
kind. Rigid adherence to the mathematical method in philosophy 
would lead to a 'house of cards,' and Hegel, foUowing Kant, saw that 
phUosophy was in the pecuUar situation of having to justify its own 
starting point. But U phUosophy has to justify its own beginnings "this 
can be done only U the arguments of phUosophy, instead of having 
an irreversible direction from principles to conclusions, have a revers­
ible one, the principles estabUshing the conclusions and the conclu­
sions reciprocaUy establishing the principles." 2 0 8 
The charge that there is a vicious circle in such a reasoning, in 
which there is reciprocal justification of principles by conclusions and 
conclusions by principles, is averted by noting a pecuUar feature of 
phUosophical thought, namely, "the Socratic principle that phUosoph­
ical reasoning leads to no conclusions which we did not in some sense 
2 0 5 Reply to the Second Set of Objections; see E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross, 
eds., Philosophical Works of Descartes, Vol. Π, N.Y., Dover, 1955, p. 49. 
206 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 158. 
207 Brid., p. 159. Anticipating what is to come for purposes of finding our direc­
tion, let it be said that CoUingwood is referring to a concrete universal when he speaks 
of these first quasi-axioms of Leibnitz and Spinoza. Not just a supposed beginning is 
postuhted, but a whok concrete system is affirmed categorically, within which, by a 'systole-
diastole' dynamic reciprocity of question and answer, this continuaUy sustained 
beginning wUl be rationaUy and systematicaUy unfolded, in which unfolding the akeady 
implicit is explicitated. 
208 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 160. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
129 
know already." 2 0 9 It has widely been recognized that philosophy, 
unlike exact or empirical science, does not bring us to know some­
thing of which we were previously simply ignorant, but rather brings 
us to know in a new and different way something we knew in some 
way akeady. 
H the species of a philosophical genus overlap, the distinction 
between the known and the unknown, which in a non-philosophi­
cal subject-matter involves a difference betwen two mutually exclu­
sive classes of truths, in a philosophical subject-matter implies that 
we may both know and not know the same thing: a paradox which 
disappears in the light of the notion of a scale of forms of knowl­
edge, where corning to know means coming to know in a different 
and better way. 2 1 0 
The establishment of a proposition in philosophy, therefore, is 
not a transference from the unknown to the known, but from the 
known (in one way) to the same but known in a new way, or as 
CoUingwood frequently puts it, a passage from the implicit to the 
explicit. PhUosophical method is a method of expUcating what is 
akeady known, but implicitly only. This is the case U we know that 
something happens, but do not know why it happens. It would be 
a better knowledge to know both that and why it happens together. 
In phUosophical knowledge the facts are manUestations of principles 
and simultaneously principles render the facts understandable; the 
inteUigible principles are manifested in the observation of facts at the 
same time as the observed facts are rendered understandable by the 
principles. The principles of understanding are impkcated in the 
observed fact and the observation of fact implicates the understand­
ing of its principles. This is simply repeating what was said above, 2 1 1 
following Bernard Bosanquet, that individuality involves fuU deter­
mination, that whatever 'is' not only 'is' but also 'is what it is,' so 
that to say of something that 'it is'is to say something meaningless 
U it is taken apart from 'what it is.' As CoUingwood expresses it: 
И by seeing certain facts in the Ught of certain principles we come 
to understand the facts and at the same time to have visible con­
firmation of the principles, this is a gain to our knowledge both of 
the principles and of the facts.212 
209 Jbid., p. 161. 
210 wid. Philosophy thus begins 'from a question,' or in wonder, for, in question­
ing, we both know and fack knowledge about that which we question or wonder. 
2 1 1 See this chapter, above,pp. 90-92. 
2 1 2 An Essay on Phiiosophical Method, p. 162. 

130 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
In this does philosophical knowledge differ from that of the exact 
sciences. The truth of mathematical conclusions is totaUy dependent 
on the proof. The conclusion of a philosophical proof is known prior 
to the proof; the proof merely assures us, not that it is so, but why 
it is so, thus enabling us to know it better. 
. . . philosophical systems in general . . . exhibit as a reasoned 
and ordered whole of interconnected knowledge what was arready 
in substance known before the work of philosophizing began.213 
It foUows from this that the conclusions of phUosophy can be 
checked by comparison with the anticipations of experience, so that 
the direction of the argument regarding principles and conclusions 
is reversible, each being able to be established by an appeal to the 
other. This is not a vicious circle, since 'established' here means being 
raised to a higher grade of knowledge. What was mere observation 
has become an understood observation, an explained or explicated 
observation. And an otherwise merely abstract principle is no longer 
a merely abstract principle but a factually verified principle. 
The chief implication of this for the theory of inference in phUos­
ophy is as foUows: 
If the substance of phUosophical knowledge is known to us, 
however dimly and confusedly, before phUosophical reasoning 
begins, the purpose of that reasoning can only be to present it in 
a new form, that is, the form of a system constructed according to 
certain principles. The phUosopher who unfolds such a system is 
not spinning a web of ideas from the recesses of his own mind; he 
is expressing the results of his own experience and that of other peo­
ple in a reasoned and orderly shape.214 
Collingwood says that this means that instead of asking himself 
only one question at every step in the argument, as in exact science, 
namely, 'What foUows from the premisses?', the phUosopher has also 
to ask another question as weU, namely 'Does what foUows from the 
premisses agree with what we find in actual experience? Any phUo­
sophical argument that neglects the test of actual experience is defec­
tive. Thus, a phUosophical argument does not hang with its whole 
weight on the starting-point; it is supported throughout its texture 
by cross-references to experience. 2 1 5 
In this it resembles the inductive procedure of empirical science. 
2 1 3 Bid., p. 163. 
2 1 4 Md., p. 164. 
2 1 5 See ibid. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
131 
Does this mean that philosophical theory is wholly based on observa­
tion and experience, and is therefore an empirical science?216 
B.iii.c. Extrinsic Relationship of Fact and Theory in 
Empirical Science 
The aim of inductive reasoning is to establish universal proposi­
tions from individual facts. Its starting point is the facts as data, the 
universal propositions are its conclusions; the data are known em-
piricaUy, by perception or by the historical record of perceptions in 
the past; the conclusion must already be present at the beginning in 
the form of an hypothesis which is to be tested by bringing it into 
relation with the data. At first the hypothesis is a mere possibility and 
the aim of the inductive procedure is to convert that possibility into 
a probability. In empirical science to establish means to estabUsh as 
probable, more or less. The data, however, are certain from the 
beginning and the inductive process leaves this certainty untouched, 
for that rests entirely on observation and in no way on the demon­
stration. The work of induction is to conform to the facts; it depends 
on them and they in no sense depend upon i t . 2 1 7 
Just as in the case of exact science, the principles of induction are 
of two kinds. First, logical principles which retain their own certain­
ty throughout the inductive process and, as in exact demonstration, 
are logically presupposed by all induction, never being established 
by induction itserf. The second kind of principles, those which belong 
properly to induction itsetf, such as the principle that the future wffl 
probably resemble the past, are assumptions that are necessary if there 
is going to be any argumentation at aU. The successful conduct of the 
argument based on these principles in no way confirms them; their 
assumption is a necessary precondition of the very existence and 
possibUity of inductive argumentation. We are conscious throughout 
the more or less successful progression of the induction that these 
assumptions are assumptions and nothing more. What increases in 
successful inductive inquiries is not the probabUity of such principles 
(as that the future wUl probably resemble the past) but the probabU­
ity of hypotheses such as that fermentation is due to microorganisms. 
The principles never appear as conclusions even in the modUied sense 
in which inductive thinking has conclusions. 
The logical movement of inductive thought is therefore irrevers­
ible in the same sense as that of exact science. The principles on 
2 1 6 See ibid. 
2 1 7 See ibid., pp. 165-66. 

132 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
which induction rests receive in return no support from the induc­
tive process itseU. Either they are certain from beginning to end, 
or from the beginning to end they are mere assumptions.218 
Exact science admits of reversibUity of its data (though not of its 
principles), whereas inductive argument is not reversible regarding 
its data, since the data are facts vouched for by perception. A n as yet 
unobserved fact inferred by induction is merely inferred, that is, estab-
Ushed as probable and not perceived. It becomes certain only by obser­
vation subsequent to the inductive argumentation. 
B.iii.d. The Rapprochement, or Mutual Implication of Fact 
and Theory, Principles and Conclusions, Essence and Existence, 
Experience and Explanation in Concrete Philosophical Reasoning 
Notwithstanding the resemblance between phUosophical reason­
ing and scientUic induction in that both possess knowledge prior to 
the reasoning process, there are notable dUferences. 
The initial knowledge of phUosophy forms the substance, the 
material out of which the final, systematized knowledge is constructed. 
The theory of cyclones does not include in it a statement of the indi­
vidual barometric observations on which it depends, whereas in phUos­
ophy the very same proposition first known to be true is reaffirmed 
in the conclusion with proofs in the body of a system. In empirical 
science the initial knowledge is individual facts; in phUosophy, the 
initial knowledge, being homogeneous with the conclusion, must 
consist of universal propositions. 
The data of phUosophy are thus never mere facts in the sense 
of individual events, individual objects, individual actions or the Uke; 
they are always universal.219 
Again, whereas the individual facts dealt with by science are appre­
hended by perception, the facts of phUosophy must be apprehended 
in another way. 
. . . the data of phUosophy, tf they are universal propositions, 
cannot be apprehended in that way [by perception]; they must be 
grasped by something in the nature of what we caU, as distinct from 
perceiving, thinking. 2 2 0 
Therefore, the experience which provides the data of phUosophy 
is the experience not of a perceiver but of a thinker, or of an intellec­
tual perception. 
218 Md., p. 167. 
219 Tbid., p. 168. 
220 Md., p. 169. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
133 
The initial knowledge of philosophy differs from that of empirical 
science not only in its relation to the reasoning process and in its own 
constitution and in the way we come to possess it, but also in what 
happens to such data throughout the development of thought. In 
adding the theory purporting to explain the facts in empirical science, 
the theory is another knowledge in addition to the original facts which 
themselves are not known in any new way. The process is one of ac­
cumulation. But in philosophy the knowledge why things are so makes 
a difference to the knowledge that they are so. 
[m philosophy] the new knowledge imparts a new quality to 
the old; in seeing why things are thus, we are not merely adding 
one piece of knowledge to another, we are coming to know the old 
better. Our knowledge is not simply accumulating, it is develop­
ing; it is improving, as weU as increasing; it is widening and 
strengthening itseU at once.221 
There is a consequent dUference in the conclusions of phUosophy 
on the one hand and science on the other. In empirical science the 
result of the induction is "an hypothesis standing, somewhat nebu­
lously, outside the facts on which it depends . . . " whereas " i n phUos­
ophy, the theory that emerges from consideration of the facts is no 
mere hypothesis, it is the facts themselves more thoroughly under­
stood." 2 2 2 So, 
In phUosophy there is continuity between the experience and 
the theory; the theory is nothing but the experience itseU, with its 
universaUty further insisted upon, its latent connexions and contra­
dictions brought into the light of consciousness.223 
In science there is a separation between the facts explained and 
the theory doing the explaining. But in pMosophy experience as phUo-
sophically experienced is already found to be going over into theory, 
and theory, in explaining, remains an experience. 
V 
. . . the separation between theory and fact. . . in phUosophy 
is no separation at aU, but only a distinction of the kind . . . between 
specific developments of the same genus . . . articulated in a scale 
of forms. 2 2 4 
Thus, in accordance with such a distinction, the pre-phUosophical 
knowledge from which the phUosophical process begins is only in a 
2 2 1 Tbid., pp. 169-170. 
2 2 2 Ybid., p. 170. The hypothetical and the assertive are mutually impUcated, the 
answer is (implicitly) in the question, and the question is (expUcitly) in the answer. 
2 2 3 lbid., pp. 170-171. 
224 D>id., p. 171. 

134 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
relative sense non-philosophical; it is less philosophical than that into 
which it develops but is not absolutely non-philosophical. The knowl­
edge from which philosophy begins is already fuU of phUosophical 
elements, not at the zero end of the scale but at least at unity. Thus 
the 'conclusions' of phUosophical thinking and the 'experience' on 
which they are based are names for any two successive stages in the 
scale of forms of phUosophical knowledge. The rational element of 
any one stage on the scale of phUosophical thought may be irrational 
relatively to the next stage above it. 
One stage in the scale of forms of phUosophical knowledge is 
related to the next higher as knowledge questioned to explicitation of 
that same knowledge by a knowledge which is an answer to a ques­
tion provoked by the prior knowledge. The answer explicitates what 
is questioned, namely the prior experience. Questioning is experience 
seeking its order in the whole of experience; seeking to be experienced 
as whole with constitutive parts. 
. . . what is asked of the higher is not simply that it should agree 
with the lower, but rather that it should explain it: perpetuate its 
substance in a new form, related to the old somewhat as a fact plus 
the reasons for it is related to the bare fact.225 
Thus, every pMosophical experience becomes the object of a ques­
tion which requests that the experience be explained by a theory which 
consists in the expUcation of that experience, in which explicitation the 
original experience persists but with a new quality. The (relatively) 
bare experience goes over from within its own resources to becoming 
a rational experience, to becoming the experience of a rational being 
who knows not merely that he has an experience but why he has it, 
and knows why in terms of elements provided from within the orig­
inal experience itseU. 2 2 6 The original experience, experienced as un-
2 2 5 lbid., p. 172. Thus, again, whether a certain content is question or answer 
depends not on there being two entities having those characters as mutuaUy exclu­
sive species, but precisely on the attitude the mind takes to the one same content. 
If the mind's attitude is one of supposal (although with reference to further asser­
tion) then that content is the content of a question. But if the mind's attitude to that 
content is assertive, then the content is a proposition having the character of answer 
to the question which demanded that assertion. What may provide the answer to 
previous questions may also provide the supposal which causes further questioning 
to arise. 'John Doe has been murdered' is assertive with respect to questions regard­
ing John Doe's present whereabouts, but it is supposed with respect to the further ques­
tion 'Who kQIed John Doe?' 
2 2 6 According to B. Bosanquet in The Principk ofIndividuality and Value, pp. 3W1, 
aU experience is characterised by a tendency to universality inasmuch as from itseU 
it tends to go beyond partiaUty and manifest a wholeness which both Uluminates dif-

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
135 
explained, as caUing for rational explanation, is a question, or the expe­
rience of questioning, or a questioning experience, which, from within 
its own inner resources, resolves the conflicting alternatives which 
constitute the question, and passes over into the experience of explan­
ation, or providing the answer to the prior question. Thus, the question 
and answer process forms one continuous whole analogous to a single 
cell which divides from within itself by a process of self-differentiation 
to a final well distinguished equikbrium state. 
At every stage in the scale, there is a datum or body of experi­
ence, the stage that has actuaUy been reached; and there is a prob­
lem [question], the task of explaining this experience by construct­
ing a theory of it, which is nothing but the same experience raised 
by intenser thought to a higher level of rationality. The accomplish­
ment of this task is only the continuation of a process akeady begun; 
it was only by thinking that we reached the point at which we stand, 
for the experience upon which we phflosophize is akeady a ratio­
nal experience; so our reason for going on is that we akeady stand 
committed to the task. But the new and intenser thinking must be 
thinking of a new kind; new principles are appearing in it, and these 
ferent contexts and receives light from them. This tendency is towards an ideal of 
truth, that is, an experience rationaUy accounted for through eUmination from it of 
conflicting interpretations of the same facts in the same relations. General rules repre­
sent a step in the direction of the completion of knowledge as a coherent whole, but 
generalization pursues an identity apart from differences; its method is omission and 
is achieved by attending only to the common qualities of individuals while disregard­
ing their differences. This procedure prohibits the consideration of any world struc­
ture of which the concrete individuals would be members and Ukewise prohibits the 
ascertainment of the fuU concrete nature of any individual itseU. Whole areas of ex­
perience are thus left unaccounted for when identity is sought through exclusion of 
differences and individuals are taken merely as members of a class whose totaUty is 
by way of a whole of repetition. The generalisation method of totality thus rules out 
on principle any consideration of the differences within that common characteristic 
and those which constitute the individual in what he is distinctively. Bosanquet main­
tains that contradiction is most successfully removed from experience when experi­
ence is regarded as having that unity which is proper to a whole of parts, namely 
an organism, or more generaUy, that of a world or a cosmos. The unity impUed by 
the terms world or cosmos is the most inclusive, and therefore the most effective, 
type of universal, and " a world or cosmos is a system of members, such that every 
member, being ex hyvothesi distinct, nevertheless contributes to the unity of the whole 
in virtue of the pecuUarities which constitute its distinctiveness." Bosanquet contrasts 
"the concrete universal. . . with the general rule as a centre of radii compared with 
a superficial area." He says that its test of universality does not consist in the number 
of subjects which share a common predicate but rather in the number of predicates 
which can be attached to a single subject. This, he says, "is the degree in which a 
systematic identity subordinates diversity to itseU or, more truly, reveals itseU as the 
spirit of communion and totality within which identity and difference are distinguish­
able but inseparable points of view." Thus, Bosanquet maintains, the power of the concrete 
universal, or of individuaUty which constitutes the true type of universaUty, is its capacity 
to unify experience. 

136 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
give a criterion by which the principles involved in the last step are 
superseded. Thus the stage last reached, regarded as a theory, is 
now a theory criticized and refuted; what stands firm is not its truth 
as theory, but the fact that we have experienced it; and in criticiz­
ing and demolishing it as a theory we are confkrning and explain­
ing it as an experience.227 
This citation very weU sums up the process of the unfolding of 
experience as it was presented in detaU by CoUingwood in his Specu­
lum Mentis. Note that it is not a matter of external addition, after the 
manner in which empirical science would explain, but rather of in­
ternal "addition," more exactly of seU-dtfferentiating division from 
within; not the constructing of a system of external relations but the 
unfolding of a system of internal relations; not a quantitative addi­
tion but a quaUtative addition, that is, not an extensification of thought 
coming to know more things, but an intensUication of thought, by 
coming to know better and more fuUy what was already less weU 
known. Since the different levels are dUferent levels of actual experi­
ence, the earUer and later stages are not merely logicaUy earlier and 
later but also temporaUy so. Time is thus intrinsic to the elaboration 
of the concrete universal, 2 2 8 for which reason history and phUosophy 
are related by intrmsic relations. Whereas natural accumulation is the 
addition of something from outside according to spatial relations, 
experiential accumulation is by way of seU-dWerentiating addition from 
within, according to temporal relations determinative of thought. The 
227 An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 173. 
2 2 8 Notwithstanding that CoUingwood accuses Bosanquet of "conceiving the proper 
object of knowledge PlatonicaUy as a timeless world of pure universaUty" (The Idea 
of History, p. 143) and that Bosanquet himseU says (The Principle of Individuality and 
Value, pp. 78-79) that "History is a hybrid form of experience, incapable of any con^ 
siderable degree of 'being or trueness' " and (ibid., p. 80) that PhUosophy and ReUgion 
"take us far beyond the spatio-temporal externality of history," nevertheless Bosan­
quet himseU seems to provide a jumping off ground for the amendment of his posi­
tion more into ColUngwood's line of thinking, in which history and temporaUty are 
of the essence of individuaUty and concreteness. Thus, ako in The Principh ofIndividu­
ality and Value, p. 72, Bosanquet identifies individuaUty with spirituaUty and then states 
that memory is bound up with the spiritual being of the mind. "The Individual is 
one with the spiritual, and the characteristic of the spiritual in its proper nature is 
inwardness as opposed to externaUty . . . Memory is inward because its diversity is 
bound up with the being of the mind; you cannot take the one and leave the other, 
hiwardness is diversity without dissociation." Now, if memory is bound up intimate­
ly with mind and its inward respect it necessariIy foUows that mind and its inward 
respect are intimately bound up with time, since time is of the essence of memory. 
Again, if, as Bosanquet says (ibid., p. 70) the uniqueness which marks individuality 
is the uniqueness of purpose, and purpose is meaningful only in the context of a 
forward-looking aspect into the future, then individuality, or concrete universality, 
essenuaUy implicates futurity, therefore temporaUty, therefore a historical dimension. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
137 
seeds of this notion are found in Kant and their elaboration also in 
Bergson, for whom external spatial relations characterise the external 
world of material nature whereas internal temporal relations charac­
terise the internal spiritual world of consciousness. The shadow of 
Descartes is ako present, identifying the external world with its spatial 
dimensions, and the internal world of setf<onsciousness with thought. 
And when ColHngwood, in the above citation, says that "our reason 
for going on is that we stand committed to the task," I interpret this 
to refer to the emotive dynamism already mentioned in regard to 
questionings'—the restlessness of the mind to pass on from an in­
adequate experience to a more adequate experience, 2 3 0 such inade­
quacy not merely known but also emotively felt. 
This felt tension within the conscious experience of a rational agent 
to transform its given experience into a more fuUy rational, accounted 
for experience is weU described by B. Bosanquet: 
[Thought] presses beyond the given, foUowing the "what" 
beyond the Umits of the "that." But it is also true that in foUowing 
the "what" it tends always to return to a fuUer "that." И its impuke 
is away from the given it is towards the whole—the world. And as 
constituting a world it tends to return to the fuU depth and round­
ness of experience from which its first step was to depart. In a 
"world," a "concrete universal," we do not lose directness and sig­
nificance as we depart from primary experience; on the contrary, 
every detail has gained incalculably in vividness and in meaning, 
by reason of the intricate interpretation and interconnection, through 
which thought has developed its possibiUties of "being." 2 3 1 
Bosanquet further says that the notion of reaUty, the concrete 
whole of individuaUty is essentiaUy the notion of a spring of adjust­
ment within the self, 2 3 2 whereby the seU seeks to bring the fragmen­
tary elements of experience into a systematized whole. Experiences 
such as the apprehension of beauty and those of the moral and reU-
gious consciousness are experiences in which the aspiration of aU 
experience to be a unUied whole at least partiaUy comes into its own. 2 3 3 
The main point in the contrast between the relations of abstract gener-
aUzation on the one hand and concrete thinking on the other is the 
2 2 9 See Chapter 3, p. 67 above; see also CoUingwood's The New Leviathan, pp. 47^8 
and pp. 50-53 on appetite as feeUng-discomfort pointing to a 'there-and-then' satisfy­
ing state of feeling. 
230 g
e
e this chapter, above, pp. 134-136. 
2 3 1 The Principle ofIndividuality and Value, p. 56. 
2 3 2 Jbid., p. 53. 
2 3 3 Tbid., pp. 56-57. 

138 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
capacity of the latter to give completeness and futfiUment to experi­
ence. By pursuing the overcoming of contradiction within itseU, by 
seeing its multiple elements as contributing by their dUferences to the 
meaning of a whole, the mind arrives at an incomparably more vital 
and intense experience as weU as at a more logical and rational expe­
rience than that of the unexamined lUe of everyday perception. 2 3 4 
Form, interdependence, significance, setf-completeness are charac­
teristics of thought at its best, so of vitaUty at its highest. This is the. 
general character by which fhe concrete universal gjves us the clue 
to the individual. 2 3 5 
The datum of phUosophy does not therefore remain as a fixed 
point, it undergoes development as it undergoes analysis and finally 
vanishes in its old form to reappear in a new. 2 3 6 
PhUosophy embodies the systematizing function of deductive 
thought, since every phase in its development is at least ideaUy a com­
plete system connected throughout by strict logical bonds. But the 
system of phUosophy is something more than a deductive system since 
its principles of systematization are always open to criticism, that is 
to questioning, and stand or faU according to their success or faUure 
in explaining our experience (as in Speculum Mentis). 
Likewise, phUosophy embodies the inductive function of discern­
ing the principles that permeate experience, making it a rational whole. 
But the experience on which it bases its theories is the theorizing ex­
perience of rational Uving. The theory of phUosophy is thus an essen­
tial part of phUosophy; the activity of phUosophizing is a datum to 
phUosophy; the data from which it begins are homogeneous with the 
theories by which, as conclusions, the data are explained. 
C. The Systematic Unity of the Concrete 
Universal According to Collingwood 
As said above, 2 3 7 the notion of system is central to the understand­
ing of Collingwood's concrete rapprochement logic, for the unity in 
diversity in which consists the concrete universal is systematic unity 
as opposed to isolated, seU-contained, atomic units of abstract intel­
ligibUity such as Positivistic science trades in. 
234 Tbid., p. 58. 
2 3 5 Tbid., p. 59. 
2 3 6 Tninking is thus not a fixed state for CoUingwood but an activity of becoming. 
2 3 7 See this chapter, above, p. 93; see also CoUingwood's Speculum Mentis, p. 
221. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
139 
CoUingwood's treatment of "The Idea of System" 2 3 8 adapts Bosan­
quet's tendency to totality which characterises rational experience to 
his own systematisation of thought as an overlap of classes in a 
dynamically unfolding scale of forms. 
CoUingwood ekborates his idea of system in the context of explain­
ing the constructive moment in philosophical thought which foUows 
upon a period of scepticism. 2 3 9 He says that the idea of a system im­
plies finaUty, completeness, objectivity and unity. 2 4 0 But, a problem 
arises as to whether any of these notes can properly be appUed to 
any type of thought, such as phUosophical thought, which constant­
ly advances through new discoveries to new points of view. 2 4 1 
Against the objection that any constantly changing branch of 
thought cannot have systematic finality, CoUingwood repUes that any 
advancement in knowledge requires that the student take stock from 
time to time as to where he stands at the point at which he has arrived. 
But this can be done only by stating his result systematically, show­
ing by what devious routes he has reached his present position. 2 4 2 
The phUosopher . . . like every student, must sum up his 
progress from time to time, and express his conclusions in a sys­
tematic form, ii progress is to continue.243 
To dUficulties advanced against the possibUity of systematizing 
the unwieldy mass of what constitutes modern phUosophical knowl­
edge CoUingwood argues that systematic completion does not require 
an encyclopaedic summation of aU avaUable facts. A n adequate survey 
is quite possible in order that phUosophy may "deal with its own 
special problems in its own special way." 2 4 4 No branch of knowledge, 
least of aU phUosophy, is a mere unwieldy accumulation of ascertained 
facts. Any thinker, any problem solver, works within a weU defined 
area which is in organic (or internal) relationship with the work of 
predecessors and contemporaries, in such a way that he "finds himseU 
shepherded, as it were, into a particular line of study by the fact that 
others round him are doing work which requires this as its comple­
ment." 2 4 5 Thus, the completion proper to systematic phUosophy is 
2 3 8 See An Essay on Philosophical Method, p. 176-198. 
2 3 5 See ibid., p. 176. 
2 4 0 See ibid., p. 177. 
2 4 1 See ibid. 
2 4 2 See ibid., p. 179. 
2 4 3 Tbid., p. 180. 
244 Md., p. 181. 
245 Tbid., p. 182. 

140 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
that the investigator stands at the term of intrinsic relations with past 
and with contemporary thinkers so that his special problems are deter­
mined for him by the context in which he is working. 
To the objection that a personal contribution, which every thinker's 
contribution must be, cannot be objective and therefore cannot be 
systematic, CoUingwood replies that the contribution, as a justtfica-
tion of making a genuine contribution to the body of human knowl­
edge, must have a theory of the place that his contribution has in the 
whole; that is, he must be able, in his result, to show the internal 
relationships which his personal thought bears to that of his prede­
cessors and contemporaries. This means that he must contribute his 
answer as to what phUosophy is. In adding to the fund of human 
knowledge he does not just add another item to the inventory but 
reshapes in his own mind the idea of phUosophy as a whole. 2 4 6 
Systematic thought does not mean adherence to rigidly preestab-
lished formulae, as U the diversity of phUosophical problems required 
that they be kept separate and solved by their own special methods. 2 4 7 
The very concept itself of phUosophy is a phUosophical concept, so 
that its specUic classes overlap. 2 4 8 
This overlap of the various classes of the concept of phUosophy 
takes place in three dUferent ways. The so-caUed departments meta­
physics, logic, ethics, etc., overlap; secondly, the work of an indivi­
dual thinker and that of his contemporaries overlap; thirdly, the work 
of a contemporary thinker overlaps with that of his predecessors. 
Just as the work of various individual thinkers, both past and pre­
sent, does not accumulate aggregationally, by addition from outside 
one another, so neither do the various parts of phUosophy—logic, 
ethics, etc—develop in isolation one from the other and add together 
merely aggregationally. Progress in one is intrinsicaUy related to, and 
vitaUy affects, what is going on in every other part, PhUosophy as 
a whole of parts is thus a concrete universal, not an abstract, classi­
ficatory universal. So, the various parts which together make up the 
content of a phUosophy wUl occur as terms on an overlapping scale 
of forms, each expressing distinct aspects of the one same subject 
2 4 6 Tbid., pp. 182-184. The same might be said of the historian; that he rewrites 
the past as he has transformed it in his mind; it has changed inasmuch as now it is 
something he has come to know; it includes his knowledge of it with which subse­
quent historians have to reckon. 
2 4 7 See ibid., p. 185. 
2 4 8 See ibid., p. 188. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
141 
matter which together wffl permit a more adequate expression of the 
nature of one substance.249 
Each form in such a scale sums up the whole scale to that point; 
that is to say, each form is itsetf a system in which the topics and 
methods of the subordinate forms find a subordinate place.250 
Philosophizing as a system involves the responsibility of show­
ing that theories otherwise true would have to be condemned as errors 
if considered as distinct and autonomous philosophies. 2 5 1 
. . . the philosopher, in constructing ä system, has his place 
in a scale whose structure is such that every term in it sums up 
the whole scale to that point . . . he is always [only] at a relative 
end . . . 2 5 2 
Just as the various parts of philosophy stand in intrinsic relation 
to the whole, so also in regard to any philosophy in regard to its his­
torical situation: "As one form in a scale, an individual philosophy 
is one among many, a single moment in the history of thought, which 
future philosophers wffl have to treat as such." 2 5 3 Philosophy, as re­
affirming the efforts of past philosophers as elements within itseU, 
summarizes the whole previous course of its history, and is thus 
universal as weU as individual, 2 5 4 " . . . a new phUosophy which is 
at the same time an improved version of the o l d . " 2 5 5 
In a history of this kind aU the phUosophies of the past are tele­
scoped into the present, and constitute a scale of forms, never be­
ginning and never ending, which are dUferent both in degree and 
in kind, distinct from each other and opposed to each other.256 
A genuine phUosophy arises in a concrete situation in which a 
phUosopher finds himsetf, and this happens by an objective neces­
sity. The situation and problems confronted by any individual 
phUosopher are unique to himseU, so that U his thought is to become 
acceptable to another, it wUl require modification and reaffirmation 
as an element which the other incorporates into his own phUosophy. 
That each [phUosopher] must reject the thoughts of others, re­
garded as setf-contained pMosophies, and at the same time reaf­
firm them as elements in his own phUosophy, is due not to causes 
2 4 9 See ibid., p. 189. 
250 ttid., p. 190. 
2 5 1 See ibid. 
2 5 2 VM., p. 191. 
**Md. 
2 5 4 See ibid., pp. 191-192. 
2 5 5 Md., p. 195. 
256 mid. 

142 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
in taste and temperament but to the logical structure of philosoph­
ical thought. 2 5 7 
Philosophy is not something rigidly predetermined as regards 
method or content and is not achieved by the application of rigid 
formulae. It is characterized by a methodical flexibility in which the 
method changes from one topic to another, since form and content 
undergo mutuaUy interdependent development as thought traverses 
its scale of forms as it graduaUy approximates to the ideal of a perfect­
ly phUosophical subject-matter treated by a perfectly phUosophical 
method. 2 5 8 
The idea of a system is nowhere finaUy and completely realized; 
but it is always tending to realize itseU wherever any diversity is 
recognized in the subject-matter and methods of thought. 2 5 9 
The tendency of phUosophical experience to take on a systematic 
shape is expressed in an infinite variety of ways, a new way every 
time a new kind of diversity is encountered demanding to be organized 
into a whole. 2 6 0 
Regarding the systematization of (a) the various branches of phUos­
ophy, φ) the history of phUosophy, (c) the varieties of contemporary 
phUosophies, CoUingwood comments as foUows. 
The various departments of phUosophy are ordy minimaUy syste­
matized, but systematization is to some extent reaUzed for these differ 
both in kind and in degree as various ways of dealing phUosophical-
ly with various topics. 
It is only in a rough and approximate way that the conventional 
canon of phüosophical sciences corresponds to the idea of system; 
but it is only in so far as it does correspond that it can claim phUo­
sophical importance; otherwise it represents a merely empirical 
grouping of phUosophical topics.261 
The history of phUosophical thought is genuine only insofar as 
the events contained in it are seen to lead one to the other, that is, 
insofar as each phUosopher derived his phUosophy by studying the 
work of his predecessors. 
A phUosopher genuinely phUosophizes only insofar as he does 
what his predecessors did in assimUating what is true and reject-
257 Oid., p. 192. 
2 5 8 See ibid., p. 192. 
ω» Md., p. 193. 
2 6 0 See ibid. 
2 6 1 Md., p. 194. This seems to suggest that this division of philosophy into parts 
is more a classificatory division than an overlap of classes. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
143 
ing what is false, and thereby produces a new and improved version 
of the old. 2 6 2 
In a history of this kind aU the phUosophies of the past are tele­
scoped into the present, and constitute a scale of forms, never 
begirming and never ending, which are dUferent both in degree and 
in kind, distinct from each other and opposed to each other.263 
Finally the phUosophy of a phUosopher's own time can only be 
set out by way of the various relations that subsist in and between 
the various apparently conflicting and opposing prevaUing views. 
"These various relations are not given to their terms from without, 
by an arbitrary act of a systematizing inteUect; they reaUy subsist in 
and between the terms, and to apprehend the terms without appre­
hending these relations is to misapprehend t h e m . " 2 6 4 Ji these rela­
tions are grasped, interiorly, from within, the divergent views wUl 
reveal themselvesas nodal points in a system of thought as a whole 
which may rightly be regarded as the phUosophy of the present day. 
Such a system is conceivable only as a scale of forms. On such 
a scale, ideaUy, the crudest and least phUosophical view can be located 
at the lower end which tends towards zero without actuaUy reaching 
it. The second phase of such a scale is reached when the chaos of 
conflicting views is sorted out, by consoUdation and by criticism, into 
more or less definite and organized groups of theories called phUos­
ophy today. The third phase is reached when these conflicting theories 
are seen to participate in varying degrees and kinds in a single com­
mon spirit. 2 6 5 
A phUosopher proceeds in the same way in trying to think out 
his own phUosophy. He begins with a welter of haU-truths and quarter-
opinions which he allocates to the lower end of the scale of forms. 
These are sifted, diversified and consolidated so that, eventuaUy, weU 
defined interrelated groupings of views are recognizable. Then he tries 
at a higher level to see these various positions as parts of a connected 
whole, adjusting not only the parts to the idea of the whole but also 
adjusting the idea of the whole to meet the demand of the parts, so 
that the idea of the whole is itseU undergoing transformation as the 
scale of forms which constitutes the whole is traversed upwards. 2 6 6 
2 6 2 See ibid., pp. 194-195. 
2 6 3 Md., p. 195. 
264 Jbid., pp. 195-196. 
265 Jbid., pp. 196-197. 
2 6 6 See ibid., pp. 197-198. 

144 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Such a system is only an ideal in the sense that it regulates the 
procedure of a philosopher trying to answer the question at issue, 
and cannot be expected to present itseU fuUy formed in his answer.267 
Collingwood thus develops more explicitly than Bosanquet the 
progressive characteristic of the individuality of the concrete univer­
sal, no doubt due to his predominating interest in historical thought. 
Collingwood's systematization of the concrete universal as a scale of 
forms is most likely intended to overcome the dUficulties that H . H . 
Joachim found in developing the coherence notion of truth in Une with 
Bosanquet's notion of the perfect whole as that of a world or cosmos. 
A theory of truth as coherence, we may say must enable us to 
conceive the one significant whole so as to satisfy certain require­
ments. We must so conceive it that it is a timeless actuality, main­
taining and fuUUling itseU through the setting up within itself of 
modes, which yet are independent; and by creating an inner other­
ness or duality, which yet is continuously subdued to unity. 2 6 8 
The overlap of classes in a scale of forms is a reaction to this need 
"to conceive the one signUicant whole . . . as . . . . a timeless actual­
ity . . . " The signUicant whole, which for CoUingwood is that at which 
rational experience aims, is not a timeless actuality but a historically 
unfolding actuality which has the unity of a scale of forms mtrinsicaUy 
related by internal relations. Collingwood's rendering of the concrete 
universal as an overlap of classes in a scale of forms is more faithfully 
in line with Bosanquet's notion of mind as the active form of total­
ity, 2 6 9 which, in turn, is more faithful to CoUingwood's notion of rnind 
as seU-actualizing activity which both presupposes and is reaUzed in 
a historical, temporalized process. 
D. The Dialectical Dynamism of the Concrete Universal 
Collingwood's commitment to the theory of the concrete univer­
sal and the corresponding logic entaUed thereby, is bound up with 
his rejection of substance in preference to action as the basic charac­
teristic of aU that is. And this repudiation of the category of substance270 
267 Brid., p. 197. 
2 6 8 H. H. Joachim, The Nature of Truth, London, Qarendon Press, 1906, p. 175. 
2 6 9 B. Bosanquet, The Principk of Individuality and Value, p. 59. 
2 7 0 Thus, the mind is not a substance underlying its different activities. "Hume 
was . . . right to maintain that there is no such thing as 'spiritual substance', nothing 
that a mind is, distinct from and underlying what it does." The Idea ofHistory, p. 
222. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
145 
and static essences271 is bound up with his rejection of the abstract 
universal. 
ш place of a pluraHty of abstract essences each constituting one 
species of knowledge, CoUingwood proposes, on the side of the sub­
ject, a scale of historical activities, art, religion, natural science, 
political science, economic science, history, and so on, having as 
their objects a scale of corresponding activities: the relation of sub­
ject and object being in each case such as to constitute a fundamental 
'unity', each of which is a concrete universal, and aU of which 
together constitute the moments of the concrete universality (i.e., 
activity) of mind. 2 7 2 
The concrete universal has no identity apart from the existence 
which it has in its members or instances which manUest it. Its essence 
does not in any way transcend the particularity of the existent in­
stances. What makes the instances be what they are is precisely the 
membership which they have in that universal. They are connected 
among themselves and to the whole by essential relationships. The 
universaUty of the concrete universal is therefore not the universality 
of a substance sharing a common undUferentiated nature. Such an 
abstract substantiaUsm is mcompatible with historical knowledge, since 
distinction of the natural world from the historical world depends upon 
it. 
A concrete universal is not a universal substance whose nature 
is shared in common by its instances. It is, on the contrary, a kind 
of synthesis which embraces differences as well as similarities. The 
instances of a concrete universal do not belong to that universal in 
the sense that they aU possess, in precisely the same way, the same 
abstract characteristics which are the essence of that universal. И 
this were the case, then differences would be accidental and unim­
portant. And since dUferentiation and change are precisely those 
features which distinguish history from nature, whUe there can be 
scientific, there cannot be historical, knowledge of abstract univer¬
sals. The genuine universal, however, does not enjoy the separate 
existence of the abstract universal. Apart from its members, or in­
stances (or, as Hegel preferred to caU them, its 'moments'), it does 
not exist at aU; its essence does not transcend the particularity of 
its instances Uke the essence of an abstract universal. One might 
almost say that the instances of a concrete universal, rather than 
2 7 1 Lionel Rubinoff, in Collingivood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 155, explains 
that the state for CoUingwood is not, as is generaUy regarded, a substance having 
a fixed essence whose principles are deducible from the definition expressing that 
essence, but is a historically changing dynamic process. The question, for CoUing­
wood, is not what are the attributes of the state, but what is poUtical action. 
272 Ш., 
pp. 155-tt6. 

146 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
sharing a common abstract characteristic, possess—to borrow Witt­
genstein's phrase-"family resemblances"; and it is in virtue of these 
"family resemblances" that the various moments of the universal 
are recognized to belong to the same class.273 
ReaUty, or that which is at the basis of everything that is, is an 
activity, or process, or an identity in dUference of which polar oppo­
sites are the manUestation (as red and blue are the polar opposites 
of a spectroanalysed white Ught). More basic than the character of polar 
opposition, by which the dynamic process of dialectic activity is mani­
fested, iscreative or signUicant negation which is nothing other than 
the activity itseU as generative of its polar opposites. As explained 
by CoUingwood previously 2 7 4 the polar opposites are not entities in 
themselves from which events or processes are derived by a combin­
ation thereof, rather the process or activity itseU is what is basicaUy 
given, and the opposites are aspects which one analyses out of this 
one concrete activity. But these aspects are dynamic entities, they are 
the opposite features that result from the process of negation which 
belongs to the very nature of the basic activity. 2 7 5 " A t the centre of 
dialectic is the notion of 'deterrninate negation.' " 2 7 6 
'Otherness' is the first and simplest form of negation. Every other 
form presupposes it and impUes i t . 2 7 7 Otherness, or dUference, is the 
form of negation closest to common sense, which accepts plurality 
as a datum. But negation is more fundamental than a pluraUty of enti­
ties, for it also constitutes relationships between the entities of the 
plurality. These relationships may be regarded as a factor intrinsic to 
existence, or to our interpretation of it. That is, negation can be under­
stood in terms either of thought or of existence or both. 2 7 8 Facts, for 
every philosophy of opposites, include positive and negative aspects, 
and are understood both as regards what they are and as regards what 
they are not. 2 7 9 
Dialectic is basicaUy an existential aspect of things and is used in 
thinking about existence, as a factor in existence. The concept of dialec­
tic may refer either to the dialectical process or operation of 'negating,' 
273 Md., p. 156. 
2 7 4 Where he clarifies the kind of opposition found in philosophical concepts, An 
Essay on Phiksophical Method, pp. 68-77. See this chapter, above, pp. 107-110. 
2 7 5 SeeO. Lee, "Dialectic andNegation," TheReviewofMetaphysics, 1(1947), p. 3. 
2 7 6 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 176. 
2 7 7 See Otis Lee, "Dialectic and Negation," The Review ofMetaphysics, I (1947), 
p. 1. 
278 Tbid., p. 3. 
279 Md., p. 4. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
147 
or to the restdt of the negating activity, or to the relation intrinsic to 
the opposition of affirmation and negation. Dialectic regards the action 
or process as the most basic of these three aspects, the entity which 
results, and the relation (of opposition) is a derivative of it. The concept 
of substance, typical of preceding historical periods, put static existence 
before change, but absolute idealism places becoming before being 
and holds that the basic entity of aU that is, namely spirit or rnind, 
is an endless becoming. 2 8 0 
Collingwood explains the meaning of a dialectical series in Specu­
lum Mentis in the context of the forms of experience understood as 
a dialectical series. "The terms of a dialectical series are not related 
to one another in terms of degree, but by the assertion in each term 
of something which in the previous term was wrongly denied." 2 8 1 
" A dialectical series means a series of terms, each one of which is 
an erroneous description of the next." 2 8 2 CoUingwood exempUfies this: 
In a dialectical series A B C, the truth is C; B is a distorted ac­
count of it, and A is a distorted account of B. Now tf C represents 
the true nature of rnind, B is a mistake—partial of course; no mistake 
is a mere mistake—which C makes about itseU. This mistake wUl 
recoU on C's own nature, for a mind which makes mistakes about 
its own nature wiU find its conduct, which is its nature, affected by 
these mistakes. Its nature wUl not be so far altered as to coincide 
with the false conception, but it wUl be disturbed by that concep­
tion. Thus we get B, what the mind now thinks it is, and C\, what 
it actuaUy is. The next downward step wUl be to faü even to get the 
notion B coherent, to distort and degrade it into A. This still further 
lapse from truth in the seU-knowledge of the rnind C is now an error 
of the second degree, and therefore reacts in the second degree on 
the conduct and nature of the rnind. It no longer therefore behaves 
as Ci but as Bj, which is equivalent to C2. In a sense we may say 
that it stiU is C, though it does not know it; but because its seU-ignor-
ance affects its conduct, to caU it C is misleading, for it does not 
behave like C but like C2.
2 8 3 
v 
CoUingwood elaborates this by describing in fuU the condition of 
the mind in this activity. Implicitly it is C, but it is trying to conceive 
itseU as B, although there is no such thing as B. But, in trying to con­
ceive itseU as B it confuses itseU even in doing this and results in think­
ing of itseU as A. The successive misconceptions B and A so retroact 
280 Tbid., pp. 4-6. 
2 8 1 Speculum Mentis, p. 208. 
2 8 2 Md., p. 206. 
283 Tbid., pp. 206-207. 

148 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
over the mind's true nature, C, that it comes out in the form C2. C2 
is its actual form (i.e., C, its true nature after retroaction of miscon­
ceptions B and A), A is its explicit form, basicaUy or ultimately it is 
C. Thus, the aesthetic mind (A = pure Unagination) caUs itseU an artist, 
but wUl be basicaUy historical (C = historical experience), but the 
historical nature (C) wffl be so affected by the description of itseU as 
aesthetic that it wUl not appear even to a dispassionate observer as 
pure or unqualUied history. The distortion in its nature disappears 
when it discoversits true nature through discovering the error of its 
false conceptions. A mind ignorant of its true nature does not in the 
fullest sense possess its nature. The true nature of the mind is not 
something ready-made waiting to be discovered; it exists only when 
it is discovered, yet, previous to its discovery, it exists in a confused 
and distorted form (i.e., implicitly), for errors are partial truths, and 
the dialectical work is to bring that true nature into existence by clearing 
up the confusions which appear as inconsistencies experienced as a 
conflict by the mind between what it is and what it ought to be. 2 8 4 
Another presentation of an instance of a dialectical series is given 
by CoUingwood in An Autobiography (pp. 97-99) Ulustrating that 
the past which a historian studies is not a dead past, but a past 
which in some sense is stUl Uving in the present . . . [which] I 
expressed . . . by saying that history is concerned not with 'events' 
but with 'processes'. . . [which] are things which do not begin and 
end but turn into one another . . . 2 8 5 
Again, in the same work, 2 8 6 as akeady explained above, 2 8 7 the state 
is not a transcendent eternal entity exemplUied in Plato's Republic or 
Hobbes' Leviathan, but an active process which changes from what 
Plato describes it to be to what Hobbes describes it to be. 2 8 8 Again, 
as L. Rubinoff weU explains, 2 8 9 in his article entitled "Political 
2 8 4 See R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 207. See ako B. Bosanquet, "Con­
tradiction and Reality," Mind, XV (1906), p. 2: ". . . the unrest of action and cogni­
tion seems to arise from the perpetual presence of impHcit contradiction in the nature 
of actual fact, a presence which becomes explicit on the sUghtest reflection and forces 
us to go further in the hope of faring better. It must, I infer, be admitted that fact, 
as given in ordinary experience, is both actual and setf-contradictory." This experi­
enced conflict, which spurs the mind to reflect and explicitate its implications, is ap­
petite; see also CoUingwood's New Leviathan, pp. 47-53. Felt contradiction thus drives 
the mind to develop itseU into more perfect forms. 
285 An Autobiography, pp. 97-98; see Chapter 6, pp. 217-220 below. 
2 8 6 See An Autobiography, pp. 61-62. 
2 8 7 See Chapter 2, above, pp. 53-54. 
2 8 8 See also Chapter 6, below, pp. 217-220. 
2 8 9 See his Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 155. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
149 
Action" 2 9 0 CoUingwood develops the concept of the state in terms of 
dialectically dynamic political action rather than in terms of a static 
entity entaUing properties as abstract deductive logic would treat it. 
Each member of such a series occurs on a scale of forms and its 
place is determined by its internal relations with respect to its higher 
and lower members. The negation whereby it negates the limitation 
(negation, hence negation of negation) of the lower is not a static rela­
tion thereto but a dynamic, active relation thereto. The higher comes 
out of the lower when the lower coUapses under the strain of its buUt-in 
contradiction. This negation of the negation that occurs from within 
the lower member is at the same time the coming into being of the 
higher. The process then continues; as each member develops it gives 
way to something higher "beating it on its own ground" by active 
negation of its own limitations. 
Thus, active negation is the dynamic differentiation of one form 
from another arranged on a dialectic scale of forms. The dtfferences 
of species arrayed on a dynamic scale of forms are not static extrinsic 
differences, but dUferences mtrinsic to the cUfferentiated form, consist­
ing in the active, dynamic, seU-transcendence of that form. Thus, in 
a dialectic scale of forms, the 'otherness' whereby one form dUfers 
from another is a seU-determining activity, an activity which is not 
other than the active seU but of the very essence of that self. Thus, 
'the other' comes from 'a seU' inasmuch as that seU actively distances 
itseU from itseU; it alienates itseU from itseU from within, by reason 
of the very activity which is nothing other than itseU. 
Hence the concrete universal, as an actively, dynamicaUy develop­
ing entity, is an 'identity-in-difference'; it has itseU actively by a setf-
development which results in its giving way to something other than 
itseU, in which other is found the fuUUlment of the active striving with 
which it is identified. 
E. The Concrete Universal and the Logic of 
Question and Answer 
ColUngwood's explicit deniaJ. of the distinction between phUos­
ophy and history, as this distinction is understood by the realists, is 
the foundation of his logic of question and answer, 2 9 1 and, therefore, 
his question and answer logic is the logic of the rapprochement he 
sought, as his Ufe's work, to bring about between phUosophy and 
2 9 0 See Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, (1928-1929), 155-176. 
2 9 1 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 15; see also R. G. 
CoUingwood's An Autobiography, pp. 65456. 

150 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
history. And "when CoUingwood . . . argues in the Autobiography that 
the history of aU thought, including metaphysics, can be approached 
through the logic of question and answer (A, 58, 65, 67), he is impHcit-
ly declaring that the question-and-answer complexes revealed by 
applying the logic of question and answer to the history of thought 
assume a dialectical scale of forms" 2 9 2 and therefore must be regarded 
as a concrete universal. We have ahready seen that Collingwood says 
that "the process of knowledge . . . is not so much an alternation of 
question and answer as a perpetual restatement of the question with 
a perpetual revision of the answer," 2 9 3 but knowledge as a process (as 
distinct from knowledge as a series of events or catalogue of facts such 
as abstractionist, classUicatory logic would regard it, such as, for ex­
ample, Positivism regards historical events when it seeks "hard facts") 
is rather a scale of forms consisting of a series of questions and answers 
arranged according to their mutual impUcations, or internal relations. 
The knowledge of "who kUled John Doe?" for example, consists of 
a series of questions and answers, begirming with that question, end­
ing with the answer that the rector kUled John Doe, as was explained 
in Chapter 1, above. Inasmuch as one possesses this answer in an 
historicaUy scientUic way, one knows that the rector kUled John Doe 
in terms of aU the reasons—in their proper order, as they form a 
coherent whole—why one maintains that proposition. To know this 
scientifically 2 9 4 one has to know the whole series of questions and 
answers as synthetically integrated. That is, one has to know that 
whole series of questions and answers as a concrete universal, as a 
scale of forms, each member being related to its prior and posterior 
members by necessary implication. The question "who kUled John 
Doe?" lays down an area of inquiry, thereby delmeating a certain in­
teUigible whole, which area is progressively elaborated as the inquiry 
proceeds. It is the focal point of attention, a whole within which some 
facts or events wUl be included as relevant, others excluded as irrele­
vant. The sorting of the irrelevant from the relevant by means of the 
questioning process is the buUding up of that scale of forms which 
constitutes a concrete universal. A scientUic inquiry, therefore, con­
sists in visualizing a certain whole from the beginning; the process 
wUl consist in seeing that whole as explicated in terms of its internal 
2 9 2 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 252. 
2 9 3 R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 80; see also L. Rubinoff, Collingwood 
and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 252. See also, above, Chapter 3, pp. 70-71. 
2 9 4 'Scientific' here refers to the method of orderly procedure according to which 
history is caUed a science, as was explained in Chapter 1, above, pp. 12-13. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
Ш 
relations, the parts, which, with these relevant distinctions and inter­
relations, constitute that synthetic totaHty. It is the whole, first delin­
eated by the dominating question, that gives meaning to the parts 
(dividing the relevant from the irrelevant) and reciprocaUy, the parts 
that give meaning to the whole. In other words, whole and part are 
not mutually exclusive, as if the parts were entities in themselves related 
merely by external relations, as dassificatory genus-spedes logjc would 
analyse a whole, but are rather themselves overlapping dasses in a 
scale of forms, the whole being reaUzed only in and through its parts, 
and other parts being what they are through constituting the whole. 
Thus, crime detection consists in striving to grasp a situation, the 
experience of a number of facts, as a whole. The perpetuaUy restated 
question that is restated in every different question the crime solver 
asks is 'How do aU these things fit together?' It is this 'fitting together' 
of the 'pieces' that more and more expUcates the insight into the whole 
picture in which everything is explained as interrelated. Those famUiar 
with the Perry Mason type of inquiry wUl recognize how one weU 
loaded question to an interrogated suspect aknost predpitates its own 
answer so that 'everything faUs into place'; so much so that for the 
susped to be faced with the question immediately provokes the answer 
merely by his behavioral response, without waiting for him to supply 
an articulated verbal reply. The principle, the criterion dominating 
the progress of the inquiry throughout, which criterion places one 
always in the presence of an inteUigible totality, is that human events 
do not happen in isolation, but are intimately connected by internal 
relations, so that any one event is not properly understood untU its 
place in the context of other events is appreciated. Concrete thirU<ing 
is thus essentiaUy contextual thinking, thinking of events not as isolated 
units (which the term 'event' itself unfortunately may suggest) but 
as intertwined into the fabric of a whole which at the same time takes 
its meaning from that whole and conveys meaning to that whole. This 
grasping of a situation as a whole, in terms of its internal relations, 
in terms of the 'inside' of events, is what CoUingwood caUs 'insight.' 2 9 5 
But inward reaUty, as distinct from outward manUestation, is spirit 
or thought. 2 9 6 It is through the inward human thoughts and purposes 
that external human events are internaUy connected into a systematic 
unity in diversity, that is, a concrete universal. By means of 'insight' 
into the thoughts and purposes within human events a coherent, 
2 9 5 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 101. See Chapter 6, below, 
p.221n.45.. 
2 9 6 See B. Bosanquet, The Principle of Individuality and Value, p. 72. 

152 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
interconnected whole is constituted. SpecificaUy human entities, such 
as a culture, or a city, or a war, are constituted by a web of factors, 
each external as far as appearance is concerned, but intrinsically and 
dynamicaUy integrated by internal relations resulting from human 
thoughtful and purposeful activity. 2 9 7 
Similarly, history in its concrete elaboration by the historian begins 
with a question, 2 9 8 and seeks to elaborate a series of events in such 
a way that there is no longer merely a series of disconnected facts, 
but a process in which the succeeding events are seen to give way 
one to the other by internal necessity, so that a coherent whole is 
presented in the form of an overlap of classes in a scale of forms. This 
explains why past facts change in meaning as their implications are 
developed throughout the course of history by being reassimilated 
by succeeding thoughts in the pursuit of new purposes. Thus, the 
tombs excavated by Flinders Petrie in Egypt now have as part of their 
history the fact that they were excavated by Petrie at that particular 
time and for the particular motives which Petrie had in undertaking 
such excavations. 
Thus, in crime detection and in historical inquiry, the elements 
of the complex knowledge, consisting of seried questions and answers, 
fit together to form one complete picture somewhat in the way the 
parts of a jigsaw puzzle fit together. What guides the jigsaw puzzle-
2 9 7 According to B. Bosanquet, The Principk ofIndividuality and Value, p. 70, the 
uniqueness which marks individuaUty, the concrete universal, is what is commonly 
regarded as the uniqueness of purpose. A purpose which is the practical element of 
a logical whole is nothingbut a want, or a wanted object. Correlate this with ColUng­
wood's " O n the So<aUed Idea of Causation," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
ΧΧΧνΤΠ (1938), pp. 85-112, for CoUingwood's understanding of the primary sense 
of the term 'cause' to be that of purpose. See also CoUingwood's Autobiography, p. 
101, and Ch. 6, pp. 224-226, below, for CoUingwood's assertion that historical insight 
is concerned with purposive activity. See also his The New Leviathan, pp. 47^0, 67-82; 
especiaUy p. 72, par. 10.5, where he writes: "Shame . . . the critical point in the pro­
cess converting fear into anger, is . . . a critical point in the whole development of 
mind . . . The importance of anger as a bridge from the lower leveb of consciousness 
where thought is at first merely apprehensive, capable of taking what is 'given' to 
it, and then merely conceptual, capable of framing abstractions from what is 'given,' 
to the higher levek of consciousness where thought is first 'propositional,' capable 
of discriminating good from evU and truth from error, and then 'rational,' capable 
of understanding both itseU and other things, has been long expounded in many 
forms." Thus, the theory of the individual, of the concrete universal, is intimately 
tied up with the theory of the primacy of practical (i.e., purposive) knowledge. One's 
unique individuaUty is at one with one's life goals. As Aristotle said (Nicom. Ethics, 
114a 30-35): " . . . the end appears to each man in a form answering to his character." 
2 9 8 R. G. CoUingwood, passim. See also H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning ofHistory, p. 
131. See also Ch. 9, pp. 355-359 below, for a consideration of various historians' atti­
tudes to history as proceeding according to an interrogative method. 

Concrete Logic vs. Abstract Logic 
153 
solver is the criterion of a whole picture which results from the fitting 
together of aU the parts. But the Ulustration defaults, inasmuch as the 
picture, the whole, is superimposed on the parts as not entirely one 
with the reaUty of the parts, since the partial picture on each section 
can be rubbed off. But, in regard to human events, with which history, 
and crime detection, deal, the thoughts and purposes which consti­
tute the 'inside' of such events, are embodied right into the fabric of 
the reaUty of the events themselves. "The historian asks himseU, 'Does 
this fit in with everything I know about the world of facts, the nature 
of the case, the liabUity of the informant to error and mendacity, and 
so forth?' " 2 9 9 This means that (a) the facts, (b) the integration of the 
facts, that is, their "going together," or their "identity in dUference," 
(c) their manUestness as facts to the investigator (historian or detec­
tive) which itselfis one of the facts which internaUy affects the nature 
of aU the other facts, 3 0 0 and (d) the questioning mind, 3 0 1 whose ques­
tioning activity makes the facts evident as facts, are aU mutuaUy impU-
cated, that is, related to each other and to the totaUty by internal rela­
tions. That is, the facts are not "hard facts" set over against the mind 
as something merely contemplated by it, but form, among themselves 
and with the mind that knows them, a concrete totaUty of mutual impU-
cation. 
FinaUy, it may be noted that, in the question and answer complex 
which forms the knowledge element in crime detection and in history, 
we are deaUng with truth as coherence. This coherence notion of truth 
finds perhaps its most explicit exposition in H . H . Joachim's The Nature 
of Truth,302 
with which Collingwood was famUiar. 3 0 3 But, whereas for 
Joachim truth is a coherence of judgments, for CoUingwood truth is 
the coherence of a complex of questions and answers. 3 0 4 
V 
2 9 9 R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 214. 
3 0 0 See ibid., pp. 218-221, p. 240. 
3 0 1 See ibid., pp. 244-246. See also Chapter 1, above, pp. 32-34. 
3 0 2 Oxford, C3arendon Press, 1906. 
3 0 3 See R. G . ColUngwood's Autobiography, p. 18. 
3 M See ibid., pp. 33-34. 


CHAPTER F l V E 
Questioning, Presupposing 
and Metaphysics 
A consideration of Collingwood's theory of Metaphysics as the 
historical investigation of the absolute presuppositions of scientific 
enquiry is necessary in order to understand his theory of question­
ing, since science is an ordered body of knowledge, 1 that is, of ques­
tions and answers,2 and what causes relevant and meaningful ques­
tions to arise are the presuppositions made by the questioner.3 
"Furthermore, the doctrine of absolute presuppositions . . . is part 
of a wider doctrine . . . previously discussed under the heading of 
the 'concrete universal,' " 4 and " . . . the theory of presuppositions 
first expounded in Truth and Contradiction was part of a general attempt 
to develop an alternative logic to the propositional logic of reaUsm." 5 
And, again, "Metaphysics is an appUcation of the logic of question 
and answer to the organization of the history of absolute presupposi­
tions into a scale of forms (or concrete universal) . . . " 6 
A dUferent way of speaking in An Essay on Metaphysics from that 
of the earUer Speculum Mentis seems to indicate a change of doctrine 
1 See Chapter 1, above, pp. 12-13. 
2 See ibid., pp. 21-22; also Chapter 2, above, pp. 50-52. 
3 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 23-33. 
4 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 248. 
5 
Ш. 
6 Ш., 
p. 262. 
155 

156 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
in CoUingwood regarding the nature of questioning. Ьл Speculum Men­
tis, and even in An Essay on Philosophical Method, the concrete univer­
sal is explained solely in terms of experience polarized into questions 
and answers. But here, in An Essay on Metaphysics, there are three 
explanatory factors, namely questions, answers and presuppositions. 
Previously, as expUcitly stated in Speculum Mentis,7 questions belonged 
to the order of suppositions, whereas here, in An Essay on Metaphysics, 
questions seem to be some sort of intermediary between presupposi­
tions (whose logical efficacy provokes relevant questions8 and which 
are alleged to be spun out of the mind by itseU)9 and answers. Pre­
suppositions as determinants of world view meanings, appear now 
to have a recognizable distinctness from experience, so that coher­
ence is no longer to be found only within experience itseU but in expe­
rience under the influence of some experience-transcending a priori 
mind-stuff. 1 0 In other words, the rational explanation of experience 
seems now no longer to be regarded in terms of relational coherence 
between parts and whole within that experience itseU, that is, the con­
crete universal of the earlier works, but to be understood in terms 
of a subsumption of experience under some transcendent mind-deter­
minant in a quasi-Kantian fashion. 
If this is so, then the rapprochement which CoUingwood sought to 
establish as his lUe's work has already broken down in principle from 
within the system itself. Before attempting to take a position on this 
apparent discrepancy in CoUingwood's theory of questioning, his treat­
ment of presuppositions as presented in his Essay on Metaphysics wffl 
be considered, after which a return wffl be made to the problem high-
Ughted above. 
To avoid misapprehensions due to Collingwood's manner of 
expressing himseU in the Essay on Metaphysics, L. Rubinoff points out 
that it is necessary to read the Essay, and the theory of absolute pre­
suppositions found there, as a reply to Logical Positivism, specificaUy 
to the chaUenge of A. J. Ayer's Language, Truth and Logic which 
appeared in 1936, in which Ayer maintains that experimental verifiabfl-
ity is the sole criterion of truth, apart from tautologies. CoUingwood 
maintains against this that there is a class of statements ultimately 
involved in and therefore prior to the process of verUication, and a 
condition of the possibUity of verUication. These statements CoUing-
7 See Chapter 3, above, pp. 65^7. 
8 See R. G. ColUngwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 25-27. 
9 See ibid., p. 197. See also this chapter, below, pp. 157-158. 
1 0 See below, this chapter, pp. 205 et seq. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
157 
wood caUs presuppositions. These statements are neither true nor fake, 
and their acceptance before aU enquiry is a necessary condition of en­
quiry from which truth and falsity itseU will arise. 1 1 But this denial 
of truth and falsity to presuppositions, Rubinoff warns, is due to Col­
lingwood using a neutral language to endeavour to communicate with 
the Logical Positivists on their own ground. DialecticaUy, the truth 
or falsity of absolute presuppositions wUl be reckoned according to 
their place on a scale of forms of questions, answers and presupposi­
tions. 1 2 CoUingwood himseU says, speaking of a 'false' answer which 
is nevertheless 'right', " i t is 'right', because it constitutes a Unk, and 
a sound one, in the chain of questions and answers by which the fake-
ness of that presupposition is made mantfest." 1 3 
A. Presuppositions and the Logic of Question and Answer 
In the Autobiography CoUingwood dealt with statements as being 
meaningful only as answers to questions. Such statements, made as 
answers to questions, are what are usually called propositions. But 
now CoUingwood recognizes another type of statement involved in 
the question-answer process. Statements which are not consequences 
of questions, as answers to questions, but necessary conditions of the 
arising of relevant questions, are caUed presuppositions by CoUing­
wood. Among this latter type of statement there are relative and abso­
lute presuppositions. Metaphysics, according to CoUingwood, is the 
historical investigation of the latter. 
ColUngwood's doctrine of absolute presuppositions is tied to his 
own experience of knowledge as an active interrogation, as opposed 
to the realist doctrine of knowledge as 'compresence' with an object. 
He contrasts his own personal experience of the activity of knowl­
edge with that of S. Alexander, who was reputed to be able to see 
the solutions to problems intuitively with no apparent effort. 1 4 
. . . with a slow and feeble thinker Uke myseU there is nothing 
when I am thinking hard and efficiently that is like 'compresence' 
with any 'object' whatsoever. There is at first a whole nest of prob­
lems aU tangled up together. Then by degrees the tangle is reduced 
to order. Here and there in it one problem is seen to depend for 
its solution upon the solution of another. Given luck and great 
patience and strict attention to the rule of never asking two ques­
tions together but always separating them out and asking the first 
1 1 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, pp. 241-248. 
1 2 See ibid., pp. 248-251. 
13 An Autobiography, p. 38. 
1 4 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 172-180. 

158 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
one first, I can sometimes solve the whole lot. ΚI tried to deal with 
them according to Alexander's presumption I know by experience 
that I should never solve any.15 
For CoUingwood, absolute presuppositions are a priori in the sense 
of not being derived from experience, and function in systematic 
enquiry as "catalytic agents which the mind must bring out of its own 
resources to the manipulation of what is caUed 'experience' and the 
conversion of it into science and civUization." 1 6 They are therefore 
seU-made tools of knowledge according to which the rnind thinks and 
systematizes experience into an inteUigible experience. They there­
fore precede knowledge as preconditions of scientific inquiry, that is, 
systematic interrogation. 
Collingwood says that his Essay on Metaphysics was written "nei­
ther to expound my own metaphysical ideas, nor to criticize the 
metaphysical ideas of other people; but to explain what metaphysics 
is, why it is necessary to the wellbeing and advancement of knowl­
edge, and how it is to be pursued." 1 7 
CoUingwood holds that "Metaphysics is for us the name of a 
science, and has been for many centuries, because for many centuries 
it has been found necessary to think in a systematic or orderly fashion 
about the subjects that Aristotle discussed in the front of treatises col­
lectively known by that name." 1 8 He rejects Aristotle's understanding 
of metaphysics as a science of pure being 1 9 but accepts Aristotle's posi­
tion that it is the science of first principles, which he, Collingwood, 
understands as the presuppositions which underlie aU scientUic think­
ing, 2 0 that is, orderly interrogation of a subject matter. 
To Kant's question, 'Under what conditions is Metaphysics a genu­
ine science?', CoUingwood's answer is that it is a science in the sense 
in which any organized body of knowledge is a science.21 It is concerned 
to discover what are the presuppositions which underUe scientUic en­
quiry 2 2 and it is possible only on condition that it is conducted as a his­
torical Uivestigation into the absolute presuppositions which were made 
at various historical periods, and the continuity existing between them. 2 3 
15 Md., pp. 177-178. 
16 wid., p. 197. 
1 7 P. vii. Note departure from historical procedure. 
1 8 See tbid., p. 4. 
1 9 See ibid., pp. 11-16. See also L. Rubinoff, CoUingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, 
pp. 221-222. 
2 0 See An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 11; 20; 47. 
2 1 See ibid., p. 4. 
2 2 See ibid., pp. 34^8; esp. p. 40. 
2 3 See Ш., pp. 49-77, esp. 55; 58-61, p. 77. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
159 
L. Rubinoff argues convincingly that the substance of ColUng­
wood's Essay on Metaphysics, "which is treated [in the Autobiography] 
as a part of the more general 'logic of question and answer,' " "was 
originally conceived during the first world war and first written out 
in the unpublished and subsequently destroyed 'Truth and Contra­
diction.' " 2 4 Furthermore, the substance of CoUingwood's Metaphysics 
as the science of absolute presuppositions was foreshadowed in 
CoUingwood's address at the Ruskin Centenary Conference in August 
of 1919,25 which, Rubinoff notes, is damaging to the Knox-Donagan 
radical conversion theory. 
Rubinoff aligns the consteUation of absolute presuppositions of 
the later An Essay on Metaphysics with what is referred to in the Ruskin 
centenary address as the basic principles to which a man adheres, 
which define what is referred to as one's phUosophy of IUe. 
. . . there are certain central principles which a man takes as 
fundamental and incontrovertible, which he assumes as true in aU 
his thinking and acting. These principles form, as it were, the 
nucleus of his whole mental life: they are the centre from which aU 
his activities radiate. You may think of them as a kind of ring of soUd 
thought—something infinitely tough and hard and resistant— 
to which everything the man does is attached.26 
CoUingwood seems to tie up this "consteUation of absolute pre­
suppositions" of the Essay, or "ring of soUd thought" of the Ruskin 
centenary address, with the basic character determination of the moral 
personality, 2 7 which concords well with his rapprochement of thought 
and action, and is rerniniscent of the Chestertonian remark regard­
ing a landlady interrogating a prospective tenant, that it is just as 
important that she knows his phUosophy as it is to find out what his 
income is. 
As in his later thought, so in 1919 CoUingwood regarded a man's 
phUosophy as a function of his character. He therefore declares that 
2 4 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 223. 
2 5 See ibid. CoUingwood's Ruskin Centenary address, "Ruskin's PhUosophy," is 
repubUshed in Alan Donagan's edition of CoUingwood's Essays in the Philosophy of 
Art, Bloornington, Indiana University Press, 1964. (The essay was origjnaUy published 
by Titus Wflson and Son, Kendal, England, 1920.) Rubinoff, op. cit., p. 225, writes: 
"Not only is the essay an occasion for CoUingwood to bring his own presuppositions 
to the surface; but the entire essay may be viewed as an application and restatement 
of the theory of phUosophy which CoUingwood claims to have worked out in 'Truth 
and Contradiction' a few years earUer." 
2 6 R. G. CoUingwood, "Ruskin's PhUosophy," see Alan Donagan's edition of 
R. G. CoUingwood's Essays in the Philosophy ofArt, p. 10. See also L. Rubinoff, Colling­
wood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 224. 
2 7 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 224. 

160 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
a man ". . . is a great man or a Uttle, a valuable man or a worthless, 
largely according as this ring is strong or weak in structure, good 
or bad in material" (RUP, 7). And since all of the acts and decisions 
which shape a man's Ufe are suspended from this ring (one thinks 
immediately of Aristotle's notion of hexis) we may, according to 
CoUingwood, regard a man whose ring is weak as having an un­
worthy character, while a man whose ring is composed of "un­
sound" and "untrue" principles may be regarded as "bad" and 
"foolish." And whUe CoUingwood does not expressly say so, it is 
impUed by what he does say that just as the character of an indi­
vidual is bound up with the quaUty of his beliefs, so the character 
of an entire age is simUarly to be regarded. This view dearly an­
ticipates the attitude towards the dangers of first-level dogmatism 
in Speculum Mentis, the theory of the corrupt consciousness in the 
Principles of Art, and the critique of irrationalism in the Essay.28 
The essentially historical character of the investigation of these 
primary thought determinants is akeady recognized in the Ruskin 
centenary address. Corresponding to the distinction made later in the 
Autobiography between "reaUsm" and "the logic of question and 
answer" there is found in the Ruskin centenary address the distinc­
tion between the logical method "which proceeds on the assumption 
that every individual is an instance of some eternal and unchanging 
principle" and the historical method which dUfers from the logical 
method in that "where the logical mind looks for general laws, the 
historical rnind looks for individual facts, and it explains these facts 
by appeaUng not to laws but to other facts." 2 9 Rubinoff says, "Presup­
posed here is the distinction drawn in Speculum Mentis between the 
logic of the abstract universal and the logic of the concrete universal." 3 0 
m the Ruskin centenary address CoUingwood distinguishes the 
logicist ('reaUst' of the Autobiography and Essay) and historicist ('ques­
tion and answer' of the Autobiography and Essay) attitudes to contra­
diction. 
The old logic lays it down that of two contradictory propositions 
one must be false and the other true. To contradict yoursetf, on this 
2 8 Jbid. What CoUingwood speaks of as absolute presuppositions or primary con­
victions seems to be what J. Maritain refers to as the primary seU-determination which 
results from "The hnmanent Dialectic of the First Act of Freedom," see his The Range 
ofReason, London, Bles, 1953, pp. 66-85. See also what Henry Veatch says in his Two 
Logics, Evanston, Northwestern University Press, 1969, pp. 242-245, regarding the 
logical import of character traits. 
2 9 See R. G. CoUingwood, "Ruskin's Phflosophy" in Akn Donagan's R. G. Colling­
wood's Essays in the Philosophy ofArt, p. 12; p. 14. Also see L. Rubinoff, Collingwood 
and the Refortn ofMetaphysics, p. 225. 
3 0 L. Rubinoff, op. cit., p. 225. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
161 
view, is a sign of mental confusion: the wise man never contradicts 
himseU. The alternative view starts from the axiom that there are 
two sides to every question, and that there is right on both sides; 
from this, the inference is drawn that truth is many-sided and that 
seU-contradiction may easily be a mark not of weakness but of 
strength—not of confusion, but of a wide and comprehensive view 
which embraces much more truth than the one-sided consistency 
of the logicians.31 
Commenting on this passage of "Ruskin's Philosophy," Lionel 
Rubinoff says that the old logic, or logic of logicism, is the abstract 
logic of classification and division, the logic of genus and species. The 
new logic, or logic of historicism, is undoubtedly the basis of what 
CoUingwood himseU later describes in the Essay on Phihsophical Method 
as the dialectical logic of the overlap of classes and as the logic of ques­
tion and answer in the Autobiography. Rubinoff points out that CoUing­
wood attributes this new historicist logic mainly to the efforts of Hegel 
and nineteenth century historical idealism and concludes therefore 
that "Ruskin's PhUosophy" provides clear and unequivocal evidence 
that the logic of question and answer of the Autobiography is in fact 
CoUingwood's development of the dialectical logic of Hegel, which 
conclusion, Rubinoff says, supports his claim that the logic of ques­
tion and answer is part of the wider dialectical logic of the scale of 
forms and overlap of classes, sometimes referred to as the logic of 
the concrete universal. 3 2 
Rubinoff further concludes that the theory of truth referred to in 
the above passage, according to which truth is reached only through 
contradiction or deterrninate negation, presupposes the logic of ques­
tion and answer of the Autobiography and Speculum Mentis, and is vir-
tuaUy the same position defended in An Essay on Philosophical Method 
and in CoUingwood's 1935 correspondence with GUbert Ryle, in which 
Collingwood defends the position that phUosophical arguments must 
proceed by means of systematic fallacies.33 
3 1 R. G. CoUingwood, "Ruskin's Philosophy", in AIan Donagan'sR. G. Colling­
wood's Essays in the Philosophy ofArt, p. 22. 
3 2 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 226. 
3 3 See ibid., pp. 226-227. Rubinoff further says, op. cit., pp. 230-231, that: ". . . 
'Ruskin's Philosophy' must therefore be regarded as representing an important stage 
in the development of ColUngwood's thought. Not only does it appear to support 
CoUingwood's own claim in the Autobiography to have arrived at the theory of pre­
suppositions and the logic of question and answer early in his phUosophical career 
but it is also probably the closest record we have of the actual views of 'Truth and 
Contradiction.' H this is so then my earlier contention that 'Truth and Contradiction' 
may be regarded as an early statement of the doctrines of the Essay on Metaphysics 
is given further support. At the same time, as I have tried to show, just as the Essay 

162 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
B. Presuppositions and Questions 
In his Essay on Metaphysics CoUingwood first reiterates what he 
has akeady said in the Autobiography concerning the meaning of prop­
ositions as functions of answering questions, and, in addition, intro­
duces the role played in the question and answer process by presup­
positions and especially what he caUs the absolute presuppositions. 
Whenever anyone makes a statement of his thought in words there 
are many more thoughts in his mind than are expressed in his verbal 
statement. Among these some stand in special relationship to the stated 
thought; they are not just its context but also its presuppositions. When 
I say 'that is a clothes-line' I mean that it was put there for the pur­
pose of hanging clothes. In saying that, I am presupposing that it was 
put there for some purpose, otherwise the question for what purpose 
would never have arisen.3* 
Presupposition means priority, not in time, but logical. We do not 
go from fkst thinking of purpose in general for which the clothes­
line in question substitutes a determinate purpose, nor do we fkst 
may be regarded as futfilling the requirements of Speculum Mentis, so the latter may 
be regarded as a systematic exposition of some of the main points of the essay on 
Ruskin. It therefore foUows that, contrary to Donagan's interpretation, far from ex­
perimenting with a different doctrine, Collingwood's activity from 1924 to 1936, as 
he himself declared in the Autobiography, consisted primarily in applying the new 
'historicist logic' to the solution of various phUosophical problems; thus the actual 
theory of metaphysics expounded in the Essey may be regarded as the formal exposi­
tion of a doctrine which had been consistently applied since 1924. 'I did not reaUy 
feel,' wrote CoUingwood concerning the youthful period of Truth and Contradiction, 
'any great desire to expound the phUosophical ideas I have been setting forth in these 
chapters [he is referring of course to the doctrine of presuppositions] whether to my 
colleagues or to the public' Instead he continues, ' . . . I felt justified in turning to 
the more congenial task of applying them and thus testing them empirically' (A, 74). 
Speculum Mentis may therefore be regarded as an attempt to expound the presuppo­
sitions of consciousness in so far as the latter exists at the first ontological level. The 
Idea of Nature, the Idea of History, and the Principles of Art are attempts to expound 
the presuppositions of particular forms of experience, each of which has its own history 
and exists, as I have argued, on three distinct but related ontological levels. Ьл prac­
tice, of course, CoUingwood does more than merely describe these presuppositions; 
he criticizes them as weU, by explaining how they arose in the first place, and in so 
doing 'vindicates' them from the absolute standpoint, which is precisely what the 
metaphysician of the Essay on Metaphysics is required to do. The metaphysician's 
business, he writes, is not only to identify several different constellations of presup­
positions but also to find out on what occasions and by what historical processes one 
set has turned into another (EM, 73; A, 66). Presupposed by these claims are a special 
set of presuppositions which the metaphysician discovers when he reflects on his own 
experience as metaphysician—which is precisely what CoUingwood himself is doing 
in the main body of An Essay on Metaphysics, the Principles ofArt, and the 'Epüegomena' 
of the Idea ofHistory." 
3 4 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 21. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
163 
think of the clothes-Une as having some purpose and then go on to 
ask what is that purpose which it has. We first think 'that is a clothes­
line,' then, by a kind of reflective analysis, come to see that this pre­
supposition was made however Uttle one was aware of it at the time. 3 5 
Here Ues the difference between the desultory and casual think­
ing of our unscientific consciousness and the orderly and systematic 
thinking we caU science. In unscientUic thinking our thoughts are 
coagulated into knots and tangles; we fish up a thought out of our 
minds like an anchor foul of its own cable, hanging upside down 
and draped in seaweed with sheUfish sticking to it, and dump the 
whole thing on deck quite pleased with ourselves for having got 
it up at aU. Thinking scientificaUy means disentangling aU this mess 
and reducing a knot of thoughts in which everything sticks togeth­
er anyhow to a system or series of thoughts in which thinking the 
thoughts is at the same time thinking the connexions between 
them. 3 6 
CoUingwood says that logicians have paid a good deal of atten­
tion to some kinds of thought connections, but that they have neglected 
others, such as the theory of presupposition. He adds that perhaps 
this is responsible for the unsatisfactory condition of metaphysical 
theory, which depends upon the theory of presupposition. CoUing­
wood then proposes to deal summarUy with the theory of presuppo­
sitions to the extent to which his present purpose deems necessary. 
He proceeds to expound his theory in a series of numbered proposi­
tions, after the manner of a Spinozistic a more geometrico.37 
Proposition one is: 'Every statement that anybody ever makes is 
made in answer to a question.' He then explains that by statement 
he includes not only those spoken out loud to someone else but also 
statements made interiorly by one to himseU in the coürse of solitary 
thinking. Likewise, questions include questions addressed to onesetf. 
He appeals to famUiarity with scientific procedure to back up the prop-
position that: 
In proportion as a man is thinking scientificaUy when he makes 
a statement, he knows that his statement is the answer to a ques­
tion and knows what that question is. 3 8 
In our least scientUic and reflective moments we scarcely know 
that the thoughts we have are answers to questions, let alone what 
the questions are. It is only by analyzing what is meant by saying that 
3 5 See ibid., p. 22. 
3 6 Md., pp. 22-23. 
3 7 See ibid., p. 23. 
3 8 Md., p. 24. 

164 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
'this is a clothes-line' that I realize it to have been the answer to the 
question 'What is that thing for?' 3 9 A question is logically prior to its 
own answer and, when thinking is ordered scientificaUy, this logical 
priority is accompanied by temporal priority. But the fact that the 
question is formulated first in thinking scientifically does not mean 
that it ceases when the question begins to be answered; this is a special 
type of temporal priority in which the prior event or activity does not 
stop when the posterior begins. 
The act of asking the question begins and takes a definite shape 
as the asking of a determinate question before the act of answering 
it begins; but it continues for the whole duration of this latter.40 
This is so because, U a question did not endure during the answer­
ing of it, the questioner would have since lost interest in his subject, 
and the alleged answer would not be an answer at aU, but a meaning­
less form of words. A question does not cease to be a question by 
being answered, but ceases only to be an unanswered question. 4 1 
By way of darifying the meaning of his terms, CoUingwood defines 
what he means by 'proposition.' Let that which is stated (i.e., that 
which can be true or false) be caUed a proposition, and let the stating 
of it be caUed propounding i t . 4 2 CoUingwood warns that English usage 
refers to a question or a supposition also as a statement, and this jargon 
is customary among logicians. 
Then CoUingwood lays down his second proposition: 'Every ques­
tion involves a presupposition.' 4 3 
Ordinarily, Collingwood explains, a question involves large 
numbers of presuppositions, but a distinction must be made between 
direct and immediate presuppositions and indirect and mediate pre­
suppositions. 
Directly or immediately, any given question involves one pre­
supposition and only one, namely that from which it directly and 
immediately 'arises.'44 
But, this direct and immediate presupposition has in its turn other 
presuppositions which are mcUrectly presupposed by the original ques­
tion. But U this immediate presupposition were not made, the ques­
tion to which it is logicaUy immediately prior could not be logically 
3 9 See ibid. 
«>Md. 
4 1 See ibid., pp. 24-25. 
4 2 See ibid., p. 25. 
4 3 See ibid. 
4 4 lbid. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
165 
asked. The question 'have you stopped beating your wife?' could not 
be logically asked without the presupposition on the part of the ques­
tioner that the one questioned had been in the habit of beating his 
wife. In the absence of that presupposition the question 'does not 
arise.' It is not denied that such a question can be verbally asked but 
only that it can be logically asked. 
To say that a question 'does not arise' is the ordinary English way 
of saying that it involves a presupposition which is not in fact being 
made. A question which 'does not arise' is a nonsensical question, 
not intrinsically nonsensical, but nonsensical in relation to its context, 
and specifically to its presuppositions. One asking a question which 
'does not arise' is talking nonsense and inviting the one so questioned 
to join him in nonsense taUc.45 
CoUingwood says that just as one can ask questions without know­
ing it, and a fortiori without knowing what questions one is asking, 
so also one can make presuppositions without knowing it, and a for­
tiori without knowing what presuppositions one is making. Thus, in 
asking 'What is that for?' I need not necessarily be aware that I am 
presupposing that it is 'for' something. Only to the extent that I think 
scientificaUy am I aware of my presuppositions. Thus, in decipher­
ing a worn and damaged inscription, I am aware that before asking 
'What does that mark mean?' I must have first assured myseU that 
the mark is part of the inscription, that is, I must first answer the ques­
tion 'Does it mean anything?' A n affirmative answer to the question 
'Does it mean something?' causes the further question 'What does 
it mean?' to arise. 4 6 
The causing of a question to arise is caUed the logical efficacy of 
whatever so causes it to arise. Mere assumption, or mere supposi­
tion for the sake of argumentation, is sufficient to make the question 
'what does this mark mean?' arise in the mind of any epigraphist when 
he is not sure whether a certain mark is part of an inscription or not. 
The logical efficacy of the supposition that the mark means something 
is identical with the logical efficacy of the proposition that it means 
something. 4 7 
CoUingwood then lays down that to assume is to suppose by an 
act of free choice, 4 8 which is explained by saying that anyone who 
4 5 See ibid., p. 26. See also L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, 
p. 232. 
4 6 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 26-27. 
4 7 See ibid., p. 27. 
4 8 See ibid. 

166 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
'makes an assumption' is making a supposition about which he is 
aware that he might, if he so chose, make another. All assumptions 
are suppositions, but not aU suppositions are assumptions, for some 
are made unawares and others of which one is aware of making may 
be made without the awareness of the possibUity that other assump­
tions may have been made. When we use the word 'assumption' we 
always imply free choice, as for example when we say 'let us assume 
χ equals ten.' It may be used, however, with malice aforethought to 
insult another, as when one says to another, 'you are assuming that 
no one wUl work except for payment,' implying that only a fool would 
make such an assumption. It may also be used by one wishing to be 
insulting, as when one asks 'what do you mean by treading on my 
toe?' knowing weU that the treader meant nothing by i t . 4 9 
The logical efficacy of a supposition does not depend upon the 
truth of what is supposed, or even on its being thought to be true, 
but only on its being supposed. 5 0 CoUingwood appeals first to prac­
tice in scientUic reasoning, where the validity of an argument is in 
no way affected by making assumptions beUeved to be false, and then 
to the conduct of daUy affairs, when a receipt is asked for, based on 
the assumption that the payee is capable of dishonesty notwithstand­
ing the belief that he is not. 5 1 
CoUingwood says that a presupposition is either relative or abso­
lute (here reference is not to the act of presupposing but to that which 
is presupposed). A relative presupposition is one which stands relative­
ly to one question as its presupposition and to another question as 
its answer, m using a tape measure, for example, I presuppose that the 
answer to the question 'what is the distance between these two points?' 
wUl be right. The accuracy of the tape is thus a presupposition of the 
question 'what does this distance measure?' But its affirmation is the 
answer to the question 'is this tape accurate in length?' One may use 
a tape measure without ever questioning its accuracy, in which case 
the assumption of its accuracy remains unquestioned, which might 
lead us to suppose that it is not a relative presupposition. But, that 
certain presuppositions are open to being questioned is not disproved 
by the fact that someone who makes them faUs to see their question-
abUity, just as the necessary consequence of a conclusion from 
premisses is not disproved U someone who states the premisses faUs 
to see the consequence. "The business of logical inquiries, like that 
4 9 See ibid., pp. 27-28. 
5 0 But see this chapter, Section G, pp. 193-205, below. 
5 1 R. G . CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 28-29. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
167 
on which we are now engaged, is a study of high-grade or scientific 
thirUdng: their conclusions are not impaired by the fact that low-grade 
or unscientific thinking also exists." 5 2 
To question a presupposition is to ask for its verification, that is, 
to demand that a question should be asked which wUl have that pre­
supposition itseU as its answer, and so become a proposition. To speak 
of verifying a presupposition involves supposing that it is a relative 
presupposition. 5 3 
But "an absolute presupposition is one which stands, relatively 
to aU questions to which it is related, as a presupposition, never as 
an answer." 5 4 
Thus, a pathologist, U asked, 'What is the cause of event E which 
sometimes happens in this disease?' wUl reply, 'The cause of E is 
C 
Questioned further, he might add that this was established by So-
and-so in such and such experiment, now classical. Questioned fur­
ther, ' I suppose that before So-and-so found out what the cause of 
E was, he was quite sure it had a cause?' the answer would probably 
be 'Quite sure, of course.' И the further question 'Why?' were pressed, 
the answer would likely be 'because everything that happens has a 
cause.' tf the further question 'how do you know that everything that 
happens has a cause?' is imprudently asked, the one questioned wUl 
probably blow up "because you have put your finger on one of his 
absolute presuppositions, and people are apt to be tickUsh in their 
absolute presuppositions." 5 5 
But one thus questioned, U he keeps his temper so as to be able 
to give a civil and candid answer, would probably reply that it is 
something he takes for granted in his job. It is not brought into ques­
tion. It is not subjected to the process of verification. It is not something 
that anyone has discovered, but something everyone takes for granted. 
Such a one is saying that it is an absolute presupposition of the science 
which he pursues. The Ulustration was set in terms of a pathologist's 
science, which, CoUingwood says, is one science which stffl maintains 
that it is an absolute presupposition that events have causes, whereas 
most other sciences in the past hundred years have abandoned that 
as an unquestioned presupposition. 5 6 
Collingwood says that the idea of verUication does not apply to 
5 2 Md., p. 30. 
5 3 See ibid. 
54 wid., p. 31. 
55 Vbia., p. 31. 
5 6 See ibid., p. 32. 

168 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
absolute presuppositions however much we might Hke to verify them. 
Verification presupposes that the presupposition in question is a rela­
tive presupposition. K anyone protests that if they are not verifiable 
they are useless in science, the answer is that their use in science is 
their logical efficacy and that this logical efficacy does not depend on 
its being verifiable, because it does not depend on its being true. It 
only depends on its being supposed.57 
Absolute presuppositions are not propositions because they are 
never answers to questions, whereas a proposition is that which is 
stated, and whatever is stated is stated in answer to a question. 5 8 
The logical efficacy of an absolute presupposition is independent 
of its being true, since the distinction between truth and falsehood 
does not apply to absolute presuppositions at all but only to proposi­
tions. This is the same as saying that absolute presuppositions are 
never propounded, not merely in the sense that no one ever pro­
pounds them but that they are unpropoundable, for "to be pro­
pounded is not their business; their business is to be presupposed." 5 9 
The scientist's business is not to propound them but only to 
presuppose them. The metaphysician's business, as we shall see, 
is not to propound them but to propound the proposition that this 
or that one of them is presupposed.60 
From this CoUingwood draws the conclusion that to question an 
absolute presupposition is to ask a nonsense question. 
Hence any question involving the presupposition that an abso­
lute presupposition is a proposition, such as the question 'Js it true?' 
'What evidence is there for it?' 'How can it be demonstrated?' 'What 
right have we to presuppose it ii it can't?', is a nonsense question.61 
CoUingwood adds that it is nonsense to say, as some modern logi­
cians say, that "supposing' is one of the several attitudes that one 
can take towards a proposition, meaning by a proposition something 
that can be either true or false. CoUingwood warns that this is a device 
for imposing on unwary readers the dogma that aU presuppositions 
are relative, or, in other words, that there are no absolute presuppo­
sitions. 6 2 
5 7 See ibid. But, see this chapter, section G below, regarding the truth and fakity 
of absolute presuppositions. 
5 8 R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 32. . 
59 Jbid., p. 33. 
60 Ibid. 
6 1 Tbid. But see later, Section G below, regarding the question of the truth of abso­
lute presuppositions. See L. Rubinoff, op. cit., pp. 234-235. 
6 2 See R. G. Collingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 33. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
169 
C. Metaphysics as the Science of Absolute Presuppositions 
CoUingwood says that in low grade or unscientific thinking we 
are hardly aware of making presuppositions, since the tangled con­
dition of thoughts coming up from the bottom of our minds gives a 
deceptive appearance of 'immediacy.' 6 3 If I merely reflect on the 
thought that 'this is a clothes line' without analysing it, I think that 
I have been confronted with something which in itselfis a clothes line, 
quite apart from anyone's thoughts about it, and so I think that I have 
simply 'apprehended' or 'intuited' that clothes line for what it really 
is. Ίί I never get beyond this casual way of thinking, CoUingwood says, 
I wUl always remain satisfied that knowledge is no more than the 
simple apprehension or intuition of (or compresence with) what con­
fronts us as being absolutely and in itseU what we intuit or apprehend 
it to be. 6 4 This attitude is what CoUingwood means by realism, which 
is founded on nothing other than human stupidity. Any one can 'con­
vince' himseU of the truth of reaUsm U only he wUl let his mind drUt 
and think so casually and haphazardly that he is hardly thinking at 
aU. When he succeeds in doing that, he wffl find that he does auto­
matically what the realists say we always do whenever we think. 6 5 
CoUingwood wUl admit the legitimacy of reaUsm as a study of the 
way anchors get fouled up and covered with seabed sediment. In caUn 
weather and neap tides, he says, such an anchor is good enough to 
hold the ship. 6 6 
But the danger of such reaUst third<ing, according to CoUingwood, 
is to rest satisfied with such assertions as 'That is a clothes line,' or 
'What I am looking at is my hand,' or 'The bookcase is further away 
than the table.' The danger in accepting such statements as right in 
themselves is, in supposing that rectitude, to suppose also that this 
realism is achieving again, and better, what Kant and Descartes 
achieved in their theories of knowledge. But Kant and Descartes were 
concerned more with how to make anchors hang the right way and 
get the ship home during a storm rather than with merely consider­
ing how anchors fouled up. CoUingwood accuses reaUsts of not realiz­
ing that the best account of unscientific knowledge can never be 
preferable to even the worst account of scientUic knowledge. 6 7 
CoUingwood says that in this low grade thinking, at its lowest, 
6 3 See ibid., p. 34. 
6 4 See ibid. 
6 5 See ibid., p. 35. 
6 6 See ibid. 
6 7 See ibid., p. 35. 

170 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
we are quite unaware that every thought is an answer to a question, 
and wholly unaware that the question arises from a presupposition. 
Such low grade thinking will never give rise to metaphysics and 
theories of knowledge. One who accepts such low grade thinking as 
the model of thought wffl never understand what metaphysics is about, 
or why it should be. 6 8 
But, because man is capable not only of low grade thinking but 
also of high grade or scientific minking, he has succeeded in dominat­
ing the natural forces within and around him, and thereby given 
himsetf the unique character of a setf-made inhabitant of a world caUed 
civUization which he has made as an environment fit for himsetf to 
live in, the original nature, both of himseU and his surroundings, 
serving only as the raw material of his craft. 6 9 
High grade thinking means thinking energeticaUy instead of idly: 
thinking hard instead of aUowing your mind to drift. 7 0 
CoUingwoodsays that higher types of animal are higher because 
instead of functioning only at a low intensity they store energy for 
a future occasion which they meet by an expenditure of that stored 
energy, which elevates their mechanical effectiveness above its average 
level so as to be able to overcome the obstacle. What higher animals 
have succeeded to do with their bodies man has learned to do with 
his mind; he is the only arumal who has learned to think hard enough 
so as to be able to transform the whole structure of his lUe by this 
means. "Everything that we caU spectficaUy human is due to man's 
power of thinking hard." 7 1 
In addition to increase of effort, the increased effort requires to 
be weU directed U its effectiveness is to be increased. "High grade 
thinking, therefore, depends on two things: increase of mental effort, 
and skffl in the direction ofthat effort." 7 2 
CoUingwood says that increase of mental effort brings about not 
only a dUference of degree in the intensity of thinking but also a dU­
ference of kind in its quality. At its lowest levelof intensity, one is 
conscious only of 'intuiting' or 'apprehending' what presents itseU 
to the mind. To say that something presents itself to one's mind is 
only another way of saying that one thinks about it without notice­
able effort. Collingwood says that when one becomes aware of effort 
6 8 See ibid., pp. 35-36. 
6 9 See ibid., p. 36. 
70 
Ш. 
7 1 Md., p. 37. 
72 Vbid. 

&estioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
171 
one at the same time becomes aware of a hunger that is no longer 
satisfied by what swims into one's mouth; such a one wants what 
is not there and wffl not come of itsetf and such a one swims about 
hunting for i t . 7 3 
This ranging of the rnind in search of its prey is called asking 
questions. To ask questions, knowing that you are asking them, is 
thefirst stage in high-grade thinking: the first thing that distinguishes 
the human mind from the sea-anemone mind of the 'realist' theory 
of knowledge. 
The second stage is not merely to hunt one's prey but to hunt 
it cunningly. To hunt it at aU is to ask questions; to hunt it cunning­
ly is to ask questions with skffl, or scientifically.74 
Collingwood further subdistinguishes two stages in this 
second stage: "The first is disentangUng, the second is arranging." 7 5 
When a question first comes into one's mind it is generally . . . 
a confused mass of dUferent questions aU of which, because aU must 
be answered before I can catch my dinner, and because I am hungry, 
I ask at once. But they cannot all be answered at once. Before they 
can be answered they must be distinguished, and the nest of ques­
tions resolved into a list of questions where each item is one ques­
tion and only one.76 
The question 'Have you stopped beating your wtfe?' is a stock 
logic text Ulustration of what is caUed the faUacy of many questions, 
which is a logical vice of grammatically confusing into one question 
what is logically many questions. CoUingwood says that a skfflful think­
er, practised in disentangling knots, wUl quickly resolve it into four 
distinct questions: 
1. Have you a wUe? 
2. Were you ever in the habit of beating her? 
3. Do you intend to manage in the future without doing so? 
v 
4. Have you begun carrying out that intention? 
After the work of distinguishing, there foUows the arranging, or 
ordering of the questions. 
After disentangUng comes arranging. The reason why questions 
have to be arranged is because one of them may be contingent upon 
a certain answer being given to another. The question whether you 
7 3 See ibid., p. 37. Correlate with The New Leviathan, Ch. 8, on hunger. 
7 4 R. G. Collingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 38. Emphasis added. 
75 Jbid., p. 38. 
76Md. 

172 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ever beat your wife does not arise unless an affirmative answer has 
been given to the question whether you ever had one.77 
Scientific or orderly thinking is orderly in the sense that it deals 
with things in their logical order, putting what is presupposed before 
what presupposes it. The resolution of the grammaticaUy single ques­
tion 'Have you stopped beating your wife?' into four questions also 
shows how these four questions have to be arranged in their logical 
order, so that each arises when, and only when, an affirmative answer 
has been given to the one next before it. The thought process from 
question to question does not depend on the truth of the answer but 
only on this, that it answers; not upon the questioner's thinking the 
answers to be true but only on his accepting the answers given, or 
assuming them for the sake of argument. It was pointed out previous­
l y 7 8 that the power of causing a question to arise, or the logical efficacy 
of a supposition, does not depend on the truth of what is supposed 
but only on its being supposed. 
The work of disentangling and arranging questions can also be 
described as the work of detecting presuppositions. The question whether 
a man has left off beating his wife yet presupposes that he has formed 
the intention of leaving off, which in turn presupposes that he used 
to beat her, which in turn presupposes that he has a wife. AU these 
are relative presuppositions, each standing now as a presupposition 
to one question, now as an answer to another. Each is both presup­
position and proposition. 7 9 
But in addition to relative presuppositions there are absolute pre­
suppositions "and the analysis which detects absolute presuppositions 
I call metaphysics." 8 0 
Before a presupposition can be caUed relative, one has to have 
asked whether it is relative or absolute U one is thinking scientifical­
ly. The question 'what does this presuppose?' itself presupposes an 
affirmative answer to the question 'does it presuppose anything?' But 
to ask that question is to consider the possibUity that it may be an 
absolute presupposition, and to claim that you could identUy one U 
you found it. 
Collingwood says that the procedure and quaUfications required 
77 Tbid., p. 39. See also L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, pp. 
235-236. 
7 8 See page 166, above. See also below, Chapter 7, pp. 280 et seq. on the criticism 
of this dialectical attitude. 
7 9 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 40. 
8 0 n>id. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
173 
to carry out this metaphysical analysis are in no way different from 
the pure and simple analysis as described above. In either case the 
question which is constantly being asked is 'is this presupposition 
relative or absolute?' The modus operandi is the same whichever answer 
is given, so that the modus operandi of aU analysis is metaphysical, and, 
since it is analysis which confers the scientific character on science, 
science and metaphysics are intimately united and stand or faU to­
gether. The establishment of orderly thinking is together the birth of 
science and the birth of metaphysics; each must Uve together and die 
together. 8 1 This is based on the assumption that metaphysics is the 
science of absolute presuppositions, which CoUingwood says he as­
sumes because he finds it in Aristotle, the inventor of metaphysics 
(after purging him of what has been shown to be nonsensical—CoUing-
wood is referring to Aristotle's position that metaphysics, besides being 
the science of first principles, that is, absolute presuppositions for Col-
Ungwood, is also the science of pure being and of first being, or Theol­
ogy, which CoUingwood rejects as the nonsense element). 8 2 Colling­
wood visuaUses an objector saying that U he (CoUingwood) wants to 
make such an assumption it is his business but that he (the objector) 
is not interested until such an assertion is proven. CoUingwood repUes 
that such an objector does not know what he is talking about or ask­
ing for, for the attitude of a reasonable man is simply to examine a 
few metaphysical problems and see whether or not they are concerned 
with absolute presuppositions. 
Little analytical abfflty is needed to convince ourselves that we 
take a good many things for granted without asking whether they 
are true or not. But most often this analysis is not pressed far enough 
for one to decide whether these things are so taken for granted on 
account of lack of due, unprejudiced enquiry, or whether they are 
in fact principles which neither admit nor require verUication. 8 3 
At first glance it might seem as U the distinction between absolute 
and relative presuppositions is not so much a distinction between two 
kinds of presupposition as a distinction between two ways of presup­
posing, and that an ordinary inteUigible and reasonably honest man 
could say exactly which of the two he was doing. But the position 
is not so easy, for " i n modern Europe absolute presuppositions are 
unfashionable." 8 4 CoUingwood then points out the obvious truism 
8 1 See ibid., pp. 40^41. 
8 2 See ibid., p. 41. See also ibid., pp. 13-15 and 17-20. 
8 3 See ibid., pp. 41^2. 
84 Md., p. 42. 

174 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
that when things are conventionaUy regarded with disapproval peo­
ple will go to remarkable lengths to convince themselves and others 
that they do not engage in these things. Denying the existence of abso­
lute presuppositions is regarded as the smart thing to do. Even those 
who recognise the ridiculousness of this fashion may be so affected 
by a kind of mass suggestion in this regard that at a critical moment, 
when every ounce of mental determination is required to decide 
whether a given presupposition is absolute or relative, they wffl be 
persuaded to decide in favour of its being relative, even if in fact it 
is an absolute presupposition. 8 5 
Furthermore, honesty, candor and veracity, even in conjunction 
with intelligence, can do little to facilitate answering the question, 
because it is not the type of question that can be settled by introspec­
tion. 
Introspection can do no more than bring into the focus of 
consciousness something of which we are akeady aware. But in our 
less scientific moments, when knowledge appears to us in the guise 
of mere apprehension, intuiting that which simply confronts us, we 
are not even aware that whatever we state to ourselves or others 
is stated in answer to a question, stiU less that every such question 
rests on presuppositions and least of aU that among these presup­
positions some are absolute presuppositions. In this kind of think­
ing, absolute presuppositions are certainly at work; but they are 
doing their work in darkness, the Ught of consciousness never faU-
ing on them. It is only by analysis that any one can ever come to 
know either that he is making any absolute presuppositions at aU 
or what absolute presuppositions he is making.86 
CoUingwood then proceeds to outline the manner in which such 
an analysis proceeds. He says that the analysis may be conducted by 
one or another of two types of thought—experiment, either upon one 
weU trained in a certain type of scientUic work 8 7 or upon oneseU, the 
latter being the more preferable. 8 8 
H the enquker, says Collingwood, can find someone weU trained 
in a certain type of work to which he is devoted, but not yet accustomed 
to metaphysics, and U the enquker is skfflful enough in questionkig, 
and the subject questioned cooperative, at least as far as relative 
presuppositions are concerned, it wUl be found that, as soon as one 
of his absolute presuppositions is touched, he wffl react violently at 
8 5 See ibid., pp. 42^3. 
86 n>id., p. 43. 
8 7 See iMd. 
8 8 See ibid., p. 45. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
175 
any attempt to bring them within the orbit of the questioning pro­
cess. This rejection is a symptom that the subject, who has cooperated 
in the analysis, has been brought to seeing that the presupposition 
which he is being asked to justify is an absolute presupposition and 
that the kind of work to which he is devoted depends on that presup­
position being unquestioningly accepted. 
This is what . . . I called being 'tickhsh in one's absolute pre­
suppositions'; and the reader will see that this ticklishness is a sign 
of inteilectual strength combined with a low degree of analytical skUl. 
A man who is ticklish in that way is a man who knows 'instinctive­
ly' as they say, that absolute presuppositions do not need justifica­
tion. In my own experience I have found that when natural scien­
tists express hatred of 'metaphysics' they are usually expressing this 
disUke of having their absolute presuppositions touched.89 
CoUingwood regards this method of dialogue with another as 
somewhat precarious, owing to the delicacy of the quaUfications it 
requires in the questioned subject, who, as soon as he understands 
what is happening to him, wUl likely lose that 'ticklishness' which 
gives the distinctive value to that untouchable area. It is a sort of vio­
lation of virginity in the reflective faculties. When Socrates is accused 
of corrupting the young men of his time, the word translated by 'cor­
rupt' is the same as the word for seduction. 
The only altogether satisfactory method, says CoUingwood, is for 
the analyst to experiment on himself. 9 0 It is only in this case that the 
experiment is more rather than less valuable to the subject, but it re­
quires great resolution, and the temptation to cheat is unexpectedly 
strong. 9 1 
The process, simply as analytic, is the same as analysis found 
ordinarUy in science, but its purpose is to find out what absolute 
presuppositions are in fact being made on certain occasions and cer­
tain kinds of occasions, fri the scientUic analysis the relative presup­
positions are brought to the fore and subjected to verification, the abso­
lute presuppositions being put to the side. But " i n metaphysics it is 
the relative presuppositions that are thrown back and the absolute 
presuppositions that are put into the basket; not in order to justUy 
them, because to taUc of justifying them is to taUc nonsense; but in 
order to have them scientificaUy described." 9 2 
89 Tbid., p. 44. 
9 0 See ibid., p. 45. 
9 1 See ibid. 
9 2 Md. 

176 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
CoUingwood says that Aristotle's identification of metaphysics with 
theology reminds us that these two opposite procedures of analysis 
are contemplated by people with quite different feelings with respect 
to them. 
You may call it superstition or what you will, but hard names 
make no difference to the fact that there is something uncanny about 
absolute presuppositions. They give people more than a touch of 
the feeling which Rudotf Otto caUed numinous terror.93 
This terror used to be dealt with by the procedures of magic. Our 
time prides itseU with having aboUshed superstitions, but in fact, there 
are as many as ever, the only dUference is that we have lost the magical 
art of conquering them. 
So it is a special characteristic of modern European civUization 
that metaphysics is habituaUy frowned upon and the existence of 
absolute presuppositions denied. This habit is neurotic. It is an 
attempt to overcome a superstitious dread by denying that there is 
any cause for it. K this neurosis ever achieves its ostensible object, 
the eradication of metaphysics from the European mind, the eradi­
cation of science and civUization wiU be accompUshed at the same 
time. 9 4 
CoUingwood says that the metaphysical enterprise of attempting 
to find out what absolute presuppositions have been made by dUfer­
ent persons on dUferent occasions wUl give rise to the further consid­
erations whether absolute presuppositions are made singly or in 
groups; how such groups were organized; whether dUferent races or 
classes made dUferent absolute presuppositions; whether some have 
been made semper, unique, ab omnibus, or aU dUfering on dUferent occa­
sions for dUferent discussions.95 
Pseudo-metaphysics is the kind of thought which questions what 
are in fact absolute presuppositions on the mistaken beUef that they 
are relative presuppositions and, as propositions, susceptible to truth 
or error. As, for example, U one were to ask about the absolute pre­
supposition AP, 'Is AP true?' 'Upon what evidence is AP accepted?' 
'How can AP be demonstrated?' 'What right do we have to presup­
pose it U it is not demonstrable?' The answers to such questions are 
neither true nor false but nonsense and arise from thinking that sup­
posing is one of the attitudes we can adopt towards a proposition, 
9 3 Tbid., p. 46. 
9 4 Ibid. 
9 5 See ibid., p. 47. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
177 
as some logicians think, as if what is supposed absolutely must be 
either true or false. 9 6 
CoUingwood adds a lengthy footnote 9 7 which contains statements 
and impücations highly relevant to his notion of the historical char­
acter of absolute presuppositions. He faces, in this footnote, the objec­
tion that since he (CoUingwood) admits that absolute presuppositions 
change, that he is saying that they are merely changes of fashion. To 
this objection Collingwood repUes that a change of fashion is a super­
ficial change symptomatic perhaps of deeper and more important 
changes, but itseU is of Uttle depth or importance. New superficial 
changes of fashion can be initiated simply because others do so, or 
salesmen or advertisers promote it. But absolute presuppositions are 
not dodges, and those who start one do not do so because they 'like' 
to start it. Usually people are not aware of their presuppositions and 
consequently are not aware of changes therein, so such a change is 
not a matter of choice. Nor is it a superficial or frivolous change, for: 
It is the most radical change a man can undergo, and entaUs the 
abandonment of aU his most firmly estabUshed habits and standards 
for thought and action. 
Why . . . do such changes happen? . . . because the absolute 
presuppositions of any given society, at any given phase of its his­
tory, form a structure which is subject to 'strains' . . . of greater or 
less intensity, which are 'taken up' . . . in various ways, but never 
anniMated. И the strains are too great, the structure collapses and 
is replaced by another, which wUl be a modification of the old with 
the destructive strain removed; a modUication not consciously 
devised but created by a process of unconscious thought.98 
The last statement seems to be saying that absolute presupposi­
tions are functions of a cultural nature, a resultant of socio-cultural 
forces which buUd up into tensions and strains untU something in the 
nature of a socio<ultural 'earthquake' happens in the social structure 
and finally an equUibrium is reached. 
D. Metaphysics as an Historical Science 
CoUingwood maintains that aU metaphysical questions, that is, 
questions about absolute presuppositions, are historical questions, 
9 6 See ibid., pp. 47-48; see also this chapter, p. 168 above. 
9 7 See R. G. Coffingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 48, footnote added to Chap­
ter 5. 
9 8 R>id., p. 48. This reflects the fundamental character traits referred to above in 
comparing the absolute presuppositions of the Essay on Metaphysics with "the ring 
of soUd thought" of the eariier "Ruskin's Phflosophy." 

178 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
since they are about the absolute presuppositions certain people make 
on certain occasions. "AU metaphysical questions are historical ques­
tions and aU metaphysical propositions are historical propositions." 9 9 
Every metaphysical question either is simply the question what 
absolute presuppositions were made on a certain occasion, or is 
capable of being resolved into a number of such questions together 
with a further question or further questions arising out of these. This 
is the central point of the present essay.100 
The various presuppositions regarding causation made by 
physicists during dUferent historical periods iUustrate the point at issue. 
Newtonian Physics presupposes that some events have causes, those 
not due to the operation of laws. Thus, the time at which a moving 
body passes a definite point on its trajectory is calculable in advance 
according to a law. But U a colliding body changes its course, this 
change of direction would be accounted for not by a law, but through 
a cause. 
The presupposition of nineteenth century physics was that all 
events have causes, which seems to originate with Kant. 
The peculiarity of the Kantian metaphysics is that it uses the 
notion of cause and the notion of law, one might almost say, inter­
changeably: it regards aU laws of nature as laws according to which 
causes in nature operate, and aU causes in nature as operating 
according to law. 1 0 1 
But for modern physics nothing happens according to causes; aU 
happens according to laws. Cases of the impact of one body with 
another are no longer regarded as instances of interference render­
ing inoperative the Laws of Motion; they are regarded as cases of 'free' 
motion, that is, motion not interfered with, under pecuUar geometrical 
conditions with the straight Une of Newton's first law substituted for 
by some other kind of line. 
CoUingwood says that we might be led to think from this that there 
are three schools of thought in physics, the Newtonian, for which some 
events have causes, the Kantian, for which all events have causes, 
the Einsteinian, for which no events have causes, and it might seem 
as U the metaphysician has to teU which of these three schools is based 
on a false foundation and which is not. The dogmatic metaphysician, 
Collingwood says, wUl not hesitate to pronounce in favour of one or 
other of them as being 'seU-evident.' But the conscientious meta-
" R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 49. 
1 0 0 Md. 
1 0 1 Jbid., p. 50. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
179 
physician wiU be embarrassed, because he wUl see that there is no 
way in which that can be decided; it is a pseudometaphysical prob­
lem of the type previously discussed, 'is AP true?' The reason why 
that is not a metaphysical problem is that it is not an historical problem. 
The sentences [Some events have causes, AU events have causes, 
No events have causes], express absolute presuppositions made 
respectively in three dUferent schools of physical science. Each is 
important, to the science that makes it, because it deterrnines the 
entire structure of that science by determining the questions that 
arise in it, and therefore determining the possible answers.102 
So, every detaU in these respective sciences depends on what abso­
lute presuppositions each respectively makes. 
But this does not mean that it depends on these presupposi­
tions being thought true, or that the truth of the conclusions arrived 
at depends on the presuppositions being in fact true. For the logical 
efficacy of a supposition does not depend on its being true, nor even 
on its being thought to be true, but only in its being supposed .. . 1 0 3 
Therefore, according to CoUingwood, it is a mistake to think that 
the metaphysician can pronounce on the fundamental correctness of 
one school as against the others by investigating their absolute presup­
positions from the aspect of their truth or falsity. To enquire into the 
truth of a presupposition is to assume that it is not an absolute but 
a relative presupposition. But such an enquiry into the truth of an 
absolute presupposition is nonsense and 
pseudometaphysics. 1 0 4 
Collingwood says that there are two things that can be done about 
absolute presuppositions. You can suppose them, which is what the 
ordinary scientist does, or you can investigate to find out what they 
are, which is what the metaphysician does. The metaphysician's job 
is to find out which absolute presuppositions are in fact being made; 
it is not his job to find out what it is to be an absolute presupposition, 
for this is the proper work of logic. 
When I say that this is what metaphysicians do I mean that this 
is what I find them doing when I read their works from Aristotle 
onwards.105 
CoUingwood says that the business of the ordinary scientist in 
his scientUic work, Ü he is a Newtonian, is to presuppose that some 
events have causes, U he is a Kantian, to presuppose that aU events 
102 Oiid., p. 52. 
103 
Ш. 
1 0 4 See ibid., pp. 53-54. 
105 U>id., p. 54. 

180 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
have causes, and if he is an Einsteinian, that no events have causes, 
whereas the business of the metaphysician is to find out that Newton­
ian scientists presuppose that some events have causes, that Kantian 
scientists presuppose that aU events have causes, and that Einstein­
ian scientists presuppose that no events have causes. These are true 
metaphysical propositions and their contradictories would be false 
metaphysical propositions. 
It wiU be clear that the true metaphysical propositions are true 
historical propositions, and the fake metaphysical propositions fake 
historical propositions. It is the proper business of a metaphysician 
to answer the question what absolute presuppositions are or were 
made by Newtonians, Kantians, Einsteinians and so forth. These 
are historical questions. 
The hktorical nature of the metaphysician's inquiries is at once 
evident when the propositions he makes are stated as they are above 
. . . . What makes it evident k that the wording of each statement 
includes the formula 'so-and-so presupposes (or presupposed) 
that. . . .' Since the presupposition aUeged to be made is an abso­
lute presupposition, and since the question whether it is made k 
not a personal one but one concerning the pecuUarities of a certain 
phase of scientific thought, the formula would be more accurately 
rendered: 'in such and such a phase of scientUic thought it is (or 
was) absolutely presupposed that....' Thk formula I caU the 'meta­
physical rubric.' 1 0 6 
According to CoUingwood, history has its own rubric, namely, 
'the evidence at our disposal obliges us to conclude that' such and 
such an event happened. The rubric customarily used by legendary 
literature is 'the story says that . . .' or 'the story goes on to say 
that. . . .' But just as in these cases the reader is left to supply these 
rubrics for himseU, since he is supposed to know the ropes, so also 
the metaphysical rubric is most often left to the reader to be put in 
for himseU, on the presumption that he is inteUigent enough, and ac­
customed enough to this kind of literature. 
Another reason, CoUingwood teUs us, for omitting these rubrics 
is that the writer himseU does not see their necessity. 
It is only when a man's historical consciousness has reached a 
certain point of maturity that he realizes how very dUferent have 
been the ways in which different sets of people have thought. When 
a man first begins looking into absolute presuppositions it is likely 
that he wUl begin by looking into those which are made in his own 
time by his own countrymen, or at any rate by persons belonging 
to some group of which he k a member. This of course, is aUeady 
1 0 6 Md., p. 55. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
181 
an historical enquiry. But various prejudices current at various times 
which I will not here enumerate have tended to deceive such en­
quirers into minking that the conclusions they have reached wül hold 
good far beyond the Umits of that group and that time. They may 
even imagine that an absolute presupposition discovered within 
these Umits can be more or less safely ascribed to all human beings 
everywhere and always. In that case, mistaking the characteristics 
of a certain historical mUieu for characteristics of mankind at large, 
they wiU leave out the metaphysical rubric on purpose, and pre­
sent a piece of purely historical research as U it were a research into 
the universal nature of understanding. But their mistaking it for 
something else does not alter the fact that it is history. 1 0 7 
CoUingwood concludes, therefore, that metaphysics has to be re­
thought so as to take into account its own historical dimension as re­
quired by the demands of the recently developed historical conscious­
ness. He then proceeds to outline his proposal for the reform of meta­
physics as the historical science of absolute presuppositions. 
E. Collingwood's Proposed Reform of Metaphysics 
as an Historical Science 
Kant, living at the time when the Newtonian Physics was making 
its impression in the field of science, sought to reform metaphysics 
using as his model the highly successful method of Newtonian physics 
as the paradigm of genuine knowledge. CoUingwood, impressed by 
the methods of history, sought to bring metaphysics into line with 
what he thought to be the acme of human thought, namely historical 
reasoning. 
CoUingwood says that the historical character of metaphysics has 
not always been evident to metaphysicians, since 
it is only within the last hatf-century that the aims and methods of 
history have defined themselves with the sort of precision that those 
of natural science achieved around about the year 1600. Until that 
happened people did not understand that history is a kind of think­
ing whereby cogent inferences about the past are drawn from inter­
pretation of the evidence it has left behind. 1 0 8 
So, according to CoUingwood, what obscured the historical 
character of metaphysics was a misunderstandmg regarding the nature 
of history itseU, which, until recently, had been regarded as a scissors-
and-paste affair, in which historians use ready-made statements in 
documents regarded as 'authorities.' According to CoUingwood, the 
107 Md., p. 57. 
108 An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 58. 

182 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
correct historical method proceeds by using documents not as 'authori­
ties' but as evidence.109 And Metaphysics, Collingwood says, is an his­
torical science, not in the sense of scissors-and-paste history of accept­
ing testimony, but in the sense that it 
proceeds according to a method called metaphysical analysis, by 
which the metaphysician discovers what absolute presuppositions 
have been made in a certain piece of scientific work by using the 
records of that work as evidence.110 
But history today is no longer a scissors-and-paste affair in which 
the historian repeats statements accepted on the testimony of author­
ities. Instead of this 
the historian of today makes his own statements on his own author­
ity according to what he finds the evidence in his possession to prove 
when he analyses it with a certain question in his rnind. 1 1 1 
Collingwood says that anyone understanding the nature of pres­
ent day historical thought needs no further convincing that meta­
physics is an historical science; aU they need to understand is that 
statement itseU in order to see that it is true. 
The dissatisfaction felt with the state of metaphysics, especially 
since Kant's time, "can be removed by taking seriously the proposi­
tion that metaphysics is an historical science.112 CoUingwood says that 
"the peculiar perplexities and obscurities that have always been felt 
to surround the work of the metaphysician wUl disappear" U " i t be 
understood both by metaphysicians and by their critics that meta­
physics is the science of absolute presuppositions," and that "the 
distinction between metaphysics and pseudo-metaphysics be firmly 
grasped," and " i t be understood that the business of metaphysics 
is to find out what absolute presuppositions have actuaUy been made 
by various persons at various times in doing various pieces of scien­
tific thinking," and " i t be understood that U a certain absolute pre­
supposition has been made on one occasion by one person this fact 
makes it probable that the same presupposition has been made by 
other persons having in general what may be caUed the same cultural 
equipment as himseU . . . but improbable that it has been made by 
persons whose cultural equipment was noticeably dUferent." 1 1 3 
1 0 9 See Chapter 1, above, pp. 32-34. 
1 1 0 R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 59. 
1 1 1 Brid. See also Chapter 1, above, pp. 29 et seq. 
1 1 2 R. G. CoIUngwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 59-60. 
1 1 3 Ж., 
p. 60. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
183 
CoUingwood adds, however, that probabUities are not history, for 
history requires proof and the only proof that someone has made a 
certain absolute presupposition is by analysis of the records of his 
thoughts. 
Two results wiU foUow U this is done in regard to the meta­
physician's work. Perplexities and obscurities wUl disappear, and the 
scope of metaphysical enquiry wUl be enlarged. 
As regards the removal of perplexities, CoUingwood says that this 
wffl take place in four areas of consideration: the subject of meta­
physics, its method, its form, and its effect on the mind of its readers. 
ConcerrUng the perplexities regarding the subject of metaphysics, 
that is, what metaphysics is about, CoUingwood says that clarifica­
tion is achieved here U we recognise that Aristotle both knew weU 
enough that metaphysics was a science of absolute presuppositions 
and also that he is altogether responsible for the notion of metaphysics 
as the barren search for pure being, as U to suggest that the science 
of pure being and that of absolute presuppositions were one and the 
same. 1 1 4 
With the removal of this perplexity there is also removed, as Col­
lingwood says, the perplexity as to how the metaphysician should 
train himseU to do his work. The Middle Ages thought it was in logic, 
the seventeenth century, physics, and the nineteenth century, psychol­
ogy. But having clarified that the subject matter about which meta­
physics is concerned is absolute presuppositions, it followsthat the 
metaphysician is a special kind of historian, so that his trairdng should 
be first in general historical education, secondly in special attention 
to the history of science, and finally in concentration on such prob­
lems as the light which documents providing evidence about the 
history of science throw on the question as to what absolute presup­
positions have been made. 1 1 5 
The removal of perplexities as to what metaphysics is about results 
in removal of perplexities as to how it should proceed. CoUingwood 
maintains that, with the rejection of Aristotle's science of pure being, 
metaphysics no longer continues to be what it was as a result, name­
ly a blind groping for something that in fact is not there, which in 
effect is to be doing something futUe in regard to an inaccessible object. 
But, when it is clear that metaphysical problems are historical prob­
lems, it is Ukewise clear that its methods are historical methods. The 
1 1 4 See ibid., p. 61. 
1 1 5 See ibid., p. 62. This seems to make metaphysics a species of the genus history. 

184 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
metaphysician is then a man who has to get at facts; he must beclear 
about the facts he wants to get at and the evidence he proposes to 
use to get at them. There is no excuse in the twentieth century for 
not knowing the methods of history. 
CoUingwood faces the objection that, U metaphysics is the science 
that investigates presuppositions, then it itseU must refrain from mak­
ing any itseU. But he refutes this on the grounds that it is a science 
and, like any science, its questions arise from presuppositions, ulti­
mately from absolute presuppositions. 
If metaphysics is a science at aU it is an attempt to think syste-
maticaUy, that is, by answering questions inteUigently disposed in 
order. The answer to any question presupposes whatever the ques­
tion presupposes. And because aU science begins with a question 
. . . aU science begins with a presupposition. Metaphysics therefore 
either has presuppositions or is no science.116 
To attempt a metaphysics devoid of presuppositions, says CoUing­
wood, can only result in an unscientUic tangle of confused thoughts 
which glories in its confusion. Furthermore, not only is metaphysics 
a science having quite definite presuppositions, but everyone knows 
what some of them are, for, as an historical science, it shares in the 
presuppositions of aU history with which everyone nowadays has some 
acquaintance.117 
As to form, two perplexities can be removed. The first concerns 
completeness, whether there is a set of problems which constitute 'the' 
problems of metaphysics, and the second concerns the mutual impli­
cation of the various solutions to metaphysical problems. 1 1 8 
The systematization of the problems of metaphysics is not perplex­
ing when it is reaUzed that "Metaphysics aware of itseU as an historical 
science wUl be systematic in the sense in which aU historical thought 
is systematic and in no other," for "the historian's work is never 
finished; every historical subject, hke the course of historical events 
itseU, is open at the end, and however hard you work at the end it 
is stiU open." Thus "the idea that these problems form a closed reper­
tory, or even a repertory with the door ajar, is the purest Ulusion," 1 1 9 
for 
people who are said to 'make history' solve the problems they find 
confronting them but create others to be solved, if not by themselves, 
1 1 6 R. G. Colttngwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 63. 
1 1 7 See ibid., pp. 63-64. 
1 1 8 See ibid., p. 65. 
119 Tbid., p. 65. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
185 
by their survivors. People who write it, if they write weU, solve 
problems too; but every problem solved gives rise to a new prob­
lem. 1 2 0 
But, U there is a formal structure uniting the various problems 
of metaphysics, so that the answer to one problem impUcates the 
answer to subsequent problems, the question immediately arises: "Is 
metaphysics a 'deductive' science?"121 
A definite 'No' in answer to this question removes many perplex­
ities that otherwise arise from it, since "metaphysics is an historical 
science" and "the things which it studies, namely absolute presup­
positions, are historical facts." 1 2 2 Anyone reasonably weU acquainted 
with historical work knows that there is no such thrng as an isolated 
historical fact, for every historical fact forms a consteUation or com­
plex with other historical facts. As a consequence, the question as to 
what absolute presupposition is made by such and such a piece of 
thinking cannot be answered by reference to a single absolute presup­
position. It must be given with reference to a consteUation of abso­
lute presuppositions. 1 2 3 
This immediately raises the question regarding the logical rela­
tions subsisting between the presuppositions making up this constel­
lation. The relationships are not those of logical entaUment in the 
deductive sense of antecedents necessitating consequents. The dUfer­
ent presuppositions, constituting one complex piece of thinking, are 
aU made at once, in that one same piece of thinking. Their relation­
ship, one to another, is a relationship of befittingness, in the same 
sense as when we are able to say that one item of dothing "goes w i t h " 
another item. 
The consteUation, complex though it is, is stUl a single fact. The 
different presuppositions composing it are aU made at once, in one 
and the same piece of thinking. They are not Uke a set of carpenter's 
tools, of which the carpenter uses one at a time; they are Uke a suit 
of dothes, of which every part is worn simultaneously with aU the 
rest. That is to say that, since they are aU suppositions, each must 
be consupponible with aU the others; that is, it must be logically pos­
sible for a person who supposes any one of them to suppose con­
currently aU the rest.124 
120 B>id. 
121 Md. 
1 2 2 See ibid., p. 66. 
1 2 3 See ibid., p. 66. 
1 2 4 Tbid., p. 66. L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 237, com­
ments: ". . . instead of pointing out that the rules governing the relations among 
presuppositions are derived not from propositional but from dialectical logic, CoUing-

186 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Not only is the complex consteUation of absolute presuppositions 
a single historical fact, but any constituent absolute presupposition 
within the constellation is also a single historical fact which the meta­
physician is able to discover in the same way that any historian dis­
covers any historical fact, by mterpretation of the evidence. No single 
fact is deducible, a priori, from the consteUation of which it is a con­
stituent, it has to be uncovered by the historical method of interpret­
ing facts from historical evidence. 
U a given person in a given piece of thinking makes the abso­
lute presuppositions APi, AP 2, AP 3, AP 4 . . . each of these is a gen­
uinely independent presupposition which can no more be deduced 
from the rest than waistcoat can be deduced from trousers and coat 
together.125 
Collingwood says that the awareness of metaphysics as an his­
torical science banishes once for aU the hope of making it quasi-deduc­
tive or mathematical. Thus, when a metaphysician sets himsetf to 
discuss the absolute presuppositions of the thought of his own time, 
the literary form in which he expresses his thought cannot be that 
of a continuous argument from point to point by way of quasi-mathe­
matical demonstration, such as is found in the Ethics of Spinoza. It 
must be in the form of a catalogue raisonni, such as is found in the 
fourth book of Aristotle's Metaphysics, or in the Quaestiones of a 
mediaeval metaphysician. 1 2 6 
Furthermore, metaphysics aware of itseU as an historical science 
wUl give up the idea of founding 'schools' or estabUshing doctrines. 
When I accept what Spinoza says on this subject [that Nature 
is the same as God] I am no more going Spinozist in a war of meta­
physical sects than I am going Tacitean in a war of historical sects 
when I accept Tacitus's statement that Agricola conquered south­
ern and central Scotland. What I am doing in either case is to say: 
'Here is a statement as to certain facts made by a contemporary 
writer. The evidence at my disposal proves that it is true.' 1 2 7 
wood attempts, in his effort to avoid using the language of dialectical logic, to com­
municate the meaning of dialectical logic by means of a neutral language. He therefore 
declares that presuppositions are not related as parts of a deductive system but instead 
constitute a 'constellation.' The latter however is simply a new way of characterizing 
what has hitherto been described as a dialectical system. FinaUy, he declares, the logical 
relation holding among presuppositions making up a consteUation is one of consup-
ponibUity. . . . " 
1 2 5 R. G . ColUngwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 67. 
1 2 6 See ibid., pp. 67-68. 
127 VM., p. 69. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
187 
Thus, to say today that 'all events have causes' would not be the 
assertion of a metaphysical doctrine, but a blunder, the mistake of 
saying that an absolute presupposition is being made when in fact 
it is not being made. 
The discovery that metaphysics is an historical science, concerned 
with the absolute presuppositions of a period, greatly erUarges its scope 
of enquiry, according to CoUingwood. Ignorance of this has led 
metaphysicians to confine their attention to the absolute presupposi­
tions of the present, which, in fact, is not reaUy a present but a rela­
tively recent past, whereas the so-caUed past is a more remote past. 
Realisation of the historical nature of the enquiry opens it up to the 
study of presuppositions not only of the so<aUed present, our imme­
diate past, but of the more or less remote past, and to the study of 
the transition effected when the presuppositions of one period gave 
way, by historical change, to those of a succeeding period. Metaphysics 
then becomes the history of the absolute presuppositions made 
throughout the various periods of history. This, then, is an amplifi­
cation of its scope of enquiry, it not now being restricted to the (so-
caUed) present absolute presuppositions. Aristotle's metaphysics was 
confined to the absolute presuppositions of the Greek science of the 
4th century B.C. and that of St. Thomas was confined to those of the 
central Middle Ages and that of Spinoza to those of European science 
of the 17th century. 1 2 8 
As a result, the metaphysician, instead of having before him only 
one consteUation of absolute presuppositions, has before him an in­
finite number of them, and so has many worlds to conquer. He can 
study the presuppositions of European science at any phase of its 
history for which he has evidence. He can also study the absolute 
presuppositions of Arabic, Hindu or Chinese science in whatsoever 
phase he is able to find historical evidence for them. He can study 
the presuppositions of primitives and prehistoric peoples. AU these 
belong not merely to an historical background of his work but to his 
own proper work itseU, once the historical character of his science 
is revealed. 1 2 9 
When he has acquired knowledge about several dUferent constel­
lations of absolute presuppositions the metaphysician can begin to 
make comparisons. This study wUl convince the metaphysician that 
there are no eternal or crucial problems. It wUl get him out of the 
1 2 8 See ibid., pp. 70-71. 
1 2 9 See ibid., p. 71. 

188 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
parish pump provincialism of thinking that the metaphysical problems 
of his own generation are those which all metaphysicians everywhere 
worried about and that they are the only ones there are to be worried 
about now or in the past or the future. He will then reaUze that dif­
ferent sets of absolute presuppositions correspond not only to differ­
ences in the structure of scientific thought but also to differences in 
the entire fabric of civilization. 1 3 0 
The metaphysician, when he uncovers the presuppositions of this 
or that period, must not think that they are something static which 
can be comparatively studied merely by noting likenesses and differ­
ences. What is essential about phases of history isthat each dynamical­
ly gives place to the succeeding, not by the violence of war from with­
out or revolution from within, but simply because "each of them while 
it lives is working at turning itself into the next." 1 3 1 Thus: 
To trace the process by which one historical phase turns into 
the next is the business of every historian who concerns himserf with 
that phase. The metaphysician's business therefore, when he has 
identified several different constellations of absolute presupposi­
tions, is not only to study their Ukenesses and unlikenesses but also 
to find out on what occasions and by what processes one of them 
has turned into another.132 
CoUingwood refers to this as "the orUy legitimate (that is, histor­
ical) way in which he, or anybody else, can answer the question 'why 
did such and such people at such and such a time make such and 
such absolute presuppositions?' " 1 3 3 He adds that that question, like 
aU questions in metaphysics, is either an historical question or a 
nonsense question. 
It is a nonsense question U the answer it expects is one which 
identifies the cause of the historical fact in question with something 
outside history, like geographical or cUmatic environment of that 
fact or the psycho-physical characteristics of the human beings con­
cerned in it. It is a significant question ii it expects an answer in the 
form: 'Because they or the predecessors from whom they inherited 
their civUization had previously made such and such a different set 
of absolute presuppositions, and because such and such a process 
or change converted the one set into the other.' If any one is 
dissatisfied with this kind of answer his dissatisfaction shows that 
the question, as he was asking it, was a nonsense question.134 
1 3 0 See ibid., pp. 72-73. 
1 3 1 Md., p. 73. 
1 3 2 Bid. 
1 3 3 Bid. 
134 Bid., pp. 73-74. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
189 
CoUingwood adds that it is not enough to know that each phase 
in the dynamics of history is converted into the next but that it is further 
necessary to know the more mtimate relation between one phase and 
the next according to which one phase, by reason of an unstable equi-
Ubrium within itseU, had in itseU the seeds of change, and indeed 
of that particular change which in fact took place. The fabric of any 
period is always under a strain. The world studied by history is one 
wherein tout passe, tout lasse, tout casse, and it is an important part of 
the historian's work to analyse the internal strains to which a given 
consteUation of historical facts is subjected, and the means by which 
it takes up these strains and prevents them from breaking it to pieces. 
Collingwood criticises Gibbon for lack of sensitivity to the internal 
strains of the periods about which he writes, but lauds Hegel, because, 
for Hegel, historical study was primarily a study of such internal 
strains, thereby opening the way to Marx's brffliant feat of analysing 
19th century economic society in terms of its internal strains. He criti­
cises Spengler for historicising as U piecing together a jigsaw puzzle, 
with every piece placidly fitting together into the picture. CoUingwood 
says that where there is no strain there is no history. A civUization 
works itseU out by a dynamic logic, 
in which dUferent and at first sight incompatible formulae some­
how contrive a precarious coexistence; one dorninant here, another 
there; the recessive formula never ceasing to operate, but function­
ing as a kind of minority report which, though the superficial 
historian may ignore it, serves to a more acute eye as evidence of 
tendencies actually existing which may have been dominant in the 
past and may be dominant in the future. 1 3 5 
The mediocre historian may in his study neglect these strains 
which a recessive element presents and the pecuUar quaUty which 
it imparts to the whole, even though he may have sensitive enough 
feeUngs to detect it. But the man of action cannot neglect them, for 
his Ufe may depend on his abUity to see where they are and to judge 
correctly their strength. Cortez destroyed Montezuma not merely using 
gunpowder but using it to reinforce the strains akeady present and 
tendmg to break up Montezuma's power. 1 3 6 
This same characteristic of internal stress and strain wUl be found 
in any consteUation of absolute presuppositions, and a metaphysi­
cian with a general grounding in history wUl know to look for it. 
135 Md., p. 75. 
1 3 6 See ibid., pp. 75-76. 

190 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
He wül expect the various presuppositions he is studying to be 
consupponible only under pressure, the consteUation being subject 
to certain strains and kept together by dint of a certain compromise 
of mutual toleration having behind it a motive like that which causes 
parties to unite in the face of an enemy.137 
CoUingwood adds that this is why the conception of metaphysics 
as a deductive science, the presenting of the consteUation of absolute 
presuppositions as a strainless structure luxe a body of propositions 
in mathematics, is a pernicious error, because mathematical proposi­
tions are not historical propositions, whereas those of metaphysics 
are. 1 3 8 
A reformed metaphysics wffl conceive any given consteUation 
of absolute propositions [sic] as having in its structure not the sim­
plicity and calm that characterize the subject matter of mathematics 
but the intricacy and restlessness that characterize the subject matter, 
say, of legal or constitutional history. 1 3 9 
CoUingwood concludes by adding that the only way that meta­
physics can become a science is by becoming more completely and 
consciously what in fact it has always been, namely an historical 
science. He maintains that its much needed reform can only be brought 
about "by its adoption of principles and methods which are now 
common form among historians." 1 4 0 By achieving such a reform, 
CoUingwood feels that metaphysics wUl be able to withstand aU the 
criticisms previously brought against it, which criticisms were justi­
fied by defects in its own practice. 1 4 1 
F. Presuppositions as Beliefs 
In his Ruskin's Centenary address, Collingwood referred to the 
fundamental principles of a man's phUosophy as "uncontrovertible," 
as something "he assumes as true in aU his thinking and acting," "the 
centre from which aU his activities radiate" and "to which everything 
a man does is attached." 1 4 2 In the Essay on Metaphysics, Collingwood 
identUies the absolute presuppositions with the religious beliefs of 
individuals and civUizations which it is the business of institutions 
to perpetuate. 
137 Brid., p. 76. 
1 3 8 See ibid., pp. 76-77. 
139 Tbid., p. 77. 
140 
Ш. 
1 4 1 See ibid. 
1 4 2 See "Ruskin's Philosophy" in Alan Donagan's R. G. Collingwood's Essays in 
the Philosophy of Art, p. 10. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
191 
Ьл any civüization it is man's religious institutions that refresh 
in him from time to time the wUl. . . to retain the presuppositions 
by whose aid he reduces such experience as he enjoys to such science 
as he can compass; and it is by dint of these same religious institu­
tions that he transmits these same presuppositions to his children.143 
Religion is concerned with expressing these presuppositions as 
basic convictions according to which we regulate our behaviour, 
whereas science is concerned to interpret and systematize our experi­
ence in terms of these general convictions which basicaUy predeter­
mine our view of the world. 
. . . if science is 'experience' interpreted in the Ught of our general 
convictions as to the nature of the world, religion is what expresses 
these convictions in themselves and for their own sake and hands 
them on from generation to generation and it does this irrespectively 
of whether we know by means of metaphysical analysis what these 
convictions are.144 
This holding firm by personal convictions, as an act of religious 
faith, to our absolute presuppositions is at the same time the beUef 
of some attribute regarding God. 
The act by which we hold such presuppositions .. . is religious 
faith; and God is that in which we beUeve by faith; therefore aU our 
absolute presuppositions must be presuppositions in holding which 
we believe something about God. 1 4 5 
This, according to CoUingwood, is why Aristotle's Metaphysics 
is alternatively caUed Theology. "The ordinary name for that which 
is the logical ground of everything else is G o d . " 1 4 6 And CoUingwood 
1 4 3 R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 198. 
144 Jbid., p. 198. This, however, seems to involve a contradiction. Γη Speculum Mentis, 
CoUingwood says (p. 110) that "Art asserts nothing; and truth as such is matter of 
assertion." P. 113: "The point at which a chUd begins to ask whether stories are true, 
and passes through the crisis of learning to disbeUeve in fairies . .. indicates the emer­
gence of religion from art." P. 114: ". . . the assertion is the transcendency of this 
monadism [of art], for to make any given assertion is to commit oneseU to the denial 
of whatever contradicts it. Religion is essentially assertion, beUef." P. 115: ". . . reU­
gion by its very nature is pledged to selectiveness, to a discrimination between the 
utterances of the spirit, to a duaUsm between true vision and false vision." This means 
that what reUgion asserts is asserted as true. But CoUingwood has insisted that truth 
and falsity do not apply to absolute presuppositions. The difficulty could be averted 
by saying that the error of reUgion is to assert as a proposition what is reaUy a presup­
position. But, then, why need institutions to perpetuate error? To express them as 
convictions without asserting them as true seems to involve a contradiction, which, 
I think, is a felt difficulty throughout CoUingwood's whole discussion of absolute pre­
suppositions. 
1 4 5 R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 216. 
146 Oid., p. 10. 

192 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
explains that, regarding Ansehn's argument that 'God exists,' "what 
it proves is not that because our idea of God is an idea of id quo maius 
cogitari nequit therefore God exists, but that because our idea of God 
is an idea of id quo maius cogitari nequit we stand committed to belief 
in God's existence." 1 4 7 "That God exists is not a proposition, it is a 
presupposition," 1 4 8 and it is a presupposition upon which, since 
Aristotle, natural science depends. 1 4 9 The Patristic writers, according 
to CoUingwood, saw that the pagan world was coUapsing due to its 
faUure to keep alive its own fundamental convictions. Their remedy 
was a new analysis and formulation of these basic convictions codified 
in what they caUed the 'CathoUc Faith.' 1 5 0 
The presuppositions that go to make up this 'CathoUc Faith' pre­
served for many centuries by the reUgious institutions of Christen­
dom, have as a matter of historical fact been the main or fundamental 
presuppositions of natural science ever since. They have never been 
its only absolute presuppositions; there have always been others and 
these others have to some extent differed at different times. But from 
the fifth century down to the present day aU these dUferences have 
played their changing parts against a background that has remained 
unchanged: the consteUation of absolute presuppositions original­
ly sketched by Aristotle, and described more accurately, seven or 
eight centuries later, by the Patristic writers under the name of the 
'Catholic Faith.' 1 5 1 
Faith or beUef is the commitment to fundamental convictions which 
wUl give meaning to our experience and which wUl constitute us as 
having a world view, a standpoint from which an ordered perspec­
tive can be had. 1 5 2 Experience is the consequence of acting according 
to our basic convictions or presuppositions. 1 5 3 ScientUic experience 
is the result of thinking systematicaUy according to any given set of 
presuppositions. 1 5 4 Metaphysics is the act of thinking systematicaUy 
about what presuppositions are actually in use. 1 5 5 
Absolute presuppositions are historico-culturally conditioned a 
priori principles of thinking coherently. Kant discovered by analysis 
147 Md., p. 190. 
148 VbiA., p. 188. 
1 4 9 See ibid., p. 206; ako pp. 210-214. 
1 5 0 See ibid., p. 225. 
1 5 1 Hrid., p. 227. 
1 5 2 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 285. 
1 5 3 See ibid., p. 284; p. 285. 
1 5 4 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 196. 
1 5 5 See L. Rubinoff, op. cit., pp. 284-285; see also R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay 
on Metaphysics, p. 197. 

tyestioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
193 
what he thought were the permanent, immutable and eternal prin­
ciples of science, conceiving rnind as a fixed universal nature. But they 
were no more permanent than the presuppositions of Newtonian, 
eighteenth century physics. A n analysis of physics today, or of that 
of the Renaissance or that of Aristotle, would give a different set. 1 5 6 
The mind's essence is not that of a static substance, but is dynamic 
and historical so that its deterrnining categories have their own his­
tory, and are therefore related as members of a dialectical scale of 
forms. 
. . . [absolute presuppositions] are a special kind of synthetic a priori. 
They derive from the categories of mind, and are entailed by the 
statement that mind exists. But since the essence of mind is histori­
city, each category has its own history which takes the form not of 
a random sequence but of a progressive or serial scale of forms. 1 5 7 
G. Truth and Falsity of Absolute Presuppositions 
CoUingwood has expressed in his Essey on Metaphysics that truth 
and falsity do not apply to absolute presuppositions. 1 5 8 But one of his 
principal commentators, Lionel Rubinoff, maintains that CoUingwood 
is simply denying that they possess the truth or falsity of empirical 
verUiabUity. According to Rubinoff, CoUingwood is arguing against 
A. J. Ayer, for whom truth consists in empirical verUiabUity, and that 
he (Collingwood) is using a neutral (rather than dialectic) language, 
and, instead of arguing in terms of the truth and falsity of absolute 
presuppositions as they are seriaUy related as a scale of forms in an 
overlap of classes, he takes his stand on Ayer's notion of truth as 
equivalent to verUiabUity and simply denies that they are true or false, 
that is, subject to an empirical verUication process, since, in fact, they 
are prerequisites of that verUiabUity process itseU. Rubinoff maintains 
that CoUingwood's way of expressing himself is "a misleading conse­
quence of his obsession with the need to cure positivism of its anti-
metaphysical tendencies," 1 5 9 and, more specifically, a consequence 
of Collingwood's growing concern to combat "The Elimination of 
Metaphysics," of Ayer's Language, Truth and Logic (1936), whose 
"thesis is that, since metaphysical statements are neither tautologies 
1 5 6 See R. G. ColUngwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 179. 
1 5 7 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 286. 
158 
his £ssay 
on Metaphysics, pp. 28-29 and especiaUy pp. 32-33. See also, above, 
this chapter, pp. 156-157. 
1 5 9 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 234. 

194 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
nor empirical hypotheses subject to empirical verification, they are 
meaningless.'' 1 6 0 
Since we have here a case of a major commentator interpreting 
CoUingwood in a sense quite other than that which CoUingwood's 
own texts would seem to imply, it is necessary to examine Rubinoff's 
position on this point. Rubinoff maintains that the real point of CoUing­
wood's discussion is to demonstrate that there are dUferent ways of 
evaluating and justifying truth and falsity, but that the method of veri­
fication which is the only one admitted by the positivists, together 
with its implied propositional logic, is inappropriate to the work of 
metaphysics in the same way that the methods of the natural sciences 
are inappropriate to history. 1 6 1 
Rubinoff argues that metaphysics, Uke history, is a work of the 
a priori imagination, and that since this is a critical activity it seeks 
to establish not only what is the case but also whether it is true. The 
truth appropriate to an absolute presupposition is its consupponabU-
ity, without introducing strain into the consteUation, with other pre­
suppositions, and its degree of truth or falsity is to be reckoned accord­
ing to the integrity it maintains on the scale of forms to which it 
belongs. 1 6 2 Rubinoff states his position thus: 
To show that a presupposition is indispensable is equivalent to 
showing that it is true only because its indispensabUity has survived 
the critique through which it has been elicited. The aim of such a 
critique is to show that it is consupponible with a variety of other 
presuppositions which together define the structure of a given form 
of Ufe—in which case it would be better to speak of the "truthful­
ness" rather than truth of a presupposition. Truth is a property 
which belongs only to the whole, but a presupposition is "truth­
ful" to the extent to which it contributes to the integrity of the 
whole—in the sense in which each form on a scale maintains the 
integrity of the whole scale to which it belongs. And since a scale 
may be internaUy consistent with itseU and inconsistent with respect 
to other scales the very same presupposition may be "truthful" with 
respect to its place on the scale to which it most immediately belongs 
and false with respect to an entirely dUferent scale. The purpose 
of metaphysics is therefore to expose both the implicit truthfulness 
(or falseness) of a presupposition with respect to its immediate form 
of life and its impUcit falseness (or truthfulness) with respect to the 
world of knowledge as a whole. 
The real point of the essay, then, is not simply to deny that abso­
lute presuppositions are truth functional; its more important purpose 
1 6 0 See ibid., p. 241. 
1 6 1 See ibid., p. 234. 
1 6 2 See ibid., pp. 234-235. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
195 
is to outline the method whereby absolute presuppositions can be 
elicited and evaluated. The "reform of metaphysics" does not lie 
in banishing truth from the realm of presuppositions by means of 
a quibble; it lies rather in the development of a methodology which 
respects the notion of truth as a scale of forms. And this amounts 
virtuaUy to an extension of the doctrines of An Essay on Philosophical 
Method to the problem of metaphysics.163 
Thus "instead of trying to explain the real basis of his new dialec­
tical logic, which would have meant representing some metaphysical 
statements as a special type of synthetic a priori, he (CoUingwood) chose 
to emphasize only those statements that report historical facts about 
what so-and-so absolutely presupposed." 1 6 4 But " . . . metaphysics, 
in addition to being a descriptive-historical science, is also an activity 
through which absolute presuppositions are criticaUy evaluated accord­
ing to the criteria of dialectical logic; in which case they are to be 
regarded as a special type of the class of synthetic a priori state­
ments." 1 6 5 
Rubinoff maintains that Collingwood's doctrine of absolute pre­
suppositions, with its implied rejection of eternal problems, is but part 
of the wider doctrine of the concrete universal. He rejects the historicist 
charges of Knox, 1 6 6 who regards Collingwood's Essay as a total ab­
sorption of phUosophy into history without remainder. According to 
Rubinoff, this identUication of phUosophy and history, affirmed by 
Collingwood since his earliest work, Religion and Philosophy, is to be 
understood in terms of the rapprochement of the dialectical logic of the 
overlap of classes in a scale of forms in a concrete universal. 
. . . the rejection of the reaUst distinction between philosophy and 
history is a direct impUcation of the rapprochement of Speculum Men­
tis: thus committing myseU to the further doctrine that so far as there 
is any irnphed identity of philosophy and history in the Essay it ought 
to be understood according to the terms of the same rapprochement. 
As we have seen, CoUingwood himseU declares in the Autobiography 
that the theory of presuppositions first expounded in "Truth and 
Contradiction" was part of a general attempt to develop an alterna­
tive logic to the propositional logic of realism. И, as I have already 
suggested, this alternative logic is the dialectical logic of Speculum 
163 0>id., p. 235. 
164 Tbid., pp. 245-246. 
165 Tbid., p. 245. 
166 s e e Диу., pp. 238-241. Knox's charges are accepted by Alan Donagan; see 
Donagan's The Later Philosophy ofR. G. Collingwood, p. 12: "Knox's demonstration 
that between 1936 and 1938 CoUingwood radicaUy changed his mind about the rela­
tion of phUosophy to history must be the foundation of any interpretation of his later 
works." 

196 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Mentis and An Essay on Philosophical Method, then the identity of 
philosophy and history which is implied by the theory of presuppo­
sitions must be what foUows from the rapprochement between 
phUosophy and history which it is the purpose of dialectical logic 
to achieve.167 
Granted that absolute presuppositions are appropriately handled 
only by dialectical logic, Rubinoff says that certain things can be said 
about them. 
Firstly, they are subject to two sorts of criteria, one dealing with 
meaning, the other dealing with truth. 
As regards meaning, a statement is meaningful in one or another 
of two ways, either as the appropriate answer to a given question, 
in which case it is propositionally meaningful, or as logically presup­
posed as a sine qua non condition of the intelligibUity of the question 
and answer complex as a whole. 
In other words, there are some statements which are concerned 
with one's overaU world view to which everything that is said and 
done is referred (either expUcitly or impUcitiy) in regard to its meaning-
fumess. Absolute presuppositions, and the consteUational whole which 
they form, constitute a horizon of meaning usuaUy referred to as one's 
world view. This consteUation of basic commitments is what is 
ultimately responsible for one's world being recognizable as a world, 
as a whole of meaning. The "Map of Knowledge" which CoUingwood 
draws in his Speculum Mentis ends by presenting us with the external 
world as the rnind's reflection of itseU. 
The mind is not one among a number of objects of knowledge 
.. . it is what is reaUy known in the ostensible knowing of any object 
whatever . . . [but] it can only know itseU through the mediation 
of an external world, know that what it sees in the external world 
is its own reflection.168 
The true object [of the rnind] . . . is the mind itseU. And thus 
the external world is not a veü between it and its object, but a pic­
ture of itseU, drawn to aid its own seU vision; a picture which as 
it grows firmer and harder, takes surface and poUsh and steadiness, 
becomes the rnirror of the mind; and aU the detaU in it is seen by 
the rnind to be the reflection of its own face.169 
But, since the rnind is what it does, the rnind is nothing other 
than this construction of a world in which it deploys itself. Absolute 
presuppositions thus seem to be nothing other than the mind itseU 
1 6 7 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, pp. 248-249. 
1 6 8 R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 315. 
169 Bid., p. 313. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
197 
precisely as it is determinative of itsetf through the determination of 
its world which it determines in the very determination of its own 
view of the world. The absolute presuppositions thus seem to be the 
mind itsetf if we view the mind as possessing, from within its own 
resources, certain structural determinations which wÜl function as the 
armature, so to speak, upon which the mind wül weave its tfved expe­
rience in the rational process of explanation. 1 7 0 
This conception of absolute presuppositions as world view deter­
minants finds a surprising reechoing in John Wild's article, "Being, 
Meaning and the W o r l d , " 1 7 1 in which Wild maintains that the world 
horizon is wider than that of being, 1 7 2 that certain meanings of being 
vresuppose that of a world view, 1 7 3 and that 
being is not necessarily found with meaning, as the major streams 
of Western thought, and also Heidegger, have supposed. Contrary 
to these teachings, they may faU apart, and they have faUen apart 
in the world of our time. 1 7 4 
This statement reflects Collingwood's strains in the consteUation 
of meaning-giving absolute presuppositions, whose rupture and re­
alignment (subsequent consupponabUity) results in the breakdown 
of a definite culture and its world view with the subsequent rise of 
a new culture and new world view in which a consistent whole is 
recognizable and more or less provides for a harmonious way of lUe 
and thinking. 
1 7 0 This conception of CoUingwood's absolute presuppositions is not without its 
difficulties, however. There seems to be an internal tension within the theory between 
a Kantian type of dualism and a dialectical monism. H, as Rubinoff says (Collingwood 
and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 286), CoUingwood's absolute presuppositions "are 
a special kind of synthetic a priori... 
[which] derive from the categories of the mind," 
notwithstanding that they are admitted to be historically conditioned, their a priori 
character seems to set them apart from experience. On the other hand, identity of 
form and content is a fundamental tenet of dialectical thinking which does not lend 
itseU readUy to being understood in terms of an a priori (form) and a posteriori (ex­
periential content) dichotomy. The above explanation takes its point of view from the 
dialectical identity of form and content and sees the mind's determinants as the mind 
itself so determined aUowing for the further conception of the mind experienced as fur­
ther determinable. It is the same mind (which is what it does) which, looked at one 
way is determined as regards how it thinks, looked at in another way is subject to 
modification and further deterrninabiUty. This tension within CoUingwood's think­
ing between a sort of Kantian duaUsm and ideaUst, dialectical monism, akeady noted 
at the beginning of this chapter, wffl have to be faced in its own right later in the 
chapter; see below, p. 205 et seq. 
1 7 1 The Review of Metaphysics, XVTiI (1965), pp. 411^29. 
1 7 2 See ibid., pp. 419^21. 
1 7 3 See ibid., pp. 421-426. 
174 Md., p. 427. 

198 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Wild further maintains that "we are more concerned with being 
than with the world of meaning. So we seem to have closed ourselves 
off from the wonderful." 1 7 5 This seems to echo Sartre's repugnance 
when faced with the actuality of meaningless being. 
Wild then ruminates in a self-interrogating fashion as follows: 
What do we feel when, after careful manoeuvering through the 
wreckage, a gleam of possible meaning breaks through the clouds 
and we gain a brief gUmpse of the elements, the waves and the sea 
and the clouds aU together? In this sudden dawn of a possible mean­
ing, the disjoined becomes joined on an aU encompassing ground, 
and the utterly aUen now becomes strange. 
Is this not the feeling of thauma, or, as we say, wonder with 
which phUosophy begins?176 
H we read questioning for wonder and consteUation of absolute 
presuppositions for Wfld's world horizon of meaning, we seem to have 
CoUingwood's position on absolute presuppositions as this is inter­
preted by Rubinoff. 1 7 7 Being, for WUd, seems to refer to experienced 
actuality, and meaning seems to refer to what is traditionaUy caUed 
essence. И I understand him rightly, for Collingwood, being refers 
to the totality of aU that is, expressed by the formula 'identity in dU­
ference.' It is experience precisely as this is the experience of mind 
systematically organizing its experience into a rational totaUty. The 
organized totality in the world of actual experience is possible only 
through the world view constituted by the consteUation of absolute 
presuppositions, which is logicaUy prior to the mind's organization 
of experience. 
The second criterion to which, according to Rubinoff, a presup­
position is subject is that of truthfulness, since every presupposition 
is part of a question and answer complex which occupies a place on 
a dialectical scale of overlapping forms. The theory of truth accord­
ing to which absolute presuppositions are evaluated is more accurate­
ly a dialectical history of errors, according to which truth is the pro­
duct of error proceeding and developing by means of contradiction, 
paradox and ambiguity, and arrangeable on a scale of forms in which 
they are related as opposite coincidents, whereas U taken singly, as 
propositional logic would take them, absolutely in themselves, they 
would be regarded as incompatible opposites. There would be no pro­
gress U successive absolute presuppositions did not overlap on a dialec-
175 mi. 
176 Tbid. 
1 7 7 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, pp. 249-250. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
199 
ticaUy evolving scale of forms, for progress is possible only inasmuch 
as each succeeding age can reflect on the absolute presuppositions 
of its predecessors which formed the basis of the question-and-answer 
complex characteristic of their age. This means being able to answer 
the question as to how these absolute presuppositions came to be pre­
supposed in the first place, which question is answerable in terms 
of the dynamic strains in the preceding consteUation of absolute pre­
suppositions of which the consequent absolute presuppositions are 
the resultant equUibrium state. To understand one's own age, there­
fore, requires that one become the historian of one's past. 1 7 8 History 
then becomes an essential ingredient in the very constitution of the 
described facts and not merely the distanced observation and record­
ing of them. Metaphysics as the historical specialization in the analysis 
of absolute presuppositions is therefore vital to the preservation and 
perpetuation of culture and civUization, for the world, in the sense 
in which we can speak of it as a cultural determinant (as when we 
speak of the Greek or Roman or Renaissance world), is determined 
by its absolute presuppositions, or what the people of that age were 
basically committed to as their fundamental source of meaningful ac­
tivity. The survival of a culture or civUization therefore requires insti­
tutional protection and propagation of its foundations, the absolute 
presuppositions which are the very catalytic agents by which the mind 
converts experience into science and civUization. 1 7 9 
Rubinoff further says that Collingwood's argument in the Auto­
biography, that the history of aU thought, including metaphysics, can 
be approached through the logic of question and answer, implies that 
the question and answer complexes, which result from the applica­
tion of the question and answer process to the history of thought, 
assume the inteUigible pattern of a dialectical scale of forms. Rubinoff 
iUustrates this from CoUmgwood's account of the rise of natural science 
in Greece as this is presented by CoUingwood in his The Idea ofNature 
and An Essay on Metaphysics. 
Natural science, as practised by the Greeks, emerged from a 
context which was dominated by the attitude of magic. Suppose we 
were to compare the witch doctor's account of nature with that of 
the Ionian phUosophers. A reaUst would no doubt regard each as 
a dUferent answer to the same question, What is nature? What is 
more, he would declare that in answering this question the Greeks 
were right and the witch doctors wrong. According to the logic of 
1 7 8 See ibid., p. 249. 
1 7 9 See ibid., p. 287. 

200 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
question and answer, however, the Greeks and the witch doctors 
were not reaUy competing for the same prize; if we take into account 
the fact that every question rests on certain presuppositions we wUl 
become aware of hitherto unnoticed dUferences between the ques­
tions of magic and the questions of Ionian natural phUosophy. 
Indeed, the logic of question and answer may be regarded as an 
effective antidote to the historical myopia of realism. For example, 
when the witch doctor asks, What is nature? (i.e., Why do things 
happen as they do?) he is presupposing absolutely 'that aU things 
are fuU of Gods' (an attitude which for the sake of convenience I 
shaU call 'polytheistic animism'). His answer therefore takes a 
mythopoeic form whUe his actions take the form of magic. Given 
his presuppositions, his answer is the 'right' one in the sense that 
it is the only appropriate response to the question he is asking.180 
These answers, which are mutually conflicting U considered (as 
the realists consider them) as propositions meaningful in themselves, 
and as dUferent answers to the same question, are aU right answers 
U understood in relation to the mentality dominated by dUferent abso­
lute presuppositions. Nevertheless, Rubinoff carefuUy points out that 
ii the question-answer complex is placed in dialectical relation with 
other succeeding complexes, then the answers are wrong because, 
by virtue of such a complex in which the answers are meaningful (and 
right) in accordance with the absolute presuppositions vivUying that 
complex, those who are committed to such a complex are restricted 
in the questions they can put to their experience, and the answers 
which they can expect from it. But dialectical logic regards their pre­
supposition in the first place as necessary to the manUestation of their 
falsity, which manUestation appears in lived experience when the 
explanation of that experience in accordance with those presupposi­
tions is inadequate to the experience. The magical world view of the 
witch doctor sooner or later comes up against experiences which it 
cannot handle and which demand a new attitude superseding the 
superstitious attitude of magic. 1 8 1 
The strains experienced through thinking in the context of such 
absolute presuppositions led to the transformation of the reUgious con­
sciousness from polytheism to monotheism with a corresponding 
change of presuppositions and a corresponding change of world view. 
Instead of presupposing that aU things are fuU of gods, and adopting 
a magical attitude to the world, the new outlook is determined by 
presupposing (1) that there are natural things (The Idea ofNature, p. 
180 Q>id., pp. 252-253. 
1 8 1 See ibid., p. 253. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
201 
29), (2) that natural things make up one natural world (ibid., p. 29), 
and (3) that aU natural things in common are made up of a single 
material substance (ibid., p. 30). Rubinoff says that aU this is implicit 
in the religious belief which expresses that 'God exists.' 1 8 2 
In Speculum Mentis religion was shown to have its ground in the 
realization that the expUcitly pluraUstic monadology of art impUcit-
ly presupposes the monistic principle which Ues at the basis of 
science. In the Essay on Metaphysics, this phenomenological transi­
tion is exempUfied in the historical transition from the aesthetic 
reUgion of polytheism to the more "reUgious" reUgion of monism, 
which by virtue of its monistic character contains within it the seeds 
of science. Thales' achievement is therefore represented as one of 
the implications of the transition from a polytheistic to a monotheistic 
religious consciousness. And, as in Speculum Mentis, this transition 
is regarded as a progress from error to truth. 
In declaring that the scientUic world view supersedes the reli­
gious world view (which in turn has superseded the aesthetic) we 
are recognizing that science at the same time impUcitly sums up the 
truth of the more primitive standpoints. From the magical world 
view is retained the wondering attitude of supposal and question­
ing; from the reUgious world view is retained not only the notion 
of unity but the attitude of faith with which the conditio sine qua non 
of aU science must ultimately be embraced. Magic, science, and 
reUgion, then, are not just dUferent answers to dUferent questions, 
they are, at the same time, internaUy refoted forms on an overlapping 
scale.183 
Rubinoff follows with a lengthy exposition as to how the same 
dialectical development took place within the history of science itseU. 
Regarding the transition from Thales to Pythagoras he says: 
The transition from Thales to Pythagoras is a dialectical transi­
tion from one set of presuppositions to another: a transition which 
both exposes the absurdity of Thales' presuppositions and preserves 
their truth. It was, in other words, a rational (i.e., dialectical) transi­
tion in which a genuine progress through error can be detected. In- 
> 
deed, it is only because the presuppositions underlying the question-
and-answer complexes which make up the history of thought are 
so related that there can be historical progress at aU. 1 8 4 
Rubinoff says that the historian in his critical function acts as a 
catalyst of the historical process, and brings about progress by means 
of his critical rejection of presuppositions and, consequently, of the 
complex of questions and answers whose presuppositions they are. 
1 8 2 See ibid. 
183 Ш., 
p. 254. 
184 H>id., pp. 255-256. 

202 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
This critical rejection of presuppositions comprises two functions, first 
a rejection of presuppositions arrived at irrationaUy, that is, by a dog­
matic fixation which refuses the critical examination and by prejudices. 
Secondly there is critical rejection of presuppositions hitherto fruit­
ful in a previous standpoint, but no longer adequate to present prob­
lems which they themselves have precipitated. Such rejected presup­
positions are false, not as failing to conform to an abstract criterion 
of truth but for the historical reason that they are necessary forms of 
error on a developing scale of truth. 1 8 5 It is in this way that past 
philosophical systems are accepted, rejected or modified, inasmuch 
as their presuppositions are rated true or false through criticism oper­
ating by dialecticaUy ordering them on a scale of forms. Rubinoff cites 
CoUingwood's criticism of Aristotle in his Essay on Metaphysics as a 
good example of the evaluation of absolute presuppositions as regards 
their truth or falsity. 1 8 6 
Rubinoff's conclusion regarding CoUingwood's treatment of abso­
lute presuppositions in his Essey is as foUows: 
CoUingwood himself declares that precisely the same consid­
erations which led him to his theory of the history of phüosophy 
led him also to his view of the nature of metaphysics. I have al­
ready argued that the former—which CoUingwood explicitly re­
gards as an appUcation of the logic of question and answer (A,58)— 
rests upon the doctrine of the concrete universal and constitutes, 
therefore, a dialectical history of errors. But U the logic of question 
and answer functions for metaphysics as it does for the history of 
phUosophy, then my contention, based on the foregoing examples, 
that metaphysics is an appUcation of the logic of question and 
answer to the organization of the historyof absolute presupposi­
tions into a scale of forms (or concrete universal), is given further 
support.187 
Rubinoff adds that, for CoUingwood, metaphysics as the histor­
ical science of absolute presuppositions of questioning may be re­
garded as a dialectical history of errors, and, as such, rests on two 
related sets of concepts. The first is the concept of logical efficacy, ac­
cording to which presuppositions are judged to be 'right' but not 
judged to be 'true or false.' The second is the concept of historical 
change, according to which absolute presuppositions are aUgned on 
a scale of forms in which "(a) one set of presuppositions is replaced 
1 8 5 See ibid., p. 260. 
is« gee ibid. 
187 B>id., pp. 261-262. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
203 
by another and Qo) there is exhibited in this change a gradual pro­
gress towards t r u t h , " 1 8 8 from which they are rated true or false. 
The attitude to error of realist propositional thinking and of dia­
lectical thinking is thus quite opposite. Realist propositional logic 
understands error in an absolute sense, and it therefore is to be 
detected for the purpose of rejecting it. But in dialectical logic, error 
is functional. It is a catalyst of the rnind in forging out the truth, and 
therefore a necessary means to the truth. The error of a given form 
on a dialectical scale of forms is systematically related to the form 
which, in relation to it, is seen to be true. In dialectical logic, there­
fore, rightness and falseness can coexist as regards any particular 
proposition. 
The same considerations apply to the dialectic of standpoints 
in Speculum Mentis. Each standpoint is 'right' and yet 'false'. For 
it is only by committing the errors from which the differentiae of 
the separate standpoints derive, that the abstract construction of art, 
reUgion, science, and history come into existence at aU. Thus CoUing­
wood could easUy have asserted, about the forms of experience in 
general . . . that art looks at reality from the point of view of the 
imagination; religion from the point of view of faith; science from 
the point of view of the abstract concept; history from the point of 
view of the concrete fact. There is no point in asking which is the 
'right' point of view. Each is the only one possible for the person 
who adopts it. 1 8 9 
CoUingwood's metaphysical analysis, which according to Rubinoff 
is modelled on Kant's transcendental analytic, and thus a regressive 
analysis into the conditions of scientUic thought, is identUied with 
history. For Kant, the mind's deterrnining forms belong to the perma­
nent and unchanging structure of the human mind. For CoUingwood, 
the absolute determinants which condition aU our thinking are a priori 
structures which are themselves subjected to historical change in 
accordance with Collingwood's position, and the being of mind is 
historical, in contrast to the being of nature which is cycUcal and repeti­
tive. 
For Kant the behaviour of mind derives from a permanent and 
unchanging structure and the principles derived from this structure 
are eternal truths. For CoUingwood, the a priori is itseU a product 
of historical change. Transcendental analytics is therefore history. 
The presuppositions according to which we think and to which we 
are (under certain conditions) obliged to commit ourselves, are 
188 Drid., p. 264. 
189 lbid., p. 267. 

204 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Hkewise subject to historical change. In other words, the very a priori 
criteria according to which the objectivity of historical metaphysics 
is guaranteed are themselves not only historicany grounded but his-
toricaUy relative.190 
Rubinoff reconciles the a priori and transcendental character of the 
absolute presuppositions with their historical relativity by distinguish­
ing the dialectical sense of these terms from that of propositionaJ. logic. 
They are the categories of the rnind whose essence is historical, so 
that its categories are seriaUy ordered according to a dynamicaUy evolv­
ing scale of forms. 
Their meaning and truth do not depend simply upon their cor­
respondence with objectively existing facts. To apprehend the truth 
of such principles is not Uke apprehending the truth of the axioms 
and definitions of geometry. They are not analytic. Nor are they 
purely synthetic, being whoUy derived from, and verifiable only by 
means of, experience. They are, as I have arready suggested, a special 
kind of synthetic a priori. They derive from the categories of mind, 
and are entaUed by the statement that mind exists. But, since the 
essence of mind is historicity, each category has its own history 
which takes the form not of a random sequence but of a progres­
sive or serial scale of forms. 1 9 1 
The a priori and transcendental character of absolute presupposi­
tions must therefore be understood in terms of mind as a concrete 
universal and the existence of the mind as identical with its action. 
Thus the essential meaning of the statement, Mind exists, 
changes as the scale develops. The statement, "AU thought is for 
the sake of action," for example, which is an absolute presupposi­
tion of experience in general, can only be understood in terms of 
a concrete universal whose meaning and truth value, although it 
changes from age to age, is nevertheless connected in a coherent 
system. For this reason, the history of past thought is never final. 
Each generation must reconstruct the past for itseU, and in so doing, 
revealto itself the a priori principles which Ue at the basis of expe­
rience.192 
Becoming conscious of the logical inconsistency, that is, uncon-
supponabUity, of absolute presuppositions either results in, or is indi­
cated by, corresponding felt strains in lived experience. The dialectic 
between presuppositions as implicated in lived experience and as ex-
plicitated by thought gives rise to strains which constitute the dialec­
tical driving force of history. 
1 9 0 Rnd., p. 286. 
1 9 1 wid. 
1 9 2 Md., pp. 286-287. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
205 
Becorrung consdous of the principles which are impUdt in expe­
rience leads in some cases to a recognition that there is a basic in­
consistency between the impUcit presuppositions of an experience 
and its expUcit presuppositions. The result is that the latter are 
replaced by the former. Such changes are neither random nor irra­
tional. They are, on the contrary, progressive, having the charac­
teristics of a scale of forms. The idea of the past is therefore a scale 
of forms which takes shape in the course of the mind's own dis­
covery of itsetf. It is an innate idea which is at once both the source 
of the activity of historical thinking and the product of that activity; 
for it is only by means of this activity itself that "we endeavour to 
provide this innate idea with detailed content. And this we do by 
using the present as evidence for its own past" (Ш,247).193 
As regards the rightness and the truthfulness of absolute presup­
positions Rubinoff says finaUy: 
The presuppositions according to which we think and act are 
the product of this a priori imagination. We can never subject them 
to any special kind of proof, but the whole point of CoUingwood's 
argument is to show that this is not necessary. Their meaningful-
ness, in other words, does not depend upon this kind of verifica­
tion. The very fact that they are absolute presuppositions is proof 
that they are 'right'. As for their ultimate truth when judged from 
the absolute standpoint, there is no way of determining this except 
by continuing to use them until we are obUged to abandon them. 1 9 4 
H. A Problem of Consistency 
By way of conclusion of the latter section on the truth and falsity 
of absolute presuppositions, and of this whole chapter on absolute 
presuppositions, a return is made to the dU"ficulty highUghted at the 
beginning of the chapter. There it was remarked 1 9 5 that the presup­
positions of An Essay on Metaphysics seemed to introduce a dichotomy 
into CoUingwood's thought prejudical to the identity of form and 
content essential to dialectical unity in diversity, and therefore into . 
the rapprochement which CoUingwood sought as his Ufe's work. The 
earlier doctrine of supposition as integral to the activity of question­
ing seems quite consistent with concrete unity in diversity, whose 
inteUigibUity is in terms of internal retations within the concrete whole. 
But the presuppositions of the later Essay, as a priori to the experience 
of questioning (notwithstanding that, unUke Kant's a priori structures 
of the mind, these are historically conditioned and mutable) seem to 
193 Jbid., p. 287. 
194 
Md. 
1 9 5 See this chapter, above, pp. 155-156. 

206 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
introduce a rift between the experience which is to be (questioned 
and) explained and the explicative factors, namely these absolute pre­
suppositions. Rather than internal relations between members of a 
whole we now seem to be dealing with a subsumption, in Kantian 
fashion, of experience under a quasi experience-transcending deter¬
minant. 
One way of interpreting CoUingwood's position so as to main­
tain consistency with earlier works is to regard the absolute presup­
positions, taken in their consteUational unity, as a particular concep­
tion which consciousness has of itself at any stage of its development 
as regards the manner in which it sums up its past within itseU 
precisely as this seU-summation gives direction (articulated in the form 
of relevantly arising questions) to its own self-unfolding towards its 
future. They would thus be in the nature of "soundings" 1 9 6 indica­
tive of the determination of seU-developing consciousness at this or 
that particular stage of its development. Dogmatism would regard 
them as static entities, whereas dialectical thought would regard them 
as overlapping classes in a scale of forms. 
Absolute presuppositions would thus seem to be embodied in the 
factual information which forms the body of the question, somewhat 
in the way in which Stephan Strasser197 explains that a "fact" em­
bodies in its structure a methodic idea. Strasser's methodic idea would 
seem more or less to correspond to Collingwood's presuppositions, 
including his absolute presuppositions. 
In this way, conscious experience can stUl be regarded as an all-
embracing totality of unity in diversity, and thus stUl be able to be 
understood consistently in terms of the concrete universal as elabor­
ated in Chapter 4, above. 
But this favorable interpretation is not without its own internal 
strains. Why speak now of presuppositions rather than suppositions 
as previously? A n obvious reply is that they are presuppositions with 
respect to this or that particular question, or this or that complex of 
questions and answers, whereas with respect to the activity of mind 
as a whole they are its suppositions. И we begin with this or that ques­
tion, or this or that complex of questions and answers, and ask the 
Kantian question "What are its (or their) unconditioned conditions?" 
we would eventuaUy come to its (or their) absolute presuppositions. 
They are absolute presuppositions, or unconditioned conditions with 
1 , 6 See CoUingwood's The New Leviathan, pp. 63-64. 
1 9 7 See Strasser's Phenomenology and the Human Sciences, Rttsburgh, Duquesne Uni­
versity Press, 1963, pp. U4-125. 

Questioning, Presupposing and Metaphysics 
207 
respect to this or to that particular question, or to this or that partic­
ular complex of questions and answers. They are thus absolute only 
in a restricted order and not simply absolute. For if one looks at them 
in the total context of the mind's activity, they are not absolute but 
relative, and it is precisely as such that they have the truth or falsity 
which Rubinoff accords to them in the dialectical sense. Looked at 
from the life of the mind globaUy, from the absolute aspect, that of 
philosophy which views precisely in terms of the concrete universal, 
the concrete totality of aU that is, the absolute presuppositions are not 
absolute but relative, and this on two counts. 
Firstly, these absolute presuppositions are conditioned (therefore 
not unconditioned) by their own retroactive feedback, inasmuch as 
the question and answer complex to which they effectively give rise 
and condition can retroact over these same absolute presuppositions 
so as to modify, or even displace them. 
Secondly, they are conditioned (therefore not unconditioned, so 
not absolute) by reason of the lUe forms, together with their absolute 
presuppositions, which preceded them and which gave way to them. 
tf, therefore, one looks at the overaU activity of the mind, rather 
than at the particular cluster of question and answer complexes, the 
absolute presuppositions are not reaUy absolute but are just as condi­
tioned as the question and answer complexes which they themselves 
condition. 
It is submitted that, U one looks to the absoluteness of absolute 
presuppositions, rather than at their implication in this or that ques­
tion and answer complex, there is reaUy only one strictly absolute 
presupposition in the whole Collingwoodian enterprise, namely that 
of seU-positing mind. This ties up with what CoUingwood said in his 
Essay on Philosophical Method198 regarding the object of phUosophy as 
being one sustained and constantly recurring starting point, in which 
the object cannot be posited in thought without at the same time being 
posited in actuality. In this radical, unique presupposition, expressed 
by the dictum " M i n d is what it does," Collingwood is laying down 
his whole phUosophical system in germ, in which act of positing sup­
posal overlaps with assertion. The positing of this starting point is 
implicitly the positing of aU that wUl develop into explicitness by the 
mind's questioning activity which is one with what the mind is. It 
may be further remarked, I think, that this ever recurring starting point, 
ever recurring according to dUferent forms of itseU, is the one eternal 
1 9 8 See pp. 158-159 and 169-175. See also above, Chapter 4, pp. 132-138. 

208 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
reaUty in CoUingwood's thought, notwithstanding his aversion for 
eternal realities. It is eternaUy so that " M i n d is what it does," not­
withstanding that what it does is to continually transform itseU. 
Since history according to CoUingwood is the unfolding of this 
self-developing mind, the manUestation of creative mind in aU its 
multUarious variety and concretions, whose logic of manUestation is 
by way of question and answer, it is fitting now to pass to a consider­
ation of Collingwood's notion of history as the story of seU-develop-
ing mind. 

CHAPTER SlX 
History as the Science of the Mind 
A. History as Knowledge of Concrete Fact 
The position of Speculum Mentis regarding history is that "the object 
of history is fact as such," 1 and that "the historical consciousness 
asserts concrete fact." 2 The scientific consciousness denies the con­
creteness of this fact in regarding facts as mere instances of an abstract 
scientific law. 3 Attempts to raise history to the rank of a science by 
extracting general laws from it end in bankruptcy. 4 In science, the 
general law is the end and the facts merely the means to it. Whether 
Newton's apple really fell or not is of little moment as long as one 
grasps Newton's law of gravitation. But it is just the opposite in history; 
the individual fact is the end and the general law is important only 
1 R. G. Collingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 211. 
2 lbid., p. 208. 
3 See ibid. 
4 See ColUngwood's 1930 paper "The Philosophy of History" in WiHiam Deb-
bins' Essays in the Philosophy ofHistory by R. G. Collingwood, Austin, University of 
Texas Press, 1965, p. 133. Probably the best known currently discussed attempt to 
explain history in this way is what is known as the Popper-Hempel Covering Law 
Theory. See Wffliam Dray, Laws and Explanation in History, London, Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 1957, Ch. 1 for a statement of this position. See also Henry Veatch, Two 
Logics, Evanston, Northwestern University Press, 1969, pp. 222-241 for a discussion 
of this theory from the logical aspect. 
209 

210 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
to the extent that it enables us to deterrnine the fact. 5 The nineteenth 
century contributes to the philosophy of history by emphasizing the 
individuality of the historian's object and the generality of the scien­
tist's.6 
B. History as Knowledge of the Past 
CoUingwood says that "history is the study of the past; to be an 
historian is to know how things came to be what they are." 7 But since 
a past is something which everything has, as the explanation as to 
how it came to be what it is, the historical aspect of things is a universal 
and necessary aspect of them. 8 Science studies the nature of selected 
parts of the world as a whole, whereas phUosophy is thinking about 
the world as a whole. The biological scientist studies organisms as 
they are special parts of the world. But when Whitehead says that 
the world as a whole is an organism, he is taUdng as a phUosopher, 
not as a biologist. Thus, whereas science studies the particular and 
contingent characteristics of things, phUosophy studies the universal 
and necessary characteristics of things. 9 There can be a phUosophy 
of something only U that something is not merely a fragment of the 
world " b u t . . . an aspect of the world as a whole—a universal and 
necessary characteristic of things." 1 0 The justification of our abUity 
to speak of the phUosophy of art, religion, history, etc., is that art or 
reUgion or history is somehow a universal and necessary character­
istic of things and not merely a particular and contingent character­
istic of a certain group of things. 1 1 So, U we can legitimately speak 
of a phUosophy of history, history must be not merely a trade or amuse­
ment but a universal and necessary human interest, that is, an in­
terest in some universal and necessary aspect of the world. 1 2 Since 
the time of Plato it has been regarded that genuine knowledge "must 
be universal, not particular; necessary, not contingent; of eternal 
truths, not of transitory facts." 1 3 Since everything in the world has 
a past, "history as a study of the past is therefore a universal and ne-
5 See R. G. CoUingwood, "The Philosophy of History," in WiUiam Debbins' Essays 
in the Philosophy ofHistory by R. G. CoUingwood, p. 132. 
6 See ibid. 
7 See tTrid., p. 124. 
8 See ibid. 
» See ibid., p. 121. 
1 0 Rrid., p. 122. 
1 1 See ibid. 
1 2 See ibid., p. 123. 
1 3 mid. 

History as the Science of Mind 
211 
cessary human interest—interesting to anybody who is interested in 
anything—and not the affair of a special professional group." 1 4 
C.Philosophy and the Method of History 
From the vantage point of his fiftieth year, when he was writing 
his Autobiography, CoUingwood saw his life's work as that of effect­
ing a rapprochement between phUosophy and history. 1 5 m addition to 
demanding that phUosophers respect standards of historical think­
ing when they are dealing with the history of their own subject, 
CoUingwood insists that a phUosophy of history is required of them, 
in the sense of a special branch of phUosophical inquiry which would 
investigate the special types of problems that are raised by historical 
thinking. But the reaUzation of the need for a new branch of phUosophy 
soon developed into a demand for a new kind of phUosophy, a new 
way of phUosophising. 
From the seventeenth century onwards, the problems that since 
ancient Greek times have gone by the name of Physics proved readUy 
solvable by the new methods of mathematics and experiment. Man 
now had the means of discovering aU nature's secrets; it was no longer 
merely a matter of gaping at the natural world; nature merely pre­
sented riddles which man had now learnt the trick of answering. 1 6 
Man did aU the asking; putting nature to the torture untU she gave 
him the answer to his questions. 1 7 
1 4 Bid., p. 124. 
1 5 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 77. See also L. Rubinoff, Colling­
wood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, pp. 3-5. 
1 6 Descartes, whom CoUingwood regards as one of the three masters on interro­
gation, regards the role of experience in Physics as that of providing problems which 
the inteUigence wUl solve by its method of intuition and deduction. " S i l'exp£rience 
ne peut pas r6soudre les questions, du moins, par eUe-mSme eUe ne trompe pas; ce 
qui lui permettra de jouer un role positif: celui de poser les problemes que l'entende-
ment tentera de räsoudre par l'analyse. Un probleme est un ensemble de propositions 
obscures et complexes ä rendre intelligibles par l'intuition et la deduction: ces propo­
sitions renferment des natures composees qu'ü faut reduire en älements simples. S'in-
terroger sur l'origine des problemes, c'est se demander queUe est la source des natures 
composees."J.-L. AUard, LeMathematismedeDescartes, EcUtionsdel'Universit£dOt-
tawa, 1963, p. 80. The same author, in an unpubUshed paper, "The Role of Experience 
in the PhUosophy of Descartes," p. 12, writes: "Evidently, the problems concerning 
the material universe arise in the human mind through sense experience," and he 
cites A. Gewirtz, "Experience and the Non-Mathematical in the Cartesian Method," 
Journal ofthe History ofldeas, 1941, p. 192: "Observation and experiment, then, by 
supplying the subject matter for problems, are the necessary beginnings of the method 
when it is appUed to the investigation of nature." See ako Pt. 6 of Descartes' Discourse 
onMethod(pp. ^0-^lofVol.lofHaldaneandRoss' PhilosophicalWorksofDescartes), 
for Descartes' discussion of the relevance of observation and experiment in physics. 
1 7 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, pp. 77-78. 

212 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
But CoUingwood became convinced that just as "the chief business 
of seventeenth-century philosophy was to reckon with seventeenth-
century natural science" so "the chief business of twentieth-century 
philosophy is to reckon with twentieth-century history." 1 8 Until the 
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, historical studies were 
much in the same state of development as were the natural sciences 
before Gameo. Just as from that time onwards in natural science some­
thing big happened which enormously increased the speed of its pro­
gress and enlargement of its vision, so Ukewise about the end of the 
nineteenth century something similar was happening in history, 
perhaps not so spectacularly or rapidly, but none the less certainly. 
The writer of history tffl the end of the nineteenth century was 
restricted by scissors-and-paste methods to what the authorities said 
about a subject. Where there were no authorities nothing could be 
said. From early famüiarity with archaeological procedures 1 9 CoUing­
wood learned another foundation for historical method than that of 
scissors-and-paste, which "would teach you, not indeed everything, 
but a great deal, about subjects whose very existence must remain 
permanently unknown to historians who beUeved in authorities," and 
which methods "might be used to correct the authorities themselves, 
where they had been mistaken or untruthful." 2 0 Thus, the idea of the 
dependence of the historian on his authorities was exploded. 
CoUingwood says that the possibUities of such a new method could 
have been got from books written since Boucher de Perthes' gravel 
pits investigations became known (although Collingwood puts it on 
record that it was never easy for him to learn from books and news­
papers; a half hour with a student at an excavation site taught him 
more than a beautUuUy Ulustrated handbook or a friend's article on 
an excavation in The Times). 
I had learnt by first hand experience that history is not an affair 
of scissors-and-paste, but is much more like Bacon's notion of 
science. The historian has to decide exactly what he wants to know; 
and if there is no authority to teU him, as in fact (one learns in time) 
there never is, he has to find a piece of land or something that has 
18 Void., pp. 78-79. 
1 9 ". . . since I was three weeks old" when he says that his father "took me in 
a carpenter's bag . . . " An Autobiography, p. 80. 
2 0 Ibid. See also AUan Nevins' The Gateway to History, New York, Doubleday-
Anchor, revised edition 1962, Ch. 5, pp. 137-155 on "The Cheating Document," and 
Ch. 6, pp. 159-168 on "The Dubious Document." 

History as the Science of Mind 
213 
got the answer hidden in it, and get the answer out by fair means 
or foul. 2 1 
CoUingwood says that this is as far as his phUosophy of history 
got before he went up to Oxford where the revolution in historical 
method was already making headway since Sir Arthur Evans earlier 
in the century weU Ulustrated the new method by unearthing and re­
constructing the history of the bronze age Knossos.22 These discoveries 
had a drastic effect on the rewriting of Oxford ancient history. Every­
thing up till the first Olympiad was cut out. And Mommsen showed 
how the use of inscriptions could enable the historian to answer ques­
tions no one had hitherto dreamed of asking. Dragendorf classUied 
and, with others, began to date Samian pottery. The excavator could 
reconstruct the history of Roman cities not mentioned by any author­
ity, and establish events not mentioned previously in any books. Col­
lingwood accredits Haverfield, with whom he worked in his (CoUing­
wood's) early career, with embedding these new notions and tech­
niques at Oxford which completely transformed the study of the 
Roman Empire. But although Roman history was making tremendous 
strides under the new methods, Greek history was stUl in the grip 
of scissors-and-paste methods. 
According to a tradition going back to the seventeenth century, 
the methods of natural science received from phUosophers the most 
painstaking scrutiny. The books, lectures and conversations of these 
phUosophers gave Collingwood the impression that they did not have 
the least awareness of what was happening in regard to historical 
method. This, Collingwood thought, was particularly odd in regard 
to Oxford phUosophers, none of whom had any training in natural 
science, whereas practicaUy aU of them had read 'Greats' and had 
undergone advanced study in ancient history. Joseph's Logic perhaps 
comes closest, with a chapter on the Historical Method, which, on 
examination, turns out to be no more than the method used in natural 
science. CoUingwood regretted that not one of the thirty or forty pro­
fessional philosophers at Oxford gave himseU to the study of the 
method of history, since, however modest it may be in certainty, dig­
nity and utUity, history was stiU a respectable intellectual activity. This 
fact, together with the fact that obscure provinces of Roman Britain 
interested him, presented CoUingwood himseU with a chaUenge which 
demanded the invention of new methods. 
2 1 R. G. Collingwood, An Autobiography, p. 81. 
2 2 See ibid. See also C. W. Ceram, Gods, Graves and Scholars, New York, Knopf, 
revised edition of 1968, Ch. 8, pp. 61-72 on Evans, Crete and the Minotaur. 

214 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Obscure subjects, by forcing us to think harder and more sys­
tematically, sharpen our wits and thus enable us to dispel the fog 
of prejudice and superstition in which our minds are often wrapped 
when we think about what is familiar to us. 2 3 
Collingwood was thus led to believe that by concentrating on his­
torical methodology he might discover truths in the theory of 
knowledge which were hidden from the reaUsts because of their 'con­
ventional and second-hand' ideas about the methods of natural 
science. Current theories of scientUic method did indeed give recogni­
tion to the dependence of scientific knowledge on historical knowledge, 
but the expression of this was done in such a way as to suggest that 
it was hoped that the reader would not notice the fact. 
No one, when he said that scientific knowledge depended on 
experiment, meant that a given scientUic theory arose in the scien­
tist's mind contemporaneously with the experiment (or rather, 
experiments) upon which it was based. He meant that a scientist, 
in framing a theory, made use of certain historical knowledge in his 
possession, as to what experiments had been tried and what their 
results had been. It was a commonplace, though a concealed one, 
that aU 'scientmc' knowledge in this way involves an historical 
element; and it was clear to me that any philosopher who offered 
a theory of 'scientUic method', without being in a position to offer 
a theory of historical method, was defrauding his public by support­
ing his world on an elephant and hoping that nobody would ask 
what kept the elephant up. It was no mere question of adding a 
theory of historical method to the already existing theory of 'scien­
tUic' method. It was a question of making good a defect in current 
theories of 'scientUic' method by attending to an element in 'scien­
tific' knowledge about which there seemed to be a conspiracy of 
silence, namely the historical element.24 
CoUingwood foresaw the possibility of being on the threshold of 
a new age in which history would be as important to the world as 
natural science proved to be between the seventeenth and twentieth 
centuries. He felt that "the wise phUosopher would concentrate with 
2 3 CoUingwood's statement here summarises in a very succinct way what is reaUy 
the whole process of concrete dialectical thinking. The continuously sustained start­
ing point (see Chapter 4, above, pp. 128 et seq.) is known first obscurely; then, by 
systematic interrogation, the object is increasingly clarified, much in the same way 
as a landscape obscured by fog becomes clearer and clearer as the fog is dissipated. 
In the case of knowledge, the fog arises by reason of low grade, that is, uncritical, 
unquestioned, thinking, such as is found in the dogmatic mode of thinking which, 
according to Collingwood, characterizes reaUst, propositional thought. (See also this 
chapter, below, pp. 249 et seq.). 
2 4 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 87. 

History as the Science of Mind 
215 
aU his might on the problems of history, at whatever cost, and so do 
his share in laying the foundations of the future." 2 5 
D. Socio^ultural Need for a Sound Theory of 
Historical Methodology 
CoUingwood saw the 1914-1918 war as "an unprecedented 
triumph for natural science." The Baconian promise of power to control 
the forces of nature was fuffiUed, but it turned out to be a power to 
destroy the bodies and souls of men more rapidly than any preced­
ing human agency. Its triumph paved the way not only for others, 
such as improvements in transport, sanitation, medicine and com­
merce, but also, and above aU, for the next war. 
But the war (of 1914-1918) was also an unprecedented disgrace 
to the human intellect. Few of the combatants wanted it; things in­
creasingly got out of hand; fighting ended without victory on either 
side. The contrast was glaring between the success of the modern 
European mind in controUing physical forces and natural realities and 
its utter inabUity to control human situations and mental forces. 
It seemed aUnost as U man's power to control 'Nature' had been 
increasing pan passu with a decrease in his power to control human 
affairs. . . . But it was a plain fact that the gigantic increase since 
about 1600 in his power to control Nature had not been accompanied 
by a corresponding increase, or anything Uke it, in his power to con­
trol human situations. And it was also a plain fact that the U1 effects 
of any faUure to control a human situation were more serious now 
than they had ever been before, in direct proportion to the 
magnitude of the new powers put by natural science . . . into the 
hands of the evU and the good, the fool and the wise man. 2 6 
CoUingwood insists that the need of our time is progress in our 
abUity to control human affairs sirnUar to that made in the control of 
nature since the sixteenth century Baconian revolution. 
CoUingwood refused to consider the possibUity that Psychology, 
the 'Science of Mind' being newly developed byFreud and others, 
could perhaps put into our hands an effective means of controUing 
human affairs as natural science had done in regard to the natural 
world. His reason is that "the mind, regarded in this way [that is, 
scientificaUy, by the methods of observation and experimentation 
25 Tbid., pp. 87-88. One may wonder whether he might not be indulging in the 
kind of prediction he regards as out of bounds for the historian. 
2 6 R. G. CoHingwood, An Autobiography, p. 91. See ateo Chapter 8, below, pp. 
341-343, for a reconsideration of the problem expressed here as the problem of urgent 
personal concern which dominated the whole of Collingwood's thought. 

216 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
appropriate to nature] ceases to be a mind at aU." 2 7 CoUingwood recog­
nises that psychology has its traditionally recognised legitimate study 
as the scientific investigation of sensation, appetite and its connected 
emotions, 2 8 the science of the body in its psychological sense, that 
is, as identical with 'feeling.' 2 9 Collingwood acknowledges that Freud 
reached a high scientUic level in dealing with problems in psycho­
therapy, but he also says that he reached an unprecedented low in 
dealing with ethics, politics, religion and social structure. 3 0 
Not to psychology, the 'pseudo-science of mind,' 3 1 but to history 
CoUingwood turned for "the help we need in diagnosing our moral 
and political problems. . . . precisely because history offered us some­
thing altogether dUferent from rules, namely insight." 3 2 But "that man 
should come to a better understanding of human affairs by studying 
history," that history was "the thing which in future might play a 
part in civUized lUe analogous to that of natural science in the past" 
could not be admitted U history were understood as a scissors-and-
paste affair. 3 3 However, it is quite otherwise "tf the historian resembles 
the natural scientist in asking his own questions, and insisting on an 
answer," and provided he is not asking "questions whose answers, 
however interesting, were of no practical use." 3 4 
Two questions have to be settled before history's status as the 
science relevant to human situations can be admitted. The first con­
cerns the status of the object of history, the human past, and the 
27 Md., p. 93. See also ColUngwood's The New Leviathan, Chapter 1, pp. 5-7, para­
graphs 1.7, 1.83, 1.84. In his Essey on Metaphysics, p. 114, Collingwood refers to 
". . . the modern methods of psychology, the science offeeling." (Emphasis added.) 
Alan Donagan, in his The Later Philosophy ofR. G. Collingwood, p. 162, comments on 
CoUingwood's latter statement as foUows: ". . . CoUingwood denounced as the beset­
ting sin of psychology [its] attempt to study the processes of thought by the methods 
which are appropriate only to feeling." In his " O n Human Nature and Human 
History" in The Idea ofHistory, p. 231, CoUingwood says that "these irrational elements 
[in the mind, not as it is spirit but as it is soul, that is, as it is concerned with the 
body as feeling—see The New Leviathan, pp. 16-17, paragraphs 3.6-3.73] are the subject 
matter of psychology." 
2 8 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 95. 
2 9 See R. G. CoUingwood, The New Leviathan, pp. 15-16, pars. 3.13, 3.54, 3.6. 
3 0 See R. G. CoUingwood, AnAutobiography, p. 95. WUUamJames' psychological 
study of reUgion, The Varieties ofReligious Experience, is especially singled out for attack 
by Collingwood. See also L. Rubinoff's editing of ColUngwood's views on the 
phflosophy of religion in the volume Faith & Reason, Chicago, Quadrangle Books, 1968, 
p. 11. See also Alan Donagan, The LaterPhilosophyofR. G. Collingwood, pp. 159-168. 
See also Collingwood's An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 101-132. 
3 1 R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 103-105. 
3 2 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 101. 
3 3 See ibid., pp. 95-96. 
3 4 Ibid., p. 96. 

History as the Science of Mind 
217 
practicality of historical knowledge. How does knowledge of the 
human past enable us to control human situations, instead of letting 
them get out of control, as instanced by the 1914-1918 war? 
Regarding the status of the object, CoUingwood insists that the 
past which the historian questions is not a dead past but a living past, 
a past in some way persisting into the present. 3 5 The historian can 
answer questions about the past only on condition that he has evi­
dence about it, which evidence, U it is something the historian can 
be said to 'have,' must be existing here and now in the historian's 
present world. An event which left no traces in the present world could 
not be known, since there would be no 'evidence' for it. 
But to leave 'a trace' of itseU in the present world, a past event 
would have to be something more than a material body or state of 
a material body U it is to function as evidence. The middle ages can 
be studied by a modern historian only because they are not dead, 
which means that not only are their writings, etc., still in existence 
as material objects, but also that their ways of thinking are still in 
existence as ways in which people stUl think; for example, the habit 
of reading and understanding Latin has survived. Indeed such ways 
of thinking can be resurrected from the dead after a long period of 
discontinuity, as, for example, the ancient Egyptian and Mesopotamian 
languages.36 
CoUingwood says that by about 1920 he arrived at his first principle 
of a philosophy of history, that "the past which an historian studies 
is not a dead past, but a past which in some sense is still living in 
the present," which he then expressed by saying that "history is con­
cerned not with 'events' but with 'processes.' " 3 7 
This notion of 'process' is most important to understand Colling­
wood's dialectical line of thought in regard to history. Processes are 
not for him static identities having a weU defined beginning and end, 
but entities which turn into one another. If we consider a process Pj 
which turns into process P2 we cannot designate any dividing line 
at which P^ stops and P2 begins. Pi does not stop but continues on 
in the changed form P2. Likewise P2 cannot be said to have a weU 
defined beginning; it was previously going on in the earlier form P^. 
3 5 See ibid., p. 96. See also CoUingwood's The Idea ofHistory, p. 282: "When a 
man thinks historically, he has before him certain documents or relics of the past. 
His business is to discover what that past was which has left these relics behind it." 
3 6 See R. G. Collingwood, An Autobiography, p. 97. See also H.-I. Marrou, The 
Meaning ofHistory, p. 119, regarding the resurrecting of an ancient language. 
3 7 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 97. 

218 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
In history there are no beginnings and no endings. History books may 
begin and end, but the events they describe do not. 3 8 
CoUingwood argues that U Pi has left traces of itseU in P2 in such 
a way that an historian living in P2 can interpret the evidence and 
see that what is now P2 was once Pj, it foUows that 'the traces' of 
Pi persisting in the present are not, as it were, the corpse of a dead 
Pi but the real Pj itseU Uving and active, although incapsulated in the 
other form of itself which is P2.
3 9 
3 8 See ibid., p. 98. This is in sharp contrast to Aristotle's notion of an event as 
something 'definite/ as when Aristotle writes in the Posterior Analytics, Book 2, Ch. 
Ώ., 95b (see p. 173 of Richard McKeon's edition of Aristotle's Basic Works, N.Y., Random 
House, 1941) that ". . . past events are Umits and atomic . . . just as points are not 
'contiguous' neither are past events, since both are indivisible." H.-I. Marrou in his 
The Meaning ofHistory, p. 48, says that because historical events do not abruptly begin 
or abruptly end the historian must "begin with an introduction which indicates the 
antecedents of the phenomenon that is studied. [The historical account] must also 
include an epUogue that aims to answer the question: What happened afterward? 
The study must not begin and end abruptly, Uke the movie screen that is lighted at 
the start of the fUm ordy to be darkened suddenly at the end." 
3 9 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 98. Compare with this descrip­
tion the unfolding of the Ufe-forms from one to the other in Speculum Mentis. See also 
the evolution of the meaning of the State from Plato's Republic to Hobbes' Leviathan, 
Chapter 2, above, pp. 53-54. What we are involved with here is not an abstract universal 
but a concrete universal, which was dealt with in Chapter 4, above. See also in this 
regard, L. Rubinoff's Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 155: ". . . the Republic 
is an account of the 'poUs' of the fifth century B. C. whUe the Leviathan is an account 
of the absolute monarchy of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in England. It 
is true that both the 'poUs' and the 'absolute monarchy' are 'states.' But the 'state' 
is not an eternal and unchanging substance; it is an rristoricaHy changing dynamic 
process which recognizes profound and essential differences between one historical 
manifestation and another. As Collingwood puts it in Speculum Mentis, summing up 
the whole matter: 'The state is an historical, not a scientific conception—a concrete, 
not an abstract universal' (Speculum Mentis, p. 174). 
"This conception of the state as a concrete universal is explored further in an arti­
cle of 1929 entitled 'PoUtical Action.' The state, Collingwood argues, is generaUy con­
ceived as a substance having an essence and attributes. This is the concept of the state 
as an abstract universal. FoUowing this concept, poUtical theory conceives itseU either 
as an attempt to deduce a priori the impUcations of this essence, or as an inductive 
inquiry about the various attitudes of sovereignty found to exist in various states. All 
such theories, deductive or inductive, are agreed in accepting the limitations of the 
category of substance and attribute ('PoUtical Action,' p. 155). CoUingwood proposes 
to approach political theory from a different angle. Instead of putting the central issue 
in the form of the question, 'What are the attributes of the state?' he proposes to put 
it in the form of the question 'What is political action?': 'That is to say, I propose 
to take my stand, not on the category of substance and attribute, but on the category 
of action.' " 
For CoUingwood, the mind is not a substance but pure activity: "The mind is 
what it does." In his The Idea ofHistory, p. 222, he says "Hume was therefore right 
to maintain that there is no such thing as 'spiritual substance,' nothing that a mind 
is, distinct from and underlying what it does." Again, in Religion and Philosophy, p. 
34, CoUingwood says that "[the] idea of the mind as a thing distinguished from its 

History as the Science of Mind 
219 
So, if Pi symbolizes a certain characteristic of a certain historical 
period (say, the polis of Plato's Republic in ancient Greece) and P2 
symbolizes the corresponding although different (and, therefore, con­
tradictory or incompatible) characteristic of a succeeding period (the 
absolute monarchy of Hobbes' Leviathan in CromweUian England) the 
successor P2 always contains a survival of Ρχ. P2 is not an opaque setf-
contained 'atomic' unit, but is "transparent, so that Pi shines through 
it and their colours combine into one." 4 0 Collingwood warns of the 
dangers of too thoroughly delmeating the characteristic features of 
this or that period, which is "to forget that the sUk of the period is 
in reality always a shot sUk, combining in itseU contradictory colors." 4 1 
CoUingwood accuses the reaUsts of inabUity to come up with a 
viable theory of history because they refuse to admit the reality of 
becoming, with the result that they inevitably reduce 'becoming' 
own activities does not seem to be really tenable; the mind is what it does; it is not 
a thing that thinks, but a consciousness; not a thing that wffls, but an activity." This 
activist, anti-substantiaUst notion of mind is fundamental to CoUingwood's thought 
and is maintained throughout his works. This means that the mind's activity, there­
fore the mind itself, is essentiaUy historical. That is, for CoUingwood, the activity which 
is the mind is an historically, dialecticaUy unfolding activity in aU its forms, namely, 
political, reUgious, artistic, scientific, historical and phUosophical. And, as Otis Lee 
weU puts it in his "Dialectic and Negation," in The Review ofMetaphysics, I (1947), 
p. 11: "for dialectic, change is sheer creativity. There is only creation and generation, 
with no decay or passing out of existence. . . . The present includes the past, which 
has not reaUy gone; and even the future is real, though it does not yet exist, for spirit 
is eternal." Correlate this with what is said later, in Chapter 9, below, pp.378-383, 
regarding the reality of past, present and future as modaUties of human existence. 
It has been shown, in Chapter 4, above, that CoUingwood's Logic of Question and 
Answer is a dialectical logic based not on the abstract universal of Substance and Acci­
dent Propositional Logic which founds Science (in the sense of Exact [mathematical] 
and Experimental Science) but upon the concrete universal whose differentiations are 
internal to its identity, or 'identity in difference.' The object of history, as also of moral­
ity and political action, is a concrete universal, a dialectical, dynamic, ongoing entity. 
Chapter 9, below, wUl take up the question of the logic of historical inquiry and of 
history as a concrete universal. 
v 
4 0 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 98. In The New Leviathan, p. 65, pars. 
9.5, 9.51, CoUingwood caUs this persistence of the past in the present the Law of 
Primitive Survivals, which "runs as foUows: When A is modified into B there survives 
in any example of B, side by side with the function B which is the modified form of A, an 
element ofA in its primitive or unmodified state." Once again, this is a case of a concrete 
universal, or unity in diversity, or identity in dUference, or overlap of classes in a 
scale of dialecticaUy developing forms which Ues at the basis of ColUngwood's logical 
theory. See also Alan Donagan, The Later Philosophy ofR. G. Collingwood, pp. 28-30, 
on the Law of Primitive Survivals. The blending compared to the combination of a 
variety of colours into one is no doubt the work of the creative imagination if one 
considers what CoUingwood writes in "The Historical Imagination" in The Idea of 
History, pp. 231-249, together with his profound description of the way imagination 
operates creatively in his Principles of Art, pp. 142-144. 
4 1 R. G. Collingwood, An Autobiography, p. 98. 

220 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
propositions into 'being' propositions. In such a reduction "the true 
proposition 'Pi becomes P2' " is made to analyse into "the complex 
of propositions 'Pi is Pi', 'Pi is not P2', 'Pi ends where P2 begins', 
'P2 is P2', and 'P2 is not Pi', aU of them either tautologous or false." 4 2 
Returning to the question whether history could provide a school 
of moral and political wisdom,CoUingwood rejects the old pragmatic 
idea, since it was based on the scissors-and-paste conception in which 
the past is a dead past about which nothing more can be known ex­
cept what authorities have said about it. Such knowledge is useless 
as a guide to action, since history never exactly repeats itseU, so that 
any problem before me now is never sufficiently like any problem 
described by my authorities to justify application of their solution to 
my problem. CoUingwood insists that it is the historian's business 
to reveal the less obvious features hidden from a careless eye in the 
present situation. "What history can bring to moral and political lUe 
is a trained eye for the situation in which one has to act," 4 3 just as 
the trained woodsman can say 'there is a tiger in this grass' whereas 
an ignorant traveUer wffl see nothing but grass and trees. But, in addi­
tion, the historian must not merely be able to reveal the special features 
of the situation but also provide the rules for acting in such a situa­
tion, just as it is not much use detecting a tiger in the grass unless 
a rUle can be provided to shoot i t . 4 4 CoUingwood felt that two things 
were necessary U history was to provide that guidance in action. 
Firstly, U you are looking for ready-made rules for deaUng with 
situations you should look to natural science for them, just as U you 
want a gun the place to go is to a gunsmith. The bankruptcy of civU­
ization between the seventeenth and twentieth centuries was due to 
4 2 CoUingwood says that he wrote the substance of these thoughts in a short book 
and sent a typed copy to his friend Guido de Ruggiero, but that, upon writing his 
Autobiography he destroyed his own only copy together with the manuscript of the 
unpublished "Truth and Contradiction." See his Autobiography, p. 99. See also L. 
Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 397, for further information on 
the "Truth and Contradiction" manuscript. LesUe Armour, in his The ConceptofTruth, 
Assen, Van Gorcum, 1969, p. 210, n. 1, states that he feels that "it seems unUkely 
that there was, originaUy, only one copy of Truth and Contradiction . . . and a copy 
may some day turn up." 
4 3 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 100. 
4 4 Such problems as these, which CoUingwood says history is competent to 
diagnose and solve, are weU discussed in the difficulties that arise in legal enactment 
and appUcation of legal rules, in Gidon GottUeb's The Logic ofChoice, London, AUen 
and Unwin, 1968. It is especiaUy revealing that the logical problems of legal proce­
dure have characteristics simUar to the difficulty of applying induction and deduc­
tion to historical thought. See especiaUy Chapter 2, pp. 14-32, of Gottlieb's The Logic 
of Choice. 

History as the Science of Mind 
221 
over-reHance on natural sdence and its capadty to provide ready-made 
rules. The result was a negled to acquire the insight needed to decide 
which rules apply not in a predefined situation but in the one in which 
one found oneself. 
It was precisely because history offered us something altogether 
different from rules, namely insight, that could afford us the help 
we needed in diagnosing our moral and political problems.*5 
Secondly, there are situations which can be easily handled with­
out any appeal to ready-made rules, provided you have insight into 
them. All you need in such cases is to see what the situation is, then 
you can straightway extemporize a satisfactory way of dealing with 
it. H you are sure that it is a tiger in the grass, and that tigers are things 
to be shot at, the thing to do is to take a rifle with you . . . but be 
sure it is not your own child which turns out to be playing in the grass. 
CoUingwood is not referring to actions which are spontaneous and 
unreflected responses to stimuli, but to the kind of action an agent 
performs because he knows or believes himseU to be in a certain sit­
uation. And by acting according to rules CoUingwood says he means 
4 5 R. G. CoUingwood, AnAutobiography, p. 101. The 'insight' which CoUingwood 
repeatedly attributes to the historian seems to mean nothing other than 'thought know­
ing thought,' for 'thought' according to CoUingwood is the 'inner' ('inside') dimen­
sion of an event whose physical characteristics are its 'outer' or 'external' dimension, 
about which the natural sciences are concerned. Whereas the natural scientist knows 
the outer face of the event, the historian knows its 'inner' side, because he knows 
the thought behind the event. 'Inner' knowledge, which is proper to the historian, 
is knowledge of 'the thought' behind or within a given event. See CoUingwood's "The 
Subject-Matter of History" in The Idea ofHistory, pp. 302-315, especiaUy pp. 305-307. 
Granted this interpretation, CoUingwood's Logic of Question and Answer, as proper 
to history, wiU be a means of discovering the thought content of an event or situation. 
See also H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning ofHistory, pp. 103-111, for what seems to be in 
substance a very simflar, U not the same position as CoUingwood's on this point. Ac­
cording to Marrou, "History is an encounter with others" (p. 107), a "dialectical rela­
tionship of the Same with the Other . . . [which] presupposes the existence of a broad 
basis of fraternal communion between the subject and the object, between the historian 
and document" (p. 104). " I n our encounter with Others in historical documents we 
must proceed as in daUy Ufe. Ъ it a good way to become acquainted with a new friend— 
or a document—if we subject either to a whole series of questions concerning our 
interests of the moment? Certainly not, for we must be open to the Other, quite 
forgetting ourselves. We must try to perceive the inner essence as something different and 
other than we are . . . " (p. 111, emphasis added). Marrou shows throughout his work 
that whatever obstructs or impedes sympathetic communion with the 'other,' the sub­
ject of study, proportionaUy impedes historical understanding of that subject. See, 
for example, his account of his changed attitude toward, and changed abffity to compre­
hend, Augustine (op. cit., pp. 280-281). See also Chapter 4, above, pp. 86-87 and n. 
43 for correlation of 'insight' and the 'inside of events' with the internal relations consti­
tutive of the concrete universal. 

222 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
acting because the rule is known and the agent decides to apply that 
rule, so that he excludes cases where an agent acts according to a rule 
but is unaware he is so acting. Most of our actions are successful 
because they are standard types whose rules we know and regularly 
apply. But action according to rules is not the only type of action. When 
in a situation not recognizable as belonging to any known types there 
is no ready rule to guide you; you have to improvise the method of 
acting. Again, when the referable rules inadequately apply to a given 
situation, since the typical situation to which the rule adequately refers 
does not exactly cover the present actual situation, you are thrown 
back on improvisation. Thus, there are rules for fair deaHng with one's 
tailor inasmuch as he is a tailor, but the attempt to apply the rules 
to deal with one's tailor who is aged 60, with a weak heart and invalid 
daughter, becomes so complex and unwieldy that its practicality is 
impossible. The complexity of required modifications to apply the 
multiplex of known rules forces one back to improvisation. 4 6 
The situation in which we have to act apart from rules because 
the situation is not of a recognizable type most often arises from in­
experience of life and is commonest among the young, or when for 
some reason or other (as travel in a foreign land) we encounter the 
unfamiliar. But the second case, where the situation involves multi­
ple classification and appUcation of a complexity of rules, is found only 
among mature people of experience and intelligence who treat the 
situation seriously, so seriously that they reject as an adequate guide 
not only desire and seU-interest but even that their conduct be right 
as measured by recognized rules. One who insists on guidance from 
prescribed rules is clinging to the low grade morality of custom and 
precept. Such an agent sees only the elements of the situation he 
already knows how to deal with but shuts his eyes to whatever in 
the situation would lead him to think that his ready-made rules are 
inadequate for the conduct of lUe. Collingwood regards dependence 
on rules of conduct as keeping action at a low potential, involving 
a certain blindness to the realities of the situation. To act at a higher 
potential the agent must see the situation in which he is to act more 
clearly. 
Science may equip us with rules adequate to act in typical cases 
we already know, but history wffl equip us to handle concrete situa­
tions in aU their actuality, provided its job is to inform us about the 
present insofar as that present is seen to incapsulate its past as a con-
4 6 See R. G. ColUngwood, An Autobiography, pp. 103-104. 

History as the Science of Mind 
223 
stitutive of that present, which may not be obvious to an untrained 
eye. Then only is history of the highest relevance for practical Ufe, 
but not if it is confined to mere authoritative repetition of a past 
regarded as dead and gone. 4 7 Scissors-and-paste history, with its 
passive dependence on the testimony of authorities regarding a dead 
past, is inadequate to equip man with the control over human situa­
tions analogous to the control natural science provides him with in 
regard to natural forces. 4 8 
E. Collingwood's Discovery of the New Historical Method 
CoUingwood says that his conviction regarding the possibUity of 
a new method of history took a decisive step forward in 1928 during 
a vacation at LeMartouret when he was able to reflect over his last 
nine years of historical research. 
The first fruit of this "long and oppressive period of gestation" 
was to make the distinction between history proper and pseudo-
history. By pseudo-history he means the prima facie appearance of 
history taken on in the early nineteenth century by such natural 
sciences as geology, palaeontology and astronomy. 4 9 Reflection over 
his practice as an archaeologist enabled him to disengage the stratio-
graphical aspect of his procedure, which resembled the methods of 
geology, from aspects which dUfered from such methods. The use 
of potsherds by the archaeologist for purposes of correlation and dating 
no doubt resembles the geologist's simüar use of fossUs, but the dU­
ference outweighs the superficial sirrularity. 
For the archaeologist, these things are not stone and clay and 
metal, they are buüding stones and potsherds and coins; debris of 
a buUding, fragments of domestic utensUs, and means of exchange, 
aU belonging to a bygone age whose purposes they reveal to him. 5 0 
Whereas sedimentation and fossUization are remains of natural 
events, potsherds, buUding stones and domestic utensUs are remains 
4 7 See ibid., pp. 105-106. 
4 8 See ibid., p. 106. L. Rubinoff, in his Collingwood and theReform ofMetaphysics, 
p. 306, says that "while the historian cannot make scientific predictions concerning 
the future, he is nevertheless able to anticipate it, and his experience as an historian 
therefore enables him to cope more effectively with the crises of life." See appendix 
2, below, pp. 488^96 for a consideration of the way a researcher conducts himseU 
in breaking new ground where there are no laws to guide him. 
4 9 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 107; see also H.-I. Marrou, The 
MeaningofHistory, pp. 36-37, for prehistory as including both a non-historical consid­
eration of man's past and also a genuine historical consideration of that same past. 
See also Chapter 9, below, p. 428. 
5 0 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p.l08. 

224 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
of human events. Only the latter are properly admissible as evidence 
according to properly historical method, and they can be used as 
evidence only insofar as the archaeologist understands what each one 
is for. If an object does not tell him that then he has no use for it as 
an archaeologist, although one more resourceful than himself may 
be able to detect human purposes in such an object. 5 1 
CoUingwood is recognizing that we have the abUity to diagnose 
consciously intended purposes as distinct from mere natural happen­
ings in the remains which are the results of such purposes. But con­
sciously purposeful activity is thought, or activity done with a reason, 
or by one knowing both that and why he is acting. When Colling­
wood thus says that we can recognize in certain remains traces of pur­
poseful activity he is at the same time weU on his way to his notion 
of history as a rethinking of past thoughts. CoUingwood says that pre-
nineteenth century natural scientists thought that they were detect­
ing purposes, not human purposes but divine purposes, in natural 
events, but no nineteenth century scientist conceives the world of 
nature anthropomorphicaUy, as acting purposefuUy. Purpose is not 
now a scientist's working category. 
You are thinking historicaUy .. . when you say about anything, 
'I see what the person who made this (wrote this, used this, designed 
this, etc.) was thinking.' Until you can say that, you may be trying 
to think historicaUy but you are not succeeding. And there is nothing 
else except thought that can be the object of historical knowledge.52 
5 1 H.-I. Marrou in The Meaning ofHistory, p. 37, writes: "[When] the . . . prehistorian 
studies objects that bear the marks or traces of man's voluntary action, [and] [w]hen 
he tries through them to gain understanding of the material or spiritual techniques 
(magic, religion) and to some extent of the feelings or ideas of their authors, he is 
reaUy doing something that pertains to archaeology, which is a branch of history. In 
this sense prehistory becomes real history in the fuU meaning of the term. When 
Norbert Casteret, for example, discovered in the grotto of Montespan a small clay 
image representing a quadruped adorned with the skull of a bear cub, an image that 
was pierced by iron-tipped spears in several places, he encountered no difficulty in 
reconstructing the rite of 'sympathetic' magic in which prehistoric hunters had par­
ticipated. Eskimos of our own time have also practiced this same rite. We understand 
this type of behavior interiorly. Direct comprehension of this kind is something quite 
different from that of the physicist who 'understands' the disintegration of the atom. 
It is our interior knowledge of man and his potentialities that enabks us to understand these 
prehistoric hunters. In this sense they are quite historical." (Emphasis added.) See also 
Collingwood's criticism of Croce's advice to one who would want to understand the 
history of a blade of grass advising such a one to try to become a blade of grass in 
the same way that one trying to understand the history of a neolithic should try to 
become a neolithic; see Collingwood's The Idea of History, pp. 199-200. 
5 2 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 110. See also the whole of "The 
Subject-Matter of History," in The Idea ofHistory, pp. 302-315. 

History as the Science of Mind 
225 
Thus, the historian of pohtical history does not concern himself 
with the pitch of a man's speech but rather with what he is trying 
to say, that is, the thought expressed in his words and subsequently 
in the minds of his hearers and finaUy in written records for rethink­
ing by future minds. And military history is not just a description of 
marches or battles but rather of plans and counterplans, that is, of 
thinking about strategy and tactics, and finally of what the men in 
the battle ranks thought. 
F. History as Rethinking Fast Thoughts 
Whereas the scientist is concerned with observable events, the 
historian is concerned with events not as such but only inasmuch as 
they express thoughts. 5 3 
Natural events are merely phenomena which the scientist con­
templates from the outside, but historical events are penetrated by 
the historian discerning the thought within. 
To the scientist, nature is always and merely a 'phenomenon', 
not in the sense of being defective in reality, but in the sense of being 
a spectacle presented to his inteUigent observation; whereas the 
events of history are never mere phenomena, never mere spectacles 
for contemplation, but things which the historian looks, not at, but 
through, to discern the thought within them. 5 4 
This means that when the historian investigates a past event he 
makes a distinction between the outside and the inside of the event. 
The outside of an event is whatever can be described in terms of bodies 
and their movements, that is, its externals, such as, for example, the 
passage of Caesar and certain men across a certain river, or the spiUing 
of his blood on the floor of the senate house. But the inside of an event 
is that in it which can only be described in terms of thought, such 
as Caesar's defiance of Republican law, or the constitutional policy 
clash between himself and his assassins. But the historian is inter­
ested not merely in one of those aspects to the exclusion of the other. 
He is interested in actions which synthesize an outer aspect and an 
inner aspect. The outside of an event is the external manifestation 
of the thought within the agent's action. 
The historian is . . . investigating not mere events (where by 
a mere event I mean one which has only an outside and no inside) 
but actions, and an action is the unity of the outside and inside of 
an event. . . . His work may begin by discovering the outside of 
5 3 See R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 217. 
54 Ibid., p. 214. 

226 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
an event, but it can never end there; he must always remember that 
the event was an action, and that his main task is to think himserf 
into this action, to discern the thought of its agent.55 
In penetrating to the inside of events to detect the thought they 
express the historian is doing something the scientist cannot do. The 
historian's task is thus both simpler in one way and more complex 
than the scientist's in another way. The scientist's event is discovered 
when perceived, but its explanation has to be further sought in its 
causes. The historian's event is not available to perception, but has 
to be constructed (rather reconstructed). But when the thought within 
the event is discovered, the historian's work is done, there is no further 
search for causes, for when he knows what is the thought within the 
event he already knows why it happened. 
For science, the event is discovered by perceiving it, and the 
further search for its cause is conducted by assigning it to its class 
and determining the relation between that class and others. For 
history, the object to be discovered is not the mere event, but the 
thought expressed in it. To discover that thought is akeady to under­
stand it. After the historian has ascertained the facts, there is no 
further process of inquiring into their causes. When he knows what 
happened, he already knows why it happened.56 
Thus, the processes studied by the historian are quite different 
from the process of natural events studied by the scientist. 
It is now clear why historians habitually restrict the field of his­
torical knowledge to human affairs. A natural process is a process 
of events, an historical process is a process of thoughts. Man is 
regarded as the only subject of historical process, because man is 
regarded as the only animal that thinks. 5 7 
G. The Conditions of the Possibility of Historical 
Knowledge as Knowledge of Past Thought 
In order that past thought may be known, two conditions must 
be fuküled. First, the thought must be expressed, either linguistical­
ly, or in one or another of the ways in which activity is expressive 
of thought, as the outstretched arm expressive of a command, or 
running away as expressive of defeat. Secondly, the historian must 
be able to think again for himsek the thought whose expression he 
5 5 Md., p. 213. This penetration to the inside of an event to know the thought 
therein I understand to be what CoUingwood means by 'insight.' See this chapter, 
above, p. 221 n. 45. 
56 tbid., p. 214. 
57 Jbid., p. 216. 

History as the Science of Mind 
227 
must interpret. Ji for any reason he is incapable of doing this he should 
leave the problem alone. One who cannot think mathematically is in­
capable of writing a history of mathematics. 5 8 
These two conditions are formulated in the foUowing propositions: 
the first, 'aU history is the history of thought,' the second, 'historical 
knowledge is the re-enactment in the historian's mind of the thought 
whose history he is studying.' 5 9 
Thus, says Collingwood, for the historian to know what Nelson 
meant by saying 'in honor I won them, in honor I will die with them', 
and for the historian to know why he said that, is for the historian 
to know what thoughts Nelson thought in saying that, which means 
that the historian must think those same thoughts for himseU, namely 
that 'this is not the time to remove the decorations of honor merely 
to save one's Ufe.' 
But this re-enactment, whereby the historian qua historian thinks 
the thoughts of another, involved CoUingwood in the dilemma as to 
whether the thoughts of Nelson as rethought by the historian are 
Nelson's or the historian's thoughts. He adds that "no question in 
my study of historical method gave me so much trouble; and the 
answer was not complete untU some years later," that is, after 1928, 
at LeMartouret. 6 0 
The answer, when he finaUy had it, is that "the dUference is one 
of context." 6 1 That thought, as thought by Nelson, was a present 
thought, whereas, as (re)thought by the historian it is a past thought, 
not the past thought of a dead past but a past thought living in the 
present, which CoUingwood refers to as 'mcapsulated' in the present. 
5 8 R. G. CoUingwood, AnAutobiography, pp. 111-112. H.-I. Marrou weU explains 
that the encounter with the other involved in history is achieved only by a sympa­
thetic attunement to that other. ". .. it is always sympathy, the source of understand­
ing, which represents the constructive phase. . . . If Denifle made a positive contri­
bution to our growing knowledge of Luther . . . it was not because of his criticism. 
On the contrary, it was rather to the extent that his personal competence as a 
medievaUst and his own experience as a Catholic belonging to a ReUgious Order (and 
as a theologian) led this Dominican of the nineteenth century to sympathize with the 
Augustinianofthefifteenth, inspiteofhimself." TheMeaningofHistory, pp. 105-106. 
A criticism to be noted later (Chapter 7, below, pp. 271-273) against CoUingwood wUl 
be in regard to his excessive emphasis (under Bacon's influence) on the critical func­
tion of history to neglect of the essential sympathetic connaturality which Marrou 
decisively points out as an indispensable ingredient of a true historian. Criticism 
presupposes sympathetic attunement, as CoUmgwood admits regarding the history 
of mathematics above. 
5 9 See R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, pp. 110, И2. 
6 0 See ibid., p. 112, also p. 107. See ako CoUingwood's "History as a Reenact-
ment of Past Experience" in his The Idea of History, pp. 282-302. 
6 1 R. G. ColUngwood, An Autobiography, p. 113. 

228 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
He explains that by an 'incapsulated' thought he means "a thought 
which, though perfectly alive, forms no part of the question-answer 
complex which constitutes what people call the 'real' life, the super­
ficial, or obvious present, of the mind in question." 6 2 CoUingwood 
explains that, for him as a historian thinking Nelson's thought, the 
question 'ShaU I take off my decorations' does not arise. The ques­
tions which do arise in his present experience are: 'ShaU I continue 
reading this book on the battle of Trafalgar?' or 'What did the Vic­
tory's deck look like to someone contemplating his chances of sur­
viving the battle?' or 'What would I have done in Nelson's situation?' 
This possibUity of historical knowledge as the reenactment of past 
thoughts incapsulated in the present, requires that a distinction be 
made between a primary series of questions which constitute 'real' 
lUe, and a secondary series constitutive of a secondary lUe which is 
prevented from flowing over into the primary lUe by that condition 
of 'incapsulation.' 
No question that arises in that primary series, the series consti­
tuting my 'real' life, ever requires the answer 'in honor I won them, 
in honor I wffl die with them.' But a question arising in that primary 
series may act as a switch into another dimension. I plunge beneath 
the surface of my mind, and there Uve a life in which I not merely 
think about Nelson but am Nelson, and thus in thinking about 
Nelson think about myseU. But this secondary Ufe is prevented from 
overflowing into my primary lUe by being what I caU incapsulated, 
that is, existing in a context of primary or surface knowledge which 
keeps it in its place and prevents it from overflowing.63 
Thus, the knowledge I have when I know the question 'WUl I 
remove my decorations?' together with its negative answer, exists as 
a thought in my mind, but the question and answer complex which 
is its context is not part of the question-answer complex in which I 
think such thoughts as ' I am a little boy in Jersey,' 'This is my father's 
study carpet, not the Atlantic,' 'That is the study-fender, not the 
Spanish coast,' which later thoughts belong to the question and answer 
complex which I recognize as my 'real' lUe. 6 4 
6 2 Md., p. 113. 
<*Tbid. 
6 4 See ibid., pp. 113-114. Note that one's 'real' Ufe is distinguished from whatever 
other Uves one may Uve by a dUference according to question-answer complexes (and, 
foUowing the theme of the previous chapter, we may add different fundamental Ufe 
commitments, beliefs or absolute presuppositions, or, again, different world-view hori­
zons). 

History as the Science of Mind 
229 
CoUingwood therefore adds a third proposition 6 5 definitive of his­
torical knowledge: 'Historical knowledge is the reenactment of a past 
thought incapsulated in a context of present thoughts which, by con­
tradicting it, confine it to a plane different from theirs." 6 6 
This causes the further question to arise: "How to determine which 
of these planes is real?" To which Collingwood replies: "By watch­
ing the way in which historical problems arise." 6 7 Contrary to the 
opinions of scissors-and-paste historians, Collingwood says that all 
Wstorical problems arise out of real life. Scissors-and-paste people think 
that they arise because of the habit of reading which simply puts ques­
tions in their mind by way of mere curiosity without any serious bear­
ing on the problems of human everyday living. But the kind of history 
which Collingwood says he is discussing is something quite differ­
ent. It is a kind of history which he has practised aU his lUe in which 
historical problems arose out of practical problems. He maintains that 
we study history in order to see more clearly into the situation in which 
we are caUed to act (the fuU force of which is realized U we recaU that 
the type of problem CoUingwood is basicaUy concerned with, faced 
with the disasters of the world war is: " H o w are we to be delivered 
from these present distresses?"). It is on the plane of real Ufe that 
aU problems arise, and the plane to which they are referred for solu­
tion is history. History, therefore, is CoUingwood's answer to the ques­
tion raised by contemporary situation ethics, namely, 'What am I to 
do confronted as I am with this real-lUe problem which eludes deci­
sion being made through reference to ready-made rules to hand?' It 
is by a grasp of the concrete situation as a concrete universal by the 
historical mind that I wffl know with certainty what is my duty in the 
concrete context in which my problem arises. 
SeU-knowledge is essentiaUy tied to one's abüity to think another's 
thoughts. 
ч 
In rethinking what somebody else thought, he thinks it himseU. I n 
knowing that somebody else thought it, he knows that he himseU 
6 5 The first and second are stated on pp. 86 and 88 of CoUingwood's Autobiography. 
6 6 See ibid., p. 115. Note the determining factor of 'context.' The Concrete Universal, 
which is the very dynamic reaUty of the mind, actively constructs itseU historicaUy 
by contextualizing in the present thoughts enacted in a previous context. Context is 
not a superaddition to concrete reaUty but belongs to the very fabric of its being. This 
I understand to be of the essence of the concrete universal. The problem to which 
this gives rise is whether context can be absorbed into a thing's essential structure 
and retain any inteUigible meaning as context. 
67 Tbid., p. 114. 

230 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
is able to think it. And finding out what he is able to do is finding 
out what kind of a man he is. 6 8 
Thus, I am able to understand the Einsteinian theory of relativity 
if I can think the thoughts Einstein thought in thinking out his theory 
as the solution of the practical problem that drove him to think out 
that theory as the answer to his problem. If a man finds that he is 
capable of thinking the thoughts of a great many men he is thereby 
able to understand the thoughts of a great many different kinds of 
men by rethiruxing them. It foUows that he must be a great many kinds 
of men, in fact, a microcosm of aU that history can know. Thus, his 
own self-knowledge is at the same time his knowledge of the world 
of human affairs, or, in other words, a concrete universal. 6 9 
CoUingwood says that this train of thought was not complete untU 
about 1930. But, with its completion, he was able to answer the ques­
tion which had troubled him since the 1914-1918 war, namely, how 
can we construct a science of human affairs from which men could 
learn to deal with human situations as skfflfuUy as natural science had 
taught them to deal with situations in the world of nature? It was now 
clear to him that the answer was that the science in question is history. 
CoUingwood says that such a discovery was not possible before the 
nineteenth century until history began to undergo a Baconian revolu­
tion and arise from its scissors-and-paste chrysalis of the eighteenth 
century to become a science in the fuU sense of that word. Men of the 
eighteenth century saw the need for a science of human affairs but were 
unable to see that history was that science. They erroneously tried to 
shape a science of human affairs after the manner of a natural science, 
such as Hume's 'Science of Human Nature.' The nineteenth century 
sought it in the science of psychology, in which the mental became 
reduced to the psychical, witii the result that the very cUstinction be­
tween truth and falsehood is jettisoned and the very idea of science 
thereby negated, psychology itseU being bankrupted in the process.70 
But, says Collingwood, the revolution in historical method which 
superseded scissors-and-paste history introduced a rapidly progressing 
form of knowledge which for the first time put man in a position "to 
obey the oracular precept 'know thyself,' and reap the benefits that 
only such obedience can confer." 7 1 
6 8 Jbid., pp. 114-115. See also CoUingwood's The ldea ofHistory, p. 10, and see also 
Chapter 9, below, pp. 418-419. 
6 9 See ibid., p. 115. 
7° See ibid., pp. 115-116. 
7 1 Md., p. 116. 

History as the Science of Mind 
231 
Collingwood acknowledges that the work of thinking out these 
ideas was laborious work "because of the method used," for "every 
detail arose out of reflection on actual historical research in which I 
had therefore to be incessantly engaged, and was tested over and over 
again by fresh pieces of research devised to that end." 7 2 
H. Historical Knowledge as Knowledge by the Mind of 
Its Acts which are Identical with the Mind Itself 
Historical knowledge has for its proper object thought, the act of 
thinking itself, not merely things thought about. 7 3 It is therefore a re­
doing of what the mind has already done in the past. 
Historical knowledge is the knowledge of what mind has done 
in the past, and at the same time it is the re-doing of this, the per­
petuation of past acts in the present. Its object is therefore not a mere 
object, something outside the mind which knows it; it is an activity 
of thought, which can be known only insofar as the knowing mind 
re-enacts it and knows itself as so doing. 7 4 
Thought is not merely presupposed by the historical process and 
the knowledge of that process, it is an integral element in that pro­
cess, and the knowledge of the process is not distanced from the 
process, but one with it. The historian knowing history is thereby mak­
ing it. 
Thought is therefore not the presupposition of an historical 
process which is in turn the presupposition of historical knowledge. 
It is only in the historical process, the process of thoughts, that 
thought exists at aU; and it is only insofar as this process is known 
for a process of thoughts that it is one. The seU-knowledge of reason 
is not an accident; it belongs to its essence.75 
In order to discover what was the thought constituting the inner 
dimension of some past event the historian has to make it his own 
thought by thinking that same thought again for himself as his own 
thought. 7 6 The history of thought, which means all history, is the re-
enactment of past thought in the historian's own mind. 7 7 The only 
way a historian of philosophy can know what Plato meant when he 
7 2 Jbid., p. 117. 
7 3 See R. G. CoUingwood, The ldea ofHistory, p. 305. 
74 Vbid., p. 218. 
75 Ш., 
p. 227. 
7 6 See ibid., p. 283 and p. 215. 
7 7 See ibid., p. 215. 

232 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
expressed himsetf in certain words is by thinking that thought (of 
Plato's) for himself, as his own (the historian's) thought. This is what 
is meant by 'understanding' what Plato wrote. The historian of politics 
or warfare will study Julius Caesar's actions by trying to discover the 
thoughts in Caesar's mind which determined him to do the actions 
of which documentary evidence remains. To do this the historian has 
to envisage for himseU" the situation in which Caesar stood by imag­
inatively reconstructing that situation and think for himself what 
Caesar thought about the situation and the possible ways of dealing 
with i t . 7 8 
Historical knowledge therefore is not thinking about something 
purely objective, for it is thinking about the very thought the histor­
ian is presently thinking in reenacting that thought. However, it is 
not on that account merely subjective, for that thought is something 
that can be thought about by anyone with the historical capacity to 
think it for himself. 7 9 
To be able to be reenacted in an historian's mind it is not suffi­
cient that something be merely an object of experience, it must be an 
experience. There is thus no history of nature. 8 0 
To the historian, the activities whose history he is studying are 
not spectacles to be watched, but experiences to be lived through 
in his own mind; they are objective, or known to him, only because 
they are also subjective, or activities of his own. 8 1 
Thus, the objectivity of historical knowledge is of a peculiar kind, 
different from the objectivity of a scientist's study of the natural world. 
The object is not something there before the rnind with which the mind 
has to get acquainted; it has to be brought into existence as an object 
in the very act of studying it; the knowing of it is the (re)constructing 
of it. This means that knowledge of the historical object is at the same 
time knowledge of one's own knowledge. Historical knowledge is both 
objective and at the same time self-knowledge. 
But, because (as I have already tried to show) it is never merely 
objective, it requires to be thought about in a peculiar way, a way 
only appropriate to itself. It cannot be set before the thinking mind 
as a ready-made object, discovered as something independent of 
that mind and studied as it is in itsetf, in that independence. It can 
never be studied Objectively', in the sense in which 'objectively' 
7 8 See ibid., p. 215, p. 242, p. 247. 
7 9 See ibid., p. 292. 
8 0 See ibid., p. 302. See Collingwood's criticism of Croce on this point in CoUing­
wood's The Idea of History, pp. 197-200. 
8 1 R. G. Collingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 218. 

History as the Science of Mind 
233 
exdudes 'subjectively'. It has to be studied as it actually exists, that 
is to say, as an act. And because this act is subjectivity (though not 
mere subjectivity) or experience, it can be studied only in its own 
subjective being, that is, by the thinker whose activity or experience 
it is. This study is not mere experience or consciousness, not even 
mere setf-consciousness; it is self-knowledge.82 
It is not enough merely to tMnk the thought of another to be think­
ing historically; one has to know what one is doing oneseU when one 
thinks historically. 
. . . unless he knows that he is thinking historicaUy, he is not 
thinking historicaUy. Historical thinking is an activity which is a 
function of seU-consciousness, a form of thought possible only to 
a mind which knows itseU to be thinking in that way. 8 3 
This means that "historical thinking is always reflection, for re­
flection is thinking about the act of thinking, and . . . aU historical 
thinking is of that k i n d . " 8 4 
This means that thought is transcendent in its own nature, in the 
sense that it is "not wholly engaged in the flow of experience," as 
is feeling, "so that we constantly reinterpret our past thoughts and 
assimUate them to those we are thinking n o w . " 8 5 
But thought does not so transcend experience as to be a mere object 
set over against the thought which thinks it. The pecuUar objectivity 
of thought consists in that it is able to be re-enacted in a mind other 
than the mind actuaUy presently thinking that thought, otherwise 
soUpsism would prevaU. 
Thought can never be mere object. To know someone else's 
activity of thinking is possible only on the assumption that this same 
activity can be re-enacted in one's own mind. In that sense, to know 
'what someone is thinking' (or 'has thought') involves thinking it 
for oneseH. To reject this condusion means denying that wehave 
any right to speak of acts of thought at aU, except such as take place 
in our own minds, and embracing the doctrine that my mind is the 
only one that exists.86 
The condusion, that historical thiru4ing is rethinking past thoughts, 
leads to a certain precision regarding the statement that history studies 
the past. Historical thinking is the same kind of thinking as that by 
which we rethink and rediscover the thought of Hammurabi or Solon 
8 2 Tbid., p. 292. 
8 3 Jbid., p. 289. 
84 Tbid., p. 307. 
85 Md., p. 296. 
86 Jbid., p. 288. 

234 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
in the remote past and that by which we discover the thought of a 
friend who writes us a letter, or a stranger who crosses the street, 
that is, the immediate past. 8 7 
Nor is it necessary that the past thought being rethought be the 
thought of another, for it is only by historical knowledge that I know 
what I thought in my own past. 8 8 
It is only by historical thinking that I can discover what I thought 
ten years ago, by reading what I then wrote, or what I thought five 
minutes ago, by reflecting on an action that I then did, which sur­
prised me when I realized what I had done, m this sense, aU knowl­
edge of mind is historical.89 
Thus rethinking of my own past thoughts is not merely remem­
bering it, but a reliving of a past phase of my lUe. Memory merely 
objectivizes the past, as a spectacle. h\ historical thought the subject 
re-enacts that thought in his mind. 
m thus rethinking my past thought I am not merely remember­
ing it. I am constructing the history of a certain phase of my lUe: 
and the dUference between memory and history is that whereas in 
memory the past is a mere spectacle, in history it is reenacted in 
present thought. So far as trds thought is mere thought, the past 
is merely reenacted; so far as it is thought, the past is thought of 
as being reenacted, and my knowledge of myseH is historical knowl­
edge.90 
The possibUity of rethinking is based on the fact that thought, 
unUke feeUng, can be disengaged from one context and given another. 
Thought in its immediacy is thought in a context of emotions and other 
thoughts. The thought has an identity in itseU, independently of this 
context. 
The seU-identity of the act of thinking that these two angles are 
equal is not only independent of such matters as that a person per­
forming it is hungry and cold, and feels his chair hard beneath him, 
and is bored with his lesson; it is also independent of further 
thoughts, such as that the book says they are equal, or that the 
8 7 See tbid., p. 219. See ako H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning ofHistory, p. 91: " . . . there 
is nothing unique in our understanding with regard to the past. It is definitely the 
same process that takes place in our understanding of other men in the present, and 
particularly in the understanding of articulated language." bi regard to the funda­
mental role of language in history, and in the construction of the concrete universal 
proper to history, see Chapter 9, beIow, p. 399 et seq. 
8 8 See R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 219. 
89 Md., p. 219. 
90 Jbid., p. 293. See also CoUingwood's Autobiography, pp. 113-116; see also, this 
chapter, above, pp. 227-228. 

History as the Science of Mind 
235 
master believes them to be equal; or even thoughts more closely rele­
vant to the subject in hand, as that their sum, plus the angle at the 
vertex, is 180 degrees.91 
A thought is neither pure immediacy nor pure mediation. И it were 
pure immediacy it would be inextricably involved in the flow of con­
sciousness in which it occurs and would then never become an object 
thought about. If it were pure mediation it would be utterly detached 
from the flow of consciousness, and thus outside the world of expe­
rience, and so non-existent. But an act of thought is together some­
thing that actually happens in a context of experience and, as an act 
of thought, able to sustain itself. 
Every act of thought, as it actuaUy happens, happens in a con­
text out of which it arises and in which it lives, like any other expe­
rience, as an organic part of the thinker's lUe. Its relations with its 
context are not those of an item in a collection, but those of a special 
function in the total activity of an organism . . . But an act of thought, 
in addition to actually happening, is capable of sustaining itseU and 
being revived or repeated without loss of its identity. . . . But it 
cannot repeat itseU in vacuo, as the disembodied ghost of a past expe­
rience. However often it happens, it must always happen in some 
context, and the new context must be just as appropriate to it as 
the old. Thus, the mere fact that someone has expressed his thoughts 
in writing, and that we possess his works, does not enable us to 
understand his thoughts. In order that we may be able to do so, 
we must come to the reading of them prepared with an experience 
sufficiently like his own to make those thoughts organic to it. 9 2 
Since an act of thought is knowledge and not mere sensation or 
feeling, it is something more than immediate consciousness and so 
not a mere flow of consciousness.93 "The positive peculiarity which 
distinguishes thought from mere consciousness is its power of recog­
nizing the activity of the seU as a single activity persisting through 
the diversity of its own acts." 9 4 This seU-sustaining and setf-reviving 
power of thought is what distinguishes it from a mere event. 
9 1 R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea of History, p. 298. 
92 R>id., p. 300. 
9 3 See ibid., p. 287. 
9 4 wid., pp. 305-306. See H. B. Acton, "The Theory of Concrete Universals (H)," 
Mind, XLVI (1937), p. 1, for a consideration of "the most convenient example of a 
universal" to be "not a quality, such as redness, but a person, such as Julius Caesar" 
who "is a universal because he is the same individual, although engaged in different 
activities, such as fighting in Gaul, marching in Italy, and so on." Thus, thought, 
as distinct from mere consciousness, recognizes the seU (the person) as an identity 
in dUference, that is, a concrete universal. See above, Chapter 4, p. 88 n. 45. See also, 
F. H. Bradley, The Principles of Logic, London, Oxford University Press, Vol. 1, cor­
rected edrt. of 1928, pp. 191 et seq. 

236 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The pecutfarity of thought is that, in addition to occurring here 
and now in this context, it can sustain itself through a change of 
context and revive in a different one. This power to sustain and 
revive itsetf is what makes an act of thought more than a mere 'event' 
or 'situation'.95 
To reduce thought to its immediate experience is to deny its char­
acter as thought. 
. . . to say that because the theorem, as an act of thought, exists 
only in its context we cannot know it except in the context in which 
he actuaUy thought it, is to restrict the being of thought to its own 
immediacy, to reduce it to a case of merely immediate experience, 
and so to deny it as thought.96 
The constituents of immediacy cannot be re-enacted, so cannot 
be objects of history. 
The immediate, as such, cannot be re-enacted. Consequently, 
those elements in experience whose being is just their immediacy 
(sensations, feelings, &c. as such) cannot be re-enacted; not only 
that, but thought itsetf can never be re-enacted in its immediacy.97 
Plato's thought and my thinking that thought are two dUferent 
thoughts in their immediacy but are identical in their mediation. 9 8 
Plato's argument as an experience of his own arose out of some dis­
cussion. Without knowing that context of discussion I can read and 
understand his argument, rearguing it with and for myseU. The process 
of argumentation which I go through is identically Plato's, not merely 
simUar to it. The argument in itself, from premisses to conclusion, 
can be developed in Plato's, my own, or anyone else's rnind; and thus 
it is thought in its mediation. 9 9 
But the thought itseU considered in its immediacy, as a unique 
act in the unique context of the lUe of the individual thinker, cannot 
be re-enacted, and therefore cannot be the object of historical knowl­
edge. 
The historian cannot apprehend the individual act of thought 
in its individuaUty, just as it actuaUy happened. What he apprehends 
of that individual is only something that it might have shared with 
other acts of thought and actuaUy has shared with his own. But this 
something is not an abstraction, in the sense of a common charac­
teristic shared by different individuals and considered apart from the 
9 5 Ibid., p. 297. 
9 6 Ond., pp. 298-299. 
9 7 Pbid., p. 297. 
9 8 See ibid., p. 301. 
9 9 See ibid., p. 300. 

History as the Science of Mind 
237 
individuals that share it. It is the act of thought itserf, in its survival 
and revival at different times and in different persons: once in the 
historian's own life, once in the Ufe of the person whose history he 
is narrating.100 
To say, then, that history is knowledge of the individual is true 
only U individual is taken to include universal sigmficance and not 
its exclusive uniqueness to a definite person at a definite time. 
Thus the vague phrase that history is knowledge of the in­
dividual claims for it a field at once too wide and too narrow: too 
wide, because the individuaUty of perceived objects and natural facts 
and immediate experiences faUs outside its sphere, and most of aU 
because even the individuality of historical events and personages, 
U that means their uniqueness, faUs equaUy outside it; too narrow, 
because it would exclude universaUty, and it is just the universality 
of an event or character that makes it a proper and possible object 
of historical study, U by universality we mean something that over­
steps the Umits of merely local and temporal existence and possesses 
a sigmficance valid for aU men at aU times.101 
What distinguishes the mere memorization of a past thought from 
historical re-enactment of it is that whereas mere memory is present 
thought of past experience as such "historical knowledge is that special 
case of memory where the object of present thought is past thought, 
the gap between present and past being bridged not only by the power 
of present thought to think the past, but also by the power of past 
thought to reawaken itseU in the present." 1 0 2 That is, U the past thought 
is presently thought of merely as an event it is merely remembered. 
But U it is thought as a thought it is present as an activity, that is, it 
is reactivating itseU in the present. Then historical knowledge is had. 
Thought which can survive the flow of experience is more than 
mere consciousness of seU; it is seU-consciousness, that is, a seU-
sustaining activity. Thinking implies some standing firm against the 
flow of immediate experience. 
The peculiarity of thought, then, is that it is not mere conscious­
ness but seU-consciousness. The seU, as merely conscious, is a flow 
of consciousness, a series of immediate sensations and feelings; but 
as merely conscious it is not aware of itseU as such a flow; it is 
ignorant of its own continuity through the succession of experiences. 
100 Tbid., p. 303. 
1 0 1 See the remark at the condusion of Chapter 5 above, pp. 207-208, that mind, 
which is identical with its activity, is the one eternal reaUty in the whole of CoUing­
wood's phUosophy. 
1 0 2 Md., p. 294. 

238 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The activity of becoming aware of this continuity is what is called 
thinking. 1 0 3 
I . Historical Thinking as a Rapprochement between Thought 
and Action, Fact and Theory, History and Philosophy 
According to L. Rubinoff "the unity of thought and action is 
. . . a cardinal principle of CoUingwood's phUosophy." 1 0 4 ColUngwood 
says that he was first motivated to effect this rapprochement by reason 
of the moral corruption which he regarded as an essential consequence 
of the realist attitude that theorizing leaves its subject matter intact, 
that what we think about our actions makes no dUference to them. 
To this he opposes what he regards as the famUiar experience of every 
human being, who 
. . . in his capacity as a moral, poUtical, or economic agent. . . 
lives not in a world of 'hard facts' to which 'thoughts' make no dU­
ference, but in a world of 'thoughts'; [so] that tf you change the 
moral, political and economic 'theories' generally accepted by the 
society in which he lives, you change the character of his world; 
and . . . U you change his own 'theories' you change his relation 
to that world; so that in either case you change the ways in which 
he acts.105 
To admit this is to deny that a clear-cut distinction can be main­
tained between phUosophy and history, that is, between the facts of 
one's situation, knowledge of which is historical knowledge and un­
doubtedly necessary for action, and phUosophical thinking concerned 
with timeless 'universals' which is not necessary for action. The realist 
position collapses as soon as the distinction between 'facts' and 
'theories' and so between 'history' and 'phUosophy' is brought into 
question.' 1 0 6 Although in 1919 his rapprochement between history and 
phUosophy was incomplete, he saw already that the rapprochement be­
tween theory and practice was one of intimate and mutual depen­
dence, thought depending on what the thinker leamed by experience 
in action, and action depending upon how he thought of himself and 
the world. He recognized that scientUic, historical and philosophical 
thinking depended as much on the moral qualities as upon the intel-
103 Vbid., p. 306. 
1 0 4 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 306. See also R. G . 
Collingwood, An Autobiography, p. 147. 
1 0 5 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 146. 
1 0 6 See ibid., pp. 147-148. 

History as the Science of Mind 
239 
lectuaI qualities of the thinker, and that "moral difficulties were to 
be overcome not by 'moraL' force alone but by clear thinking." 1 0 7 
Historical knowledge of one's past renders the rnind capable of 
acting with respect to projects to be realized in the future. 
The past, insofar as it is appropriated into the present, is in that 
appropriation 'projected' into the future; a mind which has recon­
structed its own past becomes a mind which is capable of behaving 
in new and unpredictable ways. 1 0 8 
Activity as such is both individual and universal (so, together, 
an object of both history and philosophy). Reflexive or deUberative 
activity is done having previously conceived in thought the univer­
sal plan or idea which is the criterion guiding the conscious realiza­
tion of the act. 
An act is more than a mere unique individual; it is something 
having a universal character; and in the case of a reflective or 
deliberate act (an act which we not only do, but intend to do before 
doing it) this universal character is the plan or idea of the act which 
we conceive in our thought before doing the act itsetf, and the 
criterion by reference to which, when we have done it, we know 
that we have done what we meant to do. 1 0 9 
The universality, falsely absolutized by science, is preserved in 
the predicate of the individual historical judgment. 
The individual judgment of history contains within itsetf, in the 
shape of its own predicate, the universaUty of science; and history 
is shown to be, not something that faUs short of scientific accuracy 
and rationaUty and demonstrativeness, but something that possesses 
aU this and, going beyond it, finds it exemplUied in an individual 
fact.110 
The mental activity which is historical knowledge is not merely 
activity but is an activity which is together a self-discovery and a self-
making, and the discovery is made in the making. 
Historical thinking is therefore not just the discovery of mind 
but its actualization as weU. AU thought exists for the sake of action 
and it is only through such action that the mind's nature is created 
at aU. 1 1 1 
107 Ш., p. 150. 
1 0 8 L. Rubinoff, Collingwoodand theReform ofMetaphysics, p. 306. See also Chapter 
9, below, pp. 378-383, and 404. 
1 0 9 R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea of History, p. 309. 
1 1 0 R. G. CoUingwood, "The PhUosophy of History," in CoUingwood's Essays in 
the Philosophy of History, ed. WUUam Debbins, p. 136. 
1 1 1 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 302. See also R. G. 
CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 226. 

240 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
A man is what he knows himsetf to be capable of doing, and he 
knows this through historical knowledge of what man has done in 
the past. Man's being is therefore his history. 
Knowing yourself means knowing, first, what it is to be a man; 
secondly, knowing what it is to be the kind of man you are; and 
thirdly, knowing what it is to be the man you are and nobody else 
is. Knowing yourself means knowing what you can do; and since 
nobody knows what he can do until he tries, the only clue to what 
man can do is what man has done. The value of history then is that 
it teaches us what man has done and thus what man is. 1 1 2 
. . . since the questioning which is the mind's knowledge of itsetf, 
and through which the pure state of speculum speculi is achieved, 
is essentiaUy an historical activity, history is therefore the true science 
of mind and the true medium of human setf-making.113 
This setf-making activity is an explication of the immanence of 
the transcendental conditions of the possibiHty of аП being and know­
ing, which is what is reHgiously caUed God and phUosophically caUed 
the absolute. Historical activity is therefore 
immanent-transcendent 
activity. 
God or the absolute (or however else you wish to describe the 
transcendental a priori ground of the possibUity of aU being and 
knowing) is immanent as weU as transcendent. Thus the activity of 
finite mind consists (when it raises itseU to the level of science) of 
an attempt to render explicit the impUcit setf-identity of absolute 
knowledge. This activity is precisely what CoUingwood means by 
setf-making.114 
The historical process therefore is radicaUy dUferent from aU natural 
processes. It is a seU-making process " i n which man creates for himsetf 
this or that kind of human nature by recreating in his own thought 
the past to which he is heir." 1 1 5 Such an inheritance is possessed not 
by passive reception of natural transmission but by an active setf-giving 
process which is identical with the very thought by which it is pos­
sessed. 
There is not, first, a special kind of process, the historical process, 
and then a special way of knowing this, namely historical thought. 
The historical process is itsetf a process of thought, and it exists only 
insofar as the rninds which are parts of it know themselves for parts 
of it. By historical thinking, the mind whose setf-knowledge is history 
1 1 2 R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 10. See also Chapter 9, below, p. 
418 et seq. 
1 1 3 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 301. 
1 1 4 ftid., pp. 300-301. 
1 1 5 R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 226. 

History as the Science of Mind 
241 
not only discovers within itserf those powers of which historical 
thought reveals the possession, but actuaUy develops those powers 
from a ktent to an actual state, brings them into effective existence.116 
This process of seU<reativity, identUied with man's historical, seU-
endowed nature, is not merely a barely factual self-knowledge but 
a critical seU-knowledge. It consists in knowing also what one is to 
be in addition to knowing what one is. 
5eU-creation, moreover, is seU-knowledge; not the seU-knowl­
edge of introspection, not the exarnination of the seU that is, but 
an examination of the seU that is to be—which is, of course, the very 
criterion according to which the seU makes itseU.117 
Rubinoff points out that what makes the mind's acts historical 
according to CoUingwood is not just that they happen in time but that 
they become known through a re-thinking of the thought which 
created the situation being investigated and thereby coming to under­
stand the situation. 1 1 8 
The self-making process of historical existence is thus the active 
and conscious appropriation of the past. The possibUity of such ap­
propriation, that is, the possibUity of historical knowledge, makes 
creative seU-making possible. 1 1 9 
Since mind is what it does, and human nature, U it is a name 
for anything real, is only a name for human activities, this acquisi­
tion or abUity to perform deterrninate operations is the acquisition 
of a determinate human nature. Thus the historical process is a 
process in which man creates for himseU this or that kind of human 
nature by recreating in his own thought the past to which he is 
heir. 1 2 0 
Mind is not something presupposed by history, for history is the 
very Ufe which the mind is, and the mind is not a mind except in as 
much as it together lives the historical process and in the living of 
it knowing itseU to be doing what it is doing. 1 2 1 The mind is not a 
substance underlying its acts; to know its acts is to know what it itseU 
is. 
116 Tbid., p. 226. See also pp. 215, 228; ako L. Rubinoff, CoUingwoodand theReform 
ofMetaphysics, pp. 303, 308. 
1 1 7 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 301. 
1 1 8 See ibid. See also R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 218. 
1 1 9 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 301. 
1 2 0 R. G. Collingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 226. See also L. Rubinoff, op. cit., 
p. 302. 
1 2 1 See R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 227. 

242 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
But any study of mind is a study of its activities; if we try to 
think of a rrdnd absolutely at rest, we are compeUed to admit that 
if it existed at aU (which is more than doubtful) at least we should 
be quite unable to study it. 1 2 2 
The difference between what we can and cannot know historicaUy 
defines the power of a man's mind. 
It may thus be said that historical inquiry reveals to the historian 
the powers of his own mind. Since aU he can know historicaUy is 
thoughts that he can re-think for himseU, the fact of his coming to 
know them shows him that his mind is able (or by the very effort 
of studying them has become able) to think in these ways. And con­
versely, whenever he finds certain historical matters uninteUigible, 
he has discovered a limitation of his own rnind; he has discovered 
that there are certain ways in which he is not, or not yet, able to 
think. 1 2 3 
How this knowledge of mysetf and my capabUities is achieved 
through historical inquiry is thus explained by Collingwood: 
The only way in which I can know my own mind is by perform­
ing some mental act or other and then considering what the act is 
that I have performed. ΚI want to know what I think about a cer­
tain subject, I try to put my ideas about it in order, on paper or other­
wise; and then, having thus arranged and formulated them, I can 
study the result as an historical document and see what my ideas 
were when I did that piece of thinking: UI am dissatisfied with them, 
I can do it over again. U I want to know what powers my rnind 
possesses as yet unexplored, for example, whether I can write 
poetry, I must try to write some and see whether it strikes me and 
others as being the real thing. ΚI want to know whether I am as 
good a man as I hope, or as bad as I fear, I must examine acts that 
I have done, and understand what they reaUy were: or else go and 
do some fresh acts and then examine those. AU these inquiries are 
historical. They proceed by studying accomplished facts, ideas that 
I have thought out and expressed, acts that I have done. On what 
I have only begun and am stUl doing, no judgement can as yet be 
passed.124 
Historical rethinking is not merely rethinking but evaluative re­
thinking, that is, rethinking criticaUy by passing a judgment upon it 
in terms of the new context of the historian's own mind in which that 
thought is rethought. 
The historian not only re-enacts past thought, he reenacts it in 
the context of his own knowledge and therefore, in re-enacting it, 
1 2 2 Md., p. 221. 
1 2 3 Brid., p. 218. 
1 2 4 Hrid., p. 219. 

History as the Science of Mind 
243 
criticizes it, forms his own judgment of its value, corrects whatever 
errors he can discern in it. This criticism of the thought whose history 
he traces is not something secondary to tracing the history of it. It is 
an indispensable condition of the historical knowledge itseU. Nothing 
could be a completer error concerning the history of thought than 
to suppose that the historian as such merely ascertains 'what so-and-
so thought', leaving it to some one else to decide 'whether it was 
true'. AU thinking is critical thinking; the thought which re-enacts 
past thoughts, therefore, criticizes them in re-eracting them. 1 2 5 
There is a standard operative in every creative activity by which 
a man strives to complete his human nature, which is never some­
thing fixed. This standard is, in phUosophical terms, absolute truth 
or absolute seU-knowledge, or seU-knowledge of the absolute. This 
standard appears to the scientific consciousness under the form of 
reality and to the religious consciousness under the form of God or 
the Holy, and to the artistic consciousness under the form of the beauti­
f u l . 1 2 6 This standard is made expUcit when the seU brings it into 
existence by questioning the grounds of its own being. 1 2 7 
Reflective acts, that is, acts we do on purpose, which are the sub­
ject matter of history, 1 2 8 are acts done with knowledge of what we 
are trying to do, and when done can be compared with their standard, 
the initial conception of the act, and evaluated according to their con­
formity with that standard pre<onception. Reflective activity is there­
fore activity we can perform by knowing in advance how to perform 
i t . 1 2 9 Historical judgment is therefore seU-judgment. " I t is the historian 
himseU who stands at the bar of judgment, and there reveals his own 
rnind in its strength and weakness, its virtues and its vices." 1 3 0 
Furthermore, the historian does not employ a criterion other than 
himseU. His criterion is himseU understood to include everything he 
knows. 
The expUcit criterion of mature historical thought is nothing but 
historical fact itseU: the historian asks himseU, 'Does this fit in with 
v 
everything I know about the world of facts, the nature of the case, 
the Uabflity of the informant to error and mendacity, and so forth?" 1 3 1 
125 Md., pp. 215-216. 
1 2 6 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 301. See also R. 
G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 66, p. 90, p. 120. 
1 2 7 See ibid., p. 301. 
1 2 8 See R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 309. 
1 2 9 See ibid., p. 308. 
w» Md., p. 219. 
1 3 1 R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 214. H.-I. Marrou in The Meaning of 
History, p. 161, states that the historian brings with him a phUosophy of man and 

244 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Thus, to know Plato's philosophy I must re-think it in my own mind 
in which I am thinking also the thoughts which provide a context in 
which I can judge that thought of Plato which I re-think, m becoming 
recontextuaHzed in the context of other thoughts which also exist in my 
mind I am able to judge it in the Ught of those other thoughts. 1 3 2 
But in becoming my thought, without losing its objectivity, it is ako 
not merely a seff<onsciousness but a seU-knowledge, that is, a critical 
study of my own thought, not merely an awareness that I am thihking. 
Thus the act of thought in becoming subjective does not cease 
to be objective; it is the object of a seU-knowledge which dtffers from 
mere consciousness in being setf4x>nsci0usness or awareness, and 
differs from being mere seU-consciousness in being seU-knowledge: 
the critical study of one's own thought, not the mere awareness of 
that thought as one's own. 1 3 3 
J. The Three Ontological Levels of Consciousness 
and Their Logical Correlatives 
Lionel Rubinoff, with profound insight into Collingwood's 
of Ufe. "AU our ideas about man are instruments whereby we strive to recap­
ture the human past, and are related to a phUosophy of man." Again (p. 
246): " . . . there is no true history independent of a phflosophy of man and 
of life. . . . The truth of history is a function of the truth of the pMosophy 
used by the historian." In this context, W. H. Walsh, "R. G. CoUingwood's 
PhUosophy of History," Philosophy, ХХП (1947), p. 160, writes: ". . . we 
can say with ColUngwood that history does give us an understanding of 
what human beings are and can do. But it is questionable, aU the same, 
whether we ought to see it as the science of human nature (or aU that that 
science can be). The judgments of history, as CoUingwood rightly insists, 
are individual judgments; but unless I am greatly mistaken, there are pre­
supposed in the making of them, certain universal judgments, and it is these, 
only part of the raw material of which is provided by history, which con­
stitute the science in question. Γη this connection, the view held at one time 
by DUthey is of considerable interest, that behind aU the human studies 
(history... sociology, etc.) there Ues a more fundamental study concerned 
with human nature." Theodore Litt, in "The Universal in the Structure of 
Historical Knowledge," in R. KUbansky's and H . J. Paton's Philosophy and 
History, p. 134, writes: ". . . in the .. . case [of the investigator of the spiritual 
world as contrasted with that of the investigator of the natural world], and 
in it alone what the thinking mind presupposes forms at the same time a 
part of what it wants to investigate. The 'spiritual world' whose nature the 
investigator would Uke to determine in universal statements includes in itself 
aU those spiritual actions, and abUities which are presupposed, and that 
not as merely incidental motives, which can perhaps be dispensed with, 
but as quite fundamental and ever-present functions of spiritual being and 
doing." Chapter 9, below, wiU investigate in depth the type of understan­
ding appropriate to history and human facts as distinct from the type of 
understan<fing in which the natural sciences trade. 
1 3 2 See R. G . CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 301. 
1 3 3 Toid., p. 292. 

History as the Science of Mind 
245 
thought, explains how the dialectical development of the mind is a 
movement from the implicit to the explicit and how this progressive 
explicitation manifests itself in three distinct ontological levels which 
are correlated with distinct logical attitudes and therefore highly rele­
vant to the understanding of Collingwood's logic of questioning. 
J.i. The Mind's Dialectical Development as 
an Explication of the Implicit 
The dominating concept of CoUingwood's rapprochement logic is 
that of identity in dUference. In his first work, Religion and Philosophy, 
CoUingwood argued for the identity between reUgion, phUosophy and 
history because they are aU about the same object: the real world, the 
totaUty of existence, or historical fact. Speculum Mentis reaffirms this 
same identity, but in a way which more adequately accounts for the 
dUferences between the various standpoints. Whereas Religion and 
Philosophy treated the various forms of experience in too abstract a 
manner, as univocal expressions of the single act of knowing, as dU-
ferentials of a univocal genus, Speculum Mentis departs "from the more 
abstractly conceived system of univocal relations which tends to 
characterize the standpoint of ReUgion and PhUosophy," and "gives way 
to a dialectical system according to which the various sciences form 
a logical hierarchy or scale of overlapping forms [which] reflects . . . 
the dialectical growth of consciousness itseU." 1 3 4 CoUingwood 
acknowledges that in Religion and Philosophy "the identity of the forms 
of experience is too 'abstract' and does not account for the important 
'concrete' distinctions which exist between them." 1 3 5 
This error is overcome by recognition and application of the 
principle of the distinction between the expUcit and the impUcit referred 
to above, tf one is unable to give a rational account of one's own, or 
one's observation of another's, experience its principles are said to 
be impUdt or "unconscious." Thus, the primitive world view is made 
explicit, or explained, when one finds out that for the primitive mind 
"aU things are fuU of gods." However, before expUcation by scien­
tific inquiry, this belief is already implicit in the experience in ques­
tion. In terms of CoUingwood's later phUosophy this means that an 
historian or observer can give an account of a given form of experi-
1 3 4 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 50. See also A. Shalom, 
R. G. Collingwood, Philosophe et historien, pp. 11-12, pp. 16-20, pp. 22-24. 
1 3 5 R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 108. See also L. Rubinoff, Collingwood 
and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 51. 

246 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ence onIy in terms of the absolute presuppositions which are impUcit 
in that experience. 1 3 6 
This means that the various standpoints of art, religion, science, 
history and philosophy are naturaUy ordered in such a way that each 
is the explicitation of the principles or presuppositions of the one prior 
to it on the scale, and impHcitly embodies the principles or presupposi­
tions of the one subsequent to it. Thus, religion explicitates what is 
impUcit in art, and history expUcitates what is impUcit in science, etc. 1 3 7 
Implicitly then, aU of the sciences are about the same object. In 
this sense they are identical. This identity, however, becomes expUcit 
only through the logical and phenomenological development of con­
sciousness in the course of which phUosophy graduaUy emerges. 
PhUosophy is therefore not just one among the variety of sciences 
but fhe ground of the unity of this variety. 1 3 8 
Rubinoff argues convincingly that CoUingwood's works are in­
stances of the distinction between implicit and explicit. 1 3 9 
For Collingwood, the answer to the question 'what is beauty?' 
presupposes the answer to the question 'what is mind?,' and, granted 
certain presuppositions about the nature of mind, such as that it is 
identical with its acts, and that it makes itseU through its acts, that 
is, that it undergoes dialectical development, it foUows that reality 
and truth are subject to the same dialectical seU-making. 1 4 0 Mind is 
thus not something distinct from its appearances, but rather it is those 
appearances inasmuch as they are not univocaUy but dialecticaUy 
related according to a scale of forms which presents one form of 
knowledge as it grows out of another as a result of internal strains 
deriving from innate inconsistences in the earlier form. 1 4 1 
J.ii. The Ab Extra and Ab Intra Moments of Philosophy's 
Criticism of Experience from the Absolute Standpoint 
PhUosophy is an absolute standpoint which views aU the stand­
points as interrelated by intemal, dialectical relations. 1 4 2 
1 3 6 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 52. See ako Chapter 
5, above, pp. 200-202. 
1 3 7 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 53. Refer also to 
the dockface illustration of Chapter 3, above, pp. 71-72; see also Chapter 4, above, 
pp. 88-90. 
1 3 8 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 53. 
1 3 9 See ibid., p. 53. 
1 4 0 See ibid., p. 54. 
1 4 1 See ibid., pp. 53-54. 
1 4 2 See ibid., pp. 53-54. See also above, Chapter 3, the dockface fflustration, pp. 
71-72. 

History as the Science of Mind 
247 
Rubinoff explains143 that the philosophical master<riticism of expe­
rience is effected in two ways. One way is as a form of internal criticism, 
in which philosophy assumes the standpoint of a particular point of 
view, such as religion or art, and reveals and defends the presupposi­
tions of, and thus justifies the vaUdity of, that standpoint. This is caUed 
ab intra criticism. The other form of phUosophical criticism is ab extra, 
or from the absolute standpoUit, that is, according to criteria that tran­
scend every particular standpoint. 1 4 4 Dogmatism is the absolutization 
of any particular standpoint, and dogmatic phUosophy is phUosophy 
degraded to the status of a particular standpoint among other partic­
ular standpoints and thus conceived "as the science of criticism," rath­
er than a standpoint that transcends, and includes within its own, aU 
other standpoints. 1 4 5 But this dogmatic "daim to truth of an erroneous 
standpoint is a necessary stage in the therapeutic process which begins 
with the discovery of an error and ends with its correction." 1 4 6 
The critic has a double task. As historian he must disdose the pre­
suppositions lying at the basis of any particular standpoint. As phUos­
opher, at the same time, he must judge and reveal the error at the 
basis of those presuppositions, which disclosure becomes the basis 
of a new standpoint which wUl be more satisfactory in terms of its 
abUity to explain experience. 1 4 7 
It is the very essence of a dialectical development that each phase 
in it should contain the next impUdtly, and it is this implidt presence 
of elements which are, as it were, submerged in the immediacyof 
a particular phase. Every phase of experience is implidt in its 
predecessor, and therefore it is not surprising that sdence should 
be impUcit in reUgion; but the scientUic content in tabu and the Uke 
is felt not as science but as religion. 1 4 8 
Rubinoff points out that dialectical criticism, like metaphysics, is 
both historical and the medium by which the mind makes itseU. Thus, 
1 4 3 See his Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 60. 
144 Ша., pp. 60-61. See also p. 63: "The above distinction between ab intra and 
ab extra is offered in part as a more adequate rendering of a distinction, which CoUing­
wood himseU introduces in Speculum Mentis, between the crude but popular concep­
tion of dogmatic phUosophy and the more sophisticated conception of critical phUos­
ophy (SM, 254; see also EPM, 217-20). Dogmatic phUosophy, writes CoUingwood, 
is generaUy regarded 'as the procedure of thought without inquiry into its own powers,' 
whUe critical phUosophy is 'the investigation by thought itseU of the Umitations of 
its capacity' (SM, 254)." 
1 4 5 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 61. 
146 Tbid. 
1 4 7 See ibid., p. 62. 
1 4 8 R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 164. 

248 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
diaIecticaI history is a dialectical drama marm^esting a kind of dramatic 
inevitabüity, which is a form of creative rationaUty, and not to be con­
fused with either logical deduction or metaphysical determinism. Dia­
lectical history both recounts past errors and, in doing so, shows that 
each error has made its contribution to present day knowledge. 1 4 9 
J.iii. The Ontological Levels of Ab Intra 
Criticism and Their Logical Correlatives 
Rubinoff shows that superimposed on the aforesaid methodologi­
cal distinction of ab intra and ab extra inquiry is the distinction of the 
operation of the former on three distinct but related ontological levels, 
or "soundings" in the terminology of The New 
Leviathan.150 
These levels are not simply three self-contained types Uke the 
co-ordinate species of a genus, nor are they three pigeon holes into 
which experiences may be conveniently sorted. They are, on the con­
trary, a scale of dynamicaUy changing and overlapping forms, hav­
ing a natural order of their own and subject to a special set of rules. 
Experience, in other words, undergoes a logical and dialectical devel­
opment not only from one form of experience to another (from art 
to religion, for example) but also, within each of the five major forms 
of experience, from one level to another.151 
Each of these three ontological levels, on which each of the five 
forms of experience may exist, correlates with a definite logical atti­
tude, and so is of great importance to understand CoUingwood's dialec­
tical logic of rapprochement. 
The first ontological level on which any form of experience is real­
ized is unequivocal and dogmatic regarding its interpretation of itseU. 
Two presuppositions characterize first level dogmatism: the first is 
that each form is fixed and seU-identical, the second is that that par­
ticular viewpoint represents an absolute viewpoint. 
At the first ontological level each of the particular forms makes 
an unequivocal and dogmatic interpretation of its own essential 
nature . . . First-level dogmatism rests on two fundamental presup­
positions. The first is that each form has a fixed and given seU-
identical nature. The second is that the particular conception of 
reality impUed by any given standpoint is the only true and vaUd 
one, which itseU presupposes that there is only one true view of 
reaUty (SM, 41). The theoretical moment of each standpoint, in other 
1 4 9 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, pp. 65-66. 
1 5 0 See ibid., p. 66. 
1 5 1 Md. 

History as the Science of Mind 
249 
words, presents itserf not simply as a dogmatic Weltanschauung but 
as a Weltanschauungskhre. Thus, for example, not only does art assert 
itsetf as pure imagination, but the qualities which define the objects 
of imagination are extended to the entire world of reality. It is not 
surprising, then, that such philosophies as exist at this level tend 
to assume an attitude of total indifference, if not intolerance, to any 
other interpretation of reaUty.152 
The logical attitude characteristic of first level dogmatism is that of 
equivocity. Each standpoint recognizes itseU only and aUows nothing 
in common with any other standpoint. Two standpoints, as far as first 
level dogmatism is concerned, are related purely equivocaUy. 
In second level dogmatism, which arises as a result of the dialectical 
interplay between ab intra and ab extra approaches, any particular stand­
point reUnquishes its exclusiveness, and recognizes that it is one among 
a number of dUferent standpoints. 
As a consequence of the dialectical interplay between the ab intra 
and ab extra approaches, however, consciousness is forced to the 
recognition that the absolute presuppositions of the first level of 
criticism are inconsistent. Once it is reaUzed that each standpoint, 
as defined at the first level, rests upon a false distinction, con­
sciousness is obliged to redefine the nature of each standpoint and 
start anew. Each standpoint wUl now conceive of itseU as only one 
of a number of equaUy vaUd standpoints and proceed to define it­
seU accordingly. Thus art, for example, which at the first level 
posits itseU as the only fundamental mode of existence, co-exists 
at the second level with other forms whose validity and claims 
to knowledge it no longer denies. Likewise, each of the other forms 
conceives of itseU as one of a number of equaUy vaUd and true 
standpoints, which arise as a result of the various ways in which 
mind views what is essentiaUy the same object. At the same time 
each form recognizes that it has a history which to some extent 
exempUfies the influence which the other forms have had upon 
Comparing this second with the subsequent, third ontological level 
of consciousness, there are two dUferences, namely, submission to 
the subject-object dichotomy, and acquiescence in abstract, proposi­
tional logic, in which a particular form of experience regards itself as 
one species among other species, united as diverse species of one 
abstract, univocal genus. Genus-species, propositional logic is therefore 
correhted with Rubinoff's second ontological level of consciousness. 
1 5 2 Tbid., pp. 67^8. 
153 Tbid., p. 68. 

250 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
But the philosophy or reflective-theoretical moment which seeks 
to justify this point of view is characterized by two pecuUarities which 
set it apart from the third level. In the first place, at the second level, 
consciousness has not yet overcome the subject-object distinction— 
the negation of which is the differentia of absolute philosophy. It 
therefore continues to posit the object of each form as an indepen­
dently existing entity. In the second place, second-level conscious­
ness treats each form as though it were the species of a genus, and 
any overlap which exists is therefore treated as a mere overlap of 
extension between classes—that is, the forms are externally related 
> through the simple mediation of the universal genus.154 
SeU-transcendence as a result of dialectical interplay between db 
intra änd ab extra consciousness results in the third ontological tevel of 
experience in which rapprochement between the forms is accomplished, 
and the subject-object dichotomy, characteristic of reaHsm and prop­
ositional logic, is transcended. This is the truly philosophical level in 
which each form constituting the life of the mind is seen to be, not 
the species of a genus, but an overlap of intension between concepts 
in dialectical, internal relationship one with the others. 
. . . again, as a result of the dialectical interplay between the 
ab intra and the ab extra, consciousness transcends itself. The rela­
tion between subject and object becomes one of dialectical identity 
while the relation among the forms becomes one of rapprochement. 
The result is the discovery of a new and higher level of existence 
in which philosophy treats each form not as the species of a genus, 
but as a member of a scale of forms whose overlap is an overlap 
of intension between concepts or categories rather than an overlap 
of extension between classes. As CoUingwood himseU puts it in An 
Essay on Philosophical Method, each category in its degree spedfies 
its "generic" essence, but each embodies it more adequately than 
the one below. Or, to put it another way, according to the logic of 
the overlap of classes the generic essence is immanent in or iden­
tical with the variable element.155 
Rubinoff cites CoUingwood in describing this principle of rapproche­
ment phUosophy. 
.. . our five forms of experience are not five abstractly seU-iden­
tical types of event which, by their recurrence in a fixed or chang­
ing order, constitute human experience; but types whose recurrence 
perpetually modifies them, so that they shade off into one another 
and give rise to new determinations at every turn. 1 5 6 
154 
Md. 
1 5 5 Md., pp. 68-69. See also R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Philosophical Method, 
pp. 92-103. 
1 5 6 R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 86. 

History as the Science of Mind 
251 
It is only at this third level, says Rubinoff, 1 5 7 that for the first time 
there is introduced the possibility of a genuine philosophy of history, 
rnind, and nature, etc. And it is only at this level that are transcended 
both the prejudice and intolerance of vicious (first level) dogmatism, 
and the pseudo liberal-humanism of "toleration," for genuine com­
munity of intersubjectivity. 1 5 8 
The logical attitude to which this third ontological level corresponds is 
that ofanalogical thinking. Thus, says Rubinoff, 1 5 9 for Aristotle, being 
qua being is to be understood as being qua modes of being and the 
categories are consequently to be understood as the various modes 
through which being expresses itsetf. Substance, Aristotle's highest 
category, is itsetf a scale of forms which leads to the notion of a highest 
substance. Being thus is not a genus, not an abstract, univocal class 
concept. 
Since being is not a genus, the categories are not species each 
of which expresses the genus in precisely the same way; nor is 
substance a genus, dispersing itseif into a plurality of substances. 
On the contrary the categories are a scale of forms each of which 
expresses the essence of being more adequately than the one 
below. 1 6 0 
The basic problem which Aristotle faces is the problem of relating 
the 'manyness' of being to its 'unity.' He solves it by speaking of the 
many as unified through relation, each in its own way, to one central 
point. The term being not only extensively includes the group of beings 
as a whole, as does a univocal, abstract class concept, but also refers 
intensively to what each of the members of that group have in 
common. 1 6 1 
CoUingwood's solution to Aristotle's problem, foUowing Hegel, 
is, according to Rubinoff, only through the reaUzation that being or 
reaUty is not some permanent and eternal substance, but rather a con­
stantly changing activity which, as Hegel said, is nothing other than 
mind knowing itsetf. Thus, CoUingwood locates the object of knowl­
edge ^eing) within the mind. Being remains, as it was for Aristotle, 
a plurality of activities related (each in its own way) to the highest 
being. But the highest being is not, as it was for Aristotle, a separ­
ately existing, eternal substance, but, on the contrary, an immanent-
157 Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 69. 
1 5 8 See ibid., p. 69. 
1 5 9 See Ш., 
p. 188. 
1 6 0 Bid. 
1 6 1 See ibid., p. 189. 

252 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
transcendent activity which CoUingwood caUs absolute rnind, 1 6 2 whose 
absolute standpoint, having as its object aU other standpoints together 
with its own, is the object of phUosophy. 
In his earUer Ruskin's Philosophy CoUingwood contrasts the logicist 
method (the classUicatory method of abstract science) with the synthe­
sizing historicist method in terms of what he caUs the technique of 
"analogy," which he regards as the only appropriate one for study­
ing the relations between the various activities of mind. 1 6 3 
This analogical method of reasoning... is a weapon of immense 
power, clearing the ground of unnecessary argument and accom­
panying a vast amount of varied work with the least possible waste 
of energy.164 
According to Rubinoff, CoUingwood's method of analogy contrasts 
both with the univocal attitude towards the rnind's activities, which 
attitude believes that there is no distinction between the faculties, and 
with the equivocal attitude towards them, which attitude believes, 
on the contrary, that the mind's activities are a set of equivocals pro­
ceeding from dUferent faculties. 1 6 5 
This distinction, impUcit in Collingwood's works, and brought to 
expUcitness by Rubinoff, is necessary to achieve rapprochement between 
CoUingwood's earUer and later writings, which otherwise give the ap­
pearance of insoluble antinomies. 
This threefold distinction—which is crucial not only for the pur­
pose of reconstructing and understanding CoUingwood's thought 
but also for establishing a continuity between his early and later 
writings—is not one which is explicitly formulated by CoUingwood 
himseU. It is justified, however, not only by implication but by 
certain distinctions which CoUingwood does make in various places 
for the purpose of elucidating his subject matter.166 
K. The Archaeology of Roman Britain and the 
Development of Collingwood's Logic of Questioning 
Collingwood's phUosophical development was intimately tied to 
1 6 2 In the clockface ülustration of Chapter 3, above, pp. 71-72, the absolute view­
point of philosophy is represented by the view of one situated at the centre of radia­
tion of the hands of the clock, and able to recognise the clock as a clock, together with 
all its hand positions at once. 
1 6 3 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 228. 
1 6 4 R . G . Collingwood, "Ruskin's Philosophy," in CoUingwood's Essays in the 
Philosophy of Art, ed. A. Donagan, p. 32. 
1 6 5 See L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform of Metaphysics, p. 228. See also 
R. G . CoUingwood, "Ruskin's PhUosophy," in CoUingwood's Essays in the Philos­
ophy ofArt, ed. A. Donagan, pp. 30-31. 
1 6 6 L. Rubinoff, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, p. 69. 

History as the Science of Mind 
253 
his constant engagement in historical studies, 1 6 7 and, conversely, his 
philosophical convictions greatly influenced his methods of procedure 
in his historical researches, and, in the opinion of coUeagues, not 
always to the best advantage. 1 6 8 He specialized in archaeology, speci-
ficaUy the archaeology of Roman Britain, and after the war of 1914-1918 
he was the only surviving pupil of his master Haverfield and the only 
Oxford trained Roman Britain speciaUst. Ьл 1921 he wrote, in two days, 
a short elementary book on Roman Britain, about which he said that 
it served to lay down once for aU my general attitude towards prob­
lems, and, even more important, my general conception (partly due 
to Haverfield, but partly dUferent from his) of what the problems 
were; it gave me a first opportunity of finding out, more clearly than 
was possible within the limits of a short article, how my conception 
of historical research was developing . . . 1 6 9 
A n enlarged edition of this work appeared ten years later (1931), 
which had to be revised again in 1934, the same year he wrote the 
British section in Tenney Frank's Economic Survey ofAncient Rome. In 
1935 he wrote the sections on prehistoric Britain for the Oxford History 
ofEnghmd. The invitation to write these large scale volumes gave him 
the welcome and timely opportunity to exchange the field laboratory 
for study, arrangement and pubUcation of what he had hitherto learned 
as a result of aU this archaeological and historical work regarding the 
phUosophy of history. He says that a fuU length book on Roman Britain 
"would serve to display in a concrete form the principles of historical 
minking as I now understood them." 1 7 0 Long practice in archaeology 
taught CoUingwood that the most important condition of success is 
that the person responsible for the digging should know exactly why 
he is doing it. The central principle of CoUingwood's logic of ques­
tion and answer as applicable to archaeology is that the director of 
the digging "must first decide what he wants to find out, and then 
decide what kind of digging wUl show it to h i m . " 1 7 1 Collingwood 
1 6 7 R. G. Collingwood, An Autobiography, p. Ώ0. 
1 6 8 See I. A. fächmond, " A n Appreciation of R. G. CoUingwood as an Archaeolo­
gist", (accompanying obituary notice). Proceedings ofthe British Academy, ХХГХ (1943), 
p. 476: "Here . . . emerged in rather crude form a tendency, which marked and some­
times marred his work, to drive the evidence hard and to buUd upon it a series of 
conclusions whose very artistry disguised the inherent weakness of foundation." 
1 6 9 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, pp. 120-121. 
1 7 0 Tbid., p. 121. 
1 7 1 Brid., p. V22. It was the implementation of this principle which drew upon 
CoUingwood the criticism of I. A. Richmond, as noted immediately above (n. 168). 
On pp. 478^79, art. cit., Richmond comments as foUows: ". . . CoUingwood's powers 
of analysis and appreciation outshone his abUity in field work. His attitude to exca-

254 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
criticises early archaeology in which digging was done bHndly with 
no definite question formulated whose answer was being sought. He 
severely criticized the choosing of excavation sites for purposes other 
than that it contains the solution to a burning problem, such as choices 
made which would attract financial contributions to finance digging 
operations. Historians themselves needed to be made aware of the 
fecundity of the Baconian revolution in their own field. 
ff historical studies were to pass through a Baconian revolution— 
the revolution which converts a blind and random study into one 
% 
where definite questions are asked and definite answers insisted 
upon—the first thing to be done was to preach that revolution among 
iiistorians themselves.172 
Some, but very httle, progress in this regard had been made when 
CoUingwood began his study of Roman Britain, but Haverfield, under 
whose guidance CoUingwood was trained, and his coUeagues had fuUy 
implemented the Baconian method of systematic interrogation in their 
diggings with great success at comparatively little cost. 
Haverfield and his coUeagues of the Cumberland Excavation 
Committee in the eighteen nineties had been consciously and com­
pletely Baconian in their methods. They never dug a trench without 
knowing exactly what information they were looking for; they knew 
both that this information was the next thing they needed for the 
progress of their study, and also that this trench would give it them. 
That is why they could settle highly intricate and abstruse problems 
at a cost of never more, and often much less, than thirty or forty 
pounds a year.173 
CoUingwood criticises excavations done according to the principles 
of General Pitt-Rivers during the kst quarter of the nineteenth century. 
vation was profoundly influenced by the selective method of excavation, introduced 
and perfected by F. G. Simpson on Hadrian's WaU: and the first lesson which he 
drew from these methods, that excavations should be conducted with specific prob­
lems in mind upon sites Ukely to provide an answer, was salutary and useful. But 
CoUingwood's coroUary, that to pose a problem permitted its answer to be predicted, 
was a product of the study rather than the field. For there are problems thus soluble, 
particularly those purely phUosophical problems which it was CoUingwood's daUy 
task to consider. But to the field-worker excavation, no matter how carefully planned 
in advance, is always a plunge in the dark: and, whUe problems under consideration 
form a more regular pattern on Hadrian's WaU than on most Roman monuments, 
even there no excavation has ever foUowed a preconceived course: the expected is 
always accompanied, and often overshadowed, by the unexpected: and whfle CoUing­
wood's favourite dictum, that 'what you are not looking for you do not see,' is of wide 
appUcation, an excavator's first duty is to see everything without the bUnkers, im­
posed by prearranged concentration ofvision." Refer to Chapter 7, below, pp. 308-309. 
1 7 2 R. G. ColUngwood, An Autobiography, p. V2A. 
™Md. 

History as the Science of Mind 
255 
He acknowledges Pitt-Rivers as "a very great archaeologist and a 
supreme master in the technique of excavation" but severely criticises 
the pre-Baconian stage of his problem-solving methods, for "he dug 
in order to see what he could find out. He had not applied to 
archaeology the famous advice of Lord Acton, 'study problems, not 
periods.' " 1 7 4 
m addition to this first principle which should guide historical and 
archaeological research, that the whole work should be the solving 
of a definite problem guided by definite and methodical questioning, 
CoUingwood adds a second, to the effect that history does not study 
events but actions which expressan agent's intention. 
Since history proper is the history of thought, there are no mere 
'events' in history: what is miscaUed an 'event' is reaUy an action, 
and expresses some thought (intention, purpose) of its agent; the 
historian's business is therefore to identify this thought. 1 7 5 
Applied to archaeological work, this means that aU objects must 
be interpreted in terms of purposes, and that the question to be asked 
about any object found is 'What is it for?', foUowed by the question 
'Was it good or bad for that purpose?', that is, 'Does this object suc-
cessfuUy or unsuccessfuUy embody that purpose?' Such questions, 
being historical questions, can be answered not by guesswork but only 
according to historical evidence, which means that anyone who offers 
an answer to those questions must be able to show that his answer 
is the one which the evidence demands. 1 7 6 
In an article, "The Purpose of the Roman WaU," 1 7 7 CoUingwood 
opposed the currently accepted vague description of the waU as a fron­
tier defense, maintaining that the more precise explanation is that it 
was an elevated sentry-waUc. He reached this conclusion by asking 
such questions as 'How did it work?' 'Was it intended to work Uke 
a town-waU from the top of which defenders could repel attacks?' The 
question-answer procedure involved is as foUows: 
A question answered causes another question to arise. K the WaU 
was a sentry-waUc, elevated from the ground and provided (no 
doubt) with a parapet to protect the sentries against sniping, the 
same sentry-waLk must have continued down the Cumberland 
174 wid., p. 125. Pitt-Rivers' methods were continued and developed by Sir Morti­
mer Wheeler. See Glyn Daniel, Man Discovers His Past, N.Y., CromweU, 1968, p. 70, 
pp. 74-75. Also see Mortimer Wheeler's Archaeologyfrom the Earth, London, РеИсап 
Books, 1956. 
1 7 5 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, pp. ^7-128. 
1 7 6 See ibid., p. 128. 
1 7 7 m The Vasculum, ΥΙΠ, 1, pp. 4-9. 

256 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
coast, beyond Bowness-on-Solway, in order to keep watch on vesseb 
moving in the estuary; for it wotdd have been very easy for raiders 
to sail across and land at any unguarded point between Bowness 
and St. Bee's Head. But here the sentry waU< need not be elevated, 
for sniping was not to be feared. There ought, therefore, to be a chain 
of towers, not connected by a waU but otherwise resembling those 
on the WaU, stretching down that coast. The question was, did such 
towers exist?178 
The evidence with which CoUingwood alleges he was able to 
supply that answer was provided by a "search in old archaeological 
^publications" which "showed that towers of exactly the 
right 
kind-had been found; but their existence had been forgotten, as 
generally happens with things whose purpose is not understood." 1 7 9 
Not merely archaeology, but every kind of history operates on 
the principle of getting to the thought behind the deed and not merely 
stopping at the event. The event is the deed in its externals, that is, 
as described 'from the outside,' whereas the thought is the 'inside' 
of the deed, the purposefulness of the activity which it is the his­
torian's business to penetrate and disclose. Written sources testify to 
the invasion of Britain by Julius Caesar on two successive years. These 
are 'events.' CoUingwood criticizes historians for scarcely asking 'Why 
did he do it?', which question relevantly arises given that informa­
tion. Comparison of the strength of Caesar's expeditionary force with 
that sent over by Claudius nearly a century before settled for CoUing­
wood that the answer to that question was that Caesar did not intend 
merely a punitive expedition but complete conquest of the country. 
Caesar's sUence suggests that he intended concealment of his pur­
pose since he faUed to achieve it. Consistently with what he said 
earUer regarding Vffleneuve's plan at the Battle of Trafalgar, that since 
he faUed to implement it in action we had no way of knowing what 
it was, Collingwood admits that his answer to the question regard­
ing Caesar's intention to send expeditionary forces to Britain may be 
mistaken, but "future historians wUl have to reckon with the ques­
tion I have raised, and either accept my answer or come up with a 
178 An Autobiography, p. 129. 
1 7 9 ibid. This evidence seems to be somewhat embarrassing to the very point Col-
Ungwood is making. For the very condition upon which the question is answerable 
is the existence of old archaeological records, which would not have existed unless 
the excavators, whose work was recorded in those pubUcations, noted not only some­
thing they sought as answers to their own precise questions, but, contrary to CoUing­
wood's advice, also 'whatever may have been of interest.' 

History as the Science of Mind 
257 
better one," 1 8 0 since this answer is the only answer to that question 
which the available evidence authorises one to give. 
A third principle arises from CoUingwood's reflections over his 
years of archaeological practice, namely, that "no historical problem 
should be studied without studying what I caUed its second-order 
history; that is, the history of historical thought about i t , " 1 8 1 and "just 
as pMosophical criticism resolved itseU into the history of phUosophy, 
so historical criticism resolved itseU into the history of history." 1 8 2 
CoUingwood says that archaeology especiaUy exempUfies his his­
torical principles, since its sources are not pre-existing narratives which 
could function as 'authorities,' but are what is usually referred to as 
'unwritten sources,' so that here, in archaeology, "the issue raised 
by the project of a Baconian revolution is unmistakable." 1 8 3 
When history is based on literary sources the difference between 
scissors-and-paste, or pre-Baconian history, where the historian 
merely repeats what his 'authorities' teU him, and scientific or Bacon­
ian history, where he forces his 'authorities' to answer the questions 
he puts to them, is not always quite clear. It becomes clear enough 
on occasion; for example, when he tries to get out of his 'authorities' 
the answer to a question which they did not expect a reader to ask 
(as when we try to get out of an ancient writer answers to economic 
and demographic questions) or when he tries to get out of them facts 
which they wished to conceal. On other occasions it sometimes does 
not leap to the eye. In archaeology, however, it is obvious. Unless 
the archaeologist is content merely to describe what he or someone 
else has found, which it is almost impossible to do without using 
some interpretative terms implying purpose, like 'waU', 'pottery', 
'implement', 'hearth', he is practising Baconian history aU the time: 
asking about everything he handles, 'What is this for?' and trying 
to see how it fitted into the context of a peculiar kind of Ufe.184 
CoUingwood says that for this reason archaeology provides an 
extremely sensitive method for getting answers to questions which 
are not answerable by appeal to literary sources, even by the most 
ingenious interpretation of them. The modern historian wants to ask 
all kinds of questions which are basicaUy statistical, but the sources 
from which he has to get his answer were written by men not statis­
tically minded, and statistical evidence is required U you want to 
answer statistical questions. This kind of evidence is something the 
1 8 0 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, pp. 130-131. 
1 8 1 Md., p. 132. 
1 8 2 Md., pp. 123-133. 
1 8 3 Jbid. 
1 8 4 Drid., p. 133. 

258 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
archaeologist can provide when his work has reached a certain volume. 
In England, where Roman archaeology has unceasingly progressed 
ever since the seventeenth century, there is a great buik of material 
from which many questions of a statistical kind can be answered, if 
not conclusively, at least within a reasonable margin of error. 1 8 5 
Collingwood says that, in order to get to the purpose underlying 
an event, the first thing is to ask oneself what can be expected as the 
normal development in such cases, but if the event is exceptional then 
exceptional conditions have to be sought. 
И you want to know why a certain kind of thing happened in 
a certain kind of case, you must begin by asking, 'What did you 
expect?' You must consider what the normal development is in cases 
of that kind. Only then, if the thing that happened in this case was 
exceptional, should you try to explain it by appeal to exceptional 
conditions.186 
How the reconsideration of questions of principle rather than dis­
covery of fresh evidence historically manifests the rapprochement be­
tween philosophy and history is shown clearly from the solution to 
a much debated problem current when Collingwood was writing the 
first part of The Oxford History ofEngland. Why did British Celts, who 
adopted Roman fashions in arts and crafts and persisted in them for 
three centuries, revert to their old Celtic types after Roman withdrawal? 
How could they revert to their original Celtic tastes after three cen­
turies of adoption of Roman tastes in these matters? Several theories 
prevailed; one, the tradition never reaUy died but survived and ran 
concurrently with the Romanized tradition, another, some Celtic tribes 
escaped submission to Roman rule and retransmitted the preserved 
1 8 5 See ibid., pp. 134-135. 
1 8 6 Tbid., p. 140. But a certain inconsistency seems to be involved here, if we take 
into consideration what CoUingwood said earUer in the Autobiography, p. 106, that 
"rules of conduct keep action at a low potential because they involved a certain bUnd-
ness to the realities of the situation. И action was to be raised to ahigher potential, 
the agent must open his eyes wider and see more clearly the situation in which he 
was acting." Now, here above, CoUingwood tells us to organize questions in terms 
of the normal and in terms of the exceptional to the norm. This seems to suggest that 
high grade thinking presupposes low grade thinking, or thinking according to rules. 
For how are we to recognize the exceptional, so as to ask what are its exceptional 
conditions, if presupposed to this Une of questioning is not had the idea of the normal, 
or what is in accord with rules, which Collingwood himseU has stigmatized as low 
grade thinking? This is an indication ofwhat wffl be exposed later, in Chapter 9 (see 
below, p. 429 et seq.) that natural law thinking, and its propositional logic, which 
is the principle of inteUigibflity in scientific thought, enjoys its own sui generis autonomy 
in relation to the dialectical unfolding of seU-developing consciousness, which is mean­
ingful in relation to the personal interests of human freedom. 

History as the Science of Mind 
259 
culture after Roman withdrawaL A third theory was to posit a Celtic 
temperament which required definite conditions for its flowering, 
which conditions prevailed before and after but not during the Roman 
period. 
Against the first and second opinions Collingwood argued that 
there was no evidence for such survival and "no historian is entitled 
to draw cheques in his own favour on evidence that he does not 
possess, however lively his hopes that it may hereafter be dis­
covered." 1 8 7 Against the third opinion, CoUingwood rejects the 
psychological invocation of occult entities such as Celtic temperament 
as a substitute for historical evidence. CoUingwood concluded that 
dUficulties in solving the problem derived probably from a miscon­
ception of the nature of the historical process. RecalUng what he had 
discussed in his smaU work Ltbellus de Generatione he said that "any 
process involving an historical change from Pj to P2 leaves an uncon­
verted residue of Pj incapsulated within an historical state of things 
which superficially is altogether P2."
1 8 8 Anticipating a rebound from 
the psychologists, objecting that he himsetf is involved in the process 
of introducing occult entities in speaking of incapsulation, Colling­
wood repUes that "incapsulation is not an 'occult entity' " but " m y 
name for such facts as this . . . that a man who changes his habits, 
thoughts, etc., retains in the second phase some residue of the first." 1 8 9 
The desire to smoke in a man who gives up smoking survives, not 
in smoking, but in the form of an unsatisfied desire. K he later resumes 
smoking that does not prove that he never gave up smoking but 
perhaps that he never lost the desire, which may again be satisfied 
when the reasons against its satisfaction no longer prevafl. Something 
sirmlar happens in regard to the continuity of a tradition without imply­
ing a 'racial temperament' or 'racial unconscious' or other such 'occult 
entities.' 
И the members of a certain society have been in the habit of act­
ing or thinking in certain ways, and U at a certain time they try to 
stop acting and minking in those ways, and do their best to act and 
think in dUferent ways, the desire to go on acting and thinking in 
the old way wUl probably persist. It wffl certainly persist, and per­
sist in a Uvely form, if they were accustomed to trunk and act in those 
ways very effectively and found great satisfaction in doing so. The 
1 8 7 R. G. Collingwood, An Autobiography, p. 139. 
1 8 8 Tbid., pp. 140-141. 
189 Md., p. 141. This survival of an earUer stage in a later stage of development 
is what CoUingwood caUs the Law of Primitive Survivals in The New Leviathan, p. 65, 
par. 9.51. See also Alan Donagan, The Later Philosophy ofR. G. Collingwood, p. 28. 

260 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
tendency to revert to the old ways would in that case be very 
strong.190 
CoUingwood faces the objection that such a tendency would not 
survive into a second generation unless there were something of the 
kind caUed an occult entity, like racial temperament or inheritance 
of acquired characteristics, and that he is therefore talking psychol­
ogy. His reply is: " I am not taUdng psychology, and shaU not ask help 
from its exponents; for I regard the kind of psychology that deals with 
this kind of question as a sham science. I am talking history." 1 9 1 A 
warlike people at a certain historical crisis turns peaceful; its warUke 
tendencies survive in the first generation and are sternly repressed; 
the moral education of the chUdren carefuUy points out that they must 
on no account indulge in the forbidden pleasures of war. The parent 
is asked, 'What is War?' In explaining, emphasising the moral wrong-
ness of war, the parent makes plain that war was a great thing whUe 
it lasted and that he would love to fight his neighbors again U only 
he did not know that he ought not. The chUdren thus learn not only 
that war is wrong but that it was something grand and pass this on 
to their own chUdren. 
Thus the transmission by educational means of any moral ideal 
which involves the outlawry of an institution or custom, and the 
repression of a desire for it, entaUs the simultaneous transmission 
of that desire itself. The chüdren of each generation are taught to 
want what they are taught they must not have.192 
Where the new ways prove successful and satisfying the old ways 
wUl disappear more rapidly. But where the new ways are displayed 
with only a mediocre degree of success you can be sure that the 
discarded ways are remembered with regret and that "the tradition 
of their glories is being tenaciously kept alive." 1 9 3 
Applying this to the then current problem of the revival of Celtic 
art he was able to establish that there was in fact a connection be­
tween two weU known facts hitherto not thought to be connected, 
namely, the badness of Romanizing British art on the one hand and 
the Celtic revival on the other. The applied principle also unexpect­
edly threw light on another puzzling fact, namely, the recognized 
masterpiece of the degenerate period, the famous Bath Gorgon which 
1 9 0 R. G. ColUngwood, An Autobiography, p. 141. 
1 9 1 Urid., p. 143. 
1 9 2 Bid. 
1 9 3 mid. 

History as the Science of Mind 
261 
was shown to be inspired, not by the 'classical' art, but by Celtic art, 
and was probably not the work of Briton but of Gaul. 1 9 4 
While he recognizes that the "use of epigraphic material is a 
magnificent exercise for an historian just beginning to shake himself 
free from the scissors-and-paste mentality" 1 9 5 CoUingwood says that 
"the epigraphic historian as such can never be wholly Baconian in 
spirit," for "regarded as documents, inscriptions teU you less, under 
critical scrutiny, than literary texts . . . " 1 9 6 He says that inscriptions 
themselves were of little service to his Romano-British studies 1 9 7 and 
"on the questions which I particularly wanted to ask it happened that 
inscriptions threw hardly any light." 1 9 8 Such work he regarded as 
buUding a monument to the past rather than forging a weapon for 
the future of historical research. 1 9 9 
L. Transition to Evaluation 
The foregoing chapters have attempted to expose CoUingwood's 
theory of the logic of question and answer as this is alleged by him 
to be the proper logical mstrument of historical thought. It now remains 
to review Collingwood's position as set out above in order to evaluate 
it critically and try to distinguish what is acceptable from what is to 
be emended or rejected. 
First, Collingwood's identUication of the questioning and answer­
ing activity with knowledge wUl be critically evaluated and found to 
be not totaUy in accordance with facts, especiaUy certain facts pertaining 
to scientUic discovery. This will be done in Chapter 7. In this chapter 
we wUl make a preliminary evaluation of CoUingwood's identUica­
tion of propositional meaning with the answer to a question, but the 
fuU evaluation of this central point wUl be in Chapter 9. 
Chapter 8 wiU criticize CoUingwood for neglecting to give due con­
sideration to an already weU developed logic of interrogation in the 
Aristotelian tradition, and, in terms of the criteria of that logic, the 
criticism wiU be made that Collingwood himself proceeds by a defec­
tive order of questioning. 
Chapter 9 will investigate the questioning methodology which 
many historians, in agreement with CoUingwood, aUege to be the pro-
1 9 4 See ibid., p. 144. 
195 Urid., p. 145. 
196 Void., p. 146. 
1 9 7 See ibid., p. 145. 
1 9 8 Md., p. 146. 
1 9 9 See ibid. 

262 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
cedure proper to historical thought. A n important correlation wffl be 
made between the concrete universal as exposed by CoUingwood and 
the concrete unity in diversity in human consciousness effected by 
linguistic communication which operates basicaUy by a question and 
answer process. It wUl be shown, in agreement with Collingwood, 
that man, inasmuch as he is a being who increasingly acquires com­
mand over his seU-development through free, creative, developing 
self-consciousness, has a history which unfolds as a process of raising 
and solving problems. By historical knowledge, past achievements 
* are constantly renewed in present consciousness. By a critical, ques­
tioning activity centered on the vestiges of the human past these 
vestiges become portents of future progress. But CoUingwood wffl be 
criticized for absorbing aU human activity and aU human meaning into 
that which is created by unfolding consciousness. It wffl be shown 
that the natural world, including man's consciousness as this is part 
of the natural world, in addition to being meaningful in relation to 
freely posited human projects, has also a meaning in its own right, 
and that science, inasmuch as it is concerned about this natural world, 
enjoys its own autonomous domain of competence without being 
absorbed into history. Propositional meaning wUl be shown to be of 
two kinds. One kind of propositional meaning is in relation to freely 
posited human projects and interests. This meaning consists precise­
ly in the proposition's function as answering a question, which ques­
tion articulates the historically determined human interest of the 
questioner. But it wffl further be shown, in opposition to CoUingwood, 
that propositions, as saying something about the natural world, have 
a meaning in themselves, quite distinct from their capacity to answer 
questions (though not necessarUy separate from that capacity). 
Chapter 10, finally, wUl endeavour to come to grips with the logic 
of questioning at the basis of history in terms of trying to show how 
human progress in the raising and solving of problems, which basical­
ly characterizes human history, is subject to rational and logical direc­
tion. A n attempt by the present author to carry Collingwood's ideas 
on interrogative logic some steps further is made in Appendix I I . 

PART II: EVALUATION 
CHAPTER S E V E N 
Knowledge as Question and Answer 
A. Criticism of Collingwood's Attack on Realism 
Collingwood's reasons for identifying knowledge with the activ­
ity of raising and answering questions are, not surprisingly, historical 
in origin. On his own account in his Autobiography this identification 
is his reaction to Cook Wilson's position that "knowledge makes no 
difference to what is k n o w n . " 1 He criticizes Alexander, who recom­
mends that metaphysicans adopt "an attitude of natural piety" 2 con­
sequent upon Alexander's description of knowledge "as the mere 
'compresence' of a mind with an object." 3 He criticizes the Positivists' 
attitude that " i f the function of thought is to classify observed facts, 
there must be facts available for classification before thought can begin 
to operate." Thought, for them, is basicaUy a passive submission to 
facts, "and once facts are avaUable there is no need to presuppose 
anything. You just set to work and classify them." 4 Throughout Col­
lingwood's works there is the overriding presupposition of the pure 
activity of the rnind, expressed in the statement that "the mind is what 
1 R. G. CoUingwood, An Autobiography, p. 44. 
2 R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 174. 
3 Tbid., p. 177. 
4 Jbid., p. 146. 
263 

264 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
it does," 5 which is essentiaUy tied up with the assertion that "thought 
is primarily practical; and only in the second place theoretical." 6 
"Man's rnind is made of thought," 7 and in this activity of thinking, 
the questioning activity, the mind determines itsetf to be the kind of 
thing that it is. Even though "for a man about to act, the situation 
is his master, his oracle, his god," nevertheless "the freedom that 
there is in history consists in the fact that this compulsion is imposed 
upon the activity of human reason not by anything else, but by itsetf." 8 
. CoUingwood argues that realistic attitudes, according to which the 
mind in knowing would simply be submissive to an external object, 
which enjoys some identity in itsetf independently of its being known 
by the mind, and to which "knowledge makes no dUference," speUs 
bankruptcy in moral matters and political affairs. 9 
But CoUingwood's extreme reaction to the realists' position, which 
maintains that "knowledge makes no dUference to what is known," 
seems to be based on a naive and simpUstic interpretation of that state­
ment by Cook WUson. For exactly the same reasons we could reject 
ColUngwood's own theory of conscious reflection. 
Colour, or anger, which is no longer merely seen or felt but 
attended to, is stUl colour or anger. When we become conscious of 
it, it is stUl the very same colour and the very same anger. But the 
total experience of seeing or feeling it has undergone a change, and 
in that change what we see or feel is correspondingly changed . . . 
the change which Hume describes by speaking of the difference be­
tween an impression and an idea.10 
Just as feeUngs attentively reflected upon remain feeUngs (although 
becoming conscious feeUngs), so also things known remain the things 
that they are, although, in knowledge, they become known. It is in 
this sense that knowledge makes no dUference to what is known, just 
as becoming conscious of our feeUngs makes no dUference to feelings 
inasmuch as they stUl remain feelings, tf reaUsm is to be rejected 
because it asserts that knowledge makes no dUference to what is 
known, so likewise CoUingwood's various levels of conscious reflec­
tion are to be rejected. Collingwood takes the dictum "knowledge 
makes no dUference to what is k n o w n " as U it meant that the situa-
5 R. G. ColUngwood, Religion and Phüosophy, p. 34; see also A. Shalom, R. G. Col­
lingwood, philosophe et historien, p. 7. See also Chapter 6 above, pp. 231-238. 
6 R. G . CoUingwood, The New Leviathan, p. 5. 
7 Tbid. 
8 R. G. CoUingwood, The ldea ofHistory, pp. 316-317. 
9 See R. G . ColUngwood, An Autobiography, pp. 47-50. 
1 0 R. G . Collingwood, The Printipks ofArt, pp. 206-207. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
265 
tion of knowing leaves affairs just as they were if no knowing were 
done. Ji I know that arsenic is deadly poisonous, my knowledge is 
not going to make one bit of difference to the poisoning capacity of 
arsenic, but it wiU certainly make a great deal of dUference to the way 
I behave in regard to arsenic. Thus, it wUl be restrained as regards 
its opportunities to poison, given that I know its poisoning potential. 
So, knowledge both does and does not make a difference to what 
is known, just as the attention by which I become conscious of my 
feelings does and does not make a dUference to those feelings. The 
feelings become conscious feelings and subjected to my control, but 
they do not thereby cease to be feelings. Arsenic stUl poisons just as 
much after I know this as it does before, but it ceases to have some 
opportunities of doing so. The Cook WUson realists in asserting one 
aspect of knowledge are not thereby denying the other aspect, just 
as when CoUingwood asserts that attention makes no dUference to 
feelings (as feelings) he is not denying that consciousness makes a 
great deal of dUference to feeUngs (which are transformed into 
domesticated, objectivized, regulated feeUngs). John WUd neatly ex­
presses the matter as foUows: 
The act of knowing internaUy relates itseU to the object known. 
To attain such knowledge makes an important dUference to the 
knower. But this" relation is whoUy external to the entity known, 
which suffers no real internal change from being known. 1 1 
In his act of knowing a knower is reaUy related to what he knows 
by that act. That is, being related to the object known belongs to what 
it is to be an act of knowing; it is constitutive of the act in its very 
being an act of knowledge. But in being known, the thing known gets 
its relation to the act of knowledge in that act in the knower, not in 
its own entity. The moon is known to be a moon not in the moon 
itseU but in the mind of an observer. The manUestness which it acquires 
in becoming known is not a change internal to it. A known moon is 
not a dUferent kind of moon from a real moon. Whatever change 
becoming known effects, it does not affect whatever internaUy con­
stitutes the moon to be a moon. 1 2 
B. Language Describing Sensations Presupposes 
Corresponding Physical Objects 
Again, in The Principles ofArt,13 
Collingwood assumes the Berke-
" The Challenge ofExistentialism, Bloomington, Indiana UniversiryPress, 1955, p. 68. 
1 2 See Appendix 1, below, pp. 441^44. 
1 3 p. 169. 

266 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
leyan principle 'esse est sentiri' in regard to our sensations. But when 
he attempts to explain the meaning of the statement 'this is my hat/ 
he inadvertently slips into physical-object language, describing that 
complex sensation not merely in terms of sensa and the relations be­
tween them, as a consistent phenomenalist should, but in terms of 
two physical objects, the hat and the peg in the haU on which it hangs. 
. . . instead of identifying the class of sensa he meant without 
referring to physical objects he located them in physical space by 
s reference to two physical objects. No phenomenalist reduction of 
objects of sensation to sensa whose esse is conceived as sentiri can 
escape this dUficulty; the class of sensa to which the objects of sen­
sation are reduced can only be identified by reference to physical 
objects.14 
Donagan explains that CoUingwood confuses the inabUity of a sen-
sum to be a sensum when it is not actuaUy being sensed with its in­
abUity to be anything at aU when it is not being sensed. 
Collingwood seems to have confounded the obvious truth that 
only whUe it is sensed does a sensum exist as a sensum with the 
pleasantry that when it is not being sensed it cannot exist as any­
thing whatever. WhUe the former is compatible with the common-
sense view that the moon is your sensum (i.e. what you see) when­
ever you see it, the latter is not; for although the moon ceases to 
exist as your sensum when you stop looking at it, it does not cease 
to exist as the moon. 1 5 
Donagan does not merely repel CoUingwood's anti-reaUst phe-
nomenaUst attack, but advances positive evidence for mamtaining that 
the esse of a sensum is not reduced without remainder to its sentiri.16 
He says that the strongest argument for the realism of sensed objects 
is that every natural language speaks meaningfuUy of our sensations 
by referring them to a world of physical objects. 
Can it be shown that such things as the moon are genuinely 
'sensed'? . .. The strongest argument for asserting that most of our 
sensa are physical objects, and so can exist unsensed, is that every 
natural language in which men speak of what they see, hear, feel, 
taste, and smeU is a physical object language. It does not seem to 
be possible to think in any sustained way about more than a frac­
tion of what you 'sense' except in terms of physical objects. The 
reason for beUeving that the greater part of what you 'sense' con-
1 4 A. Donagan, The Later Philosophy of R. G. Collingzoood, p. 35. 
1 5 Tbid., p. 33. 
1 6 See ibid. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
267 
sists of physical objects in a physical world is not that physical objects 
are data of sensation, but that the only coherent general account 
of what you sense that can be given is in terms of physical objects. 
Berkeley was unable to forestaU this argument, and CoUingwood 
fared no better.17 
bi his last work, The New Leviathan,16 CoUingwood asks, "Are there 
objects of feeUng or not?" and answers, " I do not know. Nobody 
knows. Some have said there are, some have said there are not." He 
denies that an answer is possible on positive grounds, but gives a neg­
ative answer on methodological grounds. "The question is whether 
a theory of feeUng needs objects as weU as modes. The Lockean theory 
does, the Cartesian does not. By Occam's Razor the Cartesian theory 
is preferable," 1 9 so that "what is felt consists simply of modes of feel­
ing, and not of objects. . . . " 2 0 
But, for the reasons given immediately above, Donagan insists 
that feeUng has not merely modes, 2 1 but also objects which can only 
be physical realities. 
FeeUng has objects; and since it appears to be impossible to form 
any inteUigible notion of what are most of the objects that anybody 
feels, except the common-sense one that they are parts of his body 
and its physical surroundings, it is reasonable to conclude that most 
of the objects of feeling are physical.22 
Although this may not suffice to set realism up as an established 
theory of knowledge in place of CoUingwood's anti-reaUst phe­
nomenalism, it does point out that ColUngwood's reasons against 
realism retroact just as unfavourably against his own theory of con­
scious reflection, and that the natural language used by CoUingwood 
to express his own convictions seems to be voided of meaning in the 
absence of the presupposition of an objective physical world to which 
it refers. Granted the fundamental role which CoUingwood accords 
to language following Hobbes, 2 3 and the importance he attaches 
17 Dnd., p. 34. Emphasis added. 
1 8 p. 28. 
1 9 R. G. ColUngwood, The New Leviathan, p. 31. 
2 0 A. Donagan, The Later Philosophy of R. G. Collingwood, p. 36. 
2 1 "At the level of first-order consciousness, a man wiU be conscious of how what 
is felt looks, sounds, feete, tastes and smeUs, and of its corresponding emotional 
charges. So much appears to be secure." A. Donagan, The Later Philosophy ofR. G. 
Collingwood, p. 36. 
И
М 
2 3 See R. G. ColUngwood, The New Leviathan, Ch. 6, pp. 40-46. See also ColUng­
wood's Principks ofArt, Ch. 11, pp. 225-269 and Alan Donagan, The Later Phüosophy 
of R. G. Collingwood, pp. 40^6; 50-54. 

268 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
to the ordinary usage of language, 2 4 this latter objection is especially 
serious. 
C. Not AU Scientific Discoveries Are Answers to Questions 
Another serious objection to CoUingwood's reduction of knowl­
edge to the activity of question and answer is the fact that many gen­
uine discoveries in science are either made without there being any 
deliberate searching for what was found, or something quite unex­
pected turns up in the search for something quite dUferent. 
Norbert Hanson 2 5 speaks of what he caUs the 'trip-over' discov­
ery. j"What characterizes the 'trip-over' discovery is the absence of 
any expectation of such a happening ever turning up at aU." 2 6 He 
discusses cases "distinguished by their total lack of relevant antici-
pation—psychologicaUy and theoreticaUy" in which the discoverer "is 
totally unprepared for the totally unexpected—both in the psycho­
logical and in the theoretical sense." 2 7 He cites as instances28 first 
the Coelacanth, which "turned up in 1938 when fishermen threw their 
nets into the sea off Madagascar in search of their next meal, and then 
dredged up the remarkable 'Uving fossU' so much discussed since"; 
and, secondly "the black swan Captain Cook is reputed to have 
encountered in Australia . . . Cook was not searching for black swans; 
indeed . . . probably he would have denied the possibUity of a 
swan being black." Hanson says29 that "these two discoveries, of 
the Coelacanth and of the black swan, are 'trip-over' discoveries par 
excellence. There was no reason to expect objects of this kind to mate-
riaUze." " I t just happened that way." Again, "Becquerel wasn't open­
ing his desk drawer looking for an example of radioactivity, for he 
hadn't an inkling that there ought be such a phenomenon. He was 
not in a 'set of expectation' psychologically or theoreticaUy, with 
respect to such a happening." 3 0 SimUarly "Herschel . . . was not 
searching the heavens for some as yet undetected object. [His] goal 
was only to map the sky in detaU. Uranus just 'turned up' before his 
telescope." 3 1 
2 4 See R. G. CoUingwood, The Principles of Art, pp. 250-251. 
2 5 See his " A n Anatomy of Discovery," in The Journal ofPhilosophy, LXIV (1967), 
pp. 321-352. 
2 6 Md., p. 334. 
2 7 Tbid., p. 335. Emphasis in original. 
2 8 Md. 
2 9 Tbid. 
3 0 Md. Emphasis in original. 
3 1 Ibid. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
269 
Perhaps the best example of the 'trip-over' discoverer is Galileo, 
whose "initial encounters with Jupiter's sateUites, with Saturn's 
rings, and with our moon's craters, were unprepared for both psy-
chologicaUy and theoreticaUy." 3 2 Hanson maintains that aU scientUic 
theories prevaUing at the time would have been hostUe to the dis­
covery of craters on the surface of the moon, which, "being a celes­
tial object, ought not to be pock-marked and 'imperfect' as GalUeo 
reported it to be." 3 3 "Almost aU discoveries of comets are 'trip-over' 
discoveries." 3 4 Carl Anderson's discovery of the positive electron 
in 1932 was made whUe he was engaged in work of a quite distinct 
kind which at no time included the discovery of a positively charged 
electron in his original project's formal expectations. And "when 
the remarkable trace of August 2 'materialized', Anderson and his 
associate Neddermeyer were stunned. It required four months of 
study and deliberation for these men to 'see' the particle proper­
l y . " 3 5 
'Trip-over' discoveries, " i n which there is no theoretical posture 
at aU with respect to the discovery in question," in which "no ante­
cedent theoretical or psychological expectations furrow the frontiers 
of inquiry," contrast with what Hanson caUs 'back-into' discoveries, 
in which there is not merely no pre-setting of the discoverer but rather 
"a strong resistance in the investigator against expecting such a 
discovery ever."36 In these instances "aU theoretical expectation is 
against coming up with this discovery . . . [but] the facts won't let 
him do anything but discover the awkward thing in question—and 
so much the worse for his theories." 3 7 Thus "the negative effect of 
the Michelson-Morley experiment (which suggested the nonexistence 
of the aether) constituted an encounter of just this variety." 3 8 The 
response which Michelson and Morley got to the question which their 
experiment directed towards reality, namely, how fast does the aether 
pass the earth as the earth travels through it, was a retroaction over 
the very conditions of the meaningfulness of the question (or over 
the presuppositions which made it a reasonable question in CoUing­
wood's terminology). 
3 2 Md. 
3 3 Md., pp. 335-336. Emphasis in original. 
3 4 H>id., p. 336. 
3 5 Vbid. 
3 6 Vrid., pp. 336-337. Emphasis in original. 
37 Tbid., p. 336. 
3 8 Md., p. 337. 

270 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The objective of setting up his ingeniously designed interfero­
meter was just to check the so-caUed 'aetherwind'—its magnitude 
and precise physical effects. Michelson had no doubt that there was 
an aether and a resultant "wind." That his careful experiment 
generated a negative effect... was a theoretical disaster for classical 
electrodynamics. И one considers Michelson's research expectations 
and the theoretical framework within which he was working, the 
last thing he expected was a negative effect of this kind—this being 
tantamount to a discovery of the nonexistence of the aether.39 
Such a 'discovery,' U one can say that Michelson 'discovered' the 
non-existence of an aether, can only be, Hanson says, a 'back-into' 
discovery, a regression, on which a previously accepted standpoint 
(a presupposition in CoUingwood's terrninology) which formed the 
basis of the investigation had to be relinquished. So that the answer 
to the question, U answer it can be caUed, is to nuUUy one of the prere­
quisites of the validity of the question. Consequently, "his 'negative 
effect' became the major observational datum in support of Einstein's 
theory of Special Relativity." 4 0 
Other instances of the 'back-into' discovery cited by Hanson are 
the discovery of the positron by Dirac, "who made every conceiv­
able effort from 1928 untU 1931 to 'cook-away' this awkward theoret­
ical blemish within his otherwise spectacularly successful electron 
theory." After every attempt to explain the facts without recourse to 
'positive electrons' he was forced finaUy to admit their existence, which 
gave rise to the question as to why they had not hitherto been 
observed. But within six months the hitherto unknown positrons 
showed their tracks in "a 'trip-over' discovery by Anderson in con­
firmation of a 'back-into' discovery." 4 1 
The inadequacy of any advance programming of scientific research 
in terms of predetermined questions is weU stated by Michael Polanyi 
as foUows: 
The science of today serves as a heuristic guide for its own 
further development. It conveys a conception about the nature of 
things which suggests to the enquiring mind an inexhaustible range 
of surmises. The experience of Columbus, who so fatefully mis­
judged his own discovery, is inherent to some extent in aU discovery. 
The impUcations of new knowledge can never be known at its birth. 
For it speaks of something real, and to attribute reality to something 
3 9 Tbid., p. 337. 
4 0 Md. 
4 1 Md., p. 338. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
271 
is to express the beUef that its presence wiU yet show up in an in­
definite number of unpredictable ways.42 
D. Even the Question Itself Is Not Purely 
an Activity of the Mind 
This is not by any means a substitution of 'expect the unexpected' 
for CoUingwood's "revolution which converts a blind and random 
study into one where definite questions are asked and definite answers 
are insisted u p o n . " 4 3 Between the random study of searching "just 
to see what we can find o u t " 4 4 and rigid adherence to the clear-cut 
question formulated, there is a middle way more in accord with expe­
rience. AU the whUe remaining "certain that you can satisfy an mquirer 
who asks you: What are you doing this piece of work for?" 4 5 one can 
and must maintain a constant reservation, or questioning attitude, 
even with respect to the very question itselfwhich dominates and motivates 
the investigation. Not only does the answer to a question depend on 
the question, but the very question of the questioner has a certain 
dependence on the answer and has to carry with it a certain abeyance 
or suspension with respect to the formcoming, hoped-for answer. This 
is particularly true in historical investigation, as is weU explained by 
Marrou: 
The historian begins by posing a question to himseU. . . . The 
question which started the whole process in motion does not main­
tain its original identity, but in contact with the documentary data 
it is continuously changing. 
Suddenly the historian realizes, for instance, that the question 
was preposterous and anachronistic ("the problem does not even 
arise"). He learns to formulate it in more precise terms, better 
adapted to the nature of the object. This is the advantage to be 
derived from a provisional setf-effacement. Instead of an impatient 
interrogation constantly interrupting the witness to teU him, "Get 
back to the question!" the historian asks the document, "What are 
you? Help me to know you." 4 6 
E. CoUingwood's Theory of Knowledge Based on 
Undue Absolutization of the Juridical Mode of Questioning 
It is here that we must take issue with what CoUingwood caUs 
his Baconian attitude to questioning. This attitude unduly inflates the 
4 2 Michael Poknyi, Personal Knowkdge, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1962, 
p. 311. See also Appendix 2 below, p. 484. 
4 3 R. G. ColUngwood, An Autobiography, p. ΏΑ. 
4 4 Md., p. 122. See also p. 125. 
4 5 Tbid., p. 126. 
4 6 H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning of History, p. 131. 

272 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
autonomy of the questioner and the dommating activity of the mind 
to the depreciation of the positive activity on the part of the interro­
gated object or person in the contribution to the answer to the question. 
Bacon, whose scientific method of interrogating nature is CoUing­
wood's model for historical methodology, "wrote Uke a lawyer arguing 
a case, rather than like a scientist solving a problem; or, as was said 
of him, he wrote phUosophy 'like a Lord ChanceUor'. WeU he might: 
He was Lord Chancellor." 4 7 Since the tune of Descartes, the fear of 
error has taken on the aspect of an obsessive neurosis in modern 
thought. Descartes' second Meditation betrays this exaggerated fear 
in"setting aside aU that in which the least doubt can be supposed 
to exist, just as U I had discovered that it was absolutely false." 4 8 The 
same neurotic obsession with the danger of error, more exactly with 
the danger of being 'deceived,' pervades Bacon's expurgation of the 
mind of its various idols. 4 9 Bacon, the phUosopher of scientUic meth­
odology, exorcising the mind of aU its anticipations of nature, and 
putting nature to the question, is heavUy under the influence of Bacon 
the jurist, the Lord ChanceUor.50 
CoUingwood's questioning theory of knowledge and of histori­
cal methodology, based as it is on Descartes' and Bacon's radical mental 
hygiene, is both heir to and victim of this exaggerated fear of decep­
tion by a presumed untrustworthy witness. 5 1 Even the existence of 
cheating documents is no excuse for the exaggerated mental hygiene 
of excessive precaution against Ukely deception. The sober, balanced 
4 7 T. W. Organ, TheArt ofCritical Thinking, Boston, Houghton Mifflin Co., 1965, 
p. 110. It may also be noted that Vico, whose name stands at the fountainhead of 
the modern attempt to do justice to history and its methodology, the man whose New 
Science sought to do for historical methodology what Descartes sought to do for 
mathematical methodology, was a lawyer. B. MazUsh, in The Riddle ofHistory, New 
York, Harper and Row, 1966, p. 13, says that "Vico's legal studies colored his whole 
thought, and it is important to emphasize here that Vico, Uke his contemporary, 
Montesquieu, was a jurist." 
4 8 See Vol. 1 of the E. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross edition of the Philosophical Works 
of Descartes, New York, Dover, 1955, p. 149. 
4 9 J. Spedding, R. L. ElUs and D. D. Heath edition of The Works ofFrancis Bacon, 
London, Longman and Co., 1857-1874. See Vol. 4 (1868), Aphorisms XXXVin to LXH, 
pp. 53^4. 
5 0 Bacon, however, aUowed himseU a moment of juridical forgetfumess when he 
more humanely said that "entrance into the human kingdom based on sciences is 
lÜce entrance into the kingdom of heaven in that each proceeds with the simplicity 
of a chUd." See Vol. 4 of Spedding, EUis and Heath edition of The Works ofFrancis 
Bacon, Aphorism LXVTfl, p. 69. 
5 1 H.-I. Marrou, in his The Meaning ofHistory, p. 103, remarks that "methodical 
distrust is the form that the Cartesian principle of methodical doubt wiU take when 
applied to history." 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
273 
attitude which the historian should maintain in regard to possibly 
deceptive documents is thus explained by A. Nevins: 
The cheating document seldom imposes (at least for any length 
of time) upon any but the ignorant or careless. A combination of 
scholarly knowledge and common sense can in ninety-nine instances 
out of a hundred expose it—but they must be reinforced by constant 
vigilance.52 
This constant vigilance advocated by Nevins is very different from 
treating as false anything one may have the least suspicion to doubt, 
as Descartes does. 
The point to be made here, in criticizing CoUingwood's theory 
of knowledge as questioning, is that fear of error arising from the pos­
sibUity of deception by an untrustworthy witness, or witnesses teU-
ing conflicting stories about the same thing, 5 3 is not the only reason 
we may have for questioning. That is, not aU questioning is the ques­
tioning of a hostile witness suspected of intent to deceive. 
F. Questioning Not a Mere Extortion of Information 
Under Duress: Questioning from Wonder and 
from Sympathetic Connaturality 
From the beg^ning of human inquiry, and throughout its history, 
there has always been recognized a more fundamental, more congenial 
motivation for questioning than that designed to expose a deceiver. 
There is that inquiry in which Plato and Aristotle consider phUosophy 
to have had its begirming, namely the inquuy that starts from wonder. 
. . . Wonder is the feeUng of a phUosopher, and phUosophy 
begins in wonder . . . 5 4 
. . . it is owing to their wonder that men both now begin and 
first began to philosophize; they wondered originaUy at the obvious 
dUficulties, then advanced Uttle by Uttle and stated difficulties about 
the greater matters, e.g., about the phenomena of the moon and 
those of the sun and of the stars, and about the genesis of the 
universe. And a man who is puzzled and wonders thinks himseU 
ignorant. . . therefore since they phUosophized in order to escape 
5 2 A. Nevins, Gateway to History, New York, Doubleday, 2nd ed., 1962, p. 137. 
5 3 See, for example, L.-M. R£gis, Epistemology, New York, Macmillan, 1959, pp. 
7 et seq., for the problem arising due totwo storytellers in us regarding the external 
world, the senses testifying to movement and multiplicity, the intellect testifying to 
the unity and seU-identity of reality. 
5 4 Plato, Theatetus, see Vol. 2 of B. Jowett's translation of The Dialogues ofPlato, 
New York, Random House, 1937, p. 157. 

274 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
from ignorance, evidently they were pursuing science in order to 
knoW/ and not for any utüitarian end. 5 5 
A striking instance of philosophical wonder closer to our own time 
is recorded by H . Spiegelberg in regard to Husserl. 
Phenomenology in general may be characterized as a philosophy 
which has learned to wonder again and to respect wonders for what 
they are in themselves, where others see only trivialities or occa­
sions to employ the cleaning brush. But not aU these wonders are 
of equal importance. To Husserl in particular there was one wonder 
which exceeded them aU,' 'the wonder of aU wonders,'' as he caUed 
it: "the pure ego and pure consciousness." [Ideen Ш, Husserliana, 
- Vol. 75.] The wonder about this phenomenon seems to have been 
the focal and fundamental experience of Husserl's philosophical exis­
tence, and it became so increasingly, as his phenomenology devel­
oped. The central mystery was to Husserl not Being as such, but 
the fact that there is such a thing in this world as a being that is 
aware of its own being and of other beings. This fascination accounts 
for Husserl's growing emphasis on the subjective aspect of pheno­
menology andfor its shtft from the "object" to the subjectivity of 
the existing ego.56 
At the beginning of his Metaphysics, Aristotle says that "aU men 
by nature desire to know." Prior to any anxiety to take precautions 
against likely deception, there is the questioning which arises spon­
taneously upon the encounter with the presence of 'the other' in Uved 
experience.57 Wonder is the expression of this spontaneous desire to 
get to know that 'other.' In wonder, there is knowledge (e.g., of an 
eclipse experienced to be taking place) plus ignorance (as to why the 
sun's Ught should be darkened) plus fear on account of that ignorance, 
not fear of being deceived, but fear simply of the unknown, since the 
unknown is threatening. 
In the experience of wonder the mind is spUt within itseU, into 
the mind knowing and the (same) mind not knowing in regard to the 
same object. Knowing that it does not know, that is, knowing its ig­
norance, it is UteraUy diseased within itseU and consequently ex­
periences a tendency to shake off that disquieting feeling by striving 
to know what it does not know. This striving within itseU to over-
5 5 Aristotle, Metaphysics, Book I, Ch. 2, 982b 10-25, trans. W. D. Ross in The Basic 
Works ofAristotk, ed. Richard McKeon, New York, Random House, 1941, p. 692. 
5 6 H. Spiegelberg, The Phenomenological Movement, The Hague, M. Nijhoff, 1969, 
Vol. 1, p. 87. 
5 7 See M. Heidegger, Being and Time, translated by John Macquarrie and Edward 
Robinson, New York, Harper and Row, 1962, pp. 24-35; also K. Rahner, Spirit and 
the WorU, translated by W. Dych, Montreal, Palm PubHshers, 1968, pp. 57^5. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
275 
come its own ignorance is expressed and articulated as a question. 
Because the rnind is split into a duality of itsetf-knowing and itsetf 
knowingits lack of knowledge it can dialogue with itself. The strive 
to overcome ignorance thus takes the form of a setf-interrogation. 
Questioning, therefore, may arise simply from wonder, as a spon­
taneous response to a together known and unknown presence, and 
not exclusively from doubt caused by conflicting testimonies on the 
suspicion that one is being deceived. 
L.-M. Regis contrasts the ignorance at the basis of wonder with 
the ignorance at the basis of doubt. 
The ignorance at the root of wonder is directly concerned with 
things; its object is the complex aspects of the same reality, a com­
plexity that seems disordered and therefore urdhteUigible. The ignor­
ance that is the weUspring of doubt is not concerned with things 
but bears directly upon the proofs of our causal knowledge of things. 
It has as its object the explanation or vindication of the truths we 
possess.58 
Regis says, further, that wonder can result from our ignorance 
as is indicated by the infinite number of 'whys' asked by children "who 
wonder at everything because they know nothing." And then there 
is the wonder which accompanies us throughout our lives "whenever 
we embark upon a field of research new to us."59 
Wonder is outgoing to 
things to be known, doubt is reflexive and concerned with the insecur­
ity of our knowledge of things. 
Doubt is not concerned with things, or with primary evidence, 
or with the immediate knowledge of contingent things, but solely 
with concluded truth whose cause is not evident when it should be. 
Strictly speaking doubt is the contrary of science, when the latter 
is taken in the formal sense of a conclusion known through the 
causality of premisses.60 
Skepticism is aligned with doubt but not with wonder, although 
skepticism is by no means identical with doubt. 6 1 The opposite of 
wonder is an insensitivity to the presence of something exceeding our 
knowledge of i t . 6 2 
The scientific quest for knowledge takes us away from the imme­
diacy of the wonder-producing encounter. The object of scientific 
5 8 L.-M. Rägis, Epistemology, p. 26. 
59 wid., pp. 26-27. Emphasis added. 
6 0 flrid., p. 27. Emphasis in original. 
6 1 See ibid., pp. 27-28. 
6 2 See Sam Keen, Apologyfor Wonder, New York, Harper and Row, 1969, pp. 26-27 
and 29-40. 

276 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
thought is not a presence, a thou, or a mystery, but a problem to 
be solved.63 
The deficiency in CoUingwood's theory of questioning should now 
be making its presence felt. Any philosophy which absorbs the whole 
of that which is into rnind thinking about that which is, is going to 
maximize or inflate questioning arising from doubt and minimize or 
ignore questioning arising from wonder, or from concern with the 
objectively present as a genuine other. This is speciaUy true in history, 
in which the primary orientation of the historian's questioning is not 
to torture the truth from a hostile and deceptive witness but rather 
to get to know the other as another seU. History puts the historian 
'in the presence' of 'other peoples,' with their thoughts, purposes 
and achievements, as objects 'to be wondered at' and whom the 
historian naturally wants 'to get to know.' 
G. Historical Knowledge as Familiar Knowledge 
Attained by Friendly Rather than Extortionate Questioning 
Marrou exploits the notion of sympathetic connaturality between 
the historian and the object of his inquiry. He explains that the basic 
attitude of the historian to the object of his investigation, whether a 
present document or past event known by means of the document, 
is that of a friend to a friendseeking familiarity one with the other. 
Speaking precisely of 'history as friendship,' Marrou says: 
Anyone who thinks too much, too soon or solely of using his 
friends can neither reaUy love them nor know them; friendship and 
business relations are not to be confused. History furthermore 
assumes a centrifugal rather than an egocentric inner attitude, and 
an opening out towards others which demands that we mute our 
existentialist preoccupations.64 
The knowledge sought by the historian is famUiar knowledge, 
famUiarity with the object of his research, the type of knowledge by 
which the members of a famUy know and desire to know one another. 
Marrou insists that the basic condition of historical knowledge of the 
past is that the historian, confronted with the document or other trace 
of the past event, or with the deciphered past event itseU, sees in that 
'other' something of 'setf.' A basic connaturality, a basis for trust­
worthiness and famUiarity, is the first condition of the possibUity of 
historical knowledge of the past. 
63 Tbid., p. 33. 
6 4 H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning of History, p. 224. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
277 
Κ piistorical] understanding is really that dialectical relationship 
of the Same with the Other which we have described, it presupposes 
the existence of a broad basis of fraternal communion between the 
subject and the object, between historian and document. (Let us also 
say, more precisely, that it is presupposed between the historian 
and the man who is revealed through the document as by a sign 
or symbol.) How can we understand unless we have that attitude 
of mind which makes us connatural with others? It is this that 
enables us to feel their passions and re-conceive their ideas in the 
very light in which they were experienced—in short, it permits us 
to commune with them. Even the word "sympathy" is insufficient 
in this respect. Between the historian and his object a friendship 
must be formed, or how else can the historian understand?65 
This, incidentally, hits quite hard against Collingwood's notion 
of history as a reliving of past thoughts as distinct from past feelings. 
But, if one goes to Grand Pre, Nova Scotia, to an inconspicuous iron 
cross on which is inscribed: 
The dry bed of the creek which is in sight a few paces in the 
marsh is the SPOT where THE VICTIMS OF THE EXPULSION OF 
THE ACADIANS OF 1755 were embarked on the smaU boats to be 
rowed over to the transports lying at anchor in Minas Basin 
one relives not merely the past thoughts, but the anguished feelings 
of those people. 
Another historical incident in which the elements of feeling are 
relived just as much as the thoughts is related by Colin Ronan. 6 6 He 
tells how Sir WiUiam Huggins, when in 1908 found he no longer had 
the vitality to use his elaborate spectroscopic equipment, asked the 
Royal Society to see that it went to an institution which would carry 
on the spectrographic work he had pioneered. It was agreed, and 
arranged that the equipment be all removed to the Cambridge Depart­
ment of Astrophysics. Howard Grubb came from Dublin to super­
vise the removal, and Ronan cites the foUowing account from Grubb's 
notes: 
The Equatorial had been partiaUy dismounted; aU the numerous 
parts and attachments had been removed and were scattered over 
the floor, which was encumbered and littered with axes and various 
parts of the instrument, some of which had been arready placed in 
packing cases; and in the midst of this Utter, wrapped in a large cape 
and seated on a packing case, was Sir WUliam himself, and his 
faithful coUaboratrice who was flitting about watching the packing 
with keen interest and loving care. . . . Lady Huggins had asked 
65 Tbid., p. 104. Emphasis in original. 
6 6 CoHn Ronan, Astronomers Royal, New York, Doubleday, 
1969. 

278 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
me to let her know when I was ready to close the box (which con­
tained the large object-glass from the telescope), and when I inti­
mated that I had it safely in the case, she took Sir Wffliam by the 
hand and brought him across the room to have a last look at their 
very old friend . . . They gazed long and sadly before I closed the 
lid. 6 7 
Ronan concludes by saying that two years later Huggins died. In this 
historical account one relives not merely past thought decontextual-
ized from its associated emotion, but, if anything, the emotions rather 
tHan the thoughts. 
Marrou says that when Norbert Casteret discovered the clay image 
of a" quadruped pierced with iron-tipped spears he immediately 
recognized it as an instance of sympathetic magic practised by pre­
historic hunters similar to that practised by Eskimos of our own time. 
Marrou says that we understand this type of behaviour quite differ­
ently from the way we understand the disintegration of an atom. We 
understand it interiorly; it is through our interior knowledge of man 
and his potentialities that we understand these prehistoric hunters. 6 8 
However, we can only understand another by reason of his 
resemblance to ourselves. "Ц the Other were completely dissimilar 
and totally alien it is difficult to see how any understanding would 
be possible at aU." 6 9 But, paradoxicaUy, if it is through seU-knowledge 
that the historian knows the other, it is also through a certain seU-
forgetfulness, in which the Other is permitted to present its affilia­
tion with the historian's setf. 
The historian appears to us as a man who can transcend himself 
through epokM, a real seif-suspension in order to be outgoing in 
his encounter with the Other. We can give thisVirtue a name: it 
is caUed sympathy.70 
Marrou, on the other hand, is careful to point out that this con­
natural sympathy in "the dialectics of the Same and the Other" 7 1 does 
67 Ш., pp. 163-164. 
6 8 H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning ofHistory, p. 37. Marrou thus agrees with CoUing­
wood that we have an 'insight' into, or interior way of knowing, the human past, 
but Marrou's explanation in terms of sympathetic connaturality is quite diverse from 
ColUngwood's overly inteUectual explanation. Correlate with CoUingwood's criticism 
of Croce's advice to try to become a blade of grass U one wants to know its history; 
see The ldea of History, pp. 199-200. 
6 9 H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning of History, p. 93. 
70 B)id., p. 103. Again, p. 267, he says, "History begins only where the historian 
forgets himself enough to come out of himseU and go forward, openminded, toward 
the discovery and the encounter with the other." 
7 1 Md., p. 93. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
279 
not prejudice the critical spirit of the historian, 7 2 but this critical part 
of the historian's work is always subordinate to the positive, construc­
tive part. 
. . . it is always sympathy, the source and condition of under­
standing which represents the constructive phase. Criticism demol­
ishes the provisional edifice of imperfect knowledge and suggests 
requirements that are useful in the latter reconstruction, but of itseU 
it contributes little. 7 3 
Historical knowledge is the same type of knowledge as is found 
in our everyday experience when we become acquainted with another. 
We enter into possession of the human past on those psycho­
logical and metaphysical terms that in our daily life permit us to in­
crease our knowledge of this other. . . . [H]istory comes before the 
bar of human reason with the same claims of credibility as aU expe­
rience of the other.74 
H. Some Presuppositions to Questions Are 
Genuine Insights into Reality: Intuitive 
Reason vs. Constructive Reason 
N . Belnap, in an as yet unpublished report, 7 5 says that prior to 
Harrah's work on the logic of questioning (that is, prior to 1961) "most 
attempts at analysing questions concentrated on the consideration that 
asking a question ordinarily articulates a state of doubt." 7 6 But Bemap 
says that "Harrah's insight was that asking a question ako articulates 
a state of information. That is, although asking a question is not the 
same thing as making an assertion, nevertheless, to ask a question 
is, partly, to make an assertion. " 7 7 Now, when Belnap wants to fflus-
trate this, he uses the very same example CoUingwood had used in 
his Essay on Metaphysics to Ulustrate his (Collingwood's) theory of 
presuppositions, namely, the question "Have you stopped beating 
your wUe?" 7 8 Belnap says that to ask Jones this question is to assert 
72 Md., p. 104. 
73 Md., p. 105. 
74 Tbid., pp. 241-242. 
75 AnAnalysisofQuestions. fteHrrrinaryReport, June3,1963.Adoctunentproduced 
in connection with a research project sponsored by the independent research pro­
gram of the System Development Corporation, Santa Monica, CaUfornia. (Copy of 
this report made available by courtesy of System Development Corporation.) 
76 Ш., 
p. 8. 
77 B)id. For David Harrah's position, that "the question and answer process is in­
terpreted as an information-matching 
game," see his "Logic of Questions and 
Answers," in The PhihsophyofScience, XXVTfl (1961), pp. 40-46. 
78 An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 25-26, 38-39. See ako above, Chapter 5, p. 165. 

280 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
that Jones is married and used to beat his wife. CoUingwood had said 7 9 
that to ask Jones this question is to presuppose that Jones is married 
and used to beat his wife. And for CoUingwood, to suppose is not the 
same as to assert. Assertion belongs to propositions as answers to ques­
tions, supposal belongs to questioning as such. 8 0 Belnap says that "[to] 
ask, 'Did she wear the red hat or the green one?' is to assert that she 
wore one or the other but not (presumably) both." 8 1 That questions 
have an information-bearing content is famUiar to any examiner who 
ha,s to be careful to word his questions in such a way that the infor­
mation content is not so great as to bear within it the answer to the 
question, or such information as would imply the answer. 
It is true that to ask a question is not the same as to make a state­
ment; nevertheless, since questions have presuppositions, it is clear 
that in asking a question we do also assert something . . . and that 
questions do, like statements, have information-content. The stu­
dent of chemistry can learn something from being asked, "What 
is the proportion of sodium to chlorine in common table salt?", the 
student of human nature from overhearing, "Who was that woman 
I saw you with last night?" 8 2 
The question we must ask here, crucial to the evaluation of Col­
lingwood's theory of knowledge as questioning activity, is whether 
the presuppositions to questions are always merely supposal, or 
whether at least some of these presuppositions, whUe remaining pre­
suppositions as far as the question is concerned, are not aho neces-
sarUy insights into reality. 
Francis H . Parker, in his article "Traditional Reason and Modern 
Reason," 8 3 draws attention to "two alternative conceptions of reason: 
the conception of reason as intuitive and the conception of reason as 
constructive." 8 4 
The conception of reason as constructive is a modern conception 
dating from the time of Kant. For Kant, intuition is a prerogative of 
sense; understanding intuits nothing, only reflects. 
Given a stock of intuited sensory particulars as materials, the 
understanding can set about its proper business of constructing 
79 Tbid. 
8 0 See Speculum Mentis, pp. 76-80. See also Ch. 3 above, p. 66 et seq. 
8 1 N. Bemap, op. cit., p. 8. Italics added. 
8 2 Tbid., pp. 129-130. Emphasis in original. BeInap, unUke CoUingwood, seems to 
equate presuppositions to assertions here. 
8 3 See Philosophy Today, Ш (1963), pp. 235-244. 
8 4 Md., p. 237. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
281 
orderly phenomenal objects according to its purely a priori blue­
print. 8 5 
The universals which are the proper concern of the understand­
ing are a priori and non-empirical. The understanding has no peculiar 
intuitions, no proper objects of its own. 
Since ail empirical data or intuitions are sensory and therefore 
particular and contingent, and since necessary propositions essen-
tiaUy involve universals, no necessary proposition can be empirical, 
a posteriori, or factual.86 
The conception of understanding, intelligence or reason which 
underlies this belief, the purely reflective or non-intuitive conception 
of reason, is what Parker caUs 'constructive reason.' But, according 
to Parker, there is "an alternative conception of reason which . . . 
is essentially foreign to modern thought. It is peculiarly classical and 
mediaeval, and it originates most clearly in Aristotle." 8 7 This is "the 
conception of reason as an intuitive agency, a mode of cognition, 
distinct both from sensation on the one hand and from reflective discur­
sive reason on the other." 8 8 Parker cites Aristotle as attributing to the 
thinking part of the soul a capacity for receiving the form of the object. 
The apprehensions of this thinking part of the soul give rise to the 
universal and necessary judgments which form the first principles of 
scientific knowledge. This apprehensive faculty Aristotle caUs νοϋς, 
which Parker renders as 'intuitive reason.' 8 9 This intuitive reason has 
8 5 Md., p. 236. 
*-Md. 
87fttd. 
88 Md. 
89 Jbid. See ako Aristotie's De Anima, Bk. 3, Ch. 8, 432a 4-6; Nicomachean Ethics, 
Bk. 6, Ch. 3, 1139b 31-1140a 8. See ako Marjorie Grene, A Portrait ofAristotle, Lon­
don, Faber and Faber, 1963, pp. 241-247, for a discussion of Aristotle's nous. Grene 
understands Aristotle to be saying that the nous which discovers the first principles 
"is not the mind turned inward on itseU . . . but the mind methodicafly and appro­
priately facing a suitable reality, a suitable specimen of the kind that is to be known. 
Things speak to the mind of their being-what-they-are and the mind, finding the univer­
sal in the perceived individual, putting its insight into words in the correct definition, 
thus comprehends the substance of the thing, and, as formal grasp ofthe formal, 
actual understanding of the actual, is identified with it. Knower and known are united 
because, being in nature suited to each other, they have never been wholly apart." 
Having thus dearly articulated Aristotle's position, Grene takes a characteristicaUy 
modern attitude, for, to the question " . . . do things show us their being-what-they-
are? Is the peculiar substance of each kind of thing there for us to grasp, vaguely 
in perception, step by step through induction, directly and luminously through rational 
and necessary intuition?" she replies emphatically in the negative and says that "the 
what of each kind of thing held the conjectures of the Aristotelian sdentist firrnly in 
check. For us, the strand of contingency is ultimate; we may transcend it, we must 

282 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
its own proper objects, namely the forms, essences or characteristics 
of things which are given as data embedded in the particular, con­
tingent data of sensation. 
Since .. . there is nothing outside and separate in existence from 
sensible spatial magnitudes, the objects of thought are in the sensible 
forms, viz. both the abstract objects and aU the states and affections 
of sensible things.90 
This means that the propositions which define these forms are 
also a posteriori, factual and existential. 
Consequently the assumption of rational intuition of formal 
structures coeval with and immersed in sensory data impUes the pos­
sibUity of propositions which are both essential and a posteriori, both 
necessarUy and factuaUy true. 9 1 
Such propositions are certUied in immediate experience since they 
are true in virtue of their meanings alone. No further, subsequent 
experience is thus required to verify them. Such meanings, which 
immediately guarantee these necessary existential propositions, are 
factually real, and as proper objects of the mtuitive reason are em­
bedded in experienced reality. 9 2 
Whereas the constructive reason reveals only our attitudes toward 
things, the mtuitive reason, on the other hand, is revelatory of factual 
reality, and "the replacement of intuitive reason by constructive reason 
might be weU regarded as a fundamental theme of the rise and 
development of modern phUosophy." 9 3 
Ancient phUosophy is characterized by the struggle for the dis­
tinctness of reason from sensation, and thus the distinction of man 
from the brute. In mediaeval phUosophy the struggle was of a differ-
transcend it, but in peril. Both the source of nature's reaUty and nature itseU have 
lost their radical determinancy, and so lost ako the radical inteUigibUity of Aristo­
teUan substances. And so when we understand one aspect or another of the world 
around us, that understanding becomes our venture, not the world's. H we succeed, 
that is our achievement; if we faU, our 'understanding' turns out to have been our 
dream. AristoteUan knowledge could be impersonal because things, including minds, 
were thoroughly determinate. The determination we impose on things is in part at 
least of our own making, and in what part we can never precisely say." Emphasis 
in original. It is this constructive concept of mind that, foUowing Parker, and in accord 
with Aristotle, we are taking issue with here. 
9 0 Aristotle, De Anima, Bk. 3, Ch. 8, 432a 2-5, cited from Richard McKeon's edi­
tion of The Basic Works ofAristotle, New York, Random House, 1941, p. 595. Emphasis 
added. 
9 1 F. H. Parker, art. cit., p. 236. 
9 2 See ibid., pp. 236-237. 
9 3 Ш., 
p. 237. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
283 
ent kind, namely, to justify the distinction of reason from revelation, 
and consequently to defend the distinctness of the specificaUy human 
from the purely spiritual, the angeUc and the divine. 9 4 Man is thus 
between the purely animal and the purely spiritual. And it is man's 
reason, understood as man's natural faculty of discerning universals 
in and through particular sense experience,95 which distinguishes him 
from either, and locates him in an intermediary position. 
But the basic characteristic of early modern philosophy is a revolt 
against this traditional concept of reason, which could go in one or 
the other of two ways, either by way of a reduction of reason to sen­
sation or of a reduction of reason to revelation. 9 6 These two forms of 
revolt against traditional reason developed concurrently. The reduc­
tion of reason to sensation meant the substitution of empirical science 
for rational philosophy and thus the confusion of philosophy with 
science. The reduction of reason to revelation meant the substitution 
of religious faith for philosophy and resulted in the confusion of 
philosophy with reUgion.97 This double-phased revolt continued down 
into and through modern times, and, as it proceeded, it led to the 
development of reason as constructive.98 The early stages of the reduc­
tion of reason to sensation occur mainly in WiUiam of Ockham and 
Nicholas of Autrecourt, and the early stages of the reduction of reason 
to revelation are found rnainly in Meister Eckhart and Nicholas of Cusa. 
The next stage in the loss of the traditional intuitive reason and 
development of constructive reason is found in the intermediate con­
ception of reason such as it is found in Descartes and the continental 
rationalists, for whom reason was the faculty of deducing universal 
truths a priori from innate ideas which are whoUy independent of sense 
experience. The revolution of Kant, consequent upon the British em­
piricist discarding of the rationaUst conception of a priori reason and 
innate ideas, gave to modern philosophy the fuUy developed concep­
tion of reason as constructive. 9 9 Parker summarizes the various con­
ceptions as foUows: 
9 4 See ibid., p. 238. 
»5 See ibid., p. 237 and p. 238. 
9 6 See ibid., p. 238. One immediately recaUs in this context CoUingwood's account 
of the patristic codification of "fundamental convictions which would form the pre­
suppositions of a new way of living, a new science and a new civUization, which 
cocUfication was caUed the 'CathoUc Faith.' " See An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 225¬
227; see also above, Chapter 5, p. 190 et seq. 
9 7 See F. H. Parker, art. cit., p. 238. 
9 8 See ibid. 
9 9 See ibid., pp. 238-239. 

284 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
For the tradition the intelUgence officer [i.e., reason] . . . finds 
meaning in experience; for continental "rationaUsm" meaning is 
deduced from innate ideas independently of experience; for British 
"empiricism" meaning is imparted only by the subrational faculties 
of passion and habit; and for Kant and his voluntarist and pragmatist 
followers, utilizing the conception of reason as constructive, mean­
ing is created out of the mind itself.100 
I. Distortion of the Nature of the Abstract 
Universal Arising from Exaggerating the 
Activity of Reason into Creative Activity 
From this Kantian constructive conception of reason, Hegel and 
his foUowers, including CoUingwood in this regard, passed to a crea­
tive conception of reason, reason as the activity of a mind 'which is 
what it does,' which is nothing more or less than what from its own 
activity it forms itseU to being. Human reason is defined and spoken 
of in ways previously reserved for the thought and the being of God. 
Aristotle's seU-thinkmg thought and Aquinas' Pure Act are now char­
acteristics of the human reason. 1 0 1 
The theory of the concrete universal, exposed in Chapter 4 above, 
has its historical roots in this Kantian evacuation of real content from 
the abstract universal, which then becomes a mere classUicatory device 
of the constructive reason. 
The name 'horse' is the name of a certain class of individuals. 
But we also have a general idea or concept of a horse. This is an 
inteUectual construction made by us out of attributes which we have 
abstracted from individuaTs. It might be described as a second order 
abstraction, being a construction out of abstractions. The name 
'horse' thus applies to or denotes an aggregate of individuals. It ako 
connotes an inteUectual construction, namely an idea or concept 
formed by us of a type of individual. 1 0 2 
A. J. M . MUne goes on to warn that faUure to understand this 
may lead to a wild-goose chase in a search for a supposed essence 
embodied in the members of a class. This is a clear rejection of the 
traditional notion of the comprehension of the universal as the real 
1 0 0 Md., p. 239. 
1 0 1 Not only is there achieved here a radical rapprochement between philosophy 
and religion, but the knowing (questioning in CoUingwood) activity of the human 
mind is identified with what in mediaeval theology was understood as the (not mere­
ly productive, which presupposes preexisting matter, but) creative activity of the divine 
mind (which presupposes no pre-existent material). 
1 0 2 A. J. M. MUne, The Social PhUosophy ofEnglish Idealism, London, George AUen 
and Unwin, 1962, p. 18. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
285 
object of intuitive reason. For Milne the connotation of the universal 
notion is a construction formed by the mind to typify the members 
of the class. 
J. Nature of the Abstract Universal and Its Value in Knowledge 
Disturbed by the consequences of the teaching of Bradley and 
Bosanquet regarding the abstract, and because he found himself un­
reflectingly adopting the prevaüing opinion, thereby depreciating the 
abstract as merely abstract, Norman Kemp Smith submitted both the 
abstract universal and the concrete universal of Bradley and Bosan­
quet to a thorough scrutiny. 1 0 3 He criticizes the identification of the 
abstract universal with the class-concept. 
. . . it is by no means clear by what right Bosanquet should thus 
identify the abstract universal with the class-concept. In so far as 
the abstract universal is some one character, it is indeed applicable 
as a predicate to any and every concrete existence in which the 
character is found; and we may, if we please, describe this range 
of application as being a class. Our purpose in selecting the char­
acter need not, however, be classificatory; we may be investigating 
the character in and for itself; and it may be in the very variety and 
heterogeneity of its embodiments that we obtain the needful data.104 
Smith attacks Bosanquet's contrasting of the concrete universal 
with the abstract universal on the ground that one signifies a world 
and the other a class, and whereas " i t takes all sorts to make a world, 
a class is essentiaUy of one sort only." 1 0 5 Smith remarks that examples 
of universals which stand closest to concrete particulars, such as that 
of the Death's Head beetle, represent, like a 1925 model Ford car, a 
standardized type that repeats itself without notable change in the 
infinite number of its instances. Here the feature of monotonous repe­
tition is at a maximum. But, on the contrary, if we choose a class-
concept higher in the biological hierarchy, which is therefore more 
abstract, we can no longer say that while it takes aU sorts to make 
a world a class is of one sort only. The universal 'beetle' covers some 
haU mUlion dUferent species that vary among themselves in colour 
and shape and a variety of characteristics. Smith argues that just as 
1 0 3 This analysis by Norman Kemp Smith is to be found in two articles, "The Nature 
of Universals" in Mind, XXXVI (1927), pp. 137-157, 265-280, and 393-422, and "The 
FruitfuIness of the Abstract'' in The Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, XXXVm (1927), 
p. 149. See also B. Bosanquet, The Principle ofIndividuality and Value, p. 37. 
1 0 4 Norman Kemp Smith, "The Nature of Universals," Mind, XXXVI (1927),p. 149. 
1 0 5 See ibid., p. 150. See ako B. Bosanquet, The Principk ofIndividualityandValue, 
p. 37. 

286 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
a world may or may not be a macrocosm of microcosms (traditional 
mechanistic physics presents a world notable for its uniformity of struc­
ture) so also a class may or may not be a type of types. Even if it were, 
it is not in proportion to its abstractness but rather to its closeness 
to the concrete that reduces it to a uniformity of simple recurrence. 1 0 6 
Smith points out that Bosanquet himseU admits 1 0 7 that the abstrac­
tion or notion which is to include both men and animals has to pro­
vide for a variable animality, for animaUty in man is different from 
animaUty in brutes. The concept animal is therefore not formed simply 
by the omission of certain qualities which differentiate man from the 
~ other animals. There is something corresponding to rationality in 
animals, namely (animal) inteUigence.108 Accordingly, "we can neither 
merely omit the characters which vary in their instances nor proceed 
by simple inclusion of others that are strictly uniform." 1 0 9 Far from 
being "little more than an unfortunate necessity due to the Hmita-
tions in our powers of attention," abstraction is "a methodological 
device" enabUng us to study partial features " w i t h the ultimate pur­
pose of so mastering the material, part by part, that through gradual 
reversal of this abstractive procedure, we may finaUy be in a position 
to grapple with the experienced in aU its concreteness." 1 1 0 Jacques 
Maritain says 1 1 1 that there is no true knowledge of unity where there 
is not also knowledge of distinction. Any serious attempt, he says, 
at metaphysical synthesis must distinguish in order to unite, especial­
ly when dealing with the complex riches of knowledge and of the 
mind. A reflexive and critical phUosophy must above aU discriminate 
and discern the various degreesof knowing with its organization and 
internal dUferentiation. Maritain criticizes contemporary idealism's 
refusal to recognize any nature or structure of the mind, regarding 
it as pure freedom and pure movement. It thus systematicaUy neglects 
vast areas of knowledge and tends to reduce the diversities of the Ufe 
of the mind to a noetic monism. 
106 gee Norman Kemp Smith, "The Nature of Universals," Mind, XXXVI (1927), 
p. 150. 
1 0 7 See B. Bosanquet, Logic, Oxford, Ckrendon Press, 1888, pp. 66^S7 (Smith errone­
ously cites pp. 58-59). 
1 0 8 See John N. Deely, "Animal InteUigence and Concept-Formation," in The 
Thomist, XXXV (1971), pp. 43-93, for an interesting discussion on this point. 
1 0 9 See Norman Kemp Smith, "The Nature of the Universal," Mind, XXXVI (1927), 
p. 151. 
1 1 0 See Norman Kemp Smith, "The Fruitftuness of the Abstract," Proceedings of 
the Aristotelian Society, XXVIII (1927-1928), p. 204. 
1 1 1 See his The Degrees of Knowledge, London, Bles, 1959, p. ix. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
287 
Norman Kemp Smith attacks the negative attitude to abstraction 
which sees in it only omission. 
. . . abstraction is not merely omission. Indeed, it is question­
able whether the term omission has any relevance. AU that we are 
justUied in asserting is that the mind abstracts from certain factors, 
not that it omits them. That, however, is a rninor point. What caUs 
for special insistence is that the process mainly at work is integrative, 
not separative in character.112 
CoUingwood regards abstraction as synonymous with error. "Our 
enemy is abstraction" 1 1 3 and "abstract knowledge is the same as 
error." 1 1 4 
N . Lobkowicz points out 1 1 5 that, in response to the objection that 
"since in reality the forms of material things do not exist in separa­
tion from particulars, our inteUect must be wrong U it grasps such 
forms as abstract," Aquinas distinguishes between two meanings of 
abstraction, separative abstraction and abstraction through sUnple non-
consideration. One may assert by a judgment that f does not inhere 
in χ, thereby abstracting f from x. Thus, to say that the apple is not 
colored is to abstract color from the apple by denying its existence 
in the apple. H in fact the apple is colored, such abstraction is impos­
sible without falsUying the whole factual situation. But, on the other 
hand, one may simply consider the color which in fact is in the apple 
without considering the apple in which it is and without considering 
any of the other characteristics (taste, weight, etc.) which are together 
with the color in the apple. There is no assertion here that the color 
is separated from the apple in fact, merely the non-consideration of 
aU the characteristics other than the color which also are in fact in the 
apple. And "thus abstraction involves no falsity, so long as it remains 
a simplex et absoluta constderatio, i.e., does not involve a judgment." 
Abstraction is rather a focusing of attention 1 1 6 on a special aspect 
1 1 2 Norman Kemp Smith, "The Fruitfuhiess of the Abstract," in The Proceedings 
of the Aristotelian Society, ΧΧνΤΠ (1927-1928), p. 206. 
1 1 3 Speculum Mentis, p. 268. See above, Chapter 4, p. 94. 
114 Speculum Mentis, p. 313. 
1 1 5 See his "Abstraction and EHaIectics," in The Review of Metaphysics, XXI 
(1967-1968), pp. 468^69. 
1 1 6 Questioning is concerned primarily with this focusing function. "Questions, 
of course, do not estabUsh the answers—they merely estahUsh the relevance of a range 
of answers. The 'right' answer must in some sense 'match' the world and this seems 
to commit us to the outHnes of a correspondence theory as a component in the ultimate 
situation." Leske Armour, The Concept of Truth, Assen, Van Gorcum, 1969, p. 211. 
The position to be taken here is that the question, when directed at reaHty, aims at 
a 'docking' of the mind with its corresponding real object. The 'correspondence' of 

288 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
of a concrete individual fact or event; it presents the mind with a 
definite content which can be examined in itself, without confusing 
it with the context in which it is reaHzed. A red object can be examined 
and questioned precisely inasmuch as it is red. The fact that we do 
not attend to the object as being steel or heavy in no way invalidates 
what we can know of it through knowing that it is red. 
Abstraction . . . is merely the more attentive apprehension of 
what has been antecedently known in some concrete setting; and 
it would thus seem to be simply the rendering of our initial 
awareness more definite and precise.117 
Smith criticizes the presumption that there is no problem regard­
ing the apprehension of concrete particulars which are supposed to 
be apprehended in ordinary experience in aU their concrete particu­
larity. Having successfuUy done this, it is then asked, how do we arrive 
at universal concepts? These are said to be the outcome of abstrac­
tion, consisting in a comparison of particulars and arriving at a class-
concept by disregarding the dUferences. 
But the uniqueness of the unique, the individuality of the indi­
vidual, is just as much abstract and universal as is the redness or hard­
ness. We cannot taUc meaningfuUy about the individuaUty or unique­
ness of the concrete U we do not abstract these universal characteris­
tics as meaningful objects. "Indeed, may we not say that this is an 
ideal goal towards which we can only approximate?" 1 1 8 Upon reflec­
tion, it seems rather that we know the generic before the individual 
peculiarities. 
We start, in experience and knowledge, not with the individual, 
but with the vaguely generic, and advance in knowledge is to be 
measured quite as much by increased appreciation of differences 
as by capacity to generalize. The chUd can usuaUy recognize trees 
before he can distinguish the dUferent species of trees; and to the 
end aU recognition, even of what is discriminated as being an indi-
the mind with reaUty here is vastly dUferent from a naive correspondence theory, 
as if the rnind merely ran paraUel with the object without in any way engaging in a very 
definite type of docking arrangement. As wiU be shown later, the primary 'docking' of 
the mind with reaUty is through answer to the 'what' question, as is weU explained 
by Aristotle (see Chapter 8, below, p. 337 et seq). But, in order that this 'docking' 
be successfuUy achieved, the questioning of reaUty, prefaced by the questioning as 
to what past thinkers have thought of reaUty (which is aU CoUingwood aUows), has 
to be carefuUy and correctly enacted. 
1 1 7 Norman Kemp Smith, "The Fruitfumess of the Abstract," in The Proceedings 
of the Aristotelian Society, ΧΧνΤΠ (1927-1928), p. 207. 
1 1 8 See ibid., pp. 207-208. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
289 
vidual distinct from aU others, is by means not of absolutely unique 
features, but of types.119 
The fact that we frequently err in our identUication of individuals 
indicates that the absolutely unique is a term of reference whose 
evidence consists in more than purely immediate experience. 
Comparison according to sirnUarities and dissirrularities is not itseU 
abstraction but a prerequisite facUitating and disposing for abstrac­
tion. "The individual is, indeed, initiaUy known only in its relations 
within some complex context, and this context may be temporarUy 
left out of account." 1 2 0 For the completion of abstraction there must 
be not merely knowledge of Uke and urUike characters, but identUica­
tion of what the common element is as iise//constituting a type or kind. 
The abstracted factor is, therefore, abstracted in this sense only, 
that it is at once distinguished from the conflicting features that 
accompany it in the various instances, and at the same time identi­
fied, not qua existent but in type or kind, as being the same in them 
aU. 1 2 1 
Knowing that something is a man is together a knowing of what 
man is and a re-cognizing that it is here in this individual. 
To cognize is to recognize, to recognize is to identify a recur­
rent type, and to identify a recurrent type is to have selected for 
special-i.e., abstractive—attention, in one or more instances of the 
type, the feature or features which go to make up the content of 
the type. 1 2 2 
To cUstinguish successfuUy just acts from unjust acts is possible 
only U we are able infallibly to recognize which acts are just and which 
are unjust. But, since justice is not a directly experienced quaUty or 
a sensible character, its recognition presupposes possession of the con­
cept we profess to be seeking in the comparison of instances. 1 2 3 
Everything in our experience has a dual aspect: its thisness and 
its suchness. 
As features of the particulars they share in the 'thisness' of the 
particulars: they are themselves particulars. On the other hand, as 
making up the content of the type, they are apprehended as 'such¬
nesses'; and thus, in their regard, as in regard to aU else, we have 
119 Tbid., p. 208. 
120 Oid., p. 211. 
1 2 1 Tbid., p. 210. 
»22 Ybid. 
1 2 3 See ibid., p. 209. 

290 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
to accept as mtimate the dual 'this-such' nature of everything expe­
rienced.124 
Corresponding to this dual character of what we experience, there 
are two kinds of recognition, and consequently two kinds of pre­
supposed identity. 
Identity, and consequently recognition, is found in two forms. 
There is recognition as ordinarily understood, namely, recognition 
of an individual as having been previously experienced. Secondly, 
, there is the recognition which logic has mainly in view, but which 
is not ordinarily so caUed, namely, recognition of a particular as being 
in this or that regard of this and that kind. In other words, there 
is recognition of individuality, and there is recognition of type. The 
two forms of recognition are correlative to the two species of 
identity—the self-identity of a particular and the identity of a type 
in distinguishable particulars.125 
Smith insists that " i t is important to discriminate the two species 
of identity as sharply as possible." 1 2 6 He explains that identity of type 
is what is meant by the universal and that this is representable by 
invariable symbols and persists unvaried with variation of dUferences. 
(That is, it is a true identity-in-dUference.) 
The identity of a type or kind I take as being precisely what is 
meant by a universal. It is that which can be asserted to be iden­
tically the same in one and aU of a number of instances; and as such 
it is invariable. While aUowing of [sic] combination with this and 
that other universal, it does not in any such combination admit of 
modUication by these others. It is an identity that is found amidst 
dUferences, but which is never in any degree or fashion altered in 
its identity by these differences. It is, indeed, a condition of the com­
bination of universals that together they are found to constitute a 
new type—that is, to constitute what is more than a mere combina­
tion of the simpler types. Otherwise we should not be conceiving 
a new type, but only conceiving simultaneously the previously con­
ceived types. But irito the conception of the new type the simpler 
universals enter without change of meaning. Thus the universal or 
type 'triangularity' enters into the more complex universals, 
'equUateraI' and 'scalene', and as a constituent of the two latter has 
a meaning that is umform for both; though they are species of 
'triangle', they are not species of 'triangularity'. Similarly, 'animaI-
ity' has a uniform meaning as predicated of man and of the various 
species of brutes, and this is why they can all alike be said to be 
124 Ibid., pp. 210-211. 
125 lbid., p. 211. 
126 lbid., p. 212. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
291 
animal species. Universals, being thus fixed in meaning, can always 
be represented by symbols that are invariables.127 
Individuals enjoy individual identity which persists through its 
variations. Its differences, unlike the differences of the universal type, 
are intrinsic to it. 
Individual things, on the other hand, are admittedly variable; 
each is an identity that is compatible with, and indeed can be con­
ceived at aU only in and through the diversity of its distinguishable 
qualities, and in and through the changes whereby it responds to 
changes in its environment. It is not merely, like type, an identity 
amidst dUferences, it is an identity in and through its differences. 
The differences enter into its innermost being; and yet do so in a 
manner which aUows of their own variation.128 
Although universals are never found save as embodied in chang­
ing particulars they find a quite constant, not a variable, embodiment. 
The individual dUfers from the universal in that it preserves its iden­
tity through its variations. Consequently, the universal has a definite 
identUiabUity, but the individual an indefmite identifiabUity. The 
universal can be expressed, the individual only indicated. 
. . . whereas the universal, as being a type, consists in a defi­
nitely enumerable set of constituents, each of which can be abstract­
ly considered, and in this manner exhaustively known, the in­
dividual can never be equated with any finitely exhaustible number 
ofknown characters. . . . Every individual, though apprehensible 
in terms of an indefinite variety of dUferent types, according as it 
is regarded in this or that aspect, is never thereby exhausted.129 
But, since " w e cannot recognize what we do not apprehend" 
"though identity is of these two species, identity in and through dU­
ference, i.e., identity of a continuant, and identity amidst dUference, 
i.e., identity of type, the mode of their recognition is found, on closer 
examination, to be one and the same in both cases." 1 3 0 When the in­
dividual is recognized as identical, "what we recognize as evidencing 
the continuing identity" of that which is elsewhere and otherwise 
experienced "is the special manner in which the types . . . are com­
bined with one another." 1 3 1 
127 Md. 
1 2 8 Jbid., p. 212-213. 
129 Tbid., p. 213. 
1 3 0 Md. 
1 3 1 Md., pp. 213-214. 

292 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The special manner of their combination, that is, the special per­
mutation of common factors, is our sole clue to the identity of the 
individual, as found at different times and in differing situations. 
In other words, identification of the individual is thus itself stffl a 
form of identification by type. It is capacity to recognize type, "such-
ness," that makes possible the capacity to apprehend the individ­
ual. 1 3 2 
Smith says that this is the chief way in which the abstract mani­
fests its fruitiulness, namely, as making possible the apprehension 
ofJts counterpart, the uniquely individual. No inferences are possible 
either from or to the unique as unique. Such inferences 
are possible only in virtue of some identity, as defined by means 
of type. Accordingly, in apprehending the individual in terms of 
type, we bring it, notwithstanding its uniqueness, within the range 
of aU those inferences which are relevant to the type. 1 3 3 
The individual, as such, is outside the range of apprehension and 
reasoning, since the universal is a prerequisite of aU inference. 
. . . that apprehension of type is what can alone bring the in­
dividual within the province of reasoning. A universal is a prereq­
uisite of aU inference; and the fixity of the abstract type is what 
enables the concept of the type to supply this need.134 
But it is important to note, in order to avoid charges of the un­
reality of the abstract universal, that this universal, which is the 
medium of aU our inferential knowledge, can be obtained only as sup-
pUed by experience and has its value only as referred back to expe­
rience. 
И we are to arrive at knowledge of what is not itseU experienced, 
the means of conceiving it must none the less stffl be suppUed in 
experience. For just as the mind can onlyisolate what is actuaUy 
given, so it can only synthesize what has already been appre­
hended.135 
K disengagement from concreteness in particulars is necessary for 
knowledge of the universal, embodiment in concrete particulars is 
necessary for its reality. It is important not to confuse abstract knowl­
edge with knowledge of the abstract, as is often done. 1 3 6 
1 3 2 R>id., p. 214. 
1 3 3 Tbid. 
1 3 4 VtM., p. 215. 
1 3 5 Md., p. 217. 
1 3 6 See J.-H. Nicolas, Dieu connu comme inconnu, Paris, Desclee de Brouwer, 1966, 
pp. 36-37. Also pp. 37-38: ". . . la distinction entre les deux manieres dont une con-
naissance peut tee dite universeUe: 'Соппайге quelque chose universeUement s'entend 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
293 
K. Abstract Universal Not Merely Classificatory 
but Also Penetrative of Reality 
The abstract universal, therefore, has a twofold relationship: one 
to the mind as that which the mind immediately apprehends 1 3 7 and 
the other to reality, as the intelligible face which reality presents, as 
object, to the mind 1 3 8 Now, if one considers the aspect of relation to 
the mind, and the mind's requirements on account of this relation, 
we find that genus-species classificatory logic has priority. 1 3 9 But if 
we consider abstract knowledge as a penetration of reality, the logic not 
of univocal genus and species but of analogy is required. 1 4 0 
Human reason is both intelligence and reason. As intelligence it 
has access to being in all its intelligible clarity and absolute universal­
ity. As reason it progresses step by step in the acquisition of the most 
profound truths. 1 4 1 
A profound antinomy is immanent to the laws of reason which 
the scientist and philosopher use in studying reaHty. On the one hand, 
they are characterized by an absolute rigour by reason of which logic 
is a genuine science and an absolutely sure art in the work of the in­
tellect. On the other hand, they are characterized by a suppleness, 
flexibility and a variety of nuances which permit them to be adapted 
de deux manieres. Ou bien il s'agit de la chose connue, et on parle alors de 
n'en connaitre que la nature universelle. En ce sens connaitre universellement est 
une imperfection: il connaitrait l'homme imparfaitement celui qui saurait seulement 
qu'il est dans le genre animal. Ou bien on pense ä ce par le moyen de quoi on connait. 
Alors il est plus parfait de connaitre quelque chose universellement: plus parfait en 
effet est l'intellect capable de connaitre les singuliers selon ce qu'ils ont de propre 
dans un 'medium' universel, que l'autre qui ne le peut.' fl faut donc distinguer la 
connaissance de l'universel qui est une imperfection, et la connaissance dans l'universel 
qui au contraire est une perfection. Mais pour la pensee humaine, tout entiere condi-
ϋοηηέε par le procddd abstractif, l'universel sous ces deux formes est le fruit de 
l'abstraction: 'E est accidentel ä l'universel d'etre abstrait des singuUers, cela vient 
de l'inteUect qui le connait et qui tire sa connaissance des choses. S'il est un inteUect 
ne tirant pas sa connaissance des choses, l'universel connu par lui ne sera pas abstrait 
des choses.' C'est ainsi qu'il nous faut distinguer dans la connaissance humaine: une 
connaissance de l'abstrait, qui se termine, comme ä un 'quod cognitum,' ä une 
essence encore indeterminee, ä une determination partielle; et une connaissance 
abstraite qui se termine ä une d£terminatkm achevee et atteint en elle et par eUe le 
raeI concret." 
1 3 7 See this chapter, above, pp. 287-288. 
1 3 8 See this chapter, above, pp. 281-283. 
1 3 9 See Jean Petrin, "Univocite et analogie dans les lois de k logique," in Angelicum, 
XXVI (1949), pp. 233-242. See also L.-B. Geiger, Philosophie et spiritualite, Pans, Edi­
tions du Cerf, 1963, Vol. 1, pp. 76-77. 
1 4 0 See Jean Petrin, erf cit., pp. 242-249. See also L.-B. Geiger, op. cit., pp. 77-86. 
1 4 1 See Jean Petrin, art. cit., p. 233. 

294 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
increasingly to the thousand and one forms of inteUigible reality. 1 4 2 
The rigorous and dear value which these laws possess depends upon 
an ensemble of univocal concepts, which concepts consequently enjoy 
a priority in the logical order. On the other hand, their suppleness and 
infinite variety in application depends upon an ensemble of analogical 
concepts which carries with it a certain primacy in the order of intelli­
gibility.1*3 
L. Being as Class Concept and as Active Presence 
It wUl be recalled that in his Essay on Metaphysics, CoUingwood 
'rejected metaphysics as a science of abstract being, or "ontology . . . 
my name for a mistake which people have made, Aristotle first and 
foremost . . . " 1 4 4 since "there can be no science nor even a quasi-
science or pseudo-science of pure being." 1 4 5 CoUingwood's reason is 
that "abstraction means taking out. But science investigates not what 
is left out but what is left in. To push abstraction to the limiting case 
is to take out everything; and when everything is taken out there is 
nothing for sdence to investigate." 1 4 6 But this is to overlook completely 
the fact that the concept 'being' as it is the object of metaphysics "is 
not situated rigorously on the same level as other concepts, and that 
it is quite irrelevant (une maniere toute matärieUe) to treat what it 
presents simply as the most general class." 1 4 7 
Because of the unique situation of the concept of being in the lUe 
of the mind, it has the unique function of presenting to our inteUi-
gence both the simUarities and dissimUarities of beings. 1 4 8 
Our concepts are elaborated in two quite different but complemen­
tary climates. On the one hand we are preoccupied with analysing, 
defining and classifying, through noting likenesses and dUferences, 
when placed in the presence of things by our sensory equipment. This 
classffication through dUferentiation and simUitude is the principle of 
genus and species conceptualisation which is adopted essentiaUy un­
changed by the methods of sdence. Most certamly these concepts place 
us in the presence of being, but impUcitly only. But "what we explicit­
ly note and directly express by these concepts is the result of the rela­
tionships discovered between beings or between parts of beings, or 
1 4 2 See ibid., pp. 233-234. 
1 4 9 See ibid., p. 234. 
1 4 4 An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 17. 
145 Vbid. 
146 Ш., p. 14. 
1 4 7 L.-B. Geiger, Philosophie et spiritualite, Vol. 1, p. 73. 
1 4 8 See ibid., pp. 73-74. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
295 
even their relationship with our body, by sensible knowledge under 
aU its forms." 1 4 9 In this way we see being much in the way an ex­
plorer observes, registers and describes the particularities of a region 
he is investigating. He supposes that the country he is investigating 
exists, that he himseU exists, that what he is doing is inserted in real­
ity, but his geographical description does not attend to that aspect 
of his object, however fundamental it may be. 1 5 0 
The same is true of all our universal concepts. . . . In effect it 
is by the work of comparison between different beings or their 
actions and thus by an ensemble of relative data which, in default 
of grasping the essence directly, we form generic and specific con­
cepts.151 
Such comparisons are made above aU on the sensible plane. Thus 
it is in the structure of the sensible that we find the source of the 
univocal Ukenesses and diversities at the basis of our genus and species 
concepts. On this level, the likenesses of things exclude the dUfer­
ences, and it would be contradictory to base on the same principle 
both the likeness and the unlikeness between beings. 1 5 2 At this level, 
our concepts do not grasp essences as such, that is, as determinate 
ways of exercising the act of being. Beings are there, and we know 
that, but we do not attend to that aspect. We analyse, compare and 
classtfy beings, but not inasmuch as they are beings. We do not 
formaUy envisage the essences as essences but as quiddities. Rational­
ism excessively separates the work of reason elaborating quiddities 
from their ontological base which, in fact, it seeks to attain. 1 5 3 
But immediately when the mind focuses on the being of things 
as its direct object, everything changes. 1 5 4 The mind interrupts its in­
vestigations to perceive clearly the reality of that which exists. Until 
then, it merely manipulates and names in function of its manipula­
tions in terms of genus-species relationships. As soon as it adverts 
to the object of its manipulations as being, as something which is, 
the mind operates in an entirely new dunension. The definition is now 
not merely an ensemble of relations of simUarity and dissimUarity, 
but signUies a way of exercising the act of being, that is, of formally 
comprehending an essence.155 
149 Md., p. 76. 
1 5 0 See ibid. 
1 5 1 mid. 
1 5 2 See ibid., pp. 76-77. 
1 5 3 See ibid., p. 77. 
1 5 4 And, it may be added, the mode of questioning changes. 
1 5 5 See L.-B. Geiger, op. cit., p. 78. 

296 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
What I know of man, and which up to that moment was a dif­
ferential knowledge based on sensible representations and rational 
elaboration [of the differential as manifested by the relations of sen­
sible things] appears now in itseU in its own right, in its in­
dependence with regard to my knowledge [of it]. 1 5 6 
The term 'man' and the term 'being of man' both attain the one 
same reality; one attains it by a system of relations, the other in an 
absolute way, as a mode of being. In Kant's famous problem of the 
hundred thaiers there are reaUy two problems. On the one hand, there 
is the distinction made by Kant between the hundred possible thalers 
*and the hundred actual thalers, that is, in Kant's thought, between 
essence and existence. On the other hand, and perhaps more subtly, 
there is the distinction between the knowledge of a hundred possi­
ble thalers inasmuch as their number can be placed in a series of possi­
ble numbers, that is, put in relationship with four hundred or a 
thousand thalers, and the knowledge of those same hundred thalers 
inasmuch as in some way they qualUy real or possible existence, that 
is, inasmuch as they represent an essence of some sort. 1 5 7 
A mathematician does not inquire regarding the being-value of 
his object. He is satisfied to construct, define, and demonstrate, operat­
ing aU the whUe at the interior of a world populated, Uke our real world, 
by weU-determined beings, but resulting as the fruit of the construc­
tive activity of the mind. 1 5 8 But U that same mathematician reflects 
so as to ask what is mathematical being he knows fuU weU that he has 
altered his point of view. To deal with a fourth dimension as some­
thing seen in relationship to a first, second, third, or even fUth dimen­
sion is properly mathematical. But to ask U a fourth dimension is as 
real as a third is to ask a non-mathematical question. 1 5 9 
In passing from the world of mere inteUigible consistency to that 
of reality one passes from the world of representation to that of 
presence. More exactly, one enriches the world of representation with 
that of presence, real or inteUigible presence. Representation and 
presence seem to be the best terms to characterize, from the point 
of view of the theory of knowledge, the relations between our univocal 
concepts and that of being. 1 6 0 
Being, therefore, is not an abstract concept obtained by leaving 
out aU the dUferences of being, as CoUingwood says, aUegedly foUow-
156 Wid. 
1 5 7 See ibid., p. 78. 
1 5 8 See ibid., p. 79. 
1 5 9 See wid., pp. 79-80. 
1 6 0 See ibid., p. 80. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
297 
ing Aristotie, 1 6 1 that is, a character which one finds in everything to 
the exclusion of differences. Being is indeed found in everything which 
is, but in a diverse manner. Ji it is something absolutely universal, 
it is because it is present in everything, but both as regards their like­
nesses and as regards their unlikenesses. This relative unity of being 
and the absolute diversity of beings does not imply a contradiction, 
since each belongs to two different points of view: the point of view 
of rational construction (de la ratio) on the one hand, and on the other 
hand, the order of penetration (de la saisie), or of presence, or of 
inteUect (intellectus).162 rnteUect and reason (or mtuitive and constructive 
reason) are not two faculties but one only. Because the penetration 
of penetrating reason, or inteUect, is always only partial, that is, abstrac­
tive, it is also relationally constructive (of its partial insights) in order 
to obtain a synthetic world view. "To reason is proper to a human 
inteUect." 1 6 3 
M . Being as a Concrete Universal of Identity in Difference 
How beings are one as such and at the same time dUfer accord­
ing to their being is the problem of analogical unity, as distinct from 
the univocal unity of the generic universal. Here is reaUzed a true unity 
in diversity, identity in dUference. What makes a horse a dUferent 
kind of being from a man is itseU being, the same as that which makes 
them the same. The inteUigible grasping of things is a grasping of them 
in their very communication in diversity (communion dans l'alUriti). 
Thus, beings can manUest to one and the same intelUgence that they 
are, that they communicate in the act of being, and also that in their 
essences and proper content they are diversUied as beings. 1 6 4 
What this means is that whereas the univocal genus 'animal' is 
dUferentiated into the species 'man' the dUference, extrinsic to the 
common genus, bears the whole weight of the dUferentiation. And 
man, dUfering from dog as rational from irrational, dUfers inasmuch 
as there is affirmation and negation of 'rational,' that is, of the dUfer­
ence, not of the common genus. But, when the common term, being, 
is dUferentiated into (say) human being and vegetable being, the dU­
ferentiation does not at aU take place outside the common term, but 
takes place precisely through simultaneous affirmation and negation 
1 6 1 See this chapter, above, p. 294 et seq. 
1 6 2 See L.-B. Geiger, op. cit., p. 82. Correlate with F. H. Parker's intuitive reason 
and constructive reason, this chapter, above, pp. 280-284. 
1 6 3 L.-B. Geiger, op. cit., p. 82. 
1 6 4 See ibid., pp. 84-85. 

298 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
of the common term. Man is a being, and thus affirms being. But as 
his being is not the being of a vegetable (cabbage) he simultaneously 
negates being, the being that is distinctly that of the cabbage. 
When I undeistand a chimpanzee, I posit something, let us say, 
the characteristics of this particular species, and simultaneously I 
deny the characteristics of another species. But notice that the asso­
ciation of assertion and negation concerns the differential. With 
analogates the association ofassertion and negation concerns the common 
ground.
165 
This is "the secret of analogical thinking," namely that 
you have an assenion of the common ground coupled with a negation of 
the common ground. . . . You have here a togetherness of the 'yes' 
and the 'no,' an association of assertion and negation which con­
cerns the common ground. Ifthe common ground were a genus, asser-
tion and negation would concern only the differential 
factor.
166 
What immediately becomes clear at this stage is that what dialec­
ticians such as Hegel and Collingwood are striving to do by means 
of auto-determination through significate negation in their phUosophy 
of rnind, in which the foundation of aU that is is seU-actuating, setf-
creatrng rnind, actualizing itseU through simultaneous affirmation and 
negation of itsetf, the proponents of the phUosophy of being are 
striving to do by means of then- theory of the analogical unity of being, 
as that which is simultaneously affirmed and negated in the very con­
stitution of everything that is. Thus, the logical problem at the basis 
of both systems is the old Parmenidean problem, 'How can that which 
is basicaUy at the root of aU that is (mind for the Hegelians, being for 
reaUsts) be simultaneously both affirmatively and negatively the reason 
why each thing is what it is?' 
Whereas HegeUans, accepting the Kantian critique, which con­
cludes that understanding is always mediate and unable to reach things 
in their own reality, but rejecting Kant's impasse at the antinomies 
of reason, 1 6 7 seek to find in reason, that is, in constructive reason, 
the lost intuitive contact with the foundation of aU that is, and thus 
elaborate the doctrine of the concrete universal as concrete unity in 
diversity attained by the seU-creative activity of seU-actuating reason, 
165 Yves Simon, The Great Dialogue of Nature and Space, New York, Magi Books, 
1970, p. 66. Emphasis added. 
166 Md., p. 65. Emphasis added. 
1 6 7 See J. E. Griffiss, "The Kantian Background to Hegel's Logic," in The New 
SchoUisticism, XUII (1969), p. 517. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
299 
on the other hand, philosophers of being, such as F. H . Parker 1 6 8 and 
Y. Simon 1 6 9 regard the understanding as enjoying its own type of im­
mediacy with the concrete world of experience, distinct from the imme­
diacy of sense, so that, for them, the abstract universal is not merely 
abstract,170 but the inteUigible face of present reaUty 1 7 1 as being. Being 
as thus something present to the inteUigence, or to intuitive reason, 
is the foundation both of its being present and of its being what it 
is as distinct from what it is not. This being of things, inasmuch as 
it is that which is universaUy pervasive and together the concrete deter­
minant of the being of each thing is just as much a concrete unity in 
diversity as is the concrete universal of Bradley, Bosanquet and Col­
lingwood. It is "a universal which determines its own particulariza-
tion." 
And " i n this sense the universal conceived by Aristotle was, 
in intention at least, concrete . . . " 1 7 2 
The movement of thought which began with GaUleo and which 
founded the natural sciences may be described as the insurrection 
of matter against [Aristotle's] imposed determination by form. It 
developed in conscious opposition to the doctrine of 'substantial 
forms', and its fundamental principle of efficient causation was 
nothing less than the assertion that the existence of things is deter­
mined by other principles than those which determine their kind. 
The revolt was successful, and destroyed for ever after the claim 
of the AristoteUan universal to be concrete.173 
N. Interim Summary 
The foregoing sections of this chapter have taken issue with Col­
Ungwood's position that propositions are meaningful only as answers 
to questions and that knowledge therefore is a matter of propositions 
taken in union with the questions they propose to answer. First, Col­
lingwood's reäson for asserting his position was questioned, namely 
his opposition to Cook Wüson and the Oxford ReaUsts and their reaUst 
principle that "knowledge makes no dUference to what is known." 
It was shown in what sense this principle is quite legitimate, and that, 
U this legitimate sense is denied for the reasons aUeged by Colling­
wood, then CoUingwood's own theory of conscious reflection over 
feeUngs is Ukewise prejudiced. Then, second, it was shown that many 
1 6 8 See above, this chapter, p. 280 et seq. 
1 6 9 See above, p. 298. 
1 7 0 See above, this chapter, p. 292 and note 136. 
1 7 1 See above, this chapter, p. 293 et seq. 
1 7 2 M. B. Foster, "The Concrete Universal: Cook Wikon and Bosanquet," in Mind, 
XL (1931), p. 1. 
1 7 3 Md., p. 2. 

300 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
scientific discoveries have been made which were independent of, and 
sometimes quite opposed to, the questions in the minds of the re­
searchers. Third, it was shown that the very questioning activity of 
the mind is not solely a matter of an active domination of the subject 
matter by the mind, as the Baconian and juridical method of inter­
rogating a recalcitrant witness suggests, but itsetf involves a respect­
ful receptivity towards that which is questioned, whether person or 
document. And furthermore, the questioning involved in historical 
research was shown, following Marrou, to presuppose a basic sym­
pathetic connaturality with the questioned object, in which the basic 
' attitude of the questioner with respect to the questioned object is that 
found in everyday Ufe between members of a famUy, that is, of famU­
iarity, in which the other is sympathetically respected as a friend, 
and the interrogation of the historical object is sirnUar to that which 
takes place between friends trying to get to know one another. Thus 
the questiordng traditionally associated with the attitude of wonder 
was shown to be other than that associated with behaviour proceed­
ing from suspicion and doubt, where the predominating concern of 
the questioner is calculated to avoid deception. Questioning is thus 
not merely the activity of extorting information reluctantly given, but 
may be, and often is, a cooperative activity in which the questioner 
and his interrogated object concur spontaneously and connaturaUy 
in an exercise of famUiarity. Fourth, CoUingwood's epistemology was 
questioned from the point of view that the content of the question 
carried by its presuppositions might not be merely presuppositions 
catalytically drawn out of the mind by its own activity of supposal, 
but might in fact be genuine intuitive penetrations into reaUty pres­
ent to the mind. Collingwood was criticised for being impUcated in 
a theory of reason originating from Kant, according to which theory 
thought is always reflexive and mediate, enjoying no intuitive imme­
diacy with reality. FoUowing F. H . Parker, it was shown that the Aris­
totelian theory of abstraction attained universals as the structures of 
concrete reality present to the rnind and not merely as mental clas­
sUicatory devices. Then, sixth, it was shown that the abstract concepts 
of the mind are adapted both to the mind's demands for clarity and 
distinction, for which the rnind requires univocal concepts of the genus-
species variety, which form the stock in trade tools of the scientist, 
and also to the transcendent fuUness of present reality, for which 
analogical concepts are required. The concept of being was then shown 
not to be an empty class concept, as CoUingwood would have it, but 
an analogical concept which is a genuine concrete universal whose 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
301 
differentiations are intrinsic to the common term itsetf. Metaphysics 
is thus concerned with being as an active presence of that which is 
to the mind, both as regards its common being and as regards its dif­
ferentials in being and not merely with presuppositions which the 
mind actively presents to itsetf solely from within its own resources. 
Consequently, the natural world, as philosophicaUy viewed, is there­
fore not merely an understanding of objects in terms of external, spatial 
relations, but an active presence of that which is to mind exercising 
its own distinctive way of being. This ontological dimension of the 
natural world wffl be of the highest importance in Chapter 9 below, 
in defending, against CoUingwood, the meaningfulness of proposi­
tions in themselves, as expressive of penetrations into the natural 
world, in addition to the meaning which they have as answers to ques­
tions, in which function their meaning is in terms of human concerns. 
O. Instance in which Knowledge Clearly 
Demands Relation to Question 
But U the foregoing sections of this chapter tend to undermine 
ColUngwood's theory that every meaningful statement is by way of 
an answer to a question and that knowledge is therefore an activity 
mduding both questions and their answers, there are instances which 
dearly favor CoUingwood's position. Perhaps one of the dearest possi­
ble instances of the meaning of a proposition being missed because 
the correct question was not asked is to be found in Hans Vaihinger's 
The Philosophy of 'As If',174 in which Vaihinger records the interesting 
case of Berkeley, who discovered the answer to a question he had 
never asked, and because he had not asked the question that he should 
have asked when he had its answer in his hands, he faUed to appre­
ciate exactly the knowledge he had within his grasp through not seeing 
what he did know as precisely the answer to a crucial question. 
The context is that of the use of systematic errors, especially in 
mathematics. This methodical procedure consists in aUowing a devia­
tion or contradiction to enter one's system, provided that a compen­
sating correction is admitted elsewhere into the system in order to 
cancel out the original deviation. 
И, in fictions, thought contradicts reaUty, or if it even contradicts 
itseU, and tf in spite of this questionable procedure it nevertheless 
succeeds in corresponding to reaUty, then—and this is a necessary 
1 7 4 English translation by C. K. Ogden, London, Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., 
2nd edition, 1925. See pp. 109-^4 on the method of antithetic error and the case of 
Berkeley's involvement therewith. 

302 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
inference—ffozs deviation must have been corrected and the contradiction 
must have been made good.175 
Where the correction that must be made is that of aligning men­
tal constructs with reality, the logical procedure is caUed the method 
ofcorrecting deviations made arbitrarily. Where seU<ontradiction is whoUy 
within the logical construct itseU, as when something is added to one 
side only of a mathematical equation and the correction must be made 
in the only way possible, namely by an equivalent, cancelling error 
of an opposite nature (one is reminded of the Hegelian negation of 
the negation), the procedure is caUed the method ofantithetic error.176 
Jo the method of correcting deviations between thought constructs 
and reaUty, and the method of antithetic error, which remains whoUy 
internal to the logical system, we may add a third type of systematic 
correction which is confined whoUy to experienced reality. As an in­
stance, a structural problem in the engineering complex of the 200-inch 
Mount Palomar telescope may be cited. 1 7 7 The mirror and the observ­
er's cage were to be located at opposite ends of a tube suspended 
pivotally at a gravitational centre between them. The problem was 
to support the 40-ton mirror assembly in any desired position in mid­
air, and sixty feet away at its focal point float a six-foot house fuU of 
mirrors and instruments and carrying an observer several tons in aU— 
and at no time let the two elements sUp out of line with each other 
by more than 8/100 of an inch. Such rigidity seemed an impossibUity 
from an engineering point of view. Serrurier gave a brUliant solution 
to the problem by first agreeing with the engineers that such rigidity 
was impossible. Of whatever strength the tube may be those great 
weights suspended at both ends were bound to bend it. The solution 
was "very weU, then let them bend it. Simply design the tube," he 
said, "so that the mirror and the observer's cage will move together, 
by the same amount and in the same direction, and thus in relation to each 
other stand 
still."178 
To define a circle as an ellipse is a self-evident error, but U one 
adds that the distance between the foci is zero, the assertion immedi­
ately becomes inteUigible. One error has been made good by another. 
It is logically nonsensical that a distance equals zero; a distance equal 
to zero is no distance at aU, but the non-occurrence is regarded as 
1 7 5 H. Vaihinger, The Philosophy of 'As lf', p. 109. Emphasis in original. 
1 7 6 See ibid., p. 109. 
1 7 7 See D. O. Woodbury, The GUiss Giant ofPahmar, London, Heinemann, 1940, 
pp. 226-228. 
1 7 8 D. O. Woodbury, op. cit., p. 226. Emphasis added. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
303 
an occurrencein the negative sense. Two mistakes have been com­
mitted here: first, the assertion that the circle is an ellipse, which is 
compensated for by the second, namely, that a certain distance be 
allowed to equal zero, which if literaUy taken is the same kind of con­
tradiction as it is to say that a circle is an elUpse. 1 7 9 
Many problems in mathematics are solved by a procedure in which 
a discrepancy introduced into the data at the beginning is cancelled 
out when the process is finished. A problem for a long time insoluble 
was the determination ofthe conditions under which a linea divided 
into parts χ and a - x shaU have x 2 (a - x) at a maximum. 1 8 0 Fermat 
solved it by an arbitrary substitution of x + e for x. This transforms 
the original x 2(a - x) into (x + e)2· (a - x - e) and treats the latter 
as if equal to the former when in fact it is not. Thus, 62(9 - 6) = 108, 
whereas (6 - 1) 2 (9 - 6 - 1) = 50. The original and the transformed 
equations are then expanded as foUows: 
x 2(a - x) = x 2a - χ 3 
(1) 
(x + e)2(a - χ - e) = (x 2 + 2ex + e 2) (a - x - e) 
(2) 
= ax 2 + 2aex + ae2 - x 3 - 2ex2 
- e 2x - ex 2 - 2e2x - 
e 3 
Equating (1) and (2) gives: 
x 2a - χ 3 = ax 2 + 2aex + ae2 - x 3 - 2ex2 
- e2x - ex 2 - 2e2x - e 3 
(3) 
This (i.e., equation 3) reduces to the following: 
2aex + ae2 = 3ex2 + 3e2x + e 3 
. . . which in turn reduces to: 
2ax + ae = 3x 2 + 3x 3 + e 2 
But, in the next step, Fermat simply cancels out the previously 
introduced error by saying that x + e was a catalytic fiction merely to 
facUitate the calculation. The equivalence of equations (1) and (2) is 
possible only U e = 0, and then aU expressions containing e drop out, 
giving 
2ax = 3x 2 
2a 
= 3x 
2a 
= χ 
3 
This means that U a Une a equals 12 inches, the only division in which 
a part χ and the remaining part a - x wffl give a maximum value for 
1 7 9 See Hans Vaihinger, op. cit., pp. 112-113. 
1 8 0 See ibid., pp. 113-115. 

304 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
x2(a - x) wül be when x = 8 and a - x = 4, and 82(4) = 256. Every 
other division gives a smaUer resutt than that. 
Fermat's reasoning in obtaining this solution was that the fictitious 
quantity x + e is not equal to the quantity x if e is a real value, but 
is equal only if e = 0. The whole method is based on first assuming 
e to be real and then equating it to zero. Fermat caUed this an adaequaUtas, 
that is, something approximating a complete equation being treated 
as if it were a complete equation, although according to strict math­
ematical and logical code x can never be equal to x + e. Nevertheless, 
acorrect result is obtained by mterpolating the fiction x + e and 
'equating it with x. Fermat simply deliberately made one errorand cancelled 
it in the course of the procedure by allowing the catalytic quantity e to drop 
out. The equality then ceases to be imaginary and becomes real in the 
end. By this antithetic operation an important and hitherto unob­
tainable result was achieved. 
Another somewhat similar procedure is adopted to solve second 
order equations, such as x 2 + px = q, which are solved by introduc-
2 
2 
ing the auxUiary quantity 
so that x 2 + px + 
= q. But, to 
correct the error of adding that quantity to one side of the equation, 
an antithetic operation is immediately performed by adding the same 
\ 2 
2 
term to the other side, giving x 2 + px + 
= q + 
_ 
The equation can now be solved thus: 
* ) ' - K ' 
χ 
= * v ^ t f 
P 
2 
M 2 
Mathematical thought arrived at this conclusion by adding I - I 
to both sides of the equation, the addition to the right-hand side being 
to correct the error of adding it to the left side. 
The second procedure resembles that of Fermat in some respects, 
but whereas in the first case the methodology consists in the introduc-

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
305 
tion of a mental ßction (an unreality), in the second case the method­
ology consists in the deliberate introduction of error into the reality of 
the case, requiring a corresponding balancing counter-error. Upon this 
Vaihinger makes the foUowing comment: 
I am not claiming to have reduced the logical functions to 
mathematical ones, but to have shown the formal identity of scien­
tific methods in the various fields of scientific inquiry, and in par­
ticular of methods which attempt to attain their goal by an altera­
tion of the given facts, by an arbitrary deviation from reality. The 
mathematical example given merely happens to be the most 
transparent and shows how it is conceivable that thought should 
be able to progress precisely because of such deviations from reaUty. 
The logical function finds itseU faced by the stubborn data, the 
material of thought, but without allowing itseU to be frightened 
thereby it arbitrarily alters the facts, sets the ideas in motion, and 
then quietly changes the mistakes it first made. The formal identity 
of these logical devices is thus obvious.181 
Vaihinger then discusses how Berkeley showed that the dUfer-
ential calculus can be sirruTarly explained by reduction to Fermat's 
schema. He concluded that a double error had been made, and his 
objections were developed at great length in fifty sections of his 
neglected work, The Analyst. 
But VaUiinger says that in manUesting the contradictions in the 
mathematical operations of the calculus, instead of recognizing that 
he had made a briUiant discovery regarding mathematical methodol­
ogy, Berkeley rejected it as Ulogical. His conclusion was that mathe­
maticians had no right to scoff at the incomprehensible mysteries of 
Christianity, since their own subject suffered from exactly the same 
fflogicaUties. Vaihinger maliciously adds that "like a good English­
man . . . the Bishop of Cloyne did not reaUze that he would then also 
have to reject the basic principles of Christian theology." 1 8 2 Vaihinger 
comments that here "we have a strange spectacle, and one not likely 
to occur again in the history of science, of a thinker with a key to a 
problem in his hands—but without the problem itself."183 
The explanation Vaihinger offers is as foUows. Irritated by math­
ematical 'free-thinkers' expressing themselves scepticaUy about the 
incomprehensible mysteries of Christian dogma, Berkeley tried to 
direct the mathematicians' attention to their own sorry plight and 
recognize that their fluxions were fuU of contradictions. In doing so, 
1 8 1 H. Vaihinger, op. cit., pp. 116-117. Emphasis in original. 
1 8 2 Md., p. 117. 
1 8 3 Void. Emphasis added. 

306 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
quite by chance he discovered and demonstrated that the method pro­
ceeds by cancelling one error with another and thereby arriving at 
the correct result. 
But, Vaihinger carefully points out, "the real problem was and 
stffl remains this:-How comes it that in mathematics a correct result 
can be obtained by means of contradictions such as those involved 
in fluxions?"184 "The answer to the problem," Vaihinger says, 1 8 5 "is 
that the correct answer is obtained by the method of antithetic error." 
Berkeley's effort was confined merely to showing the existence 
of contradictions in the operations of fluxions. He actuaUy accom­
plished more than he intended, but because he did not have the relevant 
question in his mind he failed to see the discovery he had made, which 
discovery is seen for what it is only when seen as an answer to that question. 
[Berkeley] accomplished more than he intended for he also dis­
covered the answer to a question that he had never asked. And yet 
this answer should have led him to the correct question. We cer­
tainly have here an unusual occurrence in the history of science.186 
It is doubtful whether a more forceful example of Collingwood's 
thesis, that knowledge is by way of an answer to a question, could 
be found than the one recorded by Vaihinger. Had Berkeley seen the 
propositional data which he had as an answer to a question he would have 
seen what those propositional data meant. He knew that it was a fact 
that there were contradictions in the procedures of calculus (fluxions). 
He stopped there. Had he asked 'Why do such contradictory proce­
dures lead to correct results?', he would have seen those contradic­
tions for what they reaUy are in those mathematical operations, namely, 
the method of antithetic error, and not merely blatant fflogicalities 
which are aU that they appeared to be to h i m . 1 8 7 
F. General Condusion Regarding Collingwood's Identification 
of Knowledge with the Mind's Questioning Activity 
What these arguments both for and against CoUingwood's posi­
tion manUest is that questions and their answers can exist quite inde-
184 Md., p. 118. 
i
8
s m 
186 Ibid. 
1 8 7 Having read this incident as reported by Vaihinger, what is one to think of 
the foUowing statement? "The Renaissance studies of Plato suffer from . . . the mania 
of trying to find in a phUosopher answers to questions he had never asked." EmUe 
Br4hier, "The Formation of Our History of PhUosophy," translated by Mary Morris, 
in Philosophy and History, The Ernst Cassirer Festschrift, edited by Raymond KIiban-
sky and H. J. Paton, New York, Harper Torchbooks, Harper and Row, 1963, p. 163. 

Knowledge as Question and Answer 
307 
pendently of one another. Questions may be asked which, perhaps 
quite by chance, may only be answered generations or perhaps cen­
turies later. 
. . . a knowledge that is incomplete in a thousand ways may 
still be the answer to a certain question. Someone may raise a ques­
tion a few centuries before the answer is obtained, and one day when 
the answer to precisely this question is obtained, we do not yet know 
everything, we do not know the whole about anything, but we have 
nevertheless obtained a true answer, a true proposition.188 
Then again, as in the Berkeley case narrated by Hans Vaihinger 
above, 1 8 9 a scholar may possess the answer to a question without pos­
sessing the question to which it is an answer. CoUingwood himseU 
recognizes this. During his archaeological investigation of the Cum­
berland WaU as a sentry walk, CoUingwood theorized that U the waU 
was not a defense barrier but in fact a sentry walk, "there ought. . . 
to be a chain of towers, not connected by a waU but otherwise resem-
bUng those on the waU, stretching down that coast." 1 9 0 To the relevant­
ly arising question " d i d such towers exist?" the answer in the affir­
mative was revealed by "search in old archaeological publications 
[which] showed that towers of exactly the right kind had been found; 
but their existence had been forgotten, as generally happens with 
things whose purpose is not understood." 1 9 1 Now the crucial point 
here is that had the contributors to the old archaeological publications 
merely recorded, in strict accordance with ColUngwood's proposed 
Baconian method of rigidly adapting findings to a preconceived ques­
tionnaire, only what answered their own questions, they may never 
have seen fit to record such information as was to prove crucial to 
the answering of questions raised later by Collingwood. They had the 
answer to CoUingwood's question without having the question. But had 
they discarded that information as being irrelevant to their own in­
vestigations, Collingwood later would have had his question without 
having the answer to it. Again, CoUingwood writes: 
in England, where Roman archaeology has gone forward incessant­
ly in most parts of the country ever since the seventeenth century, there 
is a gigantic bvdk of material from which many questions of this kind 
[concerning Graeco-Roman population statistics] can be answered, 
if not conclusively, at least within a reasonable margin of error.192 
1 8 8 Yves Simon, The Great Dialogue ofNature and Space, New York, Magi, 1970, p. 68. 
1 8 9 See this chapter, pp. 301-306. 
190 An Autobiography, p. 129. 
1 9 1 Vbid. 
1 9 2 Jbid., p. 135. 

308 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Had the coUectors responsible for this gigantic Ьшк of material simply 
dealt with it as precise answers to their own questions, it would not 
be subsequently available as a means of answering many newly arisen 
questions. This stock of information, in the form of statements, is 
valuable as such even before the questions arise to which it wffl pro­
vide the answer. 1 9 3 
The conclusion of aU the foregoing, therefore, is that propositions, 
besides being answers to questions, have a meaning in themselves in 
an absolute way. They not only relate to the questioning mind as answers 
to its questions, as the satisfaction of its inquiry, but they relate also 
"to objective reality and have meaning as so related, as sigrdfying real-
1 9 3 LesUe Armour, The Concept ofTruth, Assen, Van Gorcum, 1969, p. 213, agrees 
with ColUngwood's criticism of the archaeologists who "were in the habit of ransack­
ing historical sites, pUing the loot neatly, and then trying to see what 'natural kinds' 
the objects sorted themselves into. The main result, according to CoUingwood (and 
he was probably right) was simply the destruction of a great deal of historical evi­
dence. . . . The archaeologists were fooUsh because they faUed to ask themselves such 
simple questions as 'How many different sorts of people Uved on this site and in what 
order7'-a question which would have readUy suggested to them the fact that the order 
of the material in an ancient garbage heap might weU be extremely important and 
that not aU objects which looked more or less aUke necessarily belonged together." 
Armour points out that "if one's interest in the objects is purely aesthetic, the classifica­
tion of objects might weU be very different than ύ one's interests were both aesthetic 
and historical or only historical. Again, U one's interests lay in the molecular struc­
tures of the garbage, one would get a stUl different set of classifications." He con­
cludes that "the same data . . . can yield a variety of different kinds of information 
depending on the questions one asks. [And] if one asks no questions, it does not seem 
that the data could yield any information." Armour and CoUingwood are certainly 
correct in maintaining that the yield, in terms of inteUigible meaning content, of the 
excavation results depends on the direction of the excavator's questions, but exclu­
sive insistence on the role of the excavator's questions, dominated as they wUl be 
by the excavator's interests in the 'dig,' may result in the very thing which both Col­
lingwood and Armour wam against, namely the destruction of evidence, for future 
investigators may weU find in the same excavation yield answers to their questions 
which may be questions the original investigators never envisaged. The warning is 
that an excavator who approaches an excavation site with aesthetical questions in rnind 
should ateo keep in mind the possibUity that other investigators, now or at some future 
time, may be interested in the results of the excavation from the optic of historical 
or chemical (scientific) questions. K he is not careful to preserve or record the results 
of his investigations in such a way as to be avaUable to these other researchers, he 
may weU destroy forever the very evidence that these other investigators need to 
answer their questions provoked by their respective interests. Criticism of mdiscriminate 
digging appUes weU to men Uke Bekoni (see C. W. Ceram, Gods, Graves and Scholars, 
New York, A. Knopf, 1968, revised ed., pp. 117-120), who ransacked Egyptian tombs 
with no other motive than personal glory or monetary gain. But an excavator with 
a minimum of scientific respectabffity wül approach any excavation with reasonable 
caution so that his work wiU yield the maximum of information, answering not only 
his own particular questions, but, as far as possible, being avaUable to answer subse­
quent, and perhaps hitherto unknown, questions. 

Knowledge as Qwesfion and Answer 
309 
ity. 1 9 4 The Berkeley case as narrated above by Hans Vaihinger clearly 
shows this. That is, the meaningful content of a proposition does not 
totaUy derive from the question to which it is the answer, but also 
from its relationship to objective reaUty which it is able to present to 
the mind and thereby answer the mind's questions addressed to real­
ity. This means that statements made in any historical period are not 
restricted in their meaningfulness to the questions currently raised 
during that period. CoUingwood's insistence on the matching of mean­
ing and evidence exclusively to questions involved serious defects in 
his archaeological work, as is testified by I . A. Richmond. 1 9 5 "That 
excavation should be conducted with specUic problems in mind upon 
sites Ukely to provide an answer, was salutary and useful," 1 9 6 but its 
"coroUary, that to pose a problem permitted its answers to be predicted 
was a product of study rather than the f i e l d , " 1 9 7 and involved Col­
Ungwood in prediction rather than discovery: " . . . at King Arthur's 
Round Table, near Penrith . . . he had made up his mind in advance 
what he was to find and found it with fatal precision." 1 9 8 The atti­
tude of natural piety, which CoUingwood regarded as a vice in Alex­
ander, 1 9 9 but which is a virtue absolutely essential to any researcher, 
was completely lacking in CoUingwood. " H e had . . . supreme in­
teUectual confidence which prevented him from being taken by sur­
prise . . . " 2 0 0 This exclusive attention to knowledge as active ques­
tioning, characterized by "a power of artistic criticism and draught-
manship," 2 0 1 stUled that sense of wonder and openness which rec­
ognizes that "the expected is always accompanied and often over­
shadowed by the unexpected" and that "an excavator's first duty is 
to see everything without the blinkers imposed by prearranged con­
centration of vision." 2 0 2 
1 9 4 See below, Chapter 9, p. 430 et seq. 
1 9 5 See Richmond's "Appreciation of R. G . CoUingwood as an Archaeologist," 
accompanying obituary notice in Proceedings of the British Academy, ХХГХ (1943), pp. 
476480. 
1 9 6 Md., p. 478. 
1 9 7 Bid. 
1 9 8 Vbid., p. 479. 
1 9 9 R. G. CoUingwood, An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 174. 
2 0 0 R. B. McCaUum, "Robin George CoUingwood," accompanyingobituary notice 
in Proceedings of the British Academy, ХХГХ (1943), p. 467. 
2 0 11. A. Richmond, art. cit., p. 476. 
2 0 2 Vbid., pp. 478-479. 


CHAPTER E l G H T 
Logic and Questioning 
A. The Awakening of Reason and the Birth of Logic 
Ernst Cassirer teUs how the ancient Egyptians held in special rever­
ence the moon-god Thoth, "the scribe among the gods," from whose 
hands writing came into being and who "aUows gods and men to 
know what is their due; for he determines the measure of things." 1 
Speech and writing—the precondition of aU human intercourse and 
community-"are valued as the origin and measure; for the capacity 
to fix the fleeting and changing, and thereby remove the accidental 
and capricious, inheres, above aU, in them." 2 
Cassirer says that aheady in myth and religion it is detected that 
human culture is not seU-evidently given, a mere datum to be accepted 
as such, but a miracle of some sort which has to be explained. This 
feeUng generates the deeper seU-awareness which not only drives man 
to pose the questions which ask for that explanation, but dares him to 
go further and to construct an authentic and independent method by 
which he can answer them. The Greeks first took this decisive step, 
and thereby revealed the new power which alone could lead to a 
1 Ernst Cassirer, The Logic of the Humanities, New Haven, Yale University Press, 
1960, p. 44. 
2Md. 
311 

312 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
science of nature and a science of human civiUzation. Thought awak­
ened strives to grasp the unity that pervades the whole of reality. 
m place of the unrestricted multipUcity of the mythical attempts 
at explanation, which focus on first one phenomenon and then an­
other, there emerges the representation of a thoroughgoing unity 
of being, which must correspond to a similar unity of explanation. 
This unity is accessible only to pure thought. The diverse and numer­
ous creations of the mythmaking imagination were henceforth re­
jected and eradicated by the critique of thought.3 
Thus, intellectual awakening occurred with this awareness that 
-a radical unity pervaded the hitherto discordant multiplicity. From 
its own resources critical thought had to supply the answers which 
would replace the destroyed mumpHcity of mythical explanations. This 
task proceeded from the admirable consistency of the Pre-Socratics 
to the solution given in Plato's theory of ideas and Aristotle's meta­
physics, which remained decisive and exemplary for centuries. Many 
apparently diametricaUy opposed tendencies contributed to the state­
ment of the question and solution of the problem. The unifying con­
cept in the diversity of the labour of Greek thought is that of logos. 
. . . if we look at it in terms of its origin and goal, this whole 
colossal labor of thought, in a certain measure, yields to being com­
prehended within one fundamental concept, which Greek philos­
ophy was the first to discover and which it worked out and per­
fected in aU its factors, m the development of Greek thought the 
concept which played this role was that of logos.1 
By means of this concept, HeracUtus saw the world as a totaUty 
of materials which reciprocally metamorphose into one another. The 
Ionians were not satisfied to know merely the " w h a t " of things, but 
demanded also to know their " h o w " and their " w h y . " 5 Heraclitus 
faced these questions with the reaUzation that perception alone could 
not give a satisfying answer. The answer could be given only by 
thought, for thought alone permits a man to transcend subjective 
enclosure within his own private individuality. "He no longer pur­
sues his 'subjective understanding,' but comprehends one that is 
universal and divine. A universal law [of the world] replaces . . . 
'private insight.' " 6 With the recognition of this hgos, this 'universal 
3 Md., pp. 4445. 
4 Jbid., p. 45. Emphasis in original. 
5 These are three of the four questions which Aristotle later wiU systematize into 
the scientific interrogation of reaUty as distinct from dialectical interrogation of prevaU-
ing beUefs and convictions about reaUty. See later, this chapter, p. 330 et seq. 
6 E. Cassirer, The Logic of the Hunianities, p. 46. 

Logic and Questioning 
313 
law of the world/ a man is first liberated from his mythical dream­
world of imagination and narrow and limited world of private sense 
perception. 
For just this is the character of being awake and of awakened 
being—that individuals possess a common world, whereas in 
dream(s) each lives only in his own world and remains mired and 
imprisoned in it. 7 
Western thought found it impossible ever to deviate from this new 
direction imparted to it by Greek thought. 
From the time this thought first permeated the school of Greek 
philosophy, aU knowledge of reaUty was bound, to a certain extent, 
by this basic concept of 'logos'—hence by 'logic' in the widest sense.8 
Logic in its widest sense, therefore, is this acceptance of thought 
as bounded by a radical principle of unity and coherence at the basis 
of everything that is, and it is in terms of this principle that aU mean­
ing and inteUigibUity is to be found. 
This newly awakened consciousness, searching for the explica­
tive principle of aU that is, soon became commercialized by the Greek 
sophists, for whom "what they believed to be wisdom (because they 
confused wisdom and power) was but an art of seducing and persuad­
ing minds." 9 For them the inteUectual lUe was a sport, a contest, a 
battle of eloquence whose sole purpose was a public victory over their 
adversary's thesis, whether by fair means or by foul. The audience 
played the primary role, as the verdict of the bystanders was the final 
judgment. These men were professors of the 'successful' Ufe through 
the techniques of opportunism, especially in the poUtical field. 1 0 But 
by the dialectic of history "they made Socrates possible," 1 1 whose 
"critical spirit (critical in the phUosophical sense of the word) appre­
hends questions and tests ideas according to their intrinsic value, inde­
pendently of the judgment of the crowd." 1 2 What matters now is not 
the blows exchanged in the arena of public contestation, but what is 
achieved in the workshop of trial and proofwithin the mind itseU. 
7 wid. One recalls CoUingwood's transcendence of art and reUgion and emergence 
of the scientific consciousness, as described in Speculum, Mentis. 
8 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 46. 
' J. Maritain, Moral Philosophy, London, Bles, 1964, p. 5. 
1 0 See ibid., p. 5. 
1 1 See ibid. 
1 2 Tbid.; emphasis added. 

314 
Logic, Phuosophy, 
and History 
"The passion for truth has taken the place of the passion for suc­
cess." 1 3 
From this, the notion of science clearly emerged, the notion of 
authenticaUy intellectual knowledge, established on the level of the 
inteUect's own Ughts and proper demands. 1 4 The first and most basic 
demand of authenticaUy scientUic knowledge is the search for what 
things are, their definitions. ScientUic discussion regarding what is 
just and what is not just aU turns on our abUity to answer the ques­
tion of what is justice. 1 5 This is extremely important in evaluating Col­
Ungwood's theory of the logic of questioning, for on the one hand 
'he rejects the definitional 'what' question as vague and meaningless, 
and to be substituted for by the 'which' question, since the 'what' 
question offers no alternatives;16 on the other hand, he frequently sets 
out from a 'what' question, although, during the course of the inves­
tigation, he transforms it into a 'which' question, dealt with by 'the 
u Tbid., pp. 5^s. Aristotle wiU later distinguish in his Topics ^ΤΠ, 5, 159a 2540) 
argument for the sake ofinvestigation and teaching from the argument of those engaged 
in a competition. In the first case, there is a common seeking ofa common aim, namely 
knowledge of some subject matter; in the second each contestant seeks to win over 
the other, not to achieve a common purpose. Bacon's scientific method of interrogat­
ing a recalcitrant and hostile witness is of the btter type. 
1 4 J. Maritain, Moral Philosophy, p. 6. 
1 5 See ibid. 
1 6 See CoUingwood's The New Leviathan, p. 74, par. ll.tt: 
" A question that offers 
no alternatives is a bogus question. The technique of knowing proper, or what is caUed 
scientific method, depends on replacing questions which, being vague or confused, 
are unanswerable, by real questions, or questions which have a precise answer. (11.13) 
The vague question 'What do I want?' is thus replaced by the precise or real ques­
tion: 'Which do I want, a or b?' " See also CoUingwood's depreciation of definition 
in his Speculum Mentis, p. 111: "Giving and coUecting definitions is not phUosophy 
but a parlour game." Louis O. Mink, in his "CoUingwood's Dialectic of History," 
in History and Theory, VII (1968), p. 4, writes: He [CoUingwood] did not ask or attempt 
to answer the question "What is History?" Elsewhere he specificaUy renounced aU 
questions of the form 'What is X?' " Mink refers us to pars. 31.61-31.68 of Col­
lingwood's The New Leviathan, where we read: "Ancient [Greek] sciences . . . de­
fined their aims by asking questions like: 'What is Nature?' 'What is man?' 'What 
is Justice?' 'What is Virtue?' A question of this sort was to be answered by a defini­
tion of the thing. From this definition, which had to state the 'essence' of the thing 
defined, implications could be derived, each impUcation being the statement of some 
'property.'.. . To seek for x a singIe essence from which aU the 'properties' of x are 
logically deducible is to propose a science of x with an unlimited objective. That is 
implied in any question of the form: 'What is x?' To a question in this form, for exam­
ple: 'What is Nature?' modern science answers: 'I do not know. What the essence 
of Nature is nobody knows, and nobody need care. When they asked that question 
the Greeks were asking a question too vague to be precisely answered.' " Correlate 
this statement by ColUngwood with Marjorie Grene's comments on Aristotle's nous; 
see Chapter 7, above, pp. 281-282 n. 89. See ateo criticism of this position, this chapter, 
below, pp. 337-338 and pp. 347-349. 

Logic and Questioning 
315 
plain historical method.' 1 7 This transformation of 'what' questions 
(such as what is art? what is religion? what is science?) into questions 
about the idea of art held by certain peoples at various historical 
periods, about the idea of religion, about the idea of science or about 
the idea of nature prevaihng at certain periods, is the transformation 
of the scientific (in the strictsense; since science in the strict sense 
is dominated by knowledge of what the subject matter is in itself—a 
question out of bounds in European thought since the Kantian 
1 7 Thus in The New Leviathan, p. 1, pars. 1.1. et seq.: "What is man? . . . [which] 
is asked because we are beginning an inquiry into dvfflzation, and . . . (1.13) civiliza­
tion is a condition of communities; so to understand whaf civüization is we must first 
understand what a community is. (1.14) A community is a condition of men . . . so 
to understand what a community is we must first understand what men are. (1.15) 
This gives us the scheme of the present book . . . " This is nothing other than the 
old AristoteUan order of interrogation: to know why men are dvfflzed we must know 
what community life is; to know what community Ufe is we must know what men 
are precisely as men, that is, what is man? That is, properties are known ultimately 
as necessitated by the essence of the subject. The essence, expressed by the defini­
tion, of the ultimate subject of discussion—the answer to the question 'What is it?' 
regarding the subject—is the point of departure for any sdentific discussion. In the 
case of The New Leviathan this definition is that man as man is subjed of community 
living and by medium thereof of dvUized living. But CoUingwood does not foUow 
through with this method outUned at the beginning of The New Leviathan. On p. 61, 
par. 9.1 et seq., he says that "the account of man as mind given in this first part, 
the account of community to foUow it in the second, and the account of a civUized 
community to be given in the third, are aU constructed on what Locke caUed the 
'historical plain method.' (9.11) The essence of this method is concentration upon 
facts. . . . (9.16) A study of mind on the historical method involves two renuncia­
tions. First it renounces with Locke aU 'science of substance'. It does not ask what 
mind is: it asks only what rnind does. (9.17) You can have your cake and eat it too 
by holding that mind is 'pure act', so that the question what mind is resolves itseU 
without residue into the question what mind does; but [note weU]: whether this is defen­
sible I shall not ask. [Latter emphasis added.] (9.18) Secondly, it renounces aU attempts 
to discover what mind always and everywhere does, and asks only what mind has done 
on certain definite occasions . . . [and] (9.21) whatever I need to know for this pur­
pose is about the modern European mind. . . . " But this evasion of the 'what' ques­
tion at one level reinvolves it at another. For in order to know what has been done 
by the modem European mind we need to know what the modem European mind is in order 
to know what is to be induded and what is to be excluded from one's 'plain historical 
method.' A clue to the reason why CoUingwood sUps out of gear from one method 
into another, proceeding, as he does, as a dialectician, is given by what Aristotle says 
in the Topics, Bk. 8, Ch. 2,158a 15-20: "Not every universal question can form a dialec­
tical proposition as ordinarUy understood, e.g., 'What is man?' or 'How many mean­
ings has the good?' Fora dialectical premiss must be ofaform to which it is possible to reply 
yes' or 'No', whereas to the aforesaid it is not possible. For this reason questions of this 
kind are not dialectical unless the questioner himself draws distinctions or divisions before 
expressing them, e.g., 'Good means this or this, does it not?' For questions of this sort 
are easUy answered by a yes or a no." The straight 'what' question is a direct inter­
rogation of reality, hence a scientific question; but 'is it this or this?' transforms it into 
a question about our knowledge of reality, that is, a dialectical question. See later in 
this chapter, pp. 349-350 below. 

316 
Logic, PhUosophy, and History 
critiques) questioning and investigation ofreality into dialectical ques­
tioning and investigation of what peopk think or have thought about real­
ity. This is the core critique against the whole Collingwoodian enter­
prise: the most basic scientific (in the strict sense) question is put out 
of bounds by exaggeration of the historical dimension in human knowl­
edge and consequent absorption of aU inquiry into dialectical inquiry. 
The root cause of this is a historical cause, the rupture of viable con­
tact of the understanding inteUect with concrete reality in itseU by the 
Kantian critique, and the Hegelian aUeged restoration of rational con­
tact with reaHty by historical/dialectical seU-creating, seU-unfolding 
reason. 1 8 To argue, as CoUingwood does in his Autobiography,19 that 
'what is the State?' is a dUferent question for Plato and for Hobbes 
is to presuppose that the only knowable object regarding the State 
is what Hobbes or Plato or Marx or somebody thought it to be, and 
to put out of play completely the vital scientUic question 'what is the 
State?' which means 'what is the State really?' as distinct from what 
anybody thinks it to be. K one argues, with CoUingwood, that the 
'what' question such as 'what is the State?' is reducible without residue 
to what a, b, c, d, etc., thought it to be, then one thereby abandons 
the properly scientific and phUosophical enterprise which began with 
the discovery by the Greeks of all-pervading logos, and lapses into 
a new though perhaps more refined sophism, which masks its 
sophistry behind historical respectabUity. 
Jacques Maritain warns against misunderstanding the Socratic 
ignorance. It is an ignorance ofwhich we are aware, and one of which 
Socrates took great pains to make us conscious. But Maritain asks, 
"tf the idea of science were not there, would I have the idea of my 
ignorance?" 2 0 For Socrates, ignorance is something pointing to some­
thing else. As blindness would be meaningless U sight were not a 
reaUty (trees lack sight but are not bUnd; the term is meaningless in 
their regard) so ignorance, being ignorance, would be meaningless 
U science were not a reality. Awareness of ignorance presupposes 
awareness of knowledge, of knowledge which dispels the ignorance, 
whose known absence constitutes that very ignorance. Maritain cites 
Aristotle as assuring us that Socrates strives in regard to the moral 
virtues to discover their definitions. "He [Socrates] is in search of what 
things are: because he applied himself to doing syllogisms, and the 
1 8 See Chapter 7 above, pp. 298-299. 
1 9 Pp. 61-64. 
2 0 J. Maritain, Moral Philosophy, p. 6. 

Logic and Questioning 
317 
principle ofsyllogisms is what things are."21 Maritain comments as fol­
lows: 
The whole Socratic enterprise bears witness to the fact that it 
must in the end be possible to define the virtues. And thus what 
matters above all is that the ideal of a knowledge which is firm and 
incontestable in itserf, a science of moral matters, is now brought out.22 
With Socrates and Plato, the element of ignorance and con­
sciousness thereof prevailed—as is clear from the variety of opinions 
on different matters, each ably defended by one school of sophistry 
or another—and the search for definitions remained a protracted search 
rather than an achievement. But with Aristotle, reaping the fruits of 
the constructive questiordng of Socrates and Plato, a soUd core of weU-
defined scientific knowledge becomes available. The dialectic give-
and-take between opinions culminates, at least to some extent, in the 
insight from which true science begins, the insight into what (e.g., 
movement or nature) is. Definitions, as expressing insights into the 
constitution of what things are, do not come out of the blue, but only 
after perhaps years or even generations of discussion, sifting what 
the various schools of thought held on a question. The 'state of the 
question'—that is, the ordered catalogue of opinions pro and con a given 
thesis—is stffl the normal and natural lead-up to the true beginning 
of any scientific inquiry. Having considered all the 'points of view,' 
one is proximately disposed to 'see,' to have 'insight,' into 'what the 
thing is' which previous discussion has been about. But once this 
insight is secured23 into what the subject matter is (expressed by the 
real definition), the opinions drop out of the picture as no longer rele­
vant. They were approaches to the principle or principles of the subject-
matter itsetf, which principles then dominate thought totally in the 
elaboration of genuine science. The clustering of the opinions pro and 
con a given question serves to focus the mind of the investigator on 
what exactly is the subject matter he is deaUng with, so that he is made 
ready to have the insight into the definition which is going to func­
tion as medium in demonstration. The readiness to pass from the 
opinions to the insight into what wül function as the demonstrative 
2 1 Md., p. 6. See also Aristotle, Metaphysics, Bk. 13, Ch. 4,1078b 18-25. Emphasis 
added. 
2 2 J. Maritain, Moral Philosophy, p. 6. Emphasis in original. 
2 3 By intuitive reason, as explained in the previous chapter; see above, pp. 280¬
284. 

318 
Logic, Phüosophy, and History 
medium 2 4 is what Aristotle caUs 'quick wit.' "Quick wit is a faculty 
of hitting upon the middle term instantaneously." 2 5 
B. The Aristotelian Contribution to the Logic of Questioning 
It has already been noted 2 6 that Collingwood neglected to make 
any mention of Aristotle's contribution to the methodology of ques­
tioning. On the other hand, L.-M. Regis goes so far as to accredit Aris­
totle with the invention of two techniques of interrogation. 2 7 One such 
technique is designed for orderly and correct questioning of our own 
or of another's knowledge. 
One [technique] is for the purpose of discussing knowledge that 
is already possessed with other phUosophers and with his own 
rnind, in order to classUy and set it in order, to defend it against 
opponents, to expose sophisms in argumentation, to dispose of ad­
versaries whose contentions are irrational and contradictory. This 
first technique is caUed "dialectics" and is set forth in the Topics, 
as are its three functions concerning properly phUosophical knowl­
edge.28 
The other technique is for the direct interrogation of reality, and 
constitutes the basis of strictly scientific and phUosophical investigation. 
The other technique is the very backbone of scientUic and 
phUosophical knowledge and consists in the direct interrogation of 
reaUty by the inteUect, an interrogation made up of a precise number 
of questions to be answered by the universe under the threat of re­
maining obscured by a heavy veU, hiding it from the inteUect and 
leaving visible only its outer contours. This questionnaire is fuUy set 
forth, along with its vindication, in the second book of the Analytics.29 
In another work 3 0 Regis notes that Aristotle uses the word hgic 
only in connection with the dialectical treatise. Only in the Topics31 
does Aristotle use the word Organon (δργανον), whereas for the theory 
of demonstration or science he uses the word analytics (άναλυτιχός) 
as in the Prior and PosteriorAnalytics.32 
Regis remarks thatDescartes 
reverses this usage, understanding by the term "logic" the science 
2 4 And, as wffl appear later, аП questioning is a search for a middle which wiU 
determine one way or another two possible alternative statements. 
2 5 Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, Bk. 1, Ch. 34, 89b 10. 
2 6 See Chapter 1, above, p. 27, n. 68. 
2 7 See his Epistemology, New York, Macmfflan, 1959, p. 127. 
28 Vbid., p. 127. 
29 aid. 
3 0 L.-M. Rägis, L'opinion selon Aristote, Paris, J. Vrin, 1935, p. 208, n. 2. 
3 1 As in 163b 11; 105a 21; 108b 32. 
3 2 As in On Interpretation, 19b 31 and Topics 162a 11. 

Logic and Questioning 
319 
of demonstration. For Aristotle, then, the Analytics is the method of 
proceeding scientificaUy and must be known before the scientUic work 
begins, not learnt during the scientific procedure. 3 3 In his Metaphysics3* 
Aristotle insists upon this necessity to have ahready been instructed 
on the way to proceed in each subject-matter, for it is absurd to seek 
at one and the same time a science and its method. 
The syllogism is the foundation stone of the whole AristoteUan 
logical edUice, but there are two ways in which it operates: scientifi­
caUy and demonstratively in the Analytics, dialecticaUy and inventive­
ly in the Topics.35 In demonstration, the syUogism proceeds from estab-
Ushed principles founded on the real definition of the subject-matter, 
m dialectic, the syUogism proceeds from generally held convictions 
about subject-matters, and one of its principal functions is to terminate 
in the discovery of real definitions, which then become the principles 
of demonstration in science, opinions dropping completely out of the 
picture. 3 6 Dialectical reasoning, operating as it does in the area of held 
convictions, is confined to the order of probable knowledge, or knowl­
edge of what is generaUy 'approved' to be the case, as distinct from 
objectively certain scientUic knowledge. 3 7 
C. Aristotelian Dialectical Interrogation of Human Knowledge 
AristoteUan dialectic appears to be somewhat insigruficant and 
second-rate U compared with that of Plato, for whom the dialectician 
is metaphysician and dialectic the pathway to knowledge of the reaUy 
3 3 See L.-M. Regis, L'opinion selon Aristote, p. 211. 
3 4 Bk. 2, ch. 3, 995a 10-15: ". . . it is absurd to seek at the same time knowledge 
and the wayof attaining knowledge; and it is not easy to get even one of the two." 
See R. McKeon's edition of The Basic Works ofAnstotk, New York, Random House, 
1941, p. 715. 
3 5 L.-M. R6gis, L'opinion selon Aristote, p. 213. 
3 6 See James Hogan, "The Dialectic of Aristotle," in Philosophical Studies, V (1955), 
pp. 13-14. 
3 7 However, as A. Gardeil has shown, probable knowledge has its own genuine 
type of certitude; see his " L a 'Certitude Prof>able' " in Revue des Sciences Philosophiques 
et Th6ologiques, L (1911), pp. 237-266 and pp. 441-485. This is extremely important 
in order to recognize that historical knowledge possesses a genuine certainty as dis­
tinct from opinion in the accepted sense of being merely conjectural. Jean Danielou, 
in his Christ and Us (EngUsh translation by Walter Roberts of Approches du Christ), Lon­
don, A.R. Mowbray, 1961, p. 2, writes that ". . . documents are the sole means of 
access to the historical realities. This does not mean that historical realities are not 
capable of a certainty as great as that of the reaUties of mathematics or physics. It 
would be a distortion of the reason to suppose that this is the case. Historical certain­
ties are just as absolute in their own sphere as mathematical certainties. But they re­
quire to be securely established [by] the rigorous use pf methods appropriate to their 
subject matter." 

320 
Logk, Philosophy, and History 
real. 3 8 This is because, for Plato, the forms definitive of things, what 
we mean when we taU< about what things are, are seU-subsistent; to 
reach the defining forms is to reach ultimate reaUty. Thus, dialectic 
has metaphysical value. But for Aristotle, the defining forms are a con­
stituent of experienced reaUty, and definition is through abstraction 
of that form from the contingency, mutabUity and multiplicity it has 
in experienced reality. Aristotle, like Plato, distinguishes knowledge 
from opinion, but, whereas for Plato knowledge is by way of reminis­
cence of previous direct vision of the subsistent forms as ultimate real­
ity, and opinion is "a Ukely account of a Ukely thing'' 3 9—that is, merely 
- a conjectural view of the fleeting appearances of reality—for Aristotle 
botK knowledge—spedficaUy, the certain knowledge of science—and 
opinion concern the reaUty of the mobUe world of everyday experience. 
ScientUic knowledge is knowledge of that experienced world in its 
necessary and determinate aspects, its inherent forms. Opinion, on 
the other hand, is a personal conviction based on motives other than 
determinate reality. A pupU, for example, may be convinced because 
of the weight of authority of a teacher that the three angles of a triangle 
equal two right angles without seeing how the reality of triangle, or 
what a triangle is, imposes this consequence. As soon as the pupU 
sees the implication of what being a triangle is he has no need of a 
master's authority as his motive for beUef. Thus, the one same convic­
tion may be either a scientUic conviction, based on the compeUing 
evidence of what the thing is, or an opinion, a personal conviction based 
on some other motive, the trustworthiness of an authority for instance. 
UnUke Plato, however, Aristotle attaches dialectic to opinion rather 
than to knowledge. 4 0 Distinguishing the Platonic tradition of seeking 
true knowledge in a sense-transcendent world from the earUer Socratic 
tradition, Aristotle regards himseU as developing the earlier Socratic 
tradition. 
[Aristotle] sees himseU as developing the Socratic method of defi­
nition by means of inductive arguments, starting from the ground 
of probabihties, that is, from common or generaUy accepted opinions 
and cases such as were brought forward, rnairdy in ethical questions, 
in the Socratic interrogatories, m his first reaction against Plato's 
objective ideaUsm AristoÜe appears to have reverted to the dialec­
tic of Socrates which had the advantage of providing a method of 
3 8 See James Hogan, "The Dialectic of Aristotle," p. 3, 
3 9 See Plato, Timaeus, pp. 29-30. See also A. E. Taylor, PUto: The Man 
and His Work, London, Methuen, 1952, p. 441. 
4 0 See James Hogan, art. cit., p. 3. 

Logic and Questioning 
321 
exploring, testing, and darifying the currency of probable knowledge 
or opinion. 4 1 
Whereas the scientific or demonstrative syUogism is based on the 
principle that we can only get mamfestly true conclusions from 
premisses that are marufestly true, the dialectical syUogism, although 
as syUogism, as a way of proceeding from premisses to conclusion, 
it is the same in aU cases,42 nevertheless as dialecticaUy operative it 
does not foUow this principle, since the premisses of the dialectical 
syUogism are at most probably and at least possibly true, being based 
as they are on prevaUing beliefs and opinions. 4 3 
But a phUosophy which takes an experiential basis seriously can­
not ignore prevaUing opinion. What may be scientUicaUy evident to 
a scientist may be avaUable to a non-sdentist on a basis of trust in 
the competence and honesty of the scientist. 4 4 Even the phUosopher, 
in regard to immediately evident principles, quite frequently is not 
able, in spite of every effort that he can arouse, to see unwaveringly 
the fuU force of such intrinsic seU-evidence; and the more he tries the 
more it may just look like smoke. At such times he is believing on the 
strength of his own authority as having seen in the past the indubitable 
self-evidence of such principles. K such is true of seU-evident prin­
ciples, how much more so must it be of demonstrated condusions, 
scientUic laws and even the facts of daUy experience.45 Apart from 
these rare moments of clear vision in the presence of objectively evi­
dent and seU<ompelling reality, we live out our daUy Uves, sden-
tists as weU as lay people, in the world of belief and opinion, trusting 
to our witness and trusting in the witnessing of others. 4 6 Aristotle and 
Hume have much in common in this respect. 
Aristotle is weU aware that exact or proven knowledge is pos­
sible for only a limited part of human activity, that the greater part 
4 1 Oid. 
4 2 See L.-M. Regis, L'opinion selon Aristote, p. 213. 
4 3 See James Hogan, art. cit., p. 3. It wUl be shown later (see this chapter, below, 
pp. 352-353) that CoUingwood, in assigning absolute presuppositions as basic convic­
tions determining the questioning procedure, reduces scientific interrogation of real­
ity directly to dialectical interrogation of what people basically think about reaUty. 
4 4 See A. GardeU, " L a 'Certitude Probable,' " Revue des Sciences Phitesophiques et 
Th6dogiques, L (1911), p. 258. 
4 5 See ibid., pp. 258-259. 
4 6 See M. Polanyi, The Tacit Dimension, New York, Anchor Books, Etoubleday, 1967, 
p. 64: "The acceptance of scientific statements by laymen is based on authority, and 
this is true to nearly the same extent for scientists using results from branches of science 
other than their own. Scientists must rely heavUy for their facts on the authority of 
feUow scientists." 

322 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
of man's practical Ufe Ues within the vast debatable land of opinion. 
He is disposed to much the same view as David Hume, that phflos-
ophy originates in our attempts to systematise "fhe reflections of 
common lUe," though Aristotle would not have agreed that phUos­
ophy ends, as weU as begins with fhem. 4 7 
Aristotle is distinguished among phUosophers for the respectful 
attention with which he collects and buUds upon the beliefs prevaU­
ing among mankind. 4 8 He reacts against Plato's inteUectual absolutism 
which dismisses aU that is not inteUigible as mere appearance or fflu-
sion, and sees that the way to certainties may be through probabU-
* ities^beUefs and opinions. It is in Aristotle's dialectic that is to be found 
his counterpart of the modern free use of hypotheses, assumptions 
and postulates which may or may not prove to be tenable. 4 9 
A n exhaustive study of Aristotle's dialectical method, mainly in 
the Topics, but interspersed throughout his scientUic treatises, would 
require a lengthy separate treatment of its own. We are here concerned 
with it as an akeady weU-developed theory of discovery through ques­
tioning which was completely ignored by ColUngwood. Short of a 
thoroughgoing analysis, the following relevant points may be made 
in regard to it. 
The first book programmes the treatise and indicates its relevance. 
Aristotle then defines what constitutes a dialectical proposition and 
a dialectical problem. Dialectical propositions exclude both what one 
holds and what is obvious to everyone, that is, what no one would 
doubt in his right senses.50 A dialectical proposition is to be found 
between these extremes. 
A dialectical proposition consists in asking something that is held 
by aU men, or by most men or by the phUosophers, i.e. either by 
aU, or by most, or by the most notable of these, provided it be not 
contrary to the general opinion. . . . Dialectical propositions also 
include views which are like those generaUy accepted, also proposi­
tions which contradict the contraries of opinions that are taken to be 
4 7 James Hogan, art. cit., p. 3. 
4 8 Void., p. 4. 
4 9 See ibid., p. 4. EHalectic is not concerned with the truth or falsity of its premisses 
or conclusions, but merely with internal consistency. See G. Grote, Aristotle, one-
volume edition edited by Alexander Bain and G. Croom Robertson, London, John 
Murray, 1880, p. 271. An exclusively dialectical procedure, as in ColUngwood, wffl 
not require that the premisses of argumentation be true or false in themselves but 
only that they be held, believed or presupposed for sake of argument. Truth, then, 
in the last analysis, can be nothing more than internal coherence within the various 
propositions in the reasoning process. 
5 0 See Aristotle's Topics, Bk. 1, Ch. 10, 104a 1-10. 

Logic and Questioning 
323 
generaUy accepted, and also aU opinions that are in accordance with 
the recognized arts.51 
A dialectical proposition is therefore a statement ascertained from 
prevaUing opinions and beliefs. 5 2 A dialectical problem is that about 
which an inquiry is conducted, which wffl lead to action or to knowl­
edge. 
A dialectical problem is a subject of inquiry that contributes either 
to choice and avoidance, or to truth and knowledge, and that either 
by itseU, or as a help to the solution of some othersuch problem. 
It must, moreover, be something on which either people hold no 
opinion either way, or the masses hold a contrary opinion to the 
phüosophers, or the phUosophers to the masses, or each of them 
among themselves.53 
Problems also include questions in which there are reasons for 
holding contrary positions or for which no definite reasons are 
avaUable, in other words, the doubtful. 
Problems also include questions in regard to which reasonings 
conflict (. . . there being convincing arguments for both views); 
others also in regard to which we have no argument because they 
are so vast, and we find it dUficult to give our reasons.54 
Aristotle says that 'practicaUy' aU dialectical problems are now 
caUed 'theses,' although, strictly, "a 'thesis' is a supposition of some 
eminent phUosopher that conflicts with the general opinion," and "a 
thesis is also a problem, although a problem is not always a thesis, 
inasmuch as some problems are such that we have no opinion about 
them either w a y . " 5 5 
There are two kinds of dialectical argument, induction and reason­
ing. 5 6 Reasoning is an argument in which certain things being laid 
down, something other than these necessarily comes about through 
them. Reasoning is demonstration (i.e., scientific) when the premisses 
from which the reasoning starts are true and primary, or are such that 
our knowledge of them has originaUy come through premisses which 
51 Md., 104a 5-15. 
5 2 Ln other words, one which, in CoUingwood's terms, wouki reduce into prevaUing 
presuppositions. K dialectic is the only mode of reasoning, ultimately we wiU end 
up talking about the foundations of beUefs, that is, some form or another of prevaU­
ing presupposition, as CoUingwood does. 
5 3 Aristotle, Topics, Bk. 1, Ch. 11, 104b 1-5, trans. W. A. Pickard-Cambridge in 
Vol. 1 of The Works ofAristotk, ed. W. D. Ross, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1928. 
5 4 Md., 104b 12-17. 
55 Jbid., 104b 15-20 and 2505. 
5 6 See ibid., Bk. 1, Ch. П, 105a 10-15. 

324 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
are primary and true. Reasoning is dialectical if it reasons from gener­
aUy accepted opinions. 5 7 Induction is a passage from individuals to 
universals. 5 8 Comparing the two, Aristotle says: 
Induction is the more convincing and clear: it is more readUy 
learnt by the use of the senses, and is applicable generaUy to the 
mass of men, though Reasoning is more forcible and effective against 
contradictious people.59 
Analysing the structure of an inquiry, Aristotle explains that argu­
ments start with propositions, and the subjects on which reasonings 
take place are problems. But every proposition, and every problem, 
turns-around either a genus or a pecuUarity or an accident, and around 
dUferentia inasmuch as they are applicable to the genus. 6 0 Neither 
of these four elements from itseU constitutes a proposition or a prob­
lem but every proposition and every problem arises from one or other 
of these. 6 1 
Aristotle explains the difference between a proposition and a prob­
lem: 
The dUference between a problem and a proposition is a differ­
ence in the turn of the phrase. For tf it be put in this way, ' " A n 
Animal that waUcs on two feet" is the definition of man, is it not?' 
or ' "Animal" is the genus of man, is it not?' the result is a propo­
sition: but U thus, 'Is "an animal that waUcs on two feet" a defini­
tion of man or no?' (or 'Is "animal" his genus or no?') the result 
is a problem.62 
Aristotle says that it is clear from this that propositions and prob­
lems are the same in number and that a problem can be made out 
of every proposition U the phrasing is altered. 6 3 
5 7 See ibid., Bk. 1, Ch. 1, 100a 25-31. CoUingwood's doctrine of presuppositions 
is likewise a grounding of reasoning in prevaUing convictions. He does not recognize 
demonstrative premisses which are primary and true. As Rubinoff showed, their truth 
is their serial arrangement on a scale of forms; it is relative to a preceding and succeed­
ing stage of development, not a quaUty of the premisses in themselves. ScientUic 
demonstration in the Aristotelian sense does not exist for Collingwood. 
5 8 See Aristotle, Topics, Bk. 1, Ch. 12,105a 10-15. It is difficult to be precise about 
induction in Aristotle's works. It is perhaps better to leave it in this wide sense in 
absence of special treatment in its own right. 
59 Md., 105a 15-20. 
6 0 See ibid., Bk. 1, Ch. 4, 101b 10-20. 
6 1 See ibid. 
6 2 Wid., 25-35. Both propositions and problems are interrogatives under dialecti­
cal consideration. A proposition asks a leading question giving the respondent a 
positive motivation to respond in one way; a problem proposes the alternatives indU-
ferently. 
6 3 See Aristotle, Topics, Bk. 1, Ch. 4, 101b 35-102a. 

Logic and Questioning 
325 
GeneraUy, aU propositions turn on identity and diversity, or sameness 
and dUference. Definitions set a subject apart, distinguishing what 
it is from what it is not. Widely, every predicate defines a subject in 
a certain way. But since there is sameness and diversity in sameness 
and diversity itself, things are definable in a number of dUferent ways. 
The notion of Sameness or Identity occurs so often in dialectic 
debate, that Aristotle cUscriminates its three distinct senses or grades: 
(1) Numero; (2) Specie; (3) Genre. Water from the same spring is only 
idem specie, though the resemblance between two cups of water from 
the same spring is far greater than that between water from differ­
ent sources. Even idem numero has different significations: sometimes 
there are complete synonyms, sometimes an individual is caUed by 
its proprium, sometimes by its peculiar temporary accident.64 
Something may be specUicaUy the same as another though indi­
vidually other; something may be specUicaUy dUferent from another 
but genericaUy the same. Things the same in strict definition are not 
only genericaUy but also specUicaUy the same. 
Aristotle explains that aU disputes, whether of propositions or 
problems, turn on one or other of the four ways something can be 
said of a subject: either definitionaUy, or as property, or as genus, 
or as accident. 
Aristotle takes the four heads—Accident, Genus, Proprium, and 
Definition, in the order here enumerated. The thesis of which the 
predicate is enunciated as accident, affirms the least, is easiest to 
defend, and hardest to upset. When we enunciate Genus or Pro­
prium, we affirm, not merely that the predicate belongs to the sub­
ject (which is all that is affirmed in the case of Accident), but, also 
something more—that it belongs to the subject in a certain manner 
and relation. And when we enumerate Definition, we affirm aU this 
and something reaching yet farther—that it declares the whole 
essence of the definitum, and is convertible therewith. Accordingly, 
the thesis of Definition, affirrrdng as it does so very much, presents 
the most points of attack, and is by far the hardest to defend. Next 
in point of dUficulty, for the respondent [to the questioner], comes 
the Proprium.65 
6 4 George Grote, Aristotle, ed. Alexander Bain and G. Croom Robertson, London, 
John Murray, 2nd ed., 1880, p. 277. The ideaUsm of Bosanquet and CoUingwood denies 
the vaUdity of this distinction of identity in difference into these three species, identify­
ing as it does identity in dUference with concrete identity in difference or individual­
ity. It is therefore a partial denial of the fuU ampUtude of the meaning of identity in 
difference. 
6 5 G. Grote, op. cit., pp. 284-285. 

326 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Books 2 through 7 of the Topics deal with the problems arising 
from each of these modes of predicating. Book 8 deals with the inter­
rogation rules to be respected by the questioner and by the respon­
dent in the various types of dialectical situations which cUffer according 
to the purpose of the discussion. In a didactic situation (and didactic 
is not primarily a dialectical situation, but may use dialectical method­
ology) the questioner-respondent relationship is that of teacher-
student. The purpose of the teacher as questioner is to teach what 
he knows and the respondent to learn what he does not know, fri 
a contestational situation the questioner and respondent are dueU-
ing, each seeking only victory over the other. In purely investigative 
argumentation the aim of both parties is neither to teach nor to con­
quer, but the common aim of testing the argumentative consequences 
of different admissions and obtaining proficiency in the chains of 
reasoning pro and con a certain topic. 6 6 
In the exercise of dialectical discourse two talkers are assumed: 
the respondent who sets up the thesis he undertakes to defend, and 
the questioner who interrogates with a view to impugn it or to involve 
the proponent in self-contradictory answers. 6 7 
The dialectician, being engaged in debate, must shape his ques­
tions, and regulate his march as questioner, according to the conces­
sions obtained or likely to be obtained from his respondent; who, 
if a question be asked having an obvious reference bearing on the 
thesis, wUl foresee the consequences of answering in the affirma­
tive, and wiU refuse to grant what is asked.68 
This is quite other than what the philosopher does, for he does 
not face an opponent in a strategy estimating situation. 
On the contrary, the philosopher, who pursues investigation 
with a view to his own satisfaction alone, is under no similar re­
striction. He looks at once for such premisses as conduct straight 
to a conclusion; and, the more obvious their bearing on the conclu­
sion is, the more scientific wiU the syllogism be, and the better wiU 
he be pleased.69 
6 6 See ibid., p. 354. 
6 7 See ibid. 
6 8 Md. 
6 9 G. Grote, op. cit., p. 354. ColUngwood, not admitting the type of interrogation 
which deals directly with experienced reaUty, transforms aU interrogation into contesta-
tive interrogation with other thinkers, or the interrogation which takes place as a dia­
logue of the soul with itself, taking now one side, now another, and thus absorbs 
aU philosophical and scientific interrogation into dialectical interrogation, in which 
there is only interrogation regarding what is held or believed about a given topic, and 
never direct asking of experienced reality: What are you? How did you get to be this 
way? 

Logic and Questioning 
327 
The rules for correct interrogation and response differ according 
as the purpose of the dialogue is one or another of the three enumer­
ated above. Aristotle claims to have been the first to distinguish the 
third purpose and investigate its particular rules of inquiry. 7 0 Book 
8 of the Topics then details rules of procedure for questioner and 
respondent in the different interrogation situations. 7 1 
What is important in this regard, in evaluating CoUingwood's posi­
tion on interrogative logic, is that questioning, inasmuch as it is con­
sidered to be a procedure of logical reasoning, implies the syllogism, 
and sometimes induction, as an integral part of that process. In a con-
testational situation the respondent is maintaining a thesis. He must 
avoid, in his responses to his interrogator, conceding anything from 
which the interrogator can deduce, as implied, the contrary or contra­
dictory of his thesis. 7 2 The questioner must interrogate in such away 
that he does not put the respondent on guard by a too direct ques­
tion, whose affirmative or negative response is too blatantly in oppo­
sition to the defendant's thesis. 
. . . Aristotle adrrdnisters counsel to the questioning as weU as 
to the responding partner. You as questioner have to deal with a 
thesis set up by the respondent. You see at once what the syUogism 
is that is required to prove the contrary or contradictory of that thesis; 
and your business is so to shape your questions as to induce the 
respondent to concede the premisses necessary towards that 
syUogism. If you ask him at once and directly to concede these 
premisses, he sees your drift and answers in the negative. You must 
therefore begin your approaches from a greater distance. You must 
ask questions bearing only indirectly and remotely upon your 
ultimate conclusion.73 
The exercise and practice of dialectic requires that one be accus­
tomed to argumentation by converting the syUogisms of which the 
7 0 See G. Grote, op. cit., pp. 354-355 and p. 362. See also Aristotle's Topics, Bk. 
8, Ch. 5, 159a 25-37. 
7 1 For commentary on this see G. Grote, op. cit., pp. 353-375. See abo Grote's 
commentary on the Sophistici Elenchi, op. cit., pp. 376421, which contains a notable 
amount of material on orderly dialectical questioning. 
7 2 In real life situations, this may be a matter of Ufe and death. An F.B.I, agent, 
impersonating an espionage agent, has to be very careful in any of his responses not 
to supply those among whom he is an impersonator of one of their own with infor­
mation from which they can deduce his real identity. 
7 3 G. Grote, op. cit., p. 355. Compare CoUingwood's 'Who kUIed John Doe?' inves­
tigation; see above, Chapter 1, p. 26, and CoUingwood's The Idea ofHistory, p. 268. 
"The Detective-mspector was severely blamed later on, for aUowing the rector to see 
in what direction his inquiries were tending, and thus giving him an opportunity to 
take cyanide and cheat the hangman." 

328 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
arguments consist, and of testing every thesis by first assuming it to 
be true, and then assuming it to be false, and following out the conse­
quences on both sides. Having hunted out each train of argument, 
one ought to look for the counter-arguments against it. This 
strengthens one's position both as questioner and as respondent. The 
exercise is so valuable that one should go through the process with 
oneself if no companion is available. The different trains of argument 
bearing on the same thesis ought to be put side by side for comparison. 
A<:ommand of a large number of both affirmative and negative argu­
ments serves weU both for attack and defense. 7 4 Ji this is so, Colling­
wood's argument that interrogative reasoning is specifically other than 
deductive, syUogistic reasoning, cannot be sustained, as interrogation 
as a form of reasoning necessarUy implicates syUogistic reasoning. A n 
analogy with the wave-transmission of Ught, as explained by physicists, 
may be helpful. In a traveUing wave front of light from, say, a point 
source, each point on the wave front may be considered to emit a series 
of secondary waves. The waves so interfere with one another that the 
energy is transmitted along the perpendiculars to the original wave 
front, but completely canceUed in every other direction in the forward 
hemisphere. Diffraction involves the incomplete interference of secon­
dary wavelets at the edge of the light beam. 7 5 The analogy with dia­
lectical argumentation is that every admission, concession or state­
ment, together with the presuppositions of questions, are 'point 
sources' from which deductive inferences flow, and any statement 
made along the way could be looked at as itseU a 'point source' of 
implications. But the dUferent implications of the progressing state­
ments and presuppositions as the discourse continues have an inter­
fering effect on each other, some not consistent with others, therefore 
requiring that some or another admission or presupposition be re­
jected, or that the argument go along this or that direction. 
The business of Dialectic . . . is to find and apply the syUogiz-
ing process to anygiven thesis, with premisses the most probable 
that can be obtained bearing on the thesis . . . [The questioner's] 
purpose is to investigate and impart this syUogizing power—the 
power of questioning and cross-examining a respondent who sets 
up a given thesis, so as to drive him into inconsistent answers.76 
7 4 See Aristotle, Topics, Bk. 8, Ch. 14, 163b 5. See also G. Grote, op. cit., pp. 
372-373. 
7 5 George Dimitroff and James G. Baker, Telescopes and Accessories, Philadelphia, 
Blakiston Publishing Company, 1945, pp. 6-7. 
7 6 G. Grote, op. cit., p. 417. 

Logic and Questioning 
329 
Another important point for the purpose of evaluating CoUing­
wood's position is the indUference of dialectical reasoning to the truth 
or falsity of any of the statements involved. AU that is of interest to 
the partners is consistency. The questioner attempts to attack the 
respondent's thesis by forcing from him admissions inconsistent with 
that thesis, and the defendant is concerned to guard himseU against 
answering in a way inconsistent with his maintained position, aU the 
more so U such a position is in itse//false (such as that of a murderer 
in a trial trying to maintain his plea of innocence in the cross-exam­
ination). 
. . . neither the direct purpose of the debaters, nor the usual 
result of the debate, is to prove truth or to disprove falsehood. Such 
may indeed be the result occasionaUy; but the only certain result 
is that an inconsistency is exposed in the respondent's manner of 
defending his thesis, or that the assaUant faUs in his purpose of 
showing up such inconsistency. Whichever way the debate may 
turn, no certain inference can be drawn as to the thesis itseU . . . 7 7 
Ц, as for CoUingwood, dialectical reasoning is the paradigm form, 
the truth of the constituent premisses in themselves is meaningless, 
and the only aUowable meaning of truth is coherence. And this is 
exactly the position of CoUingwood, as also of Bosanquet. The abso­
lutizing of dialectic and truth as correspondence necessarUy go 
together. 
Again, dialectic is an art, not a science, and one who reduces 
reasoning to dialectical reasoning wUl reduce science to art and men­
tal activity toproductive activity, as does Collingwood. 
. . . Dialectic does not prove any thing. . . . Dialectic . . . is not 
a definite science or body of doctrine, but, Uke rhetoric or medicine, 
a practical art or abfflty of deaUng with the ever varying situations 
of the dialogue; of imagining and enunciating the question proper 
for attack, or the answer proper for defence, as the case may be. 7 8 
The last words of this quotation very aptly describe CoUingwood's 
whole attitude to the process of knowledge. Because CoUingwood had 
no genuine appreciation of science as distinctively a knowing func­
tion, distinct from whatever pragmatic and creative functions it may 
associate with it, he was forced to subordinate science and scientUic 
reasordng, erroneously understood as merely classUicatory, to the seU-
creative, artistic activity of the mind manUested by a dialectical ques-
77 Jbid., p. 271. 
78 ttrid., p. 273. 

330 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
tion and answer discourse. CoUingwood's priority of the practical over 
the speculative, his theory of art as basis of aU human activity, his 
theory of dialectical primacy of reasoning are aU mutuaUy implicatory 
—that is, dialecticaUy justifiable—prwKfed the premisses be accepted and 
not questioned as to their truth or fakity. As CoUingwood himseU says: 
We do not acquire absolute presuppositions by arguing; on the 
contrary, unless we have them akeady arguing is impossible to us 
. . . We must insist on presupposing them in aU our minking with¬
out asking why they should be thus accepted.79 
D. Aristotelian Scientific Interrogation of Reality 
But, as noted above, 8 0 Aristotle is credited with the elaboration 
of a second questioning technique, one designed for the dkect inter­
rogation of reality itseU, which is properly the scientific investigation, 
as distinct from the interrogation of various opinions and convictions 
held regarding reality. Here, man dialogues with the universe itseU; 
for its correct and successful conduct he must be equipped with the 
(not merely art, but) science of asking questions, "the technique of 
asking the questions the human mind must ask the universe U it would 
lay bare the latter's secrets and discover its mysteries." 8 1 L.-M. Regis 
commends Kant for modelUng the inquiry of his fkst critique on the 
interrogation of the universe by man, but at the same time criticizes 
Kant's method, whose "questioning is of the type to which a judge 
subjects a witness, whereas that of Aristotle and St. Thomas cor­
responds to the respectful but avid questions a pupU asks his teach­
er." 8 2 The requkements of the art of phUosophical dialogue, however, 
are imposed not by the demands of an overbearing, beUigerent rnind, 
but by the nature and complexity of the subject matter being investi­
gated. 8 3 
A question is defined in terms of wonder and the deske for that 
knowledge of which one knows one is ignorant. 8 4 In every question 
there is involved both something known and something not known 
which is sought. 8 5 The subject of questioning is not what is evident 
79 An Essay on Metaphysics, p. 173. 
8 0 See this chapter, p. 318. 
8 1 L.-M. Regis, Epistemology, p. 127. 
8 2 Brid. See also Chapter 7, above, pp. 271-273, for criticism of the excessively 
juridical approach in investigation. 
8 3 L.-M. Regis, op. cit., p. 129. 
8 4 See Chapter 7, above, pp. 273-276. 
8 5 See L.-M. Regis, op. cit., p. Ύ2&. See also Aquinas' Commentary on Aristotk's Meta­
physics, Bk. 7, lect. 17, n. 1669 (In Metaphysicam Aristotelis Commentark, Taurini, Librairie 
Marietti, 1926). 

Logic and Questioning 
331 
but only what needs to be made evident. What is immediately evi­
dent is exduded from questioning by the very nature of the case. Ques­
tioning, therefore, bears only on what has to be made known through 
mediation, that is, through demonstration. 
. . . science is knowledge acquired through demonstration. But 
we must acquire the knowledge by demonstration of those things 
which were unknown before, and we ask questions concerning those 
things [of which we are ignorant].86 
Since there is no question about that which is evident, or known, 
and what is questionable is an admixture of something known and 
something not yet known, the question or problem must take its begin­
ning from the knowledge-context of the problem. 8 7 According to 
Aristotle: 
The kinds of question we ask are as many as the kinds of things 
which we know. They are in fact four: (1) whether the connection 
of an attribute with a thing is a fact; (2) what is the reason of the 
connection; (3) whether a thing exists; (4) what is the nature of the 
thing. 8 8 
Aristotle shows that these four questions can be ordered into two 
groups of two, each based on the simplidty or complexity of the inter­
rogated subject. The subject is considered simply when either its exis­
tence or its nature is in question. It is considered as a complexity when 
the existence of one or other of its attributes, or the reason for the 
inherence of such attribute, is in question. 
Concerning the questioning of a subject considered as a complex 
of thing and attribute, Aristotle explains the procedure thus: 
[On the one hand] we ask whether the thing is thus or other­
wise qualified—whether, e.g., the sun suffers ecUpse or not—then 
we are asking as to the fact of a connexion. That our inquiry ceases 
with the discovery that the sun does suffer eclipse is an indication 
of this; and if we know from the start that the sun suffers eclipse, 
we do not inquire whether it does so or not. On the other hand, 
when we know the fact [of the connection] we ask the reason; as, 
for example, when we know that the sun is being ecUpsed and that 
an earthquake is in progress, it is the reason of ecUpse or earthquake 
into which we inquire. 8 9 
8 6 Aquinas, Exposition ofAristotle's PosteriorAnalytics, Bk. 2, lect. 1, n. 6. See Pierre 
Conway's translation, Quebec, La Librairie PhiIosophique, 1956, p. 291. See also L.¬
M. Regis, op. cit., pp. 128-129. 
8 7 See L.-M. R^gis, op. cit., p. 129. 
8 8 Aristotle's Posterior Analytics, Bk. 2, Ch. 1, 89b 20-35. See Richard McKeon's 
edition of The Basic Works ofAristotk, New York, Random House, 1941, pp. 158-159. 
89 Md., 89b 25-30. 

332 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Thus 'whether?' (whether the sun is eclipsed?) and 'why?' (why 
is the sun eclipsed?) are the two questions that can be asked of a com­
plex. For some objects of inquiry, however, the questions asked are 
different. Aristotle explains: 
[On the one hand we ask] whether there is or is not a centaur 
or a God. (By 'is or is not' I mean 'is or is not, without further 
quaUfication'; as opposed to 'is or is not (e.g.) white'.) On the other 
hand, when we have ascertained the thing's existence, we inquire 
as to its nature, asking, for instance, 'what, then, is God?' or 'what 
" is man?'90 
Aristotle concludes by saying that "these . . . are the four ques­
tions we ask, and it is in answers to these questions that aU our knowl­
edge consists." 9 1 
Aristotle then says that since aU questioning is a search for 
evidence, " i t is clear . . . that aU questions are a search for a 
'middle,' " 9 2 that is, for a medium to demonstrate and make evident 
what is not already, i.e., immediately, evident. Every question is a 
request for a demonstration, so that " i n all our inquiries we are ask­
ing either whether there is a 'middle' or, U so, what that 'middle' is." 9 3 
A dUficulty occurs in regarding the request for definition, the quid 
sit question, as a request for a demonstrative medium and demonstra­
tion therefrom. The dUficulty comes from the fact that the definition 
is never the conclusion of a demonstration but a principle, a pre­
requisite to the very possibUity of demonstration. 9 4 And " . . . even 
U division does demonstrate [the definition's] formula, definition at 
any rate does not turn out to be a conclusion of inference." 9 5 Again: 
" . . . induction proves not what the essential nature of athing is but 
that it has or has not some attribute." 9 6 
The search for, and manUestation of, essential nature is tied inti­
mately to the way in which we know its existence. What a thing is 
presupposes answered the question whether it is, for " . . . to search 
for a thing's essential nature when we are unaware that it exists is 
to search for nothing." 9 7 And, furthermore, "the degree of our knowl-
90 Void., 89b 30-35. 
9 1 Tbid., 89b 35-38. 
92 Vbid., Bk. 2, Ch. 3, 90a 35. 
93 Oid., Bk. 2, Ch. 2, 90a 5^. 
9 4 See ibid., Bk. 2, ch. 4, 91a 10-15. The paraUel in CoUingwood is that we must 
not ask for verification of absolute presuppositions, which are the prerequired condi­
tions of the possibUity of demonstration. 
9 5 Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, Bk. 2, Ch. 5, 92a 5. 
9 6 Md., Bk. 2, Ch. 7, 92a 35-92b. 
9 7 Jbid., Bk. 2, Ch. 8, 93a 25-30. 

Logic and Questioning 
333 
edge of anyttdng's essential nature is determined by the sense in which 
we are aware that it exists." 9 8 One or other, or several, of the elements 
of a thing's definition may be known, inductively or perceptively, as 
attributes of that known existent without it yet being known that they 
are in fact elements of its definition. The darkening of the moon is 
an attribute of the moon being eclipsed. When we know its darken­
ing, we know that an eclipse is occurring, but we may not know why 
this darkening occurs, namely, by the interposition of an obscuring 
screen between the sun and the moon. As soon as we ask why this 
happens, why the moon has this attribute, we are asking for the defin­
ing conditions of the attribute, namely, what is an eclipse? When we 
see that the reason why the moon is eclipsed is that a screen (in this 
case the earth) interposes between it and the sun's light, we know 
that an eclipse is the interposition of an opaque body between the 
sun and the body ffluminated by it. Thus, the definition of an eclipse 
is manifested in the demonstration which demonstrates the cause why 
the moon is eclipsed, although it itsetf is not demonstrated by that 
demonstration. For " . . . while there is no syllogism—i.e. no demon­
strative syUogism— of essential nature, yet it is through syUogism, viz. 
demonstrative syUogism, that essential nature is exhibited." 9 9 That 
is, the expUcative reason why some factually experienced attribute is 
in a given subject is ultimately the definition of that attribute. And 
the definition becomes known precisely in knowing it as the reason 
why the attribute inheres in the subject. That is, we co-know its essen­
tial nature through knowUig the causaUty of which that essential nature 
is an unconditioned condition. In other words, even though defini­
tions cannot be proved as conclusions ofdemonstrations, they are mani­
fested (and in that sense demonstrated) precisely in the exercise of 
the causality which it is the job of the demonstration to manUest. m 
marufesting the causaUty of that which embodies the definition, the defi­
nition itselfis co-manifested. Therefore definitions, their goodness or 
badness, their completeness or incompleteness, are ultimately tied, 
as far as their manUestation (i.e., demonstration) goes, to the way in 
which we experience the realization of the defined essence.100 It fol­
lows, therefore, that however abstractly and decontextualized the for-
98 Void. 
99 Tbid., 93b 15-20. Emphasis added. 
1 0 0 This intimate tie-up of definition formation with the way we experience the 
defined reality is brought out clearly if we consider the difficulties of trying to form 
the concept of a unicorn, such as are considered by Leslie Armour in his The Concept 
of Truth, pp. 91 et seq. 

334 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
mation of definitions may be presented in a logic treatise, in the con­
crete, in the actual implementation of definition and concept-forma­
tion, how we become aware of the existence of that which is to be 
defined is of vital importance and cannot be programmed in advance by 
any purelyformalized rules.101 In the most general consideration, then, 
what the thing to be defined already means to the one seeking the 
definition wffl be the starting point for his construction of the real 
definition. The normal starting point is, therefore, what the name 
means to the one who seeks to find out what the thing is, or its real 
definition. The search for real definitions begins in nominal defini­
tions, or the way people generaUy designate things in everyday dis­
course. Dialectic, therefore, wUl play a large part in the passage from 
nominal definition, in which non-defining attributes are probably con­
fused with defining elements, 1 0 2 but its function is merely catalytic 
and directed to immediate confrontation with the reaUty in its essen­
tial attributes. 
£. The Scientific Questionnaire for the Interrogation of Reality 
The four questions for the scientUic interrogation of reality are 
therefore formulated as foUows. 1 0 3 First, Quia est? (Regis), or Quod? 
(Grote), which asks whether a fact or event is so-and-so, or whether 
a given subject possesses this or that attribute, or is in this or that 
condition (Grote), and thus deals with the existence of an accident 
in a substance or subject, such as: "Is God eternal?" (Rägis). The 
second, Propter quid? ^agis), or Сиг? (Grote), which asks why is it 
that a certain attribute exists in a certain subject (why is the moon 
eclipsed?), or what is the cause or reason for such fact, or such con­
junction of subject and attribute (Grote), and is thus concerned with 
the bond between accident and substance, as "Why is God eternal?" 
(Regis). The third, An sit? (Grote and Regis), or "Does the subject 
1 0 1 The impUcation of this is that a fuUy formaUzed logic, such as is sought by those 
designing a logic for computer purposes, is already a long way from base point and 
has a long chain of presuppositions preceding its own starting point. This attempt 
to decontextuaUze meaning from Uved experience is never fuUy successful. As Col­
lingwood weU said: ". . . technical terms .. . are invented solely to serve the purpose 
of a particular scientific theory; but as they begin to pass current in the scientist's 
speech or writing they express to him and to those who understand him the pecuUar 
emotions which that theory yields." Principles ofArt, p. 268. Most contemporary 
research on the theory of questioning is concerned with computer programming and 
thus is of Uttle relevance in assessing CoUingwood's theory of questioning. 
1 0 2 The second book of Aristotle's Topics discusses the attribution of defining 
elements to a subject in an accidental way. 
1 0 3 See G. Grote, op. cit., p. 238. See also L.-M. Regis, Epistemology, p. 131. 

Logic and Questioning 
335 
exist?" (Regis), which deals with the predicate of the act of existence 
(Regis). 1 0 4 The fourth, Quid sit? (Grote and Regis) asks what is the 
essence of the subject (Grote), and is thusconcerned with the nature 
of the subject (Regis). 
Two of these questions, therefore, bear on existence, one on the 
existence of the subject absolutely, the other on the existence of an 
attribute in the subject. The other two questions bear on the nature, 
one of the subject absolutely, the other of the connection of the attri­
bute with the subject, which ultimately goes back to the nature of the 
attribute and the nature of the subject. 
The two existential questions, the first and third above, namely 
Quod and An (Grote's terminology), seek to find out whether or not 
a middle term exists which wffl demonstrate that the subject exists, 
or that the attribute exists in the subject. The second and fourth ques­
tions, Cur and Quid (Grote's terminology), assume that there is a 
middle, and one then tries to find out what that middle is. 1 0 5 
The inquiry Cur is in the main analogous to the inquiry Quid; 
in both cases, we aim at ascertaining what the cause or middle term 
is. But, in the inquiry Cur, what we discover is perhaps some inde­
pendent fact or event, which is the cause of the event auaesitum; 
while in fhe inquiry Quid, what we seek is the real essence or defini­
tion of the substance—the fundamental, generating, immanent cause 
of its concomitant attributes.106 
The problem now arises as to the order of these four questions 
in a scientific interrogation of reality. According to Grote 1 0 7 there are 
two distinct pairs of questions, Quod and Cur forming one pair, and 
An sit and Quid sit forming the other; 1 0 8 and obviously, says Grote, 
the Cur question presupposes the answer to the Quod question, and 
the Quid sit question presupposes an affirmative answer to the An sit 
question. But Grote says that Themisticus and other expositors have 
proposed that a more suitable arrangement would be that the An sit 
1 0 4 E. Gilson, in his Being and Some Philosophers, pp. 192 et seq., refuses to aUow 
that existential, as distinct from copulative, propositions predicate existence as an attri­
bute of the subject; what he aUeges to be asserted is the absolute positing of the subject, 
together with aU its implied predicates, in existence. Regis' formulation would per­
haps be better rendered as 'the question which deals with the unqualified existence 
of the subject.' 
1 0 5 See G. Grote, op. cit., p. 239. 
106 Tbid., pp. 239-240. 
1 0 7 See ibid., pp. 238-239. 
1 0 8 Corresponding to the division in the previous paragraph above into two exis­
tential and two essential questions. 

336 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
and Quid sit couplet should precede the Quod and Cur couplet. The 
reason is given as follows: 
.. . the third and fourth (An sit, Quid sit) are simpler, and come 
earlier in the order of philosophical exposition, whUe the first and 
second (Quod, Cur) are more complicated, and cannot be expounded 
philosophicaUy until after the philosophical exposition of the 
others.109 
But Grote maintains that this problem is cleared up by adverting 
to the AristoteUan distinction between what is first in the order of cog-
jution relatively to us (nobis notiora) and what is first in the order of 
recognition by nature (natura notiora). He (Grote) explains this as 
foUows, first dealing with the order of knowledge relatively to us. 
To us (that is to men taken individuaUy and in the course of actual 
growth) the phenomena of nature present themselves as particu­
lars confused and complicated in every way, with attributes essen­
tial and accidental implicated together: we gradually learn first to 
see and compare them as particulars, next to resolve them into gener­
alities, bundles, classes, and partially to explain the Why of some 
by means of others. Here we start from facts embodied in proposi­
tions, that include subjects clothed with their attributes.110 
Then he deals with the order of knowledge relative to the subject 
matter. 
But in the order ofnature (that is, in the order followed by those 
who know the scibile as a whole, and can experience it scientifical­
ly) that which comes first is the Universal or simple Subject ab­
stracted from its predicates or accompaniments: we have to enquire, 
first, whether a given subject exists; next, U it does exist, what is 
its real constituent essence or definition. 1 1 1 
These two processes, therefore, correspond to the order of the 
acquisition of science by one who is as yet untrained and to the order 
of the seasoned scientist equipped with the habit of thinking scienti­
ficaUy, able to deal with the subject matter of the science on ifs terms 
rather than on terms of his own meagre knowledge. 
We thus see the reason for the order in which Aristotle has ar­
ranged the two co-ordinate pairs of Quaesita or Problems, confor­
mable to the dUferent processes pursued, on the one hand, by the 
common inteUect, growing and untrained—on the other, by the 
1 0 9 G. Grote, op. cit., pp. 238-239. 
"o Void., p. 239. 
1 1 1 
Ш. 

Logic and Questioning 
337 
mature or discipUned inteUect, abready competent for phüosophical 
exposition and applying itseU to new incognita.112 
In other words, there are two scientUic questionnaires, one cor­
responding to science in its becoming, in its acquisition, the other cor­
responding to science in being, as a fuUy achieved habit of thought 
in the mature scientist. 
Regis explains the questionnaire of the mature scientist as 
foUows. 1 1 3 The first of the four questions, the An sit question, can only 
be asked when the existence of the subject in question escapes our 
immediate perception. I cannot ask U there is an eclipse of the moon 
going on U I am presently perceiving it. We can only ask this ques­
tion regarding the causes or effects of what is immediately perceived 
to exist. The objects of astronomy and microphysics faU within the 
scope of this question, as weU as the existence of God and of spiritual 
realities other than the human soul. Thus, the answer to the An sit 
question may faU within the range ofsense perception, as astronomy 
and microphysics endeavours to answer certain questions. The ques­
tion of the existence of God is answerable as faUing within the range 
of the cause-effect relationship immanent to sensibly perceived things, 
as the existence of fire is known from the existence of smoke. Only 
dialectical questions can be asked regarding what is immediately per­
ceived to exist, but not properly scientUic or phUosophical questions. 
Again, to ask the question as to the existence of something, the nominal 
definition, or what the name means, has to be presupposed. To ask 
meaningfully whether or not unicorns or centaurs or flying saucers 
exist or not, I need at least to know what I mean by using those names. 
Regis then says that the second, Quid sit, question is the most im­
portant of aU, since it is that which the human inteUect naturally and 
spontaneously seeks to ask and answer in regard to the physical objects 
of daUy experience. It is the most dtfficult to answer because what 
we immediately are aware of in regard to experienced realities are their 
accidental attributes, or perhaps more exactly their obvious attributes, 
without being able to detect whether they are essential or nonessential 
attributes. We can see straightway that snow is white, but not straight­
way whether its whiteness is of its essence and definition or not. As 
soon as we realize that things other than snow are white, we then 
know that whiteness does not belong to its essence, but that it is an 
1 1 2 Void. Compare with Michael Polanyi's account of the probation of a scientific 
researcher; see Appendix 2, below, p. 479 et seq. 
1 1 3 See L.-M. Rigis, Epistemohgy, pp. 131-135. 

338 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
accident. Regis explains that this question faUs primarüy upon sub­
stances and on other things through relation to substances. 
The reason substance has such exclusive rights over definition, 
in the proper sense, is that the definition, as its name indicates, im-
pUes strict unity (i.e., indivision in itseU and division from every­
thing eke), and only substance has a sufficiently rich mode ofbeing 
to possess the unity that makes it inteUigible. When the question 
Quid? is asked about nonsubstantial beings, it assumes a derivative 
and relative meaning, which must be clearly recognized U we would 
^ avoid impasses or pseudoproblems.114 
Jbis essence, which definition expresses to the rnind as quiddity, in 
answer to the Quid sit (what is it?) question, is not grasped by sense 
in perception, since sense only grasps sensible accidents (as snow beUig 
white, but not what snow is). But in perception the inteUect, as the 
faculty of intuitive reason as explained previously, 1 1 5 abstracts the 
essential from the non-essential and visualizes it in its own right, 
thereby answering to itseU what the thing is. The essence of things 
which we do not irnmediately perceive are known as causes or effects 
of what we do perceive.What God is, for example, wUl be answer­
able only insofar as there is some resemblance, through causal con­
nection, between what perceived objects are and what God is. What 
as yet unreaUzed artUacts are, as, for example, flying machines before 
they became reaUzed achievements, are known in relation to the pur­
poses for which they are intended. 1 1 6 
The third question, Quia ita est? concerns not the absolute actuaUty 
of the subject, the subject as a substance, but its actual attributes. Con­
crete questions of this kind are, "Is the soul immortal?" "Is knowl­
edge true or false?" that is, "Is truth and falsity a property of knowl­
edge?" 
The fourth question, Propter quid ita sit?, is, according to Regis, 
the most important question in the order of demonstrative knowledge, 
since in it consists the very soul of demonstration. Having answered 
the previous question to the effect that certain attributes are inherent 
in the subject under question, the question next is in regard to the 
nature of the bond between the attribute and the subject, whether it is 
114 Jbid., p. 132. What Regis caUs the most important question of aU, CoUingwood, 
on account of his anti-substantiaIist dynamism, rejects as a vague question to be con­
verted into clear 'which' questions. See this chapter, above, pp. 314-316 and nn. 16 
and 17. 
1 1 5 See above, Chapter 7, p. 280 et seq. 
1 1 6 This latter mode of defining is extremely important in regard to historical or 
cultural concepts; see below, Chapter 9, pp. 359-372. 

Logic and Questioning 
339 
necessary or incidental. To answer this question, the reason of the 
inherence must be known. And this question is intimately connected 
with the answer to the second, Quid? question. 
The propter quid that is the object of this last question is nothing 
but the quid of the second question, not in that it constitutes the 
nature of the thing, but that it muses this nature's properties, as effi­
cient cause, final cause, or, again, as material cause in 
qua.117 
Having considered each of these questions in its own right, the 
question pf their order in a philosophical questionnaire then arises. 
Guided by Aquinas' commentary 1 1 8 on Aristotle's 
PosteriorAnalytics, 
Regis 1 1 9 explains that, first, in regard to Quia and Propter quid, some­
times we know that something is so, but do not yet know why it is 
so (as, for example, we may know that the moon is eclipsed, as when 
it is darkened, but not know why it is ecHpsed). At othertimes, how­
ever, the answers to both questions are immediately apparent to us (a 
favorably placed observer could see together that and why the moon 
is ecUpsed). But it is impossible to know why something is so with­
out knowing that it is so. Regis summarizes this as foUows. 
[We can say] three things about the third and fourth ques­
tion: first, that there is no question U the existence of the effect and 
the nature of the cause are known; second, that there can be no ques­
tion about the nature of the cause as long as the existence of the 
effect is unknown; and, finaUy, that when the existence of an 
effect is known, the only question that can be asked is Propter 
quial™ 
Regarding the An sit and Quid sit questions, sometimes we know 
that something is but not perfectly what it is. Sometimes both that 
a thing is and what it is are known together, but one cannot know 
what something is without knowing whether it is. 1 2 1 Regis summarizes 
this as foUows: 
. . . concerning the first two questions: As long as the existence 
of a being is not known (An sit?), the problem of its nature (Quid 
sit?) is uninteUigible; when the existence and the nature of a being 
1 1 7 L.-M. R£gis, Epistemology, p. 134. Emphasis in original. 
1 1 8 See Pierre Conway's translation of Aquinas' Commentary on Aristotle's Posterior 
Analytics, Quebec, La Librairie Philosophique, 1956, Bk. 2, lect. 7, n. 5, p. 335. 
1 1 9 See L.-M. Rägis, op. cit., p. 135. 
i 2 ° m 
1 2 1 On the dependence of the definition upon the existence of a thing, see above, 
this chapter, pp. 332^334. 

340 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
are known simultaneously, there is no question. FinaUy, the question 
Quid est? presupposes that the existence of this being is known. 1 2 2 
An overaU summary of the order of the four questions is presented 
by Regis thus: 
Therefore, the normal and complete order of the four questions 
is as foUows: The existence of a thing must be evident before we 
can ask questions about its nature; then, we must have evidence 
of the existence of accidents or effects in order to ask questions about 
^ the cause of fhese effects. The immediate conclusion to be drawn 
from these statements is that, chronologicaUy speaking, the first 
object of the phUosophical questionnaire is a being whose existence 
is immediately known by the human inteUect, i.e., material things 
in their concrete and physical existence. И this existential starting 
point is not accepted, there can be no phUosophy, since the ques­
tions Quid? and Propter quid? can never be asked.123 
F. Transition to Evaluation of Collingwood's 
Theory of the Logic of Questioning 
This lengthy analysis of Aristotle's theory of questiorting method­
ology has been necessary to evaluate CoUingwood's position regarding 
an allegedly as yet undeveloped logic of questioning. It is clear that 
CoUingwood has neglected, both as phUosopher and as historian, to 
take into consideration Aristotle's quite considerable contribution to 
the theory of questioning. Aristotle's Topics and Sophistical Refutations 
(regarded by most commentators as the last book of the Topics 1 2 4) con­
tain a weU-articulated theory of the dialectical mterrogation of opinions 
and convictions held about various subject matters. The second book 
of the PosteriorAnalytics contains a weU-articulated theory of the scien­
tUic interrogation of reaUty. 
Furthermore, by applying the Aristotelian scientific questionnaire 
to CoUingwood's problem of knowledge and to his subsequent identi­
fication of knowledge with the question and answer procedure charac­
teristic of historical thought, one can regard this theory as the result 
of asking questions out of order, an especiaUy relevant criticism, since 
it accuses his theory of being a violation of his own insistence on the 
primacy of orderly interrogation. 
By reason of his own innate disposition and of the historical situa-
1 2 2 L.-M. Regis, op. cit., pp. 135-136. 
1 2 3 Tbid. 
1 2 4 See G. Grote, op. cit., p. 262. 

Logic and Questioning 
341 
tion in which he worked, Collingwood was led to pose the question 
regarding knowledge in a peculiar way, as also were Kant and Des­
cartes before him. 
G. Collingwood's Basic Problem and the Logical 
Order of Questioning 
How does Collingwood pose the problem regarding knowledge? 
What questions does he ask? and in what order does he ask them? 
Collingwood's problem of ultimate concern, as has already been 
shown, arose out of the deep impression made on him by the 1914-1918 
war as "an unprecedented triumph for natural science" and at the 
same time "an unprecedented disgrace to the human intellect." 1 2 5 The 
Baconian promise of knowledge as power had been futfUled in the 
"power to destroy the bodies and souls of men more rapidly than 
had ever been done by human agency before." 1 2 6 From this cmminat-
ing triumph others followed, such as improvements in transport, in 
surgery, medicine, psychiatry, commerce and industry "and above 
all . . . preparations for the next w a r . " 1 2 7 
The war broke out not because anyone wanted it but because a 
situation got out of hand and continued to get more and more out 
of hand as it proceeded. Fighting ended not because control was re­
gained but because one side was fought to a standstill. The situation 
was more out of hand than ever with the signing of the peace treaty. 1 2 8 
This admixture of outstanding success combined with abysmal 
faUure of the human intellect is CoUingwood's central problem. 
The contrast between the success of modern European minds 
in controUing almost any situation in which the elements are physical 
bodies and the forces physical forces, and their inability to control 
situations in which the elements are human beings and the forces 
mental forces, left an indelible mark on the memory of every one 
who was concerned with it.. .. I seemed to see the reign of natural 
science within no very long time, converting Europe into a wUder-
ness of Yahoos.129 
CoUingwood's problem, therefore, begins in wonder. He wonders 
why it is that the same human inteUect which has achieved such out­
standing success in the control of natural forces is such a colossal 
1 2 5 See R. G. Collingwood, An Autobiography, p. 90. See also the introductory 
chapter, above, p. 1 and Chapter 6, pp. 215 et seq. 
1 2 6 R. G. ColUngwood, An Autobiography, p. 90. 
127 
Bid. 
1 2 8 See ibid. 
129 Bid., pp. 90-91. 

342 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
faUure in its hancUing of human forces. Descartes had wondered why 
it is that the human inteUect achieved such outstanding success in 
mathematics but such hopeless confusion in phUosophy, which had 
largely degenerated into scepticism. 1 3 0 Kant wondered why it is that 
the same human inteUect which achieved such success in natural 
science was so barren in metaphysics. 1 3 1 
Descartes moved from his problem thus posed to its solution by 
equating genuine knowledge with knowledge of the mathematical 
type 1 3 2 and asked what it is that mathematics has, which, unless 
1 3 0 See L.-M. R£gis, Epistemology, pp. 33-36. 
1 3J Kant, indeed, in order to relegate logic to the status of propaedeutic of science, 
had said, "We do not enlarge but disfigure sciences, if we aUow them to trespass 
upon one another's territory." (Norman Kemp Smith's translation of Immanuel Kant's 
Critique ofPure Reason, London, MacmiUan, 1933, p. 18). But having saidthis, he pro­
ceeded to erect mathematics, and especiaUy the newly developed Newtonian natural 
science, into the paradigm of true science, and to ask whether metaphysics can have 
what they have which makes them genuine science. "What then, is the reason why, 
in this field [of metaphysics], the sure road to science has not been hitherto found?" 
(Jbid., p. 21.) "The examples of mathematics and natural science, which by a single 
and sudden revolution have become what they now are, seem to me sufficiently 
remarkable to suggest our considering what may have been the essential features in 
the changed point of view by which they have so greatly benefited. Their success 
should incUne us, at least by way of experiment, to imitate their procedure, so far 
as the analogy which, as species of rational knowledge, they bear to metaphysics may 
permit." (Md., pp. 21-22.) ". . . we must therefore make trial whether we may not 
have more success in the tasks of metaphysics if we suppose that objects must con­
form to our knowledge. This would agree better with what is desired, namely that 
it should be possible to have knowledge of objects a priori, deterrmning something 
in regard to them prior to their being given. We should then be proceeding precisely 
on the lines of Copernicus' primary hypothesis." (lbid., p. 22.) Note the assumption 
of the experimental method of procedure, by hypothesis and verification. Again (ibid., 
p. 22): ". . . we are brought to the conclusion that we can never transcend the Umits 
of possible experience though that is precisely what this science [metaphysics] is con­
cerned, above aU else, to achieve. This situation yields, however, just the very ex­
periment by which, indirectly, we are enabled to prove the truth of this first estimate 
of our a priori knowledge of reason, namely, that such knowledge has to do only with 
appearances, and must leave the thing in itseU, as indeed real per se, but as not known 
by us." Later (ibid., p. 55), Kant writes: "Now the proper problem of pure reason 
is contained in the question: How are a priori synthetic judgments possible?" Kant 
states (ibid., pp. 55-56) that "in the solution of [this] problem we are at the same time 
deciding as to the possibUity of the employment of pure reason in estabUshing and 
developing aU those sciences which contain a theoretical a priori knowledge of objects, 
and have therefore to answer the questions: How is pure mathematics possible? How 
is pure science of nature possible? Since these sciences actuaUy exist, it is quite proper 
to ask how they are possible; for that they must be possible is proved by the fact that 
they exist." See also L.-M. Regis, Epistemohgy, pp. 36-38. 
1 3 2 See Descartes' Rules for the Direction of the Mind, end of Rule 2, in Vol. 1 of 
the Haldane and Ross edition of The Philosophical Works of Descartes, Dover, 1955, p. 
5: ". . . one condusion now emerges out of these considerations, viz. not, indeed, 
that arithmetic and geometry are the sole sciences to be studied, but only that in our 
search for the direct road towards truth we should busy ourselves with no object 

Logic and Questioning 
343 
philosophy has it also, philosophy cannot be genuine knowledge. 1 3 3 
Kant moved from his problem thus posed to asking, what it is that 
natural science (i.e., Newtonian physics) has, that, unless metaphysics 
has it, metaphysics cannot be genuine knowledge. 1 3 4 Now, how does 
CoUingwood proceed in the development of his problem? 
He cannot argue that since science is such an unprecedented suc­
cess, it foUows that its methods should be applied to human affairs 
and a science of human affairs developed analogous to physics as a 
science of nature, biology as a science of lUe, and psychology as a 
science of mind. He is forestaUed from this equation precisely because 
it is the unprecedented triumph of science as such that is at the same 
time the reason of the unprecedented disaster in human affairs. The 
trouble is in the very nature ofscience as adapted for successfulcontrol 
over nature, tf there is a genuine science of human affairs, it is not 
a science analogous to the sciences of physics or biology or psychology. 
Let us foUow his thought further in this matter. Why is science, 
or, U you wffl, the mind thinking scientificaUy, so disastrous in human 
affairs in contrast to such success in natural matters? 
The acceleration of scientUic progress from the mediaeval wind-
mffls and water-wheels through GaUleo's discoveries to the almost 
incredible power and delicacy of the modem machine contrasted with 
human dealings of man with feUow man, which remained much as 
they had been in the middle ages. Whereas well-meaning babblers 
talked of the need for a change of heart, CoUingwood felt that the 
trouble was obviously in the head. "What was needed was not more 
goodwffl and human affection, but more understanding of human 
affairs and more knowledge of how to handle them." 1 3 5 
This progress of science went hand in hand with the departmental­
ization and resutfing fragmentation of human Ufe. The Ufe forms—art, 
reUgion, etc—took on scientific forms in which "each tended to become 
a speciaUzed activity pursued by speciaUsts for the applause of special­
ists." 1 3 6 Mediaeval art, religion and phUosophy were perhaps medio­
cre as art, as reUgion and as phUosophy, but the men who practised 
them "were men, whole of heart and secure in their grasp on Ufe." 1 3 7 
about which we cannot attain a certitude equal to that of the demonstrations of 
arithmetic and geometry." 
из g e e L.-M. Rägis, Epistemology, p. 139. 
134 
Ш. 
1 3 5 R. G. ColUngwood, An Autobiography, p. 92. 
1 3 6 R. G. ColUngwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 34. 
1 3 7 Jbid., p. 35. 

344 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Today, art, religion and philosophy are fuUy developed in their own 
right, but a genuine human lUe is impossible. 
Today we can be as artistic, we can be as phUosophical, we can 
be as religious as we please, but we cannot even be men at aU, we 
are wrecks and fragments of men, and we do not know where to 
take hold of lUe and how to begin looking for the happiness which 
we know we do not possess.138 
It is this departmentalization that characterizes the scientific way 
of4hinking which makes it so unsuitable for fhe study of human affairs. 
The integrity of a harmonious human existence is radicaUy sundered 
by its departmentalization into specialized operations. ReUgion be­
comes one man's specialty, art another man's specialty, science another 
man's specialty and phUosophy another man's specialty. A harmoni­
ous, weU-balanced lUe then gives way to the competition of, say, reli­
gion with science, science with phUosophy, phUosophy with history, 
and so on. 1 3 9 The end result: the First World War, foUowed soon after 
by the Second . . . and, we may confidently add on CoUingwood's 
behalf, foUowed immediately by the threat of a third. 
But this departmentalized way of living is due to "the specific 
character of science, its abstractness." 1 4 0 And, 
to abstract is to consider separately things that are inseparable: to 
think of the universal, for instance, without reflecting that it is merely 
the universal of the particulars, and to assume that one can isolate 
it in thought and study it in isolation.141 
Now, the mode of proceeding of the rnind which abstracts is that 
of genus-species logic. But "the five forms of experience—and what­
ever others there may be—are not species of a genus, which may be 
indUferently taken in any order; they have a natural order of their 
o w n . " 1 4 2 Absolutization of the scientific way of thinking results in the 
absolutization of formal logic and the maintenance of the five forms 
of lUe experience as coordinate species of a genus. 
There is therefore only one form of knowledge, describable in 
terms of logic, which is directed indUferently upon five classes of 
1 3 8 Jbid. 
1 3 9 ". . . we now recognize the nature of our disease. What is wrong with us is 
precisely the detachment of these forms of experience—art, reUgion, and the rest— 
from one another." Speculum Mentis, p. 36. 
140 Md., p. 160. 
1 4 1 ma. 
1 4 2 mid., p. 50. 

Logic and Questioning 
345 
objects. This is pure inteUectuaUsm, and leads us to look for syllo­
gisms in music, inductions in religion, and so forth. 1 4 3 
But this absorption of aU forms of thought into logic as a supreme 
form of thought is togethera result and a rejection of absolutized genus-
species logic, or scientific method; it "precisely contradicts the thesis 
with which this view began, namely the independence of these various 
fields of thought." 1 4 4 
Science, therefore, with its abstractive mode of conceptuaUzing 
and genus-species mode of proceeding logically in induction and 
deduction, whUe quite legitimate as the proper way of controUing 
nature and natural forces, is inherently untenable in dealing with 
human affairs and the lUe forms of human experience. The attempt 
to deal with human experience and the affairs of men by the method 
of science and its genus-species logic breaks down under the strain 
of its own internal contradiction. 
It is this segregational character of science which together facUi-
tates knowledge of nature and at the same time frustrates knowledge 
appropriate to human affairs. 
But, stUl following Collingwood's train of thought, why is the ab­
stractive, separative character of scientific procedure so suitable for 
the investigation of nature and so unsuitable for the study of human 
affairs? He says that it is because the world of nature is characterized 
by external relations, whereas human affairs are characterized by in­
ternal relations. 1 4 5 Human affairs have an inside as weU as an outside, 
and what is needed in regard to knowledge of human affairs is 'in­
sight,' or knowledge of this distinctive 'inside' content which is alien 
to natural reaUties.146 But that which exists with the mode of interiority 
to seU is thought, so that to know the thought within the event is to 
have 'insight' into the event and thereby to know the event in its inter­
nal relations with other events, for thought is characterized as purpos­
ive activity, and internal connectedness is through human purposes. 
. . . aU thought is for the sake of action and . . . every one who 
offers us a phUosophy must answer the question "What shaU we 
do to be saved from these present distresses?"147 
143 Md., p. 49. 
144 
Md. 
1 4 5 See Chapter 4, above, pp. 86^7. 
1 4 6 See CoUingwood's The Idea ofHistory, pp. 199-200. 
1 4 7 R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 35. And, ibid., p. 36: ". . . our cure 
can only be [the] reunion [of the forms of experience] in a complete and undivided 
Ufe, our task is to seek for that Ufe, to buUd up the conception of an activity which 
is at once art, and reUgion, and science, and the rest." 

346 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
But is there any science or human discipline with which we are 
acquainted, which (1) instead of proceeding abstractly proceeds con­
cretely; and (2) instead of dassifying diverse spedes, externaUy related 
with respect to each other, and externaUy unUied under an external, 
abstract, dassificatory genus, grasps its objed as an unmutilated whole, 
as a concrete totality in terms of mutuaUy implicatory internal rela­
tions within the one individual whole; and (3) instead of explaining 
through recourse to external universal covering laws, explains from 
within the events themselves, so that to know what happened is at the 
same time to know why it happened? 
With his question posed in this way, CoUingwood has the answer 
ready at his fingertips. The answer is 'history.' И there is to be a sdence 
properly adapted to the knowledge and control of human affairs, it 
is rdstory. Sdence itseU then becomes an asped of human affairs when 
it is seen historicaUy. And, historically, history itseU comes into being 
with the coUapse of science as an experienced self-contradictory, 
autonomous Ufe form. In the control of human affairs, then, science 
itseU has to be dealt with otherwise than by its own methods, namely 
by the methods of history. The historical point of the conversion of 
science into history took place when Descartes saw that aU science 
"rests upon one indubitable certainty that I think and that therefore 
I exist." 1 4 8 CoUingwood says that Descartes meant what he said and 
that what he said was that the concrete historical fad, the fact of one's 
present actual awareness, was the root of science. Descartes saw that 
the scientist's ad of observation preceded any natural fact and that 
the fact of his observing the event is the fact that reaUy matters. The 
discovery of which Descartes' cogito is the deepest and most fruitful 
expression is that sdence presupposes history and can never go behind 
history, and "this discovery impUdtly resolves science into history." 1 4 9 
What has been said in the expository chapters (1 through 6 above) 
then foUows coherently from this central Une of reasoning, and it stands 
or falls according as this line of reasoning stands or faUs. 
But what has happened here U we look at this line of thought as 
an exercise of orderly interrogation! 
Collingwood does not^irsi ask 'what is knowledge?' and then ask 
'why does knowledge have the scientific and historical (and phUosoph­
ical) modes?' His line of reasoning, as sketched above, leads him to 
answer the third question, Quia ita sit? without having asked it, by 
Tbid., p. 202. See also above, chapter 4, p. 85 et seq. 
R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 202. 

Logic and Questioning 
347 
equating knowledge with its historical mode. Just as Descartes, by 
reason of the concrete situation in which his critical problem arose, 
equated genuine knowledge with one of its attributes, namely the 
mathematical mode, so CoUingwood, by reason of the concrete situa­
tion in which he posed his problem of knowledge, equated genuine 
knowledge with its historical mode. In effect, by presupposing as 
answered the third question mdependentIy of the second, each inad­
vertently converted the third question into the second and equated an 
attribute ofknowhdge with its essence or definition.150 Genuine knowledge, 
for Descartes, is knowledge of the mathematical mode, and the 
criterion of true knowledge is the evidential character of mathematical 
clarity and distinction. AU probable knowledge is thereby rejected as 
knowledge, and common sense convictions are rejected as erroneous. 
Genuine knowledge for Kant is natural science (which for him is iden­
tified with Newtonian physics), and whatever does not measure up 
to the experiential criterion of Newtonian physics is not genuine knowl­
edge. Metaphysics, faUing as it does to take account of experience, 
and endeavouring to attain knowledge of things as they are in them­
selves without recourse to experience, is an impossible ideal. Meta­
physics, therefore, as a claim to reach things as they are in themselves, 
is not genuine knowledge. SimUarly for Collingwood: Knowledge 
comes to be equated with one of its modes, namely historical knowl­
edge, so that whatever does not meet the standards of historical 
knowledge is defective as knowledge. 
In answering the third, Quia ita sit, question independently of the 
Quid sit question regarding knowledge, CoUingwood equates an attri­
bute of knowledge with its essence. Knowledge is had of concrete 
singular human events, i.e., historical happenings. But this is known 
not as belonging to the essence of knowledge, as U that statement 
were an answer to the second, Quid sit, question regarding knowl­
edge, rather than an answer to the third question, 'by what modalities 
do we know?' or 'what properties does our knowledge have?' Answer­
ing this third question without answering the second inadvertently 
converts it into the second, and its answer, which enunciates a property 
or modality of knowledge, becomes the definition of knowledge as such 
and therefore the criterion which separates what wUl be diagnosed 
as true knowledge from its counterfeits. ScientUic knowledge is there-
1 5 0 We may recaU that Book 2 of Aristotle's Topics concerns conflicting opinions 
which arise from confusing an attribute with the definition and essence, especially 
the generic essence of some subject matter. 

348 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
fore not a genuine mode of knowledge but an abstraction, and 
therefore a falsification of what it knows since it abstracts from con­
creteness and singularity, which are of the essence of historical knowl­
edge. 
We have seen at the beginning of this chapter that the dominat­
ing question in philosophy is the what, quid sit, question, the search 
for definition. It was upon the ability to answer this question, to say 
what justice is, what nature is, what movement is, that genuine science 
(in the ancient sense), as propter quid (answer to fourth question) knowl­
edge, depends. We know why the moon is eclipsed scientifically when 
*we know that 'why' in terms of 'what' an eclipse is, i.e., in terms 
of the answer to the second, quid sit, question asked regarding an 
eclipse. To circulate within the third and fourth questions, going from 
experienced attributes to explanations as to why the attributes are 
found in a subject, without attacking head-on the definitional, quid 
sit, question is to remain within the order of empirical generaUzation 
through induction and never to aUow direct knowledge of the cause, 
the propter quid, in its causality, necessitating the attribute by reason 
of what it is. Because an ecHpse is the interposition of an opaque body 
between an ffluminating body and an üluminated body, the illumi­
nated body is necessarily darkened whenever such an opaque body 
thus intervenes. As was shown above, sometimes the what and the 
why are shown simultaneously, but sometimes the attribute is known 
without it being known why it is an attribute, because the definition 
of the attribute is not known. 1 5 1 
И one is to rise above mere inductive generalization to properly 
philosophical knowledge of the muse convertible with the effect, one has 
to rise above the merely experienced fact of attributes said of subjects, 
and inductive generalization therefrom, and reach knowledge of the 
Quid sit. When we know that an opaque body (the earth) is in fact 
between the sun and the moon we know not merely that the moon 
is darkened but also why it must be darkened. The Quid sit question 
is therefore the key question in any philosophical questionnaire. To 
short-circuit it out is to run the risk of confusing essences with attri­
butes and, however good or complete one's inductions may be, to fail, 
or to explain erroneously the facts calling for explanation. 
1 5 1 Ernst Cassirer notes that much of the scientific research concerning whether 
or not animals speak is questionable, if not quite worthless, because the researchers 
are without any precise defining concept of speech; that is, they have not asked or 
answered the question 'what is speech?' See Cassirer's The Logic of the Humanities, 
pp. 133-135. 

Logic and Questioning 
349 
CoUrngwood, Hke Kant and Descartes, did not ask what is knowkdge 
and, in the light of the answer to that question, go on to ask why it has 
the attributes of scientUic, mathematical and historical modes. But, 
worse than Kant and Descartes, CoUingwood, by reason of the way-
he approached the question of knowledge, was forced to put out of 
play the very question upon which aU other questions concerning 
knowledge depends. Because of his attitude to abstraction, and to 
scientUic knowledge as abstract knowledge, he rejected the vaUdity 
of the Quid sit question, the properly phUosophical question, trans­
forming it, as he always insisted on doing, into a dialectical question 
with specUied concrete alternative instances from which to answer. 1 5 2 
Because he thus bypassed the Quid sit, definitional question re­
garding knowledge, his criterion as to what constitutes genuine knowl­
edge had to come from another source than the very essence of knowl­
edge itseU. It came from his dialectical interrogation of the concrete 
problem in which he was historicaUy situated. Knowledge in the gen­
uine sense is then knowledge of the integraL concrete whole, namely 
historicalknowledge. Sciences, abstractknowledges, arenotgenuine 
instances of knowledge, but errors due to separating part of the con­
crete whole and treating it as U it were the whole, as does the artist: 
" . . . abstraction is always intuition or imagination." 1 5 3 
But U the scientific order of interrogation as exposed above had 
been foUowed, the first question to settle would have been what is 
knowledge in itself, before inquiring into its modaUties in this or that 
way in which it is in fact realized. In this way, scientUic knowledge 
would have been explained as knowledge reaUzed in a particular way, 
historical knowledge would haVe been explained as knowledge real­
ized in another, but equaUy vaUd, way. What knowledge is would be 
seen as realizable in its scientific form, in its mathematical form and 
in its historical form, each form being respected in its own right without 
illicit reduction of one to the other. 
H. Collingwood's Key Theses as Result of His 
Order of Questioning 
But there are other far-reaching consequences of CoUingwood's 
equation of genuine knowledge with concrete historical knowledge. 
First, historical knowledge is constructive of its object; the histor­
ian has to reconstruct the past from present traces. Historical knowl-
1 5 2 See this chapter, above, pp. 314-316 and nn. 16 and 17. 
1 S 3 R . G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 293. 

350 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
edge is also knowledge of events as embodying human purposes. It 
is knowledge of action and, according to Collingwood, for the sake 
of action. With the designation of historical knowledge as the paradigm 
of genuine knowledge, knowledge becomes essentiaUy practical and 
constructive, there being no genuinely autonomous speculative science 
in its own right. 
Second, historical knowledge is by way of interrogation of docu­
ments as traces of the human past to discover the thought and pur­
pose of which it is the trace. It is an interrogation of events and thought-
expressions to discover the thought of which the event is the expres­
sion. Philosophical knowledge, inasmuch as it is genuine knowledge, 
conforming to the historical mode of knowing, is restricted to what 
has been thought about some particular question. The question 'what 
is the state?' is the same as the questions 'what did Socrates, Plato, 
Aristotle . . . Hobbes . . . Marx, etc., say the state is?' This means 
that the properly philosophical question, 'what is the state?' becomes 
converted into a cUalectical question which always remains in the order 
of what someone or other considered something to be, without ever 
attaining the reaUy scientUic (in the ancient sense) question regard­
ing the reaUty as it is in itseU. 1 5 4 The properly scientific and phUosoph­
ical questions about any subject matter then become stigmatized as 
dogmatisms with critical thought supreme, being a dialectical interro­
gation of the prevailing opinions throughout history on a given ques­
tion. The knowledge of any subject matter then becomes a scale of 
forms in which a subsequent view is seen to be based on critical inter­
rogation of a previous view, and itseU is subsequently criticaUy inter­
rogated, resulting in a subsequent view, and so on. What the state 
(or nature or history) is becomes converted into what it is thought 
to be at various periods of history, and that thought is to be taken 
in its historical evolution through critical mterrogation seriaUy arranged 
in an overlap of classes in a scale of forms. AU conceptions of thought 
are thus reduced to their historical equivalents without remainder. 
Third, the universal, the unity in diversity through which aU 
rational explanation is made, must be a concrete unity in a concrete 
diversity. The whole is the concrete individual whole whose parts are 
inteUigible as members contributing to that individual whole. This 
results in a contextual theory of meaning. Every thing is what it is, not 
1 5 4 The scientific question, in the fuUest sense of the word, asking what the thing 
is in /'fsei/(that is, as distinct from what someone thinks it to be) has been out of bounds 
in modern and contemporary thought since Kant's first Critique. See Chapter 7, above, 
p. 280 et seq. 

Logic and Questioning 
351 
by reason of some essence determining it in itself absolutely, but by 
reason of its relationship to everything else in the concrete whole.155 This 
is the absolutization of context, which, in effect, is also its destruction 
as context, since it then becomes converted into the essential determinant 
of each thing. There is, then, in effect, in a Spinozistic way of think­
ing, only one substance, one being in itsetf, one thing which really 
is, namely the whole, and aU other beings are exhausted by their con­
textual reiations in that whole, and their whole meaning-manUestative 
function is to manUest themselves as parts of that absolute mdividual 
whole. True unity in diversity is therefore ultimately lost, for we are 
left with the unity as absolute and the multiplicity a merely rehitional 
function in the context of the whole. 1 5 6 A genuine unity i n diversity 
is had only tf there is admitted a diversity of substances, a diversity 
of absolute unities whose coexistence in the whole of the universe 
is without prejudice to their own intrinsic, essential and definitional 
unity. There are diversities of things in the universe of experience 
which have their definitions as exclusively their own, about which 
the what, Quid sit, question can be asked in their own right. The unity 
of the universe is not the unity of one substance whose parts are merely 
relational parts in the whole, but a unity through mteraction, and con­
sequent interpassion, of each substantial whole on every other sub­
stantial whole. That is, there is diversity in the world of experience 
1 5 5 See Speculum Mentis, pp. 218-220. See also Chapter 4, above, pp. 86-93. This 
absorption of context into definition, or, if you wiU, of progressive definition through 
widening of context so that the thing to be defined is presented in its relationship 
to everything else, is perhaps most clearly manifested in CoUingwood's definition 
of reUgion and his comments thereon in Speculum Mentis, pp. 111-112: ". . . to assert 
what it imagines . . . to beUeve in the reality of the figments of its own imagina­
tion. . . . this is the definition of reUgion, so to speak, from beneath: the purely abstract 
or formal definition whose purpose is to give the rrdnimum account of the lowest and 
most rudimentary religious consciousness. It is the mere armature on which our con­
crete conception of religion is to be buUt up, and the reader need not trouble to point 
out its inadequacy as a description of the higher reUgions. Here and ekewhere, in 
fact, the reader is earnestly implored to resist the vice of coUecting 'definitions' of 
this and that and the other, as il any one but a fool imagined that he could compress 
a thing Uke art or reUgion or science into an epigram which could be lifted from its con­
text and, so lifted, continue to make sense. Giving and coUecting definitions is not phUos­
ophy but a parlour game. The writer's definition of reUgion (as of art and so forth) 
is coextensive with this entire book, and wiU nowhere be found in smaUer compass. 
Nor will it be found in its compkteness there; for no book is wholly selfexpfonatory, but soUcits 
the cooperation of a reasonably thoughtful and instructed reader." ^mphasis added.) 
1 5 6 And, ultimately, with Bradley, we must confess the relational as such (whether 
internal or external) as mere appearance. See F. H . Bradley's Collected Essays, Vol. 2, 
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1935, pp. 635-650 and Bradley's Appearance and Reality, Ox­
ford, Qarendon Press, 9th corrected impression 1930, pp. 21-29. See also M. S. Gram, 
"The ReaUty of Retetions," The New Schoksticism, XLTV (1970), pp. 49^8, esp. pp. 49-53. 

352 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
which is not merely relational but at least absolute in some way. That 
is, each is what it is in itself, expressed by its definition which says 
what it is in answer to the Quid sit question, whatever else it may subse­
quently be through its relationships with other things and with the 
whole of that which is. 
L'univers n'existe comme tel qu'en tant que ses parties agissent 
et reagissent. Ainsi, l'esse de l'univers comme univers, ce n'est pas 
simplement l'ensemble des esse de ses ei£ments, c'est l'ensemble 
et de ces esse et des actions qui les expriment, en actualisant leur 
^mutuelle relativite\ (Car tout esse fini, depar sa finitude meme, est 
relatif ä un autre, ä un compldment, ä un "remede" de cette fini­
tude). Des lors, l'action apparait comme l'acte dernier de l'univers 
en tant qu'univers, sa forme, et, mieux encore, son exister.157 
Fourth, the function which properly should come from the defini­
tions, manifesting the essence of the subject matter as they do, there­
by fflummating the subsequent questions, is usurped by a thought-
product, the absolute presuppositions which unconditionally condi­
tion any interrogation procedure, according to Collingwood. Instead 
of proceeding in the light of insights into the very constitution of the 
reaUty of a given subject matter, the mind proceeds under the domi­
nation of catalytic agents which it forms out of its own absolute 
dynamism, which catalytic agents are no more than prevaUing beliefs 
or convictions about the world. The mind's questioning procedure 
is thus locked in dialectical reasoning, always tied at its roots to prevaU­
ing convictions and forestaUed in principle from ever breaking out of 
seUenclosure within prevaiUng viewpoints to direct confrontation with 
reaUty itseU. CoUingwood's theory of absolute presuppositions as some 
kind of commitment to a way of thinking is his counterpart to Aris­
totle's definition and the principles dependent on definition which 
result from asking the Quid sit question of reaUty itseU. Having outUned 
nine characteristics of CoUingwood's absolute presuppositions, David 
Rynin states the following: 
I may say at once that the above characteristics appear to me 
to be the very obvious properties of definitions themselves in at least 
one important sense of 'definition,' namely, the sense in which they 
are decisions, commitments, acts, and as such neither true nor false, 
although generaUy being expressed in declarative sentences that may 
be interpreted also as analytic truths. 1 5 8 
1 5 7 J. De Finance, Essai sur l'agir humain, Rome, Presses de l'Universiti G^gori-
enne, 1962, pp. 10-11. 
ι» David Rynin, "Donagan on CoUingwood: Absolute Presuppositions, Truth and 
Metaphysics," The Review ofMetaphysics, ХЛТП (1964-1965), p. 309. Emphasis in original. 

Logic and Questioning 
353 
Having put out of play the Quid sit question, the inteUectual guide 
which should come from reality in answer to that question is now 
regarded as coming from some commitment or decision or beUef as 
to the structureof lived experience, not from experience itself. When 
historical knowledge becomes the paradigm of knowledge, the direc­
tives of our thought processes are no longer defmitions of real essences 
as explicative of their properties, but are personal or social or cultural 
historicaUy determined beUefs or cornmitments. The thought-deter­
minant is then from thought itseU, as a catalytic agent formed out of 
its own radical, dynamic seU-forrning activism. AU discussion is locked 
radicaUy in beliefs held about this or that subject matter, never 
achieving insight into what the subject matter is in its own right. AU 
discourse is then dialectic discourse, never truly sdentific or phUosoph­
ical discourse. 
It is important to stress here that the aforesaid four-point basic 
criticism of the CoUingwoodian system is made precisely on the score 
of its resulting from the criticism made regarding an incorrect order­
ing of questions. The whole point at issue in this chapter is CoUing­
wood's theory of logic as ordered interrogation. CoUingwood has been 
criticised for historical neglect in faUing to take into consideration the 
head-on treatment Aristotle gave to questioning methodology. In the 
light of the scientUic order of interrogation as explained by Aristotle, 
CoUingwood's whole superstructure can be viewed as a result of 
neglecting, indeed positively rejecting, the centrality of the Quid sit 
question, whose answer provides the basic criterion for aU else that 
follows in the Quia ita sit and Propter quid questions in phUosophy. 
What is said above regarding CoUingwood's identUication of genuine 
knowledge with historical knowledge has been said solely from the 
point of view of its being a consequence of disordered interrogation, 
without considering whatever other reasons may be avaUable for 
critidsing CoUingwood's basic position on other grounds. 
But here we have been concentrating on questioning as an exer­
cise of logic, forgetting for the time being CoUingwood's assertion that 
questioning is properly the methodology of history. Apart from wheth­
er or not CoUingwood absolutizes history (with its methodology) as 
the paradigm case of genuine knowledge, we can stUl ask whether 
or not he is right in regarding historical methodology as properly a 
logic of questioning. That is the concern of the next chapter. 


CHAPTER N l N E 
Logic, Questioning and History 
A. Questioning as the Method of Procedure Proper to History 
The answer to the question whether history is an organized body 
of knowledge proceeding by a distinctive logical method of question 
and answer cannot ignore a consideration of what historians do. 
Henri-henee Marrou probably comes closest to CoUingwood in 
his direct assertion that "properly speaking, the historian does not 
proceed by way of deduction or induction," 1 but "begins by posing 
a question to himseU," which "question which started the whole pro­
cess in motion does not maintain its original identity, but in contact 
with the documentary data it is continuously changing." 2 Again, "any 
knowledge the historian may acquire wUl obviously depend on the 
question or questions he chooses to investigate," 3 and "the copious­
ness of historical knowledge wffl depend directly on the skfflfulness 
and ingenuity with which the initial questions are posed." 4 Documen­
tary sources are not complete in themselves "since their compUers 
did not have in mind (and could not have conceived as possible) aU 
the questions which the documents themselves suggest to us, [and 
1 H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning ofHistory, p. 89, also p. 124. 
1 Md., p. 131. 
3 Md., p. 68. 
4 RHd., p. 69. 
355 

356 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
thus] they do not provide us with the means of discovering such 
questions." 5 A source of information is entitled to be caUed a docu­
ment in the broad sense " U the historian's mind can extract some­
thing from it to increase our knowledge of the human past consid­
ered with reference to the question that has been posed regarding 
i t . " 6 Again, he says, "the truth of the conclusions obtained wUl be 
the direct task of the historian's technique, and of the skUl and 
judiciousness with which he formulates the questions and the an­
swers." 7 Referring to the perfected history of today, Marrou says that 
"there is a history that now confronts the past with questions that 
are ahvays new, more varied, more extensive or more penetrating. 
And there is a corresponding inquiry that is enlarged and extended 
in every direction." 8 
Regarding the logic of the elaboration of historical knowledge, 
Marrou says that "the fundamental logical operation in action . . . 
is the process of understanding," and "the understanding of history 
apparently consists in the mterpretation of meaningful symbols," such 
as inscriptions, the ashes of a home and hearth or fingerprints, by 
means of which immediately present remains "we succeed in perceiv­
ing something about man in former times," which "mcludes his activ­
ity and behaviour, his ideas and inner seU, or sometimes simply his 
presence—anything indicating that man has passed this way." 9 This 
questioning procedure by which we understand the human past is 
not unique but "is definitely the same process that takes place in our 
understanding of other men in the present, and particularly in the 
understanding of articulated language," 1 0 which is nothing other than 
what Marrou elaborates at length as a "dialectical [questioning] 
relationship of the same with the other. . . 
."11 
Louis GottschaU<12 explains that in any historical exposition or nar­
rative "historical facts have to be (1) selected, (2) arranged, (3) empha­
sized or minimized, and (4) placed in some sort of causal sequence."13 
Selection is determined by what is considered to be relevant. The 
5 Md., p. 79. 
6 Md., p. 81. 
7 Jbid., p. 136. 
8 Tbid., p. 
84. 
' Tbid., p. 
88. 
10 Jbid., pp. 91-92. 
1 1 B>id., p. 104. See later, E. Cassirer's incisive explanation of language as estab¬
lishing a concrete unity in diversity (of persons). See this chapter, below, pp. 399-400. 
1 2 In his Understanding History, New York, Knopf, 2nd ed., 1969. 
13 Lbid., p. 207. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
357 
problem, then, is the criterion of relevance about which Gottschalk 
suggests social means of determining, but "usually the process can 
be simplified by converting propositions into queries" so that "the 
subject of any historical investigation may be expressed in the form 
of an interrogative hypothesis." 1 4 But Gottschalk feels that "both the 
unifying proposition and the interrogative hypothesis can be useful 
only for subjects so monographic in nature that their themes can be 
contained in a single proposition or interrogation," which "rules out 
aU subjects that have no narrative, descriptive or causal synthesis but 
are held together only by association in time, place, or persons, or 
only by analogy," which would include such subjects as "the history 
of a given region at a given time, of a coUectivity of leaders of parties 
or movements, of schools of art and thought, and of analogous move­
ments and institutions." However, GottschaTk seems to weaken his 
exception of these from the interrogative process when he adds that 
"for synthetic subjects like these, analysis by aspect key words never­
theless can be useful U each of the separate elements in the synthesis 
is regarded as a separate monograph whose theme can be stated as 
a proposition or an interrogative hypothesis." 1 5 For Gottschalk, 
relevance is the overricUng concern of the historian in any subject and 
"the decision of whatis relevant is largely a matter of personal judg­
ment," and in the final analysis "the individual historian must be 
left to make his own selection of his data." 1 6 But U this is not to be 
purely capricious, and U his account is to have universal public inter­
est, it seems that some definite determination by the historian, some 
definite question in his mind, has to be made expUcit U there is to 
be any reaUstic criterion distmgmshmg the relevant from the irrelevant. 
Wood Gray and his coUaborators17 explain historical methodology 
as consisting of six steps: (1) selection of a topic, (2) search for evi­
dence, (3) note-taking on evidence, (4) critical evaluation of evidence 
coUected, (5) arrangement of material meaningfully, and (6) interest­
ing presentation which wUl command readers' attention and commu­
nicate the maximum of understanding. 1 8 Regarding the pursuit of 
evidence, these authors have the following advice to give: 
Your pursuit of evidence wffl have had much in common with 
a detective's search for dues. In the evaluation of the evidence which 
uMd., 
p. 208. 
15 Md., p. 211. This seems to come at least close to CoUingwood's method of break­
ing the subject matter up into a series of questions and subquestions. 
1 6 Jbid., p. 211. 
1 7 m their Historian's Handbook, Boston, Houghton Mifflin Co., 2nd ed., 1964. 
1 8 See ibid., p. 9. 

358 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
you uncover, you wffl follow rules of evidence comparable to those 
of a court of law. An obligation rests upon every historian as it does 
upon a member of a jury to render a verdict to the best of his abfflty 
solely in accordance with the evidence and with as full a sense of 
his responsibfflty. . . . You wffl have to weigh conflicting evidence, 
discount special pleading, and bear in mind the faUibiUty of human 
observation and memory. And likewise your decision will be sub­
ject to review.19 
W. L. Lucey 2 0 says, " I t is obvious that history is an inquiry and 
that the historical method of investigation easily qualifies as scien­
tific." 2 1 He maintains that history cannot be an exact science since 
"man is a free agent and his freedom of choice is the most important 
causal factor in human history. " 2 2 Lucey says that man's freedom re­
mains the most important factor in regard to future events and is the 
reason why the future is not predictable, 2 3 yet he admits that history 
qualifies as a science. 
History is knowledge, systematized knowledge, arrived at by 
scientific procedure. K it is weak on the score of general laws and 
generalizations, one can only point out that the nature of its subject 
matter severely restricts the freedom to generaKze.24 
Marc Bloch, 2 5 complaining of the oversimplified presentation of 
the historian's method, says that "even those texts or archaeological 
documents which seem the clearest and the most accomodating wffl 
speak only when they are properly questioned." 2 6 He adds that " i t 
is a prime necessity of a weU conducted historical research to force 
the witnesses to speak against their wUl once we accept no longer to 
simply record the witnesses' w o r d . " 2 7 
It seems to be generaUy accepted among historians, then, that the 
materials functioning as documents and sources, as evidence of what 
happened in man's past, exercise this function of being-evidence only 
as a result of an active, orderly interrogation by the historian. CoUing-
19 Jbid., p. 57. 
2 0 In his History: Methods and Interpretation, Chicago, Loyola University Press, 1958. 
21 Jbid., p. 10. 
2 2 Tbid., p. 13. 
23 Md. 
24 B>id. This distinction, between history as the study of free causaUty and natural 
science as the study of laws and generaUzations expressive of necessary causality, 
wUl be highly relevant later in this chapter when the analyses of R. Stover and E. 
Cassirer are exposed. See below, pp. 360-372 and pp. 384-414. 
2 5 See his The Historian's Craft, New York, Knopf, 1963. 
26 Md., p. 64. 
27 Tbid. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
359 
wood's thesis would thus seem to be substantiated by being in agree­
ment with what the above sampling of historians say about their 
method of procedure. 
But does this interrogative uncovering of the human past differ 
significantly from the scientist's investigations, which uncover the in­
teUigible laws of the natural world? The affirmative answer to this ques­
tion involves ciistinguishing the type of inteUigibUity which supplies 
meaning and explanation when we are dealing with man as a free 
being and free agent from the type of intelUgibUity which supplies 
meaning and explanation when we are dealing with the natural, un¬
free, deterministic world (including man to the extent that he also 
belongs to that world). 
B. Two Ways in Which the World of Experience 
Is Intelligently Meaningful 
To evaluate Collingwood's assertion that history proceeds by a 
distinctive logic of question and answer, it is necessary to consider 
two fundamental ways in which, according to a number of recent 
authors, the world of Uved experience can be made mteUigibly mean­
ingful and rationally accounted for. CoUingwood has insisted that 
"scientUic history contains no ready made statements at aU," and that 
" . . . confronted with a ready made statement about the subject he 
is studying the scientific historian . . . asks himseU . . . 'what does 
this statement mean?' " 2 8 CoUingwood further insists that "the scien­
tUic historian does not treat statements as statements but as evi­
dence . . . as other facts which, U he knows the right questions to 
ask about them, may throw light on these facts." 2 9 The following 
analysis wUl show that one of two distinguishable types of meaning 
is the proper concern of the historical investigation and that this type 
of meaning becomes disclosed in an interrogational dialogue of an 
intersubjective nature, or, as ColUngwood expresses it, "by rethink­
ing past thoughts." 3 0 The criticism to be made against Collingwood 
wffl be that he reduces both types of meaning to this one particular 
type, which is the proper concern of the historian, and that in doing 
so, he channels aU investigations ultimately into investigations of an 
historical nature, thereby effectively denying to science its own auton­
omous access to its proper type of meaning and explanation. This con-
2 8 R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 275. See also Chapter 1, above, p. 29. 
2 9 R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 275. 
3 0 See CoUingwood's Autobiography, pp. 112-116. See also his The Idea ofHistory, 
pp. 282-302. See above, Chapter 6, pp. 225-226. 

360 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
elusion wffl be arrived at by drawing on the insights and conclusions 
of recent thinkers, principally Robert Stover, Ernst Cassirer and John 
WÜd. 
Robert Stover distinguishes natural order intelligibility and a dis­
tinctive type of inteUigibUity arising from man's abUity to disclose the 
world in alternative ways according to greater or lesser suitability to 
human and personal needs. Ernst Cassirer distinguishes nature con­
cepts, founded in what he caUs "thing" perception, from culture con­
cepts, founded in what he caUs "expression" perception. The ideal 
of objectivity aimed at by nature concepts excludes every personal 
'manUestation, whereas culture concepts, and the meaningfulness of 
the moral, cultural and historical world buUt up by means of them, 
are intelligible only as expressions of personal attitudes consciously 
adopted with respect to the encountered (natural and human) world, 
or, in Stover's terms, expressions of care and concern. John WUd's 
analysis of man as a "care-taking" being greatly ffluminates Stover's 
analysis of meaning deriving from the attitude of careful confronta­
tion of the world, and in doing so throws light on the nature of what 
is historical being, which contributes greatly to our abUity to answer 
questions about the object and methodology of the historian. 
C. Natural Order Intelligibility and Intelligibility 
from the Standpoint of Living in the World 
Robert Stover's 3 1 "thesis is that there are essential presupposi­
tions and requirements which define what it is for an occurrence to be 
intelligible to us and that one set of such presuppositions and require­
ments defines natural order inteUigibUity" 3 2 and another set defines 
what he caUs the inteUigibUity of the standpoint of Uving in the world. 3 3 
This latter is the standpoint of confronting the world caringly, 3 4 that 
is, " w i t h an attitude of concern, which poses questions about the 
world—questions as to the relative preferabUity of one or another alter­
native states of affairs," which "is to presume that one or another 
alternative might be preferable." 3 5 
3 1 See his The Nature ofHistorical Thinking, Chapel Hill, University of North Car­
olina Press, 1967. 
3 2 Tbid., p. 5. Emphasis in original. 
3 3 See ibtd., p. xiii and p. 147. 
3 4 See ibid., p. 149. 
3 5 Bid. Note the interrogative character of this attitude of concern. Correlate with 
CoUingwood's The New Leviathan, Chapter 11, on questioning and desire, par. 11.39: 
". . . the&stpartofknowingyourseUisknowingwhatyouwant''; 
(pars. 11.22-11.23) 
". . . a proposition is an answer to a question; and a question offers alternatives . .. so 

Logic, Questioning and History 
361 
These two ways of thinking about the world, inasmuch as they 
define two distinct ways of questioning, are called standpoints. 
Cordrontation of the world in such a way that a distinctive ques­
tion arises is what we mean by a standpoint. The queries that give 
rise to critically differentiated lines of questioning develop from 
everyday encounters with the world. 3 6 
But Stover warns that "at the outset of man's thinking it is not ap­
parent that there are fundamentaUy distinct question-posing ways in 
which the world is there for us, let alone what these are," for " i t is 
a philosophical error . . . to suppose that our everyday thinking has 
its own framework of intelUgibility and provides the key to the intel-
UgibUity of the world"; rather, ''differentiation of these standpoints from 
one another" parallels "refinement in conception of standpoints." 3 7 
This iUuminates CoUingwood's position on the primacy of the ques­
tioning activity in knowledge. It is by the taking of dUferent stand­
points in confrontation with the world by questioning from such stand­
points that a definite type of meaningfulness and explanation is 
recognizable. Meaning and explanation are not explicated in our day-
to-day encounters with the world untU we confront the world with 
a definite type of question characteristic of a definite type of stand­
point. A standpoint is therefore a definite position or situation taken 
up by an agent or observer cortfronting a world of events questioned 
as to their meaning and explanation. Questioning, therefore, implies 
a situated observer or agent, and a world of events which such ob­
server, or agent, confronts as puzzUng to him in some way. Situa­
tion and world are therefore mutuaUy implicatory terms. A situation 
takes place only in and with reference to an environing world; a world 
desire asks and answers the question: 'What do I want?' which it begins by convert­
ing into: 'Which do I want, a or bl' [which] . . . are put before you as alterna­
tives . . . " [for] (11.11-11.12) "knowing involves asking questions and answering 
them . . . and . . . asking a question impUes contemplating alternatives." 
3 6 R. Stover, op. cit., p. 147. However, Stover's warning is not to be understood 
as if he sets everyday thinking in radical opposition to historical thinking. On p. 186 
he writes: "The extraordinary interesting fact remains that we find the same histor­
ian sometimes adopting the standpoint of the agent and sometimes that of natural 
order. This is one way in which the historian's thinking resembles our thinking in 
everyday Ufe. In everyday life we are not specialists. We pass from one standpoint 
to the other a thousand times a day without any hesitation or sense of discontinuity. 
Like many an historian we use both.'' Thus, far from being in opposition to Marrou's 
position that historical knowledge resembles famiUar day-to-day knowledge (see 
Marrou's The Meaning ofHistory, pp. 89-91 and pp. 103-111; see also Chapter 7, above, 
pp. 276-279). Stover's position, as clarified by himseU here, ffluminates also Marrou's 
position. 
3 7 R. Stover, op. cit., p. 147. Emphasis in original. 

362 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
is what situates by envirorüng that which is situated in some meaning­
ful way. 3 8 
Stover holds that there are two fundamentaUy, as distinct from 
derivatively, distinguishable ways in which the world of events can 
be confronted questioningly. 
. . . we shall maintain that there are two fundamental lines of 
questioning, i.e., two ways in which we make occurrences inteUi­
gible, and, corresponding to them, two fundamentaUy distinct types 
of historical thinking: thinking from the standpoint of natural order and 
thinking from the standpoint of living in the 
worki.39 
^SJatural order thinking is based on the observed umformity in oc­
currences. Stover explains this as foUows: 
Roughly speaking, natural order is an orderliness manifested 
in occurrences: under the same circumstances the same things 
happen, either always or with the same frequency. To think about 
the world, to observe it, to form concepts, and to reason with a view 
to making judgments about the orderUness of happenings, is what 
we caU thinking from the standpoint of natural order, and the objec­
tive of thinking from this standpoint is natural order inteUigibUity.40 
Stover says that this standpoint "characterises much of what we 
caU scientific thinking," although scientific thinking is not to be equated 
with this type of thinking, since, notwithstanding that "the quest for 
valid empirical generalizations, for unUying theories, for systematic 
knowledge, all can be carried on from this standpoint," nevertheless 
"scientUic thinking . . . is not always from the standpoint of natural 
order, and even when it is, specUic objectives of the scientist are Uke­
ly to be selective, narrower in scope than those of the standpoint 
itseU." 4 1 
Just as the scientist may proceed not exclusively in his charac­
teristic mode of natural order thinking, so the historian need not 
proceed by a distinctively historical type of thinking that totaUy ex­
cludes natural order thinking, which latter is characteristic of scien-
3 8 See R. G. Collingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 248, for the correlativity of the seU 
and its world. See this chapter, below, p. 376. See also this chapter, below, pp. 410411 
n. 262 for John Wild's explanation of the meaning of the term 'world.' 
3 9 Robert Stover, op. cit., pp. xii-xiii. Emphasis in original. 
40 Tbid., pp. 34. 
4 1 Md., p. 4. Emphasis in original. For example, finances may force a researcher 
to restrict the focus of his inquiry. His economic concern, a factor extraneous to scien­
tific inquiry as such, may condition the type of inquiry beyond that of properly scientific 
considerations. The two standpoints, though distinct, mutuaUy condition each other 
in their use. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
363 
tific thirdang. The causes and effects of human events and actions from 
the standpoint of natural order are of interest to historians. Stover 
cites G. M . Trevelyan 4 2 as conceding that at least guessing about such 
things is part of the historian's business. 4 3 
. . . natural order intelligibffity is a plausible objective of think­
ing about particular occurrences of the human past. . . . It is the 
principal objective of some historians on some occasions . . . it is 
among the objectives of many historians on many occasions. It con­
stitutes one very common idea of what historical inquiry is aU about: 
a quest for the order exhibited in world happenings.44 
Natural order inteUigibUity as an ideal 4 5 aims at universal deter­
minism; " . . . this idea is an important constituent of the scheme of 
natural order inteUigibUity"; 4 6 "we postulate universal determinism 
presuming that, pending evidence to the contrary, any given occur­
rence is an instance of natural order." 4 7 It Ukewise aims at unrestricted 
universaUty of nomological laws; "our second requirement was that 
a nomological universal not be formulated in terms that entaU a scope 
of predication restricted to a definite number of occurrences." 4 8 But, 
notwithstancUng these ideals of natural order mteUigibUity, those seek­
ing such inteUigibUity frequently settle for something less, though 
approximating that ideal. 4 9 
Natural order inteUigibUity is a way of thinking of which the 
historian can and sometimes does avaU himseU without precluding 
him from making use of other ways of thinking. 5 0 But Stover warns 
that "sometimes the initial mistake is made of attributing a charac­
teristic to a subject matter that should be attributed to a way of think­
i n g . " 5 1 
4 2 See Clio: A Muse, London, Longmans, Green and Co., 1930, pp. 144, 148. 
4 3 See R. Stover, op. cit., p. 4. 
4 4 Md., p. 4. Emphasis in original. 
4 5 See ibid., Ch. 2, pp. 15-53. 
46 Md., p. 46. 
47 nrid., p. 47. Emphasis in original. 
4 8 Brid., p. 12. 
4 9 See und., pp. 1640. As a deviation from natural order mtefflgibiUty, Stover notes, 
ibid., p. 48, that "the only available example of experimentaUy verified disorder is in 
the field of quantum mechanics." 
5 0 See ibid., p. 57. 
5 1 Md. This is a point to be borne in mind in judging the Popper-Hempel theory 
of historical knowledge. This warning also removes the prima facie contradiction which 
may appear between Stover's recognition of the historian's use of natural order intel­
ligibility and Ernst Cassirer's opposing of nature concepts to cultural and historical 
concepts; see later in this chapter, pp. 403414 below. 

364 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Stover correctly points out that "rational actions can be descrip­
tively understood and thought about from the natural order stand­
point/' 5 2 which means that "they can in principle be accounted for 
deterministically.'' 5 3 Barbara Mertz noted, "Sooner or later, most 
historians succumb to the urge to discover causes in history," 5 4 and 
Robert Stover states that " . . . most 'causal' accounts of events to be 
found in historical works are a special form of natural order inteUigi­
bUity." 5 5 The historian, in having recourse to causality as essentially 
connoting a confirmed regular relation, is implicitly taking a stand 
onthe meaning of causaUty in history. He is thereby subscribing to 
'a "generaUty" interpretation of causality, in the sense that causal 
accounts imply a general proposition of the sort caUed nomological 
universals. 5 6 The historian E. H . Carr seems to be in agreement with 
this, and states that the historian constantly uses generalizations to 
test his evidence. If, for instance, it is not clear from the avaUable 
evidence whether Richard murdered the princes in the Tower, the 
historian wffl ask, consciously or unconsciously, whether rulers of the 
particular period habituaUy liquidated rivals to their throne, and his 
final judgment wffl be influenced by this generalization. 5 7 
The historians' recourse to deterministic causality in order to 
explain has its parallel in psychology, and what F. J. Braceland and 
M . Stock 5 8 say in that context is equaUy vaUd for the historian. Their 
position is that U we look along a series of events involving free deci­
sions afler the fact, we can assign the actual causes which operated in 
the series, whereas U we look along the series 'from the front end,' so 
that at each stage we find ourselves confronted with alternatives, "we 
cannot see whether or not [an event] wffl occur, for whUe we see the 
5 2 R. Stover, op. cit., p. 93. 
53 Vbid. 
5 4 Barbara Mertz, Tempies, Tombs and Hieroglyphs, New York, Howard McCann, 
1964, p. 326. 
5 5 Robert Stover, op. cit., p. 93. 
5 6 See ibid., p. 9.1 am not sure that I agree with Stover here. Actions based on 
care for the world are determined by free personal decisions. The free causality of 
human initiative is thus an alternative mode of causaUty to the "generaUty" (Stover's 
term) type of causaUty based on the necessity impUed by nomological universals. Never­
theless, I thirik Stover is correct in saying that when historians do have recourse to 
causal explanation it is to the type of causality based on nomological universals that 
they have in mind. 
5 7 See E. H . Carr, What is History? Harmondsworth, Penguin Books, 1964, p. 63. 
See also Henry Veatch, Two Logics, Evanston, Northwestern University Press, 1969, 
pp. 242-245, regarding character traits as bases for causal inferences based on nomolog­
ical universals. 
5 8 See their Modem Psychiatry, New York, Doubleday, 1963, pp. 252-255. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
365 
motivations which are possible, we cannot predict which ones wiU 
be freely chosen." 5 9 Thus, " i n psychology, a causal sequence explains 
what has happened, but it cannot foreteU what wUl happen in the 
next simUar event, and the dUference lies in freedom of choice." 6 0 H 
in the following we read 'historical' for 'psychological,' we can easUy 
see how the historian is justified in giving the deterministic natural 
law type of causal explanation for historical events, notwithstanding 
that the events are manUestations of the seU-determinations of free 
agents: 
In effect, then, we may and should accept scientific determin­
ism when studying psychological data, accepting the principle that 
every psychological phenomenon which occurs comes from a cause. 
Simultaneously, we can accept free wUl, asserting that before they 
have occurred, many psychological phenomena are subject to free 
disposition by the human agent. And this seems to solve the 
dUemma.61 
The second fundamental standpoint of thinking distinguished by 
Stover is "the standpoint of living in the w o r l d , " 6 2 whose principle 
of meaning and inteUigibUity is that of care or concern in regard to 
how the world is disposed with reference to a situated agent's 
preferences.63 "To confront the world as living in the world is to con­
front it caringly. How the world is matters." 6 4 
Caring, Stover explains, is a mental attitude of concern which ques­
tions the world as to the relative preferabUity of one or another recog­
nizable state of affairs. Caring assumes that things might be other­
wise than they are, and that the subject has a relation of preferabUity 
to one or another of these possible states. It may not always be 
apparent what is the preferable state of affairs, but the prevaUing 
opinions about this wUl precipitate discussion and inquiry. The exis­
tence of recognizable alternatives as objects of preference is essential 
59 Md., p. 253. 
6 0 Tbid., p. 254. See p. 364 n. 56 above for the question regarding the identification 
of causaUty with deterministic causaUty. I think that the determinative activity of free 
agents is itseU a distinctive type of causality, namely free causaUty. That is, I object 
to identifying causaUty with predetermination. 
6 1 F. J. Braceland and M. Stock, op. cit., p. 254. This is a very important insight 
and, U it is kept in mind throughout the remainder of this chapter, it wffl forestall 
many difficulties that might otherwise arise by reason of a presupposed freedom-
determinism antinomy. 
6 2 Robert Stover, The Nature of Historical Thinking, pp. 147 et seq. 
4 3 See ibid., pp. 149-152. 
6 4 Md., p. 149. 

366 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
to this way of thinking. "Thinking from the standpoint of living in 
the world takes the form of ascertaining what is preferable." 6 5 
Stover distinguishes "between two sorts of judgments of prefer-
abüity: evaluations and practical reasomng." 6 6 By evaluations he means 
"judgments as to the comparative merits or shortcomings of a situa­
tion or aspect of a situation cared about." 6 7 Thus, "we may evaluate 
the effects of certain events on our own human situation," and "what 
is evaluated can be past, present or future." 6 8 Probably most evalua­
tions are in connection with practical considerations such as deliber­
ating whether to act, what course of action should be taken and what 
are the consequences of choices already acted upon, although evalua­
tions äre possible without essential connection with proposed rational 
action. 6 9 
Contemplated alternatives relative to one involved in a decision­
making situation are essential to this mode of thinking, and it is a 
fundamental note distinguishing it from natural order thinking. A 
question of preferabflity as to situations, institutions, courses of action, 
etc., is presupposed to evaluation and practical reasoning. Only a mat­
ter of concern can precipitate questions whose answers are evalua­
tions and practical reasonings, cuhninating in decisions and action 
thereon. Whether or not someone in fact is concerned about such mat­
ters, there must at least be matters about which concern can be had 
in order that there be possible this distinctive inteUigibiHty based on 
the world as Uved in. There is always a personal reference of some­
thing judged as preferable to or for someone. 7 0 
Many of the meanings by which events are inteUigible from the 
standpoint of the suitabUity or unsuitabUity to human concern accom­
pany the human situation as such. Consequently, it is possible to 
recognize the meaning that some past or distant object or event had 
for those confronting it in their situation of time and place. It is 
recognizably meaningful to us simply by consulting the orientation 
of our own preferences and value judgments. 
Identifying understanding is descriptive understanding together 
with an awareness that the kinds of distinctively human meaning rela­
tions that characterize the subjective or objectified mamfestations 
6 5 
Ш. 
6 6 
Ш. 
67 Oid., p. 150. 
6 8 Jbid. 
6 9 See ibid. Again note the importance of alternatives, which, according to Col­
Ungwood, are made known by and in a question. See above, Chapter 3, p. 66. 
7 0 See Robert Stover, op. cit., pp. 151-152. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
367 
we are understanding, are the same kinds of meaning relations that 
characterize our subjective experience and that are involved in mean­
ings objectively manifested in our artifacts, institutions and behavior. 
These kinds of meaning are correlates of human standpoints—com­
mon ways of confronting the world, of asking questions about what 
goes on, and of striving for inteUigibUity.71 
Thinking from this standpoint of living in the world is character­
ized by temporaUty, concreteness and particularity. The temporal char­
acter of our careful concern for the world is thus explained by Stover: 
The questions we ask and answer from the standpoint of living 
in the world vary with the temporal perspective. We do not deUber-
ate about an action ab*eady done; we do review and criticize past 
deliberations and compare the actual with the foreseen conse­
quences. On the other hand, we do not criticize ourselves for a deci­
sion not yet made nor do we compare envisioned consequences with 
actual consequences of a decision we have yet to execute.72 
The concreteness and particularity characteristic of our thinking 
from the standpoint of care for the world is then explained as foUows: 
The minking we do from this standpoint reflects not only the 
particularity of situations but the multiplicity of ways in which a 
human being can fare weU or iU, do weU or badly, make things weU 
or poorly. It reflects the diverse kinds of interrelationships we have 
With things human and non-human: the precarious combination of 
environmental conditions upon which survival depends; the 
physiological complexity of our bodies, which exposes us to a diver­
sity of stimuU and gives us the abiUty to do countless things as weU 
as to extend the range of possible activities by martipuIating our envi­
ronment; our involvement in numerous and varied cultural systems 
and correlated social organizations; and so on. Whence questions 
arise: Which of several possible actions or activities, which state of 
affairs, which product of our making is, in a particular situation or 
in general, the preferable one?73 
Both types of meaning, that deriving from natural order and that 
deriving from careful concern for the world, derive their meaning in 
relation to human beings, so that there is a general sense in which 
both meanings can be said to be human. But meaning based on care 
for the world is human in a very special way, inasmuch as this mean­
ing is a relationship to the preferabUity of human persons in human 
71 Tbid., p. 93. 
72 Md., p. 150. See this chapter, below, pp. 373-384, for John Wild's explanation 
of human temporality in this context. 
7 3 R. Stover, op. cit., p. 150. 

368 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
situations. 7 4 Natural order meaning is human in the sense that it is 
meaning^jr human beings, whereas "the personal reference essen­
tial to preferabiHty is a reference to persons as human beings, as in the 
human situation." 7 5 Since natural order meaning lacks this essential 
relation to human preferabihry, the meaning of the world in terms 
of natural order is a neutral type of meaning when contrasted with 
"the other distinctively human modes of meaning: being satisfactory 
for someone (evaluations), and being the appropriate thing for some­
one to do or the appropriate way for someone to proceed (practical 
judgments)." 7 6 
Now, the historian is able to make past events inteUigible in terms 
of their preferabUity with respect to the interests and concerns of 
persons contemporaneous with those events. 
Judgments of preferabiUty are personal in reference. Forpersons 
living in the past—past relative to the present in which the historian 
sets about making the past inteUigible—there were questions of 
preferabUity.77 
These questions of preferabUity may either be questions of satis-
factoriness, that is, evaluations, or questions as to the correct way to 
proceed in decision and action. As regards the first: 
Some questions of satisfactoriness for them (matters of evalua­
tion) were actuaUy posed by them. Some of these questions they 
answered thoughtfuUy, using generalization and judgment. An in­
definite number of questions of satisfactoriness for them could have 
been posed.78 
As regards the second type of question, questions of preferabU­
ity which the historian may recognize in the past as making it intel­
ligible, Stover has the foUowing to say: 
Similarly, there were an mdefinite number of questions for these 
persons as to what to do and how to proceed (practical questions), 
of which some were actuaUy posed and some were answered 
thoughtfully by them. Even when no question was explicitly asked 
or answered, they engaged in activities and viewed happenings with 
the understanding—sometimes resulting from previous thinking— 
74 Tbid. 
75 Md., p. 152. 
76 Md. 
77 ttnd., p. 153. Emphasis in original. It is important to keep in mind here the clar­
ification which was borrowed from psychology in regard to human events seen from 
their standpoint facing their oum indeterminate future. See this chapter, pp. 364-365, 
above. 
7 8 R. Stover, op. cit., p. 153. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
369 
that what was being done was appropriate, or that what was hap­
pening was satisfactory (or unsatisfactory).79 
Stover makes a further important distinction in regard to the ways 
in which the historian can deal with past happenings. The historian 
may deal with past events either by descriptive understanding or by 
identifying understanding. He explains descriptive understanding as 
foUows: 
The historian can describe the questions asked, the thirdcing done 
(or the manner in which the questions were resolved, whatever it 
may have been), and the temper of rnind, mood, or outlook with 
which activities were carried on and happenings regarded. This is 
descriptive understanding, i.e., description of meaning relations; in 
this case, description of distinctively human meanings concretely 
experienced or objectified.80 
Such descriptive understanding, notwithstanding that it is deal¬
ing with persons acting preferentiaUy in their particular situation, deals 
with such person-involved happenings from the outside, so to speak, 
as considered by an impartial observer. 
But, contrarily, when the historian takes the viewpoint of the eval­
uating or deUberating agent, seeing the events from the agent's point 
of view, from within his personal evaluating and decision-making sit­
uation, he is using what Stover caUs identifying understanding. 
. . . the historian can also identify with the standpoint of Uving 
in the world of those persons in the past; in so doing he regards 
the questions as universaUy human. It is this latter way of regard­
ing the lived experience of the past which distinguishes identifying 
understanding from mere description, descriptive understanding.81 
IdentUying understanding presupposes descriptive understand­
ing, though this does not mean that they are exercised as two sequen­
tially distinct operations. The value of the distinction, according to 
Stover, lies in the fact that it aUows for the recognition of another way 
of meaningfuUy objectifying Uved experience, namely as marufesting 
natural order. Thus, "[a] historian's description can be auxUiary to 
both standpoints of thinking; it can serve two ultimate aims: identify­
ing understanding or natural law thinking." 8 2 
79 Vbid. 
80 Void. Emphasis in original. 
8 1 Void. Emphasis in original. It is from this point of view that a past human act 
appears as a free decision-making act whose own future looks to that act as its deter­
minant. 
8 2 Void., pp. 153-154. 

370 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Descriptive understanding, then, considersan event simply as 
something which happened, with minimal, if any, penetration into 
the meaningful content of the happening. History written solely in 
this way would seem to be what is caUed mere chronicle, a mere state­
ment of a sequence of happenings and their dates of occurrence with 
little or no regard to precisely what happened or why it happened. 
Natural order understanding would attempt to supply such mean­
ing and explanation in terms of the inteUigibUity of what regularly 
happens according to some recognizable nomological universal law 
(as, for example, rulers levying heavy taxation are unpopular and pro­
voke discontent). Identifying understanding, on the other hand, would 
seek to situate itseU within the concern of the agent involved in his 
(the agent's) present (historian's past) situation, and to understand 
the situation and what happened in terms of the agent's action by 
reflecting the agent's interests and concerns. 
Stover takes CoUingwood to task for identUying (a) the descrip­
tive understanding of person-oriented events and happenings with (b) 
identifying understanding when he (ColUngwood) says that in history 
to know what happened is also to know why it happened by insight 
into the thoughts and motives of the agents concerned. Stover says 
that this identUication forestaUs aUowing that actions initiated by pur­
posive agents, and their effects, can be treated also from the stand­
point of natural order, deterrninistic mteUigibUty,83 which CoUingwood 
does not allow. CoUingwood correctly recognised the distinctiveness 
of the voUtional attitude, the standpoint of the agent whose action 
involves thought, and he was correct to recognize that causal gener­
alizations or nomological universals or their approximations are not 
implicitly contained in identUying understanding as such. But due 
to his (CoUingwood's) faulty conception of understanding, "he faUed 
to grasp clearly the dUference between understanding the practical 
reasons or reasoning of others and thinking from the standpoint of 
natural order." 8 4 Thus, CoUingwood "mistakenly supposed that when 
the historian understands, happenings (actions, in this case) thereby 
become inteUigible in the same way that deterministic accounts make 
them inteUigible." 8 5 CoUingwood's error was to think that when the 
historian understands he thereby knows the determining conditions 
of the events in question; knowing the thoughts behind the agent's 
8 3 See ibid., pp. 77-79; 90-95; 104-107. 
8 4 Vbia., p. 106. 
85 Lbid. Emphasis in original. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
371 
action is the same as knowing the determinate reasons why the action 
happened. This, Stover says, is to equate understanding with under­
standing the determinate reasons why an action occurred, and, therefore, 
in Stover's judgment, to regard understanding as an alternative ofthe 
same type of understanding as is found in natural order, deterrninistic 
thinking. Had CoUingwood, in Stover's opinion, seen the dUference 
between understanding which can be merely descriptive, and understand­
ing by identification with the agent, he would have been able to allow 
for the possibUity of understanding from the natural order standpoint 
making its own distinctive contribution to historical explanation. 8 6 
I am not sure that Collingwood's position is as easUy disposed 
of as Stover makes it out to be here. CoUingwood's identUication of 
historical understanding with what Stover caUs identUying under­
standing is hardly a mere sUp or oversight on Collingwood's part. 
He has too clearly and consistently argued the impotence of thought 
in its scientUic mode of procedure, that is, through abstract univer­
sals and general laws, to deal with the problems proper to history. 
I agree with Stover that the explanation of some historical event, the 
satisfying answer to someone's question regarding a certain histori­
cal happening, may weU be of the type "tyrants do fhat sort of thing," 
or "heavy taxes always breed discontent," or "kings of that period 
usuaUy were cruel." Consequently, I disagree with CoUingwood's 
position not aUowing answers of a universal and general type as 
answers to specUic historical questions. But I Ukewise disagree with 
Stover's statement that the trouble on CoUingwood's part is his in-
abUity to distinguish descriptive understanding from identUying under­
standing. CoUingwood's whole system ofthought leads him to conclude 
that abstract thought, as found in natural science, is erroneous, and 
that truthis had only in thought which achieves concreteness and 
totality. Only historical thought, of the type Stover caUs identUying 
understanding, fuUUs the conditions of concrete and genuine thought 
for CoUingwood. So it is in principle, rather than as a result of a 
negligent oversight, that CoUingwood identUies understanding in 
history and what Stover caUs identifying understanding. From his (Col· 
Ungwood's) view, CoUingwood saw only too clearly that natural order 
inteUigibUity could not contribute to historical explanation. In effect, 
Stover here is faUing to take precisely that standpoint of identUying 
understanding in regard to CoUingwood; he does not look at CoUing­
wood's denial of that distmction from the standpoint of the problem 
8 6 See Ш., 
p. 106. 

372 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
which CoUingwood faced in his own mind. Furthermore, historical 
thought, for CoUingwood, is conducted at a level of consciousness 
which transcends scientUic thought. The historian is thinking about 
thought (i.e., past thought, though not necessarily thinking about the 
activity itseU of thinking about [past] thought, which, for CoUingwood, 
is philosophical thought), 8 7 whereas the scientist thinks not about 
thought, but about spatialized, deterministic objects. The issue with 
ColUngwood is rather with the fundamentals of his whole system, 
which forbid him even to visualize the possibUity of the distinction 
which Stover seems to regard as a de facto error that crept in as some 
sort.of oversight. 
But, Stover continues, had CoUingwood distinguished descrip­
tive understanding from identUying understanding, he would have 
seen that 
descriptive understanding places rational activity at the disposal of 
the historian-scientist: what happened was purposive thinking, the 
solving of a varticuuir problem (an emphasis repeatedly made by Col­
lingwood); the historian-scientist's problem then is to find out the 
determining conditions of the fact that the agent reached the deci­
sion that he did reach, solved his problem as he did solve it, and 
acted on the basis of his decision as he did act.88 
IdentUying understanding is possible, and it is able to supply an 
inteUigible account of past events precisely because those Uving in the 
past, and ourselves in the present striving to understand that past, 
confront the world as feUow human beings. 
It is inteUigible to us having been inteUigible to them, as having 
been thought about and judged by them as fellow human beings. The 
kind of inteUigibUity that the world had for them is recognized as 
one of the kinds of inteUigibUity that "our" world has for us, a kind 
we ourselves at least sometimes pursue, the goal of one form of our 
questioning.89 
D. Man as a Historical Being 
Robert Stover has weU distinguished pre-determined causation, 
characteristic of scientUic explanation, from seU-determining causa­
tion, characteristic of human decision-making in free choice. The 
8 7 See CoUingwood's The Idea ofHistory, pp. 2-3. See also p. 2 of the introductory 
chapter, above. 
8 8 R. Stover, op. cit., pp. 106-107. Emphasis in original. 
89 H)id., p. 154. Emphasis in original. This is an important point to be developed 
later by Ernst Cassirer. The principle which gives care<oncern concepts a logical value 
is the underlying unity of man. See this chapter, below, pp. 387-388. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
373 
basic distinction is between necessary causality and free causality, be­
tween what could have been otherwise and what could not have been 
otherwise, as everyday colloquialism expresses it. The reason why 
something happens may be due to the efficiency of preexisting actual­
ities, or it may be due to the autonomous initiation of a free being 
on account of as yet unrealized but realizable foreseen eventuaHties 
that he seeks to bring into being by his free decisions. His determina­
tion of a foreseeable future is thus a reason for and explanation of 
the events resulting from his actions. 
The recognition of man's free, seU-determiruhg causaUty provides 
the key to distinguishing the historical being proper to man from that 
of natural being (which man shares with natural things as part of the 
world of nature). This character of man as a seU-responding situated 
being is weU explained by John WUd in his The Challenge of Existen­
tialism.90 
Man's situatedness and facticity is first made aware to him by 
certain emotive responses which disclose much more than any amount 
of theorizing. Mood and feeling disclose objects that threaten me in 
such a way that I am made aware, aU together, of the object, the feeUng 
itseU, and myseU as experiencing that modaUty of feeUng. Such a mood 
is then not as a thing-object, to be looked at, but rather as a way I 
am, which reveals my being as a being situated in the world. 
This revelation discloses the naked facticity of the situation. I feel 
myseU oppressed by the situation into which I am thrown and feel 
myseU trying to disengage myself from that situation felt as some­
thing oppressing. 9 1 
To a certain extent this clarifies what CoUingwood explained 9 2 
regarding appetite as making us aware of a future as yet unrealized, 
harmonious state of weU-being through making us presently aware 
of an unsatisfactoriness, or felt disquietude, in our present situation. 
But, I think WUd's explanation is more in accord with experience, 
inasmuch as he allows that these emotive moods themselves have 
revelative capacity, whereas for ColUngwood the selective activity of 
conscious attention has to intervene to disengage the 'there-and-then' 
of feeling from the 'here-and-now.' 9 3 CoUingwood seems to exaggerate 
9 0 Bloomington, indiana UniversityPress, 1955. See Ch. 4, pp. 86-115, on "Human 
Awareness and Action." 
9 1 See ibid., p. 8. 
9 2 Correlate with ColUngwood's The New Leviathan, pp. 21-26, pars. 4.37-4.89 and 
pp. 47-53, pars. 7.1-7.69. 
9 3 See ibid., pp. 21-23, pars. 4.4-4.6 and p. 51, par. 7.53. 

374 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
the active role of consciousness over feeling when he says, "This prac­
tical directive or selective act [of attention] 'makes', as we say, the 
distinctions between what we attend to and what we attend 'from' 
or 'repress.' " 9 4 To the crucial questions 'Are there objects of feeling 
or not?' 9 5 and 'Is feeling active or passive?'96 he answers that he does 
not know in both cases. But to the first he gives methodological reasons 
for preferring that what are felt are modes rather than objects of the 
activity. To the second he says he cannot give even methodological 
reasons for answering one way or another. So without being able to 
answer these crucial questions from positive grounds, he akeady loads 
the issue heavily on the side of the activity of consciousness, over­
riding the passivity and contribution from its object side. 
K mood ai ,d feeling awaken me to the facticity of my situation, 
it is understanding which "focuses on my essential possibilities and 
projects—that part of me which is always ahead of itself in the future," 
which, according to Heidegger, is the central core of my being. Under­
standing is thus a kind of creation, the projection of new being. 9 7 
The whole world is ordered and understood with reference to the 
ultimate projects I set for myseU. To judge something is to interpret 
it in the Hght of some project and, mtimately, in the Ught of my ultimate 
concern. 9 8 
Our primitive insights are practical. K the hammer I am using is 
too big I look for another. But when I have leisure, and am freed from 
the demand on me to act, I can look at the hammer from a detached 
point of view and inquke what goes with hammers as such. From 
such contemplation theoretical science arises. Such activity presup­
poses leisurely detachment from pressing practical everyday needs 
and has its own distinctive mood of relaxation, detachment and con­
centration. Theoretical knowledge bears on something as a fixed entity 
of some sort, and is thus incapable of grasping human possibility. 9 9 
Practical knowledge, grasping human possibihties, does so from a sit­
uation of dynamic involvement in which these very possibilities arise. 
Inspked by Heidegger, Wild explains as follows: 
Our primordial and true insight into the world is derived from 
our active projection of possibiUties ahead of ourselves. This projec-
9 4 Brid., pp. 22-23, par. 4.52. 
9 5 See ibid., p. 28, par. 5.2. 
9 6 See tbid., p. 31, par. 5.4. 
9 7 See John Wild, The Challenge of Existentialism, pp. 87-88. 
9 8 See ibid., p. 89. 
9 9 So it is clear why dialectical thought gives primacy to action rather than to sub­
stantiality in expkining. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
375 
tion is the first act of understanding. This orders ourselves and all 
other entities into an inteUigible world. mterpretation is the detailed 
development of this frame, and its application to concrete objects 
confronting us. To fit something into such a frame is to disclose its 
being. Such disclosure belongs to Dasein. He is the disclosure he 
makes. Some of them are true and reveal the entity itseU.100 
This remarkable quote darifies and ties up much that has been 
said in the foregoing. The "interpretation" referred to here seems to 
be the same as CoUingwood's "interpretation" 1 0 1 or "insight" 1 0 2 into 
a situation needed to understand what one ought to do in that situa­
tion. It is clear that the understandabUity of the situation as described 
here by WUd is through nothing other than what has been previous­
ly explained at length 1 0 3 as a concrete universal. The development of 
the frame of reference in which we order our projects is the buUding 
up of a concrete universal which gives meaning to aU those things 
brought together and related among themselves according to their 
necessary involvement in that overaU framework. The relevance of 
aU that Stover has said above regarding man's careful concern for the 
world as a source of distinctive meaning is also implicated here. The 
1 0 0 John Wild, op. cit., p. 90. 
l
m See CoUingwood's treatment of 'insight' into the meaning of law in his Specu­
lum Mentis, p. 225, where he says that the important thing about legal rules is not 
their rigid formulation but their 'interpretation,' whereby they are seen to Шипйпаге 
dynamicaUy a concrete situation. I think that what is said above, together with what 
is said by CoUingwood regarding the role and function of law, would greatly clarify 
many of the issues raised by Gidon GottUeb in his investigation into legal reasoning 
in his The Logic of Choice. See, for example, Gottlieb's two cases of the shooting of 
an elephant, one in a U.S. Central Park zoo, the other in Burma (op. cit., pp. 60^61). 
"AU the circumstances, the nature of the offence, the motives of the accused, were 
in aU respects identical. . . The only difference between the two cases was that one 
arose in the U.S. and the other in Burma. There too, a variety of facts was brought 
to the attention of the court but for the same two facts: the colour of the dothes of 
the accused and the colour of the elephant's skin. Γη both instances, however, the 
elephant was a white elephant. The colour of the elephant was of no spedal interest 
in the U.S. . . . but it was of crucial importance in Burma, where white elephants 
are sacred and their slaughter sacrilegious. To omit in Burma any reference to the 
colour of the elephant was tantamount to concealing from the court a most important 
fact." GottUeb then makes his point in regard to the interpretation of laws about 
shooting elephants: "Facts and cows have this in common: they may be sacred in 
mdia but not in the U.S. The importance of cows and the relevance of what happens 
to them depends on their place and function in the community; what may be sig­
nUicant here may be—to enrich our metaphor—a red herring ekewhere." See also 
Appendix 2 below, p. 491, regarding judicial interpretation of law. 
1 0 2 For Collingwood's discussion of the need for 'insight' into a given situation 
in order to dedde how to act in the concrete circumstances see his Autobiography, pp. 
101-106. See also Chapter 6 above, pp. 220-221. 
1 0 3 See Chapter 4, above. 

376 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
mutual clarification of Stover's treatment of mtemgibüity deriving from 
man's deliberated choice, CoUingwood's treatment of insight into and 
interpretation of a situation, and the elaboration of this meaning of 
the concrete universal by Bosanquet and CoUingwood, aU seem to be 
nicely summed up and articulated in the above quote of WUd. The 
progressive determination of our projects involves the elaboration of 
enmeshing relations which at the same time create and reveal the mean­
ings of aU that is thus related. Understanding in this context is 
thoroughly pragmatized, as it is also in Sartre and Heidegger. 1 0 4 
The meaning of an event is the way it fits into a plan of action, 
and aU understanding presupposes an ultimate end that has been 
chosen. Theory is assimUated to practice. My choice of myseU and 
my world order is at the same time my discovery of the world. 
Awareness and choice are reaUy one. 1 0 5 
WUd, immediately after this, adds that "this pragmatic concep­
tion determines the existentialist attitude towards the discipline of 
logic," 1 0 6 which he proceeds to consider, and his consideration is of 
the highest importance in enlightening the verdict to be passed on 
CoUingwood's theory of logic, especiaUy as it is relevant to history. 
Like CoUingwood, 1 0 7 WUd criticises the formal or symbolic logic which 
prevaUs in many parts of the world inasmuch as "conceptual mean­
ing has been ignored and sometimes reduced to the instrumental sym­
bols of language," and "the syntactic structure of these symbols has 
been cut off from their referential functions." 1 0 8 The result is that logic 
becomes sundered from reaUty and knowledge, and becomes the play­
thing of technicians, each playing his own game. 1 0 9 
According to Heidegger, the judgment is logistically dissolved 
into a system of rules, and becomes the object of a sort of reckoning 
rather than the theme for ontological interpretation.110 
In opposition to this, WUd insists on the intentionality of logic 
as a human discipUne. "The logic of science and of aU Uving discourse 
is referential." 1 1 1 To reintroduce this classical notion, Heidegger, 
1 0 4 John Wild, op. cit., p. 95. 
105 Brid. 
™Md. 
1 0 7 See, for instance, CoUingwood's comments on symboUc logic in his The Prindpks 
of Art, pp. 268-269. 
1 0 8 John WUd, op. cit., p. 95. 
109 
Md. 
110 Md., p. 96. 
1 1 1 0>id. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
377 
according to Wild, feels the need to regard the primordial insight into 
existence as achieved only in terms of oui active projects. 1 1 2 m CoUing­
wood the same thing is found in his recognition of the primacy of 
the practical over the theoretical. 1 1 3 CoUingwood is obviously doing 
what WUd says Heidegger and the existentialists do in this respect, 
namely "rescue logic from the hands of minute technicians . . . to 
restore it to the position it once had as the interpreter and guide of 
meaningful discourse." 1 1 4 Whatever may be the interest and impor­
tance of turning logic into the theory of calculating machines, such 
"mathematical logic has certainly not shed much Ught on the Logos."115 
Like ColUngwood, WUd insists, "Instead of becoming obsessed with 
minor detaUs of mathematics, it is the function of logic to inquire into 
the structure of human meaning as such." 1 1 6 He reechoes CoUing­
wood's need "to study the intentional structure of Uving discourse and 
to devise a human discipUne for its guidance." 1 1 7 As human awareness 
is primarUy practical rather than theoretical and human awareness 
cannot be separated from human action, the revitaUzation of logic must 
be as a logic of human choices, decisions and action. 1 1 8 Since this is 
the stuff history is made of, any distinctive logic of history wUl be a 
logic of human action and human awareness as it arises in and through 
action. 
According to WUd, following Heidegger, it is the feeling of dread 
that awakens me to that which cUstinguishes me as a historical being, 
namely a being whofaces possibilities to be determined and actualized through 
choices. 
1 1 2 Tbid. 
1 1 3 Passim. See specificaUy his Autobiography, pp. 147-167, and his New Leviathan, 
p. 5, par. 1.66. Collingwood's thesis, that 'mind is what it does/ I think, seems to 
sum up this attitude in one sentence. 
1 1 4 J. Wild, op. cit., p. 97. 
1 1 5 Jbid. See also E. Cassirer on the meaning of Logos; see this chapter, below, 
pp. 387-389. 
1 1 6 John Wild, op. cit., p. 97. 
1 1 7 lbid., pp. 97-98. Chapters 1 and 2, above, expose CoUingwood's caU for this 
new logic. 
1 1 8 John WUd, op. cit., p. 97. This means that CoUingwood's (and WUd's) caU for 
a revitalized logic must be a logic of what Stover, above, caUed man's 'careful con­
cern for the world,' or the logic of human decision-making. This aspect of logic is 
not as neglected today as it was in CoUingwood's time. See, for example, Chapters 
1,13,14 and 15 of W. Edgar Moore's Creative and Critical Thinking, Boston, Houghton 
Mifflin Co., 1967. See also the first four chapters of Troy W. Organ's The Art of Critical 
Thinking, Boston, Houghton MUflin, 1965. The former work stresses the human 
decision-making dimension of logic, the latter its interrogative aspect. See also Henry 
S. Leonard's Principles ofReasoning, New York, Dover, 1967, pp. 22-86, on the recog­
nition of problems and the methods of their solution. 

378 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Dread singles me out and leaves me alone to face what I still 
might be. It also touches the whole structure of my being in the 
world, but with a poignant emphasis on those real possibflities which 
I reaUy am, though they be ahead of me. 1 1 9 
WUd then rejoins Stover in singling out "that care or commitment 
which characterizes aU specUicaUy human action." The term 'care' 
expresses the conative structure characteristic of human existence as 
concrete and dynamic. 1 2 0 Human existence does not just flow down 
Uke a stream from a past through a present to some unforeseeable 
future. As a historical being my past and future are together with me 
in any present now in my careful concerns. 
. . . my activity is always to a future which I have already pro­
jected ahead of myseU by understanding and mood. . . . The past 
and future are not separated from each other by a punctual present. 
They are held together in a certain unity which can be clearly seen 
in the structure of care. This care is always ahead of itseU and never 
confined to the present. . . . It is this envisaged future that directs 
my care.121 
WUd distinguishes a "threefold order of human existing as the 
structure of care: (1) ahead of itseU . . . (2) as already in the world 
. . . (3) as being with . . . " 1 2 2 H this is so, then we may regard this 
as the basic structure of a concrete universal, and so it is of the high­
est importance in expUcating that notion. Care means more than active 
co-presence. One can act carelessly regarding a present object. Care 
is a special kind of co-presence peculiar to man. И that which is co-
present is another man one does not merely act on him. This careful 
concern does not come and go but lies at the very core ofman's concrete 
being. The care-taking agent is a centre of care (in its variety of forms, 
namely, of drive, urge, desire, wish or wUl), that is, a projective struc­
ture. Even the theoretical order is basicaUy practical and embodies 
this structure when it is a question of the possibUity of a truth I do 
not yet know and to be sought out by carefuUy chosen means. 1 2 3 This 
includes scientific research, and one may add aU such investigations 
1 1 9 John Wild, op. cit., p. 99. The feeUng of dread thus seems itseU to deUneate 
man in his factual situation from the environment in which he has to make choices. 
Therefore, before the conscious activity of selective attention, a weU defined struc­
ture is presented at the level of feeUng. See criticism of CoUingwood on this point, 
above, pp. 373-374. 
1 2 0 See John WUd, op. cit., p. 100. 
1 2 1 Md. 
1 2 2 Tbid., p. 101. 
1 2 3 See ibid. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
379 
as CoUingwood's 'who kUled John Doe?' ''This possibUity [of some as 
yet unknown truth] ahead of me arouses my concern[;] it takes over 
any factual existence and directs it to the necessary procedures and 
acts." 1 2 4 
The most signUicant dUferentiating factor in distinguishing the 
dUferent levels of care is the weight of the futurity factor. Drives and 
urges are dominated by an object as present; they seem to flow out 
of the past, so that the image of the stream is more fittingly said of 
them. Desires and interests, at a higher level, are almost totaUy lost 
in what is present, with at best only a dim view of futurity. Wishes 
martifest a limited view of real possibUities. But "the more authentic 
kinds of care are manUested in those acts of purposive choice where 
basic possibUities are clearly grasped. They take over the whole per­
sonality in decisive commitment." 1 2 5 
This threefold structure of the aU-pervasive human phenomenon 
of care opens the way to the understanding of the problem of time 
and of the connections of past, present and future as these are his­
torical characteristics.126 
The more spatiaUzed and famUiar conception of time is that of a 
succession of 'now' moments. The present is real at any given moment. 
The past was once a (present) now and the future wUl be a now when 
it reaUy is. Present nows seem to flow into the past and be replen­
ished from future nows flowing into the present. This goes on in­
definitely, and aU that happens, including myseU, happens in this 
flow of time. The present can be exarnined as an object before my 
senses, the past I remember, the future I anticipate or predict. 1 2 7 
But, WUd asks, do not these characteristics belong to what is in 
time rather than to time itseU? Is time itseU divided into past, present 
and future? or rather "is not time itself dissolved with the dissolu­
tion of the past and future?" 1 2 8 
Following Heidegger, WUd says that "time lies at the root of the 
structure of human care." It "is an existential structure which per­
vades man's being in the w o r l d . " 1 2 9 
1 2 4 Tbid. Thus, the investigative stage, or way of discovery of some theoretical con­
cern, is itseU not merely theoretical but also practical, involving careful deUberation 
and decision. See below, Appendix 2, p. 488 et seq. 
1 2 5 Vrid., p. 102.1 think that we may say that the degree of expectation of purpose 
here is at the same time the measure ofa man's disengagement from the natural world 
and the constituting of himseU as a free, autonomous, and thus historical, being. 
1 2« See ibid., p. 103. 
1 2 7 See ibid., pp. 103-104. 
1 2 8 Md., p. 105. 
1 2 9 Md., p. 106. 

380 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Time is not a sort of space which things are in, nor is the human 
person, the historical being, a thing, or a set of events in time. Time 
is rather a 'stretch' or 'intension' of man's being. His being is notfirst 
confined to a given moment and then stretched out into past and future; 
from its beginning to its end his being is thus characterized. 1 3 0 
From the very beginning, his being is stretched out into possibil­
ities ahead of himseH, and a past which he must take over if he is 
to be with things at a factual present.131 
" What Heidegger caUs the three ecstasies of time are thus integrated 
*into the unity of man's existential being. "He is not in time, but rather 
he islt, and exists it. To have time for something is to have seU-devotion 
to it. To lose time, or to waste it, is to waste the self." 1 3 2 Man's historic 
being is thus described: 
I am not confined to a present moment nor to a specious present. 
I am the future I have projected ahead of myself, and I stUl am the 
past that I have been.133 
WUd stresses that " i t is the future that must take hold of the past, 
and guide it in present action." 1 3 4 But this addition to my present is 
not an accidental addition to an already there substantial being. At 
no moment am I ever all there. Stationing myseU in this projected future, 
from this vantage point I can direct and criticize my action. " I t is from 
this being ahead of myseU that I regard the flow of my being out of 
the past, through the present, towards where I am primarUy, at my 
end in the future." 1 3 5 Note what is implied here. My lUe is seen by 
me as a meaningful whole only U I see myseU as a completed whole from 
some point of goal-achievement located in the as yet unrealized future. 
But the being of man is not exclusively futuristic; it is stretched 
over the past which he has been and bears with concern on present 
130 Bid., pp. 106-107. H this is so, we can see the relevance of CoUingwood's ex-
pUcation of man's historical being as an overiap of classes in a scale offorms, each 
later form taking up and modifying the earUer. Rather than an ejection of his being 
into a dead past there is a constant retaking up of that past, an injecting of it into 
the present (CoUingwood's reUving of past thoughts), and a directing of the whole 
present actuality (fertUized by its own revived past which it sums up in itseU) into 
the as yet unrealized but realizable future. Any stage of its active development can 
be represented together as the fuUUment (summation) of its past to that point and 
as its forward thrust to the self-reaLization of future projected possibUities. 
1 3 1 J. WUd, op. cit., p. 107. 
1 3 2 Tbid. 
1 3 3 Bid. 
1 3 4 Bid. 
1 3 5 Bid. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
381 
things and actions. Hence, the present does not just come after the 
past nor the future after the present. These are inseparable phases 
of a single integrated structure whose "unity must be maintained by 
resolute choice that holds them tightly together with the future, not 
after but before the present." 1 3 6 Laziness and irresolution may rup­
ture this unity; then man passes from past to future through present 
in the way any physical object does so, as something which just 
happens to it, not as something he carries himseU through by decisively 
and freely "taking himself in hand." As things observed scientifical­
ly they are in time, and their past, present and future are related by 
external relations. 1 3 7 But as man is consciously aware of them, his past, 
present and future are not things but modaUties of his (conscious) exis­
tence related by internal relations through human action in decisions 
and the realization of projects. In this threefold modaUty, 
the future is in the mode of possibfflty, [so that] no part of it can 
become actuaUy present without altering its mode of existence. The 
past is abeady there; its factual content fixed, and not open to choice. 
The present moment is not yet there to be forgotten or taken over. 
It is stiU indeterrninate and open to choice.138 
My past is not something over and done with. It is that which 
I have been so long as I am. It is unfinished because it never was aU 
there. The future is more than a not-yet-now that wUl be, which would 
seem to imply that until then it is nothing. But even now I am this future 
which stretches ahead of me in the mode of possibUity. It is what deter­
mines the meaning of my existence, and from whose vantage point 
I interpret the past and guide the present in action. The three modes 
of existence temporalize themselves each with respect to the other 
and each in its own way. 1 3 9 
136 wid. Emphasis in original. Again we have, in WiId's words, what may be taken 
as an exceUent summary statement of ColUngwood's explanation of history as a con­
crete universal constituted by'a scale of forms in an overiap of classes. 
1 3 7 This lazy and irresolute attitude seems to correspond with CoUingwood's iden­
tification of 'reaUst' thought with low-grade and unscientific, inertial thinking. See 
his Essey on Metaphysics, p. 34. See also above. Chapter 5, p. 169. 
1 3 8 John WUd, op. cit., p. 108. Emphasis in original. 
139 Brid., pp. 108-109. Luigi Sturzo, in his lnnerLaws ofSociety, trans. Barbara Barday 
Carter, New York, P. J. Kenedy & Sons, 1944, p. xxv, says: "The human present. . . 
is not something static and definitive; it is, on the contrary, dynamic. It projects itseU 
into the future, which presses on to become present and lose itseU in the past. The 
dynamism towards the future in human process transktes itseU into finaUsm, whUe the 
activity that in reaUzing the present loses itseU in the past translates itseU into causaUty. 
The past is the moment of causaUties, the future that of purpose, whUe the present is 
the reaUty of existence. Past and future do not exist in themselves, but in the present, 
that is, in real human existence, which is in fact a continuous succession of presents." 

382 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
History is usuaUy referred to as a succession of events in the past, 
the role of the past being regarded as so predominant as to define 
history as the study of the past. It is often thought of as a great stream 
flowing down from the past through the present to the future. Under 
the influence of naturalistic thinking the past is thought of as a fixed 
entity on whose sure basis we must buUd the future. 1 4 0 
But this image of the stream is inaccurate, since at any designated 
moment the whole stream exists with aU its parts from beginning to 
end. But men are not in a stream of history; they are their history. 
Social man, like individual man, exists with these modalities of past, 
" present and future, no single one existing without the essential im-
pUcation of the others. Social man, Uke individual man, is always ahead 
of himseU. But U he is not to remain lost in mere possibUities, for their 
realization he must appropriate his factual past and put it to work 
in present action directed towards the realization of future projects. 1 4 1 
From the point of view of the seU<onstituting consciousness, therefore, 
the present is together an active appropriation of the past and at the 
same time an active construction of the as yet unreaUzed but reaUzable 
future. 
Thus appears the concern for the historic past; it is not something 
dead and gone but something stUl with us. It is what we (who are 
now) have been. The past is not aU gone because it never was all there 
in the first phce. It never occurred as an event but as something ahead 
of itseU in its (own) future. 1 4 2 
It is impossible, therefore, to understand a historic fact without 
understanding its future. PossibUity is at the very heart of human his­
tory as the guiding centre of human care. So the past which is the 
object of human history is a past having a human future, a past whose 
fuifUment in reaUty is to be found in a future of its own. 1 4 3 
The stream-image is defective because its past, present and future 
parts are aU in the same mode of being, namely 'being-there,' or as 
'events.' A historicaUy past event was not a floating futurity, it also 
had ifs own past and its own future in the Ught of which that past was 
reappropriated in acts of seU-deterrnining choice. Thus, the past, as 
1 4 0 See John Wüd, op. cit., pp. 110-111. 
1 4 1 See ibid., p. 111. This is more or less what I understand CoUingwood to mean 
when he says that questions, the cutting edge of the mind, determinative of future 
possibUities, are not the pure form of questioning, but are formed out of a preexist­
ing, that is, past, body of fact. See his Speculum Mentis, pp. 78-79. See ako Chapter 
3, above, pp. 66-68. 
1 4 2 See J. WUd, op. cit., pp. 111-112. 
1 4 3 See Md., pp. 112-113. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
383 
known historicaUy, can disclose to us its own possibUities (in the light 
of what was future for it), some of these which became reaUties. Insight 
is required to resolve these possibUities now buried in the mists of 
ambiguity. The unity of history is not a completed fact aheady there 
waiting just to be accepted; it is a struggle to be won and to be main-
tamed against the threat of being lost again. 1 4 4 
Thus men, their being in the world, and the world in which they 
are, are aU historical. The things which go to make up the world were 
not once aU there in a certain form; they have their history, so that 
the things we now have are dUferent. The world itseU, in which men 
and things are said to be, was never fixedly aU there; it was always 
temporalizing itseU by actively endowing itseU with the reaUzation 
of future projects based on past achievements. 1 4 5 
It is the essential possibUities open to man which give unity to 
history. Wüd thus states the task of the professional historian: 
He is studying the being of man. His duty is to darify such 
insights as we already possess, and to show how those real possi­
bUities have been won or lost in the past. By helping us to under­
stand more dearly those that stffl remain to us, he is participating 
in the actual process of history. This understanding is the most 
primordial part of history. Without the relating of real possibUity 
to brute fact, there would be no process of history. In this sense, 
the science of 'history' is history itseU, and the single name is not 
only appropriate but required.146 
It is thus in the mind of the historian, or rather in the mind of 
man as he is a historian, that past and future are integrated in an intel-
Ugible present, which is thereby understandable. As both CoUingwood 
and Marrou insist, man the historian is one with his history and can­
not be intelligibly separated therefrom. 
But our concern is mairüy with the logic of this historical being, 
specUicaUy with that logic as it is a logic of questioning. Ernst Cassirer 
has given considerable thought to the logic of the properly human 
world, induding its history, and what he has to say is highly rele­
vant to the evaluation of CoUingwood's position on the interrogative 
logic proper to history. We now turn to consider Cassirer's account 
of the logical ordering of the human, cultural, moral and historical 
world. Here the optic is epistemo-logical, that is, the ordering of the 
»** See ibid., p. 113. 
1 4 5 See ibid., p. 114. 
» * m 

384 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
phenomenal multiplicity into a recognizably inteUigible unity of uni­
versality. 
E. The Logos of the Physical Natural Order 
and of the Spiritual Moral Order 
Ernst Cassirer points out that from the awakening of critical 
thought, two meaningful spheres of order and inteUigibUity confronted 
man. There is the world of nature, which was most likely the first 
to be brought from chaos to ordered cosmos by the science of astron­
omy. But more intimate to man is his own human world, the world 
* of custom, culture, civUization and morality. Primitive mythology 
explained both orders as gifts of the gods or superior beings. Even 
the tools produced by his own technology, including his inteUectual 
tools, speech and writing, were attributed to the gods as gUts to man. 
Language, for example, was regarded by the Egyptians as a gift of 
the moon-god Thoth. 1 4 7 
Speaking of the mythico-theological climate of the priesthood of 
Memphis on the eve of the accession of Akhnaton to the throne of 
Egypt, James Breasted 1 4 8 has the following to say: 
Ptah had been from the remotest ages the god of the architect 
and craftsman, to whom he communicated plans and designs for 
architectural works and the products of the industrial arts. Contem­
plating this god, the Memphite priest, little used as his mind was 
to abstractions, found a tangible channel, moving along which he 
gained a rational, and with certain limitations, a phUosophical con­
ception of the world. The workshop of the Memphite temple, where, 
under Ptah's guidance, were wrought the splendid statues, uten­
sUs and offerings for the temple, expands into a world, and Ptah, 
its lord, grows into the master-workman of the universal workshop. 
As he furnishes aU designs to the architect and craftsman, so now 
he does the same for aU men in aU that they do; he becomes the 
supreme mind; he is mind and aU things proceed from him. 
With the awakening of critical thought questioning the world of 
experience, both natural and human, man sought to explain such expe­
rience in terms of some recognizable unity in the phenomenal multi-
pUcdty. With this need to reduce the privately experienced phenomenal 
multipUcity to some commonly accessible rationale as principle of unity 
of order, logic in its widest sense is born. 
1 4 7 Ernst Cassirer, The Logic of the Humanities, pp. 40-44. 
1 4 8 See his A Hütory of Egypt, New York, Scribner's, 1959, (first pub. 1905), pp. 
356-357. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
385 
The Ionians . . . are not . . . satisfied with mere knowledge of 
the "what"; they also ask for the "how" and the "why". . . . Only 
thought can give us the answer: for in it, and in it alone, is man freed 
of the Umitations of his own individuality. He no longer pursues 
his "subjective understanding," but comprehends one that is uni­
versal and divine. A universallaw.. . replaces . .. "private insight." 
It is by so doing that man, according to Heracktus, first frees himself 
from the mythical world of dream(s) and from the narrow and 
Umited world of sense perception. For just this is the character of 
being awake and of awakened being—that individuals possess a 
common world, whereas in dream(s) each lives only in his own 
world and remains mired and imprisoned in it. 1 4 9 
This ideal of bringing the world of experience under a universal 
reason, according to Cassirer, was unable to live harmoniously with 
the Christian revelation during the Middle Ages. 
The attempt to bring the logos-concept and the Johannine gospel 
under one denominator .. . will always remain abortive. For within 
these two the manner of mediation between individual and univer­
sal, finite and infinite, man and God, is radicaUy dUferent.150 
Descartes sought to universaUze experience in a world urufied by 
the mathematical ideal of inteUigibUity. 
This fundamental idea [of a unUied world and umfied knowl­
edge thereof] of modern (scientific) research found its decisive 
phUosophical legitimation in Descartes' concept of mathesis univer­
salis. The cosmos of universal mathematics, the cosmos of order and 
measure, comprehends and exhausts aU knowledge. In itseU it is 
completely autonomous; it requires no support and could recognize 
none, other than that which it finds within itseU. Now, for the first 
time, reason comprehends the whole of being in its clear and distinct 
ideas, and now, for the first time, it is able to penetrate and dom­
inate this whole by means of its own powers.151 
Cassirer says that "what is decisive in Descartes' system of meta­
physics is his original conception of a single all-inclusive method of 
knowledge." 1 5 2 But the duaHsm of (spiritual and material) substances 
qualUies and limits the ideal of the Cartesian monistic method. The 
world of spirit and the world of nature retained their radical exclu­
sive duaUsm. But, with Grotius, for whom there is a thorough analogy 
between knowledge of law and of mathematics, and Spinoza, for 
1 4 9 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 46. Emphasis in original. 
150 Md., p. 47. But see Sam Keen, Apologyfor Wonder, New York, Harper and Row, 
1961, p. 17, for an opposite opinion on this. 
1 5 1 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 49. Emphasis in original. 
1 5 2 Md. 

386 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
whom God is the one substance having two manifestations, "the 
human spirit was to cease to be a 'state within a state'; it was to be 
known by the same principles, and the same lawfumess was to under­
lie it that underlies nature." 1 5 3 Consequently, "Spinoza creates a new 
form of ethics . . . by taking geometry as its pattern. . . . " 1 5 4 Radical 
unification of thought and methodology is now achieved. 
Here, for the first time, the sphere (of knowledge) appears to 
be complete; the circle of mathematical thought has been able to en-
^ compass, with the same method, the world of matter and the world 
of the soul, the being of nature and the being of history. 1 5 5 
But the unification of the outer, physical and inner, spiritual, moral 
world under the one same mathesis universalis was short-lived. Implicit­
ly, Descartes' English contemporary, Thomas Hobbes, and expUcitly 
the Italian, Vico, a century later, effected a Copernican revolution that 
was to subordinate the mathematical to the cultural in the paradigm 
position of universalizer. According to Hobbes, the meaning of the 
natural world is confined to the propositions which we are able to 
form in its regard. These propositions are inteUigible to us because 
we are their authors. God alone knows the natural world itseU, since 
he alone is its maker. Vico elevates this attitude into the status of a 
fundamental principle: Verum = Factum. 1 5 6 According to Vico, math­
ematics, as Descartes rightly says, gives clear and distinct knowledge. 
But this is so, says Vico, only because mathematical entities are the 
products of our own thought. Since we are their authors, we are able 
to have comprehensive knowledge of them. But mathematics is con­
fined to the sphere of concept-formation, and so remains in the ideal. 
It is only in the works of civUization that man has knowledge of an 
object which is both penetrated conceptuaUy and concretely real. These 
objects are not only conceivable but are also fully determinate, con­
cretely individual and historicaUy existential. 1 5 7 
1 5 3 Jbid., p. 51. 
154 
Ш. 
155 Tbid., pp. 51-52. 
1 5 6 See Bruce MazUsh, The Riddle of History, New York, Harper and Row, 1966, 
pp. 23-28. See also CoUingwood's translation of Croce's The Philosophy ofGiambattista 
Vico, New York, RusseU and RusseU Inc., 1964, especiaUy pp. 24-29. See also, above, 
Chapter 1, p. 15 et seq., for CoUingwood's attitude to mathematics and deductive 
inference. The inferential compulsion in mathematical, deductive reasoning is a com­
pulsion which the mathematician imposes on himseU in virtue of the commitment 
to the original assumptions which he makes in order to solve the problem to hand. 
1 5 7 E. Cassirer, op. cit., pp. 52-53. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
387 
From then onwards, thinkers such as Herder looked to man's cul­
tural products as the proper objects of man's knowledge. 
[In] Herder's work [in] the philosophy of language, the theory 
of art, and the philosophy of history . . . we are able to study . . . 
the rise and ultimate breakthrough of a new form of knowledge, 
which . . . is not to be abstracted from its matter, but which becomes 
manifest only in the free shaping of this matter and in its spiritual 
domination and penetration.158 
But, since the focal point of our inquiry is the logic of history, we 
must ask what is the logos, the one in the multiple, which enables 
us to deal rationaUy with such phenomena. The unity behind, or rather 
within, aU such diversity, its principle of intelligibility and meaning-
fulness, is the unity of man. The infinite varieties of human manUesta-
tions in aU their forms are unUied inasmuch as they are the mamfes-
tations of man, of the human spirit. 
. . . whatever man is required to perform must spring from the 
condensation and unbroken unity of aU his powers; aU that is iso­
lated is evü. 1 5 9 
This is the 'unity in diversity' which is the principle of unity, and 
therefore of intelUgibility, in the human sciences and in history. It is 
Marrou's "same in the other which . . . presupposes a broad basis 
of fraternal communion between the subject and the object, between 
the historian and document." 1 6 0 Speaking of the Ancient Egyptians, 
Barbara Mertz 1 6 1 weU expresses this same-in-other, this unity in 
diversity, as foUows: 
How richly grotesque—how bizarre—was the spiritual world 
which these long-dead aliens envisaged. And then we come upon 
a single sentence, or an isolated phrase, and the mask of ceremonial 
vanishes to expose the familiar poignancy, of man's quest for 
immortality, with aU its uncertainty and its aching desire. "No one 
has returned from thence to teU us how they fare." The lament for 
a dead child, the demand for justice, the lover's yearning for his 
158 lbid., p. 54. Italics deleted. Here is the seed of Hegel's later dialectical unity 
of form and content. 
1 5 9 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 55. This new outlook, which sees isolation of what springs 
from the unbroken unity of aU of man's powers as evU, is most likely the source of 
CoUingwood's notion of evil as outlined in Chapter 4, above, p. 112, in which the 
same act may be regarded as good or evil according as it is integrative of all that 
preceded it, or, contrarUy, as yet stUl divided away from the fuUUlment it wiU achieve 
at a higher level on a scale of forms. 
1 6 0 H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning ofHistory, p. 104. 
1 6 1 See her Temples, Tombs and Hieroglyphs, New York, Howard McCann, 1964, 
p. 338. 

388 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
beloved—before our recognition of the universality of human 
emotion, time and distance shrink, the barriers of language, color, 
and nationality go down; we look into the mind of a man three 
millenia dead and caU him "brother." 
Poetry, "the mother tongue of the human race" according to Vico 
and Hamann, is the living expression of man's concrete unity. 
It is in poetry that he seeks to realize and make live again that 
originaVunity which, in the beginnings of historical language and 
myth, had fashioned history and poetry into a genuine totaUty, into 
an unpartitioned whole. 1 6 2 
"But the penetration of our knowledge into the human products 
of language, art, mythand history is impeded so long as physical 
objects remain the only goal of inquiry. As long as the ideals of natural 
science monopolize the methods of inquiry "this question is not only 
unsolved, but cannot even be stated in its true and fuU sense." 1 6 3 
Cassirer insists that we must come to recognize that universal natural 
science and the physical cosmos are only an instance of a much more 
general inquiry which is now more and more supplanting the pan-
mathematical ideal which has dominated phUosophical thought since 
Descartes.164 Cassirer concludes that the idea of a cosmos and universal 
order is not restricted to the mathematical and physico-astronomical 
world. The lawfulness of natural phenomena, of the world of matter, 
is not the exclusive type of order and intelligibUity. Wherever unity 
in diversity is recognized there is order and inteUigibUity. 
We encounter the idea of a cosmos, the idea of a thoroughgoing 
order wherever a determinate and untfied lawful structure becomes 
apparent within multiplicity and diversity. This "holding good" of 
such lawful structure—this, in the fullest sense of the term, is the 
most general manifestation of what we mean by "objectivity." 1 6 5 
But what is meant by a 'cosmos' in this wider and all-embracing 
sense? " A 'cosmos', an objective order and deterrnination," Cassirer 
informs us, "is present wherever individual persons relate themselves 
to and participate in a common w o r l d . " 1 6 6 
1 6 2 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 55. What is said here about poetry seems to be much 
the same as Collingwood says about art generaUy, that it is an expression of man as 
a whole, not of one or several of his faculties. The central role accorded here to lan­
guage agrees with ColUngwood's regarding linguistic activity as the basic form of art. 
1 6 3 Ш., 
p. 57. 
1 6 4 See ibid. 
165 Jbid. 
166 nrid., pp. 57-58. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
389 
Now, where, first, do we find this breaking free of the bonds of 
isolated individuaHty so that a shared, pubUc world is clearly observed? 
Cassirer says that this is found in the phenomenon of speech. The 
word is an intended meaning which exists only as constructed within a 
whole of communication in which the word passes from one person to 
another, fusing both into one living dialogue. A dialogue, therefore, is 
a living unity in diversity which exists as a form estabUshed by the very 
activity itself oflanguage and speech. 1 6 7 
. . . understanding through linguistic communication becomes 
for Herder, as it had been for Heraditus, the genuine and typical 
expression of our understanding of the world. Logos creates the bond 
between the individual and the whole; it gives assurance to the in­
dividual that, instead of being enclosed within the waywardness 
of his own ego . . . he is capable of a universal existence. . . . 1 6 8 
The rationality of physical science is a derivative of the more fun­
damental "rationality invested in language and expressed in its con­
cepts," from which "the path points to the rationaHty of science." 1 6 9 
Language is not from itseÜ" able to generate science, yet it is an in­
dispensable stage on the way thereto. Language "constitutes the only 
medium in which the knowledge of things can arise and progressive­
ly develop." 1 7 0 
The fundamental unity in diversity in human affairs is established 
by the act of rwming. This harks back to Hobbes, as CoUingwood notes. 
FoUowing Hobbes, CoUingwood says: "From being an indispensable 
means to the dUfusion of knowledge, language has become the pre­
condition and foundation of knowledge, so far as knowledge is 
science." 1 7 1 Thus, "man becomes capable of reason because he has 
invented speech." 1 7 2 Cassirer says that the act of naming is the indis­
pensable first step and prerequired condition of the determinative act 
which constitutes the scientific task. He insists, consequently, that 
a theory of language is a necessary component in the development 
of epistemology. 1 7 3 
167 Md., p. 58. Γη Bosanquet's tenninology, it is an "active form of totaUty." See 
above, Chapter 4, p. 144. 
1 6 8 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 58. 
1 6» fti'd. 
1 7 0 Md. 
1 7 1 R. G. CoUingwood, The New Leviathan, p. 44, par. 6.47. 
172 Tbid., p. 45, par. 6.53. 
1 7 3 See E. Cassirer, The Logic ofthe Humanities, p. 58. Compare CoUingwood, The 
Principles ofArt, pp. 264-266. A. Brunner, in his La Connaissance humaine, Paris, Aubier, 
(1943?), in regard to "Le probleme de la connaissance; comment se pose-t-U?" (p. 7), 

390 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Cassirer, Hke Collingwood, 1 7 4 insists on the creative character of 
language. It is never a simple copy, registering only the contents and 
relations presented to us immediately by sensation. As creative, 
language is a self-actualizing activity of the rnind. 
. . . language is a determinate and fundamental tendency of the 
mind's activity—an ensemble of psychological and inteUectual acts; 
and it is in these acts that a new aspect of reaUty—the actuality of 
things—first discloses itseU to us. 1 7 5 
- Cassirer's profound insights find striking confirmation in Luis 
w Alonso Schökel's consideration of language in the context of Biblical 
interpretation. Schökel attacks the naive realism of a positivistic atti­
tude to language in underscoring the formative role that language has 
on our experience of reality. 
. . . any explanation in terms of language necessarily involves 
a transformation of reaUty. Reality and our experience of it are 
stylized and expressed through the medium of language. Thus real­
ity and experience are not deformed, but rather conformed through 
language. Language is a power which teaches us to understand and 
to order the world as weU as to shape our own experiences. The 
great writers, whUe emiching the instrumentaUty of language, have 
likewise enriched our capacity for ordered perception. For the most 
part, therefore, the naive reaUsm of language can no longer be main­
tained. 1 7 6 
How the external, natural world is humanized in perception and 
given a distinctive meaning due to being humanly perceived is thus 
explained: 
The external world confronts man and longs to be discovered. 
When man perceives this world, he humanizes it. This does not 
mean that man deforms or falsUies the world, but that their mutual 
relationship is actuated in a moment of plenitude, since knowing is 
after examining various traditional positions regarding "le point de depart de la 
criteriologie" (p. 21, pp. 7-17), says: "Nous prendrons notre point de depart dans 
un ph6nomene concret, reel, connu de tous les hommes, et necessairement impUque' 
dans la recherche m§me qui nous occupe.. . . Le phenomene qui nous parait fournir, 
et seul fournir un point de dέpart, est le dialogue. La premiere raison de ce choix est 
p^cis6ment le fait que le langage est l'instrument indispensable de la vie intellec-
tuelle et spiritueUe de l'homme. Toute philosophie se constitue par l'intermediaire 
du langage.. . . En outre, le langage est un fait teUement evident que celui qui voudrait 
le nier, ne pourrait le faire qu'en l'employant, en s'infligeant par consequent un demen­
ti par son affirmation mSme" (pp. 22-23). 
1 7 4 See ColUngwood's The Principles ofArt, pp. 128-131; p. 275. 
1 7 5 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 59. 
1 7 6 Luis Alonso Schökel, Understanding Biblical Research, Montreal, Palm Publish­
ers, 1963, p. 94. 

Logic, (Questioning and History 
391 
the perfection of man and being known is the perfection of the 
external universe. The dawn which a man contemplates in a moment 
of sorrow is not the same dawn which is seen by a cow when it 
beUows toward fhe sky. Nor is the moon of which the romantic poet 
sings the same as the moon which prompts the dogs to bark during 
the night. Thus the world is humanized by our hving encounters 
with it, and aU the more so according to the intensity which we bring 
to this experience.177 
This humanization of the world, akeady begun at the level of per­
ception, is continued at the level of Unguistic expression into the inter­
pretative sphere. 
These Uving experiences, however, possess a quaUty of totaUty 
or completeness and are presented to us as a formless or only haU-
formed continuum. It is the specific function of language to convert 
this continuum into discrete parts by applying a system of vocabu­
lary, morphology, and syntax, m this way the experience is given 
a new and human form. This is the second stage of transformation 
or interpretation. It does not deform the things of the external uni­
verse, but rather gives them a human dimension.178 
The social, kiterpersonal dimension essential to language contri­
butes to the humanization and meaningful interpretation of human 
experience. 
Further, the Unguistic form by which I order my experience also 
has a social function, namely to communicate my interior Ufe to other 
men, and thus to bring about a strictly personal encounter which 
is altogether superior to the mere knowledge of objects. This social 
and interpersonal orientation of language is an additional interpre­
tative factor, one which raises language to all the grandeur of the 
human. 1 7 9 
Schökel notes the seriousness with which the Biblical account of 
man's origin treats man's activity of naming the thingsabout him. 
It has something of the quality of God's creative activity exercised 
simply by "caUing" (naming) a thing into being. 
In the Garden of Paradise, man alone was able to give names 
to the animals. By doing this, he brought the human order into 
existence, an order over which he was lord and master. In this he 
resembled God, who went about giving names to His creatures, thus 
caUing them into existence. Just as man is created in the image and 
177 wid. Emphasis in original. Schökel here, and Cassirer later (see this chapter, 
below, pp. 407408) note that the stabUizing of the Heraditean flux is akeady at work 
in perception. 
178 Md,, p. 95. 
17» Rnd. 

392 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
likeness of God, so he creates the world of language according to 
his own image and likeness.180 
The past comes down to us only as transformed by and into 
language but in such a way that the result is faithful to objective reality. 
All language, in fact, consists in a transformation. The occur­
rences of the past come down to us transformed into Unguistic terms, 
possessing a new, intermediate reaUty which faithfuUy, though inad­
equately, represents the objective reality. One must have this fun-
^ damental aspect of language as his point of departure if he is to go 
on in his study to the forms of literary language.181 
Ένβη language itself, in metaphor, is subjected to its own trans­
formative, meaning-giving, creative activity. 
In Uterary language there is also another type of common 
transformation which can affect a word or group of words—the meta­
phor, the image, and the allegory. Not only is reality or experience 
transformed through linguistic expression, but even language itself 
can undergo a transformation.182 
Cassirer says that language-awareness brings with it an awaken­
ing to a Ufe of 'meanings.' These meanings, as distinct from mere 
impulsive reactions, are something repeatable and recurring, not re­
stricted to the momentary here and now but remaining "one-and-
the-same in countless lUe-moments and in the appropriation and use 
of countless other persons," 1 8 3 that is, constituting a true universal­
ity and principle of inteUigibUity. 
These two fundamentaUy diverse world-views, that of the natural 
world and that of the moral and cultural world, with their correspond­
ing diversities of meaning and explanation, have a common root in 
primary perception. To understand more clearly the nature of these 
two dUferent spheres of meaning it is necessary to examine the struc­
ture of primary perception inasmuch as this concretely embodies 
within itself a double rationale which founds and gives rise to these 
two dUferent ways of meaningfully interpreting experience. The 
analysis is furthermore decisive for the understanding of the nature 
of cuUural phenomena, since it articulates very clearly the nature of 
cultural entities and how they arise through the creative activity of 
expression-perception, of which language is the primary instance. The 
1 8 0 Ibid., pp. 95-96. 
1 8 1 Tbid., p. 96. 
1 8 2 Tbid., p. 97. 
1 8 3 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 60. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
393 
analysis greatly Uluminates CoUingwood's position on the primacy 
of art and language in properly human activity. The diversUication 
and complexity buUt up by personal, creative, expressive activity wUl 
be seen to realize the characteristics of what in Chapter 4, above, was 
said of the concrete universal. 
F. Expression-Perception and Thing-Perception 
The universality whereby particular phenomena are meaningful 
and inteUigible is not to be considered in isolation from its particu­
lars. "Concepts without percepts are empty," and "the logical order 
must be tied throughout to the perceptual order." 1 8 4 Consequently, 
"analysis of the form of concepts as such is not capable of bringing 
complete clarity to what specUicaUy cUstinguishes the humanities from 
natural science." 1 8 5 Cassirer resorts to a pre-logical phenomenology 
of perception to contribute to the solution of this problem. 1 8 6 
Primitive perception is 'two-faced,' fusing together two irreducibly 
distinct factors. Every perceptive act is that of a perceiving subject and 
that of a perceived object. 1 8 7 Consequently, the world encountered 
in perceptual experience is a " t h i n g " or " i t " world on the one hand, 
and an " I " or a " y o u , " that is, a person-world, on the other hand. 
A n " i t " is something totally unlike "ourselves," totally alien, totaUy 
"the other," in no way "a seU." A " y o u " is another that is "not totaUy 
other," for it is perceived as "another seU."* 8 8 
These two opposite characteristics, akeady apparent in primary 
perception, provide the foundation for two opposite dkections in 
which the percipient subject can go in meaningfuUy elaborating and 
explicitating that original perceptual experience. U elaborated mean­
ing is taken from the subjective side of perception then we are deal-
mg with expression-perception or perception of expression. Myth mak­
ing is explanation exclusively in terms of expression perception. Thus, 
thunder and lightning as "meaning" that this or that god is angry 
is an explanation of this phenomenon in terms of personal 
expression-factors. The thunder and lightning are "expressions" of 
a personal disposition, that of anger. Theoretical explanation, on the 
other hand, such as is characteristic of science (and of phUosophy 
inasmuch as it is like science) explains in terms of "objective," imper-
1 8 4 Rnd., pp. 64-65. 
185 Oid., p. 93. 
1 8 6 See ibid., p. 93 and p. 118. 
1 8 7 See tbid., p. 93. 
188 
Md. 

394 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
sonal, " t h i n g " factors; it seeks not orüy "to replace mythical explana­
tions but to battle with and attack the whole mythical interpretation 
of reality at its root . . . which is nothing other than the perception 
of expression." 1 8 9 The mythical world view gives primacy to expres­
sion-perception over " t h i n g " perception. The scientific world view 
does just the opposite. The mythical world view recognizes no fixed 
world of cause, which, however, is the very goal of aU theoretical 
knowledge. Every feature of the experienced world can metamorphose 
aJ any time. In true Heraclitean fashion, anything can give way to 
anything else. The world, both natural and human, is the expression 
of an emotion of the moment, the love or anger of a man or a god. 
The phenomenal world is thus a "face" which is the bearer of emotive 
expressions, and the emotion expressed is the explanation of the 
phenomenon. 
For [myth], the world can assume a new face at any moment; 
for it is the emotion of the moment which determines this facial 
expression. In love and hate, in hope and fear, in joy and terror the 
features of reality are transformed. Any one of these emotions can 
give rise to a God-of-the-moment in a new mythical configuration.190 
The whole world of events, the natural as weU as the human, is 
thus reduced, in meaning and explanation, to a god, a superman, or 
a man. Anthropomorphism interprets the happenings of nature as 
expressions of wffl, of emotions, of loves and hates, such as we have 
subjective and personal experience of them in ourselves. For myth, 
then, the phenomenal world is a face, or series of faces, which 
manUests the personal dispositions of their bearer. 1 9 1 
Both science and phUosophy coUaborate in an active "endeavour 
to stop up the source from which myth forever takes its nourishment, 
by disputing every claim of the perception of expression." 1 9 2 In 
opposing the mythical approach science proposes that aU expression 
qualities in which we recognize such characteristics as the trustworthy, 
the friendly or the fearful, be replaced by pure sense qualities, such 
as colors, tones and suchlike. Even these are further reduced as 
secondary properties based on more primary properties whose essen­
tial feature is mathematical, that is, pure quantitative determination. 
189 md., p. 94. 
1 9 0 Rnd., p. 95. 
1 9 1 It is a "face," not a "mask," for it expressively reveals the subject and the subjec­
tive state, whereas a mask hides and functions more as a "thing" interposed between 
the bearer and external observer. 
1 9 2 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 95. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
395 
This quantitative feature is aU that remains of reality when the ideal 
of objectivity as sought by physics is achieved. 1 9 3 
Within the framework of this ideal of physics, not only proofs for 
the existence of other selves but also the question of their existence 
is evacuated of aU meaning. The very question itseU is mythical and 
so not worthy of serious consideration. 1 9 4 
The result is that the only language recognized to be subjectively 
meaningful is that of physics, whose meaning would be universaUy 
translatable (into numerical pomter-reacUngs—recaU Eddington's scien­
tUic table) 1 9 5 and would therefore be exactly the same unvariably for 
aU (observing) subjects. The very meaning of language itseU would 
be reduced to its physical characteristics, to phonetics and the 
physiology of sound. AU 'meaningful expression,' as a manUestation 
or revelation of the psyche, the seU, reveaUng its concerns, its loves 
and fears, would be put out of play. 1 9 6 The scientUic study of the 
domains of art, reUgion and aU other cultural domains would fare like­
wise. They could not be dealt with as expressions of meaning. The 
holy could not be distinguished from the profane, nor the beautiful 
from the ugly, nor the morally approvable from the morally reproba-
tory. 
The Ulegitimacy of this physicaUst and mathematicist reduction 
is that it renders impotent before it is asked the very vital question 
"what do these activities (i.e., Unguistic, artistic, reUgious activities) 
mean?" for to ask this question is to ask what mental representation 
or thought or feeUng these phenomena express and manUest. 1 9 7 
Cassirer concedes that physicaUsm does make one important con­
tribution to the problem of understanding cultural phenomena, namely 
that of highlighting the important truth "that knowledge of physical 
things constitutes the foundation and substratum for every other con­
struction of this k i n d . " 1 9 8 In the cultural world, the world of expres­
sion-meaning, "there is no purely 'ideal entity.' . . . The ideal exists 
only insofar as it presents itseU sensuously and materially in some 
manner and embodies itseU in this presentation." 1 9 9 ReUgious, linguis-
1 9 3 See ibid. Correlate with CoUingwood's explanation of deductive science in his 
Speculum Mentis, pp. 164-169. See also, above, Chapter 4, pp. 76-82. 
1 9 4 See E. Cassirer, op. cit., pp. 95-96. 
1 9 5 See Sir A. S. Eddington, The Nature ofthe Physical World, London, J. M. Dent 
& Sons, 1935, pp. 5-6. 
1 9 6 See E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 96. 
1 9 7 See ibid., pp. 96-97. 
1 9 3 Tbid., p. 98. 
1 9 9 Md. 

396 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
tic and artistic meaning can be grasped only inasmuch as their em­
bodiment in tokens, memorials, etc., constitutes the locus in which 
we come to know their meaning. 
The cultural and historical object, a parchment, a stone monu­
ment, etc., is located in space and time and it comes to be and passes 
away just as does any physical object. But this physical object is recog­
nized to have a new function other than any which is describable in 
terms of mere physical deterrninants. Something else besides the 
physical object emerges, and "what emerges is a 'meaning' which 
isnot absorbed by what is merely physical, but is embodied upon 
and,within i t . " 2 0 0 
This 'meaning'-factor which arises is, according to Cassirer, what 
is common to that area and to its content which we recognize as "cul­
tural." 2 0 1 Cassirer fflustrates this by pomting out that a RaphaeUc paint­
ing of Plato and Aristotle includes the physical reality, such as colors, 
etc., through which we see the objective presentation, Plato and Aristot­
le in conversation. But, in addition to this objective presentation, there 
is also the subjective presentation of Raphael himself. Inasmuch as that 
painting is "a w o r k " of Raphael it is an "expression" of himseU, an 
expressive "face" whereby he is placed in our presence. Any genu­
ine " w o r k , " Cassirer says, embodies aU these three characteristics, 
namely, a certain physical thereness, an object-presentation, and the 
evidence of a unique personality. Such a " w o r k " is more than merely 
a "result," and belongs not only to the natural world but also to the 
world of culture. 2 0 2 
Because of its ideal of clarity and fear of becoming lost in obscur­
ity, Positivism does not admit those three dimensions. Cassirer agrees 
with Positivism in that when we compare expression-perception with 
thmg-perception, expression-perception does seem to have an inherent 
extraordinary dUficulty and inconceivabUity. But he points out that 
this dUficulty and inconceivabUity does not exist for the naive world 
2°° wid. 
2 0 1 See ibid. 
2 0 2 See ibid., p. 99 and pp. 146-158. H.-I. Marrou, in his The Meaning ofHistory, 
p. 115, speaking of the Christian gospels, says that they "are not direct testimony 
concerning the Hfe of Christ, but rather a primary document of incomparable value 
regarding the primitive Christian community. We can only approach Jesus through 
the image of hlmseU that was formed by his disciples . . . " This means, in terms of 
what Cassirer has explained above, that the Christian gospels, as 'works' or 'expres­
sions' of the first disciples of Christ, manifest immediately to us the beliefs of these 
first Christians, as a facial expression immediately manifests joy or sorrow. From these 
immediately manifested convictions we are led, mediately, to the person and teach­
ings of Christ. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
397 
view. 2 0 3 Expression-perception is the noetic daily bread of everyday 
Uving, of our knowledge of the familiar world. No question of proofs 
for the existence of other selves even suggests itself and no theore­
tical arguments can shake it in its conviction. But the scandal Kant 
sought to remove "of being forced to accept the existence of external 
things merely on faith . . . becomes aU the more violent when we [re-
flexively] turn from the question of external things to that of other 
subjects." 2 0 4 But Cassirer maintains that the testimony of that reflec­
tion cannot be regarded as the sole authority in the area of the reaUy 
basic problems. Recourse must be had to sources of knowledge of a 
dUferent and more original kind. The process of substantiation must 
be grounded on something itseU not deductively demonstrable, but 
able only to be pointed out. Even Descartes' cogito, according to 
Cassirer, is no formal argument but a purely intuitive cognition. 2 0 5 
Phenomenological analysis does not substantiate the assumption 
that the entities immediately accessible to knowledge are determinate 
data, with the consequence that the sensuously given is alone capable 
of immediate experience, aU else, especiaUy spiritual existence, remain­
ing uncertain. Neither observation of function nor of genesis justifies 
granting to sense perception primacy over expression-perception. The 
genetic account of the development of consciousness, both in the indi­
vidual and in the species, shows that the supposed starting points 
of aU knowledge of reality, the so-called sense data, are rather late 
products, and are themselves results of lengthy processes of abstrac­
tion whereby they are extracted from the whole of human experience. 
From the functional point of view, unbiased psychological observa­
tion testifies to the fact that the first experiences of the chUd are expe­
riences of expression. The perception of things and thing qualities 
comes only later. 2 0 6 
It is to language primarily that Cassirer attributes the transition 
from expression-perception to thing-perception since he maintains that 
capacity for objective representation grows in direct ratio as we begin 
to give, and progress in giving, linguistic expression to our experi­
ence of the world. It is by this Unguistic expression that our experience 
of the world ceases to be merely a matter of passively received im­
pressions. 2 0 7 
2 0 3 See E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 99. 
2 М Ш., 
p. 100. 
2 0 5 See ibid., p. 101. 
2 M See ibid., pp. 101-102. 
2 0 7 See ibid., p. 102. Correlate with Collingwood's The New Leviathan, p. 42, par. 

398 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The theoretical world view, that of philosophy and science, did 
not begin by regarding the world as the sum total of merely physical 
things: "this is a terminus ad quem, not a terminus a quo—ап end, not 
a beginning." 2 0 8 For Plato and Aristotle, the soul is the principle of 
motion without which the world would come to a standstffl. Descartes 
for the first time gives us the notion of a strictly mathematical and 
mechanical universe. But this view is terminal, not initial, the pro­
duct of abstraction. Here the innate tendency of theoretical science 
and philosophy to suppress the personal factor has been fuUy 
achieved. 2 0 9 
Not only does it [natural science] seek increasingly to suppress 
aU that is "personal" it strives toward a conception of the world 
from which the "personal" has been elirninated [sic]. It achieves 
its true aim only by disregarding the world of seU and other.210 
Astronomy was probably the first to achieve this goal, and recent 
phUosophy has gone further in the same direction, demanding "the 
elUnination of 'occult' psychic quaUties, not only from astronomy and 
physics, but from aU natural events." 2 1 1 Even in biology the dominance 
of mechanism has ended with Ufe itseU banished not only from the 
organism but from organic nature. The organism is explained by the 
laws of mechanics, of pressure and impact without residue or quali­
fication. 2 1 2 
But the true starting point for the understanding of cultural, as 
distinct from natural, phenomena, Cassirer maintains, is thefunction-
al meaningfulness of "the self" as this is immediately manifest in the activ­
ity ofbmguage. "l" and " y o u " are never given as absolutes in themselves 
who would communicate by some process of action at a distance. 
" . . . the I and the you exist only in so far as they exist 'for each other,' 
only in so far as they stand in the functional relation of being reciprocal­
ly conditioned." 2 1 3 Strict naturaUsm attempts to explain the forms of 
language, art and reUgion as a simple sum-total of individual effects. 
For it, language is something agreed upon by encountering individuals. 
But there would be no agreement possible except in an akeady exist-
6.26: "To name the feeUng awakens . . . consciousness of it," and p. 43, par. 6.36: 
"The man who names his feeUng thereby immediately becomes conscious ofit." 
2 0 8 See E. Cassirer, op. tit., pp. 102-103. 
2 0 9 See ibid., p. 103. 
218 Ybia., pp. 103-104. 
2 1 1 Tbid., p. 104. 
2 1 2 See ibid. 
2 1 3 Tbid., p. 107. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
399 
ing medium of speech. Society, togetherness of individuals, could not 
arise from a contract, since a contract is the product of individuals already 
united in their agreement to execute such a contract. Metaphysical 
theories, on the other hand, would trace language and society back 
to supra-personal powers such as a world-spirit. But this is to aban­
don scientific explanation and faU back into myth, in which the cultural 
world is a kind of overworld working itseU out in the physical world 
and in the lives of human beings. A critical phUosophy of culture must 
steer a midway course, avoiding both of these extremes. 2 1 4 The true 
starting point is thus indicated: 
. . . tf we no longer begin with the "l" and the "you" as two 
substantiaUy separate entities, but locate them in the meeting point 
of that reciprocal transaction, which consummates itseU in speech 
or any other culture-form, our perplexities dissipate. In the begin­
ning is the act; always in the function of speech, in artistic creation, 
in the process of thought and inquiry there is expressed a specUic 
activity. And only in this activity do the "l" and the "you" exist 
with the possibUity of simultaneously distinguishing themselves 
from each other. They exist both within and next to each other as 
they preserve this unity within speech, thought and aU manner of 
artistic expression.215 
For Cassirer, then, the "l" and the " y o u " do not exist as auton­
omous, atomic units externaUy related to each other by the external 
mediation of language. They exist, as " I " and as "you", only inasmuch 
as they communicate in linguistic discourse, that is, inasmuch as 
linguistic discourse relates them mternaUy and essentiaUy. Language, 
that is, language operative in discourse, is not some third thing fall­
ing between the two communicants, but, together with them, consti­
tutes that concrete totality in which they are communicants. The Un­
guistic, dialogical situation is therefore a concrete whole in which the 
(multiple) participants are (no longer multiple, but) a concrete unity. 
So, language constitutes a concrete unity in diversity, a unity which 
demands the diversity of participants, and simultaneously a diver­
sity which demands that unity. The unity is meaningless without the 
diversity, and conversely, the diversity is meaningless without the 
unity. That is, we have here that concrete unity in diversity which 
is constitutive of the concrete universal, as was explained in Chapter 
4, above. 2 1 6 
2 1 4 See wid., p. 108. 
215 Md., p. 109. Emphasis in original. 
2 1 6 The point is perhaps weU made by saying that not only is language something 
in us, but it is equaUy true to say that we are in our language. "We live within the words 

400 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
However, a difficulty presents itseU at this point regarding Col­
lingwood's understanding of the unity in diversity in linguistic dis­
course. On the one hand he seems to insist on the primacy of in­
dividual autonomy and on the socially communicative function of 
language as being something secondary. This seems implied in the 
following: 
In its most elementary form, language is not addressed to any 
audience. A child's first utterances are so completely unaddressed 
that one cannot even describe them as addressed to the world at 
large or to itseU. The distinction between speaking to oneseU, speak­
ing to the world at large, and speaking to a particular person or 
group, is a later dUferentiation introduced into an original act which 
was simply the act of speaking.217 
On the other hand, in a succeeding passage, he seems to speak 
exactly in accordance with Cassirer's position. Thus, he says that "the 
chUd's discovery of itseU as a person is also its discovery of itself as 
a member of a world of persons," and "as persons, they construct 
a new set of relations between themselves, arising out of their con­
sciousness of themselves and one another; these are linguistic rela­
tions." 2 1 8 He then insists that my discovery of myseU as a person is 
the discovery that I can speak, and in speaking I both speak and hear 
myself speaking, and "since the discovery ofmyselfas a person is also 
the discovery of other persons around me, it is the discovery of speakers 
and hearers other than myself." 2 1 9 
Cassirer says that although it is recognizable that there is "expres­
sion of emotion" even in the animal world, this is passive and mere 
spontaneous reaction to environmental stimuli. But when we come 
to the sphere of human existence and human culture something new 
is encountered, for aU culture-forms are active expression-forms, not mere 
reactions, like blushing, frowning, or doubling of the fist. They are 
genuine actions as distinct from mere events which play themselves 
out in our bodies. They are energies through the exercise of which 
the cultural world of language, art and religion form themselves. In 
addition to their sheer physical presence, of which we are informed 
of language, the shapes of poetry and plastic art. . . . " Ernst Cassirer, op. cit., p. 143. 
Emphasis in original. See also this chapter, below, p. 409. 
2 1 7 R. G. CoUingwood, The Pnnciples ofArt, p. 247. 
2 1 8 Md., p. 248. 
219 Jbid. Emphasis added. See also J. de Finance, Esei' sur l'agir humain, Rome, 
Presses de l'Universite Gregorienne, 1962, pp. 177-178, for language as primarily 
directed towards another and only secondarUy directed towards oneseU. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
401 
by sense experience, there is something symbolic, that is, something 
'meant.' 2 2 0 
Just as there is passive expression in animal behaviour, so also 
there is passive speech which does not go beyond mere habit. True 
speech is never purely imitative but is also productive. It is only within 
this latent energy which becomes manifest in this productive func­
tion that the other energy caUed "thinking" is displayed. 2 2 1 
The true relationship between " I " and "you" has its being in 
the act of sharing a common universe of discourse. It is continual 
daUy engagement in this common language-world that gives rise 
to the "I-you" relationship.222 
The world of the " I " is never given as a finished, enduring, sub­
stantial entity, with words doing no more than transporting this given-
ness from one subject to another, the mere buUding of bridges be­
tween inner worlds of dUferent subjects. The true relation is quite 
otherwise. Cassirer explains as foUows: 
In speech and art the individuals not only share what they 
already possess; it is only by virtue of this sharing process in speech 
and art that individuals have attained what they possess.223 
This is observable in any Uving and meaningful conversation in 
which " i t is never simply a question of imparting information, but 
of statement and response." 2 2 4 Thus: 
In question and answer "l" and "you" must be distinguished, 
not only that they may understand each other, but even tf each is 
ever to know himseU. Here both factors are in continual interplay. 
The thought of one partner is kindled by that of another. And by 
virtue of this interaction each constructs for himseU a "shared world" 
of meaning within the medium of hnguage. Wherever this medium 
2 2 0 See E. Cassirer, The Logic of the Humanities, p. 110. This seems more or less 
the distinction CoUingwood makes (Principles of Art, pp. 228-238) between psychic 
expression and linguistic expression. See Appendix 1, below, pp. 467469. See also 
Alan Donagan, The Later Philosophy ofR. G. Collingwood, p. 114. 
2 2 1 See E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 112. 
222 Jbid. This citation and what immediately follows show that Cassirer is think­
ing in terms of what in Ch. 4 above was explained as a concrete universal. Whole 
and member-parts have their identity and meaning only in virtue of mutual impU-
cation and internal relation; whole mediates member-part, and simultaneously 
member-part mediates whole. See this chapter, above, p. 399. 
2 2 3 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 113. 
224 Void. Here Cassirer joins company with CoUingwood's fundamental thesis of 
question and answer as the motor drive of knowledge as an active, seU-determining 
evolution. 

402 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
fails us our own grasp becomes unsure and dubious. AU thought 
must prove itseU in language.225 
Language is therefore not merely an extemalization of ourselves but, 
Uke art, also a pathway to the realization of ourselves. Consciousness and 
knowledge of ourselves is first achieved by its mediation. Even in a 
monologue, a "conversation of the soul with itseU," the predominating 
function is division of seU. m a dialogue it is reintegration that is central. 
. . . the "conversation of the soul with itseU" is only possible 
by virtue of the fact that in the process the soul in a sense under­
goes a division within itseU. It must undertake both the function 
of speaking and that of hearing, of questioning and answering.226 
This double function of division and reintegration appears also 
in artistic activity, in which "continual seU-renewing flow of commu­
nication . . . the artist feels himseU isolated and thrown back within 
the limits of his own ego." 2 2 7 The artist "continues to create, for he 
knows that it is only by doing so that he can discover and gain posses­
sion of his own seU." 2 2 8 The same duplexity appears in religion. The 
beUever wants to "spurn the world and break aU ties, aU social reahties 
binding man to man . . . [so that he] knows only himseU and God 
and does not want to know anything else." But, at the same time, 
he must prove his belief in making it public. "He must communicate 
his beUef to others, he must fUl them with his own religious passion 
and fervor, in order to be certain of his belief." 2 2 9 Cassirer adds that 
"the Ufe of the spirit consists in this very act of severing what is whole 
in order that what has been severed may be even more securely 
united." 2 3 0 
225 Void. This coincides with CoUingwood's anti-substantiaUsm and his understand­
ing of spirit as active setf-evolution. Not substance but action, indeed autoactivity, 
is the basic category of reaUty. It is only in the linguistic interaction situation that the 
selves are recognized as selves. 
2 2 6 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 114. This statement is fuUy in accord with CoUingwood's 
position. In a monologue, the soul opposes itseU to itseU as a speaker and one spoken 
to, as questioner and respondent. In the monologue, dialectical opposition and sub­
sequent reintegration takes place within the same mind by its dynamic seU-differen-
tiating, seU-perfecting activity. m a dialogue the opposition of speaker and one spoken 
to takes place within the aU^embracing whole estabUshed by the very act of dialogu­
ing itseU. In both cases there is the buUding up of a concrete universal in terms of 
which the situation is inteUigible. 
227 Bid., p. 115. 
228 Bid. This is the same dialectical seM<reative function of artistic expression as 
recognized by CoUingwood. 
229 Void. 
2 3 0 Md., p. 116. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
403 
Having seen the universality by which distinctively human 
phenomena are inteUigible, we can now proceed to consider how, 
foUowing Cassirer, we can distinguish cultural and historical concepts 
from nature concepts. 
G. Distinction of Culture Concepts from Nature Concepts 
The foregoing has shown that cultural and specUicaUy human con­
cepts are distinguished from scientUic nature-concepts as "function" 
concepts from " t h i n g " concepts. That is, the concept whereby we 
understand some cultural phenomenon is not the concept of a com­
pleted " t h i n g " or characteristic thereof, but is the conception of an 
ongoing, seU-realizing activity (however static and 'thing'-like the 
physical conveyance—monument, parchment, etc.—may appear). 2 3 1 
Thus, it is not by pomting out specUic and distmguismng features that 
we understand the world of culture and the world of history (e.g., 
features that might serve to identify Baroque art or Renaissance man). 
When we pass from the animal to the human world aU determina­
tions undergo a change of function. The response of a man, precisely 
as he is a man, is the autonomous response of a self-initiating, free 
being, whereas the response of an animal (e.g., the cry of an animal 
in response to a painful stimulus) is always naturaUy determined and 
more or less predictable. Within certain limits (man's freedom is not 
absolute, but conditioned, yet is nevertheless a genuine freedom), 
indeed by means of them, man can form a breadth and seU-sufficiency 
of movement accessible to him alone. 2 3 2 
The various symboUc [mearmng-mantfesting] forms—myth, lan­
guage, art, and science [as a cultural form]-constitute the indis­
pensable precondition for this process. They are the true media— 
which man himseU has created—by virtue of which he has been able 
to separate himseU from the world, and in this very separation, to 
bind himseU aU the closer to it. This feature of mediation character­
izes aU human knowledge. It is also distinctive and typical of aU 
human action.233 
2 3 1 It is clear why dialectical thinking, which trades in this sort of concept (i.e., 
concrete universals), substitutes action as the basic category in place of substance. 
Setf-creating activity is the root of meaning for this type of thought, not things 
(substances) having certain fixed properties, including that of acting in definite ways. 
2 3 2 E. Cassirer, op. cit., pp. 73-74. 
2 3 3 Jbid., p. 74. Note the dialectical separation and reintegration which is of the 
essence of these dynamic forms. This active setf-separation and setf-recovery is the 
means whereby the seU acquires determination, which in this case means increasing 
setf-identity. 

404 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Even plants and animals build themselves up by receiving stimuÜ 
from their environment and in a way answer (respond in their own 
way) to such stimuU. But their answer or response is fixed and unified, 
foUowing always from the same conditions, that is, marked by deter­
ministic response rather than by free seU-mitiating response. But this 
is radically altered the moment we find ourselves in the sphere of 
human actions. The change in the mode of behaviour is obvious in 
the use of tools. To invent a tool, attention has to be Ufted, at least 
momentarUy, from total immersion in the impulse and the necessity 
of the moment. The tool-user has to foresee some as yet unrealized 
but reaUzable goal for the attainment of which he fashions the means 
and orders them to the realization of that preconceived goaL Man, 
as homo faber, thus lives in the future. The future is already present 
for man acting humanly. Not that it is a present actuality, but that 
it is intentionally present in the agent's decision and consequent ac­
tion to bring it into fuUy actual realization. 2 3 4 
The purpose which the tool serves involves within itseU a 
definite pre-vision. The imputee does not derive solely from the force 
of the present; instead, it belongs also to the future, which must 
be anticipated in some fashion in order to become effective in this 
way. This "pre-presentation" of the future characterizes aU human 
action.235 
Cassirer says that the theoretical sphere resembles the practical 
in this regard. AU theoretical concepts bear the character of instru­
ments, tools fashioned for the solution of specUic tasks. 2 3 6 
By tools in the practical sphere and concepts in the theoretical 
sphere man is able to go ahead of his experience in an anticipatory 
way. Instead of mere subjection to the envirordng world and total im­
mersion in the facticity of brute experience, he dorninates it and subor­
dinates it, to some extent at least, to his own freely chosen goals. He 
is not merely situated by his situation but is able to face his situation 
and actively take a stand with respect to it. To know a situation es 
a situation, that is, to know what it means to be situated, is already 
to be liberated in some way from the situation; as we often say: "He 
2 3 4 E. Cassirer, op. cit., pp. 74-75. Here we are dealing with what Robert Stover 
caUs inteUigibUity deriving from careful concern for the world. See this chapter, above, 
pp. 360-372. 
235 Tbid., p. 75. Concretely reaUzable alternatives, the objects of practical decisions 
and preference (Stover), presuppose the reahn of the future as meaningfully recog­
nizable, whatever problems may be raised regarding its reaUty-status. 
2 3 6 Cassirer here reechoes Collingwood's primacy of the practical. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
405 
has taken the situation in hand." hi the choosing and reaUzing of seU-
appointed goals a man is master of himseU and of his destiny. 
AU cultural phenomena are, thus, expressions of personal deci­
sions, 2 3 7 not expUcable merely in terms of a deterrninistic, depersonal­
ized, sdentificaUy objectivized world. Thus, for example, the civUiza­
tion of ancient Egypt is to be appreciated meaningfuUy inasmuch as 
its tombs, temples and hieroglyphs are expressions of (individual and 
coUective) personal, seU-set goals, and reaUzations thereof. These ma­
terial entities parchments, stone monuments, embaUned corpses, etc.) 
are "faces" 2 3 8 by which the Egyptians' seU-achieving dialectical activ­
ity is expressed and made manUest. Thus, for example, the concern 
to secure personal immortaUty is embodied in aU their extant works. 
These monuments, etc., are inteUigible oruy in reference not merely 
to a future, but even to the future of a Ufe after death. Remove this 
urgent concern to secure immortaUty in an afterUfe from one's stock-
in-trade of meaning-conveying factors, and then there would remain 
no way of understanding and mteUigibly explainmg these stone monu­
ments and parchments other than that of the impersonal analysis of 
the chemist or physicist in terms of chemical substances, atoms, weights 
and measures, etc. 
But what logical value can we find in the concepts and meanings 
of the cultural and historical world? The logical structure of a science 
is understandable when we are dear about the way in which it sub­
sumes the particulars under the universal. 2 3 9 Cassirer objects tp the atti­
tude which opposes the universal concepts of a natural science to the 
individual concepts of historical science, since the logical function of 
any concept is to achieve a unity of the manUold, a relation between 
mdividual and universal. To set either fador in isolation from the other 
is to destroy the synthesis aimed at by every concept. The universal 
must always accomodate itseU to the particular, but the way in which 
this accomodation is achieved is what distinguishes one science from 
another. 2 4 0 Thus, the manner in which unity in diversity is achieved 
dUfers as "we compare the system of mathematical concepts with the 
empirical concepts of nature and the latter with historical concepts." 2 4 1 
2 3 7 AU that was said earUer in this chapter regarding expression-perception together 
with what was said in regard to careful concern for the world has to be kept in mind 
here and in aU that foUows. 
2 3 8 But see this chapter, below, pp. 415416, for the consideration of these exter­
nal physical media also as masks which hide the expression which they bear. 
2 3 9 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 135. 
2 4 0 Jbid. 
2 4 1 0>id., pp. 135-136. 

406 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
The simplest form of this relationship of universal to particular 
is the expression of the universal as the concept of law from which 
particular instances may be deduced. AU concepts of empirical, natural 
science strive in some way for this ideal. 2 4 2 
But the form and style concepts characteristic of the humanities 
do not accomodate particulars to a universal in this way. No one his­
torical individual can be smgled out as an instance of the concept "man 
of the Renaissance." 2 4 3 
" 'Subsumption' can never be taken here in the same sense in 
which we subsume a body given here and now, that is, a piece of 
metal, under the concept 'gold' after finding that it fuUffls aU the con­
ditions of gold known to us." 2 4 4 Cassirer explains the dUference as 
follows: 
When we characterize Leonardo da Vinci. .. Michaelangelo and 
Cesare Borgia as "men of the Renaissance," we do not mean to say 
that there is to be found in them a definite and inherently fixed 
distinguishing trait in which they aU agree. We perceive them to 
be not only completely dUferent, but even opposed. What we are 
asserting of them is that in spite of this opposition, perhaps just 
because of it, they stand to each other in a spectfic ideal connec­
tion: each in his own way is contributing to the making of what we 
caU the "spirit" of the Renaissance or the civUization of the Renais­
sance.245 
Cassirer says that the universalizing unity which is striving to be 
expressed here is that of unity of direction, not unity of actualization.246 
The particular individuals belong together, not because they are 
alike or resemble each other, but because they are cooperating in a 
common task, which, in contrast to the Middle Ages, we perceive to 
be new and to be the distinctive 'meaning' of the Renaissance.247 
Cassirer remarks that "aU . . . concepts of style in the humanities 
reduce, when analyzed more precisely, to such conceptions of mean­
i n g . " 2 4 8 Thus, the artistic style of a period can only be determined U 
2 4 2 Void., p. 136. 
2 4 3 
Ш. 
2 4 4 Vaid., p. 139. 
245 Tbid. Compare this with CoUingwood's explanation of the individual and the 
whole in the constitution of the concrete universal; see his Speculum Mentis, pp. 218-221. 
See also Chapter 4, above, pp. 86-91. 
2 4 6 See E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 139. 
2i7Rnd., 
pp. 139-140. Emphasis in origmal. 
248 Md. Style concepts which characterize a definite historical period, then, in R. 
Stover's terminology (see this chapter, above, pp. 360-372) are universal in terms of 
the unity of a common concern of some sort. The common concern of aU is reflected 

Logic, Questioning and History 
407 
we gather into a unity aU its divergent and often patently disparate 
artistic expressions recognized to be expressions or marufestations of 
a specUic "artistic wiU." Such expressions characterize but do not deter­
mine, for the particulars comprehended by that concept cannot be 
deduced from it, since there is as much dependence of it upon them 
as of them upon i t . 2 4 9 But there is true conceptualization here, not 
just mtuitive description, since there is true unity in diversity. Thus, 
"we are dealing with a distinctive manner and direction of character­
ization, with a logico-inteUectual activity which is sui 
generis."250 
This distinction, between culture concepts of form and style and 
naturaUstic, 'thing' concepts, manUests the same opposition which 
was encountered in the preceding analysis of perception. " I t is the 
logical translation of a definite opposition in orientation, which as such 
is not encountered solely in the domain of concepts, but whose roots 
run deep into the subsoU of perception." 2 5 1 Cassirer explains this 
further as foUows: 
Here conception expresses "discursively" what perception 
apprehends in the form of a purely "intuitive" knowledge. . . . The 
"reality" which we apprehend in perception and direct intuition 
in each individual, but each in his own way. The whole of that society is in each member 
in virtue of that common goal, and each member is in that whole as contributing to 
the achievement of the coordinated aim. The same can be said, for instance, of the 
concept of a coUective experience such as the First World War. Thus, Luigi Sturzo, 
The Inner Laws of Society, New York, P. J. Kenedy & Sons, 1944, pp. xviii-xix, writes: 
"When we speak of collective experiences, we do not do so as a datum of experience 
specfficaUy cUstinct from individual experience, but as an experience that is made in 
simikr form at the same time, and for the same reason, by a group of persons in some 
way bound together. Thus, that of the war of 1914 was a coUective experience for whole 
peoples, on a wider and more general scale than had ever been known. But, it was 
made up of innumerable personal experiences, each of which was in no wise reducMe 
to that of another, although taken as a whole there were the same outcomes for determined 
groups. Individual experience is retetive, Umited, circumscribed; so are coUective experi­
ences, so is the succession of experiences or process. By this very fact, it can take 
on the character now of progress, now of regression, according to the points from 
which it is seen." @imphasis added.) Thus, if a bereaved mother wonders why her 
son should have died in the First World War, the answer would be to know what 
that war was precisely as he was related to that global event, and it to him, by intrin­
sic, essential relationship. His death is understandable through the inteUigibUity of 
a concrete unity (of totality) in diversity (of parts essentially diverse and essentially 
related to the whole), that is, in terms of the inteUigibUity of a concrete universal con­
stituted ultimately by one common (сагекюпсегп) purpose diversely reaUzed in many 
individuals. 
2 4 9 1 understand this to be the mutual impUcation that exists between form and 
content in dialectical thought and concrete universality. 
2 5 0 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 140. 
2 5 1 Tbid. In other words these concepts have to be taken in concrete continuity with 
their corresponding originating perceptual acts in order that this distinction between 
the concepts themselves be recognizable. 

408 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
presents itself to us as a whole in which there are no abrupt separ­
ations. And yet it is both "one and twofold," for, on the one hand, 
we apprehend it as thing-Hke and, on the other hand, as "per­
sonal." 2 5 2 
Science and philosophy, by theoretical knowledge, seek the 
property-constants and law-constants as two essential features of the 
physical world whereby the Heraclitean flux of becoming is stabfflzed 
and the enduring distinctions discerned and an orderly cosmos recog­
nized. This tendency to "fixing" is already at work in perception. 2 5 3 
Science is distinguished from perception in that it requires strict deter­
mination, whereas perception is merely estimative. This scientific 
determination involves that the "essences" of things be elaborated 
entirely in numerical concepts and physical and chemical constants 
which characterize every class of objects as things. These constants 
are then united through fixed functional relationships and expressed 
by equations which state the dependence of one magnitude on an­
other. This is the pure way to "objective" reality by which the com­
mon (conceptual) world of things is constitutively realized. 2 5 4 
But this rigid objectivization of reality has its price. The resultant 
"thing-world" is inherently souUess; every reference to the "personal" 
experience of the ego is obliterated. Human culture is quite mean­
ingless in such a deviscerated world. 2 5 5 
But thenatural world, or cosmos, built up by scientific "thing-
oriented" objectivity, is at the same time an inter-subjective world, a 
world shared in common, that is, a world in which a multiplicity of 
subjects participate. But likewise, the cultural world, the unity of many 
subjects as subjects, as expressing, jointly and severally, cares and 
concerns regarding the lived world, is an intersubjective world, a world 
in which I participate with other selves. But this participation, whereby 
I participate with them in the cultural world, is a different sort of par­
ticipation from the participation whereby I , together with others, par­
ticipate in the physical world of nature. 2 5 6 Cassirer explains this contrast 
as follows: 
Instead of relating themselves to the selfsame spacio-temporal 
cosmos of things, they find and relate themselves within the medium 
2 5 2 Tbid., p. 141. See ako above, this chapter, p. 361 for Stover's statement that 
our everyday thinking does not distinguish the different standpoints. 
2 5 3 See this chapter, above, p. 391 n. 177. 
2 5 4 E. Cassirer, op. cit., p. 142. 
2 5 5 See ibid. 
2 5 6 See ibid., pp. 142-143. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
409 
of the various worlds [artistic, linguistic, reUgious, etc.] of form out 
of which culture comes into being. 2 5 7 
This seems to be the same distinction which some authors make 
between a " w e " communion and an "I-thou" communion. 
In an I-thou communion, we are, as it were, in front of the other 
person and we look at each other. In the "we communion," on the 
contrary, we look together with the other person at some object.258 
The commonly shared relationship to some third, an " i t , " is what 
constitutes participation in the natural world. The commonly shared 
relationship to each other, distinctive of the various cultural interactiv­
ities, is what constitutes participation in the cultural world. 
This active relating of each of the selves to each of the other selves 
in the formation of the different cultural forms takes place already at 
the perceptual level, that is, at the level of expression-perception. But 
the expression-perception by which this is achieved is not the passive 
experience of expression, or perception as mere feeling (which is some­
what analogous to"impression" in the knowledge of object-things), 
but rather "this genuine 'synthesis' is first realized in the active ex­
change which we encounter directly in every verbal (act of imparting) 
'information.' " 2 5 9 
Cassirer says that "the constancy required for this [and hence for 
universality proper to the cultural area] is not that of properties or 
laws, but of meanings." 2 6 0 He clarifies this as follows: 
The more culture develops, and the more the particular areas 
into which it unfolds, the more richly and multifariously does this 
world of meanings shape itseU. We live within the words of language, 
the shapes of poetry and plastic art, the structure of music, the 
framework of religious representation and religious beliefs.261 
The famihar notion of the concrete universal is once again appear­
ing. The parts are mediated by the whole, and simultaneously the 
whole is mediated by the parts. It is in this active, self-constituting, 
dialectical mediation that meanings characteristic of the human, 
cultural, spiritual world are created and recognized. Each member 
building up himseU is together buUding up his world. 
257 Jbid., p. 143. 
2 5 8 Dietrich von Hildebrand, Man and Woman, Chicago, Franciscan Herald Press, 
1965, p. 16. Emphasis added. 
2 5 9 Ernst Cassirer, op. cit., p. 143. 
260 wid. 
2 6 1 Jbid. See also above, this chapter, pp. 399400, n. 216 

410 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
What Cassirer says here both ffluminates and is muminated by 
what Collingwood says in this regard in his Speculum 
Mentis.262 
2 6 2 P. 248. John Wild's expUcitation of the meaning of the term 'world' is also quite 
ffluminating here. See his "Being, Meaning and the World," The Review ofMetaphysics, 
Vol. ХЛТП (1965). On pp. 413414 he says that "world . . . is a relatively recent term 
of Germanic origin with a temporal connotation. It is probably derived from wer (man) 
and ald (age), age of man. . . . Various beings in the world are not instances of the 
universal concept, 'world,' nor are they portions of world in the sense of a coUec-
tion. . . . They are in the world rather as in a region of care, as we say that a doctor 
is in medicine, a soldier in the army, or that a kettle is in the kitchen, and a book 
in the study. . . . 
"[The term] world is used derivatively for any far-ranging region of care, as the 
world of finance and the world of medicine. But in its strict sense, as the world, the 
ultimate horizon of meaning and care, it includes aU such regions, and indeed, aU 
beings, even those beyond the range of our knowledge but which we are concerned 
to know. In this sense the world, Uke being, is aU-indusive, but in a dUferent way. 
It includes them not as a concept 'includes' its instances, but as beings are included 
in a field of care. And when used in this way, the world is not a timeless, abstract, 
universal term, but a spatio-temporal, concrete . . . singular term. However, it is not 
a single thing nor any collection of things. It is rather the horizon of real meaning 
within which any such thing or coUection must occur, ii it is reaUy to be. Hence U 
we consider actual usage, we find that the notion of world is quite distinct from that 
of being, and prior to it." 
Again (pp. 417418) he says: " I am not in the world [as a drop of water contained 
in the jar]. I am in it rather as in a field of care, as we say that a student is in medicine, 
or a salesman is in business. SimUarly, I am in the world as in the widest horizon 
of my concern, as dweUing in it, and caring for it in a certain way. . . . AU the beings 
I know, and even those I know that I do not know, are in the world. . . . Even beings 
of which I am totaUy ignorant are the objects of such care, namely the care to know 
them and find them out. 
"This care has always been active in human history and is, in fact, its moving 
spring. There are now vast and conspicuous regions of industry and learning which 
are devoted exdusively to this care, Uke the research laboratories of a great univer­
sity. Those engaged in such enterprises are trying to reveal things which are as yet 
uriknown.... rT]hese things are certainly in the world, though not as yet in any expUcit 
version. This brings out the fact that every being in the world has some actual, or 
at least some potential meaning. In this horizon, beings are gathered together and 
separated in such ways as to bring out their real sense. This horizon, therefore, in-
dudes both the beings about which we know something, and those about which we 
know nothing except that we do not know. 
"pV]e may use the term being for things with only a minimum of meaning, just 
as we use the term meaning for imaginative schemes with only a rmnimum of being. 
The world is a union of the two, the field of beings actuaUy gathered together in such 
a way as to make sense and to appear as what they reaUy are. 
"Beings, as such, do not Ue around any natural center. They simply are. There 
are no regions in being, and no distinct places for dUferent things. . . . The world 
horizon may have no human center. But the beings in my version of the world lie 
around me, and those in the human world Ue around man. And this centeredness 
is not arbitrary, for the germs of world meaning are found in his versions of the world. 
It is through him that beings are brought into meaningful relations with one another 
and allowed to appear as what they reaUy are. . . . " 
И this is so, the term 'world' itseU is to be understood as belonging to Stover's 
second type of inteUigibUity based on care and concern. The term 'care' afready seems 

Logic, Questioning and History 
411 
We know each other only within the media of these cultural forms 
which constitute meaningful worlds. This flbasicaUy hnguistic) medium 
operates and builds up the various cultural forms (art, religion, etc.) 
at a pre-scientific level beginning at the level of perception, as was 
explained above. We understand one another in speech without first 
acquiring technical knowledge of linguistics and grammar, just as we 
eat before acquiring a technical knowledge of dietetics.263 But this spon­
taneous, naive, pre-reflexive knowledge of each other soon reaches 
its limits and, due to strains that develop within it, demands that the 
work of science come in to clarify and explain i t . 2 6 4 
When natural science, in its penetration into the depths of cosmic 
space, raises itself to the knowledge of universal laws which do not 
differentiate between the near and the distant, it becomes the master 
of the distant. Thus, when physical science universaHzes to the extent 
of the universal law of gravitation its scope is the whole of cosmic 
space.265 It is thus extensively universalizing. 
But this form of universality is out of bounds to the science of 
culture, which cannot renounce anthropomorphism and anthropocen-
trism. Its subject matter is not the world as such but a particular 
to implicate the term 'world/ and the very term 'meaning' itseU would seem to be 
meaningless without reference to some center as agent of concern, within whose very 
concern, manifested by questioning, meanings arise, and a world of meaning is con­
stituted. 
This notion of world has many simUarities to the concrete universal discussed 
in Chapter 4 above, in which, it wiU be recalled, B. Bosanquet says that a 'world' 
is the best iUustration of what is meant by a universal. But this separation of being 
and meaning by WUd seems inadmissible if we take the position that to say that a 
thing is a being is merely to say that it is and in no way to say what it is. In other 
words, the essential, specifying determinant of the being of a thing, for WUd, seems 
extraneous to its being. But in Chapter 7, above, pp. 297-299, the position was taken 
that the being of a thing refers not only to its active presence but also to its deter­
minate mode of presence. That is, being is differentiatedfrom within being itself, not by 
extrinsic superaddition of dUferences bom without. Being has to account not only 
for the fact of the existence of each thing but also for its determinate way of existing. 
U this is so, then being as determinative of the being of each thing is also determin­
ative of its meaning. And this meaning is ascertained by the abstractive capacity of 
intuitive reason (as explained in Chapter 7, pp. 280-284 above) and expressed by the 
real definition which says what the thing is, namely its quiddity. H this distinction 
between essence, or what the thing is, and its existence is inflated into a separation, 
then being has to get meaning from some source other than its own determinations; 
from, say, presuppositions which determine the attitude of a conscious being, and 
therefrom the being itseU, inasmuch as being is referred to the designs of a conscious 
and free being for its meaning. Γη true Kantian fashion, then, we do not know things 
as they have meanings in themselves, but only inasmuch as they have meanings/br HS. 
2 6 3 See CoUingwood, The Principles of Art, pp. 226-228, on this point. 
2 6 4 See E. Cassirer, op. cit., pp. 143-144. 
2 6 5 See ibid., p. 144. 

412 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
region of it. But it strives to penetrate fuUy and completely this sphere 
defined by the limits of the human world. That is, it universalizes in­
tensively, qualitatively and penetratingly, through progressively in­
creasing deterrninate manUestations or expressions of the same abicUng 
human reality. Cassirer further explains this type of universality: 
Its goal is not the universality of laws; but neither is it the indi­
viduaUty of facts and phenomena. In contrast to both, it sets up an 
ideal of knowledge of its own. What it seeks to realize is the totality 
of theforms in wMch human Ufe is reaUzed. These forms are endless­
ly divergent and, yet, they are not without urufied structure. For 
in the end it is "one and the same" human nature which meets us 
again and again in a thousand manifestations and in a thousand 
masks in the development of culture.26* 
This universalization of the multiplicity of cultural forms is based 
on the identity of the same human reaUty of which its various cultural 
forms are a marufestation and expression in an infinite variety of 
ways. 2 6 7 This identity, that is, this 'remaining itseU to and for itseU' 
in its progressive seU-determinations, is not made known by watch­
ing, weighing and measuring, nor by some sort of psychological intro­
spection or induction, but is "demonstrated," that is, marufested or 
expressed, only within the activity which is its very actualization and 
by which it is realized. A culture is meaningfully accessible to us only 
U we are actively involved in it. The translation of the Egyptian Rosetta 
Stone involved an active, vital penetration into the Unguistic world 
of the Egyptians, that is, a forming of the translator as in some way 
one with the scribe, by setting up a dialogue with him, a union with 
him by medium of language. Egyptian culture and history thus "come 
alive" again in that unUied, Uving dialogue into which the translator 
entered (and entered precisely by effecting it into existence) in the 
exercise of his tramlating activity. As Marrou nicely puts it, " U I knew 
Arabic as weU as Massignon, the history of Arabia would also become 
a part of my past." 2 6 8 A Uttle further ahead in the same place, he asks 
what it matters U some group of men as foreign as possible to me are 
not related to me by blood relationship, for "ifIwrite 
their history I 
266 Tbid., p. 144. CoUingwood's Speculum Mentis can be considered as his attempt 
to realize the goal of this type of universaUty. 
2 6 7 See this chapter, above, pp. 387-388, for the citation from Barbara Mertz, in 
which she weU expresses this human soUdarity with ourselves which we experience 
when we manage to penetrate to the meaning of the cultural remains of the ancient 
Egyptian civUization, recognizing those remains as expressive of the distinctively 
human. 
2 6 8 H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning ofHistory, p. 222. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
413 
too am descendedfrom them henceforth" (emphasis in original), and " i f 
I have shown that I am capable of understanding their past, it is 
because I feel the family relationship." The Unguistic breakthrough 
that took place in deciphering the Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs im­
mediately set up a dynamic, dialogical unity, a shared world, in which 
the expressions (surviving in and through the present parchment or 
monument) of the thoughts and concerns of the perhaps four thou­
sand year old, long since dead scribe, come alive again in that uni­
fied world constituted by language. The Hving, Unguistic form is able 
actively to straddle that four thousand years of elapsed time and 
bring together the historian-archaeologist and the ancient scribe in 
one Uving, active dialogical unity. That linguistic form, expressed by 
the scribe (in stone or parchment) and possessed by the translator, 
is a true (formal) unity in diversity (of individuals). Language as the 
active unifying form operative here is not language considered ana-
lyticaUy, as a set of grammatical rules and parts of speech such as a 
linguist would regard it, but language as a living, exercised activity in 
which expression is exercised and communication achieved. This seems to 
be equivalent to language in the sense of Uterature, a Hving whole, 
which precedes its analytic dismemberment into alphabet, dictionary 
meanings and grammatical rules. This also seems to correspond with 
what CoUingwood says in his Essay on Philosophical Method,269 where 
he treats "phUosophy as a kind of literature," 2 7 0 and says that "the 
language of phUosophy is therefore, as every careful reader of the great 
phUosophers akeady knows, a literary language and not a tech­
nical," 2 7 1 so that "the reader of phUosophical Uterature . . . is reading 
a language not a symboUsm." 2 7 2 CoUingwood explains this as fol­
lows: 
The duty of the phUosopher as a writer is therefore to avoid the 
technical vocabulary proper to science, and to choose his words 
according to the rules of Uterature. His terrninology must have that 
expressiveness, that flexibflity, that dependence upon context, which 
are the haU-marks of a literary use of words as opposed to a tech­
nical use of symbols.273 
Language as literature has always been regarded as the vehicle 
of the expression of the spUit, that is, the Uving insights and concerns 
2 6 9 Pp. 199-220. 
2 7 0 Md., p. 201. 
2 7 1 Vaid., pp. 206-207. 
272 Md., p. 207. 
273 
Md. 

414 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
of a people which mark them with cuUural and historical distinctive­
ness. However heavily the Egyptologist may depend on such analyses 
as Gardiner's Egyptian Grammar or Champollion's techniques of 
decipherment of hieroglyphs, he is not yet functioning properly as 
a historian until he penetrates beyond this hieroglyphic symbohsm 
to make the language hidden therein function as Uterature, as the 
vehicle of the expression of human concerns. 
Man, therefore, as a linguistic being, is a unity in diversity. 
Dialogue, i.e., linguistic activity, is possible only within the human 
world and then pnly inasmuch as this is a world of multiplicity and 
diversity. Once again we may use the example of the process of cell 
division borrowed from the biological world to illustrate the linguis­
tic, dialogical question and answer activity. One single cell by its own 
internal dynamism is able to oppose itseU to itseU, thus dividing itself 
within itseU so as to repossess itself with greater and greater dUferen­
tiation and seH-determination, so that, finaUy, a fuUy integrated, liv­
ing organism results from that initial single cell. Likewise, when a 
man enters into dialogue with another, the dialogue situation is, as 
it were, a single human "culture cell" which, by repeated position 
and opposition, by question and answer, finally ends up (although 
every such ending is a new beginning) in the manUestation of a more 
fuUy determined, more fuUy perfected humanity. But the bearer of 
this fuUUling determination is not abstract, objectively defined human­
ity, but humanity as concretely realized in the individuals who par­
ticipate in it. But they are the bearers of such self-autonomous reali­
zation only by medium of their interaction one with the others, which 
interaction, as expressed and manUested, is nothing other than a 
(dynamic, active) cultural form (as the form of language, the form of 
art, the form of religion, the form of science, etc.). 
H. History as an Inquiry Proceeding According to a 
Logic of Question and Answer 
Robert Stover has shown 2 7 4 the dUference between the meaning 
and intelligibUity of concepts based on careful concern for the world 
and of concepts based on the unUormity of behaviour observed in the 
natural world. John WUd elaborated 2 7 5 on the nature of care, from 
which the meaningfulness of careful concern concepts is derived, and, 
in particular, clearly showed the distinctive meaning of the temporal 
2 7 4 See above, this chapter, pp. 360-372. 
2 7 5 See above, this chapter, pp. 373-384. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
415 
cUmensions of past, present and future in the human care-taking situa­
tion, thereby giving us an insight into historical time proper to human 
duration as distinct from the receptacle concept of physical time in 
which physical things are located. Ernst Cassirer explained 2 7 6 at length 
the logical dimension, or properly conceptual value, of concepts based 
on careful concern for the world. He showed that the distinction in 
conceptualization, that is, in universaUzation, is not independent of 
the perceptual roots from which it arises and to which it continuaUy 
refers. Expression-perception both precipitates and effects linguistic 
intercommunion in a dialogue situation, which dialogue situation is 
of the nature of a concrete universal, involving, as it does, a genuine 
unity in diversity in which the diversity is essential to the unity and 
vice versa. AU cultural concepts, as concepts, that is, as logicaUy signUi­
cant, as unifying a multipUcity in thought, reduce back to this sui generis 
type of universaUty. 2 7 7 Whatever logic wffl be elaborated in the human 
disciplines wffl therefore have to be adapted in its methodology to 
this type of universal. 
It is clear from what has been said in this chapter regarding this 
type of universal that it is not an abstract, stabUized object like the 
universal law of gravitation in physics, which enjoys a recognizabU-
ity independently of its mobUe instances. On the contrary, it is a con­
crete, active, ongoing, seU-developing process or "function" (Cassir-
er's term), which he (Cassirer) explicitly refers to 2 7 8 as a process of 
dialogue involving question and answer. And, inasmuch as it has been 
shown 2 7 9 that the historian in his proper function as a historian 
penetrates the world of the period or the subject or person or institu­
tion he is studying, forming with those of that time and place a con­
crete living unity through dialogue, his method is one of question and 
answer. This substantiates CoUingwood's thesis that the logic of history 
is one of question and answer. In addition, it gives a deeper insight, 
first, by the medium of Cassirer, into the precise nature of the con­
crete universal logicaUy operative, and second, by the medium of 
Robert Stover and John WUd, into the properly human character of 
historical meaning, based, as it is, on the conceptual meaning deriv­
ing from man's free, seU-creative activity and consequent careful con­
cern for the world. Inasmuch as documents, monuments and such 
traces of the human past as artifacts, etc., can be made to function, by 
2 7 6 See above, this chapter, pp. 384-414. 
2 7 7 See this chapter, above, pp. 406-407. 
2 7 8 See this chapter, above, pp. 401402. 
2 7 9 See this chapter, above, pp. 398-399 and pp. 413-414. 

416 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
the use of historical techniques, as bearers of the expression of the 
interests and concerns of men of the past, Collingwood's position that 
history is a rethinking of past thought is correct, whatever criticism 
may be made of that position on other grounds. Furthermore, it is 
by a questioning technique that the historian is able to make these 
physical objects transcend their brute physicaLity (as stone, paper, etc.) 
and function expressively, as media conveying expression meaning. 
In an immediate conversation of an everyday nature with one's con­
temporaries, the facial configurations, voice sounds, hand gestures 
(aU of which Collingwood caUs language in its widest sense)280 are 
the bearers of the expression of some sort of concern. In historical 
investigation a physical medium intervenes as bearer of such expres­
sions of concern. Such a physicaUy interposed medium functions not 
only as an expressive "face," but, precisely as physical, it functions 
also as a mask hiding the expressive manUestation. Work has to be 
done on the physical object to remove the concealment function and 
allow fuU play to the manUestation function. The making of the 
physical object manUest the expression that it bears as something 
transcending its brute physicality is the constituting of the physical 
object into evidence of the past human event. m crime detective jargon 
a physical object which does not yet manUest expressively the human 
interest of which it is a relic, yet suggests that, properly interpreted 
and understood, it can be made to so function, is caUed a clue. A clue 
is turned into evidence by interrogation, either of itself or of others 
functioning as witnesses. 
So to the question, "Does history proceed by a distinctive logic 
of question and answer, as CoUingwood maintains?" the answer, by 
way of summary of aU that has been said so far in this chapter, would 
seem to be simply "yes." But a simple "yes" would be an oversim­
plified reply. Certain reservations and qualifications must stUl be con­
sidered before a definitive answer is given. 2 8 1 
It has akeady been mentioned 2 8 2 that CoUingwood's questioning 
approach to his own archaeological researches was not always success­
ful and fruitful and on certain occasions drew upon him the criticism 
of his coUeagues. In explaining the questioning procedure in history 2 8 3 
2 8 0 See his The PrincipUs ofArt, p. 236, and The New Leviathan, p. 41, par. 6.1. See 
also Alan Donagan, The Later Philosophy of R. G. CoUingwood, pp. 4143. 
2 8 1 See this chapter, below, pp. 430431, for a precise statement of the qualifica­
tions to be taken into account. 
2 8 2 See Ch. 7, above, pp. 307-309. 
2 8 3 See Ch. 7, above, p. 271. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
417 
CoUingwood exaggerates the dominance of the questioner and the 
activity of questioning, as U the asking of the question is the sole active 
influence in the production of evidence. This is quite in accord with 
Collingwood's absolutizing of the activity of human consciousness, 
which activity, for him, is basicaUy a questioning process. 2 8 4 More 
soberly, H.-I. Marrou, who agrees with CoUingwood that the method 
of history is a questioning one, insists that this questioning procedure 
in history, as in an everyday conversation, is an attempt to get to know 
another as another seU. The fact that "the other" is "a seU" that one 
is trying to get to know must not be allowed to override the fact that 
this "self" is genuinely also "another." The ever present reduction 
to consciousness in CoUingwood results in the correlative reduction 
of the "seU" to the seU-conscious seU, culrnmating in absolute thought 
as the absolute seU. There is then "only one judgment judging one 
t r u t h . " 2 8 5 In such a context aU dialogue becomes "a dialogue of the 
soul with itself," and any genuine otherness of another self is dis­
torted and finally obliterated. 2 8 6 But once one recognizes that "the 
self" one is in dialogue with and trying to get to know is truly 
"another," one wUl also recognize its right, as another, to participate 
actively in making its own distinctive contribution to the questioner's 
answers. 2 8 7 The questioner has to be at least passive enough to aUow 
the other to reply in his own right; otherwise the dialogue becomes 
a seU-sterilizing monologue. 
The issue being taken with Collingwood here is that in a postu-
latory, 2 8 8 dogmatic way, he absolutizes the activity of human conscious­
ness and identUies the questioning procedure with this absolutized, 
seU-creating activity, leaving no room to recognize the contribution 
to the answering of questions from sources beyond the knower's ques­
tioning activity. This has already been criticized above 2 8 9 in dealing 
with Collingwood's opposition to the realist's principle that "know­
ing makes no dUference to what is k n o w n . " 2 9 0 
In this absolutization of the questioning activity of the mind in 
2 8 4 See Speculum Mentis, p. 317. 
2 8 5 See ibid., p. 80. 
2 8 6 See ibid., p. 245, and pp. 248-249. 
2 8 7 See, for example, Marrou's explanation of the development of the dialogue 
of the historian with the document as explained on pp. 131 et seq., of his The Meaning 
of History. 
2 8 8 See A. Shalom, R. G. Collingwood: Philosophe et Historien, Paris, Presses Univer-
sitaires de France, 1967, pp. 516-517. 
2 8 9 See Chapter 7, above, p. 271. 
2 9 0 See Collingwood's Autobiography, pp. 25-28. 

418 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
knowledge, all meaning becomes absorbed into what Robert Stover 2 9 1 
has called care-for-the-world meaning. AU meaning is then taken 
through relation to a consciousness capable of selecting from proposed 
contemplated alternatives a situation of weU-being which the conscious 
subject can effectively bring about. As a consequence of this, even 
man's knowledge of what it is for him to be a man becomes reduced 
to his knowledge of his history. Consequently, what he can do is the 
measure of what he is, and what he can do is determined by what 
he has done, that is, by his past, his history. The achievements of 
the past create foreseeable possibUities realizable in the future. V2 
rockets as achievements of Second World War science open the pos­
sibUity to future realizable (and presently being realized) space travel. 
The alternatives for future realization are determined by "care-
concern" questioning of what has been presently actualized. Man's 
being, taking it historicaUy, is thus a careful and concerned question­
ing of past achievement with a view to alternative possibUities for the 
future (contained in the question according to CoUingwood), 2 9 2 the 
answer being the determination of the alternatives to one or another 
according to the estimated greater weU-being offered by one or the 
other of such alternatives. 2 9 3 This procedure of questioning the past 
with the view to its answer as the self-determination of future weU-
being from specUied alternative possibUities is the activity of taking 
one's lUe experience in hand, the assurning of authentic control over 
one's lUe, 2 9 4 and the giving of meaning to one's lUe. But to know one's 
possibUities is to know one's past; that is, as CoUingwood expresses 
it, the measure of what man can do is what man has done as revealed 
to him by his history. 
It is . . . of importance to man that he should know himself: 
where knowing himself means knowing not his merely personal 
peculiarities, the things that distinguish him from other men, but 
his nature as man. Knowing yourself means knowing, first, what 
it is to be a man; secondly, knowing what it is to be the kind of man 
you are; and thirdly, knowing what it is to be the man you are and 
2 9 1 See this chapter, above, pp. 360-372. 
2 9 2 See his The New Leviathan, p. 75, par. 11.12. See also Speculum Mentis, p. 78. 
2 9 3 This answers the question as to how a question contains its answer. A ques­
tion contains its answer as one of a number of possible alternatives. As long as the 
alternatives are in the state of multiple possibility the question is an unanswered ques­
tion. The answer is the determination of the multiple in possibUity to one in actual­
ity. On this point, see the iUuminating article of G. F. Stout, "Truth and Falsity," 
Mind, XLI (1932), pp. 297-310. See especially pp. 301-302. 
2 9 4 For an interesting elaboration of this point see Robert Johann's Building up the 
Human, New York, Herder & Herder, 1968, especiaUy pp. 37-53. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
419 
nobody else is. Knowing yourself means knowing what you can do, 
and since nobody knows what he can do until he tries, the only clue 
to what man can do is what man has done. The value of history, 
then, is that it teaches us what man has done and thus what man 
is. 2 9 5 
Thus, if man is only what he does, which is what man is inasmuch 
as man is mind, 2 9 6 for mind is what it does, 2 9 7 then history is knowledge 
in the plenary sense of the word, and subordinates aU other forms 
(science, religion, etc.) to itseU as imperfect moments of its plenary 
seU. In taking this position, CoUingwood is clearly in the Vician 'Verum 
= Factum' tradition, by medium of Croce. 2 9 8 When, as noted above, 2 9 9 
Vico overturned the supremacy of Cartesian rationalism by reducing 
mathematical clarity and distinction to its alleged source in man's pro­
ductive activity, he made what man can do the measure of what man 
can know, and located the source of speculative knowledge in prac­
tical knowledge, which now assumes the place of primacy, as Col­
lingwood repeatedly insists. 3 0 0 Mathematical entities are clear and 
distinct because we made them and we know what we make. Once 
that position is taken, it inevitably foUows that the order of the natural 
world known by science is known precisely because the human 
productive consciousness made that order. Theoretical science is prac­
tical in its roots, 3 0 1 and the order previously accorded to the natural 
world becomes more and more to be regarded as an order made by 
men in their practical knowledge and concern in regard to it. CoUing­
wood's phUosophy of nature is a clear instance of this. 3 0 2 His The Idea 
2 , 5 R. G. ColUngwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 10. See also his Autobiography, p. 116. 
2 9 6 See The New Leviathan, pp. 5-7. 
2 9 7 See The Idea ofHistory, pp. 221-222. 
2 9 8 See this chapter, above, p. 386. 
299 Ibid. 
3 0 0 See the opening lines of the Prologue of Speculum Mentis, p. 15: "All thought 
exists for the sake of action." See also The New Leviathan, p. 5, par. 1.66, and An Auto­
biography, pp. 147-167. 
3 0 1 It is worth noting here that the French philosopher Maurice Blondel elabor­
ated a philosophy on the principle that the speculative order is practicaUy based. The 
speculative principle of contradiction in logic is presented as having its roots in a more 
fundamental contradiction encountered in the practical exigencies of lived experience. 
See hisL'Action: Essai d'une critique de la vie et d'une science de la pratique, Paris, Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1950 (originaUy pubUshed 1893), especiaUy pp. 470-474. See 
also John McNeffl's The Blondelian Synthesis, Leiden, E. BrUl, 1966, pp. 200-236, and 
J. E. Somervffle's Total Commitment: Blondel's L'Action, Washington, Corpus Books, 
1968, especiaUy pp. 335-352. 
3 0 2 John WUd seems to some extent at least to be under this Vician influence. See 
above, this chapter, for his way of expressing the primacy of the practical over the 
speculative. However, this is not necessarUy his position, but may be only his state­
ment of the position ofcontemporary existentiaUsm. But as Cassirer weU pointed out 

420 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ofNature is reduced to a history of the ideas men have elaborated about 
the world of nature. It is a history of ideas, not an account of natural 
things.303 
But, just as Cassirer pointed out 3 0 4 that absolutization of the 
object-pole of perception leads to absolutization of the "thing-ist," 
scientific, naturalistic type of explanation in which persons and per­
sonal concerns have no place, might it not also be the case that abso­
lutization of the subjective pole and inflation of the personal concern 
type of meaning wffl bHnd one to the correct status of the natural order? 
If the perceptive act, following Cassirer, is to be taken as the focal 
point which radiates in two opposite meamngful directions, and there­
fore the phenomenological point of departure in assessing the valid­
ity of these two systems of meaning, the natural and the personal, it 
is of the utmost importance that this phenomenological investigation 
itself be conducted with its correct guide-questions in rnind. That is, 
taking seriously CoUingwood's advice in this matter regarding the im­
portance of correct questioning in any investigation, we must ask 
whether the phenomenological description alone of the lived experi­
ence of perception is the absolute arbiter regarding the structure of 
perception as this is the source of two opposite systems of meaning, 
or whether the outcome of our phenomenological description is not 
perhaps in some way pre-determined by the questions with which 
we approach the subject asking it to give an account of itseU. We are 
approaching the perceptive act with a specUied purpose in the course 
of a specUied investigation. The dommating guide-question with which 
we are approaching perception is " H o w is it that this fontal act of 
lived experiential immediacy is simultaneously the source of imper­
sonal, thing, natural meanings and of personal, care and concern 
meanings?" We are approaching perception with that precise ques­
tion in mind, precipitated by our experience of the antinomy of two 
systems of meaning, which question perception has to answer, and 
the phenomenological analysis has to be taUored accordingly. If we 
were approaching it with another question, say the question, " H o w 
does perception appear as an act of consciousness?" or the question 
" H o w does perception appear when it is the perception of a scientist 
(see above, this chapter, p. 404), in order to invent a tool, attention has to be lifted, 
at least momentarily, from total immersion in the imputee and necessity of the moment. 
So the practical depends to that extent at least on the speculative. 
3 0 3 This is pointed out by R. C. Cragg in his Ph.D. dissertation, Collingwood's Logic 
of Question and Answer, University of Toronto, 1948, p. 279. 
3 0 4 See this chapter above, pp. 395-396 and p. 408. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
421 
involved in behavioral observation?" its reply would correspondingly 
differ. We are therefore not starting from a mere primitive, brute expe­
rience simply to be described, but from a question appHed to an akeady 
distinctively recognizable type of activity which has been experienced 
to precipitate two opposite kinds of result. The phenomenological 
analysis, if it is to be meaningfuUy revelative, must itseU take account 
of its initiating guide questions, which have thek origin in the object 
of the inquker's concern. The phenomenological inquiry, like any in­
quiry, is a search for meaning, and therefore presupposes the condi­
tions under which the meaning-searching question arises, and under 
which a meaningful answer wffl be recognizable when found. The 
context giving rise to the phenomenological analysis of perception here 
is our experience of perception as the source of two opposite systems 
of meaning and of explaining, and our question, resulting from that 
context, concerns the structure of perception insofar as it has the vk-
tuality of originating those two meaning and explaining systems. 
This being granted, might it not be the case that two worlds, each 
enjoying its own proper autonomy, are communicating in some way 
in the act of perception? Might it not be that in that sui generis type 
of act, the spiritual, subjective, interior world of consciousness is 
achieving some sort of unity with the physical, objective, exterior world 
of things? It is not merely a question of correspondence but of iden­
tity, an identity which remains consistent with a diversity of another 
order. Might it not be that the conscious subject, which is also a thing 
belonging to the natural world, precisely in that act of perception over­
comes its physical duality with another physical object to enjoy an 
identification therewith, respecting aU the whUe thek natural, physical 
duality? If identity in dUference is admissible in other contexts, why 
not here also? This at least is indicated, U not solidly established, by 
the fact that perception has the potential to "spectro-analyse," so to 
speak, and be elaborated in these two opposite ways, and has in fact 
been so elaborated. Might not the scientific way of explaining in terms 
of physical natures and things (including in this explanation the 
subject, not precisely and distinctively as a conscious subject but as 
something also found in the world of nature) be an autonomous and 
valid way of thinking alongside and distinct from, though not 
necessarUy separate from, explanations of a cultural and historical sort 
in terms of human conscious concerns? 
Robert Stover opts for a "radical pluralism" 3 0 5 in answer to this 
3 0 5 See his The Nature ofHistorical Thinking, p. x. 

422 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
question. Speaking of the two ways he had distinguished of making 
the world inteUigible, he writes: 
Broadly speaking, the whole issue of universal determinism lies 
outside of the scheme of intelligibility of thinking from the stand­
point of living in the world. . . . This aUows for the compatibiUty 
of the two schemes of inteUigibUity: the presumption of determin­
ism being integral to the natural order scheme of thinking; indif­
ference to the issue of universal determinism being an essential 
characteristic of the scheme of evaluation. But compatibility, we must 
remind ourselves, is not equivalent to interrelatedness.306 
What Stover calls "ordinary history" reflects this pluralism. 
Whereas "some historians will focus their efforts on giving natural 
order accounts on the plausible assumption that particular human 
events can be accounted for deterministically" and "others wffl con­
centrate on making judgments from the standpoint of hving in the 
world," ordinary history "reflects the ambiguity ofjudgment charac­
teristic of man's ordinary, everyday, unspecialized thinking," and 
"whether the ordinary historian recognizes it or not, the vision of the 
world that moulds his work mirrors completely the pluralism pain­
stakingly discerned and articulated through critical reflection." 3 0 7 
The criticism directed against Collingwood here is that which is 
directed generally against those in the Vician tradition, namely that 
this line of thinking, dominated by the 'Verum = Factum' ideal, 
absorbs the natural into the historico-cultural, so that the world of 
nature ceases to be available to knowledge in its own right, and science 
as knowledge of nature is reduced to a mere subordinate member on 
a scale of forms, subordinated as error to history which supersedes 
it, aUegedly by overcoming its falsifying abstraction. The world of 
nature is then nothing more than the ideas which the scientific inter­
ests of a particular period of history have articulated about it. The un­
folding of the natural world by science is then nothing more than a 
stage in man's unfolding consciousness of himseU, in which ultimate­
ly the idea of nature gives way to the idea of history. 3 0 8 inasmuch as 
history both proceeds according to, and has as its object, human con­
cerns and responses to human problems, it is a questioning and answer 
procedure. But if man is regarded solely as an active, seU-deterrnin-
ing agent—and this is precisely what history questioningly investi­
gates according to CoUingwood—then history exercises an overriding 
306 Md., p. 171. 
307 Vbid., pp. 270-271. 
3 0 8 See R. G. CoUingwood, The ldea ofNature, p. 177. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
423 
autonomy, subordinating all else, including science, to itseU. 3 0 9 
Inasmuch as every science has its history of achievements, science 
can be regarded as a series of solutions to problems of personal con­
cern to the particular scientists at particular periods of human develop­
ment, and this series can be displayed meaningfully as an overlap 
of classes in a scale of forms. 3 1 0 But this is not an absolute and over­
riding subordination of science to its history, for it must allow for the 
equally valid subordination of the history of science to the science of 
which it is the history, inasmuch as scientific knowledge not only satis­
fies a question of pressing concern but also aims at the natural world 
as something enjoying some status independently of the concerned 
investigator and Ms questions. This seems to be clear from the ob­
vious fact that there are books on, say, astronomy, which, notwith-
3 0 9 K genus-species propositional thinking gives logic of the scientific type, that 
is, induction and deduction, an undue absoluteness (see Speculum Mentis, p. 49), might 
it not be equaUy so that absolutized 'overlap' logic accords to history an undue 
supremacy over science? 
3 1 0 Joseph de Finance, in his Essai sur l'agir humain, Rome, Presses de l'Universiti 
Gr6gorienne, 1962, pp. 176-177, very weU fflustrates how the meaning of both a human 
artifact, such as a watch, and a natural entity in its cultural signification, such as, for 
example, the sun, can be understood as a scale of forms. Regarding the latter Ulustra­
tion he writes: "Considerons, par exemple, le soleU. La connaisance scientifique que 
j'en ai ne fut possible que moyennant d'innombrables observations et calculs que 
d'autres ont executes au cours des äges et sur lesquels presentement je m'appuie. 
Aujourd'hui ou les enfants, des le premier £veU de leur raison, apprennent que la 
terre tourne, le systeme de Ptolemee nous parait saugrenu et U en est de meme pour 
d'autres th6ories, ä präsent pörimees, mais considäräes en leur temps comme verWs 
acquises: par exemple, la doctrine des quatre Elements. Mais si la rotation de la terre 
et maintes autres notions de ce genre se präsentent maintenant comme famffleres et 
'aUant de soi,' c'est parce que d'autres les ont, au prix de beaucoup d'efforts et de 
luttes, apprivois6es, en quelque sorte, pour nous, comme furent domestiques pour 
nous le chien, Ie boeuf et le cheval. Pour toute connaissance, si vuIgaire soit-eUe, nous 
sommes, pour la plus grande part, debiteurs des autres. Ces savoirs el6mentaires, 
ces techniques de la vie quotidienne condensent le progres de nombreux mUlenaires. 
Lire, ecrire, compter nous semblent des operations toute simples: tout cela cepen-
dant, comme les humbles et si longtemps immuables techniques agrkoles et artisanales, 
a dü Stre conquis de haute lutte et represente capitaU^ l'acquis d'innombrables gen£-
rations. 
"Mais ce n'est pas tout. L'idee du soleU ne s'epuise ni dans la representation 
vulgaire, ni dans celle que la science en fournit. EUe comporte un savoir confus de 
ce que le soleU est pour l'homme: pour le paysan, pour le promeneur, pour ceux qu'U 
ecrase de sa chaleur et ceux qui saluent sa lumiere comme une ben6diction, pour le 
poete et pour l'artiste . . . L'idee complete du soleU inclut le mythe de k caverne et 
les comparaisons des Ennaades; eUe inclut les cultes solaires: Mithra, le sol invictus etc. 
Ainsi, le monde ou nous nous mouvons se präsente ä nous comme un monde 
humanise, socialist. Notre rencontre avec lui n'est pas une rencontre solitaire: les 
choses nous apparaissent enveloppees de signification humaine, de sorte que nous 
ne pouvons ni les penser ni les nommer sans participer du mime coup aux experiences, 
aux int£r§ts, aux peines et aux joies de l'humaniteV' 

424 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
standing any amount of historical information, are properly scientific 
treatises dealing with the natural, astronomical world itseU. There are 
also books on astronomy which are quite clearly histories of astronomy, 
notwithstanding that they contain a large amount of properly scien­
tific information about the natural astronomical world. 
The very fact of this dualism, both in our perception of objects 
and in our explanations (scientific and historical), is a sign that the 
two directions in which the perceptive act points (on the one hand 
to a perceiving subject, whose perceptions both arise from and result 
in personal cares and concerns, and, on the other hand, to a natural 
world objectively present) point also to two foundations essential to 
the perceptive act, the foundation of a natural world in which things, 
including percipient subjects, are naturaUy distinct, and another foun­
dation, that of the world of conscious subjects, which, as such, and 
manifestly in the perceptive act, are able to transcend their physical 
duality in the unity of the perceptual, knowing act. As Aristotle says, 
"The activity of the sensible object and that of the percipient sense 
is one and the same activity, and yet the distinction between their 
being remains." 3 1 1 Again, if concrete unity in diversity is an acceptable 
notion in other contexts, might we not also have here in perception 
a true unity (of the activity which is together a perceiving and a being 
perceived) in diversity (of man as a natural being and object-thing as 
likewise another natural being)? 
It may be objected that this reintroduces the bogey of substantial-
ism so odious to dialectical thought. The answer is that substantial-
ism is rejected by that mode of thought on account of its own undue 
absolutization of seU-unfolding activity, which absolutization, in fact, 
is made in virtue of the equally odious process of abstraction. For seU-
creative activity is not only abstracted away from man, the agent of 
such activity, but it is then treated as if it were aU that there were in 
man the agent. An abstraction is thus made and subsequently ignored; 
precisely the situation in which abstraction involves error. 3 1 2 But, 
opposed to this position, what man is is seen to be more basic to man 
that what he does and is presupposed to what he does. Indeed, his 
actions are unfoldings and manUestations of what he is. K there is 
freedom in his doings there is presupposed freedom in his being. 
Whatever determines me to be a man at the same time constitutes me 
3 1 1 De Anima, Bk. 3, Ch. 2, 425b 25-30. The translation by J. A. Smith in The Basic 
Works ofAristotle, ed. Richard McKeon, New York, Random House, 1941, was used. 
3 1 2 See Chapter 7, above, p. 287. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
425 
open to self-determination as regards whether I become an engineer, 
a carpenter, an accountant, etc. Ji this open possibility were not already 
a fact of man's being, there would be no self-creative activity whereby 
man could take himself in hand and make something of himself. The 
moral order of seH-determination is thus built on a more fundamental 
order of being in which the conditions of the very possibUity of acting 
freely and morally are already constituted. 
Now, if we begin with conscious activity as the overriding abso­
lute, then the concept of man as Dasein, man in his state of "thrown-
ness," is perhaps the closest we can get to admitting the natural dimen­
sion of man's being. But, if we examine closely the implications of 
this notion, man as he finds himseU, man in his state of "thrown-
ness," are we not led to what it akeady supposes, namely man's 
natural being as something already constituted and "there" previous 
to critical, conscious reflection? Man "finds" himseU "there" as already 
there waiting to be so found. That is, he is not merely an autonomous 
consciousness but also a natural being. CoUingwood's reticence regard­
ing the existence of objects of feeling and regarding the activity or 
passivity of feeUng 3 1 3 has at least the suggestion of dishonesty about 
it; one aknost feels that the prejudice against admitting a 'thing' world, 
which feeling comes up against and experiences a passivity thereto, 
stifles the asking of the question even before any attempt to answer 
it can be made. Dr. Johnson's response to Berkeley, by simply kick­
ing the stone, seems much more honest and convincing in this regard. 
But is man in fact absolutized activity, or rather, do we not find 
men as both acting subjects and things who exercise thek activity? 
Cassker has insisted 3 1 4 that the " I " and the " y o u " perceived in 
dialogue are constituted by the dialogical activity, as poles thereof. But 
does the dialogue constitute the dialecticians simply and absolutely, or 
does it not rather presuppose them in a primordial way such that U there 
is no one akeady there to dialogue there is no dialogue? It is not denied 
that the self-constructed personalities of the dialecticians are con­
structed only in the dialectical communication when it is asserted that 
these seU-constructing personalities, and thek seU-constructing com­
munication, presuppose thek constitution as natural members "of a 
natural w o r l d . " 3 1 5 It is submitted that the " I " and the " y o u " who 
3 , 3 See Collingwood's The New Leviathan, p. 28 and p. 31. 
3 1 4 See this chapter, above, pp. 398-399. 
3 1 5 This statement is not to be taken as if to imply that they are merely material 
entities, but that they are members of a world found to exist as preceding any human 
activity. See this chapter, below, p. 426 et seq. 

426 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
corruTuxtucate in dialogue are possibly not manifested to themselves except 
in and through the mediation of that communicating activity, but to 
admit that is not the same as to say that what that activity manifests 
is nothing more than the parties as constituted by that activity. It is sub­
mitted that what that activity manifests to the involved parties is pre­
cisely their distinct autonomy as things and as subjects, which distinct­
ness they enjoy as a very precondition of that unifying dialogical activ­
ity. Cassirer in this respect, like Collingwood, is in the 'Verum = Fac­
tum' Vician line of thinking, so that, since a man knows only what 
he purposefully makes, the self he knows through self-knowledge is 
nothing other than the self he makes, and the making of the seU is 
in dialogical communication. But, discarding the commitment one 
makes as soon as one accepts the Vician principle 'Verum = Factum' 
as a presupposition, what is the true disclosure of the dialogical inter­
action situation? Does it not disclose two individual agents, two in 
what they are even U brought into a communicating unity by what they 
do? Just as the activity of sexual intercourse is one act done presuppos­
ing a duality ofagents in the unity ofthat action, so also does the activity 
of dialogue presuppose a dimension of being in which the dialogu­
ing agents are not one but two. Notwithstanding that they are one 
in their dialoguing activity they are two in what they are, that is, as things 
which are, prior to and as a precondition of their unUying activity. 
Their individual duaUty may not be discbsed to them prior to their activ­
ity in dialogue, but they have to be and to be as two and to be as things-
able-to-dialogue (unUke being a stone) before that seU-revelational activ­
ity takes place. Simply, this is to assert that, besides being dialogical, 
self-constituting beings, they are also natural beings. Prior to any of 
his actions—of consciousness, of artistic production, or whatever one 
will—and indeed as a determining condition of the existence of any 
of these distinctively human activities, man is found to have a weU-
defined structure in his being and in his mode of acting. To say this 
is to say, in Aristotelian terms, that man exists 'by nature.' Distin­
guishing those things which exist 'by nature' from those which exist 
otherwise than by nature, Aristotle says that what characterizes them 
is that "each of them has within itseU a principle of motion and of 
stationariness." 3 1 6 Thus a bed and a coat, as such, are not natural, 
since, as such, they exist only as a result of human production. 3 1 7 
3 1 4 See his Physics, Bk. 2, Ch. 1, 192b 10-15. The translation of R. P. Hardie and 
R. K. Gaye in The Basic Works of Aristotle, ed. Richard McKeon, was used. 
317 Ш., 
192b 10-20. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
427 
Furthermore, as such, that is, as artistic products as distinct from beings 
'from nature,' they have no innate principle within them, "no innate 
impulse to change." 3 1 8 Beings which are distinctively natural have a 
way of acting which has its reason within the acting being itseU. Thus 
"man is born from man, but not bed from bed. This is why people 
say that the figure [of a bed] is not the nature of a bed, but the wood 
is—if the bed sprouted not a bed but wood would come u p . " 3 1 9 Beds 
do not exist in the natural world but only in the human, cultural world, 
resulting from human transformation. But wood does so exist, and 
in the manner in which it is found prior to any human tampering, 
it has very definite inbuilt principles of acting. Ьл trees, in which wood 
is found 'in nature,' there is the capacity to grow and generate its 
own kind. Likewise in regard to man. There is a well-defined region 
of his being which did not result from his own seU-development. He 
is already, in what he innately is, distinguished from the non-human 
world. That some things exist 'by nature' " i t would be absurd to try 
to prove; for it is obvious that there are many things of this kind, and 
to prove what is obvious by what is not is the mark of a man who 
is unable to distinguish what is self-evident from what is not." 3 2 0 It 
is likewise obvious that man bears the marks of existing 'by nature' 
as weU as existing 'by his own ingenuity.' That is, besides being a 
member of the cultural world, the world which results from man's free 
disposition of things, he also exists as a member of the natural world, 
the world which preexists all human cultivation and development. Man 
is 'by nature' inteUigent and 'by nature' free. His inteUectual and free 
activities come from inbuUt principles which enable him to so act, 
which principles precede him in an absolute way, as in no way result-
ingfrom his disposition of himseU, but utterly presupposed to the very 
possibUity of his activity of self-dispositioning. 
This in no way weakens the thesis that history is a human activ­
ity in which the historian, or U one prefers, man as historian, enters 
into active communication with past human beings and their thoughts 
and concerns, and, in so doing, moulds himseU up into what he is. 
In fact, it enables us to maintain this thesis without the tortuous dif­
ficulties which CoUingwood tried to solve by his theory of incapsula­
tion, 3 2 1 that is, the problem as to how the same activity of thinking 
could be in a past historical figure and in the present historian's rnind. 
3 1 8 
Mi. 
3 1 9 Mi., 
193b 5-15. 
3 2 0 Md., 193a 
1-10. 
3 2 1 See his Autobiography, pp. 112-114. See also Chapter 6, above, p. 227 et seq. 

428 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
There is no problem if the two (that is, the past and present) thinkers 
have some identity other than their activities of thinking and thought 
communication, that is, if the thinker and the thought he thinks are 
not entirely the same. 
K the absolute in being is seH-conscious, seU-creative activity, then 
man is simply his history, and history as the story of what human 
consciousness has made of itseU is the absolute in knowledge. But 
if man is something more than self<onscious, self-creative activity, 
then there is room for other disciplines than history to make their own 
autonomous contribution to answering the question, "What is man?" 
Man as a natural being, for instance, can be investigated as something 
found at the terminal of a long period of biological evolution. His evo­
lution to his place in the natural world is part of the explanation of 
what he is. Thus, H.-I. Marrou distinguishes "between . .. two pasts 
of mankind," one pertaining "to biological evolution" and "the other 
to history." 3 2 2 The prehistorian not only "examines the remains of 
humanskeletons, analysestheirphysicalcharacteristics.. 
. . concen­
trates . . . on the size of the cranial brainpan or the erect posture," 
which pertains to palaeontology, he also "studies objects that bear 
the marks or traces of man's voluntary action . . . " which "pertains 
to archaeology, which is a branch of history . . . in the fuU meaning 
of the t e r m . " 3 2 3 
Self-consciousness, then, can be seen as something man has in 
addition to many other things which he has but of which perhaps 
he may never become conscious. It is by his activities of thinking and 
caring that he exercises seU-conscious, seU-creative activity, but he 
does not actively endow himseU with the very abUity to do these ac­
tions; rather, he finds himseU endowed with them. It is not by my 
free, self-determining activity that I am able to act freely. If freedom 
were not something already in what I find that I am I could never 
take myseU in hand in the exercise of free, self-determining activity. 
Man is free inasmuch as he is not fuUy determined to being one kind 
of thing, but is open, in what he is, to alternative possibUities. But 
he is not free about this, namely, that he is so open; as Sartre says 
man is condemned to freedom. But to call this openness a condem­
nation seems to suggest expression of displeasure and the wUl to 
punish, in a Platonic fashion, on the part of some personal being, and 
thus savors of myth-making. Is it not more in harmony with the facts 
3 2 2 H.-I. Marrou, The Meaning ofHistory, Montreal, Palm Publishers, 1966, p. 36. 
3 2 3 R>id., pp. 36-37. See also ibid., pp. 4345. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
429 
of our experience of ourselves and of other human beings to say that 
man is 'by nature' free; that inasmuch as he belongs to the world of 
things which (as Aristotle says) exist 'by nature,' as having within 
them predetermined principles of acting, he is 'naturaUy,' that is, un-
freely, determinately (although not by condemnation, as Sartre says) 
endowed with the ability to assess his situation, make decisions and 
take his situation, his "thrown-ness," in hand. AU this can be simply 
summarized by saying that CoUingwood's assertion that "man is what 
he does," understood, as it is by Collingwood, in an absolutized care-
meaning context, has to be modUied so as to allow also that "what 
a man does supposes what he is," which assertion recognizes man's 
membership in the world of things which exist 'by nature.' Inasmuch 
as man is a historical being he is what he makes of himself by his 
freedom. Inasmuch as he is a natural being he acts determinately, as 
his nature so determines him to act. And one of the ways his nature 
determines him to act is to act freely. 
Ainsi la spontaneite de l'esprit n'est pas absolue. La science est 
bien une construction de l'esprit, mais eUe n'est pas une pure con­
struction de l'esprit. C'est une construction partiellement au moins 
dirigee du dehors. Les choses sont comprehensibles, ce qui etait pour 
Einstein la plus incomprehensible des choses. Le progres dans la 
connaissance de l'univers et de ses lois verifie ä sa maniere la vieiUe 
these metaphysique de I'inteUigibfflte de I'etre.324 
H, consequently, we foUow Cassirer and take perception as the 
phenomenological point of departure in the analysis of the source of 
the two orders of meaning, are we in fact faced with an either/or situa­
tion: either objective, physical, natural, deterministic explanation, in 
which the subject of concern is obliterated by being absorbed into the 
natural, or subjective, personalist, spiritual, free, self-determining 
explanation, in which the objective is merely a concern of the subject? 
It is submitted that the evidence of perception justUies the validity 
of both types of explanation, and that the inabUity of one or the other 
type of explanation to deal adequately with aU areas of experience 
in supplying a rational account of experience is a warning against the 
vaUdity of such a reduction. Science bears on the natural world as 
its object, and bears on it according to its determinate characteristics 
without, however, appropriating to itseU the natural world as its own 
exclusive object. For phUosophy also bears on the natural world, as 
3 2 4 J. de Finance, Essfli' sur l'agir humain, Rome, Presses de l'Universitä Gregorienne, 
1962,p. 165. 

430 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
also on the cuUural world. Science bears on the natural world accord­
ing to the determinate observable and measurable relations found 
therein, which it expresses as 'the laws of nature.' Philosophy, on 
the other hand, inquires as to the mode of being of that which exists 
'by nature.' 3 2 5 Science, therefore, should not attempt to impose its 
method of objectivising and proceeding on history, nor should history 
attempt to foist its way of objectivising and proceeding onto science. 
Each discipHne may borrow the methods of the other, as Robert Stover 
showed, 3 2 6 but each should honestly recognize that the borrowing is 
in fact a borrowing, and that what is borrowed belongs to the other 
discipline by right. The Michelson-Morley experiment in physics can 
be regarded from the point of view of answering the question which 
manifested the personal interests and concerns of the physicists in­
volved. Explained in that way, that experiment has its place in the 
history of physics and in the unfolding of man's thinking about the 
world. Or the answer which that same experiment supplied can be 
regarded also as a proposition which says something about the natural 
world. Thus taken, that experiment belongs to the domain of physics, 
not merely to the history of physics. 
From this we can draw the conclusion which, in essence, is the 
necessary modification which must be borne in mind in agreeing with 
CoUingwood that the method of history is one of questioning. 3 2 7 When 
propositions which are answers to questions are taken precisely as 
3 2 5 The point made here is that the natural world and the scientific world are not 
synonymous, as if thinking scientificaUy about an object is what entitles it to be caUed 
'natural.' This latter position seems to be that of CoUingwood. Thus, in The New 
Leviathan, p. 7, par. 1.83, he says: "Man as body is whatever the sciences of body say 
that he is" (emphasis in original), whereas (1.84) "Man as mind is whatever he is con­
scious ofbeing." Again, in Speculum Mentis, p. 167, he says, "Mathematics, mechan­
ism and materiaUsm are the three marks of aU science, a triad of which none can be 
separated from the others, since in fact they all follow from the original act by which the 
scientific consciousness comes into being, namely, the assertion of the abstract concept. 
They are aU, it may be said, products ofthe classificatoryframe ofmind . . ." (emphasis 
added). The notion of the naturaUty of a thing as constituted by an inbuUt source 
of determinate activity is foreign to the modern mentality dominated by the Carte­
sian identUication of the natural world with externaUty, understood spatiaUy in terms 
solely of extension. Kant's subsequent understanding of the natural world as con­
stituted by the a priori form of space, foUowed by the Hegelian reduction of the 'given' 
characteristic of experience to an activity of the mind which gives its object to itself, 
eventuaUy leads, as in ColUngwood, to the identification of the natural with the 
'spatial,' that is, that which is given according to the mode of externaUty, and which 
is thus given by and in the mind thinking scientificaUy. Such a reduction, widespread 
in modern thought, evacuates from a natural world its very naturality, namely, that 
it is an autonomous possessor of its own source of acting in a definite way. 
3 2 6 See this chapter, above, pp. 362-363. 
3 2 7 See this chapter, above, p. 416. 

Logic, Questioning and History 
431 
answers to questions, they are taken precisely as satisfying some per­
sonal need or concern in a care-meaning context. But when these 
answers are taken not precisely as answers, but precisely as proposi­
tions, they are taken precisely as statements which say something 
about the natural world, and their meaning is therefore that of the 
natural order type. CoUingwood strives to suppress the propositional 
character which bears natural order meaning to inflate and absolu­
tize the answering character, which is the bearer of careful-concern 
meaning. This statement summarizes in a nutshell the core critique 
against the whole CoUingwoodian enterprise. 
One final point may be made which helps to drive home the above 
conclusion. Ernst Cassirer noted 3 2 8 that natural science, by its man­
ner of conceiving, extends itseU to the whole of cosmic space, whereas, 
due to their way of universalizing, the cultural sciences, including 
history, are confined to a small region of that domain, namely the 
human region. 3 2 9 But this implies that man is a distinguishable part 
of that cosmic whole, capable of being recognized by defining charac­
teristics, which presupposes genus-species logic. Thus Dr. Leakey, 
looking for evidences of prehistoric man in East Africa, had to be able 
to recognise what were properly human artUacts from what was the 
result of natural forces. 3 3 0 Man's conscious reappropriation of the 
cosmic totality within himself, and abUity to bend it to his own satis­
faction, is conditioned by and presupposes his location as one among 
others forming part of the natural cosmic whole. Man is thus natural­
ly a part of the whole before the whole becomes consciously part of 
man through man's investigative activity. The delineation of the area 
of seU-creative, dialectical activity mardiesting itseU as a scale of forms 
in an overlap of classes thus supposes the avaUabUity of genus-species 
logic capable of recognizing man as specifically distinct from aU other 
natural entities in the cosmos. Thus, even though the dialectical logic 
of the active seU-creating concrete universal may locate genus-species 
thinking as a seU-transcended part within itseU, nevertheless the very 
process itseU is attached to the being of man, which requires 
distinguishing him as a species from other species in the cosmos with 
whom he would be contained under some common genus. Thus there is 
mutual superiority and mutual subordination of one way of proceed-
3 2 8 See this chapter, above, p. 411. 
3 2 9 See his The Logic of the Humanities, p. 144. 
3 3 0 See L. Leakey, Adam's Ancestors, New York, Harper and Row, 1960, Ch. 3, 
pp. 29-53. 

432 
Logk, Philosophy, and History 
ing with respect to the other, depending upon the standpoint fröm 
which one operates, namely, the scientific point of view 3 3 1 or the 
historical point of view. 
3 3 1 Or, more widely than in Stover's perspective, the natural point of view, that 
is, the point of view which visuaUses a thing in its determinate mode of being, whether 
objectivised scientificaUy in terms of laws of nature, which consist in universal and 
necessary correlations of observable and measurable phenomena, or visualized philo-
sophicaUy, in terms of the mode ofbeing involved in that which acts in a determinate 
way. The opposition Stover recognizes is that between the predetermined and the 
seU-deterrrdning. Stover restricts his inquiry to the pre-deterrnined as scienrUicaUy 
investigated. 

CHAPTER T E N 
Conclusion 
A. Summary of Foregoing 
The foregoing has presented CoUingwood's caU for the develop­
ment of a hitherto neglected logic of questioning, which he alleges 
to be the logical procedure proper to history (Chapter One). Chapter 
Two investigated CoUingwood's identUication of knowledge with the 
activity of asking and answering questions, in which he takes the 
distinctive position that the meaning of any proposition can only be 
known in relation to the question of which the proposition is intended 
to be the answer. This, in consequence, involved him in also taking 
the distinctive position that aU statements are essentially historical in 
meaning, since every question (to which propositions are relative as 
regards their meaning) is asked by a definite person in a definite con­
text of time, place and circumstances. 
Chapter Three investigated the suppositional character essential 
to the activity of questioning according to Collingwood. Questioning 
as supposing is important for Collingwood since it is this characteris­
tic that marks knowledge as an activity, as distinct from the mere co-
presence of the mind with an akeady given object simply to be con­
templated. In the supposal of questioning, the mind takes an active 
stand with respect to its objects and is able to consider the nonexistent, 
the "supposed." Since Collingwood identUies this particular feature 
433 

434 
Logic, Phihsophy, and History 
of questioning with artistic activity, it was necessary to examine Col­
Ungwood's position on the nature of art and its relevance to the ques­
tioning process, which consists in this: that in questioning as supposal 
the mind exercises its creative initiative in knowledge as distinct from 
mere contemplative co-presence with a datum, as Positivists main­
tain (this latter consideration being deferred to Appendix One). 
The key logical entity in ColUngwood's proposed question and 
answer logic was shown, in Chapter Four, to be that of the concrete 
universal, which is the principle of concrete unity in diversity in history 
and "the daUy bread of every historian," in contradistinction to the 
abstract universal, which is the principle of intelligibUity in math­
ematical deduction and scientUic induction. Whereas the abstract 
universal is the principle of genus-species, propositional logic most 
apt for scientUic thought, the concrete universal is necessary for con­
crete, historical truhkmg, which, according to CoUingwood, alone could 
provide mankind with the inteUectual instrument for the harmonious 
management of human affairs. The application of Renaissance science 
to the solution of human problems had resulted in the sundering of 
the various lUe forms, namely, art, religion, science, history and 
phUosophy, and CoUingwood sought, through history and its proper­
ly human logic, to bring about a rapprochement of the now departmen-
taUzed human affairs which had culminated in the disaster of the first 
World War. ColUngwood's concrete question and answer logic was 
thus shown to be his answer to the problem of human Uls as he saw 
them to flow from the practice of treating human affairs with the 
methods of science, which are properly apphcable only to the natural 
external world. 
Chapter Five exposed Collingwood's theory that relevant ques­
tions arise from historicaUy determined presuppositions. According 
to him, Metaphysics is reaUy the historical study of the absolute presup­
positions which determine the relevant questions of this or that par­
ticular historical period. Whereas relative presuppositions are answers 
to previous questions, absolute presuppositions, which ultimately con­
dition the meaning of aU questions and their answers, are statements 
that are made not in answer to any question, but are catalytic tools 
that the rnind forms out of itseU in order to question experience and 
thereby convert it into the experience of a rational being. They are 
simply presupposed for the purpose of interrogation. 
Chapter Six then dealt with Collingwood's theory of mind as the 
ultimate basis of aU that is, and his position that mind is not a thing 
or substance, but seU-activating and seU<reating activity. The totality 

Conclusion 
435 
of that which is, or reality, is thus understandable as reduced to the 
dialectical self<reativity of mind becoming progressively conscious 
of itseU through the raising and solving of problems. 
The remaining three previous chapters (Seven, Eight and Nine) 
attempted to evaluate criticaUy the various main aspects of ColUng­
wood's thought on the logic of questioning. Chapters Seven and Eight 
concluded that although CoUingwood was right in recognizing that 
propositions have a distinctive meaning in the concrete situation in 
which they function as answers to questions, he was wrong in deny­
ing that they have a meaning in themselves distinct from their func­
tion as answers to questions. 
Chapter Eight took Collingwood to task for neglecting to recog­
nize an already weU-developed logic of questioning in Aristotle. In 
terms of the Aristotelian logic of questioning, Collingwood's theory 
of knowledge as question and answer was criticized as being the result 
of disorderly interrogation. 
Chapter Nine investigated CoUingwood's claim that history pro­
ceeds by a distinctive logic of questioning, and concluded by agree­
ing that such a logic proper to history does exist. This chapter also 
showed precisely how historical meaningfulness dUfers from scien­
tific meaningfulness, namely, that whereas science looks at the world 
as inteUigible in terms of impersonal deterministic laws, the historian 
looks at events in their relation to human, free causaUty, in which 
there is seU-determination of alternative possibUities. When a proposi­
tion is taken precisely as an answer to a definite question, it is taken 
precisely in relation to human freedom and its projects and concerns, 
which the question articulates. 
6. General Conclusion Regarding Collingwood's 
Logic of Question and Answer 
The conclusion of Chapter Nine, above, that history does in fact 
proceed, as Collingwood says, according to a logical method of ques­
tion and answer, is also the answer to one of the basic questions which 
has dominated this whole investigation, namely, whether Colling­
wood's allegation of the existence of such an undeveloped logic is to 
be admitted. 
Having agreed on this basic point with CoUingwood, subject to 
the important reservations made in Chapter Nine, in which Colling­
wood's undue subordination of induction and deduction to histor­
ical methodology was rejected, the second basic concern which has 
dominated this whole inquiry becomes relevant, namely, what can 

436 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
be said regarding the nature, structure and modes of procedure of 
this interrogative logic? 
AU that can be said in this regard, as far as the preceding inves­
tigation warrants, is that the rationale or basis which gives the con­
crete inquuy of history (and of science precisely in its historical dimen­
sion, that is, precisely in its function of discovery and research as 
distinct from its cocUfication into established principles and laws) is 
the concrete universal, which has been shown (in Chapter Four above) 
to have the character of an overlap of classes in a scale of forms in 
dialectical development, and (in Chapter Nine) to be constituted by 
a linguistic unity in diversity, a unity in diversity of human con­
sciousness in linguistic dialogue. 
But U this linguistic unity in diversity is the logical principle, the 
one in the many, at the basis of history and of research, what can 
be said regarding its principles? 
Such an investigation would involve considerable research in its 
own right, and couJd scarcely be given adequate treatment in a mere 
conduding chapter. But an attempt is made, in Appendix Two, below, 
to give some idea of the direction in which such a research could be 
pursued. The principal authority foUowed is Michael Polanyi, whose 
mam concern is with the logic of scientific discovery. Since the research 
and discovery aspect of science is properly historical, what Polanyi 
says is easUy adaptable in giving an at least prima facie outiine of the 
logic of interrogation. 
C. Final Remarks: Collingwood's Contribution 
to the History of Philosophy 
The history of phUosophy has provided us many times with visual 
aids disclosing the forms which phUosophy takes when it takes its 
cue and inspiration from other disciplines. Pythagoras, Descartes and 
Spinoza show us phUosophy under the speU of mathematics and its 
ideals and methods. The ancient atomists, Kant and A. J. Ayer show 
us phUosophy dominated by one or other of the ideals of physical 
science. Bergson fflustrates philosophy as elaborated from the view 
of evolutionary biology, and apparently, to some extent at least, so 
does Aristotle, who, according to E. GUson, "exaggerated the scope 
of one science [biology] and the value of its method, to the detriment 
of others"; 1 when "committing the opposite mistake to that of Des-
1 E. GUson, "Concerning Christian Philosophy," in Philosophy and History: The 
Emst Cassirer Festschrift, edited by Raymond Klibansky and H. J. Paton, New York, 
Harper Torchbooks, 1963, p. 71. 

Conclusion 
437 
cartes, Aristotle sets up biological method as a physical method." 2 
Gilson says that thus 
to biologize the inorganic as he and the mediaeval philosophers did 
was to condemn oneself to ignorance about those sciences of the 
inorganic world whose present popularity comes chiefly from the 
inexhaustible fertility which they display in things practical.3 
With Collingwood, following in the wake of Hegel and Croce, 
philosophy is presented to us as dominated by the thought patterns 
and modes of procedure proper to history, in which the explanation 
of the world of experience is in terms of an active striving of the con­
scious seU in the overcoming of obstacles. K " i r i the cult of antinomies 
in modern philosophy . . . Kant comes up against them" and "Hegel 
lives by them," 41 think one may say that Collingwood, in his theory 
of questioning, completely radicalizes them. In presenting us with this 
Uving, historicaUy based phUosophy, CoUingwood has rendered a ser­
vice to phUosophy itseU. We can look at this living example, appraise 
its strengths, criticise its weaknesses and disengage its genuine con­
tribution to the perennial philosophy. 
Collingwood's most outstanding contribution to philosophy is 
perhaps his highlighting of philosophy in its multUarious forms as 
answers to pressing questions, an aspect of phUosophy consistently 
overlooked, yet of the highest importance for the fuU understanding 
of any particvdar phUosophy and indeed for that whole which is phUos­
ophy itseU. Thus, Aristotle's hylomorphic theory is scarcely intelligi­
ble if it is not viewed against the background of problems grappled 
with by Parmenides, Heraclitus, the ancient Atomists, Pythagoras and 
Plato. His theory not only speaks to us about the changing world of 
experience, but also answers a definite question that was a matter of 
urgent personal concern in Aristotle's mind, which question arose as 
a result of his inheritance from his forerunners. 
The phUosophy of the future wUl have to reckon with Colling­
wood's contribution, and wUl perhaps show a greater concern for the 
dependence which phUosophy or science, or any discipline for that 
matter, has upon its own history. 
2 Void., pp. 71, 72. 
3 Md., p. 73. 
4 lbid., p. 68. 


APPENDIX O N E 
The Nature of Supposal 
as an Activity of Imagination 
At the conclusion of Chapter Three, above, the treatment of sup­
posal as imaginative activity, or artistic activity, was deferred to an 
appendix. This treatment is now to be taken up here. 
CoUingwood investigates the nature of the imagination in his 1938 
publication The Principles ofArt, which, as the title indicates, aims to 
answer the question, "What is Art?" The imagination is therefore dealt 
with in that work inasmuch as its activity is an integral element in 
the answer to that question. The question, however, which is of 
relevance here is, "What is the imagination inasmuch as imaginative 
activity is supposal or questioning?" Thus, a somewhat dUferent 
viewpoint wUl be taken in this textual analysis of that work than the 
one adopted by the work itseU. 
Three main points wUl be the focus of attention of the present 
inquiry. First, the imagination wUl be considered as the activity by 
which the objective order is most fundamentaUy constituted. By this 
activity the fleeting present here-and-now actuaUty of feeUng, in which, 
previous to reflection, subject and object are mdistinguishably blended, 
is primarily converted into a recognizable object for a conscious subject, 
and therefore the activity in which the subject-object dichotomy 
required for consciousness and thought is first established. That is, 
the activity of imagining is the activity in which the conscious subject 
actively disengages itself from that which it opposes to itself as its 
439 

440 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
object. The very possibility of meaningfully recognizing the present 
fleeting moment of actual experience as something having a past, and 
as pointing towards an as yet unreaUzed but reaUzable future, depends 
upon this fundamental objectivizing function of imagination as a pre­
supposition thereof. 1 The work of thought in aU its forms and at aU 
its levels is to convert merely felt experience into the inteUigible expe­
rience of a rational being. Foundational to this, and a presupposition 
of any explanation and mediation, is the objectivization of the actual­
ity of present experience, the transformation of it from merely felt 
actuaUty to objectivity. This is basicaUy the work of the imagination. 2 
It provides the primary instance of the recognition of an 'other' and 
the presupposition of aU subsequent recognition of an 'other,' and, 
therefore, of aU subsequent relating activity of thought, and of aU subse­
quent disengagement from and transcendence over immediacy, and 
of the very possibUity of establishing the alternatives which are a pre-
required condition for the activity of questioning. Imagining, as an 
objectivizing disengagement from actuality but yet as ordered back 
to the actuality of experience, is the activity of supposing, an essen­
tial constituent of the activity of questioning, according to CoUingwood. 
Second, imagination as expression correlates the theoretical aspect 
of knowledge, the apprehension of unity in diversity, with the 
dynamism of appetite, which is the forward striving of the mind 
1 "The real is the present, conceived not as a mathematical point between the 
present and the past, but as the union of present and past in a duration or permanence 
that is at the same time change: the possible parting with its unnecessariness and 
the necessary parting with its impossibility in an actuality which is at once possible 
[because open to an undetermined future] and necessary [because brought to actual­
ity by a determined past], not (Uke the abstract mathematical present) neither. Within 
this present there are, as reaUy as you Uke, two elements (necessity and possibUity), 
each of which taken singly or in isolation characterizes a being which is not real but 
ideal — the past and future respectively. Thus the past as past and the future as future 
do not exist at aU, but are purely ideal; the past as Uving in the present and the future 
as germinating in the present are whoUy real and indeed are just the present itself. 
It is because of the presence of these two elements in the present. . . that the present 
is a concrete and changing reality and not an empty mathematical point." R. G . Col­
lingwood, "Some Perplexities about Time," Proceedings oftheAristotelian Society, XXVI 
(1925-1926), p. 149. For a further consideration of the necessity of the past and the 
contingency of the future see Dominique Parodi, "Näcessite et contingence en his-
toire," Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale, LIV (1949), pp. 273-279. 
2 What Bosanquet says in his The Principle ofIndividuality and Value, pp. 57-58, weU 
indicates this objectivizing function of the imagination: ". . . a work of art . . . is an 
object in which we can realize what the Greeks meant by Theoria. In its essence, as 
a thing of beauty, and neglecting its aspect as a physical object or movement, it is 
self<ontained and a true whole, possessing its sigmficance in itseU, and not driving 
our thought beyond it to a detached meaning and explanation. Every point in it car­
ries the burden, or lives with the life of the whole." 

Supposal and Imagination 
441 
which constitutes the open possibilities of the future and is not reaUy 
distinct from the activity of questioning dynamicaUy considered, that 
is, as the cutting edge of the mind in action. 
Third, imaginative expression, as language, is concerned precisely 
with the process of the objectivizing of feeling, the very constituting 
of feeling into an object of imagination, that is, an idea. Language 
is the expressed embodiment of objective, therefore actuaUy achieved, 
consciousness, which thus acquires the determinate characteristic of 
a past. Furthermore, as Unguistically expressed, what is expressed is 
avaUable not only to the speaker, but publicly. " I n speech and art 
the individuals not only share what they already possess; it is only 
by virtue of this sharing process in speech and art that individuals 
have attained what they possess."3 
The structure of the content of this appendix follows generally 
the order in which it appears in CoUingwood's The Principles 
ofArt. 
Section A exposes Collingwood's distinction between thinking, feel­
ing and imagining. Section B deals with the problem of distinguish­
ing imagination from sensation and Section C with CoUingwood's 
identUication of the imagination with consciousness in its wide sense 
and with the distinction of imagination from thought in the strict sense 
of inteUectual thought. Section D outlines Collingwood's summary 
of his general theory of the imagination, and section E presents Col­
lingwood's theory of art as expression, specificaUy with emphasis on 
linguistic expression as the basic form of art. 
A. Imagination, Thinking and Feeling Distinguished 
CoUingwood first appeals to the commonly recognized distinc­
tion between minking and feeUng.4 Whereas in our experience of feel­
ing there is the experience of a perpetual flux, in that of tMnking there 
is the experience of a genuine recurrence of something; something 
is recognized to stand firm amidst the flux, somewhat in the same 
way that in the flow of a river at least the soUand the rocks in which 
the river is channelled are recognized to stand firm, at least in rela­
tion to the flow of the water. In order that something be an object 
in the most minimal sense of the term it is necessary that it be taken 
out of the condition of radical flux. If feeling is to be an object, the 
3 Ernst Cassirer, The Logic of the Humanities, New Haven, YaIe University Press, 
1966, p. 113. 
4 See R. G. CoUingwood, The Principles ofArt, London, Oxford University Press, 
1938 (first Galaxy paperback edition, 1958), p. 159. 

442 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
flux which characterizes it in its own right has to be stabilized in some 
way. 5 
CoUingwood distinguishes two recognizably distinct kinds of feel­
ing. First there is the kind we refer to when we say we feel hot or 
cold, hard or soft. Then there is the kind we refer to when we say 
we feel pleasure, pain, anger or fear, etc. He accepts estabUshed custom 
in caUing the first type sensations and the second type emotions. In 
our experience, every sensation has its corresponding distinctive emo­
tional charge associated with it, or, more correctly, with its object, 
its sensum, or that which is sensed as distinct from the act of sensing 
it. 6 
From our experience of it "feeling appears to arise in us inde­
pendently of aU thinking, in a part of our nature which exists and 
functions below the level of thought and . . . unaffected by i t . " 7 This 
sensuous-emotional nature which we have as feeling-creatures, and 
independent of our thinking nature as rational creatures, constitut­
ing a level of experience below that of thought, presents itseU as some­
thing basic, a foundation upon which the rational part is superstruc-
tured. This level of awareness, at which we merely feel, CoUingwood 
caUs the psychical level, which he says is the proper domain of the 
science of psychology. 
Thought presents itseU in our experience under two forms. Its 
primary form is exclusively occupied with its substratum of feeling, 
which gives to it (thought) its sole and universal subject-matter. When 
we think ' I am tired,' or 'It is a hot day,' or 'There is a patch of blue,' 
we are thinking about our feelings. 
. . . our experience of the world . . . the 'world of nature' . . . 
is an experience partly sensuous (strictly, sensuous-emotional) and 
partly intellectual: sense being concerned with the colours we see, 
the sounds we hear, and so forth; and thought, with the relations 
between these things.8 
But in its secondary form, thought thinks not about feelings and 
the relations between these, but rather about our thoughts themselves. 
5 I understand this to mean that pure feeling as such would be too fleeting to be 
taken hold of and dealt with in any way; it could not be said to possess a recognizable 
identity, and would thus defy objectivization. 
6 See R. G. CoUingwood, The Principles ofArt, pp. 160-163. See also CoUingwood's 
The New Leviathan, pp. 18-26. 
7 R. G. ColUngwood, The Principles of Art, p. 163. 
8 Rrid., p. 166. See also The New Leviathan, p. 16, pars. 3.54 and 3.6, for 'feeling' 
as one of the traditional meanings of the term 'body.' 

Supposal and Imagination 
443 
The propositions asserted by thought in this secondary form may 
be indifferently described as affirming relations between one act 
of thinking and another, or between one thing we think and an­
other . . . 9 
Collingwood says that the distinction of first order thought from 
second order thought is the same as the traditional distinction of under­
standing from reason, or of science from philosophy. 
The problem of imagination, or the question to which the imagina­
tion is the answer, arises in connection with thought in its primary 
function, namely as thought is concerned with the relations between 
sensa. This question arises in regard to the very possibility of making 
comparisons and establishing relationships between sensa, as when 
we say 'this is blue,' 'that is red,' and 'this blue is bluer than that 
blue.' To say that it is hotter now than a moment, or a minute, or 
an hour ago, implies that we have some means of comparing the 
presently felt sensum with the sensum felt a moment, or a while, or 
an hour ago. But the sensum of a moment, or a minute, or an hour 
ago is no longer present, having since been carried away by the flux 
of sensation. The flux of sense seems to destroy any sensum before 
it has lasted long enough to permit its relations with other sensa to 
be studied. So-called sense data are not mere data of sensation, but 
sensa as given and retained, established or fixed like a datum line in 
a survey, and therefore already taken out of the pure flux ofsensation. 
Sense data are already thought-interpreted (mediated) and stabfflzed.10 
Again, we cannot caU our relationship with our sensa an 'acquaint­
ance,' for in order to be acquainted with someone or something there 
has to be contact made with it on a number of occasions. It would 
thus have to be a recurring feature of one's experience. But sensa 
neither persist nor recur. Redness may recur and enable us to get ac­
quainted with it, but this red patch does not recur so that one cannot 
get acquainted with it. 
[Talk about and appeal to sense data] implies that I can know 
what certain sensa, not present to me, would be like U they were 
present to me, and can say 'These are, or are not, the sensa I 
expected,' comparing sensa which I now have with some idea of 
them which I framed in advance of having them; and it should be 
explained how this is possible. 1 1 
9 R. G. Collingwood, The Principles ofArt, p. 167. 
1 0 See ibid., p. 169. That is, 'sensa,' as data, are established, as weU as defined, as 
objects. Note also the character of 'past' which becomes relevant in such a comparison. 
11 R>id., p. 170. 

444 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Talking about our sensa in this way is to raise the term 'sensum' 
and aU its cognates to mean something quite cUfferent from the momen­
tary and evanescent colours, sounds, scents and the rest which we 
actuaUy feel in sensation but which we mistakenly substitute for them. 
Tf there are such things, they dUfer from sensa in not being whoUy 
fluid and evanescent, since any one of them admits of retention in 
the rnind as an object of attention after the sensation of it has occurred, 
or in anticipation of the sensation before it occurs. But, on the other 
hand, these quasi-sensa are sufficiently like sensa to be taken for them 
and to receive the same name. 
Collingwood maintains that there are such things. Hume caUed 
them ideas as distinct from impressions, and CoUingwood holds that 
"there is a special activity of the mind correlative to them . . . what 
we generaUy call the imagination, as distinct from sensation on the 
one hand, and intellect on the other." 1 2 
This activity, according to Collingwood, is the point at which the 
activity of thought makes contact with the merely psychic lUe of feeUng. 
It is Kant's blind but indispensable faculty which bridges sensation 
and understanding, and that without which, according to Aristotle, 
thought would be impossible. 
CoUingwood draws attention to the fact that everyday language 
has two ways of taUxing about sense and sensations, one of which 
maximizes the simUarity between (say) seen and imagined colours, 
the other which stresses the dUference. In the first way of talking, 
'reaUy seeing' and 'imagining' are both named sensations, and the 
objects of both are indUferently referred to as sensa, or sense data. 
In the second way of talking, the words 'sensum' and 'sensation' are 
restricted to cases referred to as 'reaUy seeing,' whereas the terms 
'imagining' and 'what is imagined' are used in opposition to 'reaUy 
seeing' and 'what is reaUy seen.' The second way of talking does not 
have any generic term to cover 'sensing' and 'sensum' on the one 
hand and 'imagining' and 'what is imagined' on the other hand, so 
that there is no indication, in this way of taUcing, as to how the two 
are genericaUy related. CoUingwood proposes to use the term 'sensa­
tion' as a generic term to cover both the act of sensing and the act 
of imagining, and the term 'to sense' when a verb is needed, and the 
object sensed wUl be referred to as 'a sensum,' whose species are 
colors, sounds, etc. As specUic names for the two cases, he proposes 
to reserve the terms 'real sensation' and 'imagination,' the species of 
1 2 Md., p. 171. 

Supposal and Imagination 
445 
real sensation being reaUy seeing, reaUy hearing, etc., and their objects; 
the species 'real sensa' are real colors, real sounds, etc., and imaginary 
sensa are imagined colors, imagined sounds, etc. 1 3 
B. Problem of the Distinction of Imagination from 
Sensation in the History of Modern Philosophy 
CoUingwood exarnines the opinions of phUosophers throughout 
the history of modern phUosophy on the question of the distinction 
of imagination from sensation. 1 4 
The assumption by the mediaevals, that sensation gives real ac­
quaintance with the real world, was undermined by sixteenth<entury 
sceptics, and the problem of guarding against Ulusions arising from 
mistaking an imaginary sensation for a real one became a major issue 
with Descartes, as, for example, our inabUity to distinguish sleeping 
and dreaming from the state of being awake. Descartes did not deny 
that there was a distinction between a real sensation and an imaginary 
one, between reaUy sitting in front of the fire and only dreaming it, 
but he concluded that there was no avaUable test whereby one could 
decide and make the distinction. Hobbes subsequently denied the real­
ity of the distinction, since immediacy was a feature of aU sense expe­
rience. Spinoza agrees with Hobbes against Descartes that in princi­
ple aU sensation is imagination. For Leibnitz, sensa deserve the name 
'idea,' since for him, unlike Spinoza, they are modes of thought. But 
they are ideas of a peculiar kind, namely confused ideas, which, U 
they could be brought to distinctness, would thereby lose their sen­
sory character.15 
Locke does not distinguish real from imaginary sensa, although 
his reason for doing so dUfers from that of Hobbes and Descartes. 
For Hobbes and Descartes aU sensa are imaginary, whereas for Locke 
they are aU real ("Our simple ideas are aU real"). But Locke was the 
first to attempt to distinguish 'real ideas' from 'fantastical.' The only 
ideas Locke aUows as fantastical are certain complex ideas formed at 
wUl by the arbitrary combination of simple ideas. 1 6 
Berkeley and Hume disowned Locke's position that sensa are real. 
Accepting Newton's world populated by bodies, Locke consequent­
ly accepted that real ideas are "such as have a conformity with the 
real Being and Existence of things, or with their Archetypes." Locke 
1 3 See ibid., pp. 172-174. 
1 4 See Md., pp. 174-190. 
1 5 See ibid., pp. 174-176. 
1 6 See ibid., p. 176. 

446 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
describes a 'fantastical idea' as one which the mind 'makes to itself.' 
Complex ideas are sometimes fantastical, as when they are voluntary 
combinations of simple ones in which the mind "uses some kind of 
Hberty in forming them." Simple ideas can never be fantastical, because 
they can never be 'Fictions at Pleasure.' 1 7 
Locke inadvertently provided Berkeley with a method which he 
(Berkeley) thought would enable him to distinguish real from imagi­
nary sensa by introspection, namely, by distinguishing ideas voluntar­
ily produced in us from those 'forced upon' us. Thus Berkeley distin­
guished 'ideas of sense' from 'ideas of imagination' on the score that 
'ideas of sense' are stronger and more lively than those of imagina­
tion. But this turns out to be ambiguous. If the distinction refers to 
the objects (the sensa) it would simply mean that a real sensation, (say) 
sound, is louder than an imaginary one, so that to caU a sound real 
or imaginary would refer merely to a dUference in audibUity. But U 
the distinction refers to the acts of sensing and imagining, it would 
mean that a real sound has a way of forcing itseU upon us that an 
imaginary sound does not, so that a real sound is heard whether we 
wUl it or no, whereas an imaginary one can be summoned up at wffl. 
In the latter case, the dUference is not between what we hear, the 
sounds, but between the experiences of hearing them, that is, a dU­
ference not recognizable by the ear but by the introspection of reflex­
ive consciousness in which we are aware of those experiences.18 
However, this introspectionist theory, drawn out of Locke by 
Berkeley, is stUl unable satisfactorily to distinguish real from imagi­
nary sensations. In the hallucinations of mental disease the patient 
is obsessed by imaginary sights, sounds, etc., which are altogether 
beyond his control. Indeed, in a healthy organism, a man who has 
been horrified by certain sights and sounds cannot banish them from 
his mind for quite some time, for he continues to imagine the crash, 
the blood, the cries, etc., in spite of aU his efforts to stop doing so. 
On Berkeley's principle, this should be a sure indication that he is 
reaUy seeing them. But all it proves is that we have but limited con­
trol over our imaginative activity. 1 9 
Berkeley then attempts a second theory of distinction. Ideas of 
sense have a certain steadiness, order and coherence according to dis­
coverable laws, the so-caUed Laws of Nature which we learn by expe-
1 7 See ibid., pp. 176-177. 
1 8 See ibid., p. 177. 
1 9 See ibid., pp. 178-179. 

Supposal and Imagination 
447 
rience. For Berkeley, the Laws of Nature are not laws concerning the 
relations between bodies or bodily movements or bodily forces, but 
are laws concerning the relations between sensa, and the Laws of 
Nature are obeyed by 'ideas of sense' but not by 'ideas of imagina­
tion,' which are w i l d . 2 0 
Collingwood says that this theory does not hold on closer scru­
tiny. Either I see what looks Uke a black animal crouching in the haU¬
light or I do not. No animal is found when I turn on the light and 
search the room, so I conclude that I was not reaUy seeing but only 
imagining. But does the imaginary animal reaUy disobey the laws of 
nature, as Berkeley contends it should? It may disobey some, but it 
obeys others. It comes under definite conditions, in the dark, when 
I am tired, bringing a slight but perceptible fear to one who, as a little 
boy, was frightened by the dark. So, although it does not belong to 
a famUy discernable in physical terms, yet it clearly does belong to 
one discernable in psychological terms. 2 1 
Can a distinction be made between real sensa and hnaginary sensa, 
asks Collingwood, on the score that real sensa obey natural laws 
whereas imaginary sensa obey psychological laws appropriate to the 
mental world? He rejects this possibUity, first, since the two orders 
are not absolutely distinct. Real sensa obey psychological laws as weU 
as do imaginary sensa, and it is stUl a debated point whether the psy­
chological is not reducible to the physical. Second, the laws of nature 
are what we learn by studying our real sensa, and the laws of psy­
chology are what we learn by studying our imaginary sensa. But this 
distinction presupposes that we are already able, as a principle of that 
distinction, to distinguish real sensa from imaginary sensa. So, 
U we need rules in order to distinguish real sensa from imaginary 
ones, it cannot be sensation, the undistinguished mixture of sensa­
tion and imagination, that teaches us those rules.22 
Hume, therefore, says CoUingwood, dropped the relation theory 
and tried to redevelop the introspection theory. Since in his Treatise 
on Human Nature he set himseU the task of showing how aU our knowl­
edge is derived from what Berkeley caUed 'ideas of sense,' and what 
he himseU called 'impressions,' he says that it is necessary to be able 
to cUstinguish ideas of sense from ideas of imagination, which he caUs 
simply 'ideas.' How, therefore, are we to place this distinction on a 
2 0 See ibid., pp. 179-180. 
2 1 See ibid., p. 181. 
2 2 Vbid., p. 182. 

448 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
firm basis? The distinction, he maintained, must depend on a differ­
ence between the two types of experience perceptible by direct inspec­
tion. "The difference betwixt these," he says at the beginning of his 
Treatise, "consists in the degrees of force and hveliness with which 
they strike upon the rnind, and make their way into our thought or 
consciousness." This is the same as Berkeley's criterion "more strong, 
lively, distinct." The distinction between real sensation and imagina­
tion is resolved into the distinction between our inability of set pur­
pose to control, excite, suppress or modify our sensory experiences. 
But, when Hume admits that ideas 'in sleep, in fever, in madness, 
or in any very violent emotions of the soul' conform to what he caUs 
impressions and the definition he gives of impressions, instead of con­
cluding that they are impressions, or that his definition of impres­
sion is faulty, he excuses himseU by pleading that these are excep­
tional cases. CoUingwood says that Hume does not see that this is 
reaUy an appeal to the alternative criterion which he has already re­
jected, namely that of the relation in which our various experiences 
stand to each other, since 'exceptionalness' is something we can attri­
bute to something only when we try to think of it as an instance of 
a rule, which, here, is a question of a rule determining the relations 
which our sensa must bear to one another U they are to be regarded 
as real sensa. Thus, Hume's attempt to derive aU knowledge from 
sensation has broken down on the very first page of his Treatise.23 
But, Collingwood maintains, progress in the science of man, as 
in any other science, comes through taking exceptions seriously. Kant 
noted that U there is any distinction between real and imaginary sen­
sa, it cannot lie in a dUference of 'force and liveliness,' that is, in the 
involuntary or voluntary character of the acts by which we perceive 
them, but must Ие elsewhere. 
Kant cUstinguished thought into a primary function, caUed under­
standing, which is concerned with the relations between sensa, and 
thought in its secondary function, which is concerned with the rela­
tions between thoughts in the primary function. Thought in its 
secondary function, for Kant, is reasoning. 
According to Berkeley, the laws of nature are aU empirical laws 
learned from experience by noting the relations between sensa. Kant 
explicitly attacked this position by showing that these first-order laws 
(relations between sensa) imply second-order laws, which Kant caUed 
'principles of the understanding.' Now, a sensum may be wüd (unruly) 
2 3 See ibid., p. 185. 

Supposal and Imagination 
449 
relatively to first-order laws of nature, so far as they have been dis­
covered at any given moment in the history of scientific discovery. 
The laws, as thus far known, may not yet permit classification of such 
sensa in any family whose law of behaviour is known. But this, 
according to Kant, cannot be so in regard to second-order laws, which 
govern the understanding itseU. It is a principle of the understanding 
that every event has a cause, and no event that comes under our notice 
can escape that principle. To call a sensation wild is simply to say that 
we have not yet discovered what its particular cause is. 2 4 
According to CoUingwood, Kant's discovery of second-order laws, 
the principles of the understanding, involves the discovery that there 
are no wUd sensa, and at the same time tells us why we can speak 
of wUd sensa existing. What we are reaUy saying is that certain sensa 
considered in the hght of second-order laws must admit of interpreta­
tion but have not yet been interpreted, and may remain uninterpreted until 
certain hitherto unknown first-order laws are discovered. Furthermore, 
according to Kant, 'reality' (as when we speak of 'real' sensa) is a 
category of the understanding, so that a sensation said to be real or 
not real is a sensation interpreted by the interpretative work of the 
understanding. 2 5 
Thus, Kant, instead of trying to conceive real sensa and imagi­
nary sensa as two coordinate species of the same genus, conceived 
the dUference between them as a dUference of degree. 
For [Kant] a real sensumcan only mean one which has Under­
gone interpretation by the understanding, which alone has the 
power to confer the title real; an imaginary sensum wffl then mean 
one which has not yet undergone that process. 2 6 
So, the common sense distinction between real and imaginary 
sensa, although flatly denied by the Cartesians, can be justified accord­
ing to Kant, but it cannot be justUied as a distinction between two 
classes of sensa.27 
Now, CoUingwood has already drawn attention to the ambiguity 
in common sense dialogue when it refers to real and imaginary sensa.28 
Sometimes it refers to both under the common genus of sensa, but 
other times it distinguishes sensation from imagination without the 
mediation of a common generic term. This second way of talking is 
2 4 See ibid., pp. 186-187. 
2 5 See ibid., p. 186. 
2 4 Rnd., p. 187. 
2 7 See ibid., p. 188. 
2 8 See this appendix, pp. 444445. 

450 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
most obvious in referring to what we caU Ulusions or ülusory sensa, 
which common sense abruptly distinguishes from real sensa. A n U-
lusory sensum is (not merely an imagined sensum, but) an imagined 
sensum taken for a real one. There is nothing special in the sensa themselves 
which would make them fflusory; to say that they are fflusory is simply 
to say that a mistake has been made about them. Pride may lead us to 
place the blame on them as U our error were due to them and not to 
our faulty thinking about them. 
But so-called real sensa are likewise susceptible to such mistakes 
about them. A chUd, or a primitive, looking into a mirror for the first 
time, may look for the source of his sensations by placing his hand 
behind the mirror, whereas experience wUl teach him that he has to 
place his hand in front of the mirror to interpret them correctly. 2 9 
Collingwood says, therefore, that it is wrong to define Ulusory 
sensa as imaginary sensa which we mistake for real ones (according 
to that second way in which common sense talks). He maintains that 
Ulusory sensa can be defined without any reference to the distinc­
tion between imaginary and real. " A n y sensum [so-called 'real' or 
so-called 'imaginary'] is Ulusory in so far as we make an error about 
i t . " 3 0 
CoUingwood clarifies by explaining that this error does not con­
sist in mistaking one sensum for a dUferent sensum. Such an error 
is impossible because aU that there can ever be in a sensum is present 
to the act of sensation. The mistakes we make about our sensa are 
mistakes about their relations with other sensa, possible or anticipated. 
The chUd or primitive before the rnirror is not mistaken in thinking 
that he sees a pattern of colours, nor that what he sees is like what 
he sees when he looks at someone else's face two feet away. His 
mistake lies in thinking that, because of these facts, he can touch the 
face he sees by feeling behind the glass. Further experience wUl teach 
him that in order to touch it he must feel in front of the glass. 
An iUusory sensum, then, is simply a sensum as to which we 
make mistakes about the relation in which it stands to other sensa. 
The conception of iUusion disappears, resolved into the conception 
of error.31 
2 9 See R. G. CoUingwood, The Principles ofArt, pp. 188-189. 
30 Tbid., p. 189. This echoes Kant's " . . . truth or iUusion is not in the object, insofar 
as it is intuited, but in the judgment about it, insofar as it is thought." Critique ofPure 
Reason (B.350); see Norman Kemp Smith's translation, London, MacmiUan, 1933, p. 
297. 
3 1 R. G. CoUingwood, The Principles of Art, p. 190. 

Supposal and Imagination 
451 
CoUingwood then applies his conclusion to such problems as the 
distant man looking smaller than the nearby one, and the raUway lines 
which 'look' convergent but 'reaUy' are parallel, etc. He rejects the 
commonly accepted distinction between realities (real men, real train 
tracks, etc.) and appearances (ofmen, of train tracks, etc.), according 
to which the men are reaUy the same size but appear dUferent and 
the train tracks are reaUy parallel though appearing to converge. He 
criticises the attitude which attributes to sensation itself an induce­
ment or temptation to us to make a mistake about it. He insists, con-
trarUy, that "just as no sensation can force us to make a mistake about 
it, so none can persuade or tempt us to do the same." 3 2 When we 
say that a distant man looks smaller, or that raUway tracks converge, 
what we mean is that we are warning ourselves or others against the 
error of thinking that because the pattern of colours we now see 
resembles the patterns we have seen on occasions of a certain kind 
then the further sensa which we may expect to behave in certain ways 
wUl continue to show the same kind of resemblance. 
Thus, the phrase 'iUusions of sense' or 'illusory sensa' describes 
cases in which actual errors are made as to the relations between 
sensa, so 'appearances of sense' describes cases in which care is 
taken that errors of this kind shaU not be made. 3 3 
Before coming to his conclusion of this long discussion, Colling­
wood asks us to consider three cases in which we speak of imagining 
something. A match box is before me; I say that I reaUy see the three 
sides facing me, but that I imagine the other three, each with its ap­
propriate color. I also say that I imagine the inside of the box and the 
matches in it. I also imagine the feel of the box and the smell of its 
phosphorous edge. These imagined things are reaUy there, and as 
Collingwood, foUowing Kant, says, it is only inasmuch as I imagine 
these things to be reaUy there (though not sensed to be there) that 
I am aware of the box as a solid body. U a person could only see the 
box without imagining, he would not see a world of solid bodies, but 
only (as Berkeley put it) 'various colours variously disposed.' Thus, 
says Kant, imagination is an 'indispensable function' for our knowl­
edge of the world around us. 3 4 
The second kind of imaginings Collingwood asks us to consider 
is Ulustrated by looking out of a window and seeing a rainbow. When 
3 2 See ibid., p. 190. 
33 R>id., p. 191. 
3 4 See ibid., p. 192. 

452 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
I do this, he says, I do not think of an arched and painted structure, 
over which men might climb and swallows build their nests, stand­
ing upon two plots of ground at its two ends. I think that I am look­
ing at rain (although I see no drops) which is Ut by sunUght and whose 
whiteness is broken into colors. CoUingwood says that in saying this 
he is rejecting one mterpretation and embracing another. CoUingwood 
further says that the rainbow is 'reaUy' there not in one sense only 
but in two. As a sensum, or arrangement of sensa, it is reaUy there 
in the sense that I see it. And, he adds, in that sense of being real, 
the imaginary beast in the twUight is reaUy there as also are the snakes 
in delirium tremens. In the second sense of being 'reaUy' there, what 
is reaUy there is the ram and the sunshine, that is, the things in terms 
of which I interpret my sensa. 
A person suffering from a bUious attack may see a zigzag pattern 
of lines before his eyes. Are these reaUy there? Collingwood answers 
that they are reaUy there in the first sense of being reaUy there. That 
is, they are sensa actuaUy seen. In the second sense ofbeing reaUy 
there, no answer can be given to the question untU they have been 
interpreted in the way the rainbow was interpreted in terms of rain 
and sunlight. K in seeing the rainbow we see drops of rain and in 
seeing the zigzag Unes we see the bUious attack, we are seeing what 
is 'reaUy' there, just as when a man goes red in the face we are seeing 
his anger which is reaUy there. But 'reaUy there' in this second sense 
is a correct interpretation according as our sensa (in the first sense 
of being 'real') are placed in a correct relationship among themselves 
and with other sensa.35 
The third case of imagining CoUingwood proposes for considera­
tion is that of a boy who dreams that a fire destroys his home whUe 
he looks on helplessly. This, says CoUingwood, is a clear case of imag­
ination, probably compUcated by Ulusion. When the boy awakens the 
Ulusion is dispelled, whereas the imagination (U he remembers his 
dream) remains. The fire is 'reaUy' there in the first sense; he 'reaUy 
sees' the sensa, the colors and shapes, etc. But is it 'reaUy there' in 
the second sense? The dream has to be interpreted in order to answer 
this question. И it is interpreted as meaning that his house wUl short-
3 5 See ibid., pp. 192-193. On p. 186 of The Principks ofArt, CoUingwood, foUow­
ing Kant, understands reaUty to be a category of the understanding. But here, Col­
Ungwood distinguishes two senses of 'reaUty' as appUcable to the question, "Are these 
[sensa] 'reaUy' there?" The interpretative sense of the term is quite consistent with 
the Kantian meaning of 'reaUty,' but in what sense is 'reaUty' to be taken when it 
is used to mean that the sensa are actuaUy seen? 

Supposal and Imagination 
453 
ly be bumed down, then we must say that the fire is unreal. Modern 
psychologists wiU connect the dream, in their interpretation, with the 
awakening of adolescent passions, etc. Ü their interpretation is right, 
then the fire is as real as the rainbow and the zigzag lines; it is the 
way that the boy sees the crisis which has come upon him. 3 6 
The conclusion, therefore, of this long analysis of sensation and 
imagination, according to Collingwood, is as foUows: 
Sensa cannot be divided, by any test whatever, into real and 
imaginary; sensations cannot be divided into real sensations and 
imaginations. That experience which we caU sensation is of one kind 
only, and is not amenable to the distinctions between real and 
unreal, true and false, veridical and ülusory. That which is true or 
false is thought; and our sensa are caUed real and fflusory in so far 
as we think truly or falsely about them. To think about them is to 
interpret them, which means stating the relations in which they 
stand to other sensa, actual or possible. A real sensum means a 
sensum correctly interpreted; an fflusory sensum, one falsely inter­
preted. And an imaginary sensum means one which has not been 
interpreted at aU; either because we have tried to interpret it and 
have faUed, or because we have not tried. 3 7 
Collingwood adds that these latter are not three kinds of sensa, 
nor are they sensa which, when correctly interpreted, are related to 
feUow sensa in three ways. They are sensa " i n respect of which the 
interpretative work of thought has been done weU, or done ffl, or left 
undone." 3 8 He adds that the common sense distinction between real 
and imaginary sensa is not false, but that it is not a distinction among 
sensa. It is a distinction among the various ways in which sensa may 
be related to the interpretative work of thought. 3 9 
What this amounts to, as far as it is relevant to the theory of ques­
tioning in Collingwood, is that sensa are not distinguished as sensa, 
but are distinguished according to the dUferent interpretative attitudes 
taken in regard to them. A n imaginary sensum, for Collingwood, is -
one not yet interpreted, one not yet subjected to affirmation and nega-
3 6 R. G. CoUingwood, The Principles ofArt, pp. 193-194. 
37 Bid., p. 194. 
3 8 Bid. 
3 9 See ibid. But, what about that second sense of real referred to above (p. 452 
n. 35)? A second dUficulty also suggests itseU as a result of this conclusion. LE imagi­
nary sensa are uninterpreted sensa, as contrasted with real sensa understood to be 
correctly interpreted sensa and Ulusory sensa understood to be incorrectly interpreted 
sensa, this seems to regard imaginary sensa as something more basic than real sensa. 
But this appears to be quite inconsistent with the basic character of actuaUy experi­
enced feeling (that is, sensation accompanied by its emotive charge), for imaginary 
sensa would now appear to be something more primordial. 

454 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
tion in thought. But nevertheless, a sensum, as imaginary, is one 
akeady set before the rnind as an object about which one can ask (ques­
tion) what interpretative attitudes are possible and justifiable in regard 
to it. Thus, the world of objectivities, which, according to Meinong, 
constitutes a distinctive world on its own, meriting study by a distinct 
branch of philosophy ignored until now, is Collingwood's world of 
imagination and supposal. 4 0 "Attending to a feeling," says CoUing­
wood, "means holding it before the mind; rescuing it from the flux 
of mere sensation, and conserving it for so long as may be necessary 
in order that we should take note of i t . " 4 1 
These imaginary, uninterpreted sensa, U considered as looking 
forward towards affirmational or negational interpretation which they 
call for, are Bradley's floating ideas. They float inasmuch as they 
demand of the mind that they be attached to reality somehow or 
another, that is, that they be interpreted through judgment. 4 2 So, 
although not yet affirmed or denied, they are nevertheless objectivized, 
and thus constituted to be in a proximate condition to enter into the 
interpretative business of affkmation and negation. 
k i dialectic thought, action replaces the static concept of substance 
as the basic reality. Action results in polarized opposites, the most 
basic of which is that between subject and object. Aesthetic activity 
4 0 See "The Movement Towards Objectivity," Ch. 8 of J. Passmore's A Hundred 
Years of Philosophy, Middlesex, England, Penguin, 1968, pp. 174-200. See especially 
pp. 180-185 for a contextualization of Meinong's problem regarding the status of the 
objective order as an order distinct from that of reality. Also, see J. Dawes Hicks, "The 
Philosophical Researches of Meinong," Mind, XXXI (1922), pp. 1-30. 
4 1 R. G. Collingwood, The Principles ofArt, p. 209. 
4 2 See Bradley's " O n Floating Ideas and the Imaginary," Mind, XV (1906), pp. 445¬
472, especiaUy p. 446 and pp. 449450; and see pp. 451453 for Bradley's appUcation 
of his theory of floating ideas and the imaginary to questions and suppositions, which, 
no doubt, influenced CoUingwood's theory of imagination, supposal and questioning. 
See also G. F. Stout, "Truth and Falsity," Mind, XLI (1932), for a discussion of objec­
tivity as abstracting from truth and falsity. Stout says (p. 299): "By a proposition I 
mean what Meinong caUs 'an objective.' It is best represented in language by such 
phrases as 'that a is b' or 'a being b'. It is a factor common to judgments, supposaIs 
and questions. I may affirm or deny that a is b. I may inquire whether a is b; I may 
merely suppose a to be b. The object in such processes, considered as something pro­
posed or capable of being proposed to a thinking mind, is a proposition. As I main­
tain, propositions are just possibUities considered as proposed to a thinking mind 
[compare CoUingwood's notion of possibUity as explained in An Essay on Metaphysics, 
pp. 274-276]. A proposition is the intentional term corresponding to the 'formal' term 
possibUity." If I understand CoUingwood rightly, I think he would say that an imagi­
nary is the term of an intentional act constitutive of the objectivity of a sensum, whereby 
the sensum is in such a condition as to be able to enter into the constitution of proposi­
tions; and, rather than being capable ofbeing proposed, is, more fundamentaUy, made 
an object (of imagination), which is the veryfoundation ofthe possibility of proposition­
al capacity. 

Supposal and Imagination 
455 
is par excellence the work of objectivization, the activity whereby the 
subject opposes himseU to himseU as subject to object. 4 3 
[The] immediate origin [of the idealist conception of the abso­
lute] was the relation between subject and object in knowledge. The 
opposition between subject and object, in turn, had its roots in the 
Cartesian dualism of mind and matter, and the group of ideas of 
which it formed a part. This dualism reappears in idealism as the 
difference between nature and spirit; and is formulated as a con­
trast between a dead, material substance on the one hand, and a 
free, creative subject on the other. In fact, the idealists often iden­
tify spirit with freedom, which they interpret as a spontaneous act 
of creation. This notion is best illustrated by art, because in art the 
self is most clearly creative. The artist objectifies his ideas in a 
medium. He puts himself into his works so completely that they 
could not have been made by anyone else. They are different from 
their author, yet they are himseJf in another form, for in them he 
expresses, or better, actualizes himself. Their full meaning is lost 
if they are taken in abstraction from him; in fact, to suggest this pos­
sibility is to imply their imperfection, by an external relationship be­
tween artist and work. IdeaUy he, as artist, can be adequately seen 
in them. The difference is that the work is finished, a created thing, 
while the artist is creating; it is the difference between being and 
becoming.44 
The essential dialectical relationship between artistic activity and 
the subject-object dichotomy is further explained by Otis Lee: 
Dialectic considers the process of objectification, negation. It is 
variously described: creation, objectification, actualization, self-
expression. But these are aU ways of stating the same idea. It is the 
activity by which spirit objectifies itseU, not an operation performed 
on a pre-existent substance. To continue our analogy [with art], we 
must suppose that the artist creates his own medium. Also, the act 
is double, for it both results in an object which is other than spirit, 
and relates this to spirit. The artist paints a picture, which is out­
side himself: he may seU it, or give it to a friend, and forget about 
it. This is the "first negation." Yet at the same time, the work is 
himseU; it does not reaUy have an independent being, although it 
may be elsewhere in space and time. This is the second negation, 
the "negation of the negation." The two phases are not separate, 
nor do they succeed one anotherin time. To become other is to 
become more completely oneseU. Thus objectification is a process 
of differentiation and at the same time of integration; it is both exclu-
4 3 See Otis Lee, "Dialectic and Negation," The Review ofMetaphysics, I (1947), pp. 
3-7. See also Ernst Cassirer, The Logic ofthe Humanities, p. 115. 
4 4 Otis Lee, "Dialectic and Negation," The Review ofMetaphysics, I (1947), pp. 6-7. 

456 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
sion and inclusion, antithesis and synthesis; the first can not occur 
without bringing the second along with it. 4 5 
Thus, the artistic dimension in conscious activity is the activity 
whereby objectivity is seen to arise from the creative, seU-assertive 
activity of the conscious subject.46 Now questioning, as Collingwood 
has repeatedly stated, is primarily a dialogue of the soul with itseLf, 
of the soul as subject with itself as object. The first and fundamental 
condition of the very possibility of a questioning situation is here 
posited by the aesthetic activity of the conscious subject. CoUingwood 
says that we can speak to others only because we first have the expe­
rience ofbeing ourselves listeners to ourselves as speakers: " . . . the 
speaker is his own first hearer." 4 7 
C. Relation Between Imagination and Consciousness 
ColUngwood next investigates the contrast of imagination with 
sensation as something active contrasted with something passive, 
something we do as contrasted with something we undergo, some­
thing under our control compared to something we cannot help, a 
making compared to a receiving. 4 8 Common sense makes this distinc­
tion, but is unable to give an account of i t . 4 9 
This distinction cannot be one between activity and passivity as 
such, since sensation itself is an activity. Even U we are stimulated 
to do it by outside forces, it stUl remains something to do. Response 
to a stimulus is passive in the sense that it cannot arise without a 
stimulus, but it is active inasmuch as it is a response. It is not a dis­
tinction between activities we choose to do and those we cannot help 
doing; it is easier to stop seeing this paper (by shutting one's eyes) 
than it is to stop imagining the frightful accident seen yesterday. 5 0 
But in spite of this, in some sense or another, imagination is more 
free than sensation. Sensation is not entirely unfree, arising as it does 
from the spontaneity of a living and sentient organism. The freedom 
of the imagination goes a step further than this, although it is not the 
conscious freedom of carrying out an intention, which is freedom of 
choice. 
45 Void., p. 7. 
4 6 See Ernst Cassirer, The Logic of the Humanities, pp. 114-115. 
4 7 R. G. ColUngwood, The Principles ofArt, p. 249. See ibid., pp. 247-252, for dis­
cussion of the distinction between speaker and listener. But see abo Chapter 9, above, 
p. 400, for comment on this. 
4 8 R. G. ColUngwood, The Principles ofArt, p. 195. 
4 9 See ibid., p. 196. 
5 0 See ibid., p. 197. 

Supposal and Imagination 
457 
Regarded as an activity or manifestation of freedom, then, imag­
ination seems to occupy a place intermediate between the less free 
activity of mere feeling and the more free activity of what is gener­
ally caUed thought.51 
The task, then, says CoUingwood, is to define this intermediate 
place, between the minimal freedom of spontaneous response charac­
teristic of sensation and the fuU conscious freedom of choice. 
Two things which must be distinguished are confused, according 
to CoUingwood, by modern phUosophers when they taUc about sensa­
tion and sensa. When they are talking about the sensa that we should 
or would perceive given certain circumstances, or those perceived in 
the past or expected to be perceived in the future, they are talking 
about something vastly dUferent from the sensa we actuaUy see or 
feel, and the sensations we are actuaUy having. 5 2 ActuaUy experienced 
sensation must be regarded as a flux of activity in which a greater 
or lesser number of distinct sensory acts are going on together at one 
time, and each is no sooner achieved than it gives place to another. 
What is thus sensed can only be present in the performance of the 
corresponding act. 5 3 Its esse is sentiri. But the sensa and sensations 
referred to above as spoken of by modern philosophers are not present, 
and not presently avaUable to be spoken of in relation to one another 
and in relation to past or future sensations. Unless there is a distinc­
tion between these two kinds of things, the statements made about 
relations between sensa, quite apart from whether they are true or 
not, could not be made; they would be meaningless. 
There must, in other words, be a form of experience other than 
sensation, but closely related to it; so closely as to be easüy mistaken 
for it, but dUferent in that colours, sounds, and so on which in this 
experience we 'perceive' are retained in some way or other before 
the mind, anticipated, recaUed, although these same colours and 
sounds, in their capacity as sensa, have ceased to be seen and heard. 
This other form of experience is what we ordinarUy call imagi­
nation. 5 4 
CoUingwood says that it was in order to distinguish this other form 
of experience, imagination, from sensation, that Hume distinguished 
ideas from impressions. What modern phUosophers caU relations be­
tween impressions are, according to Collingwood, reaUy relations 
51 B>id., pp. 197-198. 
5 2 See ibid., p. 202. 
5 3 See ibid., p. 198. 
5 4 ftid., p. 202. 

458 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
between ideas. 5 5 It is not, as Locke says, sensation which furnishes 
the empty room of the mind, but imagination. 5 6 It is Hume's ideas 
which inhabit Locke's empty room, which becomes furnished with 
what 'the busy and boundless Fancy of man provides.' And it is, 
according to CoUingwood, imagination to which Empiricists reaUy ap­
peal when they appeal to 'experience.' 5 7 
It is then the work of thought to detect relations between sensa, 
to find simUarity between this patch of colour and others, so that it 
can be caUed 'red.' But the detection of such resemblances, or of any 
other relationships, prerequires that each sensum must be recognized 
as distinct in itseU. "This act of appreciating something, just as it 
stands, before I begin to classify it, is what we caU attending to i t . " 5 8 
This act of attention must be carefully distinguished from an act of 
sensation. 
Looking is dUferent from seeing and Ustening from hearing. 
Seeing and hearing are species of sensation; looking and listening 
are the corresponding species of attention.59 
CoUingwood says that current tradition speaks of 'a red patch' 
as a sensum, but, he continues, what we see inasmuch as we merely 
see is always a visual field, more or less parti-coloured, never a red 
patch. A red patch is a well-defined region cut out of this field, so 
that to describe it as a patch implies that the field is divided into an 
object of attention and a background or penumbra from which atten­
tion is withdrawn. This division of the general field of feeling into 
foreground and background by conscious attention is the division into 
the conscious and the (more or less) unconscious. 6 0 Such a distinc­
tion does not exist at the merelypsychical level, where the rnind exists 
only in the shape of sentience.61 
When the Ught of consciousness faUs on sentience, what was sen­
tient becomes imagination. Consciousness can teU us clearly only of 
5 5 See ibid., p. 203. 
5 6 See ibid., p. 200. 
5 7 See ibid., p. 203. No doubt Bernard Bosanquet influenced this conclusion: "The 
object which thought in the true sense has worked upon is not a reUc of decaying 
sense, but is a Living world, analogous to a perception of the beautiful, in which every 
thought-determination adds fresh point and deeper bearing to every element of the 
whole." See Bosanquet's The Principle ofIndividuality and Value, p. 58. 
5 8 R. G. Collingwood, The Principles ofArt, p. 203. See also The New Leviathan, 
p. 35, pars. 5.63, 5.65. See also Alan Donagan, The Later Philosophy ofR. G. Colling­
wood, pp. 39-40. 
5 9 R. G. CoUingwood, The Principles ofArt, pp. 203-204. 
6 0 See ibid., pp. 204-205. 
« See ibid., p. 205. 

Supposal and Imagination 
459 
the things to which it attends and obscurely of those it ignores (which 
remain more or less unconscious). The so-caUed unconscious of 
modern psychology is not an area distinct from and independent of 
consciousness, but it is that which consciousness ignores in sentience 
by not attending to it. 
Attention has a double object, whereas sentience has one only. 
What we attend to is not only what we sense but the act of sensing 
it. Sight sees only colour, but conscious attention attends both to the 
colour seen and to the act of seeing it. The word 'consciousness' sig-
rufies the togetherness of sensation and sensum in the object. A man 
conscious of his anger is aware that the anger he has is his. 6 2 
Thus, the difference between seeing and looking, or hearing and 
listening, is that a person who is said to be looking is described as 
aware of his own seeing as weU as of the thing he sees.63 
When consciousness enters into experience a new principle is 
established. Mere presence to sense does not claim attention; it may 
solicit it but does not secure it. Consciousness is master in its own 
house and dominates feeling. Feeling thus dominated, as compeUed 
to accept the place accorded to it by consciousness, is no longer im­
pression but idea (in Hume's sense). Consciousness is absolutely 
autonomous. Its decision alone determines whether a given sensum 
or emotion wUl be attended to or not. A conscious being is not free 
to decide what sensations he wiU have, but he is free to decide what 
feeling he wUl place in the focus of his consciousness. He is not free as 
to whether he wUl decide or not; he must decide. But he is free to 
decide to attend to this or that feeUng. And that choice, says CoUing­
wood, is consciousness itseU. 6 4 
This freedom of consciousness, CoUingwood explains, is not a 
freedom of choice between alternatives; the decision is not made by 
reviewing the various sensations and opting for this or that one. In 
fact, says CoUingwood, this freedom of consciousness (as distinct from 
freedom of choice) is a prerequired condition of the possibUity of alter­
natives for there to be choice about. Freedom of choice is enjoyed only 
at the intellectual level. The freedom of mere consciousness is thus an 
6 2 But in The Neu> Leviathan, ColUngwood says that "in anger you have no con­
sciousness of being angry; that comes only with reflection upon anger; what you are 
aware of is simply a contrast between yourseU and something . . . other than your-
seU" (pp. 70-71, par. 10.43). See Alan Donagan, The LaterPhilosophyofR. G. Colling-
wood, p. 48, on ColUngwood's revised conception of first order consciousness. 
6 3 R. G. CoUingwood, The Prinaples ofArt, p. 206. 
" See ibid., p. 207. 

460 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
elementary kind of freedom, yet it is very real. At the level of sen­
tience, of psychical experience, the self is dominated by its own feel­
ings. This dominance, says CoUingwood, is what Berkeley and Hume 
refer to as 'force' or 'liveliness.' A chUd screams when it feels pain; 
a chUd become conscious of its feelings screams because it wants atten­
tion. The consciousness of the seU as something other than the feeUng 
of the moment, something to which the feeling belongs, is the asser­
tion of the seU as able in principle to dominate the feeling. The seU-
consciousness and the seU-assertion, the theoretical and the practical, 
form together a single indivisible experience.65 
An effect of this is that the feeUngs are tempered in their strength, 
and thereby they more and more lose their power of determining our 
actions, although their quaUty or intensity is not thereby altered. They 
become domesticated and less like storms or earthquakes. They are 
structurally fitted into the fabric of our lUe instead of going their own 
way. They become fitted into a structure. 
[I]n asserting ourselves as against our feelings we have asserted 
in principle a structure of some kind, though as yet an mdeterminate 
one. In becoming aware of myseU I do not yet know at all what I 
am; but I do know that I am something to which this feeUng belongs, 
not something belonging to it. 6 6 
Another result of this domestication of feelings is that we become 
able to perpetuate them, mduding sensa, at wffl. 
Attending to a feeling means holding it before the mind; res­
cuing it from the flux of mere sensation, and conserving it for so 
long as may be necessary in order that we should take note of it. 
This, again, means perpetuating the act by which we feel it. 6 7 
In the flux of sensation one pattern of the total sensory field is 
replaced by another. Attention focuses itself on one element of that 
field. By attending, say, to the scarlet and neglecting everything else, 
a kind of compensation for the fading of the sensation in pure flux 
is effected. 
6 5 See ibid., p. 209. Owing to the distinction which CoUingwood makes later in 
The New Leviathan, as referred to by Alan Donagan (see above, p. 459 n. 62), we have 
to say that consciousness has only impUcit awareness of self, an awareness in which 
the seU is experienced but not yet objectified by second order consciousness. That 
is, by conscious awareness, the self asserts itseU in the presence of its feeUngs, but 
reflection on this assertive activity is needed in order that the seU be distinguished 
objectively from the non-seU. 
6 6 R. G. Collingwood, The Principks ofArt, p. 209. 
67 Rnd. 

Supposal and Imagination 
461 
By. .. adjusting our attention . .. we obtain a new kind of expe­
rience by moving as it were with the flux, so that the self and the 
object are (so to speak) at rest relatively to each other for an appre­
ciable time.. . . We have [thereby] liberated ourselves for a moment 
from the flux of sensation and kept something before us long enough 
to get a fair sight of it. 6 8 
By doing this ColUngwood says we have converted a sensation 
into an idea. We have become conscious of ourselves as its masters, 
and broken its mastery over us. "We have told it to stay stffl, and 
it has stayed, though only for a moment." 6 9 
So long as any trace of a past feeling remains, attention is able 
to single it out and reconstitute the original feeling into an idea. What 
we caU remembering an emotion is never anything but this focusing 
of our attention on the traces it has left in our present feeling. This, 
says Collingwood, is the meaning which we can attach to Hume's 
formula, that aU ideas are derived from impressions. 
Collingwood draws attention to the fact that the analysis so far 
yields two concepts of the imagination, both arrived at by an analysis 
of Hume's distinction between impression and idea. 
First, the distinction between impressions and ideas was under­
stood to be equivalent to the distinction between sensa interpreted 
by thought and sensa not so interpreted. Next, the analysis revealed 
that this same (Humean) distinction between impressions and ideas 
is equivalent to the distinction between sheer feeling and feeling mod-
Uied by consciousness dominating and perpetuating it. 
But there seems to be a double discrepancy between these two 
explanations stemming from the same source (the Humean distinc­
tion). First, a discrepancy between impression as real sensum (that 
is, sensum interpreted by thought) and impression as sheer feeUng;70 
second, a discrepancy between idea as feeUng not interpreted by 
thought and idea as feeling perpetuated and dominated by conscious­
ness. Collingwood proposes to show that these discrepancies arise 
not from his own faulty analysis but from Hume's confusing of two 
quite dUferent things under the one same pair of terms. 7 1 
Considering the second discrepancy first, Collingwood says that 
the work of determining the relations between things must depend 
68 Md., p. 210. 
69 Tbid. A truly objective world is thereby constituted, a world set over against the 
conscious subject, which can be looked at 'from a distance,' so to speak. 
7 0 See ibid., p. 212. 
71 R>id. 

462 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
on something prior, namely, that those things whose relations are 
to be determined must be able to be held before the mind in such a 
way as to make it possible to compare one with another, in order to 
see how they resemble one another, and so forth. Each must be known 
as to what it is in itselfbefore being known as related. 7 2 Our knowledge 
that this is a patch of red goes far beyond knowing a patch of red 
as it is in itself; it is a consideration of it in relation to an established 
system of colours with established names. Our knowledge of what 
a red patch is in itseU, if it could be verbaUzed, would be expressed 
something like 'This is what I see,' or 'This is how I feel.' This is the 
kind of thing that CoUingwood maintains we must be able to say before 
we can begin the work of interpreting, that is, discussing relations. 
It is not through bare sensation, however, that we are able to do this, 
but through the consciousness of sensation, by its work of attention, 
selecting and perpetuating some element in the field of sensation and 
some corresponding element in the sensory act. 
Collingwood reconcUes the two conflicting accounts (of impres­
sions and ideas) by recognizing that a feeling of which we have become 
conscious, by attending to it, is one not yet interpreted but neverthe­
less ready for interpretation; one which we have only begun to inter­
pret. Conversely, an uninterpreted feeling, U it means a feeUng which 
is ready for interpretation, can only be a feeling of which we have 
become conscious through attention. 
As regards the first discrepancy, between imagination as real 
sensum (interpreted by thought) and impression as sheer feeling, the 
situation is dUferent. ColUngwood points out that three stages in the 
lUe of feeling have so far been distinguished: (i) feeling as bare feeUng 
below the level of consciousness, (U) feeUng of which we have become 
conscious by the process of attending to it, and (iU) feeling not only 
brought to consciousness by attention but also placed inrelation with 
others. The second stage of this enumeration is what, according to 
Collingwood, Hume means by idea. But Hume faUed to distinguish 
impression in sense (i) from impression in sense (ffl). A n impression, 
for Hume, is distinguished from an idea only by its force or liveli­
ness. But this force may be of two kinds: either the brute force of pure 
sensation not yet dominated by thought, or the solid strength of a 
7 2 This knowing of what it is in itself, previously to setting up any relational knowl­
edge, is what I understand by saying that it is first constituted in its objectivity. That 
is, interpretation presupposes objectivization. But if this is to be called knowledge, 
then we have admitted the existence of something entitled to be called knowledge 
which is not the answer to a question. 

Supposal and Imagination 
463 
sensum firmly placed in its context by the interpretative work of 
thought. Hume's faüure to recognize this difference provided a pit-
faü for subsequent philosophers, especiaUy in regard to the term 'sense 
datum.' The word 'sense datum' or 'sensum' is applied promiscu­
ously not only to something given by sensation (in which case it would 
at, once be taken away again: sense [i]), and not only to something 
perpetuated by consciousness or imagination (in which case the orüy 
region from which it could be caUed up would be that of past sensa­
tion: sense [U]), but also to something constructed inferentiaUy by the 
work of intellect (sense [Ui]). 
Impressions are converted into ideas, that is, crude sensations into 
imaginations, by the activity of consciousness. Consciousness and 
imagination are synonyms U taken as names for a certain kind or level 
of experience. But withm that same experience Unagination is the name 
for what has undergone conversion, and consciousness is the name 
for what effects that conversion (of sensa into ideas), hnagination is 
thus the new form which feeling takes when it is transformed by the 
(attending) activity of consciousness. Imagination is a distinct level 
of experience, intermediate between sensation and inteUect, and the 
point at which the lUe of thought makes contact with the purely 
psychical experience, the world of pure feeling. So, it is not sensa as 
such that provide the inteUect with data; it is sensa transformed into 
ideas of imagination by the attending work of consciousness.73 
D. General Theory of the Imagination by Way of a 
Summary of the Foregoing 
The discussion began with the common sense two-term distinc­
tion between feeling and thought as two distinct features of experi­
ence.74 We now seem to have a three-term distinction, with conscious­
ness assuming an intermediate level of experience connecting the two. 
But, CoUingwood insists, consciousness is not something other than 
thought; it is a level of thought which is not yet inteUect. The two-
term distinction includes consciousness inasmuch as thought in that 
expression is taken in the wide sense, as inclucUng consciousness, and 
not in its strict sense, which is intellection. The work of inteUect, that 
is, of thought par exceUence, is to construct relations. But this takes 
two forms. InteUect in its primary function apprehends relations, not 
between feelings as such, as experienced psychicaUy, but between 
7 3 R. G. CoUingwood, The Principtes ofArt, p. 215. 
7 4 See this appendix, p. 444 above. 

464 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
feelings modified by consciousness and so converted into ideas. In­
teUect in its secondary function apprehends relations between the acts 
of primary intellection, or between what we think in such acts. 7 5 
Consciousness, says CoUingwood, is that activity without which 
we would have no terms between which intellect in its primary form 
could detect or construct relations. Thus, consciousness is thought 
in its absolutely fundamental or original form. 7 6 
AU thought presupposes feeling; and aU the propositions which 
express the results of our thought belong to one of two types: they 
are either statements about feelings, in which case they are caUed 
empirical, or statements about the procedure of thought itself, in 
which case they are caUed 'a priori'. 'Thought', here, means intel­
lect; 'feeling' means not feeling proper, but imagination.77 
By the act of attention, or conscious awareness, which is activity 
distinct from mere feeling, the seU asserts itseU as owner of its feel­
ings, dominating them, so that they are no longer experiences forc­
ing themselves upon us unawares, but are experiences in which we 
experience our own activity. Their brute power over us has been 
replaced by our power of conscious control over them. From being 
impressions of sense they are transformed into ideas of imagination. 
They are still feelings of the same kind as before, but have ceased to 
be mere sensations and have become what we call imaginations. 
The important point of this discussion is that imagmation has affin­
ity with two opposite features of experience. It shares in the charac­
teristics of thought and also in the characteristics of feeUng. 7 8 From 
one point of view imagmation does not dUfer from sensation. What 
we sense and what we imagine are the same kinds of things (colors, 
scents, etc.). This explains why phUosophers have experienced dUfi-
culties in distinguishing them, and why common sense, according 
to one way of speaking, caUs both (sensations and imaginings) by the 
same name, sensation, and their respective objects, sensa. But from 
another point of view there is a vast difference between imagining 
and sensing, which is indicated by the fact that common sense has 
a second way of talking about them, in which imagination is sharply 
distinguished from sensation, with no generic term to cover both. What 
we imagine is tamed or domesticated, and what tames it is conscious­
ness, which is a kind of thought, the kind of thought which stands 
7 5 R. G. CoUingwood, The Principles ofArt, p. 216. 
7 6 See ibid. 
77 Md., p. 221. 
7 8 See ibid., p. 223. 

Supposal and Imagination 
465 
closest to sensation or to mere feeUng. Every further development of 
thought presupposes this kind of thought and is based upon it as upon 
a foundation; it deals not with feeling in its raw form, but with feeling 
as transformed into imagination. 7 9 
Consciousness itself does not consider the likenesses and dUfer­
ences between feeling, or classUy them or group them into other 
arrangements, such as a time series, etc., but only prepares the ground 
for such systematizing work of thought. In itself, consciousness does 
no more than attend to the here-and-now of feeling. In attending to 
a present feeling, it perpetuates it at the cost of turning it into 
something new, no longer merely crude feeling or impression, but 
domesticated feeling, or imagination, or idea. 8 0 
Consciousness does not compare one idea with another. WhUe 
enjoying one idea, another may be summoned up. The new idea is 
not held alongside the first, as two distinct experiences between which 
I can detect relations. Rather the two ideas fuse into one, the new 
idea presenting itself as a colouring or modUication of the old. 
Thus, imagination resembles feeling in this, that its object is 
never a plurality of terms with relations between them, but a single 
indivisible unity: a sheer here and now. 8 1 
Conceptions of past, future, the possible, the hypothetical are 
meaningless for imagination as for feeling. These conceptions belong 
to a further development of thought. 8 2 
"To form an idea of feeling is akeady to feel it in imagination," 
so that "imagmation is bUnd, that is, it cannot anticipate its own results 
by preconceiving them as purpose in advance of executing them." 8 3 
Its freedom is not freedom of choice to carry out a preconceived plan 
or to choose between alternative possible plans, which freedom belongs 
to a later stage of thought. Its freedom is freedom from submission 
to the sheer flux of feeling, whereby these can be, so to speak, 'dis­
tanced' from the seU and looked at, or objectivized. 
7 9 See ibid., pp. 222-223. 
8 0 See ibid., p. 223. 
8 1 Md. 
8 2 See ibid., p. 224. Nevertheless, these conceptions suppose imagination. Imagi­
nation, as ordered to the past, the future, the possible, and, especiaUy, the hypothe­
tical, is supposal, as looking beyond itself towards the assertion of reaUty, questioning 
activity mediating. So, although these terms are meaningless for imagination, imagi­
nation is not meaningless for them, for they suppose imagination as a necessary pre­
condition. 
83 Md. 

466 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
briagination is, therefore, for CoUingwood, consciousness of feel­
ing, or, conversely, feeUng become conscious. From one point of view, 
it is thought in affinity or continuity with the psychic, with feeUng. 
From another point of view, it is feeling as thought. It mediates be­
tween the two levels of experience, namely thought and feeling, by 
partaking of both (in Kant's way of saying it, it is homogeneous with 
the categories on the one hand and with sensation on the other). So, 
the identification by phUosophers sometimes of imagination with 
thought (Leibnitz) and sometimes with feeling (Spinoza) has a foun­
dation in experience itseU. Sensations imagined and sensations 
'sensed' or felt do not dUfer as sensations (as the distinction of sensa­
tions into real and imaginary sensations implies), but they dUfer as 
to whether they have been consciously attended to or not. Brute, mere­
ly felt, feelings, such as they are at the psychic level of experience, 
impose themselves forcibly upon us, and we experience a certain 
helplessness with respect to them. But feelings imagined, or feelings 
attended to by being consciously aware of them, are, so to speak, put 
at a distance with a definite control over them on our part. But they 
are the same feelings in both cases. 
Sensations at the brute level of feeling are uninterpreted, and in­
deed are not in a condition of being able to be interpreted by thought. 
Sensations as imagined are indeed not interpreted sensations (that 
is, ordered with other past, present and future sensations into a 
systematic unity), but are now proximately ready for the interpreta­
tive work of thought operating at a higher level of consciousness, 
namely that of the understanding. What are usually referred to as 
'sense data' are reaUy sensations, not merely attended to and stabU-
ized, but also interpreted by the understanding, by being put in rela­
tional order with other sensations from which they are distinguished. 
They are, as such, not something absolutely 'given' to the mind, as 
U the mind were a mere passive recipient, but they are rather 
something the mind gives to itself in its systematizing function, and 
it gives them to itseU from the storehouse of the imagination, not from 
brute sensa. 
Imagination is therefore both 'consciousness' and 'idea' (in the 
Humean sense). As 'idea' it refers to feelings, but feeHngs now trans­
formed, by attention, into objects of consciousness. As consciousness 
it is thought, not inteUectual thought, but thought preliminary to in­
tellection and ready for intellection. 
What is important in this discussion, as far as CoUingwood's theory 
of questioning is concerned, is that, just as brute sensation as such 

Supposal and Imagination 
467 
lacks objectivity, lacks that characteristic of being set over against a 
subject as its object, but only becomes objectivized as converted into 
an idea of imagination, so, correspondingly, awareness would not be 
a conscious awareness if that of which it was the awareness were not 
'set before it' as something confronting it with which it has to deal. 
Thus, just as imagination renders sensa available as objects, so also 
it constitutes imaginative awareness to be the awareness of a conscious 
subject set before and over against the object of that awareness. That 
is, imagination first gives rise to the fundamental distinction and rela­
tionship of subject and object. It distinguishes them in the very same 
activity in which it unites them. In other words, the bipolarity 
characteristic of thought is first constituted by imagination; that is, 
imagination sets up both the object as object, and the subject as subject. 
E. Imagination and Expression 
To relate further the theory of imagination to that of questioning, 
it is necessary to understand that consciousness becomes, or makes 
itseLf aware of, or objectivizes, its feelings by expressing them to itseLf. 
Language comes into existence with imagination as a feature of the 
conscious level of experience.84 Original or native language is imagi­
native or expressive. CaUing it imaginative describes what it is; caU-
ing it expressive describes what it does. Language is an imaginative 
activity whose function is to express emotion. 8 5 
Below the conscious level of Hnguistic expression thereis psychic 
expression, the involuntary cry of pain, the scream of fear, which rather 
betrays feeling than expresses it. 8 6 Every kind and shade of emotion 
which occurs at the purely psychical level of experience has its counter­
part in some change of muscular or circulatory or glandular system 
which, in a sense, 'expresses' that emotion. 8 7 To express an emotion 
is one thing, but to observe and interpret it is another, which belongs 
to acts of higher levels of consciousness reflecting on acts of lower 
levels. Psychical expression is the only expression of which the 
psychical O^asic feeUng-level of) emotions are capable, although levek 
of consciousness other than the psychic may admit also of psychic 
8 4 See R. G. Collingwood, The Principles ofArt, p. 225. 
8 5 See ibid. This identification of art, as expression, with language derives from 
Croce. A. Gennaro, in his "Croce and Collingwood," The Personalist, XLVI (1965), 
p. 197, writes: "Having estabUshed that art is spirituality, Croce deduces that art is 
language. 'If Aesthetics were a manifestation different from Linguistics, it could not 
have as its object the expression which is an aesthetic fact.' " 
8 6 R. G. Collingwood, The Principles ofArt, pp. 228-229. 
8 7 See ibid., p. 230. 

468 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
expression. Emotions such as hatred, love, anger and shame arise only 
through consciousness of seU, and they thus presuppose self-aware­
ness.88 UnHke purely psychical emotions, these emotions accompany­
ing acts of self-awareness, of consciousness, admit of expression in 
language, in a phrase or controlled gesture or suchlike. 8 9 But in addi­
tion to this linguistic mode of expression (characterized by conscious 
control), they have their own special psychical expressions, the blush 
of shame accompanied by muscular reaction, the blush of anger with 
muscular tension and rigidity. A psychical emotion is an emotional 
charge on a sensum, but an emotion of consciousness is an emotional 
charge, not on a sensum, but on a certain mode of consciousness. 
Emotions can be expressed in two different ways because of the 
relation between the level of expression and the next above it. The 
lower level achieves a new principle of organization when, through 
the reflection of consciousness, it is transformed to a higher level. 9 0 
Emotions of consciousness can be expressed either formaUy as modes 
of consciousness or materially as consteUations of psychic elements. 9 1 
Psychical expression is uncontroLlable, characterized by brute 
givenness. A change occurs at the level of consciousness. Conscious­
ness transforms the emotion from the condition of brute givenness 
to that of being dominated by thought, so that we now do not just 
simply feel but feel in a new way, a way we caU imagining. This change 
likewise affects the bodUy act of expression, which is raised above the 
crude psychical level to the imaginative. 9 2 
Bodily actions expressing certain emotions, insofar as they come 
under our control and are conceived by us, in our awareness of con­
troUing them, as our way of expressing them, are language.93 
m its wide sense language is thus simply the bodUy expression 
of emotion as this is dominated by thought in its primitive form as 
consciousness. A chUd soon learns to distinguish the cry expressive 
of uncontroUed emotion from the seU<onscious cry deUberately uttered 
to call attention to its needs. The second cry is language though not 
yet speech. It bears a new relation to the chUd's experience as a whole. 
It is the cry of a chUd aware of itself and asserting itseU. 9 4 Thus, imag-
88Md., 
p. 231. 
89 Vbid., p. 232. 
9 0 Void., p. 233. 
9 1 See ibid., p. 234. 
9 2 See ibid., p. 235. 
9 3 Rnd. 
9 4 See ibid., p. 236. 

Supposal and Imagination 
469 
inative experience creates for itseLf, by an infinite work of refraction, 
reflection, condensation and dispersal, an infinity of emotions demand­
ing expression in an infinite subtlety of articulations in the language 
created in expressing them. An emotion cannot be felt at any level 
of consciousness without being expressed; there are no unexpressed 
emotions. 9 5 So-caUed unexpressed emotions are emotions felt and 
expressed at their appropriate level of which the one who feels them 
is trying to become conscious of them, that is, trying to convert them 
into the material of a higher level of consciousness which, when 
achieved, wffl be an emotion at this higher level, with an appropriate 
expression of i t . 9 6 
Every kind of language (speech, gesture, etc.) is an offshoot from, 
and transformation at a higher level of, an original language of total 
bodUy gesture. The language of total bodUy gesture is thus the motor 
side of our total imaginative experience.97 Language in its original 
nature expresses, not thought in the narrower sense of intellectual 
thought, but only emotions; not crude impressions of brute sensa­
tions, but sensations transmuted into ideas by the activity of conscious­
ness. Language at the intellectual level undergoes modUication to ex­
press intellectual emotions. 9 8 
The general distinction between imagination and inteUect is that, 
whereas imagination presents to itself an object which it experiences 
as one and indivisible, intellect goes beyond that single object and 
presents to itseU a world of many such objects with determinate kinds 
of relations between them. 9 9 However complex an imagined object 
may be, it is imagined as a single whole in which reUitions between the 
parts are present as a quality of the whole. Thus, a May thrush singing 
a May song is imagined alongside the previous imagination of a Jan­
uary thrush singing a January song. Insofar as the experience remains 
at the imaginative kvel, distinct from that of the intellect, the two songs 
are not imagined separately as two things with a relation between them. 
Rather, the January song coalesces with the May song, toning it with 
a quality of mature mellowness. In an imagined whole the parts do not 
present themselves distinctly as parts but merely as qualitative modifica­
tions of the whole. But U the experience is thought about, by strictly 
inteUectual thinking, it is analysed into its parts, becorning a mardfold, 
9 5 See ibid., p. 238. 
9 6 See ibid., p. 239. 
9 7 See ibid., p. 246. 
9 8 See ibid., p. 252. 
9 9 See ibid. 

470 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
a network of things with relations between them. Different notes are 
distinguished in a definite way; each note subject to being thought 
about itseU (one note might have been higher or lower, etc.). The dif­
ference between the two songs can be described; one has a sweeter 
tone, or is longer, or contains more notes than the other. This is analytic 
thought. 
Every different kind of activity has its corresponding kind of 
emotion, which has its corresponding kind of expression. The emotion­
al charges on sense experience, as broadly distinguished from thought, 
are expressed psychically by automatic reactions, being felt at the 
purely psychic level. The emotional charges on thought-experiences 
are expressed by the controUed activity of language. The emotions 
of consciousness, taking consciousness as a level of thought lower than 
intellect, are expressed by language in its primitive and original form. 
The emotions proper to intellectual experience have their appropriate 
expression in language in its inteUectuaUzed form. The excitement 
which drove Archimedes from his bath was not a mere generalized 
excitement, but specificaUy the excitement of a man who has just solved 
an inteUectual problem. 1 0 0 In the expression of inteUectualized emo­
tion by inteUectualized language, the thought is also expressed in the 
same linguistic expression. Symbolism is inteUectuaUzed language: 
language because it is expression of emotion, inteUectualized because 
it is adapted to the expression of inteUectual emotions. Original, imag­
inative language is expressive but lacks meaning, not distinguishing 
the speaker's meaning from what he says. InteUectualized language 
both expresses and expresses meaning. As language it is emotively 
expressive; as symbolic, it refers beyond that emotion to the thought 
whose emotional charge it is. Thus we commonly distinguish what 
we say from what we mean. What we say is what we immediately 
express: the eager, or reluctant, or triumphant, or regretful. The emo­
tions, together with the sounds and gestures that express them, are 
inseparable parts of a single experience. What we mean is the inteUec­
tual activity upon which these emotions are the emotive charge, which 
is, so to speak, pointed to by the words expressing the emotions as 
a sort of finger-post indicating from which direction they came and 
in which direction the other person must go U he is to understand 
what we say, that is, U he is to reconstruct for himself and in himself 
the intellectual experience which has led us to say what we d i d . 1 0 1 
1 0 0 See ibid., pp. 266-267. 
1 0 1 Tbid., p. 269. It is interesting to note, in regard to researches on learning dis-

Supposal and Imagination 
471 
Theoretically, the artist is a person who comes to know himself, 
his emotions, which is also to come to know his world, that is, the 
sights and sounds, etc., which go together to make up his total imag­
inative experience. Knowing himseU and his world is one knowledge 
only, since the sights and sounds are to him steeped in the emotion 
by which he contemplates them; they are the language in which that 
emotion utters itseLf to his consciousness. His world is one with his 
language; what it says to him it says about him; his imaginative vision 
of it is his seU-knowledge. 
But this knowledge of himseU is together a making of himseU, 
a conversion of himseU from mere psyche, from mere feeUng, into 
consciousness. Coming to know his emotions is, at the same time, 
coming to dominate them, to assert himseU as their master. This is 
not yet the lUe of morality but is an indispensable step towards that 
lUe. He has learnt to acquire by his own efforts a new set of mental 
endowments which must be accompUshed first U later he is to acquire 
by his own effort those mental endowments whose possession wUl 
bring him nearer his moral ideal. 
The world he has together come to know and to make is a linguis-
abiIities in children conducted at the Montreal General Hospital, as presented by a 
C.B.C. telecast, that children who, without any apparent physical or psychological 
handicaps, but simply seemed unable to leam, were basicaUy unable to distinguish 
one part oftheir body from another (e.g., neck from knee), and were thus unable 
to piece together the drawing of a human figure cut up into jigsaw puzzle pieces. 
They remained unable to distinguish such parts until they were abk to name each bodily 
part distinctly. Once the distinctions were made by being able to express the appropriate 
names ('neck,' 'knee,' etc.) the learning process proceeded more or less normaUy. Ernst 
Cassirer, The Logk of the Humanities, Yale University Press, 1960, pp. 59-60, says that 
". . . the language function . . . is not a mere result but a continuous seU-renewing 
process: and the contour of man's 'world' defines itseU more clearly and determinately 
in direct proportion to the development of this process. Thus a name is not simply 
tacked on to its completed and ready-to-be-used objective intuition as an extraneous 
symbolizing of knowledge; instead, in it fhere is expressed a determinate way, a manner, 
v 
and tendency for coming to know. Everything we know concerning the development 
of language in chUdren gjves factual substantiation to this basic view. For it is manifestly 
not the case that in this development a fixed stage of already acquired objective intui­
tion is strung on to a subsequent stage, in which this new acquisition is now also 
named, defined, and grasped by words. Quite the contrary, language awareness—the 
awakening symbol consciousness—impresses its stamp upon observation and percep­
tion in ever-increasing measure as it grows in strength and extends and clarifies itseU. 
Both observation and perception become 'objective' just to the degree that this Unguistic 
energy succeeds in darifying, differentiating, and organizing the mute, undifferentiated 
chaos of particular circumstances. Linguistic symboUsm opens up an original phase 
of spiritual and inteUectual lUe. A Ufe of 'meanings' supplants the lUe of mere im­
pulses. . . . " Compare this with Collingwood's discussion of the chUd throwing its 
bonnet off its head with the exdamation 'Hattiaw'; see his The Principles ofArt, pp. 
227-228 and pp. 239-241. 

472 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
tic world in which everything is an expression of emotion. To the extent 
to which this world is expressive, or meaningful, it was he who made 
it so, out of what was presented to him in the stffl more elementary 
stage of the purely psychical experience of colours, sounds, etc. 
Looking at the aesthetical experience from a higher level of reflec­
tion, distinction is made between the theoretical and the practical. It 
is seen to embody both kinds of activity. It is both a knowing of one's 
self and one's world and a making of one's seU and one's world. The 
self consists only of emotions expressed in that language which is its 
world, and the world is the language expressive of those emotions. 
The seU which was psychic was remade in the shape of conscious­
ness, and the world, previously crude sensa, was remade in the shape 
of language, or sensa converted into imagery and chargedwith emo­
tional significance. Thus, the step forward in the development of expe­
rience that leads from the psychic level to the level of consciousness, 
which step is the specific achievement of art, is a step forward both 
in theory and in practice, though it is one step only, not two. 1 0 2 
The essence of art is that it is activity whereby we become conscious 
of our own emotions. As such it has nothing that is due to intellect. 
The proper sphere of art is, therefore, that of making conscious the 
previously unconscious emotions of the psychic level. On the other 
hand, if art is taken not merely as art but as a certain kind of art, it 
may express emotions of another order, such as inteUectual emotions, 
or emotions that only an intellectual being can feel. These emotions 
are emotional charges, not merely upon psychical experience of bare 
feeUng, nor upon conscious experience, but upon thought at the level 
of inteUectual experience, or thought in the strict sense of the word. 1 0 3 
A change in the type of emotion felt takes place as a new level 
of conscious awareness is reached. The feeling of an inteUectual being 
is dUferent from that of the chUd or primitive; his emotions at the 
psychic level are modUied and expressed in a dUferent way. Higher 
levels of consciousness react on the basic structure, thereby modifying 
it. The poet converts human experience into poetry by fusing thought 
itself into emotion, not by first expurgating the intellectual elements 
and then perceiving the emotional, but by thinking in a certain way, 
then expressing how it feels to think in that way. Thus, Dante fused 
the Thomistic phUosophy into a poem which expressed what it feels 
Uke to be a Thomist. 1 0 4 
1 0 2 See R. G. CoUingwood, The Principles ofArt, pp. 291-292. 
1 0 3 See ibid., pp. 293-294. 
t M See ibid., p. 295. 

Supposal and Imagination 
473 
To relate this theory of Unguistic expression to the theory of ques­
tioning, we have to recall Collingwood's position regarding the rela­
tion of art to other aspects of human experience. CoUingwood regards 
the experience of human lUe as having two aspects, the aesthetic and 
the logical. 1 0 5 Art indulged in as an aU-absorbing form of experience 
mistakes the aesthetic aspect for the whole, the aspect which CoUing­
wood had previously referred to as the cutting edge of the mind. The 
logical aspect is the weight of fact as something asserted which gives 
power to that edge to cut. 1 0 6 CoUingwood's account of art in Speculum 
Mentis is an attempt to give an account of the mind's cutting edge, 
which he likewise refers to as the element of pure spontaneity, or 
inquiry, that is, questioning, which is the true beginning of knowl­
edge. The lUe of art regarded as a distinctive type of Ufe-experience 
is the assertion of a phUosophical error which abstracts the aesthetic 
from the logical function and erects each into separate experiences. 
The so-called lUe of art is the persistent pursuit of this error, which 
increasingly becomes a futUe quest at every turn. 
In fact, the so-called aesthetic experience is a name for aU expe­
rience insofar as this element of spontaneity or questioning or sup­
posal enters into i t . 1 0 7 Art correctly appreciated is therefore an element 
of aU experience. It is the element of spontaneity or questioning or 
supposing. That is, it is identical with the very dynamism of the mind 
in its forward thrust. Divorced from the matrix of fact in which it is 
embedded, artistic activity is intuition removed from its context in 
experience, intuition absolutized and divorced from its logical con­
text. But when artistic activity is seen in its concrete context in lived 
experience, it is seen to be the questioning or supposal aspect of 
conscious lUe. 
Representing, as it does, the lowest level of human experience, 
art is the most rudimentary form of thought. The concept of art seems 
to function in CoUingwood's thought something like the concept of 
Eros in Plato's thought. It is the name for that intrusive and dynamic 
power which spirits the mind forward to further adventures. 1 0 8 
This activity, absolutized as art, seems to be identical with the 
power of negativity, which is the dynamism of the dialectical move­
ment of the mind. The mind is what it does; it is its activity. But this 
1 0 5 See Speculum Mentis, p. 101. This dichotomy is of Grocean derivation; see 
William M. Johnston, The Formative Years of R. G. Collingwood, p. 73. 
1 0 6 See Speculum Mentis, p. 101. 
1 0 7 See ibid., p. 103. 
1 0 8 See L. O. Mink, Mind, History and Diakctic, p. 237. 

474 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
activity is a dynamic striving from a prior state or condition to a sub­
sequent state or condition. The questioning or imaginative or sup­
posal activity which is absolutized in aesthetic activity seems in its 
context in lived experience to be the condition of negating the prior 
state of affairs (expressed by past fact, indeed constituted as past fact 
inasmuch as it is recognized to be prior) and the simultaneous thrust­
ing towards a posterior state of affairs (a future which, when expressed, 
thereby becoming present, wffl function as answers fuUffling the 
mind's striving). We can see here the radical constitution of the his­
torical character of human experience. Achievements of the mind's 
striving, answers to its questions, form the content of the past and 
provide the matter (the weight behind the cutting edge) for further 
striving in the form of questioning. A question unanswered, but with 
a restlessness demanding an answer, points to something as yet unreal­
ized, but demanding to be reaHzed; this is what we recognize as the 
future. Thus, the question and answer activity, dynamicaUy and 
exercisedly considered, is basicaUy constitutive of human experience 
as distinguishable (by thought when it reflects over the process) into 
a past (which is achieved) and a future (which is as yet unrealized, 
but straining to be reaUzed), both features being co-actualized in the 
present. 1 0 9 But that is precisely what we mean by the historical char­
acter of human experience. The objectivised, the achieved, the asserted 
is (more or less) the past. 1 1 0 The striving to achieve, the questioning, 
is the present activity of the rnind (and mind is what it does) reach­
ing beyond this present actuality to what is as yet not actualized in 
order to actualize it; and this is the future. So the future akeady exists, 
not actuaUy achieved, but in the dynamic tendency of the mind in 
the process of realizing the as yet unrealized. The intimate relation­
ship between questioning and history becomes clear. The mind thus, 
so to speak, 'feeds' on its own (past) achievements (the ascertained 
facts which are the weight behind the cutting edge of questioning) 
1 0 9 See CoUingwood's "Some Perplexities about Time," Proceedings ofthe Aristote­
lian Society, XXVI (1925-1926), p. 49. 
1 1 0 "AU externaUty is imaginary; for externality—a mutual outsidedness in the ab­
stract sense of the denial of a mutual insidedness—is, as such, abstraction, and abstrac­
tion is always intuition or imagination. It is only to the imagination that the mind is ever 
outside its object; but to the imagination it is always outside its object, even when that 
object is itseU as in fact it always is. Therefore, since the externaUty of the object is 
only imaginary, the act by which we create the object is never capricious: we only imag­
ine it to be capricious: in point of fact it is necessary and an integral part of the lUe 
of reason." R. G. CoUingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 293. hnagination and imaginative 
activity would therefore seem to be the foundation of that externaUty which is charac­
teristic of the objects of scientific (as distinct from historical or phUosophical) knowledge. 

Supposal and Imagination 
475 
in bringing itself forth in new forms of activity (which, we must re­
member, are identical with the mind itself). Its past is a quasi-sub-
stance which it transforms into new forms of itself through question­
ing and reflection. Objectivizing is the making available of what is 
achieved (past facts) as a condition of the mind's questioning activity 
(that it have something to act about in a questioning way) so that it 
can creatively bring forth new forms of itself as successive reflections 
upon its (past) achievements. 1 1 1 
Towards this future affirmational state to which it is striving, the 
question—that is, the rnind in its activity of questioning—is related 
both affirmatively and negatively: it affirms it, inasmuch as the very 
asking of the question presupposes and demands an (as yet unreal­
ized) answer as its complement; it negates it, inasmuch as the ques­
tion, being an unanswered question, is the absence (negation) of the 
answer. Likewise, in relation to the past, to the body of achieved fac­
tual information, it affirms it inasmuch as questioning presupposes 
available information; it negates it inasmuch as the mind, through 
the question, strives to go beyond it, and in doing so alters it; past 
facts look different as they are seen from greater perspective. Hence, 
the question is in dialectic interplay with prior fact (presupposed by 
the question and to some extent embodied in the question) and sub­
sequent (future, as yet not ascertained) fact, to be made known through 
the process of questioning. Thus it appears how the question is a func­
tion of the dialectic of negativity, which is the lifeblood of the mind. 
The questioning activity of the mind, as Speculum Mentis fflustrates, 
is the dialectical dynamism whereby the mind ascends from lower 
to higher levels of consciousness. Collingwood denies that any level 
of consciousness necessitates a higher one. But, as Louis O. Mink weU 
points out, 1 1 2 every mental activity is accompanied by its own charac­
teristic emotion, and this emotion may remain unexpressed at that level. 
What drives the mind to a higher level is not the thirst for knowledge 
or novelty, but the need to express the emotion attendant on think­
ing at the lower. Only a higher level of conscious activity can express 
an emotion attendant on a lower order of activity. And here is the 
dynamism of the dialectical transformation from implicit (lower level) 
to explicit fltigher level). It is in reflection that emotion is made explic-
1 1 1 ". . . inasmuch as its whole Ufe is a process of seU-determination, the past 
in any such process is the evU which is rejected, good when it was brought into being 
butnowoutworn andthereforeevUUithadbeenretained." SpeculumMentis, p. 296. 
1 1 2 See his Mind, History, and Diakctic, p. 237. 

476 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
it, not as an object of reflection but by being expressed in the discursive 
act of reflection. 
The relation between emotion and thought therefore occupies 
in Collingwood's thought the conceptual locus which in other 
systems is occupied by a distinction between "subjective" and 
"objective." Emotion is, in aU its occurrences, the felt ("subjective") 
quality of experience, thought the grasp of ("objective") structure 
in experience. Emotion never becomes an object of thought, but it 
is not opposed to thinking, as U every human act were a tactical vic­
tory over the other in a Manichean war for dominance.113 
Unexpressed emotion inhibits and holds consciousness back from 
its forward thrust, from its work of questioning and criticism. Col­
Ungwood regards this faUure to express an emotion as a corruption 
of consciousness. Louis O. Mink says 1 1 4 that the expression of emo­
tion is not just an ornamental decoration on the lUe of reason, nor 
a mere catharsis which clears the way for thought, but it is the energy 
for all rational inquiry. The mind's search for truth must not only satisfy 
the logical criteria for knowledge, but must also express the emotions 
which weU up through the levels of consciousness. For this end, the 
work of art is indispensable. The lUe of art may be a stage to be 
eventually abandoned, but it is indispensable for education in expres­
siveness.115 "Thought never outgrows the need of language, never 
learns to Uve without that immediacy or intuitiveness which marks 
the aesthetic consciousness. To lose that would be to lose its own 
cutting edge." 1 1 6 
113 Vaid., p. 237. Felt disconformity with itseU is the emotional counterpart of error, 
and the spur to the mind to reconstitute itself by reflection over its present actual 
state, and bring to (objective) clarity what is there in implicit confusion. ". . . any 
error [the mind] makes concerning its own nature (and every error is that) creates 
two conflicting results: a new state of itseU, and a new notion of itseU. But because 
its own state is a state of consciousness, this new state, even though only implicitly, 
contradicts the newly formed notion. Thus there are two conflicting notions of itself 
in the mind, and this conflict is the mark of error and the signal that a return to the 
road of truth is required. Thus the equUibrium of thought is a stable equUibrium Uke 
that of a gyroscope; but it is only the energy of the gyroscope that keeps it upright." 
Speculum Mentis, p. 297. 
1 1 4 See Louis O. Mink, Mind, History, and Diakctic, p. 238. 
1 1 5 See ibid. 
1 1 6 R. G. Collingwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 158. 

APPENDIX TWO 
Further Elaboration of the Logic 
of Question and Answer 
The conclusion of Chapter Nine, that there is a logic of question­
ing proper to history, leads one inevitably to ask about the principles, 
structure and mode of procedure of this logic. 
The basic principle of this logic, the concrete universal, was shown, 
foUowing ColUngwood, in Chapter Four above, to have the struc­
ture of an overlap of classes in a scale of forms. Looking at this logical 
basis precisely as it is the principle of logical structure in history, it 
was shown, in Chapter Nine, with the help of Robert Stover, John 
WUd, and Ernst Cassirer, that this basic unity in diversity (universal) 
is activelycreated and constitutively constructed by a unity in diver­
sity of consciousnesses urufied in the activity of dialectical interroga­
tion. 
Given, then, that this is the basis of the inteUigibUity of history, 
what can we say regarding the structural outlines of this logic such 
as might form the subject matter of a logical textbook? 
LesUe Armour feels that the elaboration of such a dialectical logic 
is possible. 
I can only conclude, then, that, though it is by no means easy 
to say what a dialectical logic is, there is, certainly, a kind of logic 
which one can distinguish in this way and the possibUities for its 
development seem to be considerable. In fact, there are important 
grounds for thinking that we cannot do without such a logic. 
477 

478 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
Under the circumstances, there seems to be no reason to sup­
pose that the demand for this kind of logic is illegitimate.1 
But the elaboration of such a logic does seem to be frustrated in 
principle right from the start, since the identity of form and content 
is a basic tenet of dialectical thought. This seems to imply that any 
concrete situation embodies its own sui generis logic, so that nothing 
can be said a priori to the concrete situation. This seems to be con­
firmed by what CoUingwood says about the need for insight into the 
concrete situation in order to know how to act2 and also when he says 
that nothing is recognizable as evidence untU it is used as such. 3 
But the situation is not quite as hopeless as this may make it appear 
to be. For, notwithstanding that Leslie Armour affirms the possibU­
ity of elaborating such a logic, he warns that such a logic is limited 
and kept in check by the existence of other and equally valid logical 
systems: 
. . . arguments in favour of a dialectical logic need not be argu­
ments for the abolition of other sorts of logic. The relations between 
them are complex, but I have suggested that one may weU need a 
"logic of limiting cases" even within the confines of a dialectical 
logic and that this wUl have important properties in common with 
traditional logics. The relationship in this case wiU simply be that 
of part and whole—and the worst sin of the traditional logician on 
this view, wUl have been that he made the part seem like the whole.4 
In agreement with this observation it is submitted (conclusion to 
Chapter Nine above) that genus-species, abstract, propositional logic 
is valid and exercises its own sui generis autonomy. Therefore, from 
the point of view of abstract genus-species logic, we can look at 
dynamic seU-developing human consciousness from the outside, not 
merely from inside some concrete situation of involvement. 5 We can 
then articulate what belongs to it as such. 
K looked at in this way, what is said about the dialectical logic 
of seU-constituting consciousness is going to concern more the moral 
quaUties of the conscious subject and the insight-abUities accruing to 
such a conscious subject. In other words, this chapter of a logical text­
book would bear upon that part of logic in which logic overlaps with 
1 Leslie Armour, The Concept of Truth, Assen, Van Gorcum, 1969, p. 115. 
2 See his An Autobiography, pp. 101-106. 
3 See his The Idea ofHistory, p. 280. See also Chapter 1, above, pp. 32-33. 
4 Leshe Armour, op. cit., p. 115. 
5 It may be remarked that Charles Reich's The Greening ofAmerica is a dialectical 
analysis of the American fact from within the American consciousness. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
479 
ethics, which is quite consistent with what ColUngwood said about 
the various parts of philosophy. 6 
if, following Collingwood's lead, we focus our train of thought 
on the logic of a consciousness engaged in research of a scientUic, or 
historical, or crime-solving nature, we can deUneate, at least in a broad 
perspective, what some of these moral quahties are and how they are 
logicaUy deterrnining, especiaUy U we aUow a little help to come from 
Michael Polanyi, since CoUingwood himself leaves his investigative 
logic little developed. The principal feature of logical import in the 
following analysis wUl be the concept of "guessing," and more spe­
cUicaUy, of "right guessing." There are no prescribed rules for discover­
ing the unknown or finding the solution to a newly arisen problem. 
Where prescribed rules and methods are sUent, the researcher or ques­
tioner is " o n his o w n , " and his personal judgment, in which he "puts 
himself and his reputation on the line," is ultimately determining. 
But his "guesses," though prescriptively without pre-given founda­
tion, are not arbitrary, or mere "shots in the dark." His guesses or 
"hunches" are "right" U he correctly foUows a directive principle which 
he himself embodies within his conscious self. And this is nothing other 
than the infixed directedness of consciousness to reality, or to the whole 
of that which is. This infixed directedness is present not as something 
seen but as a conscious "weight," presenting itseU as a feeling of con­
cern and urgency to act. The researcher has to "feel his way" through 
the pathway to the solution of his problem, and the pathway becomes 
graduaUy evident only as each step is actually taken. In other words, 
he constructs the pathway in the very activity of "picking" his way 
through it. Fidelity to this tension of consciousness in search of the 
truth, the fuUy real in which his true self is also realized, is the only 
lodestonethe researcher or problem solver has to foUow in cutting 
new pathways where none are already provided. 
V 
A. Commitment to a Consensus: Acceptance of Authority: 
Aim of Each to Be His Own Authority 
The first quality of a good researcher is commitment to a tradition. 
In order to learn 'the tricks of his trade' a novice researcher does not 
simply consult research manuals. He attaches himseU to a reputable 
community of scientists (or historians, U his field is history), which 
community is defined by scientific (or historical) aims and objects and 
professes a responsible commitment to truth. 
6 See his Essay on Philosophical Method, pp. 189-190. Also see Chapter 4, above, 
pp. 140 et seq. 

480 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
As the bearer of a tradition, this scientific (or historical) body, which 
may be regarded as a cornmon consciousness shared by many indi­
vidual consciousnesses (whose unity in diversity is basicaUy linguis­
tic, as was explained in Chapter Nine above), is defined by an accepted 
set of convictions about the world (natural or historical, as the case 
may be) as to how it looks and how it should look, or as to how it 
was in the past. 
Every interpretation of nature, whether scientific, non-scientific 
or anti-scientific, is based on some intuitive conception of the general 
nature of things.7 
This corresponds to CoUingwood's presuppositions, including ab­
solute presuppositions, which determine the integrity and identity 
of the corporate consciousness, and whose acceptance by the members 
identUies them as scientists, or historians, as the case may be. Each 
member thus begins his career by an act of fidelity to this tradition 
and to its embodied values and aims, which that group as such is 
committed to safeguard. "The premisses of science on which aU 
scientUic teaching and research rests are the beliefs held by scientists 
on the general nature of things." 8 The medical profession thus has 
the Hippocratic Oath as something in the nature of a codUied creed, 
much in the same way as CoUingwood regarded the Catholic Faith 
of the early Christian Fathers as a cocUfication of the basic commitments 
of Western civUization and culture. 9 
SimUarly, U one aspires to become proficient in the business of 
crime detection, one wUl apprentice oneseU to competent masters who 
embody that art, judgment and skffl. CoUingwood refers to two tradi­
tions (exempUfied in a Kierkegaardian fashion) as typUied by the fact­
finding Sherlock Holmes on the one hand, and by the more rational­
istic Hercule Poirot on the other hand, with CoUingwood's decided 
preference in favor of the latter. 1 0 
Since discovery is more of an art, and "since an art cannot be 
precisely defined, it can be transmitted only by examples of the prac­
tice which embodies i t . " 1 1 This means that the novice researcher must 
"recognize as authoritative the art which he wishes to learn and those 
7 Michael Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 
1946, p. 10. 
8 Md., p. 11. 
9 See CoUingwood's An Essay on Metaphysics, pp. 225-227; see also, above, Chapter 
5, pp. 191-192. 
1 0 See ColUngwood's The Idea of History, pp. 281-282. 
1 1 Michael Polanyi, op. cit., p. 15. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
481 
from whom he woukl learn i t . " 1 2 He must incorporate a tradition by 
first subjecting himseU to acknowledged masters as authorities in order 
that he may eventually establish himself as an authority. 
To learn an art by the example of its practice is to accept an artistic 
tradition and to become a representative of it. Novices to the scientific 
profession are trained to share the ground on which their masters 
stand and to claim this ground for establishing their independence 
of it. The imitation of their masters teaches them to insist on their 
own originality which may oppose part of the current teachings of 
science.13 
This traditionalism and respect for authority are not to be under­
stood in the pejorative sense which one associates with conservatism 
and authoritarianism as quite inconsistent with critical inquiry and 
progress. For " i t is inherent in the nature of scientific authority that 
in transmitting itself to a new generation it should invite opposition 
to itsetf and assimilate this opposition in a reinterpretation of the 
scientific tradition." 1 4 A scientific community thus delicately balances 
enforcement of discipline together with inducement to dissent, which 
balance is realized in dialectical intercourse between the society and its mem­
bers. This balance is expressed in the way research resources are 
aUocated, and in the acceptance of pubHshable material by the scholarly 
organs of publication. A certain tension will be inevitable in such a 
dialectical balance. 
Scientific opinion embodies the sovereign authority of science. " I t 
is only by his peers that any claimant to knowledge is judged." 1 5 
Furthermore, "every succeeding generation is sovereign in reinter­
preting the tradition of science." 1 6 
However, the sovereignty of everyone's position is more funda­
mental than the differences in rank between scientists.17 CoUingwood 
says much the same thing when he says that 
V 
.. . the only way of knowing whether a given type of argument 
is cogent or not is to learn how to argue that way, and find out. 
MeanwhUe the second best thing is to take the word of people who 
have done so for themselves.18 
1 2 aid. 
13 aid. 
» aid., pp. 15-16. 
1 5 R. G. ColUngwood, The Idea of History, p. 252. 
1 6 M. Polanyi, op. cit., p. 16. 
17 aid. 
1 8 R. G. CoUingwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 263. 

482 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
But if each aspirant is finally to become his own authority, he has 
to recognize the superiority of his peers when he is in the formative 
stage. DociHty, in the ancient, tracUtional sense of the virtue whereby 
a student is a good learner through a readiness to submit himseU to 
his masters, is thus an indispensable quahty in any apprentice research­
er being put through his paces in acquiring his own status as an author¬
ity. 
If any reader wishes to rise here on a point of order and protest 
that a philosophical question, which ought therefore to be settled 
by reasoning, is being iUegitimately disposed of by reference to the 
authority of historians, and quote against me the good old story 
about the man who said 'I'm not arguing, I'm telling you', I can 
only admit that the cap fits. I am not arguing; I am teUing him. 1 9 
The novice in scientific research wiU thus find himself, through 
commitment to the tradition, the possessor of a body of information 
in the form of dogma, of commonly accepted commitments about the 
status quo of his field, and convictions as to how the world ought to 
behave and respond. Columbus, as an explorer, was committed to 
a world view specUiable meaningfuUy in the directional terms, north, 
south, east and west, and likewise he was committed to the view of 
the global structure of the navigable world. Given these presupposi­
tions he was right in conjecturing that the East could be reached from 
the West. 2 0 His mistaking of America for India was not due to these 
legitimate principles, but to his own mistaken belief that the world 
was much smaller than it actuaUy is, so that he was quite unsuspect­
ing as regards the likeUhood of a large, hitherto unknown continent 
intervening. 
The power to expand hitherto accepted beUefs far beyond the 
scope of hitherto explored impUcations is itseU a pre-eminent force 
of change in science. It is this kind of force which sent Columbus 
in search of the Indies across the Atlantic. His genius lay in taking 
it UteraUy and as a guide to practical action that the earth was round, 
which his contemporaries held vaguely and as a mere matter for 
speculation.21 
Thus "the influence of these premisses P^eUefs held regarding the 
nature of the world] on the pursuit of discovery is great and indispen­
sable. They indicate to scientists the kind of questions which seem 
19 
Ш. 
2 0 See Michael Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 
1962, p. 310. 
2 1 Rnd., p. 277. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
483 
reasonable and mteresting to explore." 2 2 Howsoever greatly our con­
victions may be assailed, some holding firm is essential, otherwise 
there is a complete fragmentation of consciousness, with a sceptical 
abandonment of aU research and no longer a conscious domination 
of the situation, no longer a "seU-reliance" in which the conscious 
seU stands firm. 
The intellectual daring which impels our acts of commitment 
retains its dynamic character within the state of commitment, in rely­
ing on its own resourcefulness to deal with the unspecifiable impli­
cations of the knowledge acquired by the act of commitment. In this 
seU-reliance lies our ultimate power for keeping our heads in the 
face of a changing world. It makes us feel at home in a universe 
presenting us with a succession of unprecedented situations and 
even makes us enjoy Ufe best precisely on these occasions which 
force us to respond to novelty by reinterpreting our accepted knowl­
edge.23 
Such a commitment to a tradition does not eliminate doubt; other­
wise research would be frustrated in principle from the start. But, no 
matter to what extent we encounter the unexpected, or the situation 
changes, we must stand firm on our beliefs, which represent nothing 
other than our commitment to the truth. 
A fiduciary philosophy does not eliminate doubt, but (Uke Chris­
tianity) says that we should hold on to what we truly beUeve, even 
when realizing the absurdly remote chances of this enterprise, trust­
ing the unfathomable intimations that call upon us to do so.24 
Thus, just as Jacques Maritain points out that a man sacrificing 
his lUe to save a friend or to defend his country, U he does this con­
sciously and deliberately, must know in the depths of himseU that 
all is not lost, even though this action seems to negate that basic 
conviction, 2 5 so also the committed researcher must hold fast to some 
basic conviction right to the end, in spite of aU obstacles and apparent 
faUures, U he is ever to achieve success. The Newtonian physicist, 
confronted with the challenging conclusions of the Michelson-Morley 
experiment, wffl not scepticaUy abandon science as a seU-refuting enter­
prise, but wiU see rather a fuUer and richer understanding of his spatio-
temporal vision of the world. The world conceived spatio-temporally 
2 2 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 11. 
2 3 M. Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, p. 317. 
24 Md., p. 318. 
2 5 See J. Maritain, Neuflegons sur les notions premieres de h philosophie morale, Paris, 
Tequi, 1951, p. 96. 

484 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
stands firm, whereas the conception of an immobile framework of an 
absolute space at rest has to be relinquished. Again, as far as crime 
detection is concerned, the T.V. series Columbo has, as perhaps its 
unique characteristic, the image of a man who stands firm to certain 
unshakeable basic insights whose dynamic logic he foUows to the end, 
much in the same way as Columbus' unshakeable commitment to the 
rotundity of the earth impelled him three times to try to seek a sea 
route to the Indies. 
The science of today serves as a heuristic guide for its own fur­
ther development. It conveys a conception about the nature of things 
which suggests to the enquiring mind an inexhaustible range of 
surmises. The experience of Columbus who so fatefuUy misjudged 
his own discovery is inherent to some extent in all discovery. The 
implications of new knowledge can never be known at its birth. For 
it speaks of something real and to attach reality to something is to 
express the belief that its presence wiU yet show up in an indefinite 
number of unpredictable ways.26 
B. Relativism of World Views: Reality of the Whole of That 
WhichIs as Arbiter Between Different World Views 
But this grounding of research in the basic convictions of a com­
munity seems to involve a relativism of world views. Given a certain 
consteUation of (absolute and relative) presuppositions, or basic con­
victions, " i t would seem that our daUy experience compels us with 
the force of logical necessity to accept certain natural laws as true," 
and that "generalizations such as 'aU men must die' or 'the sun sheds 
dayUght' seem to foUow from experience without any intervention 
of an intuitive faculty on the part of ourselves as observers." 2 7 But 
Polanyi objects that this is due to our inclination to regard our own 
particular convictions (or absolute presuppositions) as inescapable. 
Such general convictions, however, are often denied by primitive 
peoples. Death may seem to them not to be a matter of natural neces­
sity but of evU magic, or the darkness of night may be seen as due 
to the sun returning across the night sky without shedding any light. 
Thus, the smashing of a man's skuU would be regarded by us as highly 
signUicant in regard to his death, but would be regarded by the magical 
culture as incidental and irrelevant, whereas, to them, the passage 
overhead of a rare bird would be orninous and seized upon as the 
explanatory cause. Such primitive people are of normal intelligence, 
2 6 M. Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, p. 311. 
2 7 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 25. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
485 
yet they hold their views as consistent with daily experience and 
"uphold them firmly in the face of any attempt on the part of Euro­
peans to refute them by reference to such experience." 2 8 Because "the 
terms of interpretation which we derive from our intuition of the fun­
damental nature of external reality cannot be readily proved inade­
quate by pointing at any particular new element of experience," " i t 
would seem that we are in danger of losing sight of any difference 
between the rival claims of the magical and the naturaUstic interpre­
tations of events." 2 9 
The objection stated above is that we stand enmeshed in a radical 
cultural relativism, inasmuch as each culture seems to be locked in 
its own world view determinants as regards the meaning of events, 
and therefore as regards what attitude or action, together with its in­
herent logic, is to be taken in the presence of such events. Polanyi 
cites the instance of St. Augustine, who had a profound interest in 
science before his conversion to Christianity. But, as he approached 
conversion, he came to regard all scientific knowledge as barren and 
its pursuit as spiritually misleading. Eleven hundred years later, at 
the time of the Renaissance, the speU Augustine exercised over West­
ern culture waned as the secular, critical, extrovert, rationaHst spirit 
spread into many fields and finally revived the scientific study of 
nature. Today, however, a reverse process seems to be felt, as among 
many scientists there is felt "the balance of mental needs tilting back 
once again." 3 0 Science today seems to be not so self-confident as 
regards the extent to which its generalizations make sense as far as 
the world as a whole is concerned. How do we stand, then, when, 
with wavering and multiple basic commitments, we are confronted 
with wavering and multiple interpretations of daily experience? Polanyi 
answers as follows: 
. . . objective experience cannot compel a decision either between 
the magical and the naturalist interpretation of daily life or between 
the scientific and the theological interpretation of nature; it may 
favour one or the other, but the decision can befound only by a process 
of arbitration in which alternative forms of mental satisfaction will be 
weighed in the balance.31 
But what is to be the final arbiter in determining the alternative 
forms of mental satisfaction? It is that of reality or wholeness. Each 
28 Jbid. 
29 R>id. 
3 0 Ibid., p. 27. 
3 1 wid., p. 28. Emphasis added. 

486 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
explanation is more or less satisfactory insofar as it gives us an accep­
table coherent view of experience. Consciousness is a tendency to an 
integral and fuLly determined totaUty of experience, according to which 
integrity and determination the elements of experience are regarded 
as real. Unfortunately, though, 
. . . there exist. . . no expUcit rules by which a scientific prop­
osition can be obtained from observational data, and we must 
therefore accept ako that no expUcit rules can exist to decide whether 
to uphold or abandon any scientUic proposition in face of any par­
ticular new observation.32 
If no observation can supply explicit rules for the abandonment 
or upholding of any scientUic position, what, then, is the role of obser­
vation? Polanyi states that the precise role of observation in scientific 
discovery "is to supply [not rules, but] clues for the apprehension of 
reaUty"; and he adds that this is "the process underlying scientUic 
discovery." 3 3 
This apprehension of reality thus gained in its turn provides us 
with a clue to future observations, which is the process underlying 
verUication. This corresponds to Collingwood's position that experi­
ence produces strains in our basic convictions (a consteUation of ab­
solute presuppositions) as they prove more and more inept to integrate 
our experience into a coherent totaUty. With readjustment following 
restructuring in the consteUation of absolute presuppositions, we then 
approach experience, whose meaningfulness (i.e., implication in 
wholeness) is inteUigible in the light of our readjusted consteUation 
of absolute presuppositions. This also corresponds to Collingwood's 
mutual relation of implication that exists between the starting point 
and conclusion of a phUosophical inquiry, which he conceives as a 
constant return to the beginning, combining together the movements 
from principle to conclusion (as in deduction) and from fact to prin­
ciple (as in induction). 3 4 
Polanyi says that " i n both processes there is involved an intui­
tion of the relation between observation and reaUty: a faculty which 
can range over aU grades of sagacity, from the highest level present 
in the inspired guesses of scientUic genius, down to a minimum re­
quired for ordinary perception." 3 5 Polanyi concludes with the incisive 
3 2 Void., p. 29. 
33 Void. Emphasis added. 
3 4 See R. G. CoLLingwood, An Essay on Philosophical Method, pp. 160-175; see also 
Chapter 4, above, pp. 133 et seq. 
3 5 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 29. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
487 
statement that "verification, even though usuaUy more subject to rules 
than discovery, rests ultimately on mental powers which go beyond 
the application of any definite rules." 3 6 
Three things stand out here as highly relevant to our investiga­
tion of the logic of questioning, research and discovery. First, the 
highest level of all grades of sagacity is accredited to be the "inspired 
guesses of scientific genius," and second, there are basic "mental 
powers which go beyond the application of any definite rules." 
Furthermore, third, "these mental powers" and "the inspired guesses 
of scientific genius" are concerned precisely with "an intuition of the 
relation between observation" (facts, events, fragmentary experiences, 
etc.) "and reality" (that is, universal integrity, mutual implicatedness, 
wholeness, the totaUty of aU that is grasped somehow as a universal, 
that is, as a unity in diversity, not as an abstract, generic type of univer­
sal but as a universal whose dUferences are relevant to it). 
Thus, says Polanyi, " i n the course of any single experimental in­
quiry the mutual stimulus between intuition and observation goes on 
aU the time and takes on the most varied forms." 3 7 He Ulustrates as 
foUows: 
Most of the time is spent in fruitless efforts, sustained by a 
fascination which wiU take beating after beating for months on end, 
and produce ever new outbursts of hope, each as fresh as the last 
so bitterly crushed the week or month before. Vague shapes of the 
surmised truth suddenly take on the sharp outUnes of certainty, only 
to dissolve again in the Ught of second thoughts or of further exper­
imental observations. Yet from time to time certain visions of the 
truth, having made their appearance, continue to gain strength both 
by further reflection and additional evidence. These are the claims 
which may be accepted as final by the investigator and for which 
he may assume public responsibüity by communicating them in 
print. This is how scientUic propositions normally come into exis­
tence.38 
The common consensus of the professional community wffl be 
the deciding factor as to whether the individual researcher's conclu­
sion is incorporated into the fund of scientUic knowledge as an estab­
lished position that future researchers have to take into account; that 
is, whether science as a whole wUl now operate from a world view 
which is adjusted so as to take account of the individual researcher's 
findings. Thus, the common acceptance of the Emsteinian reinterpreta-
3 6 Void. Emphasis added. 
37 Oid., p. 30. 
3 8 Md. 

488 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
tion of the spatio-temporal constitution of the world as a result of the 
Michelson-Morley experiment gave rise to the world view of relativ­
ity physics, which present researchers adopt as their basis for future 
investigations. 
C. Objectivity and Universality Guaranteed by 
Responsible Commitment 
The concept of responsible commitment discussed above39 presents 
us also with the concept of consciousness estabUshing its autonomy 
and creating itselfas a true scI/inthe decisive act of staking its identity 
as a unique and original self on that very setf-made decision in regard 
to the alternatives with which it is faced in seeking the solution to 
a problem. Human consciousness as such is an innate tendency to an integral 
and fully determined totality of experience. It maintains its setfness and 
conscious integrity in backing its decision with the whole of that self 
as its stake. 
What finally survives in research is what is commonly accepted 
by reputable authorities. As Collingwood puts the matter: 
. . . it is not enough that science should be autonomous or 
creative, it must also be cogent or objective; it must impress itserf 
as inevitable on anyone who is able and willing to consider the 
grounds upon which it is based and to think for himself what the 
conclusions are to which they point. 4 0 
Columbus, in staking his aU in seeking a route to the Indies, was 
being true to himself. Notwithstanding that his empirical seU went down 
in personal shame after three unsuccessful attempts to reach the mdies, 
his apparent "faUure" was recognized for the success it reaUy was 
when subsequent navigators correctly understood the epoch-making 
discovery he had made. The universal intent of his responsible self 
was valid, notwithstanding aU appearances to the contrary. The 
Columbus we know would never have been incorporated into history 
U he had relinquished his project merely to avoid the shame of faUure. 
His fundamental commitment was too strong for that. Being true to 
one's self means holding one's seU in truth, that is, in relation to the 
whole of that which is, in which the seU has its lUe, movement and 
mode of being. The "faUures" of a truly committed man are never 
mere faUures, but more often are the very occasions of that leap in 
the scale of forms whereby the consciousness moves from a lower to 
3 9 See this appendix, pp. 479 et seq. 
4 0 R. G. CoLUngwood, The Idea ofHistory, p. 265. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
489 
a higher level. Not aU is lost; the true seU survives in its seU-developed 
fuUUIment. 
.. . the explorer gambles for indefinite stakes. Columbus saUed 
out to find a Western route to the Indies; he failed and after repeating 
his voyage three times to prove that he had reached the Indies, he 
died in shame. Stffl, Columbus did not merely blunder into Amer­
ica. He was wrong in accepting on the evidence of Esdras and, 
presumably, of ToscanelU's map, that the westward distance of the 
Indies from Spain was only about twice that of the Azores, but he 
was right in concluding that the East could be reached from the West. 
He staked his Ufe and reputation on what appear now to be insuf­
ficient grounds for an unattainable prize, but he won another prize 
instead, far greater than he was ever to realize. He had committed 
himseU to a belief which we now recognize as a smaU distorted frag­
ment of the truth, but which impeUed him to make a move in the 
right direction. Such wide uncertainties of its aims are attached to 
every great scientific enquiry. They are implicit in the looseness of 
the hold which a daring anticipation of reality has upon it. 4 1 
This "daring anticipation of reality" is nothing other than the 
responsible judgment of the researcher, which, in addition to being 
a daring anticipation of reality, is also a positing of his true seU in 
putting his whole seU " o n the line" as the stakes. As Aristotle had 
said: 4 2 " . . . the end appears to each man in the form answering to 
his character"; and G. C. de Menasce incisively explains as follows: 
Choice of the end is more of a conversion than a simple choice. 
There is only an analogy between the Uberty of conversion or betrayal 
and that little, imperious Uberty of the choice of means. In love of 
the end, it is the whole subject who seeks, wffls, mobiUzes himself 
and finds. In this choice of the end, it is the whole subject who thus 
finds his raison d'etre, his justffication, his honor and glory. When 
I choose the means, it is the means that presents itseU to me to be 
sought; when I choose the end, I myself give an account of it. 4 3 
Commitment is the act of a conscious seU in which it together posits 
its authentic self (its self-posited self) and its relation to reality, or to 
the whole of that which is. It is the self-taking-in-hand act whereby 
the seU posits its seUness in itseU and in its distinction from, and in 
relation to, the non-self. This decisional self-positing of the seU is not 
merely a seU-isolating act but is together an act of universal import 
(therefore involving logical relevance which is our precise concern) 
4 1 M. Polanyi, Personal Knowledge, p. 310. 
4 2 In his Nicomachean Ethics, 1114a 30-35, b 1-5; see W. D. Ross' translation in The 
Basic Works ofAristotle, ed. Richard McKeon, p. 973. 
4 3 G. C. de Menasce, The Dynamics ofMorality, New York, Sheed and Ward, 1961, 
p. 86. Emphasis in original. 

490 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
and an act of consciusness, a grasping of a seU in its opposedness 
to a non-seU in a whole of meaning, an opposition which is together a 
definition of the seU. Consciousness (as explicit or impUcit thought) 
reaches out for the whole of that which is—that is, reality—but it ef­
fectively takes hold only of fragments, parts, which, as such, do not 
totaUy embody meanmgfulness. Commitment, therefore, involves the 
desire and intent that others also ought to hold to the same, and it 
is therefore an appeal to the approbation of others, especiaUy to the 
authorities to ratify. 
D. The Researcher or Problem Solver Goes Beyond Rules and 
Present Achievements by Committing Himself in 
His Decisive Judgments 
Responding to Plato's objection in the Meno that to search for the 
solution to a problem is absurd, since i£ you do not already know what 
you are looking for you would neither be moved to look for it (and so 
would not have a problem), nor would you be able to recognize it U you 
found it (so, even U you had a problem its solution would be impos­
sible), M . Polanyi says that "we must have a foreknowledge sufficient 
to guide our conjecture with reasonable probabUity in choosing a good 
problem and in choosing hunches that might solve the problem." 4 4 
But he agrees with Plato in that "we stUl have no clear concep­
tion of how discovery comes about." 4 5 Such rules as we may have 
at our disposal are "merely rules of art" whose "application . . . must 
always rely on acts not determined by rule." 4 6 Polanyi does not deny 
the existence or usefulness of rules guiding verification, but says "only 
that there are none which can be relied on in the last resort." H rules 
guide decisions, it is equaUy the case that decisions are needed in the 
choice of the relevant guiding rule. Between whatever rules may be 
at hand and the solution of the problem at hand there is interposed 
the personal, responsible decision of the researcher or problem solver. 
It is precisely this which must bring the researcher out of a state of 
continuous suspension in doubt in the presence of the alternative 
courses he may take. To say that there are no estabUshed rules of 
procedure 
is not to say that we must always remain in doubt, but only that 
our decision what to accept as finally estabUshed cannot be whoUy 
4 4 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 14. 
45 Bid. 
*>Oid. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
491 
derived from any expUcit rules but must be taken in the light of our 
personal judgment on the evidence.47 
Problems that are solved by the mere application of avaUable rules 
are solved by mere routine procedure. Likewise it is routine procedure 
(i.e., without any creative effort on the part of the researcher) to ex­
plain deviations from a rule by a deeper understanding of the rule 
and of its application. But some deviations from accepted rules may 
involve serious consequences for the rule itseU, such as, for example, 
deviation of the movement of the planet Mercury from the rules of 
GaUlean and Newtonian physics. Likewise, in judicial decisions "inter­
pretation is most chaUenging when it involves a jump from the domain 
of rules to the domain of action. It then establishes the link between 
guidance and action." 4 8 According to Collingwood: 
. . . the generality of law, like the generaUty of archaeology, is 
not an end in itseU but a means to an explicitly-recognized concrete 
end. The ideal of law is not the seU-identical immobUity of this or 
that statute, but its interpretation; and misinterpretation means 
using the law as an aid to the determination of concrete cases, just 
as the archaeologist uses his generaUzed rules for the purpose of 
fixing the concrete date of a buÜding or other object.49 
Polanyi maintains that "the rules of scientific inquiry leave their 
own interpretation wide open, to be decided by the scientist's judg­
ment." 5 0 This decisive judgment is the researcher's major function, 
and it includes "the finding of a good problem, and of the surmises 
to pursueit, and the recognition of a discovery that solves i t . " 5 1 H 
he does rely on the support of a rule, he selects the rule that applies 
to the case, as a golfer chooses the club most appropriate to his next 
stroke. The researcher does not operate hke a pre-programmed 
machine, but "from beginning to end he is himseU the ultimate judge 
in deciding on each consecutive step of his inquiry." 5 2 
This brings us to the crucial activity in research, that in which the 
researcher vitally and deliberately inserts his personal, decisive judg-
47 
Vjid., p. 30. In judicial decisions "rules, principles and canons are an assort­
ment of tools for the performance of the judicial task. The judge picks the tool he 
finds most suitable and proceeds to use it on the body of the text interpreted." Gidon 
GottUeb, The Logic of Choice, London, Allen and Unwin, 1968, p. 102. 
4 8 Gidon GottUeb, The Logic of Choice, p. 98. 
4 9 R. G. ColUngwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 225. 
5 0 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, pp. 14-15. 
51 Vbid., p. 15. 
5 2 Bid. 

492 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ment into his proceedings. This is the activity of "guessing" and of 
"guessing rightly." 
Polanyi says that, although natural laws are discoverable, this is 
not done by the mere application of some explicitly known operation 
to the given evidence of measurements and observations.53 The way 
a research scientist proceeds is somewhat similar to the way one pro­
ceeds in "discovering" a burglar in a neighboring room. First, there 
is the registering of observed facts: certain unusual sounds are heard 
from the direction of the room. Then, there is questioning: " b it wind? 
A burglar? A rat?" First there is guessing as to what it might be; then 
some definite feature, what sounds like a foot-faU, is accepted as 
evidence that it is a burglar. There is then the judgment in which we 
decide that it is in fact a burglar, in that judgment the adjudicator stands 
committed, himself to be judged right or wrong upon verification. 5 4 
Here it is not a question of deducing new observational data from what 
is akeady given. The data, as data, are consistent with an infinite 
number of possible future observations. What was discovered is the 
presence of a burglar. Polanyi explains the manner in which the dis­
covery was made as follows: 
Curious noises are noticed; speculations about wind, rats, 
burglars, foUow, and finaUy one more clue being noticed and taken to 
be decisive, the burglar theory is estabUshed.55 
Polanyi says that what we see here is "a consistent effort at guess­
ing and at guessing right." He detaUs as foUows: 
The process starts with the very moment when, certain impres­
sions being felt to be unusual and suggestive, a 'problem' is present­
ing itseU to the mind; it continues with the coUection of clues with 
an eye to a definite Une of solving the problem; and it culminates 
in the guess of a definite solution.56 
Now "the propositions of science . . . appear to be in the nature 
of guesses," and " . . . thek conjectural character remains inherent 
in them," notwithstanding that they are "founded on the assump­
tions of science concerning the structure of the universe and on the 
evidence of observations coUected by the methods of science" and 
"subject to a process of verUication in the light of further observa­
tions according to the rules of science." 5 7 
5 3 See ibid., p. 22. 
5 4 See ibid., pp. 22-23. 
5 5 Tbid., p. 23. Emphasis added. 
5 6 ibid., pp. 23-24. Emphasis added. 
57 Rrid., pp. 31-32. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
493 
But this "guesswork" so vital to scientific discovery, and "right-
guess work," the mark of scientific genius, is not unfounded, not a 
mere exercise of arbitrariness. The method inherent in its operation 
is as follows: 
In science the process of guessing starts when the novice feels 
first attracted to science and is then attracted towards a certain field 
of problems. This guesswork involves the assessment of the young 
person's own yet largely undisclosed abilities, and of a scientific 
material yet uncoUected or even unobserved to which he may later 
successfuUy apply his abfflties. It involves the sensing of hidden gifts 
in himself and of hidden facts in nature, from which two, in com­
bination, wUl spring one day his ideas that are to guide him to dis­
covery. It is characteristic of the scientific conjecture that it can guess, 
as in this case, the several consecutive elements of a coherent 
sequence—even though each step guessed at a time can be justified 
only by the success of the further yet unguessed steps with which 
it wffl eventually combine to the final solution.58 
It isimportant to recognize in this that the progressive unfolding 
is both an unfolding of the seU in its own awareness of itseU as a self 
and as a centre of potentialities (a future self) and of the unfolding 
of its world, which is together the shared world in which other selves 
participate owing to its universal intent. As CoUingwood says: 
The seU and its world are correlative. I am the seU that I am, 
simply because of the nature of the world: by studying a certain kind 
of world and Uving in it as my environment, I develop my own mind 
in a determinate way. And conversely my world is the world of my 
mind . . . 5 9 
This process of serial "guessing" impUes a certain foreknowledge 
of the solution to the problem. 
m order to guess a series of such steps an mtimation of approach­
ing nearer towards a solution must be received at every step. There 
must be a sufficient foreknowledge of the whole solution to guide 
conjecture with reasonable probabUity in making the right choice 
at each consecutive step.60 
This process "resembles the creation of a work of art," about which 
Polanyi says that 
[it] is firmly guided by a fundamental vision of the final whole, 
even though that whole can be definitely conceived only in terms 
of its yet undiscovered particulars—with the remarkable difference, 
5 8 Md., p. 32. 
5 9 R. G. ColUngwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 248. 
6 0 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 32. 

494 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
however, that in natural science the final whole hes not within the 
powers of our shaping, but must give a true picture of a hidden pat­
tern of the outer world. 6 1 
This comparison of the groping and guessing of scientific discovery 
with artistic creation can be well appreciated if we consider what 
Jacques Maritain 6 2 and G. C. de Menasce63 say regarding "the prac­
tical inteUigence, in wedlock with love" initiating a project and carry­
ing it through to completion. We are asked to reflect on how a primitive 
man, as yet ignorant of a boat as a means of crossing a river, may 
come to invent one. Such a man, standing on a river bank, desires to 
cross the river. He retains in his memory fragments of knowledge from 
past experiences, such as, for example, having seen uprooted trees 
carried down a stream by a current, and having seen some birds 
perched on these flowing trees. He Hkewise remembers how he bound 
together tree branches to make a hut. These different memories, expe­
riences and facts become fluid in his consciousness, no longer tied 
together in the unity they had as originally experienced. In this free-
floating state they/опи a dialogue with his desire to cross the river. This 
desire to cross the river is the active form of his consciousness accord­
ing to which these fragmented memories recoalesce in the growing 
consciousness of a primitive boat. 
These recaUed experiences, rubbing against each another [in 
dialogue with his desire to cross the river], form a new synthesis, 
and thus, the savage creates his first boat, which is a true boat because 
it wiU be the man's knowledge and experience that wffl enable him 
to cross the river. 6 4 
The desire which characterises the inventor's present conscious 
experience is the motor principle in the reassembUng of the fragmented 
past experiences presently retained in memory. The reunification, in 
which consists precisely the invention of the man-made boat, takes 
place when the fragments are viewed not in relation to the unity they 
had in their original past experience but in relation to the presently 
felt, but as yet unfulfilled, desire to cross the river. The truth of the 
true boat consists in the conformity of what is known to the desires 
of the agent. 
61 B>id. 
6 2 See his Creative Intuition in Art and Poetry, New York, World Publishing Com­
pany (Meridian Books), 1954, pp. 38-39. 
6 3 See his The Dynamics ofMorality, New York, Sheed and Ward, 1961, p. 149. 
6 4 Tbid. Emphasis in original. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
495 
From this comparison of creative inventiveness with research and 
discovery we can see how "the historian is . . . the criterion of history," 
in which he is "both the architect of the past, which is the subject 
of his judgment, and the author of the principles by which he 
judges." 6 5 The historian wiLl be equipped with information derived 
from experience and past research. He wiU likewise have a question 
in his mind, a problem calling for solution. His informational data, 
referred to his conscious seU in theform determined by his question, wUl 
guide him to his solution. His skffl as a historian wUl consist in his 
abUity, perfected by past experience and the guidance of masters, to 
synthesise his material content in terms of the desire of which his 
question is the expression. His continuing decisions, in which there 
is exercise of the creative imagmation in constituting a whole of parts, 6 6 
involve that he stake his aU in each succeeding decision, like a judge 
in applying law to a concrete case, and like a scientific researcher in 
solving a scientUic problem. The scientist engaged in the work of 
research and discovery is bringing about science precisely in its 
historical dimension, inasmuch as the knowledge involved is taken 
precisely as it satisfies human concerns and answers questions which 
articulate the particular human interest involved. 6 7 Concerning the 
researcher in science, Polanyi says the foUowing: 
[T]he curious fact [is] that he is himselfthe ultimate judge of what 
he accepts as true. His brain labours to satisfy its own demands accord­
ing to criteria applied by its own judgment. It is like a game of 
patience in which the player has discretion to apply the rules to each 
run as he thinks fit. Or, to vary the simUe, the scientist appears act­
ing here as detective, policeman, judge and jury aU roUed into one.68 
Thus, the "scientUic conscience cannot be satisfied by the fuUUl-
ment of any rules, since aU rules are subject to its own mterpretation." 6 9 
Quite distinct from the routine verification of facts and references which 
forms part of the daUy work of any scientist, "the real scientific con­
science is involved in judging how far other people's data can be reUed 
upon 7 0 and avoiding at the same time the dangers of either too little 
6 5 L. Rubinoff, "mtroduction" to his edition of F. H. Bradley's The Presuppositions 
of Critical History, Don MiUs, Ontario, Dent University Press, J. M. Dent and Sons, 
1968, p. 49. 
6 6 See R. G. CoUingwood, "The Historical Imagination," in The Idea ofHistory, 
pp. 231-249. 
6 7 See Chapter 9, above, pp. 422 et seq. 
6 8 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 38. Emphasis added. 
69 Md., p. 40. 
7 0 "Confronted with a ready-made statement about the subject he is studying, the 

496 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
or too much caution." 7 1 In his responsible decisions not predeter­
mined by rules, the researcher is making himself the reason for his 
assertions and putting his reputation on the line in doing so. His con­
scious awareness and decision is thus an ultimate in scientific pro­
gress. "The scientist takes complete responsibility for every one of 
these actions and particularly for the claims he puts forward." 7 2 The 
same is true of the historian, the judge making a difficult decision and 
the crime solver interpreting clues in the disclosure of evidence. H 
his judgment is later confirmed by others he is said to have been right. 
K his work is later proven wrong he is said to have failed, 7 3 since "he 
is bound to no explicit rules and is entitled to accept or reject any 
evidence at his own discretion." 7 4 His job "is not to observe any 
allegedly correct procedure but to get the right results." 7 5 Thus, in 
discovery, "the scientist has to be judge in his own case," 7 6 and, in 
doing so, he proceeds much in the same way as the primitive inven­
ting a boat. The process is described as foUows: 
Intuitive impulses keep arising in him stimulated by some of 
the evidence but conflicting with other parts of it. One habf of his 
mind keeps putting forward new claims, the other hab? keeps 
opposing them. Both these parties are blind, as either of them left 
to itseU would lead indefinitely astray. Unfettered intuitive spec­
ulation would lead to extravagant wishful conclusions; while 
rigorous ftdfiUment of any set of critical rules would completely 
paralyse discovery. The conflict can be resolved only through a judi­
cial decision by a third party standing above the contestants. The 
third party in the scientists' rnind which transcends both his creative 
impulses and his critical caution, is his scientific conscience.77 
This central role of the conscience in forming the researcher's 
progressive and final decisions thus highlights the basic moral factor 
in the foundations of scientific research. 
scientific historian never asks himsetf 'Is this statement true or false?' The question 
he asks himself is 'What does this statement mean?' [which] . . . is equivalent . . . 
to the question, 'What light is thrown on the subject in which I am interested by the 
fact that this person made this statement meaning by it what he did mean?' " R. G. 
Collingwood, The Idea of History, p. 275. 
7 1 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 40. 
72 Tbid. 
73 Vbid. 
7iMd. 
75 Jbid. 
76 Tbid., p. 41. 
77 Bid. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
497 
E. Reality as Researcher's A i m 
Sometimes the solution to a problem, or answer to a question, 
consists in selecting for its solution one of the known elements of real­
ity, and such was the discovery of the presence of a burglar as solu­
tion to the problem of the noises in a neighbouring room. 7 8 At other 
times, and often in scientific research, the solution is by way of the 
postulation of an entirely new entity. It is this reality-orientation that 
distinguishes the art of scientific or historical or crime research from 
the art of creating fiction, such as in the writing of a novel. 
Now "our principal clue to the reality of an object is its posses­
sion of a coherent outHne." 7 9 It would take years of labour to recognize 
an egg-shape if it were presented as a catalogue of spacial coordmates, 
a feat which would rate equal to the discovery of the Copernican 
system as an intellectual achievement.80 But it is precisely this capacity 
to grasp wholes in the presence of fragments which is at the root of 
discovery. 8 1 
. . . the capacity of scientists to guess at the presence of shapes 
as tokens of reaUty dUfers from the capacity of our ordinary percep­
tion only by the fact that it can integrate shapes presented to it in 
terms which the perception of ordinary people cannot readUy 
handle. The scientist's intuition can integrate widely dispersed data, 
camouflaged by sundry irrelevant connections, and indeed seek out 
such data by experiments guided by a dim foreknowledge of the 
possibiUties which lie ahead.82 
The most fundamental commitment, or most basic absolute pre­
supposition, to use Collingwood's term, seems to be that of reality, 
or wholeness, the conviction that aU our experience is "of a whole," 
or that our variety of experiences, to be inteUigibly and meaningfully 
appreciated, must be reduced to the unity of a whole, to a global world 
view of unity in diversity. 
Human consciousness, as such, seeks wholeness but everywhere v 
encounters only particularity, and so must continue its search. 
Now (and this is precisely the remarkable dUference referred to 
by Polanyi between a work of art and a work of science),83 there is 
some mysterious, pre^stabUshed harmony between human conscious-
7 8 See this appendix, above, p. 492 et seq. 
7 9 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 24. 
8 0 Md. 
8 1 Refer to Chapter 4, above, p. 86 et seq. 
8 2 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 24. 
8 3 See above, this appendix, p. 480 et seq. 

498 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ness and reality, or the whole of that which is. According to Colling­
wood, consciousness is itself the whole of that which is, so that for 
consciousness to be consciousness of unintegrated multiples of 
experience is for consciousness to be not fuUy conscious of itseU. The 
fuUUhnent of consciousness is thus, according to Collingwood, the 
fuU consciousness of experience as a whole. This is clear from what 
he says about philosophy as the absolute knowledge of absolute 
mind. 8 4 
We do not assert that the trees and hffls and people of our world 
are 'unreal', or 'mere ideas in my mind.' . . . The very essence of 
trees and hUls and people is that they should be not myseU but my 
objects in perception: they are not subjective but objective, not states 
of myseU but facts that I know. None the less my knowing them is 
organic to them: it is because they are what they are that I can know 
them, because I know them that they can be what to me fhey really 
are. They and I alike are members of one whole, a whole which the 
destruction of one part would in a sense destroy throughout, as the 
death of our dearest friend darkens for us the very Ught of the sun. 8 5 
It is this commitment to reality which guides the researcher in his 
discoveries. 
AU these processes of creative guesswork have in common that 
they are guided by the urge to make contact with a reaUty, which 
is felt to be there akeady to start with, waiting to be apprehended.86 
It is this 'sense of reaUty' which validates the researcher's right 
to make 'hunches' and 'inteUigent guesses,' even though it sometimes 
happens that such 'hunches' and 'guesses' turn out to be abortive 
(how many primitives perished in thek fkst attempts to cross a river 
on improvised rafts?). In research, the realignment of the fluid frag­
ments of past experience in the search for wholeness is articulated 
in the form of a question or problem. 
Thus, the reality-concept functions both as the basis of criticism 
of dUferent conflicting traditions, absolute presuppositions or world 
views and as that which guarantees the universaUty of the individual 
researcher's commitment, and the principle which deterrnines whether 
his "guesses" are " r i g h t " or wrong. 
F. Unpredictability of Solution: Emergent Character of Solution 
Discovery of the solution to a problem, or answer to a question, 
8 4 See his Speculum Mentis, pp. 291-317. 
8 5 R. G. ColUngwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 311. 
8 6 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 35. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
499 
occurs as "a process of emergence rather than a feat of operative 
action." 8 7 This is somewhat contrary to Collingwood's position, for 
which the activity of questioning is unduly credited as being the sole 
operative force in the discovery of the answer. 8 8 Since CoUingwood 
recognizes as the sole agent in knowledge the seU-creative activity 
of seU-evolving consciousness, he does not aUow that rest of the mind 
in which the questioned other (person or object) is aUowed to respond 
in its own right. 8 9 
Since, as was said above, "there are no manuals prescribing the 
conduct of research . . . because its method cannot be definitely 
set out," 9 0 the rules of research, luce those of all the higher arts, 
are embodied only in practice, and so can be learned only by going 
through a form of apprenticeship to someone who is already pro­
ficient in its practice. Discovery is "an extremely delicate and per­
sonal art which can be but little assisted by any formulated pre­
cepts." 9 1 
Polanyi holds that "the most essential phase of discovery thus 
represents a process of spontaneous emergence," 9 2 and, contrary 
to Collingwood, maintains that "discovery does not usually occur at 
the cumunation of mental effort. . . but more often comes in a flash 
after a period of rest or distraction." 9 3 CoUingwood insists on the need 
for sustained effort. 9 4 But Polanyi says that after "our labours are spent 
as it were in an unsuccessful scramble among the rocks and in the 
guUies on the flanks of a hUl . . . when we would give up for the 
moment and settle down to tea we suddenly find ourselves transported 
to the t o p . " 9 5 Thus, "the efforts of the discoverer are but prepara­
tions for the main event of discovery, which eventuaUy takes place—U 
at aU—by a process of spontaneous mental reorganization uncontroUed 
by conscious effort." 9 6 
87 ttnd., p. 33. 
8 8 See above, Chapter 5, p. 158. See also criticism of Collingwood's position in 
this regard, Chapter 7, above, pp. 308-309. 
8 9 See above, Chapter 7, pp. 271-277. See also Chapter 9, above, pp. 425427. 
9 0 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 33. 
91 Md., p. 34. 
9 2 Void. 
9 3 lbid. 
9 4 See especially his Essay on Metaphysics, p. 37. "Everything that we caLl spe­
cifically human is due to man's power of thinking hard . . . high grade thinking 
. . . depends on . . . increase of mental effort and skffl in the direction of that et-
fort." 
9 5 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 34. 
96 Jbid. 

500 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
G. Research and Problem Solving as the Building 
Up of a Concrete Universal 
It was shown above 9 7 that "the origin of the spontaneous coher­
ence prevailing among scientists" is found in the fact that "they are 
speaking with one voice because they are informed by the same tradi­
tion." 9 8 Because the scientists as a corporate group are agreed in accept­
ing one tradition, and trust each other as being informed by this tradi­
tion, they express the continued existence of science.99 Fruitful discus­
sion between them would become impossible if they were not able 
somehow to rely on each other's opinion. 1 0 0 
But Polanyi warns that this coherence of scientific opinion must 
not be imposed after the manner of a central authority, but rather by 
the spontaneous recognition and acceptance by the members of those 
whose judgment is the more authentic and to be followed rather than 
questioned. 1 0 1 And it is precisely in this that we can see the character 
of a concrete universal reaUzed in the case of a scientific body informed 
by a scientific tradition. 1 0 2 It fits perfectly what CoUingwood said 
regarding the concrete universal when he says that "everything in 
it is determined by its place in the whole." 1 0 3 
CoUingwood says, further, that determinism is not involved, since 
"every part determines the whole and therefore by impUcation every 
other part." Thus, "each part taken separately may be regarded as 
the crucial determinant of everything else, just as every separate link 
bears the whole responsibUity for keeping the chain together." And 
so, "everything in it is as unique as the whole, and the uniqueness 
of every part is based upon the uniqueness of every other." 1 0 4 Polanyi 
speaks simUarly regarding the scientific corporation: 
Every time a scientist makes a decision in which he ultimately 
reUes on his own conscience or personal beliefs, he shapes the sub­
stance of science or the order of scientUic lUe as one of its sovereign 
rules. 1 0 5 
9 7 See this appendix, p. 480 et seq. 
9 8 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 52. 
9 9 See ibid. 
1 0 0 See ibid. 
1 0 1 See ibid., p. 53. 
1 0 2 Rnd., pp. 64-65. 
1 0 3 R. G. ColUngwood, Speculum Mentis, p. 221. 
104 Jbid. 
105 M. polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 63. 

The Logic of Question and Answer 
501 
Polanyi asserts that scientists themselves recognize this in recogniz­
ing that "inasmuch as each scientist is following the ideals of science 
according to his own conscience, the resultant decisions of scientific 
opinion are rightful." 1 0 6 
This "give and take" within the scientific corporation simply ar­
ticulates from another optic aU that was said previously 1 0 7 about the 
essentiaUy linguistic character of the concrete universal. It is in lan­
guage that is established that unity in diversity of consciousness. Lan­
guage is nothing other than intersubjective objectivity or, what says 
the same, objective intersubjectivity, or again, one consciousness par­
ticipated in by many conscious subjects. 
Thus, speaking of the "logic" of institutions, Peter Berger and 
Thomas Luckman 1 0 8 say that this logic "does not reside in the institu­
tions and theU external functionaUties, but in the way these are treated 
in reflection about them." 1 0 9 This means only that 
"reflective 
consciousness superimposes the quality of logic on the institutional 
order." 1 1 0 They explain further as foUows: 
Language provides the fundamental superimposition of logic on 
the objectivated social world. The edffice of legitimations is buUt 
upon language and uses language as its principal instrumentality. 
The "logic" thus attributed to the institutional order is part of the 
sociaUy avaUable stock of knowledge and taken for granted as 
such.111 
H . Overlap of Classes in a Scale of Forms 
The essentially ongoing temporal character of this corporate body 
and its convictions is understandable as an overlap of classes in a scale 
of forms. The successful guidance of science by scientUic opinion 
demands strict understanding that "this opinion represents only a 
temporary and imperfect embodiment of the traditional standards of 
science." 1 1 2 The aim of a scientUic researcher, however, in soliciting 
the cormrmation of his coUeagues in the acceptance of his innovations, 
must not consist of merely subjective motives of personal prestige and 
106 Urid. 
1 0 7 See Chapter 9, above, p. 399 and 410416. 
ice s e e thejj 
Social Construction ofReality, Garden City, New York, Doubleday-
Anchor, 1967, pp. 64-67. 
109 Jbid., p. 64. 
»° Oid. 
1 1 1 Tbid. 
1 1 2 M. Polanyi, Science, Faith and Society, p. 53. 

502 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
salary status, but "only in satisfying the standards of science," 1 1 3 that 
is, as a lover of truth. Thus, "viewing onesetf as a lover of truth may 
provide the motivation for great effort in both creative and critical 
thinking." 1 1 4 This forward movement of communaUy controUed scien­
tific convictions takes the shape of a scale of forms in an overlap of 
classes, such as was explained above, 1 1 5 regarding the dynamic, dialec­
tical, concrete character of the concrete universal. 
113 
Md. 
1 1 4 W. Edgar Moore, Creative and Critical Thinking, Boston, Houghton Mifflin & 
Co., 1967, p. 8. 
1 1 5 See Chapter 9, above, especiaUy pp. 422424. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
A. COLLINGWOOD'S WORKS 
A.i. Books and Booklets, Excluding Strictly Historical and 
Archaeological Works, Published Prior to 1943 
1916 Religion and Philosophy, London, Macmfflan, 1916. 
— 
Essay on "The Devil" in H. B. Streeter's and others' Concerning Prayer: 
Its Nature, Its Difficulties and Its Value, London, Macmillan, 1916. 
1920 Ruskin's Philosophy: An Address delivered at The Ruskin Centenary Con-
ference, 8th August, 1919, London, Titus Wüson and Son, 1920. Reprinted 
in Alan Donagan's edition of R. G. CoUingwood's Essays in the 
Philosophy ofAn, Bloomington, mdiana University Press, 1964, pp. 541. 
1924 Speculum Mentis, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1924. 
1925 Outlines ofa Philosophy ofAn, London, Oxford University Press, 1925. 
Reprinted in Alan Donagan's edition of R. G. ColUngwood's Essays in 
the Philosophy ofArt, Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1964, pp. 
45-54. 
1927 "Aesthetic," an essay in TheMind, edited by R. J. S. McDoweU, Lon­
don, Longmans, 1927, pp. 214-244. 
1928 Faith and Reason: A Study in the Relation between Reason and Science, An 
Affirmations Series Pamphlet, London, Ernst Benn, 1928. Pp. 12-24 con­
tain a reprint of "Reason is Faith Cultivating ItseU," originaUy in The 
Hibbert Joumal, XXVI (1927-1928), pp. 3-14. Reprinted in Lionel 
Rubinoff's edition of Faith and Reason: Essays in the Philosophy ofReligion 
by R. G. Collingwood, Chicago, Quadrangle Books, 1968, pp. 122-147. 
1930 The Philosophy ofHistory, An Historical Association Leaflet, No. 79, Lon­
don, G. Bell and Sons, 1930. Reprinted in Wffliam Debbins' edition of 
R. G. CoUingwood's Essays in the Philosophy ofHistory, Austin, Texas, 
University of Texas Press, 1965, pp. 121-139. 
1933 An Essay on Philosophical Method, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1933. 
1935 The Historical Imagination, inaugural lecture delivered at Oxford, 28th 
October, 1935, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1935. Reprinted in The Idea 
ofHistory, Oxford, QarendonPress, 1946, pp. 231-249. 
503 

504 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
1938 The Principles ofArt, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1938. 
1939 An Autobiography, London, Oxford University Press, 1939. 
1940 An Essay on Metaphysics, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1940. 
— 
The First Mate's Log ofa Voyage to Greece in the Schooner "Fleur de 
Lys" 
in 1939, London, Oxford University Press, 1940. 
1941 The Three Laws ofPolitics, The L. T. Hobhouse Memorial Trust Lecture 
No. 11, London, Oxford University Press, 1941. 
1942 The New Leviathan, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1942. 
A.ii. Posthumous Publications after 1943 
1945 The ldea ofNature, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1945. Posthumous publica­
tion of material compiled between August 1933 and September 1934 
and revised September 1939. Minor editing by T. M. Knox. 
1946 The Idea ofHistory, Oxford, Qarendon Press, 1946. Posthumous publi­
cation of the foUowing: (a) material of thirty-two lectures on the history 
of phUosophy, divided into two parts, each part originaUy intended to 
be one book, compUed during the first six months ofl936 and revised, 
especiaUy the sections on Greece and Rome, in 1940; (b) the fragmen­
tary Principles ofHistory, sketched in Java in the Spring of 1939; the whole 
work being compUed and edited by T. M. Knox. Contains ako a valuable 
introduction by T. M. Knox with much useful information on the evolu­
tion of Collingwood's thought. Published 1961 as an Oxford Galaxy 
paperback. 
A.iii. Edited Collections of Previously Published Works 
1964 Essays in the Philosophy ofArt, edited by Alan Donagan, Bloomington, 
Indiana University Press, 1964. A coUection of Collingwood's writings 
on art previously separately published. Contains 'Ruskin's Phüosophy' 
and 'Outlines of a PhUosophy of Art.' 
1965 Essays in the Philosophy ofHistory, edited by Wffliam Debbins, Austin, 
University of Texas Press, 1965. 
1968 Faith and Reason: Essays in the Philosophy of Religion, edited by Lionel 
Rubinoff, Chicago, Quadrangle Books, 1968. 
A.iv. Strictly Historical and Archaeological Books 
1923 Roman Britain, London, Oxford University Press, 1923 (revised 1934). 
1930 TheArchaeology ofRoman Britain, London, Methuen and Co., 1930. 
1934 Roman Britain, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1934. Revised edition of the 
1930 publication. 
1936 Roman Britain and the English Settlements, co-authored with J. N. L. 
Myers, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1936. CoUingwood contributed the 
material of pp. 1-324 and pp. 462478. 

Bibliography 
505 
A.v. Collingwood's Articles, Discussions, etc., Excluding Book 
Reviews and Strictly Historical and Archaeological 
Writings 
1920 "What is the Problem of Evil?" Theology, I (1920), pp. 66-74. Reprinted 
in L. Rubinoff's edition of Collingwood's Faith and Reason: Essays in the 
Philosophy ofReligion, pp. 148-158. 
1921 "Croce's Philosophy of History," Hibbert Journal, ХГХ (1921), pp. 
263-278. ReprintedinWiUiam Debbins' edition of Collingwood's Essays 
in the Philosophy ofHistory, 
pp. 
5-22. 
1922 "Are History and Science Different Kinds of Knowledge?" Mind, XXXI 
(1922), pp. 443451. Reprinted in William Debbins' edition of Colling­
wood's Essays in the Philosophy ofHistory, pp. 23-33. 
1923 "Can the New IdeaHsm Dispense with Mysticism?" A symposium with 
Evelyn Underhill and W. R. Inge, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
Supplementary Volume ΠΙ (1923), pp. 161-175. Reprinted in Lionel 
Rubinoff's edition of CoUingwood's Faith and Reason: Essays in the 
Philosophy of Religion, pp. 270-282. 
— 
"Sensation and Thought," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, XXTV 
(1923-1924), pp. 55-76. 
1925 "The Nature and Aims of a Philosophy of History," Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society, XXV (1924-1925), pp. 151-174. Reprinted in WilUam 
Debbins' edition of CoUingwood's Essays in the Philosophy of History, 
pp. 34-56. 
— 
"Plato's Phüosophy of Art," Mind, XXXTV (1925), pp. 154-172. Re­
printed in Alan Donagan's edition of ColUngwood's Essays in the 
Philosophy of Art, pp. 157-183. 
— 
"Economics as a PhUosophical Science," International ]oumal 
ofEthics, 
XXXV1 (1925-1926), pp. 162-185. 
1926 "The Place of Art in Education," Hibbert Journal, XXIV (1925-1926), pp. 
434-448. Reprinted in Alan Donagan's edition of CoUingwood's Essays 
in the Philosophy of Art, pp. 187-207. 
— 
"Some Perplexities about Time," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
XXVI (1925-1926), pp. 135-150. 
— 
"Religion, Science and Philosophy," Truth and Freedom, П, 7 (1926), pp. 
1-3. Reprinted in Faith and Reason: Essays in the Philosophy of Religion, 
ed. Lionel Rubinoff, pp. 89-92. 
1927 "Reason Is Faith Cultivating ItseU," Hibbert foumal, XXVI (1927-1928), 
pp. 3-14. Reprinted in Faith and Reason: Essays in the Philosophy 
ofReli­
gion, ed. Lionel Rubinoff, pp. 108-121. 
— 
"Oswald Spengler and the Theory of Historical Cycles," Antiquity, I 
(1927), pp. 311-325. Reprinted in WiUiam Debbins' edition of CoUing­
wood's Essays in the Philosophy of History, pp. 57-75. 

506 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
— 
"The Theory of Historical Cycles: II. Cycles and Progress," 
Antiquity, 
I (1927), pp. 435-446. Reprinted as "The Theory of Historical Cycles" 
in William Debbins' edition of CoUingwood's Essays in the Phik>sophy 
of History, pp. 76-89. 
1928 "The Limits of Historical Knowledge," ]oumal ofPhilosophical 
Studies, 
III (1928), pp. 213-222. Reprinted in WiUiam Debbins' edition of Col­
lingwood's Essays in the Philosophy of History, pp. 90-103. 
1929 "Pohtical Action," Proceedings ofthe Aristotelian Society, ХХГХ (1928-1929), 
pp. 155-176. 
— 
' 'A Philosophy of Progress,'' The Realist, I (1929), pp. 64-77. Reprinted 
in WiUiam Debbins' edition of Collingwood's Essays in the Phik>sophy 
ofHistory, pp. 104-120. 
— 
"Form and Content in Art," Journal ofPhilosophical 
Studies, VI (1929), 
pp. 332-345. Reprinted in Alan Donagan's edition of CoUingwood's 
Essays in the Philosophy ofArt, pp. 211-232. 
1934 "The Present Need of а Philosophy," Philosophy, LX (1934), pp. 262-265. 
1936 "Human Nature and Human History," Proceedings of the 
British 
Academy, XXII (1936), pp. 97-127. Reprinted in CoUingwood's 
posthumous The Idea of History, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1946, pp. 
205-231. 
1938 "On The So-caUed Idea of Causation," Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society, XXXVIII (1937-1938), pp. 85-112. 
1940 "Fascism and Nazism," Philosophy, XXV (1940), pp. 168-176. 
A.vi. Translations Made by Collingwood 
1913 CROCE, Benedetto, Filosofia di Giambattista Vico, Bari, 1911, translated 
by R. G. CoUingwood as The Philosophy of Giambattista Vico, London, 
Latimer, 1913. Reprinted by RusseU and RusseU, New York, 1964. 
1921 RUGGffiRO, Guido da, Modern Philosophy, translated by R. G. CoUing­
wood and A. Howard Hanney, London, Library of Phüosophy, George 
Allen and Unwin, 1921. 
1927 CROCE, Benedetto, Contributatio alh critica di me stesso, Bari, 1915. Trans­
lated by R. G. Collingwood under the title of Benedetto Croce, An 
Autobiography, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1927. Reprinted by Books for 
Libraries Press, Freeport, New York, 1970. 
— 
RUGGLERO, Guido da, History ofEuropean Liberalism, transbted by R. G. 
CoUingwood, London, Oxford University Press, 1927. Reprinted by The 
Beacon Press, Boston, 1959. 
1929 CROCE, Benedetto, "Aesthetic," translatedbyR. G. Collingwoodfor 
the 14th edition of Encyclopaedia Brittanica, Chicago, 1929, pp. 263-271. 

Bibliography 
507 
A. vii. Book Reviews by Collingwood 
ALEXANDER, S., Art and Instinct, Oxford, 1927. Reviewed mJournal 
ofPhilo­
sophical Studies, ΙΠ (1928), pp. 547-548. 
BATLEY, Cyril, ed., Epicurus: The Extant Remains, Oxford, 1926. Reviewed 
in The Monthly Criterion, VI (1927), pp. 369-372. 
BRlGHTFLELD, Myron F., The Issue in Literary Criticism, Berkeley, 1932. 
Reviewed in Philosophy, ХП (1937), pp. 114-116. 
BURY, J. B., Selected Essays, ed. Harold Temperly, Cambridge, 1930. Reviewed 
in The English Historical Review, XLV1 (1931), pp. 461465. Reprinted in 
part in Collingwood's posthumous The Idea ofHistory, pp. 147-151. 
CARR, H. W., A Theory ofMonads, London, 1922. Reviewed in Hibbert Jour-
nal, ХХШ (1924-1925), pp. 380-382. 
CHARLETON, Walter, ed. Epicurus, His Morals, London, 1926. Reviewed in 
The Monthly Criterion, VI (1927), pp. 369-372. 
D'ARCY, M. C., The Nature ofBelief, London, 1931. Reviewed in The Criterion, 
XI (1931-1932), pp. 334-336. 
DUCASSE, C. J., The Philosophy ofArt, London, 1931. Reviewed in Journal 
ofPhilosophical Studies, LX (1931), pp. 383-386. 
GORE, Charles, The Philosophy ofthe Good Life, Edinburgh, 1930. Reviewed 
in The Criterion, X (1930-1931), pp. 560-562. 
LATRD, John, The Idea of Value, Cambridge, 1929. Reviewed in The Criterion, 
ГХ (1929-1930), pp. 320-327. 
LODGE, R. C., Plato's Theory of Ethics, London, 1928. Reviewed in The 
Criterion, VTU (1928-1929), p. 159. 
REro, L. A., A Study ofAesthetics, London, 1931. Reviewed in Philosophy, 
Ш 
(1932), pp. 335-337. 
STACE, W. T., The Meaning ofBeauty, London, 1929. Reviewed in Journal of 
Philosophical Studies, V (1930), pp. 460-463. Rejoinder by W. T. Stace in 
Journal of Philosophical Studies, V (1930), pp. 653-654. 
TAYLOR, A. E., Plato: The Man and His Work, London, 1926. Reviewed in 
The Monthly Criterion, VI (1927), pp. 65-68. 
TEGGART, F. J., Theory ofHistory, New Haven, 1925. Reviewed in The Jour-
nal ofPhilosophical Studies, I (1926), pp. 255-256. 
URBAN, W. M., The Intelligible World, London, 1929. Reviewed in The 
Criterion, ГХ (1929-1930), pp. 320-337. 
WAHL, Jean, Etude sur le Parmenide de Platon. Reviewed in The Monthly 
Criterion, VI (1927), pp. 65^8. 
B. WORKS O N COLLINGWOOD 
B.i. Bibliographies on CoUingwood 
DEBBuVS, Wffliam, ed., Essays in thePhibsophyofHistory, 
byR. G. ColUng­
wood, Austin, University of Texas Press, 1965, pp. 141-148. 

508 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
DONAGAN, Alan, TheLaterPhilosophyofR. 
G. Collingwood, Oxford, Claren¬
don Press, 1962, pp. 308-310. Pp. 311-312 contain an appendix of dates 
in which CoUingwood's philosophical works after An Essay on Phibsophi-
cal Method were composed. 
JOHNSTON, WiUiam M., The Formative Years ofR. G. Collingwood, The Hague, 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1967, pp. 155-165. 
Proceedings ofthe British Academy, ХХГХ (1943), accompanying obituary notice. 
Bibliography, excluding Book Reviews and Historical Works and 
Articles, including PhUosophical Books and Articles, Translations and 
Memoirs, compUed by T. M. Knox, pp. 474475. BibUography of writings 
on Ancient History and Archaeology compUed by I. A. Richmond, pp. 
481485. 
RUBINOFF, Lionel, Collingwood and theReform ofMetaphysics, Toronto, Univer­
sity of Toronto Press, 1970, pp. 394-406. 
RUBINOFF, Lionel, editor, Faith and Reason: Essays in the Philosophy 
ofReli-
gion, by R. G. CoUingwood, Chicago, Quadrangle Books, 1968, pp. 
305-311. 
SHALOM, Albert, R. G. Collingwood: philosophe et historien, Paris, Presses 
Universitaries de France, 1967. Annotated bibliography in body of text, 
pp. 154-157; includes both phUosophical and archaeological works by 
CoUingwood. 
TOMLIN, E. W. F., R. G. Collingwood, London, Longmans, Green and Co., 
1961. Brief bibUography on pp. 39-40. 
B.ii. Books (including Unpublished Dissertation) on Collingwood 
and his Work 
CRAGG, R. C., Collingwood's Logic of Question and Answer, diss. University 
of Toronto, 1948. 
DONAGAN, Alan, TheLaterPhilosophyofR. 
G. Collingwood, Oxford, C3aren-
don Press, 1962. 
JOHNSTON, WiUiamM., The Formative Years ofR. G. Collingwood, The Hague, 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1967. 
MINK, Louis O., Mind, History, and Dialectic, Bloomington, Indiana Univer­
sity Press, 1969. 
RUBbNTOFF, Lionel, Collingwood and the Reform ofMetaphysics, Toronto, The 
University of Toronto Press, 1970. 
SHALOM, Albert, R. G. CoUingwood, philosophe et historien, Paris, Presses 
Universitaires de France, 1967. 
TOMLfN, E. W. F., R. G. Collingwood, London, Longmans, Green and Co., 
new edition 1961 (first pubUshed 1953). 
B.iii. Books with Significant Sections on Collingwood 
NYGREN, Anders, Meaning and Method, Prolegomena to a Scientic Philosophy 
ofReligion and a Scientific Theok>gy, translated by Phfflp S. Watson, Lon-

Bibliography 
509 
don, Epworth Press, 1972. Pp. 194-199 are on CoUingwood's theory of 
absolute presuppositions. 
POLANYI, Michael, The Study ofMan, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 
1969. Bibliographical note, pp. 100-102, on ColUngwood's The Idea of 
History. 
VERSFELT, Martin, The Perennial Order, London, Society of St. Paul, 1954. 
Chapter Eleven, pp. 162-175, on CoUingwood's The Idea ofHistory. 
B.iv. Articles on Collingwood 
BUCHDAHL, Gerd, " A n Assessment of R. G. CoUingwood's Idea of His­
tory," TheAustralasian 
Journal ofPhilosophy, XXVI (1948), pp. 94-113. 
BUCHDAHL, Gerd, "Has Collingwood Been Unfortunate in His Critics?" 
The Austraksian Journal of Philosophy, XXXVI (1958), pp. 95-108. 
COHEN, L. Jonathan, "Has CoUingwood Been Misinterpreted?" The Philo­
sophical Quarterly, VII (1957), pp. 149-150. 
DONAGAN, Alan, "The Croce-Collingwood Theory of Art," Philosophy, 
ΧΧΧΠΙ (1958), pp. 162-167. 
DONAGAN, Alan, "Does Knowing Make a Difference to What is Known? 
(A Rejoinder to Mr. Post)," The Philosophical Quarterly, XVI (1966), pp. 
352-355. 
DONAGAN, Alan, "The Verification of Historical Theses," The PhUosophical 
Quarterly, VI (1956), pp. 193-208. 
DRAY, WiUiam, "R. G. CoUingwood and the Acquaintance Theory of Knowl­
edge," Revue Internationale de Philosophie, XI, 42 (1957), pp. 420-432. 
DUCASSE, C. J., "Mr. CoUingwood on PhUosophical Method," The Journal 
ofPhilosophy, XXXIII (1936), pp. 95-106. 
DYKSTRA, V., "Philosophers and Presuppositions" (discussion), Mind, LXTX 
(1960), pp. 63-68. 
FRUCHON, Pierre, "Sigmfication de l'histoire de la phUosophie selon 
l'Autobiographie de CoUingwood," Les Etudes philosophiques, ΧΠΙ (1958), 
pp. 143-160. 
GENNARO, Angelo de, "Croce and CoUingwood," The Personalist, XLV1 
(1965), pp. 193-203. 
GOLDSTEIN, Leon J., "CoUingwood's Theory of Historical Knowing," 
History and Theory, LX (1970), pp. 3-36. 
GRANT, C. K., "CoUingwood's Theory of Historical Knowledge," Renais­
sance and Modern Studies, I (1957), pp. 65-90. 
HARRIS, Errol, "Coffingwood's Theory of History," The Philosophical Quarter­
ly, Vn (1957), pp. 35-49. 
HARRIS, Errol, "CoUingwood on Eternal Problems," The Philosophical 
Quarterly, I (1951), pp. 228-241. 

510 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
KNOX, T. M., "Notes on CoUingwood's PhUosophical Work" (accompany­
ing obituary notice, with attached bibUography), Proceedings ofthe British 
Academy, XXLX (1943), pp. 469475. 
LLEWELYN, John, "CoUingwood's Doctrine of Absolute Presuppositions," 
The Phihsophical 
Quarterly, XI (1961), pp. 49-60. 
MACKAY, Donald S., "On Supposing and Presupposing," The Review of 
Metaphysics, П, 5 (1948), pp. 1-20. 
McCALLUM, R. B., "Robin George CoUingwood 1889-1943" (obituary 
notice), Proceedings of the British Academy, ХХГХ (1943), pp. 462468. 
MTNK, Louis O., "CoUingwood's Dialectic of History," History and Theory, 
VII, 1 (1968), pp. 3-37. 
MISCHEL, Theodore, "CoUingwood on Art as 'unaginative Expression,' " 
The Austraksian 
]ournal ofPhilosophy, 
ХХХГХ (1961), pp. 241-250. 
POST, J. F., "Does Knowing Make a Difference to What Is Known?" The 
Philosophical Quarterly, XV (1965), pp. 220-228. 
RICHMOND, I. A., "An Appreciation of R. G. ColUngwood as an Archae­
ologist" (accompanying obituary notice), Proceedings of the 
British 
Academy, XXLX (1943), pp. 476480 (with archaeological bibliography 
appended, pp. 481-485). 
RrrCHTfi, A. D., "The Logic of Question and Answer," Mind, Ш (1943), 
pp. 24-38. 
ROTENSTREICH, Nathan, "From Facts to Thoughts: CoUingwood's Views 
on the Nature of History," Philosophy, XXXV (1960), pp. 122-137. 
ROTENSTREICH, Nathan, ''HistoricismandPhuosophy,''RePwemfermirionafc 
de phüosophie, XI, 42 (1957), pp. 401419. 
RUBINOFF, Lionel, "CoUingwood's Theory of the Relation between Phüos-
sophy and History: A New Interpretation," The fournal of the History 
ofPhilosophy, 
VI, 4 (1968), pp. 363-380. 
RYNTN, David, "Donagan on CoUingwood: Absolute Presuppositions, Truth 
and Metaphysics," The Review ofMetaphysics, 
XVffi (1964-1965), pp. 
301-333. 
SHALOM, Albert, "R. G. CoUingwood et la metaphysique," Les Etudes philo-
sophiques, X (1955), pp. 693-711. 
SHOEMAKER, Robert G., "mference and mtuition in CoUingwood's Philos­
ophy of History," The Monist, 1Ш (1969), pp. 100-115. 
STRAUSS, Leo, "On CoUingwood's Philosophy of History," The Review of 
Metaphysics, V, 4 (1952), pp. 559-586. 
WALSH, W. H., "R. G. CoUingwood'sPhilosophy ofHistory" (discussion), 
Philosophy, ХХП (1947), pp. 153-160. 

Bibliography 
511 
C. PUBLICATIONS ON QUESTIONING 
C.i. Books on or with Significant Sections on Questioning 
ARISTOTLE, De Sophisticis Elenchis, trans. W. A. Pickard-Cambridge, Book 
1 only in Richard McKeon's edition of The Basic Works ofAristotle, New 
York, Random House, 1941, pp. 207-212. 
ARISTOTLE, PosteriorAnalytics, trans. G. R. G. Mure, inRichardMcKeon's 
edition of The Basic Works ofAristotle, New York, Random House, 1941, 
pp. 108-186. 
ARISTOTLE, Topica and De Sophisticis EUmchis, translated by W. A. Pickard-
Cambridge, in W. D. Ross' edition of The Works of Aristotle, Oxford, 
Qarendon Press, 1928, Vol. 1, 100al-164b30; 164al [sic]-184bl0. 
ARISTOTLE, Topics, trans. W. A. Pickard-Cambridge, Book 1 only in Richard 
McKeon's edition of The Basic Works of Aristotle, New York, Random 
House, 1941, pp. 187-206. 
BARDEN, Garrett, and Philip McShane, Towards Self-Meaning, Dublin, Gffl 
and Macmfflan, 1969. Chapters Three and Four on 'The What-Ques-
tion' and 'The Is-Question.' 
BELNAP, Nuel D. Jr., "Questions: Their Presuppositions and How They Can 
Fail to Arise," in The Logical Way of Doing Things, ed. Karel Lambert, 
New Haven, Yale University Press, 1969, pp. 23-37. 
GADAMER, Hans Georg, Wahrheit und Methode, Tübingen, J. C. B. Mohr, 
1965. 
HARRAH, David O., Communication: A Logical Model, Cambridge, Massachu­
setts, M.I.T. Press, 1963. 
HARRAH, David O., "Erotetic Logistics," in The Logical Way ofDoing Things, 
ed. Karel Lambert, New Haven, Yale University Press, 1969. 
JOHANN, Robert, Building Up the Human, New York, Herder and Herder, 
1968. Pp. 35-53 on Inquiry. 
LAMBERT, Karel, ed., The Logical Way of Doing Things, New Haven, Yale 
University Press, 1969. 
LEONARD, Henry S., Principles ofReasoning, NewYork, Dover, 1967. Units 
Three and Four, pp. 2243, on "The Recognition of a Problem." 
PAYNE, Stanley L., The Art ofAsking Questions, Princeton, New Jersey, Prince­
ton University Press, 1951. 
REGIS, L.-M., Epistemology, NewYork, MacmiUan, 1959. Pp. 126-140onthe 
theory of interrogative methodology. 
WAISMANN, F., The Principles of Linguistic Philosophy, ed. R. Harr6, New 
York, St. Martin's Press, 1965. Chapter Twenty, pp. 387417, "Towards 
a Logic of Questions." 
WELLMAN, Francis L., The Art ofCross-Examination, New York, CoUier Books, 
fourth edition, revised and enlarged, 1962. 

512 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
C.ii. Articles on Questioning 
BELNAP, Nuel D., "Questions, Answers and Presuppositions," The Journal 
ofPhilosophy, 
LXIII, 20 (1966), pp. 609-611. 
BRADLEY, F. H., "On Floating Ideas and the Imaginary," Mind, XV (1906), 
pp. 445-472. See pp. 446, 450, and 451452 on questions. 
BROMBERGER, Sylvain, "Questions," The Journal ofPhilosophy, 
LXni, 20 
(1966), pp. 597-606. 
COHEN, F. S., "Whatis a Question?" TheMonist, ХХХГХ (1929), pp. 350-364. 
HAMBLlN, C. L., "Discussion: Questions Aren't Statements," Philosophy 
of Science, XXX (1963), pp. 62-63. 
HAMBLIN, C. L., "Questions," TheAustralasian JournalofPhilosophy, 
XXXVI 
(1958), pp. 159-168. 
HAMBLIN, C. L., Entry "Questions," in Vol. VTJ of The Encyclopedia ofPhilos­
ophy, ed. Paul Edwards, New York, The Macmillan Company and The 
Free Press, 1967, pp. 49-53. 
HARRAH, David, "A Logic of Questions and Answers," Philosophy ofScience, 
XXVni (1961), pp. 40-46. 
HARRAH, David, " A Model for Applying Information and Utility Func­
tions," Philosophy of Science, XXX (1963), pp. 267-272. 
HARRAH, David, "Question Generators," The Journal ofPhilosophy, LXlII, 
20 (1966), pp. 606-608. 
ΗΓΖ, Henry, "Questions and Answers," The Journal ofPhilosophy, LD( (1962), 
pp. 253-265. 
KUBWSKL Tadeusz, "An Essay in Logic of Questions," Atti del Congresso 
lntemazionale di Fik>sofia, Venezia, 12-18 September, 1958, Firenze, San-
soni, 1960, Vol. XV, pp. 315-322. 
LEONARD, Henry S., "Interrogatives, Imperatives, Truth, Falsity and Lies," 
Philosophy of Science, XXVI (1959), pp. 172-186. 
LEONARD, Henry S., "A Reply to Professor Wheatley," Philosophy ofScience, 
XXVII (1961), pp. 55-64. 
LLEWELYN, John E., "What Is a Question?" Australasian fournal ofPhiloso­
phy, XLII (1964), pp. 69-85. 
MAYO, Bernard, "Deliberative Questions: A Criticism," Analysis, XVI (1955), 
pp. 58-63. 
PRESLEY, C. F., " A Note on Questions," Austrafosian Journal 
ofPhilosophy, 
XXXVn (1959), pp. 64-66. 
PRIOR, Mary L., and Arthur N. Prior, "Erotetic Logic," The Philosophical 
Review, LXTV (1955), pp. 43-59. 
RITCHIE, A. D., "The Logic of Question and Answer," Mind, LII (1943), 
pp. 24-38. 

Bibliography 
513 
SPERANTLA, Eugenio, "La metaphysique implicite dans les postulats de 
toute pensee possible," Travaux de LXe Congres International de philosophie, 
Congres Descartes (Actuaiit^s Scientifiques et Industrielles, Numero 
537), Vol. VTfl, Analyse riflexive et transcendence, I
e
r partie, äditeurs Her­
mann et Cie, Paris, 1937, pp. 80-85. 
SPERANTTA, Eugenio, "Remarques sur les propositions interrogatives1. Projet 
d'une logique du probleme," Actes du Congris International de philosophie 
scientifique, Paris, Sorbonne, 1935 (Actuautes scientifiques et industrieUes, 
Numero 394), Vol. VII, Logique, editeurs Hermann et Cie, Paris, 1936, 
pp. 18-28. 
WHEATLEY, J. M. O., "DeKberative Questions," Analysis, XV, 3 (1955), pp. 
49-60. 
WHEATLEY, J. M. O., "Note on Professor Leonard's Analysis of Inter­
rogatives," Philosophy ofScience, XXVTfl (1961), pp. 52-54. 
C.iii. Unpublished Manuscript on Questioning 
BELNAP, Nuel D., "An Analysis of Questions: PreUminary Report," Califor­
nia, System Development Corporation, 1963. 
D. BOOKS CFTED NOT OTHERWISE CLASSIFIED, 
AND BOOKS CONSULTED 
ALLARD, J.-L., Le Mathematisme de Descartes, Ottawa, Editions de l'Univer-
site d' Ottawa, 1963. 
AQUINAS, Thomas, Exposition ofAristotk's 
Metaphysics, trans. Pierre Con­
way, Columbus, Ohio, CoUege of St. Mary of the Springs, 1963. 
AQUnSTAS, Thomas, Exposition ofAristotle's PosteriorAnalytics, trans. Pierre 
Conway, Quebec, La Librairie philosophique, 1956. 
ARMOUR, Leslie, The Concept of Truth, Assen, Van Gorcum, 1969. 
ARMOUR, Leslie, The Rational and the Real, The Hague, Martinus Nijhoff, 
1962. 
ARON, Raymond, Introduction to the Philosophy ofHistory, trans. G. J. Irwin, 
Boston, Beacon Press, 1961 (original French edition published 1938, 
revised 1948). 
BACON, Francis, The WorL· ofFrancis Bacon, ed. J. Spedding, R. L. EUis and 
D. D. Heath, London, Longman and Co., 1857-1874. 
BARZUN, Jacques, The Delights ofDetection, New York, CriterionBooks, 1961. 
BERGER, Peter, and Thomas Luckman, The Social Construction of Reality, 
Garden City, New York, Doubleday (Anchor paperback), 1966. 
BLOCH, Marc, The Historian's Craft, New York, Atfred Knopf, 1963. 
BLONDEL, Maurice, L'Action: Essai d'une critique de U vie et d'une science de 
la pratique, Paris, Presses Universitaires de France, 1950 (first pubhshed 
1893). 

514 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
BOSANQUET, Bemard, The Essentials ofLogic, London, MacmiUan and Co. 
Ltd., 1897. 
BOSANQUET, Bernard, Implication and Linear Inference, London, Macmülan 
and Co. Ltd., 1920. 
BOSANQUET, Bernard, Knowledge and Reality, London, Swan and Son­
nenschein, 1892. 
BOSANQUET, Bernard, ThePnncipleofIndividualityand 
Value, London, Mac­
mülan and Co. Ltd. (Kraus Scholarly Reprint, New York, 1968.) 
BRACELAND, F. J., and M. Stock, Modern Psychiatry, New York, Double-
day, 1963. 
BRADLEY, F. H., Appearance and Reality, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 9th cor­
rected impression 1930. 
BRADLEY, F. H., Collected Essays, 2 vols., Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1935. 
BRADLEY, F. H., Essays on Truth and Reality, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1914. 
BRADLEY, F. H., The Presuppositions of Critical History, introduced and edited 
by Lionel Rubinoff, Don Mills, Ontario, Dent University Press, J. M. 
Dent and Sons, 1968. 
BRADLEY, F. H., The Principles ofLogic, 2 vols., London, Oxford University 
Press, 1928. 
BREASTED, James H., A History ofEgypt, New York, Scribner's, 1959 (first 
published 1905). 
BRUNNER, A., La Connaissance humain, Paris, Aubier, 1943. 
BUTTERFTELD, Herbert, Man On His Past, London, Cambridge University 
Press, 1969. 
CAHN, Steven M., Pate, Logic and Time, New Haven, Yale University Press, 
1967. 
CAPONlGRl, A. Robert, Time and ldea: The Theory ofHistory in Giambattista 
Vico, Notre Dame, University of Notre Dame Press, 1968 (first pubUshed 
1953). 
CARR, Wüdon, What is History? Harmondsworth, Penguin Books, 1964. 
CASSIRER, Ernst, The Logic ofthe Humanities, NewHaven, Yale University 
Press, 1960. 
CERAM, C. W., Gods, Graves and Schohrs, New York, Alfred Knopf, revised 
edition 1968. 
COHEN, Morris R., The Meaning ofHuman History, LaSaUe, The Open Court 
Publishing Company, 2nd edition 1961 (1st edition 1947). 
CROCE, Benedetto, History as the Story ofLiberty, translated by Sylvia Sprigge, 
Chicago, Henry Regnery Co. (Gateway paperback), 1970 (first pubUshed 
1941). 
* 
CROCE, Benedetto, History: Its Theory and Practice, translated by Douglas 
AinsUe, New York, RusseU and RusseU, 1960. 

Bibliography 
515 
CROCE, Benedetto, Logica, Vol. П of Filosofia come scienza dello spirito, Bari, 
Gius, Laterza and Figli, 1964. 
CROCE, Benedetto, What Is Living and What Is Dead ofthe Philosophy ofHegel, 
translated by Douglas Ainslie, New York, Russell and RusseU, 1915. 
DANLEL, Glyn, Man Discovers His Past, New York, Thomas Y. Crowell Com­
pany, 1968. 
DANffiLOU, Jean, Christ and Us (translation by Walter Roberts of Approches 
du Christ), London, A. R. Mowbray, 1961. 
D'ARCY, M. C., The Sense ofHistory, Secularand Sacred, London, Faber and 
Faber, 1959. 
DESCARTES, Rene, The Philosophical Works of Descartes, in 2 vols., ed. 
Elizabeth S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross, New York, Dover, 1955. 
DILTHEY, WUhelm, Pattem and Meaning in History: Thoughts on History and 
Society, New York, Harper Torchbooks, 1962. 
DrMTTROFF, G., and James G. Baker, Telescopes and Accessories, Philadelphia, 
The Blakiston Company, 1945. 
DRAY, WiUiam, Laws and Explanation in History, Oxford, Qarendon Press, 
1957. 
EDDINGTON, Arthur Stanley, The Nature of the Physical World, London, 
J. M. Dent and Sons, 1935. 
FACKENHElM, EmU L., Metaphysics and Historicity, MUwaukee, Marquette 
University Press, 1961. 
FAbNT, HaskeU, Between Philosophy and History, New Jersey, Princeton Uni­
versity Press, 1970. 
FINANCE, Joseph de, Essai sur l'agir humain, Rome, Presses de l'Universite 
Gr^gorienne, 1962. 
FISCHER, David Hackett, Historians' Fallacies: Toward a Logic of Historical 
Thought, New York, Harper Torchbooks, 1970. 
FORBES, Duncan, The Liberal Anglican Idea of History, London, Cambridge 
University Press, 1952. 
GARDINER, Patrick, Theories of History, Glencoe, The Free Press, 1959. ' 
GEIGER, L.-B., Philosophieetspiritualite,2Vols. 
Paris, Editions du Cerf, 1963. 
GENNARO, Angelo de, The Philosophy of Benedetto Croce, New York, The 
Citadel Press, 1961. 
GILSON, Etienne, Being and Some Philosophers, Toronto, Pontifical Institute 
of Mediaeval Studies, 1949. 
GILSON, Etienne, The Christian Philosophy of Thomas Aquinas, London, Vic­
tor GoUancz Ltd., 1961. 
GOTTLffiB, Gidon, The Logic of Choice, London, George AUen and Unwin, 
1968. 

516 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
GOTTSCHALK, Louis, Understanding History, 2nd ed., New York, Alfred 
Knopf, 1969. 
GRAY, Wood, and others, Historian's Handbook, 2nd ed., Boston, Houghton 
Mifflin Co., 1964. 
GRENE, Marjorie, A Portrait ofAristotle, London, Faber and Faber Ltd., 1963. 
GROTE, George, Aristotle, edited by Alexander Bain and G. Croom Robert­
son, 2nd ed., London, John Murray, 1880. 
HABERMAS, Jürgen, Knowledge and Human Interests, Boston, Beacon Press, 
1971. 
HARVEY, Van A., The Historian and the Believer, New York, The Macmfflan 
Company, 1966. 
HEIDEGGER, Martin, Being and Time, translated by John Macquarrie and 
Edward Robinson, New York, Harper and Row, 1962. 
HILDEBRAND, Dietrich von, Man and Woman, Chicago, Franciscan Herald 
Press, 1965. 
HOENEN, Peter, Cosmologia, Vol. П, Rome, Gregorian University Press, 1936. 
HOOK, Sidney, ed., Philosophy and History, New York, New York Univer­
sity Press, 1963. 
JOACHbM, H. H., The Nature ofTruth, New York, Greenwood Press, 1969. 
(OriginaUy published by The Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1906.) 
KANT, Immanuel, The Critique of Judgment, translated by J. H. Bernard, 2nd 
rev. ed., London, Macmfflan, 1931. 
KANT, bnmanuel, Critique ofPure Reason, translated by Norman Kemp Smith, 
London, Macmfflan, 1933. 
KANT, Immanuel, On History, translated, edited and introduced by Lewis 
White Beck, New York, Bobbs-Merrffl Co. Inc., 1963. 
KEEN, Sam, Apology for Wonder, New York, Harper and Row, 1969. 
KELLY, George Armstrong, Idealism, Politics and History: Sources ofHegelian 
Thought, London, Cambridge University Press, 1969. 
KLIBANSKY, R., and H. J. Paton, editors, Philosophy and History, The 
Emst 
Cassirer Festschrifi, New York, Harper Torchbooks, Harper and Row, 
1963. 
LEAKEY, L. S. B., Adam's Ancestors, New York, Harper and Row, 1960. 
LEVASSEUR, J. M., Le lieu Theologique "Histoire," Trois Rivieres, Quebec, 
Editions du Bien Pubhque, 1960. 
LOFTHOUSE, W. F., F. H. Bradley, London, Epworth Press, 1949. 
LOWTTH, Karl, Meaning in History, Chicago, University of Chicago Press 
(Phoenix Books), 1949. 
LUCEY, W. L., History: Methods and Interpretation, Chicago, Loyola Univer­
sity Press, 1958. 

Bibliography 
517 
LUPASCO, S., Du devenir logique et de l'affectivita, 2 vols., Paris, Vrin, 1935. 
MARITAIN, Jacques, Creative Intuition in Art and Poetry, New York, World 
Publishing Company (Meridian Books), 1954. 
MARITAIN, Jacques, The Degrees of Knowledge, London, G. Bles, 1959. 
MARITAIN, Jacques, Formal Logic, New York, Sheed and Ward, 1946. 
MARITAÜST, Jacques, Moral Philosophy, London, G. Bles, 1964. 
MARTTAIN, Jacques, Neuflecons sur ks notions premieres de la philosophk morak, 
Paris, Tequi, 1951. 
MARrrABSr, Jacques, The Range ofReason, London, G. Bles, 1953. 
MARROU, Henri-hrenäe, De k connaissance historique, 5 e edn. rev. et aug., 
Paris, Editions du Seuil, 1966. 
MARROU, Henri-hrenäe, TheMeaningofHistory, 
Montreal, PahnPubUshers, 
1966. (Translation by Robert J. Olson of Marrou's De la connaissance 
historique, 4th edition, 1959.) 
MAZLISH, Bruce, The Riddle ofHistory, New York, Harper and Row, 1966. 
McNEILL, John, The Blondelian Synthesis, Leiden, E. Brffl, 1966. 
MENASCE, G. C. de, The Dynamics ofMorality, New York, Sheed and Ward, 
1961. 
MERTZ, Barbara, Temples, Tombs and Hieroglyphs, New York, Howard 
McCann, 1964. 
MEYERHOFF, Hans, ed., The Philosophy ofHistory in Our Time, New York, 
Doubleday (Anchor), 1959. 
MILLER, Hugh, An Introduction to Modern Philosophy, New York, Macmfflan, 
1947. 
MILNE, A. J. M., The Social Philosophy of English Idealism, London, George 
Allen and Unwin, 1962. 
MOORE, W. Edgar, Creative and Critical Thinking, Boston, Houghton Mifflin 
and Co., 1967. 
MURE, G. R. G., A Study ofHegel's Logic, London, Oxford University Press, 
1950. 
NEVTNS, Alan, The Gateway to History, New York, Doubleday (Anchor), l%2. 
ORGAN, Troy W., The Art ofCritical Thinking, Boston, Houghton Mifflin and 
Co., 1965. 
PASSMORE, John, A Hundred Years ofPhilosophy, London, Penguin Books, 
1968. 
PLATO, The Dialogues ofPhto, in 2 vols., trans. Benjamin Jowett, New York, 
Random House, 1937. 
POLANYI, Michael, Personal Knowledge, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1962. 

518 
Logic, Phik<sophy, and History 
POLANYI, Michael, Science, Faith and Society, Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press (Phoenix Books), 1946. 
POLANYI, Michael, The Tacit Dimension, New York, Doubleday (Anchor), 
1967. 
POWELL, Betty, Knowledge of Actions, London, George AUen and Unwin, 
1967. 
RAEYMAEKER, Louis de, ThePhilosophyofBeing, 
St. Louis, B. Herder, 1954. 
RAHNER, Karl, Spirit in the Worki, Montreal, Palm Publishers, 1968. 
REGIS, L.-M., L'opinion selon Aristote, Paris, Vrin, 1935. 
RENlER, G. J., History: Its Purpose and Method, New York, Harper and Row 
(Torchbooks), 1965. (Original publisher: London, George AUen and 
Unwin, 1965.) 
RONAN, CoUn, Astronomers Royal, New York, Doubleday, 1969. 
SCHÖKEL, Luis Alonso, Understanding 
Biblical Research, Montreal, Palm 
Publishers, 1963. 
SnVION, Yyes, The Great Dialogue ofNature and Space, edited by G. J. Dalcourt, 
Albany, Magi Books, 1970. 
SOMERVILLE, J. E., Total Commitment: Blondel'sL'Action, 
Washington, Cor­
pus Books, 1968. 
SPD3GELBERG, Herbert, The Phenomenological Movement: A Historical Introduc­
tion, in 2 vols., 2nd ed., The Hague, Martinus Nijhoff, 1960. 
STERN, AUred, La phihsophie de l'histoire et le probleme des valeurs, Paris, Centre 
de Documentation Universitaire (Sorbonne), n.d. 
STERN, Fritz, ed., The Varieties ofHistoryfrom Voltaire to the Present, New York, 
World Publishing Company (Meridian Books), 1956. 
STOVER, Robert, The Nature ofHistorical Thinking, Chapel НШ, The Univer­
sity of North Carolina Press, 1967. 
STRASSER, Stephan, Phenomenology and the Human Sciences, Pittsburgh, 
Ehiquesne University Press, 1963. 
STURZO, Luigi, Inner Laws ofSociety, trans. Barbara Barclay Carter, New York, 
P. J. Kenedy & Sons, 1944. 
TAYLOR, A. E., Piflfo, The Man and His Work, London, Methuen and Co., 
1952. 
TREVELYAN, G. M., Clio: A Muse, London, Longmans, Green and Co., 1930. 
VATFHNGER, Hans, The Philosophy of 'As-If/ translated by C. K. Ogden, Lon­
don, Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1924. 
VEATCH, Henry, Two Logics, Evanston, UUnois, Northwestern University 
Press, 1969. 
VICO, Giambattista, The New Science of Giambattista Vico, abridged trans, of 
the 1744 third ed. by Thomas Goddard Bergin and Max Harold Fisch, 
Ithaca, CorneU University Press, 1970. 

Bibliography 
519 
WALSH, W. H., Philosophy ofHistory, 
New York, Harper and Row, 1960. 
WEISS, Paul, History, Written and Lived, Carbondale, Southern BHnois Uni­
versity Press, 1962. 
WHEELER, Mortimer, Archaeology From the Earth, Harmondsworth, England, 
PeUcan Books, 1956. 
WILD, John, The Challenge of Existentialism, Bbomington, Indiana Univer­
sity Press, 1955. 
WINKS, Robin W., ed., The Historian as Detective, New York, Harper and Row, 
1968. 
WOODBURY, David O., The Gtoss Giant ofPalomar, London, Heinemann, 
1940. 
E. SCHOLARLY ARTICLES CITED OR CONSULTED 
ACTON, H. B., "The Theory of Concrete Universals," Mind, XLV (1936), 
pp. 417431; XLVI (1937), pp. 1-13. 
ALLARD, J.-L., "The Role of Experience in the Philosophy of Descartes," 
unpubUshed paper, 1968. 
BEDELL, Gary L., "Bradley's Monistic Idealism," The Thomist, XXXTV* (1970), 
pp. 568-583. 
BOSANQUET, Bernard, "Contradiction and Reality," Mind, XV (1906), 
pp. 1-12. 
BOSANQUET, Bernard, "The Relation of Coherence to Immediacy and 
Specific Purpose," The Philosophical Review XXVI (1917), pp. 259-273. 
BRADLEY, Francis Herbert, "Coherence and Contradiction," Mind, XVTlI 
(1909), pp. 489-508. 
BRADLEY, Francis Herbert, "On Floating Ideas and the Imaginary," Mind, 
LX (1906), pp. 445-472. 
BRADLEY, Francis Herbert, "On Truth and Coherence," Mind, XVTJI (1909), 
pp. 329-342. 
CAPONIGRl, A. Robert, "Philosophy and History," The Review 
ofMeta­
physics, Ш, 10 (1949), pp. 119-136. 
COLLINS, James, "The Role of Monistic Idealism in Croce's Aesthetic," The 
New Schohsticism, 
XVII (1943), pp. 32-58. 
DANTO, A. C., "Mere Chronicle and History Proper," The Journal ofPhilos­
ophy, L, 6 (1953), pp. 173-182. 
DEELY, John N., "Animal InteUigence and Concept-Formation," The Thomist, 
XXXV (1971), pp. 43-93. 
Dfl3BLE, Vernon K., "Four Types of Inference from Documents to Events," 
History and Theory, Ш (1964), pp. 203-219. 
DffiTL, Paul J., "Deduction and Historical Explanation," History and Theory, 
VH, 2 (1968), pp. 167-188. 

520 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ESLICK, Leonard J., "The Platonic Dialectic of Non-Being," The New 
Schoksticism, XXIX (1955), pp. 33-49. 
FEUER, Lewis, "What is the Philosophy of History?" The Journal ofPhilos­
ophy, XLIX, 10 (1952), pp. 329-340. 
FOSTER, Michael B., "The Concrete Universal: Cook Wilson and Bosan­
quet," Mind, XL (1931), pp. 1-12. 
FRffiSS, Horace L., "Historical Interpretation and Critical Analysis," The 
Journal of Philosophy, XLLX, 10 (1952), pp. 340-350. 
GALLffi, W. B., "The Historical Understanding," History and Theory, Ш 
(1964), pp. 149-202. 
GARDEIL, A., "La 'Certitude Probable,' " Revue des Sciences Philosophiques 
et Theologiques, L (1911), pp. 237-266; 441485. 
GERHARD, W. A., "Plato's Theory of Dialectic," The New Scholasticism, XXI 
(1947), pp. 192-211. 
GEWLRTZ, A., "Experience and the Non-Mathematical in the Cartesian 
Method," Journal of the History ofIdeas, П, 2 (1941), pp. 183-210. 
GRAM, Moltke S., "The ReaUty of Relations," The New Scholasticism, XLW 
(1970), pp. 49-68. 
GRlFFISS, James E., "The Kantian Background to Hegel's Logic," The New 
Scholasticism, XLUI (1969), pp. 509-529. 
HANSON, N., "An Anatomy of Discovery," The Journal ofPhilosophy, LXTV, 
11 (1967), pp. 321-352. 
HANSON, N., "The Idea of a Logic of Discovery, Dialogue, ΓΥ (1965-1966), 
pp. 48^1. 
HICKS, J. Dawes, "The PhUosophical Researches of Meinong," Mind, XXXI 
(1922), pp. 1-30. 
HODGSON, Shadworth, "The Idea of TotaUty," Proceedings ofthe Aristotelian 
Society, Vni (1907-1908), pp. 95-114. 
HOERNLfi, R. F. Alfred, "Professor Stout's Theory of PossibUities, Truth 
and Error," Mind, XL (1931), pp. 273-284. 
HOGAN, James, "The Dialectic of Aristotle," Philosophical Studies, V (1955), 
pp. 3-21. 
HUGHES, Percy, "Concrete Conceptual Synthesis," The Journal ofPhilosophy, 
TV (1907), pp. 623-630. 
HUGHES, Percy, "Is There a Distinct Logic of Historical Construction?" The 
Journal of Philosophy, II (1905), pp. 54-55. 
JOACHIM, H. H., "Absolute and 'Relative' Truth," Mind, XIV (1905), pp. 
1-14. 
JONES, E. E. Constance, "Logic and Identity in DUference," Proceedings of 
the Aristotelian Society, VII (1906-1907), pp. 81-92. 
KOSOK, Michael, "The FormaUzation of Hegel's Dialectical Logic," The 
International Quarterly, VI (1966), pp. 596-631. 

Bibliography 
521 
KRONER, Richard, "Philosophy of Life and Philosophy of History," The 
Journal of Philosophy, ХХХШ, 8 (1936), pp. 204-212. 
KRONER, S., "The Year 1800 in the Development of German Idealism," The 
Review ofMetaphysics, I (1948), pp. 1-31. 
KUNTZ, Paul G., "The Dialectic of Historicism and Anti-Historicism," The 
Monist, Lin (1969), pp. 656-669. 
LAURffiRS, M.-L. Guerard des, " A propos de la 'Connaissance Historique' 
[de H.-I. Marrou]," Revue des sciences philosophiques et theologiques, ХХХГХ 
(1955), pp. 569-602. 
LEAHY, Daniel J., " A Pragmatic Theory of Past, Present and Future," The 
Review ofMetaphysics, VI (1953), pp. 369-380. 
LEE, Otis, "Dialectic and Negation," The Review ofMetaphysics, I (1947), pp. 
3-23. 
LEE, Donald S., "Hypothetic Inference in Systematic Philosophy," Inter­
national Philosophical Quarterly, LX (1969), pp. 363-390. 
LOBKOWICZ, N., "Abstractionand Dialectics," 
TheReviewofMetaphysics, 
XXI (1967-1968), pp. 468490. 
MacLACHLAN, D. L. C., "Presuppositions in Bradley's Philosophy," 
Dialogue, II (1963-1964), pp. 155-169. 
MANDELBAUM, Maurice, "Some Neglected Problems Regarding History," 
The Journal of Philosophy, XLIX, 10 (1952), pp. 317-329. 
MARROU, HenrHrenee, "De la logique de l'histoire ä une ethique de 
l'lustojre,'' Revue de metaphysique et de morale, LW (1949), pp. 248-272. 
MESNARD, Pierre, "L'inteUigibilite en histoire," ProceedingsoftheXIth 
Inter­
national Congress of Philosophy, Bruxelles, XTV* (1953), pp. 205-215. 
NTEL, H., "Le sens de l'histoire," Recherches de science religieuse, XLVI (1958), 
pp. 60-77. See also Enghsh translation in Philosophy Today, II (1954), pp. 
230-239. 
PARKER, Francis H., "TTaditionaI Reason and Modern Reason," Philosophy 
Today, νΠ (1963), pp. 235-244. 
PARODI, D., "Necessite et contingence en histoire," Revue de metaphysique 
et de morale, XLW (1949), pp. 273-279. 
PETRlN, Jean, "Les modes de dire 'per se' et la demonstration," Revue de 
l'Universite d'Ottawa, XXI (1951), pp. 173-192. 
PETRIN, Jean, "Univocite et analogie dans les lois de la logique," Angelicum, 
XXVI-XXVn (1949-1950), pp. 233-249. 
PITT, Jack, "Generalizations in Historical Explanation," The Journal ofPhilos­
ophy, LVI, 13 (1959), pp. 578-586. 
RESCHER, Charles, and Carey B. Joynt, "Evidence in History and in the 
Law," The Journal ofPhilosophy, LVI, 13 (1959), pp. 561-578. 
RIEZLER, Kurt, "The Historian and Truth," The Journal ofPhilosophy, XLV, 
14 (1948), pp. 378-388. 

522 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
ROBINSON, Richard, "Cook Wüson's View of Judgment," Mind, XXXVII 
(1928), pp. 304-317. 
ROBINSON, Richard, "Cook Wilson's View of the Origin of Judgment," 
Mind, XXXVII (1928), pp. 454470. 
RUSSELL, L. J., "The Basis of Bosanquet's Logic," Mind, XXVB (1918), pp. 
432-463. 
SABrNE, George H., "Professor Bosanquet's Logic and the Concrete Univer­
sal," The Philosophical Review, XXI (1912), pp. 546-565. 
SlMON, Yves, "On Order in Analogical Sets," The New Schohsticism, XXXTV 
(1960), pp. 142. 
SMITH, John E., "The Relation of Thought to Being," The New Scholasticism, 
XXXVni (1964), pp. 2243. 
SMITH, N. K., "The Fruitfulness of the Abstract," Proceedings ofthe Aristo­
telian Society, XXVrn (1927-1928), pp. 203-220. 
SMTTH, N. K., "The Nature ofUniversals," Mind, XXXV1 (1927), pp. 137-157; 
265-280; 393422. 
STERRETT, J. Macbride, "Methods of Studying the History of Philosophy," 
The Joumal of Philosophy, П (1905), p. 55. 
STOUT, G. F., "Bradley on Truth and Falsity," Mind, XXTV (1925), pp. 39-54. 
STOUT, G. F., "Truth and Falsity," Mind, XLI (1932), pp. 297-310. 
STRANGE, E. H., "Mr. Bradley's Doctrine of Knowledge," Mind, XX (1911), 
pp. 457-488. 
URBAN, Wilbur M., "Metaphysics and History," The Review 
ofMetaphysics, 
ΙΠ, 11 (1950), pp. 263-299. 
WADIA, A. R., "Mr. Joachim's Coherence Notion of Truth," Mind, XXVTII 
(1949), pp. 427435. 
WARD, James, "Bradley's Doctrine of Experience," Mind, ХХГУ (1925), pp. 
13-38. 
WILD, John, "Being, Meaning, and the World," TheReview 
ofMetaphysics, 
XVni (1965), pp. 411-429. 

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
A 
Acton, H. B.: 85 n. 38, 88 n. 45, 93 n. 
60, 235 n. 94, 255 
Agricola: 186 
Ainslie, Douglas: 106 n. 127 
Akhnaton (Amenhotep ГУ): 384 
Alexander, Samuel: 40, 157, 158, 263, 
309 
AUard, J.-L.: 211 n. 16 
Anderson, Carl: 269, 270 
AnseIm of Canterbury, St.: 192 
Aquinas, St. Thomas: 43 n. 21,187, 284, 
287, 330, 330 n. 85,331 n. 86, 339, 339 
n. 118 
Archimedes: 470 
Aristotle: xvii, 8,15, 28 n. 68, 40, 52, 53, 
79, 98,101,104,152 n. 297,158,160, 
173,176,183,186,187,191,192,193, 
202, 218 n. 38, 251, 273, 274, 274 n. 
55, 281, 281 n. 89, 282 n. 89, 282 n. 
90, 284, 288 n. 116, 297, 299, 312, 312 
n. 5, 314 n. 13, 314 n. 16, 315 n. 17, 
316, 317, 317 n. 21, 318, 318 n. 25, 
319, 320, 321, 322, 322 n. 50, 323, 323 
n. 53, 324, 324 n. 58, 324 n. 63, 325, 
327,327 n. 70,328 n. 74,330,331,331 
n. 88, 332, 332 n. 95, 334 n. 102, 336, 
339, 340, 347 n. 150, 350, 352, 353, 
398, 424, 426, 429, 435, 436, 437, 444, 
489 
Armour, Leslie: 39 n. 6, 66 n. 27, 220 n. 
42, 287 n. 116, 308 n. 193, 333 n. 100, 
477, 478, 478 n. 1, 478 n. 4 
Augustine of Hippo, St.: 20 n. 41, 221 
n. 45, 485 
Ayer, A^ J.: 156, 193, 436 
B 
Bacon, Francis: 21, 27, 27 n. 68, 28 n. 68, 
39, 42, 45, 46, 52 n. 51, 65, 85, 212, 
272, 272 n. 50, 314 n. 13 
Bain, Alexander: 322 n. 49, 325 n. 64 
Baker, James G . : 328 n. 75 
Barzun, Jacques: 27 n. 66 
Becquerel, Henri: 268 
Belnap, Nuel: 279, 280, 280 n. 81, 280 n. 
82 
BeLzoni: 308 n. 193 
Berger, Peter: 501 
Bergson, Henri: 137 
Berkeley, George: 38, 40, 50 n. 42, 57, 
267, 301, 301 n. 174, 305, 306, 307, 
309, 425, 445, 446, 447, 448, 451, 460 
Bernard, J. H . : 17 n. 28 
Bloch, Marc: 358 
Blondel, Maurice: 419 n. 301 
Borgia, Cesare: 406 
Bosanquet, Bernard: 28 n. 68, 63 n. 18, 
65 n. 23, 66 n. 25, 66 n. 28, 71, 71 n. 
46, 75, 75 n. 4, 83 n. 36, 84 n. 37, 84 
n. 38, 86 n. 43, 87 n. 43, 88 n. 45, 90, 
90 n. 47, 90 n. 48, 93 n. 60,102 n. 112, 
120 n. 173, YB,134 n. 226,135 n. 226, 
136 n. 228, 137, 139,144, 144 n. 269, 
148 n. 284,151 n. 296,152 n. 297,285, 
285 n. 103, 285 n. 105, 286, 286 n. 107, 
299, 325 n. 64, 329, 376, 389 n. 167, 
411 n. 262, 440 n. 2, 458 n. 57 
Boucher de Perthes, Jacques: 212 
Braceland, F. J.: 364, 365 n. 61 
Bradley, F. H . : 40, 50 n. 42, 63 n. 18, 64 
n. 20, 71, 71 n. 46, 84 n. 38, 88 n. 45, 
235 n. 94, 285, 299, 351 n. 156, 454, 
454 n. 42, 495 n. 65 
Breasted, James: 384 
Br6hier, Emile: 306 n. 187 
Brentano, Franz: 64 n. 18 
Brunner, A.: 389 n. 173 
Buchdahl, Gerd: 70 n. 40 
Butterfield, Herbert: 66 n. 27 
C 
Caesar, Jukus: 225, 232, 256 
Carr, E. H . : 364, 364 n. 57 
Carritt, E. F.: 37 
Carter, Barbara Barclay: 381 n. 139 
Cassirer, Ernst: xxii, 64 n. 20, 311, 311 
n. 1, 312 n. 6, 313 n. 8, 348 n. 151, 
356 n. 11, 358 n. 24, 360, 363 n. 51, 
372 n. 89, 377 n. 115, 383, 384, 384 
n. 147, 385, 385 n. 149, 385 n. 151,386 
n. 157, 387 n. 159, 388, 388 n. 162, 
389, 389 n. 168, 389 n. 173, 390, 390 
n. 175, 391 n. 177, 392, 392 n. 183, 
523 

524 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
393, 394 n. 192, 395, 395 n. 194, 395 
n. 196, 396, 396 n. 202, 397, 397 n. 
203, 398, 398 n. 208, 399, 400, 400 n. 
216, 401, 401 n. 220, 401 n. 221, 401 
n. 222,401 n. 223,401 n. 224, 402, 402 
n. 226, 403, 403 n. 232, 404, 404 n. 
234, 404 n. 236, 405, 405 n. 239, 406, 
406 n. 246, 407, 407 n. 250, 408, 408 
n. 259, 409, 409 n. 259, 410, 411 n. 
264, 412, 415, 419 n. 302, 420, 425, 
426, 429, 431, 441 n. 3, 456, 471 n. 
101, 477 
Casteret, Norbert: 224 n. 51, 278 
Ceram, C. W.: 213 n. 22, 308 n. 193 
Champollion, Jean Fran90is: 414 
Charlemagne: xviii 
Charles I: 66 n. 27 
Claudius: 256 
CoUins, James: 106 n. 127 
Columbus, Christopher: 482, 484, 488, 
489 
Conway, Pierre: 331 n. 86, 339 n. 118 
Cook, Captain James: 268 
Cook Wilson, John: 10, 37, 38, 40, 50 n. 
42, 94, 263, 264, 265, 299 
Copernicus, Nicolaus: 342 n. 131 
Cortez, Hernando: 189 
Cragg, R. C.: 420 n. 303 
Croce, Benedetto: 54 n. 60, 106, 106 n. 
127, 117, 224 n. 51, 232 n. 80, 278 n. 
68, 386 n. 156, 419, 437 
D 
Daniel, Glyn: 255 n. 174 
Danielou, Jean: 319 n. 37 
Dante Alighieri: 472 
da Vinci, Leonardo: 406 
Debbins, WiUiam: 209 n. 4, 210 n. 5, 239 
n. 110 
DeeIy, John N.: xvi, xvü, 286 n. 108 
Denifle: 227 n. 58 
Descartes, Renä: 1, 27, 27 n. 68, 28 n. 
68, 39, 42, 43 n. 21, 45, 46, 46 n. 32, 
51 n. 50, 58 n. 70, 85, 127, 128, 137, 
169, 211 n. 16, 272, 272 n. 47, 273, 
283, 318, 341, 342, 342 n. 131, 346, 
347, 349, 385, 386, 388, 397, 398, 436, 
437, 445 
Düthey, WUhelm: 244 n. 131 
Dimitroff, George: 328 n. 75 
Dirac, Paul Adrien Maurice: 270 
Donagan, Alan: 5 n. 22, 6 n. 22, 10, 10 
n. 2, 11, 11 n. 5, 17 n. 28, 43 n. 23, 
45 n. 27, 48 n. 37, 159, 159 n. 25, 
159 n. 26,160 n. 29,161 n. 31,162 n. 
33, 190 n. 142, 195 n. 166, 216 n. 27, 
216 n. 30, 219 n. 40, 252 n. 165, 259 
n. 189, 266, 266 n. 14, 267, 267 n. 20, 
267 n. 21, 267 n. 22, 400 n. 220, 416 
n. 280, 458 n. 58, 459 n. 62, 460 
Dragendorff: 213 
Dray, WUliam: 209 n. 4 
Dych, W.: 274 n. 57 
E 
Eddington, Sir Arthur Stanley: 395, 395 
n. 195 
Einstein, Albert: 55, 230, 270, 429 
EUis, R. L.: 272 n. 49, 272 n. 50 
Epicurus: 52 
Esdras: 489 
Evans, Sir Arthur: 213, 213 n. 22 
F 
Fermat, Pierre de: 303, 304, 305 
Finance, Joseph de: 352 n. 157, 400 n. 
219, 423n. 310, 429 n. 324 
Foster, M. B.: 299 n. 172 
Frank, Tenney: 253 
Freud, Sigmund: 215, 216 
Fruchon, Pierre: 37 n. 1, 47 n. 34 
G 
GalUeo Galüei: 212, 269, 299, 343 
GardeU, A.: 319 n. 37, 321 n. 44 
Gardiner, Sir Alan: 414 
Gaye, R. K.: 426 n. 316 
Geiger, L.-B.: 293 n. 139, 293 n. 140, 294 
n. 147, 295 n. 155, 297 n. 162, 297 n. 
163 
Gennaro, Angelo de: 467 n. 85 
Gewirtz, A.: 211 n. 16 
Gibbon, Edward: 189 
Güson, Etienne: 39 n. 5, 43 n. 21, 335 
n. 104, 436, 436 n. 1, 437 
Gottlieb, Gidon: 220 n. 44, 375 n. 101, 
491 n. 47, 491 n. 48 
Gottschalk, Louis: 356, 357 
Gray, Wood: 357 
Grene, Marjorie: 281 n. 89, 314 n. 16 
Griffiss, James E., Jr.: 75 n. 2, 298 n. 167 
Grote, George: 322 n. 49, 325 n. 64, 325 
n. 66, 326 n. 69, 327 n. 70, 327 n. 71, 
327 n. 73, 328 n. 74, 328 n. 76, 334, 
334 n. 103, 335, 335 n. 105, 336, 336 
n. 109, 340 n. 124 
Grotius, Hugo: 385 
Grubb, Howard: 277 

Index of Proper Names 
525 
Η 
Haldane, EUzabeth S.: 27 η. 68, 28 η. 68, 
128 η. 205, 211 η. 16, 272 η. 48, 342 
η. 131 
Hamann, Johann Georg: 388 
Hamlet: 63 
Hammurabi: 233 
Hanson, Norbert: 268, 269, 270 
Hardie, R. P.: 426 η. 316 
Harrah, David: 279, 279 η. 77 
Harris, Errol: 53 η. 57 
Haverfield, F.: 213, 253, 254 
Heath, D. D.: 272 η. 49, 272 η. 50 
Hegel, Georg Wühehn Friedrich: 75, 90, 
106 η. 127, 128, 145, 161, 189, 251, 
284, 298, 387 η. 158, 437 
Heidegger, Martin: 197, 274 η. 57, 374, 
376, 377, 379, 380 
Hempel, Carl: xiv, 209 η. 4, 363 η. 51 
Heraditus: xxii, 312, 385, 389, 437 
Herder, Johann Gottfried von: 387, 389 
Herschel, Sir WiUiam: 268 
Hicks, J. Dawes: 454 η. 40 
Hobbes, Thomas: 53, 54,148, 218 η. 39, 
219, 267, 316, 350, 386, 389, 445 
Hoenen, Peter: 109 η. 136 
Hoernte, R. F.: 63 η. 18 
Hogan, James: 319 η. 36, 320 η. 38, 320 
η. 40, 321 η. 43, 322 
Holmes, Sherlock: xv, 34, 480 
Huggins, Sir WiUiam: 277, 278 
Hume, David: 70 η. 41,144 η. 270, 218 
η. 39, 230, 264, 321, 322, 444, 445, 
447, 448, 457, 458, 459, 460, 461, 462, 
463 
Husserl, Edmund: 64 η. 18, 274 
I 
Inge, WUUam Ralph: 87 η. 43 
J 
James, Wffliam: 216 η. 30 
Joachim, Η. H . : 144, 144 η. 268, 153 
Johann, Robert: 418 η. 294 
Johnson, Samuel: 425 
Johnston, WiUiam Μ.: 106 η. 127, 473 η. 
105 
Joseph, Η. W. B.: 213 
Jowett, Benjamin: 273 η. 54 
Joynt, Carey B.: 22 η. 55 
Κ 
Kant, Immanuel: 17 η. 28, 43 η. 21, 45, 
46 η. 32,52, 55, 57, 65, 75, 77, 94, Ώ7, 
128,137,158,169,178,181,182,192, 
203, 205, 280, 283, 284, 296, 298, 300, 
330, 341, 342, 342 η. 131, 343, 347, 
349, 350 η. 154, 397, 430, 436, 437, 
444, 448, 449, 450 η. 30, 451, 452 η. 
35, 466 
Keen, Sam: 275 η. 62, 385 η. 150 
Kemelman, Harry: 27 η. 66 
KUbansky, Raymond: 244 η. 131, 306 η. 
187, 436 η. 1 
Knox, Τ. M.: 9, 10 η. 2, 10 η. 3, 11, Ύλ 
η. 9, 159, 195, 195 η. 166 
L 
Leakey, Louis S. B.: 431, 431 η. 330 
Lee, Otis: 28 η. 68,146 η. 275,146 η. 277, 
219 η. 39, 455, 455 η. 43, 455 η. 44 
Leibnitz, Gottfried WUhelm Freiherr 
von: 57, 128, 128 η. 207, 445, 466 
Leonard, Henry S.: 377 η. 118 
Litt, Theodore: 244 η. 131 
Lobkowicz, N.: 287 
Locke, John: xvi, xvü, xxü, xxüi, 70 n. 
41, 315 n. 17, 445, 446, 458 
LoweU, Percival: 17 n. 26 
Lucey, W. L.: 358 
Luckman, Thomas: 501 
Lupasco, S.: 67 n. 30 
Luther, Martin: 277 n. 58 
M 
Macquarrie, John: 274 n. 57 
Maritain, Jacques: 48 n. 37, 160 n. 28, 
286, 313 n. 9, 314 n. 14, 316, 316 n. 
20, 317, 317 n. 22, 483, 483 n. 25, 494 
Marrou, Henri-Irenee: 4 n. 14,12 n. 10, 
19 n. 33, 20 n. 41, 23 n. 56, 34 n. 88, 
52 n. 51, 152 n. 298, 217 n. 36, 218 
n. 38, 221 n. 45, 223 n. 49, 224 n. 51, 
227 n. 58, 234 n. 87, 243 n. 131, 271, 
271 n. 46, 272 n. 51, 276, 276 n. 64, 
278, 278 n. 68, 278 n. 69, 300, 355, 355 
n. 1, 356, 361 n. 36, 383, 387, 387 n. 
160, 396 n. 202, 412, 412 n. 268, 417, 
417 n. 287, 428, 428 n. 322 
Marx, Karl: 189, 316, 350 
Mazlish, Bruce: 272 n. 47, 386 n. 156 
McCallum, R. B.: 51 n. 49, 309 n. 200 
McKeon, Richard: 218 n. 38, 274 n. 55, 
282 n. 90, 319 n. 34, 331 n. 88, 424 
n. 311, 426 n. 316, 489 n. 42 
McNeUl, John: 419 n. 301 
Meinong, Alexius: 64 n. 18, 454, 454 n. 
40, 454 n. 42 
Meister Eckhart: 283 

526 
Logic, Philosophy, and History 
de Menasce, G. C.: 489, 489 n. 43, 494 
Mertz, Barbara: 364, 364 n. 54, 387, 412 
n. 267 
Michelangelo Buonarroti: 406 
Michelson, Albert Abraham: 269, 270, 
430, 483, 488 
МШ, John Stuart: 28 n. 68, 79 
Müne, A. J. M.: 77 n. 11, 77 n. 15, 93 
n. 62, 284, 284 n. 102, 285 
Mink, Louis O.: 5 n. 22, 10 n. 4, 35, 62 
n. 13, 314 n. 16, 473 n. 108, 475, 476, 
476 n. 114 
Mommsen, Theodor: 213 
Montesquieu, Baron de la Brede et de: 
272 n. 47 
Montezuma: 189 
Moore, G . E.: 37, 38, 40, 50 n. 42 
Moore, W. Edgar: 377 n. 118, 502 n. 114 
Morley, Edward WiUiam: 269, 430, 483, 
488 
Morris, Mary: 306 n. 187 
Mure, R. G. C.: 75, 75 n. 3 
N 
Neddermeyer: 269 
Nelson, Admiral Horatio: 57, 227, 228 
Nevins, Alan: 212 n. 20, 273, 273 n. 52 
Newton, Isaac: 209, 445 
Nicholas of Autrecourt: 283 
Nicholas of Cusa: 283 
Nicolas, J.-H.: 292 η. 136 
Ο 
Ockham, WUUam of: 283 
Ogden, C. K.: 301 η. 174 
Organ, Troy W.: 272 η. 47, 377 η. 118 
Otto, Rudotf: 176 
Ρ 
Parker, F. H . : 280, 281, 282 η. 91, 283, 
283 η. 97, 297 η. 162, 299, 300 
Parmenides: 119, 119 η. 169, 437 
Parodi, Dominique: 440 η. 1 
Passmore, John: 64 η. 18, 454 η. 40 
Paton, Η. J.: 244 η. 131, 300 η. 187, 436 
η. 1 
Petrie, FUnders: 152 
Petrin, Jean: 293 η. 139, 293 η. 140, 293 
η. 141 
Phormio: 58 
Pickard-Cambridge, W. Α.: 323 η. 53 
Pitt-Rivers, Augustus Henry: 254, 255, 
255 η. 174 
Poirot, Hercule: 34, 480 
Plato: 16 η. 21, 29, 45, 49, 52, 53, 54, 58, 
65, 82, 90, 104, 119, 119 η. 169, 148, 
210, 218 η. 39,219, 231, 232,236, 244, 
273, 273 η. 54, 306 η. 187, 312, 316, 
317, 319, 320, 320 η. 39, 322, 350, 398, 
437, 473, 490 
Polanyi, Michael: xxU, 270, 271 η. 42, 321 
η. 46, 337 η. 112, 436, 479, 480 η. 7, 
480 η. 11, 481 η. 16, 482 η. 20, 483 
η. 22, 483 η. 23, 484 η. 26, 484 η. 27, 
485, 486, 486 η. 35, 487, 489 η. 41, 
490, 490 η. 44, 491, 491 η. 50, 492, 
493, 493 η. 60, 495, 495 η. 68, 496 η. 
71, 497, 497 η. 79, 497 η. 82, 498 η. 
86, 499, 499 η. 90, 499 η. 95, 500, 500 
η. 98, 500 η. 105, 501, 501 η. 112 
Polemarchus: 47 
Popper, Karl: 209 η. 4, 363 η. 51 
Pritchard: 51 
Ptolemy: 423 η. 310 
Pythagoras: 201, 436, 437 
R 
Rahner, Karl: 67 η. 30, 68 η. 35, 274 η. 57 
Ranke, Leopold von: 58 
Raphael (Raffaello Santi): 396 
Regis, L.-M.: 28 η. 68, 273 η. 53, 275, 275 
η. 58, 318, 318 η. 30, 319 η. 33, 319 
η. 35, 321 η. 42, 330, 330 η. 81, 330 
η. 83, 330 η. 85, 331 η. 86, 331 η. 87, 
334, 334 η. 103, 335, 335 η. 104, 337, 
337 η. 113, 338, 338 η. 114, 339, 339 
η. 117, 339 η. 119, 340, 340 η. 122, 342 
η. 130, 342 η. 131, 343 η. 133 
Reich, Charles: 478 η. 5 
Rescher, Charles: 22 η. 55 
Richmond, I. Α.: 253 η. 168, 253 η. 171, 
309, 309 η. 195, 309 η. 201 
Roberts, Walter: 319 η. 37 
Robertson, G. Croom: 322 η. 49, 325 η. 
64 
Robinson, Edward: 274 η. 57 
Ronan, CoUn: 277, 277 η. 66 
Ross, G. R. T.: 27 η. 68, 28 η. 68, 128 
η. 205, 211 η. 16,272 η. 48, 342 η. 131 
Ross, W. D.: 274 η. 55, 323 η. 53, 489 
η. 42 
Rubinoff, Lionel: 10 η. 4,11,11 η. 6,12 
η. 8, 76, 92 η. 59, 93 η. 60, 94 η. 65, 
95, 96 η. 80, 96 η. 81, 96 η. 87, 100 
η. 102,100 η. 106, 145 η. 271, 146 η. 
276, 148, 149 η. 291, 150 η. 292, 150 
η. 293, 155 η. 4, 156, 157, 157 η. 11, 
158 η. 19, 159, 159 η. 24, 159 η. 25, 

Index of Proper Names 
527 
159 η. 26,159 η. 27,160 η. 29, 160 η. 
30, 161, 161 η. 32, 161 η. 33, 165 η. 
45, 168 η. 61, 172 η. 77, 185 η. 124, 
192 η. tf2,192 η. 155,193,193 η. 157, 
193 η. 159, 194,195,196, 196 η. 167, 
197 η. 170,198,198 η. 177, 199, 200, 
201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 211 η. 15, 216 
η. 30, 218 η. 35, 220 η. 42, 223 η. 48, 
238, 238 η. 104, 239 η. 108,239 η. 111, 
240 η. 113, 241, 241 η. 116,241 η. 117, 
241 η. 118, 241 η. 119, 243 η. Ώ&, 244, 
245 η. 134, 246,246 η. 136, 246 η. 137, 
246 η. 138, 247, 247 η. 145, 248, 248 
η. 149, 249, 250, 251, 252, 252 η. 163, 
252 η. 165, 252 η. 166, 324 η. 57, 495 
η. 65 
de Ruggiero, Guido: 220 η. 42 
Ruskin, John: 162 η. 33 
Ryle, GiIbert: 161 
Rynin, David: 6 η. 22, 352, 352 η. 158 
S 
Sartre, Jean-Paul: 198, 376, 428, 429 
Schökel, Luis Alonso: 390, 390 η. 176, 
391, 391 η. 177 
Scott, Sir George GiIbert: 41 
Shakespeare, WiUiam: 63 
Shalom, Albert: 9 n. 1, 10, 10 n. 3, 245 
n. 134, 264 n. 5, 417 n. 288 
Serrurier, Mark: 302 
Simon, Yves: 105 n. 124, 298 n. 165, 299, 
307 n. 188 
Simpson, F. G . : 254 n. 171 
Smith, J. A.: 424 n. 311 
Smith, Norman Kemp: 285, 285 n. 103, 
285 n. 104, 286,286 n. 106, 286 n. 109, 
286 n. 110, 287,287 n. 112, 288 n. 117, 
292, 342 n. 131, 450 n. 30 
Socrates: 27, 28 n. 68, 29, 47, 118, 175, 
313, 316, 317, 320, 350 
Solon: 233 
Somervffle, J. E.: 419 n. 301 
Spedding, J.: 272 n. 49, 272 n. 50 
Spiegelberg, Herbert: 274, 274 n. 56 
Spinoza, Baruch: 128, 128 n. 207, 186, 
187, 385, 386, 436, 445, 466 
Stock, M.: 364, 365 n. 61 
Stoics: 52 
Stout, G. F.: 63 n. 18, 64 n. 18, 418 n. 
293, 454 n. 42 
Stover, Robert: xxn, 358 n. 24, 360, 361, 
361 n. 36, 361 n. 37, 362, 362 n. 39, 
363, 363 n. 43, 363 n. 49, 363 n. 51, 
364, 364 n. 52, 364 n. 55, 364 n. 56, 
365, 365 n. 62, 366, 366 n. 70, 367, 367 
n. 73, 368, 368 n. 78, 369, 370, 371, 
372, 372 n. 88, 375, 377 n. 118, 378, 
404 n. 234, 404 n. 235, 406 n. 248, 408 
n. 252, 414, 415, 418, 421, 422, 430, 
432 n. 331, 477 
Strasser, Stephan: 206, 206 n. 197 
Sturzo, Luigi: 381 n. 139, 407 n. 248 
T 
Tacitus: 186 
Taylor, A. E.: 320 n. 39 
Thales: 201 
Themisticus: 335 
Thucydides: 58 
ToscanelU: 489 
Trevelyan, G. M.: 363 
V 
Vaihinger, Hans: 301, 302 n. 175, 303 n. 
179, 305, 305 n. 181, 306, 306 n. 187, 
307, 309 
Veatch, Henry: 160 n. 28, 209 n. 4, 364 
n. 57 
Vico, Giambattista: 20, 42 n. 18, 272 n. 
47, 386, 388, 419 
ViUeneuve, Pierre Charles Jean Baptiste 
SUvestre de: 57, 256 
von Hildebrand, Dietrich: 409 n. 258 
W 
Walsh, W. H . : 46 n. 32, 244 n. 131 
Wheeler, Sir Mortimer: 255 n. 174 
Whitehead, AUred North: 210 
WUd, John, xxü, 197,198, 265, 360, 362 
n. 38, 367 n. 72, 373, 374, 374 n. 97, 
375, 375 n. 100, 376, 376 n. 104, 376 
n. 108, 377, 377n. 114, 377n. 116, 377 
n. 118, 378, 378 n. 119, 378 n. 120, 
379, 380, 380 n. 131, 381 n. 136, 382 
n. 140, 382 n. 142, 383, 410 n. 262, 411 
n. 262, 414, 415, 419 n. 302, 477 
WUUams, Brooke: xx 
Winks, Robin W: 23 n. 56 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig: 48 n. 37, 146 
Woodbury, A. M.: ffi 
Woodbury, David O.: 302 n. 177, 302 n. 
178 
Wordsworth, WiUiam: 41 

