



Copyright
Copyright © 2020 by Bjorn Lomborg
Cover copyright © 2020 Hachette Book Group, Inc.
Hachette Book Group supports the right to free expression
and the value of copyright. The purpose of copyright is to
encourage writers and artists to produce the creative
works that enrich our culture.
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book
without permission is a theft of the author’s intellectual
property. If you would like permission to use material from
the book (other than for review purposes), please contact
permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank you for your support of
the author’s rights.
Basic Books
Hachette Book Group
1290 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10104
www.basicbooks.com
First Edition: July 2020
Published by Basic Books, an imprint of Perseus Books,
LLC, a subsidiary of Hachette Book Group, Inc. The Basic
Books name and logo is a trademark of the Hachette Book
Group.
The Hachette Speakers Bureau provides a wide range of
authors for speaking events. To find out more, go to
www.hachettespeakersbureau.com or call (866) 376-6591.

The publisher is not responsible for websites (or their
content) that are not owned by the publisher.
Editorial production by Christine Marra, Marrathon
Production Services. www.marrathoneditorial.org
Set in 10-point Utopia
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data has
been applied for.
ISBN 978-1-5416-4746-6 (hardcover), ISBN 978-1-5416-4748-
0 (ebook)
E3-20200605-JV-NF-ORI

CONTENTS
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
SECTION 1
CLIMATE OF FEAR
Introduction
1 Why Do We Get Climate Change So Wrong?
2 Measuring the Future
SECTION 2
THE TRUTH ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE
3 A Fuller Story on Climate Change
4 Extreme Weather or Extreme Exaggeration?
5 What Is Global Warming Going to Cost Us?
SECTION 3
HOW NOT TO FIX CLIMATE CHANGE
6 You Can’t Fix Climate Change
7 Why the Green Revolution Isn’t Here Yet
8 Why the Paris Agreement Is Failing

9 Pick a Path: Which Future Is Best?
10 How Climate Policy Hurts the Poor
SECTION 4
HOW TO FIX CLIMATE CHANGE
11 Carbon Tax: The Market-Based Solution
12 Innovation: What Is Needed Most
13 Adaptation: Simple but Effective
14 Geoengineering: A Backup Plan
15 Prosperity: The Other Climate Policy We Need
SECTION 5
TACKLING CLIMATE CHANGE AND ALL THE WORLD’S
OTHER CHALLENGES
16 Conclusion: How to Make the World a Better Place
Acknowledgments
Discover More
About the Author
Bibliography
Also by Bjorn Lomborg
Notes

Explore book giveaways, sneak peeks, deals, and
more.
Tap here to learn more.

SECTION ONE
CLIMATE OF FEAR

INTRODUCTION
WE LIVE IN AN AGE OF FEAR—particularly a fear of
climate change. One picture summarizes this age for me. It
is of a girl holding a sign saying:
YOU’LL DIE OF OLD AGE I’LL DIE OF CLIMATE CHANGE
This is the message that the media is drilling into our
heads: climate change is destroying our planet and
threatens to kill us all. The language is of apocalypse. News
outlets refer to the “planet’s imminent incineration” and
analysts suggest that global warming could make humanity
extinct in a few decades. Recently, the media has informed
us that humanity has just a decade left to rescue the planet,
making 2030 the deadline to save civilization. And
therefore we must radically transform every major
economy to end fossil fuel use, reduce carbon emissions to

zero, and establish a totally renewable basis for all
economic activity.1
Children live in fear and line the streets in protest.
Activists are cordoning off cities and airports to raise
awareness that the entire population of the planet is facing
“slaughter, death, and starvation.”2
Influential books reinforce this understanding. In 2017,
journalist David Wallace-Wells wrote a lengthy and
terrifying description of global warming impacts for New
York magazine. Although the article was generally panned
by scientists as exaggerated and misleading, he went on to
publish the same argument in book form in The
Uninhabitable Earth, which became a bestseller. The book
revels in unabashed alarmism: “It is worse, much worse,
than you think.” Likewise, in his 2019 book, Falter,
naturalist Bill McKibben warned that global warming is the
greatest threat to human civilization, worse even than
nuclear war. It could finish off humanity not with an
explosion but “with the burble of a rising ocean.” A
bookshelf would groan under the weight of recent books
with deliberately terrifying titles and messages: Field Notes
from a Catastrophe: Man, Nature, and Climate Change;
Storms of My Grandchildren: The Truth About the Coming
Climate Catastrophe and Our Last Chance to Save
Humanity; The Great Derangement: Climate Change and
the Unthinkable; and This Is the Way the World Ends: How
Droughts and Die-offs, Heat Waves and Hurricanes Are
Converging on America.3
Media outlets reinforce the extreme language by giving
ample space to environmental campaigners, and by
engaging in their own activism. The New York Times warns
that “across the globe climate change is happening faster
than scientists predicted.” The cover of Time magazine tells
us: “Be worried. Be very worried.” The British newspaper
the Guardian has gone further, updating its style guidelines

so reporters must now use the terms “climate emergency,”
“climate crisis,” or “climate breakdown.” Global warming
should be “global heating.” The newspaper’s editor
believes “climate change” just isn’t scary enough, arguing
that it “sounds rather passive and gentle when what
scientists are talking about is a catastrophe for humanity.”4
Unsurprisingly, the result is that most of us are very
worried. A 2016 poll found that across countries as diverse
as the United Arab Emirates and Denmark, a majority of
people believe that the world is getting worse, not better.
In the United Kingdom and the United States, two of the
most prosperous countries on the planet, an astonishing 65
percent of people are pessimistic about the future. A 2019
poll found that almost half of the world’s population
believes climate change likely will end the human race. In
the United States, four of ten people believe global
warming will lead to mankind’s extinction.5
There are real consequences to this fear. People are
deciding, for instance, not to bring children into the world.
One woman told a journalist: “I know that humans are
hard-wired to procreate, but my instinct now is to shield my
children from the horrors of the future by not bringing
them to the world.” The media reinforce this choice; the
Nation wants to know: “How Do You Decide to Have a Baby
When Climate Change Is Remaking Life on Earth?”6
If adults are worried silly, children are terrified. A 2019
Washington Post survey showed that of American children
ages thirteen to seventeen, 57 percent feel afraid about
climate change, 52 percent feel angry, and 42 percent feel
guilty. A 2012 academic study of children ages ten to
twelve from three schools in Denver found that 82 percent
expressed fear, sadness, and anger when discussing their
feelings about the environment, and a majority of the
children shared apocalyptic views about the future of the
planet. It is telling that for 70 percent of the children,

television, news, and movies were central to forming their
terrified views. Ten-year-old Miguel says about the future:
There won’t be as many countries anymore because of
global warming, because I hear on like the Discovery
Channel and science channels like in three years the
world might flood from the heat getting too much.
These findings, if valid nationwide, suggest that more than
ten million American children are terrified of climate
change.7
As a result of this fear, around the world children are
skipping school to protest against global warming. Why
attend classes when the world will end soon? Recently, a
Danish first-grader asked her teacher earnestly: “What will
we do when the world ends? Where will we go? The
rooftops?” Parents can find a glut of online instructions and
guides with titles like Parenting in a World Hurtling Toward
Catastrophe and On Having Kids at the End of the World.
And so, representing her generation’s genuinely held
terror, a young girl holds up a sign that says “I’ll die of
climate change.”8
I HAVE BEEN part of the global discussion on climate
change policy for two decades, since writing The Skeptical
Environmentalist. Throughout all this time, I have argued
that climate change is a real problem. Contrary to what you
hear, the basic climate findings have remained remarkably
consistent over the last twenty years. Scientists agree that
global warming is mostly caused by humans, and there has
been little change in the impacts they project for
temperature and sea level rise.9
The political reaction to the reality of climate change has
always been flawed—this, too, I have been pointing out for

decades. There are, I have argued and continue to argue,
smarter ways than our present-day approach to tackle
global warming. But the conversation around me has
changed dramatically in recent years. The rhetoric on
climate change has become ever more extreme and less
moored to the actual science. Over the past twenty years,
climate scientists have painstakingly increased knowledge
about climate change, and we have more—and more
reliable—data than ever before. But at the same time, the
rhetoric that comes from commentators and the media has
become increasingly irrational.
The science shows us that fears of a climate apocalypse
are unfounded. Global warming is real, but it is not the end
of the world. It is a manageable problem. Yet, we now live
in a world where almost half the population believes
climate 
change 
will 
extinguish 
humanity. 
This 
has
profoundly altered the political reality. It makes us double
down on poor climate policies. It makes us increasingly
ignore all other challenges, from pandemics and food
shortages to political strife and conflicts, or subsume them
under the banner of climate change.
This singular obsession with climate change means that
we are now going from wasting billions of dollars on
ineffective policies to wasting trillions. At the same time,
we’re ignoring ever more of the world’s more urgent and
much more tractable challenges. And we’re scaring kids
and adults witless, which is not just factually wrong but
morally reprehensible.
If we don’t say stop, the current, false climate alarm,
despite its good intentions, is likely to leave the world much
worse off than it could be. That is why I’m writing this book
now. We need to dial back on the panic, look at the science,
face the economics, and address the issue rationally. How
do we fix climate change, and how do we prioritize it amid
the many other problems afflicting the world?

CLIMATE CHANGE IS REAL, it is caused predominately by
carbon emissions from humans burning fossil fuels, and we
should tackle it intelligently. But to do that, we need to stop
exaggerating, stop arguing that it is now or never, and stop
thinking climate is the only thing that matters. Many
climate campaigners go further than the science supports.
They implicitly or even explicitly suggest that exaggeration
is acceptable because the cause is so important. After a
2019 UN climate science report led to over-the-top claims
by activists, one of the scientist authors warned against
exaggeration. He wrote: “We risk turning off the public
with extremist talk that is not carefully supported by the
science.” He is right. But the impact of exaggerated climate
claims goes far deeper.10
We are being told that we must do everything right
away. Conventional wisdom, repeated ad nauseam in the
media, is that we have only until 2030 to solve the problem
of climate change. This is what science tells us!11
But this is not what science tells us. It’s what politics
tells us. This deadline came from politicians asking
scientists a very specific and hypothetical question:
basically, what will it take to keep climate change below an
almost impossible target? Not surprisingly, the scientists
responded that doing so would be almost impossible, and
getting anywhere close would require enormous changes to
all parts of society by 2030.
Imagine a similar discussion on traffic deaths. In the
United States, forty thousand people die each year in car
crashes. If politicians asked scientists how to limit the
number of deaths to an almost impossible target of zero,
one good answer would be to set the national speed limit to
three miles per hour. Nobody would die. But science is not
telling us that we must have a speed limit of three miles
per hour—it only informs us that if we want zero dead, one
simple way to achieve that is through a nationwide, heavily

enforced three-mile-per-hour speed limit. Yet, it is a
political decision for all of us to make the trade-offs
between low speed limits and a connected society.12
Today, such is our single-minded focus on climate
change that many global, regional, and even personal
challenges are almost entirely subsumed by climate
change. Your house is at risk of flooding—climate change!
Your community is at risk of being devastated by a
hurricane—climate change! People are starving in the
developing 
world—climate 
change! 
With 
almost 
all
problems identified as caused by climate, the apparent
solution is to drastically reduce carbon dioxide emissions in
order to ameliorate climate change. But is this really the
best way to help?
If you want to help people in the Mississippi floodplains
lower their risk of flooding, there are other policies that
will help more, faster, cheaper, and more effectively than
reducing carbon dioxide emissions. These could include
better water management, building taller dikes, and
stronger regulations that allow some floodplains to flood so
as to avoid or alleviate flooding elsewhere. If you want to
help people in the developing world reduce starvation, it is
almost tragicomic to focus on cutting carbon dioxide, when
access to better crop varieties, more fertilizer, market
access, and general opportunities to get out of poverty
would help them so much more, faster, and at lower cost. If
we insist on invoking climate at every turn, we will often
end up helping the world in one of the least effective ways
possible.
WE ARE NOT on the brink of imminent extinction. In fact,
quite the opposite. The rhetoric of impending doom belies
an absolutely essential point: in almost every way we can
measure, life on earth is better now than it was at any time
in history.

Since 1900, we have more than doubled our life
expectancy. In 1900, the average life span was just thirty-
three years; today it is more than seventy-one. The increase
has had the most dramatic impact on the world’s worst-off.
Between 1990 and 2015, the percentage of the world
practicing open defecation dropped from 30 to 15 percent.
Health inequality has diminished significantly. The world is
more literate, child labor has been dropping, we are living
in one of the most peaceful times in history. The planet is
getting healthier, too. In the past half-century, we have
made substantial cuts in indoor air pollution, previously the
biggest environmental killer. In 1990, it caused more than
8 percent of deaths; this has almost halved to 4.7 percent,
meaning 1.2 million people survive each year who would
have died. Higher agricultural yields and changing
attitudes to the environment have meant rich countries are
increasingly preserving forests and reforesting. And since
1990, 2.6 billion more people gained access to improved
water sources, bringing the global total to 91 percent.13
Many of these improvements have come about because
we have gotten richer, both as individuals and as nations.
Over the past thirty years, the average global income per
person has almost doubled. That has driven massive cuts in
poverty. In 1990, nearly four in ten people on the planet
were poor. Today, it is less than one in ten. When we are
richer, we live better and longer lives. We live with less
indoor air pollution. Governments provide more health
care, provide better safety nets, and enact stronger
environmental and pollution laws and regulations.14
Importantly, progress has not ended. The world has been
radically transformed for the better in the last century, and
it will continue to improve in the century to come. Analysis
by experts shows that we are likely to become much, much
better off in the future. Researchers working for the UN
suggest that by 2100 average incomes will increase

perhaps to 450 percent of today’s incomes. Life expectancy
will continue to increase, to eighty-two years or possibly
beyond a hundred years. As countries and individuals get
richer, air pollution will reduce even further.15
Climate change will have an overall negative impact on
the world, but it will pale in comparison to all of the
positive gains we have seen so far, and will continue to see
in the century ahead. The best current research shows that
the cost of climate change by the end of the century, if we
do nothing, will be around 3.6 percent of global GDP. This
includes all the negative impacts; not just the increased
costs from stronger storms, but also the costs of increased
deaths from heat waves and the lost wetlands from rising
sea levels. This means that instead of seeing incomes rise
to 450 percent by 2100, they might increase “only” to 434
percent. That’s clearly a problem. But it’s also clearly not a
catastrophe. As the UN climate panel put it themselves:16
For most economic sectors, the impact of climate
change will be small relative to the impacts of other
drivers [such as] changes in population, age, income,
technology, 
relative 
prices, 
lifestyle, 
regulation,
governance, and many other aspects of socioeconomic
development [italics added].17
This is the information we should be teaching our children.
The young girl holding the sign “I’ll die of climate change”
will not, in fact, die of climate change. She is very likely to
live a longer, more prosperous life than her parents or her
grandparents, and be less affected by pollution or poverty.
But because of the fear-mongering surrounding climate
change, most people don’t hear the good news. And
because we believe that climate change is a much bigger
challenge than it really is, many countries are spending
more and more to combat it, and spending it in less and

less sensible ways. Evidence shows that globally we are
now spending more than $400 billion annually on climate
change, through investments in renewables, in subsidies,
and in lost growth.18
The costs are likely to keep increasing. With 194
signatories, the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change,
the most expensive pact in human history, is likely to incur
costs of some $1–$2 trillion per year by 2030. With ever
more nations making promises to go carbon neutral over
the next decades, these costs could escalate to tens of
trillions of dollars annually in the coming years.19
Any response to climate change will cost money (if
addressing the problem made money, doing so wouldn’t be
contentious and we’d already be doing it). If a relatively
low-cost policy could fix most of the problem, that could be
money well spent. However, it turns out that the Paris
Agreement in its best-case scenario will achieve just one
percent of what the politicians have promised (keeping
temperature rises to 1.5°C [2.7°F]), and at huge cost. It is
simply a bad deal for the world.20
Moreover, it is unlikely that the Paris Agreement, or any
other 
wildly 
expensive 
climate 
initiatives, 
will 
be
sustainable. While many people are worried about climate
change, most aren’t willing to spend much of their own
money to solve the problem. Across the world, people are
saying they’re willing to pay $100–$200 a year to address
climate change. A 2019 Washington Post survey showed
that while more than three-quarters of all Americans think
climate change is a crisis or major problem, a majority was
unwilling to spend even $24 a year on fixing it. Yet, the
commonly proposed policies will cost many thousands or
even tens of thousands of dollars per person per year.21
When fighting climate change becomes too expensive,
people will stop voting for it. Voters have already rebelled
against environmental policies that push up the costs of

energy: in France this takes the form of the Yellow Vests
movement, and in the United States, Brazil, Australia, and
the Philippines, it has seen the election of politicians
campaigning against climate change policy. For this
reason, less grandiose responses to climate change might
also be more effective, because the electorate won’t turn
against them. Climate policy has to be steady to be
effective over the long run, and if the costs of climate policy
are so high that citizens consistently turn against the
governments that promote it, then meaningful change will
be hard to come by.
ONE OF THE great ironies of climate change activism
today is that many of the movement’s most vocal
proponents are also horrified by global income inequality.
They are blind, however, to the fact that the costs of the
policies they demand will be borne disproportionately by
the world’s poorest. This is because so much of climate
change policy boils down to limiting access to cheap
energy.
When energy becomes more expensive, we all end up
paying more to heat our houses. But because the poor use a
larger share of their incomes on energy, a price increase
burdens them the most. In the rich world, an estimated two
hundred million people already suffer from energy poverty,
meaning energy sucks up one-tenth or more of their
income. So they either have to use less energy, or they
have to cut spending on other things. But energy poverty
isn’t just an extra cost to the already vulnerable—it can
disrupt their lives. For instance, energy poverty means that
poorer, elderly people can’t afford to keep their homes
properly heated, leaving them to stay longer in bed to keep
warm. The elite use only a small portion of their large
incomes on energy, so even dramatic price increases
matter much less to them. This is why it is easier for the

rich to argue for high energy taxes. In fact, financial
benefits from climate policies (like subsidies given to a
homeowner for erecting a solar panel or insulating a house,
or driving a Tesla) overwhelmingly go to the richest.22
In poor countries, higher energy costs harm efforts to
increase prosperity. A solar panel, for instance, can provide
electricity for a light at night and a cell phone charge, but
it cannot deliver sufficient power for cleaner cooking to
avoid indoor air pollution, a refrigerator to keep food fresh,
or the machinery needed for agriculture and industry to lift
people out of poverty. Countries in the developing world
need cheap and reliable energy, for now mostly from fossil
fuels, to promote industry and growth. Not surprisingly, a
recent study of the consequences of implementing the Paris
Agreement showed that it will actually increase poverty.23
Our extraordinary focus on climate also means we have
less time, money, and attention to spend on other
problems. Climate change frequently sucks out the oxygen
from 
almost 
any 
other 
conversation 
about 
global
challenges. In rich countries, this monomaniacal focus
means we have fewer and shorter conversations on how to
fix our pension plans, improve our schools, and achieve
better health care. For poor countries, climate policy
threatens to crowd out the much more important issues of
health, education, jobs, and nutrition. These are the issues
that, if addressed appropriately, we know will help lift the
developing world out of poverty and generate a much
better future.
SO WHAT IS the way forward?
First, we need to evaluate climate policy in the same way
that we evaluate every other policy: in terms of costs and
benefits. What that means in this case is that we have to
weigh the costs of climate policies against the benefits of
fewer climate-related problems. The climate problems are

incessantly highlighted, but the costs of a policy for cutting
carbon dioxide are just as real, and often hit the poorest in
society hardest. Carbon dioxide is a by-product of a society
with access to reliable and cheap energy, which helps
produce all the things that make it good: food, heating,
cooling, transportation, and so on. Restricting access to
more costly and/or less reliable energy incurs higher costs
that reduce economic growth.
In the case of carbon dioxide, the best research on costs
and benefits shows that we should cut some, but by no
means all, carbon dioxide emissions. We should do so
through a carbon tax, starting out rather low at $20 per ton
of emissions (equivalent to an 18¢ per gallon tax on
gasoline) and slowly increasing it over the century. The tax
should preferably be coordinated globally, but more likely
we’ll end up with a patchwork of less effective policies.
Still, this will cut the global temperature rise somewhat
and prevent us from reaching the most damaging
temperatures. It will also slightly slow economic growth,
because that is the inevitable corollary of making energy
more expensive.
Overall, this turns out to be a good deal. We will examine
the inner workings of these climate-economic models later,
but here is the gist. The cost from slightly more expensive
energy translates into a slightly slower-growing global
economy that over the next centuries achieves slightly less
welfare than it would have without carbon taxes. In short,
the extra cost is about 0.4 percent of total GDP.
The lower temperature rise will lead to fewer climate
damages over the coming centuries than the world would
otherwise have seen. In total, that benefit is worth about
0.8 percent of total GDP. The simple point then is that it is
a good deal to pay 0.4 percent of GDP to obtain a benefit of
0.8 percent of GDP.
Cutting some carbon dioxide makes a lot of sense. First,
it is easy to cut the first tons, because these are the lowest-

hanging fruit. There are many places where efficiency can
be obtained at low cost. You can stop heating the patio
when nobody is outside, incurring just the minimal
inconvenience of turning the heat off. Also, cutting these
first tons has the largest benefit, because it cuts the
highest and most damaging temperature rises.24
But it is also important to recognize the scale of this
solution. We pay 0.4 percent and make the world 0.8
percent better off. In total, the benefit is 0.4 percent of
total global GDP. Getting a carbon tax right can make the
world better, but not by a lot.
An approach informed by cost-benefit analysis also helps
show us what we shouldn’t do. We should not try to
eliminate almost all carbon dioxide emissions in just a few
short years. Yet, this is what most campaigners clamor for
and most politicians profess to want. If we try to do this,
the costs could escalate out of hand. Competently done, we
would need carbon taxes equivalent to tens or hundreds of
dollars per gallon of gasoline in order to effectively prohibit
carbon dioxide emissions in short order. This would cost us
about 3.4 percent more of total global GDP. Yet, the extra
benefits would be much lower at about 1 percent, making
the world overall worse off. It would be a bad deal, even if
all 
policies 
were 
done 
competently, 
and 
expertly
coordinated across all nations and across the century.25
It is much more likely that such panicked climate
solutions would be done badly and ineffectively, which
could make the total costs incredibly large. We would in
essence be paying a fantastically high price for little extra
benefit. We would truly leave the world much worse off
than it need be.
Let’s return to the speed limit analogy. No sensible
person would argue that we don’t need any speed limits,
just as no sensible person would argue that we should do
nothing in response to climate change. At the same time,

nobody argues that we should set the speed limit at three
miles per hour, even though it would save thousands of
lives, because the financial and personal costs would be too
high for us to bear. And so we find a compromise solution
somewhere in the range of fifty-five to eighty-five miles per
hour. People who worry primarily about safety will argue
for speed limits at the lower end, while those who care
more about the financial implications of free movement will
argue for the higher end. It’s a reasonable range for
conversation.
By demanding an immediate and dramatic reduction of
carbon dioxide levels worldwide, climate activists are
essentially arguing for the three-mile-per-hour speed limit.
It’s a ridiculous demand, at least for anyone who has to get
to work in the morning.
Second, we need to look at smarter solutions to climate
change. Top climate economists agree that the best way to
combat its negative effects is to invest in green innovation.
We should be innovating tomorrow’s technologies rather
than erecting today’s inefficient turbines and solar panels.
We should explore fusion, fission, water splitting, and
more. We can research algae grown on the ocean surface
that produces oil. Because the algae converts sunlight and
carbon dioxide to oil, burning that oil will not release any
new carbon dioxide. Oil algae are far from cost effective
now, but researching this and many other solutions is not
only cheap but also offers our best opportunity to find real
breakthrough technologies.26
If we innovate the price of green energy down below that
of fossil fuels, everyone will switch—not just rich world
countries but also China and India. The models show that
each dollar invested in green energy research and
development (R&D) will avoid $11 of climate damage. This
will be hundreds of times more effective than current
climate policies.27

Finding the breakthroughs that will power the rest of the
twenty-first century could take a decade or it could take
four. But we do know that we certainly won’t solve the
problem with more empty promises and investment in
inefficiency. Innovation must be unleashed.
Unfortunately, we are not doing this now. While
everyone in principle agrees we should be spending much
more on R&D, the fraction of rich countries’ GDP actually
going into R&D has halved since the 1980s. Why? Because
putting up inefficient solar panels makes for good photo
ops, and it feels like we’re doing something—funding
eggheads is harder to visualize.28
This is one more cost of the relentless alarmism. Since
we’re so intent on doing something right now, even if it is
almost trivial, we neglect to focus on the technological
breakthroughs that in the long run could actually allow
humanity to move away from fossil fuels.
Third, we need to adapt to changes. The good news is
that we have done this for centuries, when we were much
poorer and less technologically advanced. We can definitely
do this in the future. Take agriculture. As temperatures
rise, some wheat varieties might produce less. But farmers
will plant other varieties and change crops, while more
wheat farming will take place farther north. This is not cost
free, but it will significantly reduce the costs of climate
change.
Humans have proven themselves to be ingenious
masters at adaptation. We can look to Bangladesh, which
has massively lowered the death toll from tropical cyclones
since the 1970s by investing in smart disaster preparation
and better building codes, or to New York City, which
learned from tropical storm Sandy and introduced a range
of simple measures like storm covers for the subway
system.
Fourth, we should research geoengineering, which

mimics 
natural 
processes 
to 
reduce 
the 
earth’s
temperature. When the Mount Pinatubo volcano erupted in
1991, about fifteen million tons of sulfur dioxide were
pumped into the stratosphere, forming a slight haze that
spread around the globe. By reflecting incoming sunlight
this haze cooled the earth’s surface by an average of one
degree Fahrenheit for eighteen months.
Scientists suggest we could replicate such a volcanic
effect and cool the world a lot at a very low cost. It could
also cool the world very quickly, in a matter of days or
weeks. In that way, geoengineering could provide us with a
potential backup policy if, for instance, we find that the
West Antarctic ice sheet has started melting precipitously.
Standard fossil-fuel-cutting policies will take decades to
implement and half a century to have any noticeable
climate impact. Only geoengineering can reduce the earth’s
temperature quickly.
We should not do geoengineering yet, because there
might be downsides we haven’t investigated. But we should
research it to find out if it might offer plausible solutions in
some cases.
Fifth, and finally, we need to remind ourselves that
climate change is not the only global challenge. To most
people, it is not the most important issue—it is in fact the
least important one. A UN global poll of nearly ten million
people found climate to be the lowest policy priority, far
behind education, health, and nutrition (see figure I.1).
People in rich countries, having much better education,
health, and nutrition, tend to be more afraid of climate
change, but even for Europeans climate rises only to the
tenth-highest concern. For the world’s poorest, climate is
robustly last.29
By focusing most of our attention on climate change,
we’re ignoring other, bigger issues that if addressed could
make the world a much better place for billions of people.

Expanding 
immunization 
and 
curbing 
tuberculosis,
improving access to modern contraception, ensuring better
nutrition and more education, reducing energy poverty—all
of these are well within our power and, if we focused on
them, could alleviate suffering for huge swaths of the
world’s population right now.
Moreover, if we invest more in development, it will also
make everyone more climate resilient. Making a community
more resilient and prosperous means more people are able
to invest in adaptation and preparedness, and are far less
vulnerable to climate shocks. It turns out that helping the
extremely poor improve their circumstances also helps
them the most with tackling climate.
FIGURE I.1 Top policy priorities for the world. In
connection with the UN’s Sustainable Development
Goals, 9.7 million people from across the world ranked
their priorities out of sixteen options.30
We need to be aware that when we insist, as part of
foreign aid packages, that the developing world align with
our climate priorities, we are enacting a kind of
imperialism. We are not listening to what the citizens of
these countries want. We are jeopardizing their opportunity
to lift their populations out of poverty for the sake of our

own concerns. This isn’t just bad policy. It’s grossly
unethical.
WE NEED TO take a collective deep breath and understand
what climate change is and isn’t. It is not like a huge
asteroid hurtling toward earth, where we need to stop
everything else and mobilize the entire global economy to
ward off the end of the world. It is instead a long-term
chronic condition like diabetes—a problem that needs
attention and focus, but one that we can live with. And
while we manage it, we can live our lives and address the
many other challenges that ultimately will matter much
more for the future.31
In this book, we will start by examining the culture of
fear created around climate change. Next, we will ask,
what does the science actually tell us to expect? What is
the cost of rising temperatures? After that, we will look at
what’s wrong with today’s approach. How is it that climate
change is at the forefront of our minds, yet we are failing to
solve it? What do we achieve by making changes to our
lifestyles? What are we achieving collectively, with
promises made under the Paris Agreement on climate
change? Finally, we will explore how we could actually
solve climate change. What policies need to be prioritized
in order to rein in temperature rises and leave the planet in
the best shape possible for our grandchildren?
We have it within our power to make a better world. But
first, we need to calm down.

1
WHY DO WE GET CLIMATE
CHANGE SO WRONG?
PEOPLE ARE PANICKING about climate change in large
part because the media and environmental campaigners
tell us to, because politicians overhype the likely effects,
and because scientific research is often communicated
without crucial context. Too often, the missing context is
the most obvious fact of all: humans adapt to their
changing earth. They have for millennia and will continue
to do so. Any projection of the impact of climate change
that fails to take this into account is not realistic.
There are strong incentives to tell the scariest possible
story about climate change. Media gets more clicks and
views with frightening stories. Campaigners get attention
and funding. Researchers who position themselves as
addressing apocalyptic threats get outsized attention, more
recognition for their universities, and more future funding
opportunities. 
Politicians 
who 
emphasize 
the 
scary
scenarios get to promise to save us, and in the process gain
the authority to distribute significant resources to fix the
problem.
None of this means that we shouldn’t worry about
potentially big problems. We want researchers looking for
the big problems, media highlighting what might harm us,

and politicians saving us if we need it. But we should be
appropriately skeptical, because selling Armageddon is also
really useful to all these groups.
We should be most skeptical of the media’s coverage of
climate change. Nearly every day, we see new stories about
rising temperatures and the extreme damage climate
change will cause. Again, the media is rewarded for telling
the most alarmist possible version of the climate change
story—that’s what will sell the most newspapers and
generate the most clicks. Nobody clicks on a link titled
“Life in the future will be very recognizable but could be
somewhat more challenging in certain respects.” And so
instead we read, in the words of one recent headline in the
New York Post: “Climate Change Could End Human
Civilization by 2050: Report.” It’s highly unlikely that the
journalist who wrote the article, or the editor who came up
with the shocking headline, was setting out deliberately
and carefully to mislead their readers. But the journalist
and editor most definitely were trying to get more readers.
And it’s clear that they did not fully read or assess the
study they reported on, much less vet it against the
established science on the topic.1
The actual 2019 study on which the story was based is
just a flimsy seven pages from a little-known think tank,
and veers wildly from the accepted science of the United
Nations climate panel. The report presents the most
extreme and unlikely scenario in which all climate impacts
are far worse than projected by the vast majority of
scientists. Within that extremely artificial setup, which the
report authors state is beyond their capacity to model or
even quantitatively estimate, there would indeed be a “high
likelihood of human civilization coming to an end.” But
even then, the report does not set the date for the end of
civilization at 2050, but only in some unspecified future. As
one climate scientist described it: “This is a classic case of

a 
media 
article 
over-stating 
the 
conclusions 
and
significance of a non-peer reviewed report that itself had
already overstated (and indeed misrepresented) peer-
reviewed science.”2
In other words, both the “report” and the news story
were more climate fiction than climate news. Yet, in various
forms this frightening story made it into USA Today, CBS
News, and CNN, among many other major media news
outlets.3
WHAT IS THE media’s problem with climate change?
Of course, there is some careful, responsible reporting.
But there is much more that isn’t. Part of the problem is
that over the past several decades, in an effort to seem
balanced, many media outlets gave space to climate change
deniers long after their arguments had been thoroughly
debunked. More recently, deniers are not given space, and
this is for the better. But some of the alarmist coverage
now may represent an effort to compensate for past sins.
Journalists are making the same mistake at the other end of
the spectrum: they are failing to hold climate alarmists to
account for their exaggerated claims.
Take the June 13, 2019, Time magazine cover story. The
secretary-general of the United Nations, António Guterres,
is photographed standing in a suit and tie with water up to
his thighs off the coast of the tiny Pacific island nation
Tuvalu. The accompanying article warns that “rising seas
threaten to submerge Tuvalu” and states bleakly that
because it lies almost at sea level, any rise threatens to
wipe Tuvalu and its ten thousand inhabitants “off the map
entirely.”4
Alas, Secretary-General Guterres ruined a perfectly nice
suit for no reason: this is not what the science says. Yes,
global warming does make sea levels rise, including around
the more than 124 reef islands of Tuvalu. But it would have

taken the journalists just a few minutes to find the latest
scientific study of Tuvalu published in Nature. It confirms
that not only has the sea level been rising, but around
Tuvalu it has risen at twice the global average. Yet, during
the last four decades of strong sea level rise, Tuvalu has
actually expanded and seen its total land area increase by
2.9 percent. This is a result of the process of accretion. Yes,
sea level rise erodes and reduces land area, but at the same
time old coral is broken up by waves and washed up on
low-lying shores as additional sand, which counteracts the
reduction. The 2018 research shows that this accretion
process is overpowering the erosion, leading to net land
area gain for Tuvalu. Moreover, this process is ongoing and
its dynamic feature will likely mean that the Tuvalu islands
can, in the words of the Nature study, “persist as sites for
habitation over the next century.”5
The Time cover story also warns that two other island
nations, Kiribati and the Marshall Islands, will be wiped off
the map. A few more minutes of research on both nations
would have undercut the entire story. In Kiribati, four atolls
all show natural accretion outpacing reduction since 1943.
The main Tarawa atoll, where half the population lives, has
seen accretion increase the total land area by 3.5 percent
over three decades (plus a 15 percent increase from major
reclamation projects in South Tarawa). Similarly, the
Marshall Islands have seen their total land area increase by
4 percent because of natural accretion.6
Indeed, in the latest research summarizing all these
studies for Micronesia, the Marshall Islands, Kiribati,
French Polynesia, the Maldives, and Tuvalu, it turns out
that accretion has beaten out sea level rise on all atolls and
all larger islands. Despite sea level rising over recent
decades, all atolls studied have increased in area, and all
the larger islands studied either remained stable or
increased in size.7

A more carefully investigated story would have included
information on accretion and land mass gain, and could
have focused on the challenges facing people who need to
move from areas of erosion to accreted land. But instead of
looking at the real problems that nations like Tuvalu will
face because of climate change, the Time magazine story is
framed as “our sinking planet”: more digestible, scarier,
and more saleable. But also deeply misleading.
A SIMILARLY SCARY STORY swept the world in 2019, this
one told by the New York Times and many, many other
media outlets: that vast swathes of inhabited area will be
underwater by 2050, with cities “erased.” The headlines
stem from quality research: a 2019 paper, published in
Nature, that shows that past estimates of the impact of sea
level rise have been wrong, because they relied on
measurements of ground level that sometimes accidentally
measured the tops of trees or houses rather than the
ground itself. This means vulnerability to sea level rise has
been underestimated.8
That’s important. But the media used this to focus on a
dystopian vision of 2050. The New York Times presented a
terrifying map you can see on the left of figure 1.1. The
map shows which areas of South Vietnam are under the
expected high-tide water line and potentially at risk.
Clearly this looks scary, and the newspaper in no uncertain
terms declared that it shows South Vietnam will “all but
disappear” because it will be “underwater at high tide.” It
told readers that “more than 20 million people in Vietnam,
almost one-quarter of the population, live on land that will
be inundated.” Similar effects were shown around the
world.
This news went viral. “Climate change is shrinking the
planet, in the scariest possible way,” tweeted Bill
McKibben, founder of international climate advocacy

organization 350.org. Climate scientist Peter Kalmus said
he was once concerned about being labeled “alarmist,” but
news like this made him embrace the term.10
FIGURE 1.1 This figure estimates the area of South
Vietnam below high-tide water level. At the left, the
map the New York Times highlighted for readers. The
newspaper said it showed that by 2050 this entire part
of Vietnam “will be underwater at high tide.” This
claim ignores existing protection. Indeed, most of
South Vietnam is already below high tide, and almost
everyone is protected. On the right is the extra land
that will be below high tide by 2050. (Left graph
reproduced with permission.)9
What did the media forget? To reveal what the
comparative situation is today. And it is almost identical to
the situation estimated for 2050. If you look at the map to
the right in figure 1.1, you can see how much extra land
will be at risk in 2050—almost none. Both maps simply
show what everyone knows: people in the Mekong Delta
literally live on the water. In South Vietnam’s An Giang
province, almost all land that is not mountainous is
protected by a dike. It is “underwater” in the same way that
much of Holland is: large swathes of land including

Schiphol, the world’s fourteenth-largest airport, are quite
literally built under the high-tide mark. In London, almost a
million people live below that level. But nobody in Holland,
London, or the Mekong Delta needs scuba gear to get
around, because humanity has adapted with dikes and flood
protection.11
The actual research on which the New York Times article
is based mentions in its introduction that “coastal defenses
are not considered” in its approach. That’s fine for an
academic paper, but it’s ludicrous for the media to use its
findings 
to 
produce 
claims 
of 
“20 
million 
people
underwater,” or for campaigners to suggest that this gives
us reason to all become “alarmist.” The study shows that
today, 110 million people are “underwater” regularly. In
reality, almost every one of them is well protected. The real
story here is the triumph of ingenuity and adaptation.12
In 2050, the study shows a global increase of 40 million
people living below the high-tide mark: 150 million in total.
As we will see later in this chapter, almost all of these
additional vulnerable people will be protected at a fairly
low cost.13
The media didn’t set out to deceive readers, but the
news it shared was unnecessarily, unjustifiably alarming.
The real news is that an increase of forty million people
living below the high-tide mark will be a slight worsening of
a challenge that we have shown ourselves completely
capable of solving, in a world that will be much wealthier
and more resilient than it is today. Context matters.
ONE OF THE most influential recent examples of the
media’s alarmist approach is its coverage of a major report
issued in 2018 by UN climate scientists. Most news outlets
reported that these scientists were urging the world to
drastically cut emissions by 2030, with huge changes
needed to keep temperature rises below 2.7°F (1.5°C).

CNN told us, for example, that “Earth has 12 years to avert
climate change catastrophe.” Versions of this story
appeared in newspapers worldwide, and have been
parroted by politicians and activists ever since.14
In fact, what had happened was that at the Paris climate
change conference three years earlier, leaders from around
the world had declared that they wanted to achieve the
target of keeping temperature rises below 2.7°F. They even
put that aim into the preamble of their Paris climate
change agreement. They did so at the urging of
campaigners who wanted to demonstrate their willpower
and ambition, and not because the world’s scientists had
come together to declare this arbitrary cut-off point crucial.
Having already declared in 2015 that the goal was to
restrict temperature rises to less than 2.7°F, world leaders
then asked the UN’s climate scientists to find out what it
would actually take to achieve this incredibly ambitious
target. The scientists’ response became the 2018 report.
The scientists, who have promised to deliver “policy-
relevant but not policy-prescriptive information” according
to UN guidelines, obligingly said the 2.7°F goal was
technically feasible but would “require rapid, far-reaching
and unprecedented changes in all aspects of society.”
Simply put, politicians asked them what it would take to do
the almost impossible, and the scientists responded that
this would require almost impossible policies.15
Yet, the report was presented in the media as evidence
that we need to make urgent, extreme carbon-emission
reductions. It would be a bit like asking the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) what it
would take to move the entire human population to Mars.
NASA would obligingly tell us that it is technically feasible,
but would require far-reaching changes to our current
priorities 
and 
unprecedented 
investments 
in 
space
technology. Campaigners would be similarly wrong in

saying, “See, NASA is telling us that we all need to go to
Mars.”
This dramatic misrepresentation is crucial, because
claiming that we have just twelve years left is one of the
reasons why children are striking from school, cities and
countries are declaring “climate emergencies,” and many
people are even suggesting we consider suspending
democracy to fight this existential threat.16
Some people have taken the report to mean that we
must rein in temperature rises by 2030, or we will be on a
trajectory that will eventually lead to apocalypse. Others
take it to mean that climate Armageddon is imminent if the
problem 
hasn’t 
been 
solved 
by 
2030. 
Regardless,
campaigners and politicians argue that because of the
twelve-year “deadline,” we should stop even discussing the
cost of climate policy: if the world will end, surely nothing
else matters.
THE 
MEDIA’S 
ROLE 
in 
promulgating 
apocalyptic
narratives doesn’t fully explain why views about climate
change are so extreme on either side. Another important
element is the fact that climate change increasingly has
become a way to stand out to voters: “I’m going to save you
from the end of the world, and my opponent won’t.”
The politics of climate change is increasingly becoming
more partisan. In the United States well into the early
1990s, opinion about environmental issues, including
climate change, remained remarkably unified. As recently
as 2008, former GOP House Speaker Newt Gingrich and
future Democratic Speaker Nancy Pelosi filmed an ad for Al
Gore’s nonprofit organization in which they sat cozily
together on a sofa agreeing that climate action shouldn’t be
partisan.17
The era of good feeling has ended. Global warming is
now being used, often explicitly, to advance broader causes

in a partisan political environment that shapes the United
States, the United Kingdom, Australia, and much of the
world. This fact goes a long way toward explaining the
heightened levels of alarmism that characterize the current
conversation about climate change. Up until the 2018
midterm congressional elections, climate change was
deemed such a peripheral campaign issue in the US that
there was not a single question about it in a general
election debate. Things then changed very quickly. By
2019, CNN was hosting an entire “town hall debate” for
Democratic presidential contenders framed entirely around
the “climate crisis.”18
A partisan gap in attitudes has been fostered by both
sides. Today, people who identify as Democrats and
Republicans are further apart on how much priority should
be accorded to climate change than on any other single
issue. Just consider that. On gun control, the economy, the
minimum wage, workers’ rights, universal health care,
foreign policy, immigration, and abortion, Americans are
more aligned than they are on climate change.19
Democratic states including New York, California,
Washington, New Jersey, New Mexico, Nevada, and Maine
have all passed bills requiring “carbon neutrality” by 2050
or earlier. (Being “carbon neutral” means carbon emissions
have been reduced to zero, or balanced out by reductions
elsewhere.) Republican states have not passed any similar
legislation, and in 2019 the Republican Senate minority in
Democrat-controlled Oregon blocked a carbon neutrality
bill by literally fleeing the state to avoid a quorum. While
Democrats have passed what will end up being incredibly
expensive 
promises, 
President 
Donald 
Trump, 
with
Republican support, has done the opposite: he wants to do
nothing at all. Neither approach is right.20
The partisan divide in America is also reflected globally:
overwhelming concern about warming is worn as a badge

of honor by leaders of other countries who want to
highlight their differences from the Trump administration
and its woeful lack of climate policy.
Opposition to Trump has colored coverage of climate
policy all over the world. In the wake of Trump’s election,
for instance, a number of high-profile media outlets began
to publish stories claiming that China was stepping up as a
“leader” on climate change. A leader on climate change?
China has tripled its carbon emissions since 2000 to
become the world’s largest carbon emitter, and has seen its
renewable energy use halve from almost 20 percent in
2000 to about 10 percent in 2020 (although it was even
lower at 7.5 percent in 2011). According to official
estimates, even if China implements all of its green
promises, renewables will reach only 18 percent in 2040,
with 76 percent of its energy use still coming from fossil
fuels. Holding China up as a green leader is a false
narrative that tells us more about the storytellers (and
often their opposition to Trump) than it does about China.21
SETTING ARTIFICIAL DEADLINES to get more attention is
one of the most common tactics of climate change
campaigners: if we don’t act by such-and-such day, the
planet will be doomed. In 2019, Britain’s Prince Charles
announced that we had just eighteen months left to fix
climate change or it would be too late. But this wasn’t his
first attempt at deadline setting. Ten years earlier he told
an audience that he had “calculated that we have just 96
months left to save the world.” In 2006, Al Gore estimated
that unless drastic measures to reduce greenhouse gases
were taken within ten years, the world would reach a point
of no return.22
But we can go back even further. In 1989, the head of
the UN Environment Program declared we had just three
years to “win—or lose—the climate struggle.” The UN

summarized the threat: “We all know that the world faces a
threat potentially more catastrophic than any other threat
in human history: climate change and global warming.”
Really? More catastrophic than a potential all-out nuclear
exchange? More catastrophic than the one hundred million
dead in two world wars in the twentieth century? And more
catastrophic than tuberculosis, which in the last two
hundred years has killed about a billion people?23
Nearly a decade earlier than that, in 1982, the UN was
predicting 
planetary 
“devastation 
as 
complete, 
as
irreversible as any nuclear holocaust” by the year 2000,
due to climate change and other challenges including
ozone-layer depletion, acid rain, and desertification. And
even earlier last century, climate change was causing
concern, though for a completely different reason. During
the 1970s, while global warming research dominated the
scientific community, a number of high-profile researchers
promoted fear of a “catastrophic” oncoming ice age.
Science News had a 1975 cover showing glaciers
overwhelming the New York City skyline. Time magazine
published the story “Another Ice Age?” in 1974, suggesting
that “telltale signs are everywhere” for cooling, and that its
“effects could be extremely serious, if not catastrophic.”
Even if there was no ice age, the article told us, just a small
drop in temperatures would lead to crop failures, making
human life unsustainable.24
The fact that we’ve worried about both cooling and
warming does not mean we should not worry about either.
The point is that the media likes to predict impending
doom, preferably with a firm date attached. And there is
something about human psychology that makes us want to
believe it.
One of the most striking examples of this apocalyptic
tendency came in 1968, when a group of academics, civil
servants, and industrialists met in Rome to talk about the

seemingly insoluble problems of the modern world. It was a
pessimistic age: the techno-optimism of the 1950s and
1960s had given way to concern on a broad range of issues,
from geopolitics (the Vietnam War) to society (the “youth
rebellion”) to the economy (unemployment and stagflation).
Newsweek summarized the mood with a cover showing a
confused Uncle Sam gazing into an empty cornucopia, and
the words “Running Out of Everything.” In the same year
that this “Club of Rome” was forming, the massive
bestseller The Population Bomb warned that humankind
was breeding like rabbits and gobbling up whatever
resources it could find, essentially pushing our species
“into oblivion.”25
Against this backdrop, the Club of Rome was determined
“to make mankind’s predicament more visible, more easy to
grasp,” as one of the members recalled later. The think-
tank membership was convinced that all of humanity was
doomed because too many people would consume too
much, and we were about to kill ourselves and the planet
with overpopulation, consumption, and pollution. The only
hope was to stop economic growth, cut consumption,
recycle, force people to have fewer children, and “stabilize”
society at a significantly poorer level.26
The Club came up with a report, The Limits to Growth,
which was so influential that it was discussed in magazines
from Time to Playboy, scrutinized by the commentariat, and
seized upon by campaigners for radical change. The report
had special appeal to the media—and apparent extra
intellectual heft—because it was based on computer
simulations, 
which 
were 
then 
revolutionary 
and
ultramodern. Applying these, the scientists predicted with
great confidence that gold would run out by 1979, along
with a huge range of important resources that humanity
depends 
on—aluminum, 
copper, 
lead, 
mercury,
molybdenum, natural gas, oil, silver, tin, tungsten, and zinc

would run out before 2004.27
Spoiler Alert: They were spectacularly wrong. Consider
just the four most important resources. Since 1946,
technology has made more copper, aluminum, iron, and
zinc available than we have consumed, and commodity
prices have generally fallen. Oil was supposed to run out in
1990, according to these thinkers and their computer
simulations, and natural gas in 1992, but reserves for both
are actually larger today than in 1970, although we
consume dramatically more of each. Shale gas alone has
doubled US potential gas resources within the past six
years and halved the price. No resource is infinite. But the
resources that can be generated are still far beyond
consumption.28
The Club of Rome got it wildly wrong because it
overlooked the greatest resource of all: human ingenuity at
adapting. We don’t just use up the iron or gas that is there
and then give up. We get better at finding more, at lower
cost, in effect allowing humanity access to ever more and
ever cheaper resources.
THE STORY OF the Club of Rome is important because lots
of people are making exactly the same mistake now when
they study and report on climate change: they are leaving
out our remarkable ability for adaptation. Much of the
alarmism surrounding the topic can be explained by this
one fact: the stories assume that while the climate will
change, nothing else will.
So, for instance, the Washington Post recently reported
that “sea-level rise could be even worse than we’ve been
led to expect,” swamping an area similar to Western
Europe and making 187 million people homeless. Not
surprisingly, the notion of 187 million flooded people led
many press stories, with Bloomberg News warning that
coastal cities around the world were poised to “drown,”

“swallowed by the rising ocean.” Obviously, 187 million
makes for a large, attention-grabbing number. Don’t
believe it. That figure is absurdly exaggerated—and it isn’t
even new.29
The headlines come from a 2019 scholarly paper whose
authors simply repeated it from a paper published in 2011.
What the earlier paper actually found was that 187 million
people could be forced to move in the unlikely event that no
one does anything in the next eighty years to adapt to
dramatic rises in sea level. In real life, the 2011 paper
explained, 
humans 
“adapt 
proactively,” 
and 
“such
adaptation can greatly reduce the possible impacts.” When
adaptation is taken into account, the authors showed, “the
problem of environmental refugees almost disappears.”
Furthermore, “the main consequence of a large rise in sea
level is a larger investment in protection infrastructure”
and “it is incorrect to automatically assume a global-scale
population displacement owing to a large rise in sea level.”
Under realistic assumptions, the number of people
displaced in an extreme scenario of high sea level rise falls
from 187 million to 305,000. The worst-case flooding will
displace less than 1/600th of the figure in the headlines.30
Journalists and others make this same mistake over and
over, 
with 
massive 
consequences 
for 
the 
public’s
understanding of climate change. In his influential book
The Uninhabitable Earth, journalist David Wallace-Wells
states that coastal flooding caused by sea level rise will
result in somewhere between $14 trillion and more than
$100 trillion of damages every year by 2100. This idea has
been repeated by countless climate activists. But it turns
out that these figures exaggerate the problem by up to two
thousand times.31
Where do the numbers come from? Wallace-Wells uses
two key papers to support them. What these papers
basically do is predict that sea levels will increase because

of climate change over the twenty-first century, and count
how many people and how much wealth in those areas will
be flooded, without additional flood protection. Do you
notice what’s wrong with that sentence? Yup, it’s the final
four words. The headline-grabbing costs come from
modeling the effects of flooding without additional flood
protection.
And “headline-grabbing” isn’t an exaggeration. We will
come back to the extraordinarily high claim of $100+
trillion, but first let’s scrutinize the 2018 research paper
that came up with the $14 trillion cost. This was helpfully
shared with the world’s journalists via a press release. The
figure found its way into Newsweek, Axios, Science Daily,
New Scientist, and India Today. What no news stories
mentioned, and indeed, what the research paper itself
barely acknowledged, was that even an extremely stingy
amount of spending on adaptation would reduce costs by
88 percent, and that if we applied real-world, realistic
expectations of adaptation spending, the reduction would
be far greater.32
For climate change to cause $14 trillion of damage, we
must assume that not a single country will ever increase
the heights of any of its dikes beyond their present levels.
They will steadfastly keep their protective walls too low,
even as sea levels rise over the century, and even as these
countries become much richer (as they will) and able to
afford much more protection.
The authors of the original paper acknowledged the lack
of logic of this assumption, albeit in fine print: “While the
present analysis has focused upon the potential costs of
flooding in the absence of additional adaptation from the
existing baseline, it is clear that all coastal nations have,
and will continue to adapt [italics added] by varying
degrees to sea level rise.” They even point out that
“standards of protection are likely to improve particularly

with economic growth,” making the huge cost of funding
even less defensible. Of course, that caveat didn’t find its
way into the press release.33
SOME COUNTRIES HAVE adapted more successfully to
climate change than others. Today, coastal cities in the
United States have much higher expected damage costs
than European coastal cities, because they have much
lower protection standards. Likewise, rapidly growing
regions in developing countries will likely have a growing
adaptation deficit, because coastal development too often
takes priority over investments in adaptation.34
But there’s every reason to believe that globally,
adaptation will increase with sea level rise. Studies show
that as societies see greater threats, they increase the
height and number of protective dikes to reduce these
threats. 
And 
the 
evidence 
also 
clearly 
shows 
that
adaptation increases with higher incomes. This makes
sense: at the same level of threat, richer countries can
afford to demand higher dikes and more protection than
poorer countries.35
Let’s look at the second study that Wallace-Wells relied
on to reach the upper end of his estimate, the astonishing
figure of $100 trillion or more. The highly quoted study
examines the impact of rising sea levels, with human
adaptation and without. As you can see in figure 1.2,
around the year 2000 about 3.4 million people were flooded
each year, the total flood costs were $11 billion per year,
and “protection costs” from dikes, levees, and so on, ran to
$13 billion per year. The study looks at outcomes based on
multiple variables: different levels of sea level rise,
population growth, and economic growth. The conclusion is
similar across all variations, but let’s focus here on what
would happen with the highest sea level rises, of almost
three feet by the end of the century, in a world with a rich

economy that has much to lose.36
If we don’t adapt, catastrophe ensues. One hundred
eighty-seven million people will be flooded each year, and
the flood cost will be a phenomenal $55 trillion annually
(all in inflation-adjusted dollars). Since we’re not spending
any more on adaptation, dike costs go up only slightly to
$24 billion. In total, flooding costs will make up 5.3 percent
of global GDP by 2100, if we don’t adapt. In the study’s
most extreme scenario (not shown in figure 1.2), 350
million people could get flooded every year by 2100, with
costs reaching beyond $100 trillion, or 11 percent of global
GDP. This is where Wallace-Wells got his high-end,
terrifyingly large figure: the worst-case outcome of the
worst-case, no-adaptation scenario.
But, of course, we will adapt. As the authors of the paper
put it: “Damages of this magnitude are very unlikely to be
tolerated by society and adaptation will be widespread.”
With realistic projections of adaptation, the number of
people flooded will drop dramatically, to about fifteen
thousand per year by the end of the century. Yes, dike costs
will increase to $48 billion, and flood damage costs will also
increase to $38 billion. But the total cost to the economy
will actually decline, from 0.05 percent of GDP to 0.008
percent. And a 99.6 percent reduction in flood victims will
be an undeniable victory.38

FIGURE 1.2 Number of people flooded over the
century with high sea level rise, either ignoring or
including adaptation. Cost in percent of GDP includes
both flood and dike costs.37
Far more than just making it into Wallace-Wells’s
influential book, this study was quoted by many media
outlets, without any mention of adaptation. The narrative
that has repeatedly and consistently been told was that 187
million people would be flooded, and trillions of dollars in
damages would be caused.
Humans have been adapting to nature for millennia, and
with more wealth and technology we will be even better at
it in the future. Cutting carbon dioxide is not the only way
for mankind to respond to climate change—adaptation is
also crucial. For many centuries, much poorer societies
have adapted as sea levels have risen. And today we have
more know-how and technology than ever before: We can
build dikes, surge barriers, and dams; expand beaches and
construct dunes; make ecosystem-based barriers like
mangrove buffers; improve building codes and construction
techniques; and use land planning and hazard mapping to
minimize flooding. As a result, deaths from storm surges
have actually been declining even as sea levels have
risen.39

If the fact of ongoing human adaptation to the
environment is ignored, the inevitable result is a terrifying
story that draws attention. But this portrait is highly
deceiving. The reality is that while the amount of carbon
dioxide emitted has a comparatively small impact on the
number of people flooded, even with the largest carbon
emissions and the highest sea level rise, there will be many
fewer people flooded because of adaptation, especially in a
world that is richer (and the whole world is getting richer
and therefore increasingly able to afford it). Even with
rising seas, the most likely scenario is that in the future,
fewer people will die from climate-related flooding, not
more.
WE WITNESS THE SAME sloppy logic on the issue of heat
waves. Let’s examine a June 2019 headline in New York
magazine: “Meeting Paris Climate Goals Would Save
Thousands of American Lives during Heat Waves: Study.”
The news story quoted a 2019 study saying that future heat
waves so extreme they occur only every thirty years will, by
the end of the century, claim a huge number of lives across
fifteen US cities.40
But here’s a very curious thing: that study assumes that
nobody in those cities will manage to do anything sensible,
like purchasing an air conditioner. For eighty years. So, for
instance, the authors project significantly higher death
rates over the course of the century in cities like Seattle,
where only 34 percent of residents have air conditioners.
That some or all of the remaining 66 percent of the
population might buy an air conditioner at some point falls
beyond the imaginative range of the authors. The reality is
that by the end of the century, most people in cities like
Seattle will have bought air conditioners and built houses
better able to deal with heat. (Indeed, with technological
developments it would be logical to assume the air

conditioning will be even better than today’s.) The city will
also likely have invested in social innovations such as
“cooling centers” available for poorer people during heat
waves—ideas that are already being used in places like
Atlanta.41
Adaptations like improved standards and expansion of
air conditioning already allowed New York to reduce heat-
related deaths by two-thirds between the 1960s and 1990s.
France introduced reforms in 2003 that included making
air conditioning mandatory for elderly care homes. As a
result, by 2018 heat-related hospitalizations in France were
lower than they had been in earlier, cooler years. And
Spain cut heat-related deaths between 1980 and 2015,
even while average summer temperatures rose almost 2°F
(1°C).42
So what happens if we account for the fact that people
will, in fact, respond as people always have? Well, it turns
out that even with much higher temperatures, toward the
end of the century total deaths caused by extreme heat
could actually fall by seventeen thousand across the United
States. A headline rewritten for accuracy would read:
“Thousands Fewer Americans Will Die Because of Air
Conditioning; Paris Treaty Not Relevant to Story.” Once the
human propensity for adaptation is taken into account, the
numbers on climate change start looking a lot less scary.
And adaptation should always be factored into any climate
change study, because humans are always adapting.43
ONE REASON WHY people are afraid of climate change is
that when you watch the news or read the paper, the
weather, increasingly, is portrayed as frightening. Surely
climate change is costing us more money and lives? What
about the hurricanes ravaging coastlines from Florida and
Puerto Rico to Samoa? What about the massive floods and
terrifying droughts across the world? These disasters seem

to be getting worse and worse every year—right?
Wrong. The reality is that these weather events both in
number and severity have stayed the same or even declined
over the past century, as we will discuss in chapter 3.
However, the cost of these events is getting much higher,
for reasons that have little to do with climate.
A hurricane or flood hitting a sparsely populated Florida
in 1900 would have done relatively little damage. Since
then, the coastal population of Florida has increased sixty-
seven-fold. Thus, a similar-strength hurricane or flood
hitting a densely populated, wealthy Florida in 2020 leads
to much higher costs. The higher cost is not because
hurricanes changed, but because society changed.45
FIGURE 1.3 Illustration of the expanding bull’s-eye
effect. As a city keeps growing over time, adding more
and more expensive housing, an identical flood will
have a bigger impact. Thus, the cost of the flooding in
2040 will be much, much higher than in 1950, even
though the actual flood event is the same.44
This is a well-known phenomenon called the “expanding
bull’s-eye effect”: similar climate impacts will result in
much more costly disasters because an increasing number
of people with more and more valuable assets are at risk.
The expanding bull’s-eye effect can be thought of as an
archery target, with the rings (showing population density)
telling us how many people and possessions are at risk of
being hit by an imaginary arrow, or natural disaster (see

figure 1.3). The rings enlarge over time. This means it
becomes ever more likely for an arrow to hit the target—
the risk of a huge disaster increases.46
Let’s look at a real-life example of this: flooding. One
2017 study looked at Atlanta from 1990 to 2010 and found
that the number of exposed housing units on its floodplain
increased by about 58 percent in just twenty years. This
means that with the same amount of flooding and all other
things being equal, Atlanta in 2010 on average would have
seen 58 percent more housing units flooded than in 1990.
Houses in 2010 were also bigger and more valuable than in
1990, so the financial losses would be even higher.47
Similarly, a hurricane charging through downtown
Miami in 1940 would have wrecked twenty-four thousand
homes. The same hurricane hitting today would destroy
about a million much more expensive homes. In 2100, it is
estimated that a similar hurricane could ruin 3.2 million
even more expensive houses.
The expanding bull’s-eye effect means we’re likely to see
much more costly disasters happen over time, even if the
climate doesn’t change at all. This does not mean that
global warming has no distinct impact. But it does mean
that when the media trumpets that the latest hurricane,
tornado, or flood is the costliest yet, they tend to imply that
the rising damage is due to climate change. In reality,
much (and often all) we’re seeing is that more people with
more stuff live in harm’s way.
IT IS NO WONDER that people are scared about global
warming, given how the media covers it, how campaigners
pound it, and how politicians get to grandstand and
promise our salvation. Yes, global warming is real, and it
needs our serious attention. But the endless jeremiads have
warped our understanding of the issues. We need a better
sense of what global warming will actually mean. Right

now, we’re getting lots of irresponsible journalism that’s
scaring us rather than informing us. We need to end the
sensationalism and get a grip on the real size of the
problem by including information on adaptation and the
expanding bull’s-eye effect.
As I will argue later in this book, we also need to stop
believing that any story with climate in it is best solved
through climate policies. As we will see, when we are told
about the hundreds of millions of people flooded because of
global warming, the argument easily becomes “we need to
save them with carbon cuts.” But we will find out how little
that would help. We will see that even if we went all-in and
spent hundreds of trillions on climate policies, sea levels
would still rise, only slightly less than if we did nothing.
Millions would still get flooded. If we instead went all-in on
adaptation, we could for less than a hundredth of the cost
save almost everyone. The same with heat deaths; focusing
on climate policies costs vastly more yet helps much, much
less than air conditioning.
Only when the screaming stops will we finally be able to
identify the most effective ways to both address global
warming and actually help people with their real-world
problems.

2
MEASURING THE FUTURE
WHEN WE THINK about climate change and its impact on
our 
future, 
we 
need 
a 
clear 
and 
understandable
measurement system. There are two key variables:
temperature and prosperity, commonly measured with
“gross domestic product” or GDP. Both are imperfect tools,
but they’re the best we have.
The concept of climate change includes not just
temperature rises but all sorts of other changes, from
droughts and floods to storms and reductions in crop
performance, from heat-related deaths to rising sea levels.
But the summary measure for all these impacts and for
climate science in general is the change in global
temperature. This doesn’t mean that it is the only
important yardstick, but it is used as the single most
important indicator for all of the potential impacts of
climate change.
Similarly, when we talk about human welfare, what we
mean can run the gamut from the level of starvation and
deaths in society, to access to education and economic
opportunities, to the level of happiness and general life
satisfaction. GDP does not perfectly encapsulate every one
of these aspects of human welfare, but it turns out to be the
single measure that more strongly than anything else
relates to most of these impacts.

Global temperature and GDP are both rising, and each
affects the other. Our efforts to rein in temperatures will
cost resources and lead to slower GDP growth. Rising GDP
typically means more greenhouse gas emissions, which will
speed up rises in temperature. In order to understand what
the future holds, we need to get a grasp on exactly what
these two variables mean, how they interact, and how
much control we have over each.
WE HAVE KNOWN for more than a century that more
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere will lead to higher
temperatures. The carbon dioxide typically comes from
burning coal, oil, and gas, and as the world has
dramatically increased its energy use from these fossil
fuels, carbon dioxide emissions have kept increasing,
almost tripling in the last half century.1
Carbon dioxide gas leads to global warming because it
lets in the sun’s heat but blocks some of the earth’s heat
from escaping and therefore, a bit like a greenhouse,
warms us up. What matters for the earth’s temperature is
the total amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Each
year’s emissions add to the total amount, although the
world’s oceans and forests suck out the equivalent of about
half of these new emissions. So, the amount of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere keeps going up: since 1750, the
total amount has increased by 40 percent.2
The fact that the climate impact of carbon dioxide
depends on all previous emissions emphasizes the size of
the problem. Even if we reduce our emissions quite a lot
next year, the total amount of carbon dioxide in the air will
still go up, just not by as much as it would have. We have to
cut a lot and over a long period to really make an impact.
Think of the atmosphere as a bathtub, and carbon dioxide
as water. We keep pouring new carbon dioxide into the
bathtub, and the plug hole (oceans and forests) allows for

about half of the addition to drain away. The total amount
of carbon dioxide keeps increasing. Even if we start filling
the bathtub more slowly, the total still increases, just not as
fast. We have to almost stop pouring into the tub for the
total amount of carbon dioxide to start decreasing. Even
then, it will only start draining very slowly—the plug hole is
only so big.
HOW MUCH, AND how quickly, will rising carbon dioxide
levels affect global temperature?
Because global warming depends on a lot of factors,
scientists use computer models to make projections far into
the future. Serious climate models are massive, complex
computer programs containing thousands of pages of lines
of code. These vast supercomputer models represent the
world as little cubes of atmosphere, land, and ocean, and
simulate hundreds of thousands of interactions across
hundreds of years, including rain, drought, storms, and
temperatures for each location while carbon dioxide keeps
increasing. These models are expensive to construct and
can take weeks or months to run.
But there are also much smaller, faster global warming
models that simplify the inputs solely to carbon dioxide and
a few other emissions, and model the total change to the
global temperature. One of these models is called MAGICC.
It was developed partly with funding from the US
government’s Environmental Protection Agency, and has
been used by the UN’s panel of climate scientists for all of
their reports. We can use the MAGICC model ourselves to
calculate the expected temperature rise over this century.
For 
emissions—our 
input—we 
will 
use 
data 
from
researchers working for the UN, who identified scenarios
for the future, ranging from a future in which we remain
very dependent on fossil fuels to one in which there is a
strong focus on carbon emission reduction. Of these, we

will use their “middle of the road” scenario, which
fundamentally sees things continuing as they have in the
past. Without drastic climate policies, the expectation is
that annual emissions will go up and up over the century.
This is mostly because the developing world is getting
richer, and is expected to continue doing so.3
On the left-hand side of figure 2.1, you can see the
expected rise in annual emissions over the course of the
twenty-first century, more than doubling from today. Plug
this data into the MAGICC model, and it will calculate how
much temperature will increase as a result. That is what we
see on the right: the global average temperature will
increase to 7.4°F higher than it was in preindustrial times
(the change in temperature would be zero in 1750 if the
graph were extended leftward to that year). This model
helps us understand what we can and cannot do when it
comes to global warming. Let’s work out, for example, what
would happen if the entire rich world stopped all its fossil
fuel use in 2020, which would mean grinding its economy
to an almost complete halt and leaving it so for the rest of
the century.4
You can see the impact as the gray line in the left-hand
graph in figure 2.2. Emissions drop dramatically in 2020, as
the rich world stops emitting one-third of all carbon
dioxide. But because most emissions are from poorer
countries, emissions keep going up, just at a lower level. In
total, we would reduce by about a quarter all carbon
dioxide emitted over the rest of this century. On the right
side of the graph, you can see the effect on temperature
over the course of the century. The temperature still rises
by just slightly less than it would have. All that matters for
temperature is the amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere—the contents of the bathtub.

FIGURE 2.1 Emissions and temperature rises. The
left shows the UN’s middle-of-the-road CO2 emissions
over this century. Put these emissions into the
MAGICC climate model, and it outputs the
temperature increase across the century, shown on
the right.5
Even if rich countries completely curtail all emissions
(an impossible scenario), overall carbon dioxide content
continues to rise, and the temperature continues to rise
with it. So, the temperature increase is smaller, but only a
tiny bit smaller. Even after eight decades, the difference is
just below 0.8°F.1 Since the United States emits just over
40 percent of rich country carbon dioxide, in this scenario
the effect of just the US going to zero fossil fuels from
today onward would be a reduction in temperatures of
about 0.33°F in 2100.

FIGURE 2.2 Emissions and temperature rises with
the rich world stopping emissions. On the left, as in
figure 2.1, are the UN’s middle-of-the-road CO2
emissions over this century. The gray line shows
emissions if the entire rich world ended all carbon
dioxide emissions in 2020, and kept them at zero for
the next eighty years. When this data is put through
the MAGICC climate model, two different temperature
outcomes are shown on the right. In a world where the
rich countries stop emitting carbon dioxide, the
temperature ends up at 6.7°F above what it was in
1750, or almost 0.8°F lower than it otherwise would be
by the end of the century.6
ON THE ECONOMIC SIDE, let’s start by explaining what
GDP is: simply put, it is an economy’s entire market value
of goods and services, and GDP per person divides that
figure by the number of people in society. The measure
obviously originates in economics and is constantly
referred to in newspapers and by politicians. Yet, some
people think using this measurement as a yardstick for
well-being is problematic. They say GDP doesn’t count

intangible things like our health and education, or the joy
of a child’s play. Measuring welfare in monetary terms,
they say, is shortsighted.7
GDP doesn’t directly measure the health of citizens, but
it does include health spending on safer births and
immunization. It doesn’t include the quality of education,
but it does measure the higher salaries paid for better
teachers, or money spent on computers and textbooks.
Higher GDP per person means that the state and people in
society have more resources to tackle problems.
On the most basic level, a nation with higher GDP per
person is likely to have citizens who live longer; people and
the state can afford better health care, nutrition, and
safety, and have a host of other advantages that reduce
death risks. Higher GDP per person correlates to higher
education rates and to lower child mortality because
families and communities can afford better education and
better health care to treat and prevent disease.8
Global growth in GDP per person over the last few
decades explains how a billion people were lifted out of
poverty. Economic growth has reduced malnutrition by
about 50 percent in the last thirty years. And when people
become less poor, they get better access to water,
sanitation, electricity, and communications technology.9
But what does GDP have to do with the planet’s health?
As countries get richer, and thus their GDP increases, they
emit more carbon dioxide. As they move away from
agriculture and toward manufacturing, they will be using
more and more energy, mostly from fossil fuels, to power
their economy, as for instance China has done. And as
people get richer, they like their homes better heated and
cooled, they build bigger houses, buy more and more varied
food, start to travel more, and in general use their income
to consume more, which emits more carbon dioxide.
Economic growth means that poverty is massively reduced,

but at the same time it drives environmental problems like
global warming.
But in other ways, rising GDP actually alleviates
environmental problems, because poverty is often the
biggest 
cause 
of 
pollution. 
One 
of 
the 
deadliest
environmental problems today is indoor air pollution,
produced almost entirely because the world’s poorest 2.8
billion people are forced to cook and heat their houses by
burning dirty fuels like wood, dung, and cardboard.
Breathing this foul pollution is equivalent to smoking two
packs of cigarettes each day, and women and children are
the worst affected. When people emerge from poverty, they
turn to cleaner gas or electricity as fuel sources. Since
1990, the death risk from indoor air pollution has dropped
by 58 percent, mostly because of the increase in GDP per
person in the developing world.10
The biggest environmental killer, outdoor air pollution,
initially increases as incomes go up, but then it starts
declining as individuals become even richer. Put simply,
when immediate concerns like hunger and infectious
diseases are tackled, people start demanding more
environmental regulations.11
Deforestation follows the same pattern. We see vast
deforestation in poor countries because there is a strong
need for more development, but as countries get richer
they become more likely to reforest, in part because
citizens 
increasingly 
demand 
more 
biodiversity 
and
nature.12
All of which is to say that we should not assume that
rising GDP denotes only bad things for the planet. Higher
GDP not only means better social and economic outcomes
but also mostly better environmental outcomes. But does
money make you happy? Many people say no. Money may
solve the problems of the very poorest, according to
common wisdom, but beyond a certain level of income,

more money doesn’t produce more satisfaction. It turns out
that the common wisdom is wrong.13
If you look across the world (on the left-hand side of
figure 2.3), people in richer countries are more satisfied
with their lives. This connection doesn’t taper off as
incomes rise away from absolute destitution: as the
national average income doubles and doubles again, the
average person is ever more satisfied. And this is true even
inside each country (on the right-hand side of the figure):
as incomes double, individual life satisfaction increases.
Even people earning more than half a million dollars
annually continue to see life satisfaction and happiness
increasing along with their incomes.14
Higher GDP per person not only means less death, less
poverty and starvation, but also better opportunities, better
access to infrastructure, and higher well-being and life
satisfaction. That makes it a good yardstick for human
welfare.

FIGURE 2.3 Life satisfaction for different levels of
income. Zero is the worst life possible and 10 is the
best life possible. The left graph shows average life
satisfaction for each nation. As people get richer, the
average satisfaction of the nation is likely to be higher.
The right graph shows the same relation inside a
nation, for the world’s twenty-five most populous
countries. Looking at the US line, people at the lowest
household income level (less than $16,000 per year)
have an average satisfaction level of 6.6; the rich
households with $128,000 are on average much more
satisfied at nearly 8.15
OVER THE COMING DECADES, GDP per capita is likely to
go up almost everywhere. It will lift hundreds of millions of
people out of poverty and give billions many more
opportunities, from avoiding starvation to better education.
It will also lead a drive toward better environmental
conditions in almost all countries. As incomes go up, voters
will press for less air pollution, more protected forests, and

cleaner rivers. It will hugely impact global human welfare.
It will give almost everyone more satisfied lives.
All this is unequivocally, morally good. But, increased
GDP will also drive carbon dioxide emissions higher, and
that will create more warming and more problems. And
herein lies the central tension within climate policy, and
one I will return to again and again. Tackling global
warming means limiting the rise in global temperature, or
even trying to reverse that rise. This means cutting carbon
dioxide emissions dramatically, and as we saw, even
stopping the entire rich world’s emissions of carbon dioxide
will not be nearly enough. And this will mean giving up the
cheapest and most reliable energy sources, which will slow
GDP growth at significant cost to human welfare.
We have to find the right balance between the two
factors we have examined in this chapter. If we focus solely
on growing global GDP, we risk temperatures rising to such
an extent that the negative impact on our well-being will
more than offset the benefits brought about by extra
growth. Yet, if we try to cut as much carbon dioxide as we
can, out of a sense of panic, we could easily end up
reducing human well-being to a degree that far offsets any
environmental benefits we achieve.
But if we find the right balance, we can make the world
better off overall. We can reduce some of the worst effects
of warming while generating sufficient benefits to more
than offset the reduction in GDP.
Footnotes
1 We’ll use Fahrenheit throughout, because that is how temperature is
measured in the United States. But in science (and most of the rest of the

world) Celsius (or Centigrade) is used. This only matters because two
temperature limits have become focal points for the climate discussion. One is
the target of limiting temperature increases to 2°C, which is the equivalent of
3.6°F. This limit was confirmed in the Paris Agreement in 2015, and it is clearly
a political limit, not the least because it is a neat and tidy 2.0—but in
Fahrenheit, it looks a bit odd, so I’ll sometimes write 3.6°F (2°C) to remind you
that the Fahrenheit figure relates to the much discussed Celsius target. The
other limit is 1.5 °C, or 2.7°F, which has been pushed by many as a more
stringent follow-up target to the 3.6°F target. Again its origin is political, but
looks better in Celsius.

SECTION TWO
THE TRUTH ABOUT
CLIMATE CHANGE

3
A FULLER STORY ON CLIMATE
CHANGE
THERE IS A “META-NARRATIVE” about climate change, an
overarching 
storyline 
that 
threads 
through 
almost
everything we read and hear: the headlines of press
releases from climate-concerned activists, the anxious
sound bites of politicians, the TV news bulletins that pulse
with urgency, the movies and books that sketch a bleak
future.
The narrative is this: global warming makes things
worse, and since it touches almost everything, it makes
almost everything worse. The storyline tells us that where
there is more rain, the result will be floods and where there
is less rain, the result will be drought. Global warming will
be good for bad things and bad for good things.
This is a cartoon vision of the world. In real life, most
things have both good and bad consequences. You get a
new job with a higher salary, which is great, but then the
stress causes you to sleep less and eat more unhealthy
food. Losing your job feels devastating, but it might also
lead you to reevaluate your life and choose a career that
you enjoy more.
Like most other things, global warming has both
downsides and upsides. More rain can indeed lead to more

flooding in some places. But more rain can also alleviate an
existing drought. Overall, when we look at all the scientific
evidence, while an increase in rain often does alleviate
droughts, it generally doesn’t lead to more flooding,
probably because humans use much of the additional water
in agriculture and industry.
None of this means that climate change won’t in total
have significant, negative effects. None of it means that we
shouldn’t be concerned. But a one-sided representation
means we’re not being well informed. We need to see the
bigger picture.
According to the conventional narrative about climate
change, unless we make dramatic alterations today,
animals and people will die in huge numbers, the planet
will become unrecognizable, and society will disintegrate.
While horrifying, this story is comforting in its simplicity. It
is also wrong, mostly because it is a cartoon setup.
In this chapter I will examine just a small handful of the
stories that circulate widely about climate change in order
to show how the failure to describe and communicate the
full picture makes us badly informed and leads to poor
policies.
ONE OF THE iconic images of the coming climate
apocalypse is the starving polar bear sitting mournfully
atop a melting ice floe. Polar bears are adorable, and no
one wants them to die. And what better symbol of global
warming than endangered polar bears?
In his 2006 hit climate change documentary, An
Inconvenient Truth, Al Gore showed a sad, animated polar
bear floating away on a melting ice floe, presumably to its
death. A campaign by environmentalists successfully
convinced the US government to declare the polar bear
“endangered” in 2008. However, on a global level, the
International Union for Conservation of Nature, which

decides which animals and plants are endangered, was only
willing to call the bear “vulnerable”; this had been the
outcome of every evaluation except one since 1982.1
The prediction that the polar bear would suffer
immensely because of a lack of summer ice was always
somewhat odd. Polar bears survived through the last
interglacial period 130,000 to 115,000 years ago, when it
was significantly warmer than it is now. They also survived
the first thousands of years of the current interglacial
period, when arctic sea ice cover was strongly reduced and
there were even long periods of ice-free summers in the
central Arctic Ocean.2
When Polar Bear Specialist Group conservationists
began studying the polar bear population in the 1960s, they
clearly found that the biggest threat was indiscriminate
hunting. At that time, it was thought that the global
population of polar bears was around 5,000 to 19,000.
Hunting was regulated, and by 1981 the official estimate
had increased to almost 23,000. Since then their numbers
have been growing overall. The group’s latest official
estimate comes from 2019, and is the biggest yet at 26,500
(see figure 3.1).4
FIGURE 3.1 Estimated number of polar bears from
the main international body collecting polar bear
statistics, the Polar Bear Research Group.3

Clearly, this is a conservation success that we should
celebrate. Yet, given that the polar bear has been used for
so long as an icon of climate change doom, this finding is
actually quite embarrassing for campaigners. The result?
Polar bears have been quietly dropped from the climate
change narrative.
The Guardian, a British newspaper that sees its mission
as responding to the “climate crisis,” decided in 2019 that
it would no longer illustrate as many climate stories with
polar bears. (The newspaper went on to announce that it
would use more pictures of people in distress in extreme
weather events, another problematic choice, as we will see
in chapter 4.)5
Similarly, the federal government’s Arctic Report Card
heavily chronicled the decline of polar bears in its 2008,
2009, 2010, and 2014 reports, but now, with official
estimates showing that their population is not declining,
polar bears no longer get a mention. Nor did Al Gore’s
follow-up 2017 film, An Inconvenient Sequel, find room to
share the good news about the bear’s survival.
The real threat to polar bears isn’t climate change, it’s
people. Every year around the Arctic, hunters kill almost
nine hundred of them. That’s more than three polar bears
out of every one hundred that exist, every year. If we want
to protect them, rather than dramatically reducing carbon
emissions to try to tweak temperatures over many decades
with a clearly uncertain impact on polar bear populations,
our first step should be to stop shooting them.6
In fact, when it comes to species extinction, of both
fauna and flora, human behavior is a much larger factor
than climate change. The World Wildlife Fund Living Planet
Report, published in 2018, finds that exploitation (e.g.,
overfishing) and habitat loss (converting nature into farms
and cities) are responsible for about 70 to 80 percent of all
threats to species. When we look at what influences species

extinction, climate change is one of the smallest factors: 5
to 12 percent. A 2016 study published in Nature similarly
suggests that overexploitation, agriculture, and urban
development are the most prevalent threats to species,
with climate change the least important of seven factors.
This means that prosaic actions would be most helpful:
things like regulating fisheries and ensuring more space for
nature. So, yes, if we want to save our plants and animals,
we need to change our behavior. But not in the ways that
climate activists will tell you.7
ASIDE FROM A POLAR BEAR, what’s a better symbol of
global warming than a heat wave? In recent summers, heat
waves in Europe and parts of the United States have
become the ultimate evidence that our planet is headed
toward an unlivable future. There is nothing good about
heat waves—they are dangerous and kill people. But in
fact, cold weather is far more dangerous and kills more of
the population. This means that as the world gets warmer
many people will actually benefit.
Scientists who undertook the biggest ever study of heat
and cold deaths, published in Lancet in 2015, examined
seventy-four million total deaths from all causes in 384
locations in thirteen countries. These included cold
countries like Canada, temperate countries like Spain and
South Korea, and subtropical and tropical nations like
Brazil, Taiwan, and Thailand. The scientists found that heat
caused almost 0.5 percent of all deaths, but more than 7
percent of all deaths were caused by cold. For every heat
death, seventeen people die from the cold.8
Deaths caused by the cold get less attention partly
because they are less sudden. Heat kills when body
temperature gets too high, and this alters the fluid and
electrolytic balance in weaker, often older people. Cold
usually kills because the body restricts blood flow to the

skin, increasing blood pressure and lowering our defenses
against infections.
Essentially, heat kills within a few days, whereas cold
kills over weeks. In just the thirteen countries examined in
the massive Lancet study, one hundred forty thousand
people died from the heat each year, and more than two
million from the cold. We hear about heat waves that in a
few days cause hundreds of deaths, but we do not hear
about the thousands of slower cold deaths; this is because
there are no TV cameras when mostly elderly, weak
individuals expire over weeks or months in anonymous
apartments.
Let’s take as one example the United Kingdom. Each
year, the UK experiences 33 cold deaths for every heat
death. In one recent winter in England and Wales, the cold
killed 43,000 people. In one year, in a single week in
January, 7,200 people were killed who wouldn’t otherwise
have died. Because of the cold, the mortuaries were
overflowing and families had to wait for months to bury
their relative. Yet, this didn’t become a widely known story
because these cold deaths didn’t fit the broader climate
change narrative.9
It is similarly true for India. Recently, CNN capped a
monthlong report on the frightening impact of heat in India
with the headline “Dozens Dead in One of India’s Longest
Heat Waves.” It was a powerful story told by media and
climate campaigners around the world. But it was also
rather curious because it focused on the smallest risk from
temperature-related deaths. In fact, the scientific literature
shows that while extreme heat kills 25,000 people each
year in India, extreme cold kills twice as many. Indeed, the
biggest killer is moderate cold, which kills an astounding
580,000 each year.10
CNN could have written plenty of stories telling us
“normal cold temperatures in India kill more than half a

million people,” but it never did.
In chapter 1, we saw that alarming headlines about
thousands of future heat deaths are based on a study using
the far-fetched assumption that nobody will buy air
conditioning as temperatures rise. The latest US data on
heat and cold deaths, which unfortunately covers up only to
2006, shows that heat deaths are few and are in fact
declining (because, in spite of the research assumption,
people do buy air conditioning), whereas cold deaths are
far larger, and are actually increasing (see figure 3.2).12
FIGURE 3.2 Percentage of deaths caused by cold and
heat in the United States, 1985–2006. Dashed lines
show the best linear estimates.11
Why? It turns out that reducing death from heat is easier
than reducing death from cold, in part because heat is a
short-term phenomenon. You need an air conditioner just
for a heat wave, and maybe you sit in the room where it’s
working for the worst days, whereas the cold requires long-
term, structural responses such as insulating your home
and workplace, and continuous heating throughout the
winter months.
If we assume there is no adaptation, it is true that rising
temperatures mean heat deaths will increase. But surely,

we should also recognize that higher temperatures mean
fewer people will die from cold. And since cold deaths
outweigh heat deaths almost everywhere, it turns out that
even without adaptation, moderate temperature increases
will likely mean that the people who didn’t die of cold will
roughly outweigh the additional deaths from heat.13
But crucially, it is implausible to disregard adaptation.
As 
temperatures 
and 
wealth 
increase, 
people 
will
correspondingly make changes to cope. Since it is much
easier to adapt to heat than to cold, it is likely that the big
killer will remain cold. We don’t have global analyses for
adaptation to cold and heat deaths, but for the United
States, one 2017 study shows that with adaptation, even a
significant temperature increase will lead to fewer deaths
overall.14
There are two lessons we need to take away. First,
hearing only about deaths caused by heat means we end up
believing things are much worse, leading to more fear.
Second, it means we focus on the smaller problem of heat
deaths that in many places is relatively easily solved by
simple adaptation measures already being undertaken.
Instead, we focus too little on the bigger and often
stubborn problem of cold deaths. A 2015 analysis of heat
and cold deaths in Madrid showed that not only are cold
deaths outweighing heat deaths five to one, but also heat
deaths are declining, especially in the older age groups;
however, cold deaths are increasing for all groups. The
researchers concluded that there is an urgent need “to
implement public-health prevention and action measures
targeted at cold waves.” Even in hot Madrid.15
WHAT IS CLIMATE CHANGE doing to nature? Based on
what we hear every day, it’s turning green pastures and
forests into dust bowls. The reality is the opposite. Global
warming is causing an unprecedented greening of the

world, which scientists have been slow to recognize. But
global greening has now been thoroughly corroborated in a
number of global studies. The biggest satellite study to
date, published in 2016, confirmed that over the past three
decades upward of half the world’s vegetated area is
getting greener, whereas only 4 percent is browning.16
The overwhelming cause of global greening is carbon
dioxide fertilization. That’s right: carbon dioxide, which
causes global warming, also helps plants grow—and more
carbon dioxide makes them grow more.
Reforestation and more intensive agricultural practices
also contribute to the greening of the earth. China has seen
its green area almost double in the last seventeen years,
partly because of a massive reforestation program, partly
because of carbon dioxide, and partly because it grows
multiple crops, keeping land green for more of the year.17
Researchers find that global greening over the past
thirty-five years has increased leaves on plants and trees
equivalent in area to two times the continental United
States. It is equivalent to greening the entire continent of
Australia with plants or trees, two times over. It is quite
remarkable that over a few decades we got the equivalent
of two entire new continents of green because of carbon
dioxide—and virtually nobody has heard about it.19

FIGURE 3.3 Weight of vegetation in the world from
1850 to 2100. The black line is an estimate of the
actual weight of vegetation, while the dashed line
shows what will likely happen if we emit a lot more
CO2 over the century. Estimate for the weight of
vegetation in 1500 for reference.18
As we emit more carbon dioxide over the century, the
world will keep getting greener, although there is still a
significant debate over how much greener. If we measure
the weight of all the vegetation in the world, one standard
estimate shows that at the turn of the last century we had
about 530 billion tons on average over a year (see figure
3.3). The mass of greenery declined slightly over the next
seventy years, as people cut down more forest and partly
replaced it with farmland containing less green mass.20
But something amazing started happening in the 1970s:
mostly because of global warming, we started getting more
green vegetation. And this will continue over the century as
we continue to emit more fertilizing carbon dioxide. Indeed,
if we follow a standard worst-case scenario for carbon
dioxide emissions to the end of the century, we could end

up with almost 50 percent more green mass in the world by
2100. By one estimate, we would be above the amount of
green the world had in 1500, before we started the
widespread reduction in global vegetation.21
None of this is to suggest that all is well with global
warming—far from it. First, it is possible that not all the
vegetation is the type we like or need, although it seems
reasonable to say that in general, we would prefer a
greener world to a browner one. It also doesn’t diminish
the fact that many other challenges of global warming
remain, including higher sea levels and more heat waves.
But it is remarkable how little attention massive global
greening has received. It’s another way that the global
warming discourse is too narrow in scope, focused just on
the negative.
THE SPECTER OF more wars is another rallying point of
climate change activists. They argue that climate change is
a key cause of the ongoing civil war in Syria, and that this
war is a harbinger of things to come: warmer temperatures
will mean more fighting. The reality is more complicated; in
fact, the only robust scientific finding is that warmer
temperatures are linked to less fighting.22
The idea that the atrocities committed in Syria can be
blamed on global warming causing a drought is surprising,
given Syria’s history of bad water management, a
population that tripled in thirty-five years and added
pressure on resources, the effects of decades of American
and British foreign policy in the region, Arab Spring
uprisings, 
religious 
and 
ethnic 
tensions, 
political
repression, and the interference of geopolitical powers.
Moreover, 
recent 
drought 
also 
affected 
neighboring
countries including Israel, Jordan, and Lebanon, yet civil
conflict has not occurred on any similar scale there.
A 2014 study of the role of drought and climate change

in the Syrian uprisings concluded that “an exaggerated
focus on climate change shifts the burden of responsibility
for the devastation of Syria’s natural resources away from
the successive Syrian governments since the 1950s and
allows the Assad regime to blame external factors for its
own failures.” A 2019 study similarly concludes: “There is
very little merit to the ‘Syria climate conflict thesis.’”
Senator Bernie Sanders was knocked by PolitiFact’s truth-
checkers for making this very argument when he was
campaigning for the Democratic presidential nomination in
2015. Yet, the narrative persists.23
Moreover, people make a significant but common logical
mistake when they pinpoint a specific place like Syria,
where global warming could potentially have made the
drought worse. In the next chapter we will see that
globally, climate has worsened drought in some areas, but
reduced it in just as many others. It follows that you cannot
make the claim about global warming increasing drought in
Syria, and then ignore all the other places where it has
decreased drought. It’s true that over time climate change
will likely increase dryness in Syria. But as global warming
also increases global precipitation, it will also make many
other countries less water stressed, including fragile
nations like Guinea, Sierra Leone, Mali, and Burkina Faso.
So, if we worry that wars will be worsened in places like
Syria, shouldn’t we also be thankful that a reduction in
future drought from global warming will make civil war less
likely elsewhere?24
On a global scale, the latest survey, published in 2019,
shows that “the literature has not detected a robust and
general effect linking climate to conflict onset.” In fact,
studies looking at temperature changes and the onset of
wars in the Northern Hemisphere over hundreds or
thousands of years show a clear correlation between colder
temperatures and more war. The reason why cold is a

cause of war is that it reduces agricultural production; this
leads to social problems, which more often result in war,
famine, and population decline.25
More importantly, we should be very careful in assigning
blame for war to any aspect of the climate. In a recent 2019
study, researchers examined sixteen different factors that
drive the risk of conflict. When the scientists ranked that
list in terms of influence, climate came in fourteenth,
behind far more important factors like poor development,
population 
pressure, 
and 
corruption. 
The 
scientists
concluded: “Other drivers, such as low socioeconomic
development and low capabilities of the state, are judged to
be substantially more influential, and the mechanisms of
climate-conflict linkages remain a key uncertainty.”26
The narrative that higher temperatures equal more wars
is not only facile but ignores the research. The fact is that
the only well-documented connection is the exact opposite:
over the past thousand years, more cold meant more
conflict.
WE HEAR AN unrelenting barrage of messages about
climate change, and almost all of them are uniformly
negative. If that’s all we hear, then our understanding of
the world is skewed.
Just to be clear, global warming will in total have a
negative impact on our planet and well-being, so overall,
there will be more bad than good impacts to describe. But
the overarching narrative that insists on telling us only the
bad stories is unlikely to give us adequate information with
which to act smartly. It’s important to get the whole
picture.

4
EXTREME WEATHER OR
EXTREME EXAGGERATION?
“A RAGING, HOWLING signal of climate change.” That’s
what the Washington Post recently declared about extreme
weather. Whether it’s flooding, forest fires, or destructive
hurricanes, extreme weather events are inevitably cast by
the media as evidence that climate change is not only real,
but also urgent and disastrous.1
But is weather really getting more extreme globally? Are
there more and more severe droughts, hurricanes, floods,
and fires? To answer these questions, I am going to outline
what the science says. As a general rule, I will base
findings on what the United Nations’ climate scientists—the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, or IPCC—
have found. Their reports are generally considered the gold
standard, since their work is careful and robust, written by
large teams of top scientists from around the world. To see
what we should expect just for the United States, I will also
bring in official government findings from the US National
Climate Assessment.
Many of these findings run against the meta-narrative
that 
everything 
is 
getting 
worse. 
They 
seem
counterintuitive because we are accustomed to thinking
that natural disasters are ever worsening due to climate

change. So what really is going on?
Part of the problem is the media. Newspapers fill their
pages with stories of bad news because “everything is just
fine” isn’t a news story. For the past thirty years, polls
show, the vast majority of the US population has believed
that crime is getting worse, even though statistics
repeatedly demonstrate that crime is falling, often quite
precipitously. This disconnect can largely be explained by
the fact that regardless of how much crime is reduced,
there will always be enough to fill newspapers and TV
shows every day with horrific stories. Media coverage can
help shape a perception that crime is getting more rampant
even if statistics show otherwise. Politicians amplify the
problem by talking up crime to show themselves “tough on
crime,” and so statistical reality and public opinion diverge
even further.2
We are witnessing a similar dynamic when it comes to
the effects of climate change. Stories of extreme weather
are dramatic—flames engulfing Los Angeles highways,
reporters bracing themselves against heavy rains and
winds on camera, flood victims rowing through what used
to be city streets. Unsurprisingly, people are riveted, and
the media dishes up as many of these stories as it can.
Global warming is an easy shorthand for explaining these
disasters, and many politicians leap in to proclaim
themselves “tough on climate change.” The scientific facts
are left behind because the narrative feels true.
You would think that our experience of the weather
should be one thing that is completely separate from our
political identities. If a Democrat and a Republican look out
the window, they should both have the same experience of
the weather. Amazingly, that’s not true. Democrats, who
are much more worried than Republicans about climate
change, are far more likely to believe that droughts, floods,
wildfires, and hurricanes where they live have become

more frequent or more intense in the last decade. (And
conversely, Republicans are much less likely to believe
so.)3
It’s astonishing to think that people literally living in the
same place as you might have a wildly different experience
of the weather, based on their political views. But it makes
sense: someone who is afraid of climate change will think,
“That last storm I experienced felt worse than others: that
must be climate change.” Similarly, someone relatively
unconcerned can always go back in time and think, “Yeah,
but the 1935 hurricane was much worse.” Both of these
sentiments are understandable and underpin the need to
ground our approach in more than sentiment alone.
IT’S A CLASSIC IMAGE of climate change: dry, red soil
broken up by horrendous drought. Indeed, many arguments
for carbon cuts are based on the belief that droughts have
already worsened because of climate change.4
But in their last major global-level report, the UN’s
climate scientists didn’t find that to be true. They said,
“There is low confidence in a global-scale observed trend in
drought.” They found that since 1950 drought had likely
increased in the Mediterranean and West Africa, but had
likely decreased in central North America and northwest
Australia. In other words, on a planetary level, the earth
isn’t experiencing more drought.5
For the United States, the federal government’s most
recent 
National 
Climate 
Assessment 
(NCA) 
states
unequivocally that “drought has decreased over much of
the continental United States in association with long-term
increases in precipitation.” So, contrary to what you hear in
the news, even the United States’ own climate assessment
tells you that drought has decreased, not increased.6
Moreover, the UN scientists found—and this may be very
surprising—that the purported link between man-caused

climate change and drought is actually weak: “There is low
confidence in attributing changes in drought over global
land areas since the mid-20th century to human influence.”
The US National Climate Assessment agrees. The scientists
are basing their findings on data that mostly reveals no
increase in global drought. One 2014 study even shows a
persistent decline in global drought since 1982, and
another from 2018 finds this downward trend goes all the
way back to 1902. The evidence also shows that globally,
the number of consecutive dry days has been declining for
the last ninety years.7
For the United States, the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration—the official scientific agency
that focuses on oceans, waterways, and the atmosphere—
finds that since 1895, the area of the lower forty-eight
states that has been very dry has certainly not increased. In
fact, there has likely been a slight decline, from 12 to 10
percent, although this is not statistically significant. So
despite what we often hear, it is incorrect to say that we
are seeing the climate impact of drought, either globally or
in the United States.8
But what about drought in the future? The UN’s climate
scientists find, with a medium level of confidence, that if
carbon emissions increase drastically (indeed, at a level
that would be unrealistic), then it is likely that the risk of
drought could increase in already dry regions toward the
end of the century. Similarly, US government scientists find
that if emissions increase at a much faster pace than
mainstream scenarios, and if there is no attempt to improve
water management, then chronic, long-term drought “is
increasingly possible by the end of this century.”9
So it is possible to argue that climate change can make
future drought worse, but it is important to point out the
caveats here. This outcome is likely to occur only in
scenarios of very high, very unlikely carbon emissions, and

the effects will actually be experienced only toward the end
of the century. And, as the United States’ official report
makes clear, this worsening requires an assumption that
we wouldn’t take any measures to better protect and
preserve our water resources.
In the real world, that last assumption is unrealistic. In
fact, in California during droughts, reservoirs can be used
to reduce the drought deficit by about 50 percent, whereas
extensive water usage (mostly irrigation) can almost double
drought duration and deficit. Both of these actions, positive
and negative, can be more readily, quickly, and efficiently
changed than global carbon dioxide levels. Crucially, when
we look at the science, the claim that climate change is
causing drought today is just not founded.10
LEONARDO 
DICAPRIO’S 
2016 
climate 
change
documentary was called Before the Flood. Rolling Stone
published a 2019 article on climate change called “How to
Survive a Flooded World.” In the same year, the New York
Times declared: “Flooding Offers a Preview of Future
Climate Havoc.”11
Unlike DiCaprio and the media, when the world’s best
scientists worked together to examine evidence linking
flooding and climate change, they could not find enough
proof to even determine whether flooding was getting
better or worse. The United Nations has carefully
estimated the total amount of flooding around the world
and found that it’s not clear whether it is even getting more
or less frequent, much less if there is a human fingerprint
involved. Looking at inland flooding, the UN’s scientists say
there is “a lack of evidence and thus low confidence
regarding the sign of trend in the magnitude and/or
frequency of floods on a global scale.” The US Global
Change Research Program clearly says that it cannot
attribute changes in flooding to carbon dioxide, nor find

detectable changes in flooding magnitude, duration, or
frequency.12
What’s true at a global level clearly isn’t necessarily true
locally. In some parts of the United States, such as the
upper Mississippi River valley, flooding has increased. But
it has decreased in other parts of the country such as the
Northwest. 
So 
overall, 
the 
United 
States’ 
official
climatologists have made a similar finding to that of the
United Nations: they “have not established a significant
connection of increased riverine flooding to human-induced
climate change.”13
Sometimes, people hold up specific examples of flooding
(such as in Texas or in Venice, Italy) that are “caused” by
climate change, without there being any scientific basis to
link the event to climate change whatsoever. Sometimes,
there is scientific underpinning to link a flooding event to
climate change. What this typically means is that
researchers have run a climate model with and without
carbon dioxide emissions, and found that running the
climate model with carbon dioxide emissions results in
more precipitation that could be consistent with the
flooding experienced. But we need to stop and think harder
about this. If we look at computer models only when there
is a flood and then sometimes say a-ha!, we are ignoring all
the places where there was no flooding; and, because
climate change means less rain in some places, there could
have been flooding in the absence of climate change. This
is exactly what the UN tells us when it points out that
overall and globally there is no increase in flooding.
Reporting only the negative is sadly what gives us a biased
understanding.
In the future, the incidence of heavy rain will increase
and there will be an expansion of areas that experience
significant increases in runoff, which can increase the
hazard of flooding, but the UN’s scientists emphasize that

“trends in floods are strongly influenced by changes in
river management.” This tells us there are far more
important levers we could look at to reduce flooding than
carbon cuts. Even in the future, flood damage will be much
more strongly affected by other human impacts like river
management and by how much building takes place on
floodplains, than by climate change.14
US government scientists believe future increases in
heavy rain could “contribute to increases in local flooding
in some catchments or regions” but say it’s far from clear
when any future impact from climate on flooding will be
detectable. We know flooding cannot currently be linked to
climate, and the US government even points out that we
don’t know yet when or if we will be able to claim so in the
future. It is hubristic, to say the least, for climate
campaigners to claim to know better. Indeed, a 2018 study
pointed out that “despite widespread claims by the climate
community that if precipitation extremes increase, floods
must also,” it actually appears that “flood magnitudes are
decreasing.”15
We need to differentiate, of course, between the actual
incidence of flooding, which is not clearly increasing, and
damage from flooding. Images of damaging floods are often
used—whether by DiCaprio, Gore, or the world’s media—as
one of the clear examples of a world already being
transformed by climate change. But when we hear the
claim that flooding costs are skyrocketing because of
climate change, we need to consider the increase in costs
resulting from the growing number and value of houses in
harm’s way, as we saw in chapter 1—the expanding bull’s-
eye effect.
It is true that inflation-adjusted total flood costs in the
United States on average rose from $3.5 billion in 1903 to
$12.8 billion in 2018. By 2018, the annual cost of US
flooding was 370 percent of what it used to be in 1903. But

the number of housing units in the US has increased much,
much more: by 2017, there were 750 percent as many
housing units to be damaged as there had been in 1903. A
flood today will on average make seven and a half houses
awash with water, compared to a similar flood in 1903
affecting just one house. Moreover, each of these houses
has become much bigger, is worth more, and is filled with
many more valuable items. Since 1970 alone, the average
house size has increased by half, and the price has almost
tripled.16
One simple way of adjusting for this dramatic change in
the number and value of houses is to compare the flood
losses with GDP. This is a weaker correction than if we
actually had the value of houses in floodplains since 1903,
but it still delivers a very clear result.
Figure 4.1 shows the total cost of US flooding from 1903
to 2018. It shows that in the early part of the last century,
when there were few and mostly cheap houses to be
flooded, the average flood still claimed about half a percent
of GDP each year, with the Great Flood of 1913 costing a
still-unbeaten 2.2 percent. Today, with many more and
more costly houses, average floods over a year cost just
over 0.05 percent of GDP—ten times less. So while the
dollar value of flooding damage has increased dramatically
as a percentage of the national income, flooding takes far
less of a toll than it did a century ago.

FIGURE 4.1 US flooding costs in percentage of GDP,
1903–2018. Dashed trend shows best fit.17
All of which is to say that we need to think about floods
differently. Globally, the incidence of flooding is not on the
rise, nor is there any evidence that global warming has led
to more floods. In some areas, increased rains due to global
warming may eventually lead to increased flooding, and we
should prepare for that scenario with sensible water
management policies.
However, we should not confuse the rising costs of
flooding with flooding itself (or indeed with climate
change). It is entirely caused by more houses and more
wealth; in fact, the cost compared to the US national
income has declined almost tenfold. If we want to reduce
this amount even more, the solution isn’t to be found in
radically reducing carbon dioxide levels. The solution is to
stop building lots of big, expensive houses in flood zones.
EVERY SUMMER IN both the Northern and Southern
Hemispheres, wildfires erupt somewhere, contributing to a
widely held perception that they are increasing in
occurrence, severity, and damage. Perhaps because images
of fire are so frightening, or because fire can leap up with

apparent 
randomness, 
or 
because 
(particularly 
in
California) flames have subsumed the homes of the very
affluent, wildfires have become one of the most potent
political symbols of global temperatures run amok.18
The real story bears little resemblance to such alarmist
storytelling. To begin with, over the past 150 years our
exposure to fire has dropped dramatically. The examination
of sedimentary charcoal records spanning six continents
and two millennia shows that in fact global burning has
declined sharply since 1870. To a large extent, this is
because of the so-called pyric transition when humans
largely stopped burning wood at home and started burning
fossil fuels in power plants and cars. This means that today
fire has all but vanished from houses (except those of the
world’s poorest). By restricting fire to engines and power
stations, we have been able to reduce its presence and
negative impact in the rest of the world.19
There is plenty of evidence for a reduction in the level of
devastation caused by fire, with satellites showing a 25
percent reduction globally in burned area just over the past
eighteen years. And the primary factor in the reduction in
global burned area over the past 110 years is human
activity: when more people started planting crops, they
wanted to avoid fires, and did so with fire suppression and
forest management. In total, the global amount of area
burned has declined more than 540,000 square miles, from
1.9 million square miles in the early part of the last century
to 1.4 million square miles today.20
Recently, scientists undertook a global simulation and
found that the area burned for crops and pasture has
increased globally since 1900. However, the amount of
burning of undisturbed land, and of land that was
previously disturbed but is recovering, has declined more.
Overall, that has had the effect of reducing the total annual
burned area by a third.21

None of this is to say that wildfires are not a problem.
Wildfires in the United States, particularly in California, get
a huge amount of global attention. Government scientists
undertaking an official 2018 assessment concluded that the
“incidence of large forest fires in the western United States
and Alaska has increased since the early 1980s,” and they
projected 
these 
will 
increase 
further 
with 
higher
temperatures.23
FIGURE 4.2 Wildfire burned area in the United
States, 1926–2019, and estimated burned area 1900–
2000, broken down by decades.22
Indeed, we see an increase in area burned from the
three million acres burned on average in the 1980s to the
seven million in the 2010s, in figure 4.2. However, this
increase is still very small compared to the annual rates of
burning we saw in the early part of the last century, with
thirty-nine million acres burned on average in the 1930s.
So while climate change likely is increasing the amount of
land burned by wildfire, and that is something we should
take seriously, it does so from a very modest level
compared to historical data.
And importantly, it is likely that most of the increase
we’re seeing now has little to do with the climate and

everything to do with other human activities that we have
much more control over. A 2017 study found that where
humans 
are 
present, 
climate 
is 
less 
important 
in
determining fire activity. It found that significant human
presence—such as closeness to towns and roads, the
number of people living in an area, and the amount of land
developed—can “override, or swamp out, the effect of
climate.”24
Indeed, when we look at the US West, the number of
homes built in high-fire-risk zones has increased drastically
from half a million in 1940 to almost seven million in 2010.
This is more than three times faster than the US-wide
housing increase over the same period, so of course many
more homes are likely to experience wildfire. Moreover,
this growth is set to continue until 2050, meaning our first
target for reducing wildfire damage should be to deter
people from building houses in high-risk zones.25
Damage from wildfire is also on the rise, not because of
more wildfire, but because of the expanding bull’s-eye
effect. There is no US study looking at this, but an
Australian study shows that while the value of property
damaged by wildfire is on the rise, it is caused by more
people and more houses built in high-risk locations. When
the damage is adjusted for the number and value of houses
at risk, the trend is not increasing—it is actually slightly,
but insignificantly, decreasing.26
We should take wildfires seriously: global warming will
increase the risk of wildfire (though in this century not to
the levels mankind experienced prior to the middle of the
twentieth century). Compared to the year 2000, an
unrealistic worst-case, high-warming trend would increase
the burned area globally by 8 percent in 2050 and 33
percent in 2100; but even in 2100 this would still be less
than the area burned in 1950.27
For high-risk California, global warming by itself will

increase the median burned area by 10 to 15 percent by
the middle of the century, compared to 2000. But this
increase is small in relation to the 50 percent increase in
the number of houses in the highest-hazard zone over the
same period.28
As with flooding, the best way to manage fire is to focus
not on carbon dioxide levels, but on human behavior.
Planning decisions are far more important than climate
impact. Building codes and regulations are of paramount
importance, as are land management policies to ensure
there are well-maintained firebreaks in forests, and
effective 
firefighting 
strategies 
to 
stop 
fires 
from
spreading. Above all, if we are serious about reducing
future fire damage, regulators and insurance firms need to
deliver a harsh but clear message: “You just can’t live in
areas that are a tinderbox.”
HURRICANES, SCIENTIFICALLY KNOWN as tropical
cyclones, are the costliest weather catastrophes. The costs
of US landfalling hurricanes since 1980 alone amount to
two-thirds of entire global catastrophic weather losses over
that period. Hurricanes Katrina (2005), Sandy (2012),
Harvey (2017), Irma (2017), Florence (2018), and Dorian
(2019) have all been used to argue that global warming is
making extreme weather worse. But this is not what the
peer-reviewed science says.29
The UN’s climate scientists looked at the evidence and
concluded that globally, hurricanes are not getting more
frequent: they find “no significant observed trends in global
tropical cyclone frequency.” They do find an increase in
storms in the North Atlantic, but link this to air pollution.
They specifically say that there is low confidence in
attributing 
changes 
in 
hurricane 
activity 
to 
human
influence.30
This finding is backed by the US National Climate

Assessment, which concludes that hurricane activity in the
Atlantic has increased, but that it’s not possible to blame
climate change. Climate scientists at NASA not only agree,
but add that it will not be possible to detect the impact of
climate change for at least a couple of decades.31
Moreover, a new 2018 study reveals that continental US
landfalling hurricanes show no trend in frequency or
intensity; in fact, to the extent there is one, the trend is
slightly (though statistically insignificantly) declining. This
is true not only for all hurricanes, but also for the worst
ones, at category 3 and up.32
Yet, the cost of US hurricanes has gone up dramatically.
This fact is often used to suggest that global warming is
making hurricanes worse and more destructive. But what is
really 
happening 
is—again—that 
the 
bull’s-eye 
is
expanding.
While the US population since 1900 has more than
quadrupled, coastal populations have increased far more.
The population of all the coastal counties from Texas to
Virginia on the Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic has increased
sixteenfold in the same period. The coastal population of
Florida has increased a phenomenal sixty-seven times.
There are now many more people living in Dade and
Broward Counties in South Florida than lived along the
entire coast from Texas to Virginia in 1940. For a hurricane
in 1940 to hit the same number of people as a modern
hurricane ripping through Dade and Broward today, it
would have had to tear through the entire Gulf of Mexico
and Atlantic coastline.34

FIGURE 4.3 Cost of US landfalling hurricanes over
time. The graph on the left shows the cost of all
landfalling hurricanes in the continental United States
from 1900 to 2019 in 2019 dollars. The graph on the
right shows the cost if the same hurricanes had hit the
US as it looks today. Dashed lines are best linear fit.33
From Texas to Maine, the number of housing units
within thirty-one miles of the coast increased from 4.4
million in 1940 to 26.6 million in 2000. Correcting for the
increase in housing units, the story of worsening damage
changes substantially.35
If we just look at the inflation-adjusted damage from
hurricanes in the left graph of figure 4.3, it is clear that
costs have gone up dramatically, something that would still
be somewhat true if we look at it as a percentage of GDP,
because the increase in coastal vulnerability has increased
much, much more than GDP. This is why researchers
estimate the cost of hurricanes over time as if all of them
hit the United States as it looks today.
The Great Miami Hurricane of 1926 destroyed much of
the city (hence the prevalence of Art Deco architecture in
the rebuilt areas). Only about a hundred thousand people

lived in Miami at the time, in far cheaper houses than
today. The inflation-adjusted damage ran to $1.6 billion. A
hurricane of the same size and ferocity tearing down the
same path today would be the costliest US weather
catastrophe ever, causing damage worth $265 billion.
Modeling all the two hundred–plus hurricanes that have
landed in the United States from 1900 to 2019 as if they
landed today corrects for the expanding bull’s-eye effect
and reveals no significant increase in hurricane-adjusted
costs. And this isn’t true only for the United States. Similar
results are found when scientists look at Australia and
China.36
Looking to the future, the UN’s climate scientists find
that the best but weak evidence suggests that hurricanes
will become fewer but more intense. These stronger
hurricanes will likely create more damage, meaning they
will result in more costly damages. But as the population
keeps growing and the number of houses close to
coastlines increases (it is projected to more than double
this century), demographic changes will increase damages
much more, swamping the impact of climate change.37
The good news is that as people get richer, hurricanes
will become less deadly. Poorer communities are affected
far more harshly by hurricanes, in part because poorer
people live in flimsy housing that offers little protection,
and in part because they have little capital or insurance to
rebuild. Hurricane Dorian, which hit the Bahamas in 2019,
appears to have had its worst effects on the poor Haitian
immigrant population whose shantytown, “the Mudd,” was
devastated.38
Over the century, humans will keep getting richer and
better able to protect themselves from the effects of
hurricanes. Currently, according to a highly quoted study in
Nature, hurricanes cost humanity about 0.04 percent of
global GDP. By 2100, GDP is projected to increase fivefold

and deliver a much higher degree of resilience. If we
assume that hurricanes stay at the level they are today—
that is, with no climate change at all—global hurricane
damages in 2100 will cost just 0.01 percent of GDP.
However, if we use the UN’s expectation of stronger but
fewer hurricanes, the global cost in 2100 will double to
0.02 percent of GDP.39
So climate change will make future hurricanes more
damaging (0.02 percent instead of 0.01 percent), but
because the world is getting much richer, and thus more
resilient and prepared for disaster, hurricanes will have a
lower overall cost as a percentage of GDP in 2100 than
they do today.
For the future, what matters most is that we make sure
that the most vulnerable, worst-off people living in
shantytowns like the Mudd are lifted out of poverty. It is
growth, not carbon dioxide reductions, that will prevent the
harrowing losses that the world’s poorest endure as a
result of hurricanes.
BECAUSE OF THE expanding bull’s-eye effect, the
property 
damage 
wrought 
by 
extreme 
weather 
is
increasing dramatically. But is extreme weather causing
more damage to human life? The answer is a resounding
no.
The world’s best database of global catastrophes is kept
by researchers in Belgium. It includes the number of deaths
each year caused by biological means (such as infectious
diseases), political catastrophes (such as the early 1930s
man-made 
famine 
in 
Soviet 
Ukraine, 
called 
the
Holodomor), and earthquakes, volcanoes, floods, and many
other natural calamities.40
Analyzing this database, we can see that extreme
weather used to kill far more people than it does today.
Let’s look at the climate-related deaths from droughts,

floods, storms, wildfires, and extreme temperatures. Since
such deaths vary greatly from year to year, we take the
average of each decade, starting with the 1920s.
What we see in figure 4.4 is that deaths caused by
climate-related disasters have declined precipitously over
the past century. In the 1920s, these disasters killed almost
half a million people each year, mostly in large floods and
droughts in developing countries. Today the total number
of climate-related deaths across the world has declined to
fewer than twenty thousand each year. Over the past
hundred years, the number of deaths from these climate-
related catastrophes has plummeted by 96 percent.
Remember that over the same time period, the global
population has increased fourfold. So the average personal
risk of dying in a climate-related disaster has declined by
99 percent.
FIGURE 4.4 Global climate-related deaths from
disasters, 1920–2019, averaged over decades.41
This massive reduction shows a dramatic increase in
climate resilience, likely brought about by higher living
standards, a reduction in poverty, improvement in warning
systems, and an increase in global trade, meaning that
droughts are less likely to turn into widespread famines.

Aside from human casualties, the most important impact
of disasters is the economic cost: by wiping out a family’s
livelihood and possessions, a single act of nature can
transform and ruin lives. We often hear about “billion-
dollar disasters,” and how there are ever more of them.
Indeed, the Boston Globe warns us: “More Billion-dollar US
Disasters as World Warms.”42
And yes, the annual number of disasters costing a billion
dollars or more (adjusted for inflation) has indeed
increased, from about three in the early 1980s to about
fifteen in the late 2010s. But it’s once again due to the
expanding bull’s-eye effect. Any disaster today will cause
more damage because there are more homes, factories,
office buildings, and infrastructure to destroy.43
If we adjust for the increasing size of the economy, a
billion-dollar disaster in 1980 would have caused $2.3
billion in costs in 2010, in a 2.3 times bigger US economy.
Once we account for that, we discover that the increase in
the number of catastrophic disasters is statistically
insignificant.45

FIGURE 4.5 Global weather-related disaster cost as a
share of global GDP, 1990–2019. Dashed line is best
linear fit.44
Globally, we can look at the cost of weather-related
disasters adjusted for GDP (see figure 4.5.) We have good
global coverage only since the 1990s, but over these past
three decades, it is clear that global weather-related costs
have not increased, but actually declined, from 0.26
percent of global GDP in 1990 to 0.18 percent in 2019. A
new 2019 study splits the damage across all major hazards
—from flood, flash flood, and coastal flood, to heat and
cold, to drought and wind damage. It finds that for all of
them, and for both rich and poor countries, the costs of
weather-related disasters have declined, in economic terms
and, more so, in mortality.46
Thus, neither the human nor the relative financial cost of
weather-related disasters has actually increased as a result
of climate change. We cannot use these numbers to
conclude that there are no increases in the number of
weather disasters (although as we have just seen, droughts,
floods, wildfires, and hurricanes show little or no increase
globally), but they do tell us that resiliency has outpaced

any potential increase in the incidence of disasters.
And importantly, the total economic impact of these
disasters is fairly low. For the United States, hurricanes
have cost 0.19 percent of GDP since 2000. Floods have cost
0.07 percent of GDP—that is less than Americans spend
each year on fast food. It’s a large sum (Americans love fast
food), but it’s far from a world-ending amount on a national
scale. Of course, for an individual or family these events
can be utterly devastating—none of what we discuss here is
meant to diminish that reality. But a hundred years ago,
flooding and hurricane costs were much more devastating
for American communities. Both nationally for the United
States and across the developed and developing world,
extreme weather is causing less suffering both in terms of
deaths and in terms of share of GDP.47

5
WHAT IS GLOBAL WARMING
GOING TO COST US?
WE NEED TO have a clear idea about what global warming
will cost the world, so that we can make sure that we
respond commensurately. If it’s a vast cost, it makes sense
to throw everything we can at reducing it. If it’s smaller,
we need to make sure that the cure isn’t worse than the
disease.
Professor William Nordhaus of Yale University was the
first (and so far only) climate economist to be awarded the
Nobel Prize in economics, in 2018. He wrote one of the first
ever papers on the costs of climate change in 1991, and has
spent much of his career studying the issue. His studies
have helped to inspire what is now a vast body of
research.1
How do economists like Professor Nordhaus go about
estimating the costs of future climate change impacts?
They collate all the scientific evidence from a wide range of
areas, to estimate the most important and expensive
impacts 
from 
climate 
change, 
including 
those 
on
agriculture, energy, and forestry, as well as sea-level rises.
They input this economic information into computer
models; the models are then used to estimate the cost of
climate change at different levels of carbon dioxide

emissions, 
temperature, 
economic 
development, 
and
adaptation. These models have been tested and peer
reviewed over decades to hone their cost estimates.
Many of the models also include the impacts of climate
change 
on 
water 
resources, 
storms, 
biodiversity,
cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, vector-borne
diseases (like malaria), diarrhea, and migration. Some even
try to include potential catastrophic costs such as those
resulting from the Greenland ice sheet melting rapidly. All
of which is to say that while any model of the future will be
imperfect, these models are very comprehensive.
FIGURE 5.1 Impact of temperature rise. Total impact
as percentage of global GDP of a given temperature
rise, based on thirty-nine published estimates in the
literature. Larger circles are better studies. The black
line is Nordhaus’s best estimate.2
When we look at the full range of studies addressing this
issue, what we find is that the cost of climate change is
significant but moderate, in terms of overall global GDP.
Figure 5.1 shows all the relevant climate damage
estimates from the latest UN Climate Panel report, updated
with the latest studies. On the horizontal axis, we can see a

range of temperature increases. Down the vertical axis, we
see the impact put into monetary terms: the net effect of all
impacts from global warming translated into percentage of
global GDP. The impact is typically negative, meaning that
global warming will overall be a cost or a problem.
Right now, the planet has experienced a bit less than 2°F
global temperature increase since the industrial revolution.
This graph shows us that it is not yet clear whether the net
global impact from a 2°F change is positive or negative;
there are three studies that show a slight negative impact,
and one showing a rather large benefit. As the temperature
increase grows larger, the impact becomes ever more
negative. The dashed line going through the data is
Nordhaus’s best estimate of the reduction of global GDP for
any given temperature rise.3
We should focus on the temperature rise of just above
7°F, because that is likely to be what we will see at the end
of the century, without any additional climate policies
beyond 
those 
to 
which 
governments 
have 
already
committed. At 7.2°F in 2100, climate change would cause
negative impacts equivalent to a 2.9 percent loss to global
GDP.
Remember, of course, that the world will be getting
much richer over the course of the century. And that will
still be true with climate change—we will still be much
richer, but slightly less so than we would have been without
global warming.
YOU MAY VERY FAIRLY be asking at this point, how can
this possibly be true? Given all the alarming stories in the
media, how can it possibly be that the world’s top climate
economists find that relatively unrestrained warming will
cost less than 3 percent of global GDP? It seems like a tiny
number given that apocalyptic rhetoric characterizes the
climate debate.

We’ve seen in previous chapters that much of what we
have 
been 
told 
about 
climate 
change’s 
effects 
is
misleading. Those impacts are the building blocks, as it
were, of the total cost. When we allow for the reasonable
assumption that people, communities, and countries will
take reasonable measures to adapt to the effects of rising
temperatures, then the damaging impacts of climate
change turn out to be rather low. Indeed, many impacts, as
we saw with hurricanes and extreme weather in general,
might actually lead to lower, not higher, relative costs.4
Let’s zoom in on one of the most important areas:
agriculture. Over the past century, agricultural output has
grown enormously, as farming has become more efficient.
Globally, the value of agricultural products is more than
thirteenfold higher than 150 years ago. Cereal production
is now more than three times what it was in 1961,
outpacing population growth that grew a bit more than two
times. And these increases are projected to continue.5
But global warming will incur real costs and reductions
to agriculture. Unlike almost any other sector, agriculture
is acutely vulnerable to changes in weather, because most
of it will always have to take place outdoors. As rising
temperatures and changing precipitation patterns impact
future agriculture, the increases in food production will be
smaller than they could have been. Reading the headlines,
we would think these reductions would be massive:
“Climate Change Threatens Future of Farming in Europe,”
“Climate Change Could Lead to Food Shortages in the
U.K.,” “Climate Change Is Coming for Australian Sheep,”
“Climate Change Could Lead to Major Crop Failures in
World’s Biggest Corn Regions,” “Climate Change Is Likely
to Devastate the Global Food Supply.”6
But these headlines are misleading. One broad study
done for the UN’s Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
predicts that by midcentury, climate change will reduce

global crop output by just a fraction of one percent of
today’s output. By 2080, in a worst-case scenario,
production of cereals (including wheat, rice, maize, barley,
oats, sorghum, and quinoa) will be 2.2 percent lower than it
would be without climate change. So grain production will
still increase overall, just by less than it could have done.
The FAO expects an increase in global cereal production of
44 percent without global warming, and this study shows
the increase might be reduced to 41 percent by global
warming.7
So why do the news stories give us the wrong idea?
Many of them make two fundamental errors, which distort
our impression of the cost.
The first mistake is leaving out the fertilization effect of
carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is a fertilizer that boosts
photosynthesis. That’s why professional vegetable growers
pump it into the greenhouses that grow tomatoes,
cucumbers, and lettuce. More carbon dioxide means
bigger, more productive plants. On a planetary scale, this
link explains why we are seeing planetary greening.
Many studies leave out the carbon dioxide fertilization
effect to make the analysis simpler. This may be relevant in
a research context, but when news stories consistently
report on these findings without the carbon dioxide
fertilization effect, they will dramatically exaggerate the
negative effect of climate change on agriculture. One 2018
study, for example, revealed that stringent policies to
reduce carbon emissions could increase global crop yields
by 22 percent compared to doing nothing. That makes for
good headlines. But this is true only if we ignore the effect
of carbon dioxide fertilization. The research actually shows
that if we include it, the negative effects of higher
temperatures are more than counteracted by fertilization,
so stringent carbon cuts could really mean 12 percent
lower crop yields.8

The second mistake the alarmist stories make is ignoring
the reality of adaptation. For generations, farmers have
adapted, and will continue to do so. If you assume that a
wheat farmer in today’s warm countries will naively and
robotically continue to plant wheat even as temperatures
rise, then significant reductions in yield are inevitable. But
in any real-life scenario, over the next eighty years farmers,
their children, and grandchildren will start to tinker with
earlier sowing, adapt to different wheat varieties, and
might eventually switch entirely to crops that fare better in
hotter weather.
At the same time, more wheat farming will take place
farther north in cooler areas. One study shows that when
researchers ignore such adaptive measures undertaken in
the 
rich 
world, 
their 
yield 
predictions 
are 
fifteen
percentage points too pessimistic.9
So, when we account for these errors, what will be the
total cost of climate change on agriculture? The biggest
study showing the total GDP impact is based on 1.7 million
fields growing the ten most important crops. The 2016
study uses the differences in these many fields to most
accurately assess how changing temperatures will change
output and encourage adaptation. It also incorporates
carbon 
dioxide 
fertilization. 
Crucially, 
it 
includes
agricultural trade, which will reduce impacts because more
food will be produced in high latitudes and exported to low
latitudes.10
The full study concludes that the total average global
cost will be 0.26 percent of GDP by the end of the century.
While we still will end up producing much more food for
the world, global warming will mean we have to produce it
with more effort and with more trade, overall leaving us
less well off, at about a quarter of a percent of global GDP.
And actually, this is in a worst-case scenario with very high
warming; with less extreme warming the costs end up

much closer to zero, and in three of eleven scenarios
explored by the researchers there would actually be
benefits of up to 0.15 percent of GDP.11
This kind of study doesn’t give a great, worst-case
headline that can bounce around the world. But it does give
us a good sense of the size of the total problem.
One of the reasons why the impact of global warming on
agriculture is so slight is that agriculture isn’t a huge part
of the world economy anymore. In the part of today’s world
that is rich, agriculture makes up an ever smaller
proportion 
of 
the 
economy. 
In 
the 
United 
States,
agriculture employed perhaps 80 percent of the workforce
in 1800, and it was responsible for more than half the net
worth of the economy. Today, it employs 1.3 percent and
produces 1 percent of the economy. As countries get rich,
an ever smaller proportion of the workforce produces more
food, while everyone else is freed to produce other goods
and services. Even if we will have to use significantly more
resources to grow the same amount of food later in this
century, it will be a significant amount of a very small part
of the economy.12
The poorer world is undergoing the same transition that
the rich world has experienced. In 1991, more than half the
workforce in the low- and middle-income world was
engaged in agriculture and responsible for more than 18
percent of the economy. Today, only a third of the
workforce produces much more food, but because the total
economy has grown even more, agricultural output
accounts for only 8 percent of the economy.13
Climate causes only a 0.26 percent reduction in GDP by
the end of the century because it affects this ever smaller
part of the economy. That serves to underscore how it is
possible for the total impact of climate across all areas to
add up to less than 3 percent of global GDP, as Nordhaus’s
and many other studies show.

IT’S NATURAL TO ASK at this point, what about the scary
scenarios that the researchers haven’t thought of? As we
have seen, economists have studied lots of different climate
impacts very specifically. But it’s sensible to wonder, what
if we’re still missing something? It’s impossible, of course,
for any damage model, even the most sophisticated one, to
include every single possible climate impact. It stands to
reason that sectors most likely to suffer the most expensive
damage have been studied and modeled, but there could be
omissions that make the estimates too low.
FIGURE 5.2 Impact of temperature rise with
unquantified costs accounted for. Same graph as
figure 5.1, showing the total impact in percentage of
GDP of a given temperature rise. To reflect
unquantified costs, the adjusted best estimate has
added 25 percent in costs.14
So, to account for any omitted damages, Nordhaus has
added 25 percent to each damage estimate to take account
of possibly omitted damages (see figure 5.2). While this
addition is consistent with those used in other studies, it is
still something of a judgment call, since it essentially puts a
price tag on what hasn’t been analyzed.15

Accounting for these additional costs, a temperature
increase of 7.2°F around the end of the century would
mean a reduction in global GDP of about 4 percent
(actually 3.64 percent, but let’s just call it 4 percent), as
compared to the 2.9 percent reduction projected without
the added costs.
HOW TRUSTWORTHY IS the estimate, though? Couldn’t
there be some big and incredibly costly catastrophe lurking
in the shadows?
Probably not.
One possible catastrophe that people often bring up is
the complete melting of the Greenland ice sheet. If it
happened within a lifetime, that would be catastrophic.
However, the UN climate panel finds that even with a very
large amount of heat, it will take a millennium or more to
melt all of Greenland’s ice. Studies indicate that even in the
absence of climate policy, 60 to 70 percent of the
Greenland ice sheet would be around in a thousand years.
And if temperatures went back down over the next
centuries, it is likely much of Greenland would regrow.
That is why a 2019 study by Professor Nordhaus shows that
even in a worst-case, high-temperature scenario, the
increased melting of Greenland would have a rather trivial
impact by the end of the century, at 0.012 percent of
GDP.16
Another 
serious 
concern 
often 
raised 
is 
ocean
acidification. The cost of ocean acidification is not included
in any of the computer models that create estimates of the
costs of global warming. The basic problem comes from the
earth’s oceans taking up carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere, making them more acidic. Acidification hurts
marine organisms that build their shells and skeletons from
calcium carbonate.17
Economists have tried to estimate the impact of

acidification by exploring what would happen in a worst-
case scenario. Here they model a complete collapse of
fishing of wild fish from the oceans, both for commercial,
recreational, 
and 
subsistence 
fishermen 
by 
2020.
Moreover, they imagine a complete loss of tourism and
recreation from coral reefs.18
This scenario sounds devastating, although it would not
spell the end of fish consumption. Remember, two-thirds of
the total, global value of fish is already produced in
aquaculture, where increasing acidification would have
close to zero impact. Yet, the loss of ocean fisheries,
recreational and subsistence fisheries, and all coral reef
tourism 
and 
recreation 
is 
clearly 
significant. 
The
researchers estimate the worst-case cost of this complete
collapse at $301 billion by 2200. With middle-of-the-road
estimates of economic growth, this translates into a loss of
0.0075 percent of global GDP by then.
We need to bear in mind, as we are using Nordhaus’s
estimates, that he already added a significant buffer of 25
percent to include any major uncounted costs. This led to
our expected global cost increasing from 2.9 percent of
GDP to 3.64 percent at 7.2°F, a difference of 0.73
percentage points. It’s clear that this increase is much,
much higher than the combined century-wide costs of the
collapse of the Greenland ice sheet and the total collapse of
marine fisheries and coral reef tourism from acidification.
And the buffer is large enough to account for many other
costs that have potentially been left out. Indeed, this buffer
could accommodate a hundred different impacts, each as
large as the worst-case complete loss of marine fisheries
and coral reef tourism in 2200.
WE HAVE FOLLOWED the UN’s overview of the costs of
climate change impacts across different temperatures, and
used the best estimate from Professor Nordhaus, and we

have even added 25 percent to that. This has given us the
best available estimate of the total costs of climate change
at about 4 percent of GDP by 2100. This estimate is
actually larger than the one provided by the 2018 UN
climate panel report—the report that everyone uses to
argue that we have a deadline of 2030 to act to prevent
climate change. This report estimates that if we do nothing,
the cost of global warming will reach 2.6 percent of global
GDP by 2100.219
When confronted with this economic consensus on the
costs of climate change, many climate campaigners often
indignantly claim that the “real costs” must be much
higher. Yet, when you examine the arguments they use to
make this case, they are almost always based on studies or
models 
that 
leave 
out 
adaptation, 
carbon 
dioxide
fertilization, the expanding bull’s-eye effect, and the many
other factors we have looked at in this and the preceding
chapters.20
The economists’ work is comprehensive and, in the case
of Professor Nordhaus, deserving of the Nobel economics
prize. But it is obvious that predicting a cost centuries into
the future with exactitude is impossible. What is most
important is that while the cost may end up at 3.5, 4.0, or
4.5 percent in 2100, it’s unlikely to be 0.01 percent or 45
percent of GDP.
We should take this figure of 4 percent, then, as a guide,
which is exactly what we will do in the chapters coming up,
where we contrast the cost of climate change with the cost
of climate change policy.
Footnotes

2 Neither the UN climate panel report nor the Nordhaus estimate fully
incorporates the fact that as we get richer, we get less vulnerable. One good
example is that as incomes rise to a certain level, malaria gets eradicated
because society can afford to invest in serious levels of prevention. Regardless
of temperature rises, malaria is simply no longer a threat, as we see in, for
example, rich Singapore. This suggests that the 2.6 percent and the 4 percent
(if we factor in the 25 percent buffer) are an overestimate rather than an
underestimate.

SECTION THREE
HOW NOT TO FIX CLIMATE
CHANGE

6
YOU CAN’T FIX CLIMATE
CHANGE
AROUND THE PLANET, well-meaning people are making a
myriad of lifestyle changes to reduce their carbon dioxide
emissions. 
Individuals 
and 
companies 
are 
spending
hundreds of millions of dollars annually on “carbon offsets”
and other measures. Taxpayers are, through regulation and
subsidies, collectively spending hundreds of billions of
dollars annually to encourage the use of today’s alternative
energy technologies, such as electric cars and solar panels.
Soon, we will start spending trillions or even tens of
trillions of dollars every year in an effort to convert the
modern economy to green energy sources.
Yet, all of these efforts are failing. If climate policies
worked, then the amount of carbon dioxide we emit for
every unit of energy produced, so-called carbon intensity,
should be declining. But it is not.
Despite dozens of climate summits, and despite global
climate agreements struck in Kyoto and Paris, carbon
intensity has increased ever since nations first made
commitments to rein in climate change at the 1992 Earth
Summit in Rio de Janeiro. Carbon intensity is at a higher
level than ever before.1
Not only does each unit of energy emit ever more carbon

dioxide, but the world also uses more and more energy. As
a result, total carbon emissions keep rising. Since 1992,
humanity has emitted more carbon dioxide than in all
history before then. Emissions will likely keep increasing in
the coming decades, as more poor countries clamber out of
poverty.2
The last decade has seen more focus on climate change
than ever before. Yet despite this, we are not achieving
anything. In a surprisingly honest review of climate
policies, the United Nations revealed that the last decade of
climate policies has achieved a sum total of nothing.3
It’s clear that the current approach to climate change is
not working. But before talking about what we should do
instead, we first need to understand why we’re failing. Over
the next five chapters, we will explore why our current
efforts achieve so little. We’ll begin with the first great
myth of climate activism: that individuals can make a
significant difference.
IF YOU’RE CONCERNED about global warming—and
really, who isn’t?—you know that you should recycle, eat
less meat (or maybe none at all), take public transportation
more and drive less, and carry your groceries in recyclable
bags. As Blue Planet host David Attenborough puts it, every
single one of the planet’s seven billion inhabitants “must
play their part” against global warming and take “simple
everyday actions.”4
We live in a world where Prince Harry and Meghan,
duchess of Sussex, are castigated for flying on private
planes while Swedish activist Greta Thunberg is hailed for
taking a wind- and solar-powered boat from Europe to New
York to attend a climate conference. (She was later
subjected to sneering headlines when it turned out the trip
increased carbon emissions because crew needed to fly to
New York to sail it back.) The personal has become highly

political. People are worried about climate change, and
they want to help solve the problem. The intentions are
noble ones. The problem is that the changes we can make
to our personal lifestyle and habits at best make only a tiny
difference.
Asked what personal action he would take to prevent
global warming, David Attenborough once promised to
unplug his mobile phone charger when not in use. The logic
makes sense: he would save on electricity, which is mostly
fossil fuel powered. But if he remembers to do this
consistently throughout the entire year, he will cut just
seven pounds of CO2 each year, less than half of one-
thousandth of the average emissions for a single person
from the United Kingdom. And if the goal is to reduce the
emissions caused by a mobile phone, focusing on this trivial
personal action means we miss the bigger picture.
Charging makes up less than one percent of a phone’s
energy 
needs. 
The 
other 
99 
percent 
comes 
from
manufacturing the phone and operating data centers and
cell towers.5
Seven pounds of carbon dioxide per year is hard to
comprehend. One simple way that we can get a sense of the
scale of the effects of different cuts is by using the carbon
trading system. The RGGI, or “Reggie,” is a carbon-trading
marketplace covering the northeastern United States. It is
just one of many around the world, but the first and biggest
in the US.6
The RGGI puts a cap on the amount of carbon dioxide
that large, fossil-fuel-run power plants can emit in the
region. Then it allows emittance authorizations to be
bought and sold. It costs about $6 to buy an authorization
for one ton of carbon dioxide. If you buy an authorization, it
means there’s one ton less that power plants can purchase.
If you don’t use the authorization, that means all the power
plants, between them, need to find a way to emit one ton

less over the next year. Essentially, you’ve spent $6 and
reduced global emissions by one ton.
The RGGI puts the actions of individuals in perspective.
It gives us a sense, for instance, of the scale of the impact
of Attenborough’s promise. Cutting seven pounds of carbon
dioxide would cost a little less than 2¢ on the RGGI.
Attenborough might as well have just donated 2¢ to the
climate cause.
SADLY, THE VAST MAJORITY of the actions individuals can
take in service of reducing emissions, and certainly all
those that are achievable without entirely disrupting
everyday life, will make little practical difference. That’s
true even if all of us do them. The UK’s former chief climate
science advisor, the late David MacKay, once wrote of
carbon-cutting efforts: “Don’t be distracted by the myth
that ‘every little helps.’ If everyone does a little, we’ll
achieve only a little.”7
Three central challenges emerge when we try to cut our
personal emissions. The first, as we saw in the case of
Attenborough’s mobile phone, is that cuts are typically
small. The second is that we almost always save money.
This 
is 
a 
problem 
because 
of 
a 
well-established
phenomenon called the “rebound effect.” When we save
some cash by being more efficient, we spend the savings
elsewhere in ways that lead to more emissions.
Let’s take the example of reducing food waste. In theory,
if we reduce the amount of food we buy, less food will need
to be produced, which will reduce agricultural emissions.
But it will also have the happy effect of saving us money.
The problem is that we will spend that money on other
things, many of which will produce emissions, like an extra
vacation. In one 2018 study, Norwegian researchers found
that realistically, the money saved from cutting food waste
will be spent on other goods that will emit so much carbon

dioxide that the original emissions savings will be entirely
canceled.8
In many cases, the rebound effect doesn’t swamp the
entire effort; car pooling, for example, will actually reduce
emissions, with the cost savings leading only to 32 percent
of the reduction being lost. Sometimes, however, the
rebound effect leaves us worse off overall. For instance,
walking instead of taking the train means we emit much
more carbon dioxide, because trains aren’t big emitters,
and we save a lot of money that we spend on other things.
Generally, when researchers have studied the rebound
effect across a range of activities, they estimate that 59
percent of the emissions savings from “virtuous” behavior
are lost to the rebound effect.9
A third problem with restricting our behavior for
environmental reasons is that as in many areas of life,
when we do something “good,” we allow ourselves to do
something “bad” as a reward. This tendency is known as
“moral licensing.” This pattern may be familiar to anyone
who has struggled with dieting. If you’re making good
progress on your diet, you’re much more likely to choose a
chocolate bar over an apple as a snack than someone who
is struggling with their diet. This effect is copiously
documented when it comes to environmentally friendly
behavior. People who have just donated to a charity are
less likely to behave in an environmentally friendly way
afterward. 
Those 
who 
have 
reduced 
their 
water
consumption through an awareness campaign use more
electricity instead. One study of shopping behavior shows
that 
the 
more 
consumers 
purchase 
energy-saving
lightbulbs, use eco-bags, or reuse their own bags, the more
likely their weekly shopping is to contain meat and bottled
water.10
I was once invited to participate in a debate with
politicians and a journalist whom the BBC dubbed “Ethical

Man.” This man had just spent twelve months documenting
how he and his family had cut their carbon dioxide
emissions. He insulated the house, sold the car, cut out
meat, and even looked into ecological burials (although
nobody died). In total, his family managed to cut emissions
by around 20 percent, at a high personal and financial cost.
What was most striking to me about Ethical Man was that
when he finished his year’s hard slog, to celebrate he
purchased tickets to take the whole family to South
America, blowing his family’s entire carbon dioxide
savings.11
VEGETARIANISM HAS BECOME a major subject in the
climate wars. The idea that if you care about the
environment you should eat less meat has become
commonplace in the West, and vegetarianism is on the rise.
Christiana Figueres, a global climate campaigner and
former leader of the UN’s climate change body, even
suggested: “How about restaurants in 10–15 years start
treating carnivores in the same way that smokers are
treated? If they want to eat meat, they can do it outside the
restaurant.”12
I’ve been a vegetarian for ethical reasons since I was
eleven, and I believe everyone should make up their own
minds about whether or not they eat meat. But we should
be honest about what it will achieve. That’s especially true
because going vegetarian is actually quite difficult; one
large US survey shows that 84 percent of people who
decide to become vegetarians end up failing, with most
failing within a year.13
At a global level, of course, exhorting everyone to
become vegetarian is callously ethnocentric. Right now, the
world has 1.5 billion vegetarians, but only 75 million like
me are vegetarians by choice. Most are vegetarians
because they just can’t afford meat, and as they move out

of poverty, they will likely eat more and more meat.14
But if you actually stopped eating meat, how much would
you achieve? Campaigners for “climate-friendly diets” rely
on cherry-picked factoids to make the effects sound
impressive. Many credulous news outlets suggest that
eliminating meat from your diet can reduce your personal
carbon emissions by 50 percent or more. That’s massive,
but also massively misleading. This level of reduction is
achieved only by people who go entirely vegan. That means
completely avoiding all animal products, including not just
meat but milk, eggs, honey, poultry, seafood, fur, leather,
wool, and gelatin. It is suggested by other news outlets that
vegetarians achieve about half this figure.15
Regardless, the numbers remain massive exaggerations:
vegans don’t eliminate 50 percent of their personal
emissions, and vegetarians don’t cut 20 to 35 percent of
theirs. They cut only that percentage of their food-related
emissions. And food-related emissions represent only a
small fraction of an individual’s total emissions.16
A thorough, systematic analysis shows that eliminating
meat from your diet will reduce your personal emissions by
the equivalent of 1,191 pounds of carbon dioxide per year.
For the average person in the industrialized world, that
means an emissions cut of just 4.3 percent.17
We have gone from claims of a 50 percent cut in
emissions all the way to less than one-tenth of that. But
there’s more, because we need to allow for the rebound
effect. Vegetarian diets are slightly cheaper: in the United
States, vegetarians save about 7 percent, in Sweden about
10 percent, and in the UK about 15 percent of their food
budgets. Spending that extra money on other goods and
services means the rebound effect likely cuts around half of
the 
saved 
carbon 
emissions 
accrued 
from 
going
vegetarian.18
So if you’re living in a rich country, going entirely

vegetarian for the rest of your life will reduce your total
personal emissions by about 2 percent. You could achieve a
similar emissions reduction by eating anything you want
and paying $1.50 each year on the RGGI trading system.19
Trying to save the world by giving up meat or
unplugging our cell phones is ultimately misguided, and it
distracts us from doing things that could make a real
difference. If we want to improve the carbon efficiency of
our food supply, one obvious approach would be to spend
more on research and development for artificial meat. If
this could be as good as the real stuff (some would say
we’re already there) there are huge opportunities to cut
emissions. Artificial meat generates up to 96 percent fewer
greenhouse gases than conventionally produced meat. A
perfect meat substitute would be an obvious win because it
doesn’t require people to give up something they like.
People could continue to enjoy their “meat,” but with just 4
percent of the emissions. And I would be able to eat
burgers again.20
ELECTRIC CARS ARE marketed as another great way to
reduce carbon emissions. But most drivers are reluctant to
switch because electric cars are substantially more
expensive and the need for recharging leads to “range
anxiety”—“Can I make it to the next charging station?”
That is why across the United States and around the world,
lavish subsidies are the norm. When governments removed
this support, for instance in Denmark and Hong Kong, sales
plummeted to nearly nothing.
Replacing your current car with an electric car won’t
lead to dramatic emissions cuts, alas. The International
Energy Agency makes a comparison between a standard
gasoline-powered car and an electric one. The gasoline-
powered car emits thirty-four tons of carbon dioxide over
its ten-year lifetime, including production and disposal. At

first glance, an electric car would seem to eliminate all the
emissions. They are certainly sold as having “zero
emissions,” but that is true only while it’s being driven.21
Yet, in many parts of the world, electric cars are reliant
on electricity largely produced from fossil fuels. And their
production is also actually more energy intensive than that
of a gasoline-powered car, especially the battery. Since this
production is also typically reliant on fossil fuels, an
electric car is actually responsible for lots of carbon dioxide
emissions over its lifetime. Across the world, an electric car
with a reasonably long range will on average emit twenty-
six tons over its lifetime. So, switching from a gasoline-
powered car emitting thirty-four tons of carbon dioxide to a
comparable electric car that emits twenty-six tons doesn’t
eliminate emissions; it cuts them by 24 percent, leaving
more than three-quarters in place.22
Emissions, of course, aren’t the only cause of damage
caused by driving. Driving creates lots of problems, ranging
from noise pollution to lethal accidents. Figure 6.1 shows
the European Union’s latest estimate of the cost of all
damages caused by driving, which is calculated to be
almost 20¢ for every mile driven.
Notice that climate damages are a small part of the total
damages. Of course, the electric car will be a bit better
than a standard car on this measure. Electric cars also
make less noise, which is about 5 percent of the total
damage caused by driving, but nevertheless a measure on
which electric cars outperform standard ones.

FIGURE 6.1 Damage costs of driving a gasoline-
powered car one mile, per person. (Notice the climate
impact is likely vastly exaggerated.)23
Air 
pollution 
has 
an 
impact 
of 
6 
percent 
and,
surprisingly, more electric cars can mean more air
pollution. If you have plenty of hydropower as in Norway,
replacing gasoline with electric power can improve air
quality, but in places with significant coal-powered
electricity generation, including parts of the United States,
more electric cars mean more air pollution.24
China, the world’s biggest electric car market, has so
many coal-powered plants that electric cars worsen local
air, with lethal consequences. It is estimated that in
Shanghai, pollution from an additional million electric-
powered vehicles would kill nearly three times as many
people annually as an additional million gasoline-powered
cars.25
But pollution isn’t the most significant cost when it
comes to cars. About 80 percent of the damage cars cause
overall comes from accidents and congestion. For these
effects, it makes no difference if a driver is in a Tesla or a
BMW. All of which is to say that buying, or subsidizing,
electric cars doesn’t help with the biggest social problems

with cars, and it is certainly not a good investment from a
climate standpoint. Look at the costs we pay. The average
subsidy spent on electric cars globally is about $10,000 per
car. Each car saves eight tons of carbon dioxide over its
lifetime, a reduction you could buy on the RGGI market for
just $48.26
And the impact will be minimal. The International
Energy Agency hopes we can reach 130 million electric
cars by 2030, a breathtaking expectation given that we
have spent decades and billions of dollars in subsidies to
reach just 5 million. Even if we could do that, it would cut a
trifling 0.4 percent of global emissions by 2030. Electric
cars will be part of our future solution to transport needs,
but they are not about to solve climate change.27
AIRPLANES HAVE BECOME another battleground in the
climate wars. Because of the large carbon footprint of air
travel, environmental groups are increasingly pushing to
make us feel “flight shame”—guilt for the carbon emissions
produced anytime we fly.28
This is a troubling movement. There has been a
tremendous democratization of air travel in recent decades.
Whereas flying was for many years the preserve of the
ultrarich, now most people in developed countries have the
opportunity to travel. But the vast majority of people on the
planet have still never taken a single flight—at least 80
percent, according to Boeing. In India, where some 150
million people live in poverty, only 2 percent of the
population has ever boarded an aircraft.29
Flights are not only for leisure; they allow the flow of
expertise and labor, let us solve medical emergencies,
provide disaster relief, help us to learn about other
cultures, and connect us with loved ones. Even if we were
willing to sacrifice all of these things, staying off airplanes
would not have the dramatic impact on climate change we

might imagine. Even if every single one of the 4.5 billion
people getting on any flight this year stayed on the ground,
and the same happened every year until 2100, the rise in
temperatures would be reduced by just 0.05°F, equivalent
to delaying climate change by less than one year by 2100.30
What’s more, at a personal level there’s a huge rebound
effect. Researchers found that about 22 percent of the
climate change benefits from canceling a personal holiday
flight are undone, because the saved money is spent on
activities that create emissions. And the rebound effect
from canceling a business flight is 159 percent, meaning
that the climate impact actually increases with each
canceled flight. (The rebound effect has much more
dramatic implications for a business-class seat because the
ticket is so much more expensive, while the carbon
footprint is only slightly higher than in the cheaper cabins.)
Thinking of saving on emissions by taking a cruise? Sorry,
there 
is 
evidence 
that 
cruise 
ships 
are 
more
environmentally damaging than planes.31
Instead of telling people not to fly on airplanes, we
should focus on the carbon efficiency of those airplanes.
Adaptation is already occurring: each new generation of
aircraft is on average 20 percent more fuel efficient than
the model it replaces. Over the next decade, airlines will
invest $1.3 trillion in new planes.32
Research is also under way on creating more sustainable
fuels, including those produced by domestic and industrial
waste. The overall carbon footprint of sustainable fuels is
up to 80 percent less than that of today’s aviation fuel, and
testing started on using such fuels on commercial aircraft
in 2008.33
Billions are being spent, too, on exploring technologies
like more aerodynamic wings, advanced and lighter plane
structures, more efficient engines, and new aircraft
configurations. 
And 
the 
International 
Air 
Transport

Association, which represents airlines, estimates that
better route management could cut CO2 emissions by 10
percent. Every dollar we can spend as a society on research
and development to bring forward the moment of carbon-
dioxide-neutral flights will be far more meaningful and
more effective in addressing climate change than a few of
us trying to cut a few flights out of a misplaced sense of
shame.34
WHAT ELSE SHOULD WE give up for the sake of the
environment? Children, of course!
A chorus of campaigners, scientists, and journalists have
suggested that for the sake of Mother Earth, people should
stop reproducing. The Guardian directs readers: “Want to
Fight Climate Change? Have Fewer Children.” The New
York Times warns that having a child is the worst
environmental action possible. A hypothetical American
woman might switch to a fuel-efficient car, drive less,
recycle, install efficient lightbulbs and energy-saving
windows, but the newspaper says that by having two
children she will wreak damage “nearly 40 times what she
had saved by those actions.”35
Such exhortations are not new. In the 1970s, American
activists founded the National Organization for Non-
Parents, 
promoting 
childlessness 
as 
a 
“politically
responsible” choice, because they believed the world was
collapsing due to environmental ruin.36
I think it’s a morally bankrupt and intrusive argument;
environmentalists have no place telling people that they
should not become parents. And what’s more, their
counting doesn’t even add up.
The problem with research on the climate consequences
of having children is that it’s based on a deeply bizarre way
of measuring these consequences. The most cited research
paper, published in 2009, measures the climate impact of

children by holding each parent responsible for half of
every child’s projected emissions over the entire duration
of the child’s life. Fine so far. But they do not stop there. A
parent is held responsible not just for half of their child’s
emissions, but also for a quarter of their grandchildren’s
emissions, 
an 
eighth 
of 
their 
great-grandchildren’s
emissions, and so on. Moreover, the researchers estimate
that each of these future children will emit twenty tons of
carbon dioxide every year throughout their lives.37
This is a very odd approach. First off, the emissions
expected in decades to come are estimated at an old, too-
high emissions rate for the United States; it has already
declined 20 percent. Moreover, official expectations are
actually that per person emissions will drop a further 0.5
percent every year before 2050 (as research pays off and
more of our daily activities become slightly more carbon
efficient). But by far the biggest issue is that blaming a
parent for emissions of all future generations is ludicrous.
By this measure, our hunter-gatherer ancestors were far
worse for the planet than any jet-setting billionaire today.38
Measured in reasonable terms, having a child means
taking responsibility for putting into the world a new
human who will produce about ninety years of carbon
emissions. Whether your child, when she grows up, decides
to have children of her own must be her choice. Thus, the
total impact of having a child is at worst about 15 tons of
carbon dioxide every year for her life, about ninety years.
This is 1,350 tons. If you feel guilty about having a child,
you could compensate for those carbon emissions by
purchasing $8,100 worth of authorizations from RGGI.
The broader approach, telling people not to reproduce, is
preposterous. For the vast majority of people throughout
history, children have provided the meaning and happiness
that make life worth living. Children cost us in all sorts of
ways: missed sleep, emotional havoc, college tuition, and,

yes, carbon emissions. And yet people keep having them,
because the benefits are so much greater than the costs.39
THE NEXT TIME you read about the actions you “should”
take to help the planet, consider if it is just another case of
“if everyone does a little, we’ll achieve only a little.” The
truth is that most of our personal actions can have only a
tiny impact.
Let me be clear: I’m not saying that you shouldn’t think
carefully about your own personal choices. There are solid
reasons why any of us might choose to change our diets,
drive a smaller car, and reduce the carbon footprint we
leave on the planet. But climate change shouldn’t be the
major consideration, because the effect of such choices is
so limited.
Much as we may wish otherwise, personal actions are
not going to fix climate change. So, let us turn next to the
actions made by governments that actually could make a
big difference: carbon-cutting policies and international
agreements. Why aren’t those working either?

7
WHY THE GREEN REVOLUTION
ISN’T HERE YET
WAY BACK IN 1976, a leading environmental campaigner,
who remains a loud voice on climate today, confidently
declared that an economy based wholly on solar energy
was “now economic or nearly economic.” He was wrong
then, and four decades later, he is still wrong. Governments
around the world spend more than $140 billion every year
subsidizing inefficient solar energy and wind power. Yet
despite this huge expenditure, together these renewable
sources provide only about one percent of global energy
needs.1
So why hasn’t the green energy revolution happened
yet? Because without breakthrough innovations, it remains
enormously expensive.
Carbon dioxide emissions are a by-product of the cheap
and dependable energy delivered by fossil fuels that has
underpinned two hundred years of development. Ending
our reliance on fossil fuels within decades will cost
hundreds of trillions of dollars. Most rich countries
attempting to meet that price tag would face electoral
upheaval. Instead, they settle for spending hundreds of
billions of dollars subsidizing highly visible solar and wind,
without achieving much. The world’s poor nations don’t

have trillions to spend. For them, the prospect of getting
more energy from fossil fuels is much more enticing.2
And thus, everyone on the planet talks about renewable
energy, but little of any substance is happening.
WE ARE CONSTANTLY being told that renewables like
solar and wind are just about to take over the world. This is
almost entirely wishful thinking. One of the foremost
climate campaigners, Jim Hansen, puts it best: “Suggesting
that renewables will let us phase rapidly off fossil fuels in
the United States, China, India, or the world as a whole is
almost the equivalent of believing in the Easter Bunny and
Tooth Fairy.” Bear in mind that Dr. Hansen is the climate
scientist who initiated public concern on global warming
when he testified to Congress back in 1988, and he was
former vice president Al Gore’s climate advisor.3
When most people talk about renewables, they typically
think of solar and wind energy. These are the “new”
renewables. But globally, 85 percent of all renewable
energy comes from wood and hydropower, what we can call
“old” renewables. These old sources have the benefit of
providing power when we need it. In contrast, solar and
wind power can’t be turned on when needed. Despite the
incessant hype, it remains an inconvenient truth that they
produce power only when the sun decides to shine or the
wind decides to blow. That is why solar and wind power
work only as a small addition to the baseload power that
comes from fossil fuels and other reliable energy sources.4
If we want to increase the use of solar and wind
significantly, we need to add backup power, such as idle
fossil-fuel-powered gas turbines (that can be turned on
when the sun isn’t shining or the wind isn’t blowing) or
batteries 
(that 
can 
store 
their 
energy). 
Both 
add
significantly to the cost of solar and wind energy.
The sheer scale of battery storage capacity that would be

needed for solar power to work is vastly underappreciated:
today the United States has enough batteries across the
entire nation to store just fourteen seconds of average US
electricity use.5
These 
fundamental 
economic 
and 
technological
challenges are why no big nation in the world is anywhere
close to seeing new renewable energy do more than nibble
at the edges of energy consumption. This is clear when you
look at the share of renewable electricity from all sources
in the US.
Wind power produced less than 7 percent of US
electricity in 2018, and solar power less than 2 percent. In
total, renewable energy sources produced 17 percent of the
United States’ electricity, but most of this came from old
renewables, with the majority coming from reliable
hydroelectricity.
FIGURE 7.1 Percentage of US energy consumption
(not just electricity) that comes from renewables,
1900–2050. The almost vertical line showing 100
percent renewables by 2030 represents common
claims to achieve rapid conversion to all renewables.6
And electricity is itself only a part of all the energy used
in the United States, which also includes the energy

utilized in industrial production, in heating buildings, and
in driving cars, trucks, and buses. When measured against
all energy use, wind power in the United States produced
2.5 percent of US energy in 2018, and solar power only
about half a percent. Almost three-quarters of renewable
energy still came from old wood and hydropower.
As we can see in figure 7.1, over the past century the
share of renewable energy in the United States declined
from almost a quarter of all energy use to little more than 5
percent. Since 2000, mostly because of concern about
climate change, renewable energy use has picked up from
high single digits to about 11 percent today, and is
expected to reach almost 16 percent of all US energy by
midcentury according to the government’s latest official
estimate 
(almost 
unchanged 
from 
the 
last 
Obama
administration estimate in 2017 of 16.5 percent).7
FIGURE 7.2 Renewable energy as a percentage of
total global energy, 1800–2050. Data from 1800 to
2018. The hatched funnel shows the spread of
scenarios from the International Energy Agency and
United Nations.8
We need to be honest: reaching 16 percent of total US
energy in 2050 does not mean that renewable energy is
taking over from fossil fuels. That percentage is actually

less than what US renewable energy sources contributed in
1900. And even by 2050, solar and wind power are
projected to make up less than half of the 16 percent of
renewables 
(four 
and 
three 
percentage 
points
respectively), with most of this still coming from the
reliable old sources of wood and hydropower.
When we hear politicians vowing to deliver “100 percent
renewable energy” by 2030 or 2050, look at figure 7.1. We
could call it the “narwhale chart”—it shows that such ideas
are unmoored by historical reality or common sense.
The US experience reflects global trends. Today, solar
panels and wind turbines together deliver only 1.1 percent
of 
global 
energy. 
The 
International 
Energy 
Agency
estimates that even by 2040, solar and wind power will
cover less than 5 percent of global energy needs.9
The jarring fact is that humanity just finished spending
two centuries getting rid of renewable energy and
replacing it with fossil fuels (see figure 7.2). When
everyone was poor, the whole world cooked and kept warm
using polluting renewable energy sources like wood and
dung. Over a century and a half, we shed our reliance on
renewable energy and powered the industrial revolution
with fossil fuels. For the last fifty years, the level of
renewables globally has hardly budged from a level of
around 13–14 percent. This reality mostly reflects the
continued reliance of the world’s worst-off on wood and
dung.
Indeed, when we look at pathways ahead to 2040 or
2050, we see that it is very unlikely that the world will
reach a point where more than 20 percent of its energy
needs are met by renewable sources. It is likely that our
share of renewable energy in 2050 will still be lower than
what it was in 1950. It utterly beggars belief to suggest
that we’ll manage to get to 100 percent by 2030 or 2050.

IN THE POOR WORLD, replacing fossil fuels with new
renewable energy sources like wind and solar power is
hard because most people desperately want much more
power at lower cost, not fickle power at high cost.
Half a century ago, the average Chinese had less
electricity available than the poorest African today. Since
then, with rapid industrialization and a rocketing use of
coal power, China has catapulted itself away from poverty
and increased its GDP per person seventy-two times, but at
the cost of becoming the world’s biggest carbon dioxide
emitter.10
Most poor countries want to follow China’s path. As
Gwede Mantashe, South Africa’s energy minister, puts it:
“Energy 
is 
the 
catalyst 
for 
growth.” 
Indeed, 
the
International Energy Agency estimates that by using more
coal, oil, and gas, and less renewable sources—along with
much better governance—Africa can usher in an “African
Century” that will increase carbon dioxide emissions but
also grow the economy much faster, such that by 2040
every African will make $1,000 more every year.11
But why can’t we solve the poor world’s energy poverty
problem with solar panels and wind turbines? This is in fact
what many development organizations and green energy
companies claim to be doing. Their claims do not add up.
To see how the benefits of green energy sources like
solar and wind power are being massively oversold, we
should look to the poor Indian village of Dharnai, which
became India’s first solar-powered community. The citizens
had for years unsuccessfully tried to get connected to the
national electric power grid, which mostly is supplied by
coal-fired power plants. Along came a green benefactor. In
2014 
under 
the 
slogan 
“Energy 
access 
simplified,”
Greenpeace supplied Dharnai with a solar-powered “micro-
grid”—an electric grid that’s not connected to the central
grid. Greenpeace proudly declared that “Dharnai refused to

give into the trap of the fossil fuel industry.” The world’s
media reported excitedly on the “first village in India where
all aspects of life are powered by solar.”12
Greenpeace had the best of intentions. But intentions
don’t count for much in development. The day the
electricity was turned on, the batteries were drained of
power within a few hours. A boy from Dharnai remembers
wanting to do his homework early in the morning before
leaving to work in the fields, but there wasn’t enough
power for the family’s one lamp. Because solar power is
way too weak to power a stove, the citizens now had maybe
a lamp illuminating the kitchen, but they still had to use the
same old cookstoves burning wood or dung, polluting the
home and putting the whole family at risk.13
Greenpeace invited the state chief minister to the
inauguration of the solar power system so he could meet
grateful inhabitants. When he showed up, he was met by a
large crowd of people waving signs demanding “real
electricity” (the kind you can use to run a refrigerator or a
stove, and that your children can use to do their homework
in the morning) and not “fake electricity” (meaning solar
energy that could do none of these things). A week after
the protests, Dharnai was hooked up to the national grid
with more reliable electricity access. Its residents now get
power from the grid at one-third of the price.14
This situation repeats itself around the world.
In Fiji, the government teamed up with a Japanese
technology company to deliver off-grid solar power to
remote communities. They provided a centralized solar
power unit to the village of Rukua. Prime Minister Frank
Bainimarama proudly declared he had “no doubt that a
number of development opportunities will be unlocked” by
the provision of “a reliable source of energy.”15
Understandably, all of Rukua was thrilled to get access
to energy and wanted to take full advantage. So more than

thirty households purchased refrigerators. Unfortunately,
the off-grid solar energy system was incapable of powering
more than three fridges at a time, so every night the power
would be completely drained. That led to six households
buying diesel generators. According to researchers who
studied this project: “Rukua is now using about three times
the amount of fossil fuel for electricity that was used prior
to installation of the renewable energy system.” In rather
understated language, the researchers conclude that the
project did not “meet the resilience building needs” of the
community.16
Solar panels do deliver some benefits, allowing you to
charge your cell phone and run a light at night. But they
don’t deliver benefits that help drive development. One
common anecdote holds that solar lights allow students to
study at night and hence improve learning. Published in
2017, the first controlled study from India shows that solar
power actually has no impact on time spent on studying or
schooling. It also shows that solar power doesn’t increase
time spent working or improve savings, spending, business
creation, or broader development. As a result, solar panels
are not what people most want. In Tanzania, a survey of
households with solar panels showed that almost 90
percent still wanted access to the electric grid.17
Moreover, when asked in polls across the continent,
Africans report that solar panels provide much less benefit
than they cost. On average, the private benefit is worth
only 30 to 41 percent of the total costs. Even when
including the extra health benefits like a reduction in
damaging indoor air pollution from kerosene lamps, it is
likely that the solar panels are worth less to the average
African than what the well-meaning rich people pay to put
them up.18
IN CLIMATE-EXCITED RICH COUNTRIES, governments

have attempted to force more renewable energy into the
system through regulation and subsidies. In Germany and
the European Union as a whole, we see the results of this
approach.
Germany’s 
renewable 
energy 
policy, 
called 
the
Energiewende, has been hailed by environmentalists and
politicians around the world. Under this decade-old policy,
the nation has moved away from nuclear and fossil fuels
toward wind, solar, and biomass energy. The Energiewende
has cost $36 billion annually in recent years, and is the
country’s biggest political project since reunification.
Electricity costs have doubled over the past two decades
and are now at 35¢ per kWh, almost three times the US
average. Germans will have spent $580 billion on
renewables and related infrastructure by 2025.19
This massive expenditure has meant renewable energy
sources have gone from meeting 7 percent of Germany’s
total electricity needs in 2000 to 35 percent of electricity
needs in 2019, with solar and wind power accounting for
two-thirds of the renewable electricity. But the country has
been worried about nuclear power, especially since a 2011
accident in Fukushima, Japan, triggered by an earthquake
and tsunami. This fear has led to a halving of nuclear
energy from 2000 to 2019. Since nuclear power is carbon
free, the decline in nuclear energy has offset much of the
increase in solar and wind power.20
Overall, fossil fuels have declined only slightly as a share
of German energy. In the first decade of the new
millennium, the fossil fuel share of the overall energy
supply dropped somewhat from 84 to 80 percent. But in the
years since the Energiewende was passed in 2010, the
fossil fuel share has stayed almost constant, inching down
just one percentage point to 79 percent today.21
In the larger European Union, renewable energy sources
have since the turn of the century increased from 6 to 14

percent in 2018. But there’s a catch. Most of this
renewable energy does not come from solar and wind. In
total, solar and wind make up 2.7 percent of all energy,
whereas biomass makes up more than 10 percent. Biomass,
which basically is a fancy-sounding name for wood, is one
of the old, reliable renewables that can produce energy
when it is needed. The problem for the planet is that wood
is often imported from US forests in diesel-driven ships,
and emits more carbon dioxide than even coal when it is
burned. Biomass is categorized by the EU only as carbon
dioxide free because it is hoped that felled trees will be
replanted and over many future decades will soak up as
much carbon dioxide as was released by its burning.
Needless to say, this is dubious accounting at best.22
With this trickery and reliance on wood imported from
the United States, the EU has managed to cut fossil fuel
use from 79 percent in 2000 to 71 percent in 2018. Yet, the
cost of this energy policy is now more than two percent of
the EU’s economy, or about $400 billion every year.
Indeed, about 20 percent of the EU budget is now being
spent on climate policies.23
Today, residential electricity costs in the EU are twice
the US cost of 13¢ per kWh. This gap will grow quickly.
Over the next decade, one 2019 study estimates that mostly
because of stronger climate policies, the wholesale
electricity price in the EU will quadruple.24
IT IS IMPOSSIBLE to get around the fact that climate
policies 
are 
expensive. 
What 
do 
campaigners 
and
politicians do? They either downplay the cost, or far more
dangerously, maneuver to make it appear that there will
actually be a net benefit.
If we change from dirty fossil fuels to clean renewable
sources, they claim, we will not only solve the climate crisis
but unlock jobs, savings, competitiveness, and improved

well-being. 
American 
political 
commentator 
Thomas
Friedman frequently talks about how the United States
needs to jump on the clean energy bandwagon or face the
prospect that China will “clean our clocks” when they take
home all the “benefits.”25
This attempt to rewrite the facts is perhaps nowhere
clearer than when in 2018 the UN secretary-general touted
a report that he said showed the world could gain “at least
$26 trillion” in benefits from strong climate action as soon
as 2030. What are we waiting for?26
Weirdly though, the report claimed $26 trillion in
benefits, without explaining how that number was reached.
The actual documentation, the report told us, was in a
working paper that would be published shortly. I contacted
the authors and asked to see how they reached this
fantastical figure. For a year and a half, I have been in
touch every few weeks with people connected with the
publication. At the time of writing this book, the document
has yet to be made available.
Claiming that climate policy is not only good for climate
but also will actually make everyone rich is a comforting
bedside story. But it is flat-out wrong. Every serious report
shows extraordinarily large costs from climate policy,
simply because changing the energy infrastructure that has
underpinned the last two centuries of economic growth will
be very, very costly.
The UN estimates that the additional infrastructure cost
alone of achieving the 2.7°F (1.5°C) limit would come to
almost a trillion dollars each and every year for the next
thirty years. A 2018 Goldman Sachs report shows that the
cost to build just the infrastructure for electric cars, such
as charging stations and power networks, would be an
astronomical $6 trillion, or 8 percent, of today’s global
GDP.27
As such costs rack up, political opposition will become

ever more likely, causing backtracks on climate policy as
we have seen in France and elsewhere, and even
cancellation as President Trump has done with US
involvement in the Paris Agreement.
If the European Union sticks to its climate promises for
2050, it alone could end up paying more than $2.5 trillion
per year in climate costs—10 percent of its entire GDP. This
is more than all the EU’s current spending on education,
health, environment, housing, defense, police, and courts.
It 
is 
inconceivable 
that 
such 
spending 
will 
go
unchallenged.28
NEW RENEWABLE ENERGY sources like solar and wind
cost $141 billion annually in subsidies globally, and matter
little in the global energy supply. Rich countries can spend
trillions and still achieve very little. Poor countries don’t
have trillions to spend, and instead want more energy,
which will come predominantly from fossil fuels.
This, in a nutshell, is why global climate policies are
failing. There has been far more global attention to climate
change in recent years, with protest movements and
campaigners ensuring the issue remains on the front page
of newspapers. But the world’s decision makers are even
more off track than ever. This is why the UN itself
summarized the 2010s as a “lost” decade, and found there
was essentially no difference between contemporary reality
and an imaginary scenario in which there had been no new
climate policies since 2005. This was a decade full of global
talks, of promises made by politicians, and of climate laws
enacted. Yet, on a global level, the UN could not see any of
this action making any difference whatsoever.29
Next, we will explore exactly why the Paris Agreement is
not going to provide the salvation that was promised.

8
WHY THE PARIS AGREEMENT IS
FAILING
IN DECEMBER 2015, leaders from almost every country in
the world approved the Paris Agreement on climate
change. It was hailed as a landmark achievement, tackling
climate change through national promises of carbon
dioxide cuts. The agreement’s preamble even spoke of
limiting temperature rises to less than 2°C (3.6°F), or even
1.5°C (2.7°F). French president François Hollande said:
“This is a major leap for mankind.” Economist Lord Stern
added: “This is a historic moment, not just for us but for
our children, our grandchildren and future generations.” Al
Gore saw it as “bold and historic.”1
Unfortunately, they are wrong. The Paris Agreement will
cost a fortune to carry out and do almost no good.
ALTHOUGH ITS NAME suggests there is just one
elaborately engineered “agreement,” in fact, the deal is
made up of national commitments from individual countries
that vary wildly; each country simply declared how much
carbon dioxide emissions it would reduce until the year
2030. Some countries made ambitious promises, others
made far easier to achieve vows. The Paris Agreement itself
effectively staples together all those promises.

Each of those promises has a cost. To achieve the
promised carbon cuts, policies will have to make people
and 
companies 
use 
less 
carbon-dioxide-emitting
technologies and fuels. If these technologies and fuels were
cheaper, obviously this would be cost free, but the cuts
would also happen by themselves and there would be no
need for any promises. The fact that nations are making
these promises and that they are difficult to achieve means
the policies will have to force people and companies to use
more expensive technologies and fuels.
The governments themselves rarely add up the cost of
these 
promises, 
but 
it 
is 
possible 
to 
work 
out.
Unfortunately, it is not as easy as just looking at energy
taxes or subsidies. If a nation’s policy means its citizens
have to pay, say, $10 billion in extra energy taxes, then it
may seem like the cost is simply $10 billion. But that $10
billion doesn’t disappear; it is collected by the state and
used to fund other things in the budget. Equally, when a
government spends $10 billion in subsidies on solar and
wind power, that doesn’t mean a societal cost of $10
billion, because the money is not wasted; it is redistributed,
often to the rich owners of the solar panels and wind
turbines.
So what is the real cost? We need to identify the knock-
on effects of higher energy prices for everyone. Every
household, business, and organization that uses energy
finds it a bit more expensive and has a little less money for
other things. This slightly slows economic growth. This cost
is the relevant social cost of climate policies—the reduction
in welfare that comes from each nation insisting on using
energy that is slightly more costly and less reliable than
fossil fuels.
Emissions of carbon dioxide are largely by-products of
productivity—of industry, governments, and individuals
producing things that we want more of (including heating,
cooling, food, transport, hospital care, and so much more).

Wishing this wasn’t so doesn’t make it go away. When
countries promise to reduce their emissions, they are
effectively promising to make all these things a touch more
expensive. That acts as a slight brake on the economy,
leading to a small reduction in growth. It does not mean
that countries won’t grow; it simply means they will grow
slightly more slowly.
WE CAN MEASURE the cost of this slowing growth using
energy-economic models. Put simply, each model can
identify the likely pathway of GDP growth over coming
decades both with and without the climate policy. The
difference in GDP between the two scenarios is the cost of
the climate policy.
Now, any model is only as good as the data and
assumptions put into it. One model might be overly
pessimistic. It might be based on an assumption that it is
very hard to cut emissions, so strong climate policies will
result in substantially smaller GDP increases, whereas
another might be overly optimistic, based on an assumption
that all emission cuts can be achieved at almost no cost.
Unsurprisingly, climate policy partisans reliably pick the
model that advances their arguments. That is why
economists prefer to use multiple models, to average out
the optimists and pessimists.
The most prominent, nonpartisan research program that
looks at the findings from a large number of energy-
economic models is the Energy Modeling Forum (EMF)
based at Stanford University. The EMF has conducted more
than thirty such studies and is considered the gold
standard of energy-economic modeling. Using multiple
studies, mostly from the EMF, we can estimate the cost of
the most expensive promises made under the Paris
Agreement: those made by the United States, the European
Union, China, and Mexico. Together, these commitments

make up about 80 percent of the total promised carbon
reductions.
In promises made under President Obama, the United
States said that by 2025 it would reduce its overall
greenhouse gas emissions by 26 to 28 percent compared to
the emissions in 2005. Work from the EMF shows that
effective policies to achieve this goal would have increasing
costs over the period. In 2015, when the promise was
made, obviously there would be no cost. But as the policies
to achieve the promise were phased in, GDP would grow
slightly slower than it otherwise would have. The
increasing gap between the GDP that is and the GDP that
would have been is the annual cost. By 2030, it is estimated
the promised cuts would result in a GDP loss for the United
States between $154 billion and $172 billion.3 As the US
GDP is now on a slightly lower growth path, this loss would
continue into the future.2
The EU promised to cut its emissions by 2030 by 40
percent compared to its emissions in 1990. There is no
official estimate of the cost, but the EMF finds across seven
models that reducing emissions by 40 percent in 2030 (as a
pit stop toward an 80 percent reduction in 2050) leads to a
GDP loss of 1.6 percent in 2030, or $322 billion.3
Not every country took the same approach to making
promises. China vowed to reduce the amount of carbon
dioxide emitted for each dollar produced across its
economy. That’s known as “carbon intensity.” It set a 2030
target of reducing the carbon dioxide emitted per dollar
generated by its economy by at least 60 percent compared
to 2005. This will be equivalent to reducing its overall
emissions in 2030 by at least 1.9 billion tons of carbon
dioxide, or 1.9 gigatons (Gt) in short.4 Here we can use the
results from the Asia Modeling Exercise, a research project
similar to the EMF but focused on the region, which ran
thirteen 
different 
energy-economic 
models 
with 
and

without climate policies. Its results suggest that China can
reduce 1.9 Gt of carbon dioxide for about $200 billion in
annual GDP loss.4
Mexico has enacted the strongest climate legislation of
any developing country; it has conditionally promised to
reduce its emissions by 40 percent below what it would
otherwise have emitted by 2030. Although Mexico itself has
low-balled its cost estimates, independent researchers
using several models predict the cost to reach 4.5 percent
of GDP by 2030, or about $80 billion annually.5
This means that the total cost to the United States, the
EU, China, and Mexico adds up to $739 billion (or $757
billion if the US goes for the higher end of its promised
range). Given that these countries are responsible for 80
percent of the promises in the Paris Agreement, it is
reasonable to assume that the $739 billion constitutes 80
percent of the pact’s total cost. That makes the annual
global cost of the Paris Agreement by 2030 about $924
billion.
Remember, all of these cost estimates assume that
politicians will implement the most effective policy to
achieve their nation’s promised emissions reduction;
typically, one carbon dioxide tax applied across all sectors
of the economy, slowly increasing over time. In real life,
that never happens. Policy makers love picking winners and
making special deals.
For instance, back in 2008, the EU promised to cut its
emissions by 20 percent by 2020. Stanford’s Energy
Modeling Forum ran a number of models for this policy and
found that if done effectively, the EU would end up with a
GDP in 2020 about 1 percent lower than otherwise: the
cost of the policy would be 1 percent of GDP forever from
2020. “Effectively” in this case would have meant using one
carbon dioxide tax that would mostly have encouraged
power producers to switch from coal to less polluting

natural gas. Unfortunately, politicians couldn’t help but
push their economies to try to increase the amount of wind
and solar power utilized. They used subsidies that made the
policy’s 
cost 
much 
more 
expensive. 
In 
total, 
the
researchers have found that the total EU policy will end up
costing around 2.2 percent of GDP, more than double what
the price tag could have been had the EU’s politicians
made more effective choices.6
We see the same problem in the United States, where
many politicians not only want power grids to emit less
carbon dioxide, but also want the reduction to be delivered
by renewables: fundamentally, solar and wind power. In
twenty-nine states this is achieved through a so-called
renewable 
portfolio 
standard 
that 
obligates 
power
producers to get a specified fraction of their electricity
from renewable sources. California and New York have
both set 50 percent targets for 2030, while Hawaii aims for
100 percent by 2045. While this type of policy is obviously
popular with solar and wind producers, research shows
that it ends up costing states extra. Whereas the cheapest
emission reduction, just like in Europe, will often be a
switch from coal to gas, relying on renewables at least
doubles the cost for states.7
The Paris Agreement is unlikely to be an exception to the
rule that politicians do things less efficiently and less
effectively than they could. The promises made by various
nations will be implemented ineffectively, just like those
made by the EU and the United States. Therefore, it is
plausible that the Paris Agreement costs will be twice what
they would be under the most effective policy possible.
Thus, without hyperbole we can say that the Paris
Agreement will easily set the world back by at least $1
trillion annually by 2030—and more plausibly, with less
efficient policies, the cost could climb to somewhere close
to $2 trillion annually.8

No matter which way you look at it, the Paris Agreement
is by far the most expensive pact in history. At $2 trillion, it
is at par with the entire expenditure on the world’s military
each year. Every year, the Paris Agreement will cost about
two to five times the total amount of the world’s previously
most expensive global accord: Germany’s World War I
repayment settled in the Versailles Treaty. And to put this
in context, compared to some of the other policies
undertaken to help the world, the annual cost of Paris is
about a hundred times the amount the world annually
spends on protecting and promoting biodiversity. It is also
about a hundred times higher than the amount the world
annually spends on all policies to tackle HIV/AIDS.9
BY THIS POINT, you’ll probably not be surprised to learn
that there is no official estimate of what the Paris
Agreement will actually achieve.
To evaluate the impact on climate change of the
promises made under the Paris Agreement, first we need to
identify the base level of emissions today. Then we can
work out what the promises of carbon cuts mean, in terms
of effect on temperature rises.
From 2020 to the end of the century, if we do nothing,
the standard UN business-as-usual scenario sees the world
emitting about six thousand gigatons of carbon dioxide.
The total number of tons we emit is directly connected to
average, global temperature rises. The UN estimates that
an extra 1,000 Gt of carbon dioxide emitted will result in a
0.8°F increase over the long run. That means that an extra
6,000 Gt over the century will result in a temperature rise
of about 5.7°F or so. Since we’re already almost 2°F above
preindustrial levels, that means that the twenty-first
century will see the planet get roughly 7.5°F hotter if we do
nothing, similar to what we saw with the MAGICC model in
chapter 2.10

What will happen, then, if nations meet their promises
under Paris? The United Nations organizers of the Paris
Agreement once in 2015 (and never since) released an
estimate of the total maximum impact of all carbon dioxide
cuts promised by all nations. It provides the absolutely
best-case scenario that we can hope for. This estimates a
total reduction of 64 Gt carbon dioxide through to 2030.
According to the UN’s estimate of 0.8°F per 1,000 Gt
carbon 
dioxide, 
this 
translates 
to 
a 
reduction 
in
temperature by the end of the century of about 0.05°F.
What this tells us is that even in an optimistic scenario, the
Paris Agreement isn’t going to come anywhere close to
solving global warming. It will have a miniscule impact on
the temperature by 2100.11
IN FIGURE 8.1, we see the feeble results of the Paris
Agreement, compared to what would be needed to limit
temperature rises to 2.7°F. The agreement promises only a
tiny reduction of sixty-four gigatons of carbon dioxide, or a
0.05°F temperature reduction. And this is only in a best-
case scenario where every nation achieves everything that
it has promised. But in reality, we are not on track to
achieve even that.

FIGURE 8.1 The size of different emission cuts. The
first bar shows how much the Paris Agreement will cut
by 2030. The second bar shows what the agreement
will cut if promises are kept throughout the entire
century. The third bar shows how much its popular
claims suggest it will achieve: fifty times more than
the actual Paris Agreement. For comparison, we see
the cuts needed to limit temperature rises to 3.6°F
(2°C) and 2.7°F (1.5°C). All these numbers have large
uncertainties and should be used for comparison of
relative size.12
A 2017 landmark article in Nature puts it bluntly: “All
major industrialized countries are failing to meet the
pledges they made to cut greenhouse-gas emissions.” The
researchers noted that the European Union promised to cut
to 40 percent below its 1990 level by 2030, but had enacted
policies that would reduce less than half that, to 19
percent. Even including pledged policies, the EU will make
it to less than 30 percent by 2030. And what progress it
makes is mostly coming from a shift from coal to gas,
rather than from the construction of renewable energy.13
The story is the same around the globe: although it
promised to cut emissions by 18 percent below 1990 levels
by 2030, Japan is on target to cut by just 4 percent.
Emissions in Mexico and South Korea have hardly shifted,
despite their promises. And it would be entirely wrong to

imagine that the United States was on track before
President Trump announced plans to quit the Paris
Agreement. President Obama promised in Paris to cut
emissions by 18 percent below 1990 levels by 2025, but
never backed this with sufficient legislation. Based on
Obama-era policies (and not taking account of Trump’s
reversal of them), President Obama was on track to
achieve, at most, a 7 percent reduction.14
In contrast, the world’s developing countries are on
target, but only because they promised so little. For
example, India pledged to reduce emissions by so little that
its promises are likely to be achieved without any new
climate policies at all, and it will have met its obligations
even if its emissions increase by more than fourfold from
1990 to 2030.15
A 2018 study finds that of the 157 countries to have
promised emissions cuts in the Paris Agreement, only
seventeen have passed laws to do so. In other words, only
one in ten countries is taking the necessary steps to get on
track to achieve what they promised. These are not the
biggest countries. The nations are Algeria, Canada, Costa
Rica, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia,
Mexico, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Samoa, Singapore, and Tonga. The
world will not be saved by emissions cuts in North
Macedonia, population two million, and certainly not by the
most drastic actions that could be taken by Tonga,
population 108,000.16
Every single major industrialized country is failing to live
up to the promises it made under the Paris Agreement, and
the few countries on track are too small to make any
significant impact at all.
SUPPORTERS OF THE Paris Agreement sometimes accept
that the promises through to 2030 will achieve next to

nothing, but then argue that further down the road, the
pact has the potential to achieve much, much more. To
justify this boosterism, they imagine that countries will
change course and actually start delivering on their
pledges, and that they will go even further after 2030.
So, what if we give the politicians the benefit of the
doubt? What if we imagine that governments break with
historic precedent and honor their commitments, even
though they failed to honor commitments made in past
climate deals? What if we even assume that they will
continue to honor the Paris Agreement pledges not just
until 2030, but for the rest of the century?
This is incredibly unrealistic. The two previous global
climate agreements in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 and in Kyoto
in 1997 came to almost nothing at the end of their deal
periods, and certainly they were not prolonged for another
seventy years. Nonetheless, it’s worth setting out such an
artificial scenario just to illustrate what we would achieve,
in this hypothetically “best case” scenario.
Extending the Paris commitments to 2100 would deliver
cuts equal to 540 Gt of carbon dioxide. Translated into an
effect on temperature, it would reduce the increase in
temperature rises by the end of the century by a tiny
0.4°F.17
To justify their support for the Paris Agreement, some
backers assume not only that all of today’s promises will be
delivered, but that future climate conferences will lead to
global pacts with ever larger carbon-cutting promises. They
assume all of those promises will also be delivered. And
then they attribute all of those imaginary, future reductions
to the Paris Agreement. The global warming policy
campaigners who run the influential Climate Action
Tracker website make all these assumptions, and as a
result they conjure fifty times more reductions from the
Paris Agreement than were actually promised in Paris.18

This approach is astonishingly misleading. It’s as if I
promised to skip eating a piece of cake today and told you
that as a result I would lose twenty-five pounds over the
next year. No, that result requires my not only making a
promise for one day, but also taking action over twelve
entire months. Promising to take a first step is important
but it isn’t the same thing as starting, and it certainly isn’t
the same as finishing the entire journey.
At the Paris climate summit, politicians also promised to
keep global temperature from ever rising beyond 3.6°F (the
so-called 2°C limit). Accomplishing this would mean cutting
eighty times more carbon emissions than were actually
promised (and remember, they are not on track to achieve
even that much). To achieve the 3.6°F target, we would
literally need new and additional carbon cuts of the same
size as those in the Paris Agreement every single year from
2020 to 2100 (and we would need them to be actually
delivered, not just promised). The politicians even went so
far as to declare in their agreement that they wanted to
limit the global temperature increase to below 2.7°F
(1.5°C), which would mean cutting one hundred times more
than what was promised in Paris. It is therefore accurate to
say that the Paris Agreement—even if actually achieved—
provides us with only one percent of what politicians are
promising.
Currently we have promised to spend $1–$2 trillion
every year, and we won’t be able to tell the difference in
temperature even in a hundred years. Indeed, it turns out
that if we measure all the benefits of reduced climate
damage in monetary terms, every dollar the Paris
Agreement costs will avoid just 11¢ worth of long-term
climate damage. That isn’t sensible.19
SO OFTEN TODAY we hear campaigners and politicians
say the real problem is simply that promises have not gone

far enough. Indeed, since the signing of the Paris
Agreement it has become more and more fashionable to
suggest that entire nations should go net-zero; that is, stop
contributing carbon dioxide to the atmosphere by 2050 or
sooner. More than sixty countries have promised to achieve
carbon neutrality within the next thirty years. The biggest
emitters—China, the United States, and India—are not
among them. The biggest nations that have made the
pledge are the UK, France, and Germany. Finland has said
it will aim for carbon neutrality by 2035, while Norway is
aiming for neutrality by 2030. Australia hasn’t made a net-
zero commitment, but four of its states have. Within the
US, New York and California are aiming to achieve carbon
neutrality by 2050.20
All this is far easier said than done. It is going to be very
expensive. And, in every case, the promise is likely to be
broken.
It is instructive to look at the case of New Zealand. It
was actually the first country in the world to promise to go
carbon neutral. It is also the first country to have
spectacularly failed, and the first to promise for a second
time to achieve the same thing.
In 2007, Prime Minister Helen Clark declared her vision
was that the small nation would become carbon neutral by
2020. She was celebrated by the United Nations as a
“Champion of the Earth.” If only cutting carbon was as
simple as winning attention. New Zealand not only failed to
achieve the vision, but also failed even to reduce any
emissions. The latest 2019 official statistics show that the
country’s total emissions will be higher in 2020 than they
were when Ms. Clark’s ambition was declared. New
Zealand is on track to be a whopping 123 percent off Ms.
Clark’s vision. Yet, in 2018, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern
reupped the pledge, promising to achieve carbon neutrality
by 2050. Legislation aimed at achieving that goal was

passed in 2019.21
New Zealand is a fascinating case study because, to its
credit, Ardern’s government actually asked its leading
economic authority to estimate the cost of her promise.
Thus, we have what is likely the only official, academically
credible estimate of what it will cost to achieve carbon
neutrality. This research, undertaken by the leading
independent economic think tank in New Zealand, shows
that just getting halfway to the target—cutting 50 percent
of New Zealand’s emissions by 2050—would cost at least
$19 billion annually by 2050. For a small country with a
population similar to that of the Republic of Ireland or the
state of South Carolina, that’s a big deal, about what the
government spends now on its entire education and health
care system.22
And it is only the cheapest cost of getting halfway to
Ardern’s target. Getting all the way will likely amount to
more than $61 billion annually, or 16 percent of GDP by
2050. That is more than New Zealand today spends on
social security, welfare, health, education, police, courts,
defense, environment, and every other part of government
combined.23
To achieve their promise, New Zealanders will need to
accept an escalating carbon tax that ends up so
phenomenally high that it would be equivalent to a gasoline
tax of $8.33 per gallon. And even the 16 percent GDP cost
relies on a fairy-tale assumption that every single policy
will be enacted as efficiently as possible. Bearing in mind
the evidence that costs double in the real world, it could be
32 percent or more.24
The cost doesn’t just start in 2050, which would make it
easy to ignore. Getting there requires policies starting in
2020, meaning the costs will start coming in now, ramp up
to 16–32 percent in 2050, and stay there for the rest of the
century.

Across the century, the cost adds up to more than $5
trillion and could reach beyond $11 trillion. If we imagine
each New Zealander paying an equal share of this amount
every year across the century, the cost would be the
equivalent of at least $12,800 for every single New
Zealander, every year. If the policies are done badly, as
they have been done so far across the globe, the cost per
person could even go beyond $25,000 per year.25
As a back-of-the-envelope exercise, if we took the
percentage cost of going carbon neutral in New Zealand by
2050 and applied it to the United States, that would imply a
cost of at least $5 trillion in today’s money. Not just once,
but every single year. That is higher than the entire current
federal spending of $4.5 trillion. And again, under realistic
assumptions the amount could be closer to $10 trillion a
year.26
But at least New Zealand will help the world in dealing
with climate change, right? Even if the country will be
going through a huge and protracted, self-inflicted cost, it
will also deliver some good? Yes. But barely.
Let’s get a sense of the size of the impact. If we assume
that New Zealand this time will actually deliver on its net-
zero promise in 2050 and stick to it throughout the rest of
the century, the total amount of greenhouse gas reduction
will, according to the standard estimate from the UN’s
climate panel, deliver a temperature reduction in the year
2100 of 0.004°F, or about four-thousandths of one degree
Fahrenheit. Given the expected temperature increase by
around 2100, this means that New Zealand going net-zero
by 2050 will postpone the warming that we expected to see
on January 1, 2100, by about three weeks to January 23,
2100.27
So, New Zealand is considering spending at least $5
trillion to deliver an impact by the end of the century that
will be physically unmeasurable. This will make it hard to

get 
Kiwis 
to 
support 
such 
strong 
climate 
policies
continuously for the next eighty years. Sooner or later, and
likely sooner, a politician is successfully going to argue to
dump the net-zero promise that will deliver zilch in a
century, and instead double spending on things like health,
education, and environment, and get some tax reductions.
THERE HAS NEVER been an official estimate of the cost of
the Paris Agreement, nor has there been one that gives a
meaningful evaluation of its impact. Looking at the
numbers, it is obvious why.
The Paris Agreement will be the costliest pact ever
agreed to, by far. It will cost us $1–$2 trillion per year from
2030 onward, if actually fully implemented. Yet the
agreement will do almost nothing for the climate: all of its
promises will reduce the temperature rise by the end of the
century by an almost imperceptible 0.05°F. And none of the
big emitting countries are anywhere close to actually
delivering on their promises.
Spending trillions to achieve almost nothing is, not
surprisingly, a bad idea. Every dollar spent will produce
climate benefits worth just 11¢.
Surely, we can do better. Right now, we’re pursuing a
policy that won’t solve climate change—not even close—
and that will waste trillions of dollars along the way.
Footnotes
3 Under the Trump presidency, the United States has announced a decision to
leave the Paris Agreement. However, this will only take effect in late 2020 after
the presidential election, so at the time of this writing, the US is still a
signatory bound by its promises.

4 Since carbon dioxide is the most prominent greenhouse gas, we often just
talk about carbon dioxide, but there are many other greenhouse gases, like
methane. To keep life simple, we are converting all of those gases according to
the international standard into carbon dioxide, or what is technically called
“carbon dioxide equivalents.”

9
PICK A PATH: WHICH FUTURE IS
BEST?
IMAGINE IF EIGHTY YEARS AGO, in 1940, you had a
choice. 
Looking 
ahead 
through 
wars, 
upheavals,
discoveries, and opportunities, you could have set the
United States on track to have either a slightly higher or a
slightly lower average economic growth rate. It wouldn’t be
by much. Per person, it would mean a growth rate of either
1.27 percent or 1.89 percent—just 0.62 percentage points
difference.
It would seem obvious to most people to pick the higher
growth rate, making sure we would provide our children,
grandchildren, and their children and grandchildren with
more possibilities and opportunities. Yet, many people
would probably be surprised by the magnitude of this small
increase in growth over time. Because growth rates
compound over the years, the higher growth rate would
deliver a nation of individuals who would be two-thirds
richer in just eight decades.
This is the choice the rich world faces today, when
discussing the climate. And the choice is even starker for
the world’s poor. Spurred on by activists and campaigners,
many global leaders are poised to pick the lower-growth
pathway, condemning our children and grandchildren to a

worse existence, and ensuring that the world’s poorest are
trapped in a future with fewer opportunities, less
prospects, and less welfare, to the tune of $500 trillion. Per
year.
THE GLOBAL APPROACH to cutting carbon dioxide has
mostly failed for three decades. Yet, the climate policies
resulting from that approach are likely to cost us a fortune.
By 2030, the Paris Agreement will cost $1 trillion or more
per year. But this is just the start. Climate panic is likely to
end up costing humanity hundreds of trillions of dollars,
every single year.1
This sounds like an extreme claim, but it is based on
studies undertaken over a number of years by researchers
working for the United Nations climate science panel, the
IPCC, and published in 2017. They examined five different
plausible scenarios for the future, called the Shared
Socioeconomic Pathways, or SSPs. The pathways rely on
complex modeling with a huge range of different inputs and
assumptions to establish various broad, plausible futures.
The researchers who created these models looked at
factors ranging from geopolitics to economics, trade,
migration patterns, education, and health.2
All of the pathways show a world in which people get
richer over the coming century. That prediction is soundly
based on history: we spent the last two hundred years
growing the average global GDP per person by 1,600
percent, from $1,100 to about $17,500 today. But,
depending on which pathway we choose, there are vast
differences in how much wealthier people will be.3
The lowest increase takes place if we go down a pathway
the researchers call Regional Rivalry—A Rocky Road. In
this vision of the future (see figure 9.1), nationalism surges
in many countries. That means there is less interest in a
shared 
response 
to 
global 
warming. 
What’s 
more,

governments focus more on domestic challenges and
national security instead of working together or investing
in education and technological development. As a result,
economic development is sluggish, and income inequalities
persist or worsen over time. Population growth is low in
industrialized countries and high in developing ones. The
environment is given a low priority globally, meaning that
in some regions environmental challenges worsen. Even in
this depressing and fractious future, average GDP per
person in 2100 will be 170 percent of today’s level.
The second-worst outcome occurs if we go down a
pathway called Inequality—A Road Divided, where the
world splits into two: rich, well-educated countries on one
side, 
and 
poor, 
less-educated 
countries 
with 
labor
intensive, low-tech economies on the other side. While
there are large investments in health and education in the
rich world, poor countries are unable to make these
investments, 
and 
increasing 
disparities 
in 
economic
opportunity and political power lead to a growing gap
between them. The gap between the rich and poor worsens
within countries, too, so social cohesion degrades. Conflict
and unrest become increasingly common. Rich countries
make investments in the environment, but poor countries
do not. Even in this grim scenario, by the end of the
century average GDP per person will grow to 290 percent
of today’s level.

FIGURE 9.1 GDP per person across the world for the
UN’s five scenarios, 2005–2100. To the right, the GDP
per person in 2100 in percentage of its 2020 value.4
In the Middle of the Road scenario, social, economic, and
technological trends look very similar to their historical
pattern. It is a scenario not dissimilar to today, where many
problems remain and many solutions are underfunded.
There is slow progress in health and education, and
technology 
advances 
without 
major 
breakthroughs.
Development and income growth proceed fairly unevenly,
with some countries falling behind. Global and national
institutions continue to make slow progress in achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals, the UN’s global
development agenda. Yet, as we bumble our way ahead,
growth over the next eight decades will deliver GDP per
person that is 450 percent of today’s. In a 2018 survey of
prominent economists, this outcome is actually seen as the
most likely outcome for the twenty-first century.5
And then there are two other pathways: the two “best”
scenarios, leading to the highest income growth. They offer
us two completely different, conflicting approaches to
making the world better off in 2100.

One is the Sustainable Development or Green Road
pathway. This is an eco-scenario in which there is more
global harmony and cooperation. The world focuses on
reducing 
the 
environmental 
impact 
of 
consumer
consumption and ensuring that economic growth creates a
smaller footprint on the planet. Governments worldwide
make big investments in education and health along with
rapid 
technological 
development. 
Nonetheless, 
many
policies are designed to ensure that people use fewer
resources and less energy, such as by cutting meat diets
and lowering consumption. As a result, total man-made
greenhouse gas emissions are lower and the scenario sees
the lowest temperature rise of all five pathways. This world
will deliver a GDP per person that is 600 percent of today’s
level.
The final pathway is called Fossil-fueled Development or
Conventional Development. Down this pathway, the world’s
sharp focus is on growth. This is achieved through strong,
competitive markets and policies that foster innovation and
build human capital through massive investment in health
and education. The world focuses on rapid technological
development. 
Countries 
exploit 
abundant 
fossil 
fuel
resources to support resource- and energy-intensive
lifestyles. Greenhouse gas emissions are much higher and
this scenario sees the highest temperature rise by 2100.
Nonetheless, much more is invested in adaptation, and
local environmental problems like air pollution are
successfully managed. Here, average GDP per person soars
more than tenfold, hitting 1,040 percent of today’s GDP per
person.6
Both of these scenarios will see the average person on
the planet in 2100 with GDP per capita over $100,000. That
may sound fanciful to us today, but top economists give
these final two pathways a one in three and one in four
probability, respectively.7

Both of these scenarios will deliver amazing welfare for
the average person, but the fossil fuel pathway delivers
much more. Both of these scenarios will also see extreme
poverty almost eradicated by midcentury, but the fossil fuel
pathway will do so sooner—over the next three decades,
the green scenario will see twenty-six million more extreme
poor every year. And both of these pathways will see a
dramatic decline in inequality between nations. All of the
five pathways expect inequality to drop, as the poorer
world partly catches up with the richer world. But
especially the green and the fossil fuel pathways will see a
dramatic reduction in inequality between nations. By 2100
under both scenarios, inequality will be lower than it has
been for the past two centuries. And perhaps surprisingly,
the fossil fuel scenario will be even more equal than the
green scenario.8
The research identifying different pathways gives us a
really clear way of looking at the options in front of us.
These are all scenarios that the researchers deem plausible
from where we are now. It’s reassuring to note that none of
the options is a Mad Max–type dystopian future. Even in
the worst of the five scenarios, people end up better off
than today. But we should be aiming to ensure that future
generations are in the best situation possible. So with that
in mind, we can dig deeper into the differences between
the five pathways.
PERHAPS THE MOST important point that is clear from
these scenarios is that when governments invest more in
education, health, and technology, the world becomes
tremendously better off, with less poverty and reduced
inequality.
If nobody invests in education, health, and technology
(as happens in “regional rivalry”), or only the world’s well-
off countries do (as in “inequality”), the world ends up

worse off, more unequal, and with many more poor than in
the other scenarios. If governments invest modestly in all
three areas (as in the “middle of the road” scenario), there
are modest improvements in income, inequality, and
poverty. But significant investment in education, health,
and technology (as in the “green” and “fossil fuel” futures)
means that the world will be a much better place by 2100,
with very high incomes, virtually no extreme poverty, and
little inequality between nations.
In the worst scenarios, the global spread of education
crumbles. In the bottom two scenarios, only about half of
all adults will get a high school education or higher, and a
quarter will be without any education by the end of the
century. Illiteracy, which is at 12 percent today, will
increase to almost one-fifth of the world. Globally, life
expectancy will increase at most by a couple of years over
the next eight decades.9
In the two best scenarios, almost everyone will have a
high school or university degree, illiteracy will have been
almost completely eradicated, and life expectancy will
reach nearly one hundred years of age.
The most important policy choices in these scenarios
have nothing to do with climate change. We need healthy
populations that are highly educated, able to develop, and
use advanced technology. If we can manage this vital
challenge, it is likely that the end of the century will see a
world somewhere between six and ten times richer, much
more equal, and which has long eradicated extreme
poverty.
IT IS NOW OBVIOUS that policy choices matter hugely in
determining what the future looks like. The wrong
decisions will make us poorer and less literate; the right
ones will make us richer, more educated, and healthier. But
which decisions will be best for us as citizens of planet

Earth?
If we asked most pundits today which scenario they
prefer—the sustainable, green scenario or the traditional,
fossil-fuel-driven scenario—it seems fair to expect that the
overwhelming majority would go with the green scenario in
a heartbeat. We have become so focused on global warming
that the choice seems blatantly obvious.
But let’s drill down into the differences between the two,
because there is a huge disparity in outcomes.
Going down the “green” pathway, the average person in
the world will be six times as rich in 2100 compared to
2020 (see figure 9.2). Average income in 2100 will be an
astounding $106,000 in today’s currency. That is a great
achievement.
Remember, being better off correlates to better health
outcomes and greater life satisfaction. More prosperity
means more overall welfare: a general improvement in
well-being and satisfaction. So we can reasonably say that
overall global welfare is six times higher in 2100 under the
“green” pathway. That’s a great scenario.

FIGURE 9.2 Global GDP per person, 2005–2100, for
the green and the fossil fuel scenarios. The dashed
lines show the GDP per person in dollars. But higher
temperatures also mean more climate damages. The
full lines show the GDP per person after deducting
climate damages.10
But down the “fossil fuel” pathway, the average person
will be 10.4 times as rich. That is a lot better. On average
each person would earn $182,000 per year. This is $76,000
more per person per year in 2100. This is much better than
the “green” scenario. A ten times increase in welfare is an
astonishing success. Of course, it’s very reasonable to
worry that the “fossil fuel” pathway will actually increase
human misery once we take global warming into account.
Using the damage estimates that William Nordhaus
found, based on the work by the United Nations as we
discussed in chapter 5, we can identify the climate impact
on global welfare. The scenarios tell us how much warmer
it will be: the green pathway takes us to a moderate
temperature rise of 5.8°F by the end of the century, and
the “fossil fuel” pathway leads us to a much warmer rise of
8.7°F. These levels of temperature rise will mean that the

actual prosperity in the “green” scenario will be slightly
lower (2.5 percent) by the end of the century, as seen in
figure 9.2. Put into financial terms, the climate damage per
person per year will be about $3,000. Yet, the remaining
prosperity or welfare per person in 2100 will still be worth
a fantastic $103,000 per person.
The temperature rise will be greater in the fossil fuel
scenario and hence the damage will be bigger too (at 5.7
percent) at the end of the century, adding up to about
$11,000 per person per year. Deducting this cost from the
expected GDP per person means a welfare of $172,000 per
person per year in 2100.
This is important and bears repeating: a straight
comparison of GDP per person in dollars shows a difference
between the two scenarios at the end of the century of
$76,000. But climate change will cause net problems in
both scenarios that reduce our prosperity or welfare. In the
“fossil fuel” scenario, global warming will cause problems
worth $11,000 per person each year, whereas in the cooler
“green” scenario the costs will be much smaller at $3,000.
So the difference in welfare, after we have deducted the
climate damages, is now a slightly smaller $69,000 (which
is the difference between $103,000 per person in the
“green” pathway and the $172,000 in the “fossil fuel”
pathway). Even after taking into account the climate
damage, the extra welfare benefit of the “fossil fuel”
pathway is still remarkably large.
Look at it another way. If we follow the “fossil fuel”
pathway, the average welfare in 2076, after we have
deducted the climate damage, will be $79,800 for every
person in the world. Under the “green” scenario we won’t
reach that welfare before 2100. Choosing the latter means
we’re literally holding the world back by a generation. By
the end of the century, the difference for the entire world
population is a staggering $509 trillion per year.

This is the choice we are faced with. Just like the
hypothetical choice in 1940 between two pathways, we
have to ask, why would we choose a poorer world with
fewer opportunities for our children and grandchildren?
WHAT I’M ARGUING HERE, that we should pick the
higher-growth pathway, runs counter to the arguments of
many climate change campaigners, and is especially at
odds with the views of a vocal minority who believe that
growth needs to be stopped altogether for the sake of the
planet.
In late 2018, nearly 240 academics signed a letter
declaring that economic growth is bad for the planet. They
reject “sustainable” and “inclusive” growth as insufficient
concepts, and argue that instead indicators of resource use
and inequality should be given a higher priority than GDP
in political decision making, that income should be capped,
and that working time should be reduced. They and global
supporters 
of 
the 
“no-growth 
economy” 
have 
held
conferences in Mexico City, Mexico; Malmö, Sweden; and
Brussels, Belgium.11
This is a movement that says more about the self-
indulgence of rich country academics than anything else.
But it is worth emphasizing how dangerous the concept is.
Obviously, the supporters of no-growth would argue that
they do not merely want to stop economic growth, but want
to encourage more education, health, and technology,
especially for the world’s poorest. But in a realistic world,
less or no growth means that distributional fights become
more vicious, and it seems naive to expect that ever-
increasing shares of a small cake would go to the least
powerful. What is clear is that of the UN’s different
projected futures, the low-growth scenarios are utterly
unattractive, most especially for the world’s poor.
Heeding the call of no-growth would likely mean we

would have much fewer resources for health care,
education, and technology. This outcome would trap us in a
world with far fewer resources to further human welfare. In
this scenario, the anti-growth campaigners would have
succeeded in ensuring the world is only a small amount
richer by the end of the century. Our dramatic progress in
eradicating poverty would be halted. The world would be a
much bleaker place—less healthy, less educated, less
technologically advanced.
PICKING A LOWER-GDP PATHWAY does not just mean
accepting dramatically lower welfare. The harsh reality is
that reducing income also literally kills people.
Being richer means living a safer life. When you have a
higher income, it allows you to buy more risk reduction,
from safer cars, to bicycle helmets, to better medical care
and more nutritious food. Researchers have looked at the
impact of higher incomes and found that they lead to lower
death rates, both because you can afford more health care
and because you can afford to give your children better
opportunities. All of this means that kids are more likely to
survive and to thrive in adulthood. Having $69,000 worth of
higher welfare for every person for every year can make
you a lot safer. Using the estimates in the literature, it is
likely that by the end of the century the “green” pathway
will see three million more deaths each year compared to
the “fossil fuel” pathway.12
We stand at a forked road, with different paths ahead of
us. Our fear of climate change is pushing us down the
“sustainability” pathway. This sounds like things we need:
more inclusive development that respects environmental
boundaries, shifting our emphasis away from economic
growth, and reducing our consumption. Yet, the result is
that humanity will be $500 trillion worse off, with more
poor people, more inequality, less opportunity, and millions

of more premature deaths than if we decide on the “fossil
fuel” pathway. We will be choosing to make each person on
the planet $69,000 worse off per year, even after taking the
costs of climate change into account.
Following the “fossil fuel” pathway doesn’t mean that we
ignore climate policy. In section 4 we will talk about the
right climate policies we should enact to ensure that we
also tackle climate change. But it is more important for the
bigger picture that we get all of our other policies right.
Notice what the UN clearly lays out is important for
avoiding the bad scenario outcomes. It has almost nothing
to do with climate. It is all about investing massively in
education, health, and technology, especially for the
world’s poorest. Our preoccupation with climate change
makes us forget these simple truths.
Choosing the right pathway will result in huge benefits
from free trade, harnessing innovation and ingenuity,
strong developments in human and social capital, and
technological improvements, as well as more access to
energy. If we choose the right pathway, we will leave our
grandchildren and great-grandchildren with far greater
opportunities. The benefits will especially help the world’s
poorest, as we will see in the next chapter.

10
HOW CLIMATE POLICY HURTS
THE POOR
“THE RICH POLLUTE, the Poor Suffer” runs a headline
from the Economist. It’s true: one of the insidious aspects
of climate change is that although it mostly wasn’t caused
by the world’s poor, it will hurt poorer countries more than
richer countries. This is partly because the economies of
poorer countries are more reliant on industries like
agriculture that are vulnerable to climactic changes; it is
partly because they tend to be in already warmer climates;
and it is mostly because being poor means having less
capacity to adapt.1
Climate change will cost most developed countries a few
percent of GDP, which is a problem. But for the poorest
countries and particularly for Africa, this cost can easily
end up being much more, maybe 10 percent of GDP. That is
a big problem.
This unfairness has long been used to argue for stringent
climate policy. “Cut Carbon by Up to Third to Save Poor,”
the British newspaper the Guardian was already exhorting
a decade ago. But the reality is that today’s climate policy
does little to tackle the climate-related problems of the
world’s poor.2
And it does virtually nothing to help with the vast array

of nonclimate issues that the world’s poor struggle with
every day. In fact, climate policies often make life worse
specifically for the poor. This is true both in rich countries
like the United States and the United Kingdom, and in the
poorest countries, especially those in Africa and Asia.
Today’s blinkered climate policies are in fact putting the
world’s worst-off countries on a slower path to progress
and prosperity. What are we doing in the name of climate?
WHEN DO PEOPLE in rich countries talk about the
problems in the developing world? When there is a natural
disaster. Typically, whatever the catastrophe is, it is
blamed on climate change, and commentators are quick to
make the case to cut more carbon dioxide. Unfortunately,
this is an absurdly ineffective policy.3
Let’s look at the devastating Typhoon Haiyan that hit the
Philippine city of Tacloban in 2013, killing 2,700 people in
the city, or 1 in 80 of its 218,000 inhabitants. Built on flat
land in an area of the coast notorious for concentrating and
amplifying 
storm 
surges, 
Tacloban 
had 
seen 
many
disasters. In 1912, a hurricane of similar strength following
almost the same path destroyed Tacloban and probably
killed 6,000 people. But back then, Tacloban was much,
much smaller, and it was estimated that 1 in 2 inhabitants
were killed.4
Haiyan got global attention because it hit while the
world’s climate negotiators were gathered in Poland for
their annual UN conference. The Philippine envoy spoke
movingly of his grief. According to the Guardian, this made
him the face of the UN climate talks and a “climate justice
star.” The diplomat vowed to fast until the world agreed to
a solution involving dramatic carbon dioxide cuts. But will
cutting carbon dioxide really help Tacloban?5
We saw earlier that climate change will likely mean
fewer but stronger hurricanes. Cutting carbon dioxide will

delay these effects slightly, but not reverse them. Even
under the most dramatic climate policies, temperatures will
still rise, only slightly more slowly. Hurricanes will still get
stronger, only slightly less soon. Because carbon cuts will
only slowly make any impact on rising temperatures, such
action would help not one single person today or in the next
decades. Cutting carbon even drastically would help future
citizens of Tacloban only marginally in the sense that it
would push stronger hurricanes a bit further into the
future.
What if, instead of cutting carbon, we helped Tacloban
escape widespread poverty, and got more people out from
under flimsy, corrugated roofs? That would transform the
lives of today’s most vulnerable, making them more
resilient, and of course it would dramatically improve the
prospects for future generations.
Richer people are, unsurprisingly, more able to invest in
adaptation to protect lives and valuables. One 2016 study
shows that when income doubles for the average person in
a poor community, fatalities from natural disasters will be
cut by more than a quarter. What this tells us is that
increasing incomes builds resilience. This is why the much
poorer Tacloban of 1912 saw a forty times greater
hurricane death toll (in relation to the city’s population)
than in 2013.6
Since the first climate summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992,
the world has talked incessantly about cutting carbon
emissions. Imagine if in 1992 we instead had focused on
cutting Tacloban’s poverty. From 1992 to 2013, general
economic progress in the Philippines tripled GDP per
person; if we had focused more on poverty reduction, we
might reasonably have quadrupled GDP by the time
Typhoon Haiyan hit. This would have saved more than
three hundred people’s lives. Climate policies saved zero.
Putting it bluntly, choosing climate policies over growth

policies doesn’t just do nothing. It means more people die
avoidable deaths.
As Tacloban and other vulnerable parts of the world get
richer, inhabitants will be able to build better houses,
transport, and infrastructure. Of course, this will raise the
costs 
of 
property 
damage 
when 
hurricanes 
hit.
Nonetheless, investment in these adaptation measures will
mean that a doubling of average income will cause damage
as a percentage of GDP to decline by 30 percent. Moreover,
rising prosperity doesn’t just mean more money for
adaptation. It means more money for education, birth
control, and investment. It means less malnutrition and
lower infant mortality. Increasing prosperity makes life
better for people in all sorts of ways.7
In contrast, cutting carbon emissions is generally an
incredibly ineffective way to improve the lives of the
world’s poor. Helping them through carbon dioxide cuts,
even very dramatic cuts, means the world will still see a
significant temperature rise, only a slightly slower one.
This means that whatever climate-related worry you try to
address will still get worse; it’s just that it will be slightly
less bad than it could have been.
Worried about drought? Cutting carbon dioxide will not
reduce drought risks—at best it will make drought increase
slightly less quickly.
Worried about floods, heat waves, or the multitude of
other possible climate impacts? The same thing happens.
At best, you’re slowing the problems slightly, at a great
cost.
We need to open our eyes to a broader range of
solutions, because we know that lifting people out of
poverty has amazing impacts. Making people better off
over a couple of decades means that any size storm they
encounter will cause fewer deaths and less damage.
Lifting incomes significantly reduces the damage from

any 
potential 
climate-change-caused 
increase 
in
hurricanes, droughts, and floods. Moreover, there have
always been natural disasters and there always will be,
even if we stopped climate change altogether. Lifting
incomes doesn’t just help with the increase in natural
disasters caused by global warming. It also helps reduce all
the damage that would have happened anyway.8
FOR THE WORLD’S POOR, climate policies are often worse
than ineffective. They are destructive.
Take nutrition. Climate activists often point out that
higher temperatures will make more people hungry, so
drastic carbon cuts are needed. But a comprehensive study
published in 2018 in Nature Climate Change shows that
strong global action to reduce climate change would cause
far more hunger and food insecurity than climate change
itself.9
The scientists used eight agricultural models covering
the entire planet to analyze various scenarios for food
security between now and 2050. Similar to how climate
change models are used, one economic model might reflect
the overly optimistic or pessimistic assumptions of a
particular set of researchers, so it’s best to look at a broad
range of them, and at the averages.
Overall, these eight models give us reason for cheer: on
average, they suggest that when disregarding global
warming, predicted economic growth between now and
2050 would dramatically reduce the number of people
starving, from almost eight hundred million today to two
hundred million. But the models also allow us to see the
effect 
of 
climate 
change. 
They 
show 
that 
rising
temperatures could mean both lower food production and
higher food prices. By 2050, this would put about twenty-
four million extra people at risk of hunger who otherwise
wouldn’t have been.

That sounds like a good reason to aggressively push for
climate policies to cut emissions. Strong carbon-cutting
policies can indeed potentially alleviate some of this added
vulnerability to hunger. If these climate policies had no cost
at all, they would reduce the increases in temperature and
save about fifteen million out of the twenty-four million
extra people who would be starving because of climate
change.
Unfortunately, as we have seen, aggressive action to
reduce climate change is not costless. One of the biggest
impacts is on energy prices, which hurt the poor the most.
Indeed, the climate policy costs hitting not just households
but also agricultural producers, food manufacturers, and
the transport sector mean that food prices are predicted to
climb by 110 percent by 2050. And that would have the
total effect of forcing seventy-eight million people into
starvation.
Which is to say that by insisting on cutting carbon
through climate policies that push up food prices, instead
of taking a broader view of how to best help people and the
planet, we will have consigned fifty-four million more
people to starvation. This is unconscionable.5
THE 
PARIS 
AGREEMENT 
is 
expensive 
and 
largely
ineffective. It is also going to mean more people left in
poverty. A 2019 study found that the massive cost of
reducing emissions under the Paris Agreement will lead to
an increase in global poverty (compared to what would
otherwise be expected) of around 4 percent. The authors
issue a stark warning that strong climate change policies
could slow efforts to reduce poverty in poor countries.10
Let’s look at the world’s poorest continent, Africa, which
will be particularly badly hit by global warming. The green
and fossil fuel pathways we saw in chapter 9 once again
show two divergent futures (see figure 10.1). For Africa,

instead of a twenty-fold increase in incomes from 2020 to
2100 in the green scenario, the fossil fuel pathway would
deliver a thirty-three-fold increase. Of course, climate
campaigners would immediately counter: “But climate
change will devastate Africa.”
FIGURE 10.1 African GDP per person for the UN’s
sustainable and fossil-fuel-driven scenarios. The
dashed lines show the GDP per person in dollars.
Because higher temperatures also mean more climate
damages, the solid lines show the welfare left after
deducting the costs of climate damages.11
Using a regionally defined climate cost model by William
Nordhaus, we can roughly identify the total, negative
impact from climate change on Africa. It is clear that Africa
will be hurt the most of any region with global warming,
and it will lose even more when temperatures go higher
under the fossil fuel scenario. In 2100, Africa will lose 4.1
percent of its GDP to global warming if we follow the green
pathway, and it will lose much more in the hotter world of
the fossil fuel pathway, with a GDP reduction of 9.9 percent
in 2100.12
But something else is also clear. While Africans will lose

much less prosperity to climate change if we follow the
“sustainability” (“green”) pathway, they will be much
better off overall if we follow the “fossil fuel” pathway: they
will be more than thirty times more prosperous in 2100
than in 2020, even after accounting for climate damages,
compared to “just” nineteen times better off in the
“sustainability” pathway. By choosing the latter, we would
be leaving each African $55,000 worse off every year.
The truth is that climate change plays a relatively small
role in determining future well-being. It is clear that if
we’re motivated only by trying to reduce the impact of
rising temperatures, we’re literally ignoring the most
important factors—such as education, health, technology,
and access to plentiful energy—in Africa’s future well-
being.
WELL-MEANING CLIMATE POLICIES also have indirect
impacts. 
Campaigners 
used 
to 
claim 
that 
rising
temperatures would lead to more cases of malaria because
there would be more warm places where mosquitoes would
thrive. We don’t often hear this concern anymore, thanks to
tremendous 
success 
tackling 
malaria 
directly 
with
insecticide-treated 
bed 
nets, 
indoor 
spraying, 
and
treatment, which has halved the number of deaths over the
last fifteen years. Imagine if we hadn’t focused on these
simple approaches, but instead put all our efforts into
cutting carbon dioxide. We would still have 840,000 annual
deaths, 400,000 more than today, while we waited for the
miniscule effects of moderate carbon cuts to have any
impact.13
Instead, lifting societies out of poverty is a much more
important pathway to eradicating malaria. A study shows
that when the average GDP per person reaches $3,100 per
year, individuals have enough resources that most can
afford to buy drugs to cure malaria, essentially ridding

society of the disease altogether.14
Nonetheless, campaigners for carbon cuts continue to
claim that the Paris Agreement is an important way to help
tackle health issues like malaria. The World Meteorological
Organization 
devoted 
a 
Paris 
Agreement–themed
conference 
to 
health 
issues 
and 
proclaimed 
that
implementation of the pact was key to improving health,
including tackling malaria. Even the illustrious medical
journal Lancet published a commentary by two doctors
opposing the Trump administration’s backpedaling on the
Paris Agreement, citing climate change’s effect on malaria
as one of the health impacts. Yet, the Paris Agreement will
have no perceptible impact on malaria because it will lead
to such small temperature changes; in fact, it is very likely
that its total impact will actually lead to more malaria
deaths.
Certainly, we know this to be the case for the world’s
previous climate agreement, the Kyoto Protocol. It was
found that had we implemented that protocol for the rest of
this century, it would through lowered temperatures have
reduced the global number of malaria deaths by about four
hundred thousand over the century. Yet higher costs in the
rich countries implementing Kyoto would also have meant
slightly slower growth for trading partners like Africa,
forcing them to linger in poverty longer.15
The negative impact from lower growth would cause an
extra six hundred thousand malaria deaths. This perversely
leads to climate policies making more poor people die from
malaria because they delay the time when nations get rich
enough to see the final eradication of malaria.
We have been here before, implementing policies that do
a huge amount of harm in the name of climate change.
Twenty years ago, a craze for biofuels swept rich countries,
with global production quintupling in the first decade of
this century. Biofuels are created with crops rather than

fossil fuels, so in principle they do not increase carbon
dioxide emissions. Rich countries hurried to institute
targets to promote more biofuel use to help cut carbon
emissions. The European Union led the way, stipulating
member states in 2003 pass legislation aimed at replacing
5.75 percent of all transport fossil fuels with biofuels by
2010. Developing nations, even those in the grip of famine,
were pushed to grow crops for ethanol instead of for
food.16
This movement originally had the full-throated support of
many green groups that hailed the shift away from fossil
fuels. Yet, the negative impacts were much greater than
most had anticipated. The charity ActionAid calculated that
the amount of crops needed to fill an SUV’s fuel tank with
biofuel would feed a child for an entire year, and every
gallon of biofuel wiped out forty meals.17
The huge growth in biofuel inevitably contributed to a
reduction in food and an increase in food prices: a
confidential World Bank report obtained by the Guardian
found that biofuels had forced global food prices up by 75
percent. The results of the price hike were devastating.
After food prices first spiked in 2008, the UN special envoy
for the right to food, Olivier De Schutter, declared that a
“silent tsunami” had pushed a hundred million people into
poverty and thirty million into hunger. The World Bank
subsequently estimated that between June and December
2010 an additional forty-four million people fell below the
extreme poverty line because of food price hikes.18
Many environmental groups began to soften their
support for biofuels or backtrack. Campaigners for
stringent 
climate 
action 
were 
increasingly 
appalled.
Guardian columnist and strong climate campaigner George
Monbiot called the subsidies driving the biofuel industry’s
growth “a crime against humanity.” Yet, by the point of the
backtrack, vested agricultural interests had made the bad

policies almost impossible to overturn.19
It seems that we have learned little from recent history,
as we plow headlong into new policies that will similarly
hurt the world’s poor.
THE TRUTH IS that climate policies hurt the poor
everywhere, even in countries like the United States,
because higher energy prices have a disproportionate
negative impact on the poor. Universally, poor people in
well-off countries use much more of their limited resources
paying for electricity and heating. One 2019 study showed
that US low-income consumers spend 85 percent more on
electricity as a percentage of total expenditure than high-
income consumers. When climate policies lead to higher
electricity prices, this harms the poor much more than the
rich.20
This is one of the reasons why rich elites have no
problem saying we should increase gas prices to $20 a
gallon—they can easily afford it. Wealth also tends to be
clustered in cities, where people drive much less. Of
course, the struggling single mom in Huntington, West
Virginia, has a very different experience.
Across the United States, many people are still
struggling to pay their energy bills. The International
Energy Agency estimates that 9 percent of Americans, or
twenty-nine million, are “energy poor,” spending more than
10 percent of their income on energy. This means poor
Americans often literally have to forgo other basics in order
to heat (or cool) their homes sufficiently.21
High energy prices literally kill people, as one 2019
study shows. Researchers looked at the natural experiment
that happened around 2010, when fracking delivered a
dramatic reduction in costs of natural gas. The massive
increase in availability of natural gas drove down the price
to heat homes. Cold homes are one of the leading causes of

deaths in winter: there is a strong connection between low
indoor temperatures and increased risk of strokes, heart
attacks, and respiratory diseases. So reducing the price of
heat saves lives. The study estimates that these new lower
energy prices save about eleven thousand Americans from
dying in winter every year.22
If climate policy is to work, it will drive up prices of
energy to reduce consumption. So a climate policy
reversing the price reduction due to fracking will drive
energy prices back up. People will be less able to heat their
homes, and the consequent death rate will go back up.23
Higher energy prices also hit the poor the hardest in
other rich countries. In the United Kingdom, rich
households spend 3 percent of their income on energy,
whereas poor households spend 10 percent. Campaigners
celebrate that the UK has seen a reduction in electricity
consumption, but this is mostly because costs have soared.
Ever more stringent climate legislation made the cost of UK
electricity increase by 62 percent in real terms over a
decade, during a period in which average incomes
increased just 4 percent. Not surprisingly, it is the poor
who have done almost all of the cutting back, reducing
their consumption much more than average, while the
richest cut almost none of their much higher electricity
use.24
Higher energy prices hit especially the elderly, who
often have to survive on low incomes. One poll in the UK
showed that a third of elderly people leave at least part of
their homes cold, and two-thirds say they wear extra layers
of clothing as a result.25
IN THE WORLD’S poorest countries, the insistence that we
should limit future access to fossil fuels has an even more
dramatic cost, because cheap and accessible power is life
saving, and one of the best ways out of poverty.

FIGURE 10.2 For every dollar spent on aid to the
developing world, the number of cents that go to
climate purposes.26
Yet, many development organizations with a primary
goal of helping the poor, including most notably the World
Bank, direct more and more of their help to what is known
as “climate-related development finance” or “climate aid.”
These are nebulous terms, but often what they mean is
more money for projects that build solar-energy microgrids
and an explicit refusal to fund any fossil-fuel-related
projects like new coal power plants.
Efforts to calculate just how much of global development
aid goes toward climate-related projects (see figure 10.2)
make it very clear that the percentage increased drastically
from about 2005.
Climate aid does only a little good. Remember the Indian
village of Dharnai (chapter 7), where the villagers wanted
“real” electricity that could power their refrigerators,
stoves, and also the lights in the morning? In general,
studies show that aid spent on solar panels and other
climate initiatives generates some of the smallest benefits
compared to other aid investments in nutrition, health,
gender, education, and infrastructure.27
The International Energy Agency expects that 195

million people will have access to energy for the first time
in the next decade. That is great. But they will get very
little power, mostly because the focus is on getting them
off-grid solar rather than on-grid, mostly fossil-fuel-based
energy. Indeed, they will on average get just 170 kilowatt-
hours per year. That is half of what one US flat-screen TV
uses in a year. Consider what your life would be like with
access to nothing but 170 kilowatt-hours. It is not enough
to power a factory or a farm, so it cannot reduce poverty or
create jobs. It won’t even be enough to hook up a stove and
heater to combat the fire-created smoke and pollution that
claims 1.6 million lives annually. It’s not even enough to
keep a refrigerator running. For the world’s poor, this level
of energy access is hardly transformational.28
In contrast, a study in Bangladesh has shown that grid
electrification, which in Bangladesh and much of the world
mostly means using fossil fuels, has significant positive
impacts on household income, expenditure, and education.
It 
means 
households 
newly 
introduced 
to 
grid
electrification experience on average a 21 percent jump in
income, and over a period of nine years a 13 percent
reduction in poverty.29
Unfortunately, many of our political leaders have
decided that when spending on aid for the world’s poorest,
climate change concerns trump poverty. That calculation is
wrong, and is undermining the claim to helping the world’s
poor.
In one 2016 study looking at energy options for
Bangladesh, researchers found that building more coal-
fired power plants would generate global climate damage
costing around $592 million over the next fifteen years, but
the benefits from electrification would be almost five
hundred times greater at $258 billion, equivalent to more
than an entire year of the nation’s GDP. By 2030, the
average Bangladeshi would be 16 percent better off.30

Denying Bangladesh this benefit in the name of reducing
the impact of climate change is fantastically arrogant: for
every 23¢ of global climate damage that we could avoid, we
are asking Bangladesh to forego $100 of prosperity and
development. And Bangladesh is a nation where energy
shortages cost an estimated 0.5 percent of GDP, and
around twenty-one million people live in extreme poverty.31
From the comfort of the World Economic Forum’s 2017
annual meeting in Davos, Switzerland, former US vice
president Al Gore tut-tutted about plans to build coal-fired
power plants in Bangladesh. But Bangladeshi prime
minister Sheikh Hasina slapped that down, pointing out: “If
you cannot develop the economic conditions of your people,
then how will you save our people? We have to ensure the
food security; we have to give them job opportunity.”32
Sheikh Hasina is right. Choosing expensive carbon-
cutting 
policies 
or 
insisting 
on 
green 
development
approaches might seem like an easy choice for the world’s
elite in Washington, DC, or Paris, France, but the burden of
these choices falls unfairly on the world’s poor, and
especially on those living in abject poverty. They need more
energy, not moralizing from the West.
It is perverse to hear rich people piously claim that we
should help the world’s poor by cutting carbon dioxide to
make their future slightly less worse, when we have huge
opportunities to make their lives much better, much more
quickly, and much more effectively.
IF YOU ARE POOR, you will be less able to build a strong
house to withstand hurricane-level winds or flooding. You
will be less able to buy an air conditioner to adapt to rising
temperatures. But if you are poor, you will also lack
resources to save your kids from easily curable diseases, to
keep them well nourished, to educate them, to house them
in a safe neighborhood, to ensure they are not exposed to

air pollution—the list goes on.
The truth is that poverty sucks. Exposure to natural
disasters caused by climate change is just one of many
ways that it sucks, and it happens to be one of the ways
where we can help the least even when spending trillions.
And when we spend lots of resources on climate, there is
less money left to tackle all the other problems facing the
poor, problems where we can help much more.
Today there are about 650 million extremely poor people
in the world. As a thought experiment, let’s consider what
it would cost to lift all these people out of poverty. (As a
caveat, let’s just remember that lifting people from, say,
90¢ a day to just above $1.90 is great, but they are still
pretty darn poor—and actually distributing the money
would be fantastically expensive.) It turns out that the
theoretical cost to lift everyone on the planet out of
extreme poverty would be less than $100 billion per year.33
Compare this to our current trajectory: we’ve committed
to spending $1 trillion to $2 trillion a year just on the
almost entirely ineffective Paris Agreement. Every month
the cost will be the same as the amount that could lift
everyone from extreme poverty. This strikes me as
obscene. As rich countries commit to going carbon neutral,
the costs will escalate to tens of trillions of dollars per year,
to make a small temperature change in a century’s time.
Just a couple of days of these new, higher costs could
transform the world by ending extreme poverty entirely.
CLIMATE ALARMISM TOO often leads us to policies that
while well intentioned, crowd out much more effective
ways of helping people. It comes down to this: when we see
a malnourished child or a town hit by a hurricane and
seriously suggest that we should make lives better by
cutting a ton of carbon dioxide, we are not actually trying
to do good, but rather imposing our own priorities on

people who have little power to assert their own. It has
become too easy to believe that policies aimed at cutting
carbon are the answer to everything. They’re not, and we
need to stop campaigning for and enacting policies that will
have the world’s poorest paying for our mistakes.
Thirty years of climate policy have failed to rein in
temperature rises or reduce carbon intensity—the amount
of carbon dioxide we emit for every unit of energy
produced. 
All 
the 
well-meaning 
personal 
actions
undertaken in the rich world, like buying electric cars or
becoming vegetarian, amount to little more than gestures.
Far more importantly, the Paris Agreement has put us
collectively on a pathway toward incurring gigantic costs,
especially for the poorest, with next to no climate benefit.
Thus far, humanity has excelled at showing how not to
fix the climate. We have spent three decades trying the
same, deeply broken approach, over and over. Politicians
lurch from one climate summit to the next, with climate
campaigners urging them on to make even more ludicrous
promises. Enough is enough.
There are smart policies that can tackle climate change
and help make the world better. These are what we’ll turn
to in the next section.
Footnotes
5 In fact, I just told you the story without carbon dioxide fertilization, because
this story sounds more “normal.” If we include carbon dioxide fertilization (as
we should), strong climate policy becomes an even more risible solution to
hunger. The net impact of climate change will actually be beneficial, because
carbon dioxide fertilization drives down food prices more than temperature
drives them up. In total, global warming will mean eleven million fewer

starving in 2050. Trying to limit climate change by cutting carbon dioxide will
no longer solve a problem, but actually prevent a benefit. Of course, aggressive
climate action will still increase prices and drive more people into hunger.
Under these more realistic assumptions, climate policy is no longer a solution
and will in total cause seventy-seven million more people to starve (Hasegawa
et al. 2018, fig. S6).

SECTION FOUR
HOW TO FIX CLIMATE
CHANGE

11
CARBON TAX: THE MARKET-
BASED SOLUTION
IT IS TIME to admit that the current approach to fixing
climate change is not working. More protests and promises,
more solar panels and wind turbines, more subsidies—all of
these just tinker at the edges. We need to resist the
shortsighted call from campaigners, green lobbyists, and
populist politicians to double down and make even bigger
carbon-cutting promises. After thirty years of failure, we
need to say enough is enough.
The good news is that there are smarter, more effective
policy options. We should find and implement ways to cut
emissions effectively, both so the cuts cost as little as
possible and so they do more good than harm. But we also
need to harness the best of humanity—the innovative spirit
and creativity that can generate new solutions.
In this section, I will outline five key policies that most
people can agree on, because they are a smart and
effective way to tackle climate change.
THE FIRST WAY to tackle climate change is to effectively
implement a tax on carbon dioxide emissions, usually just
called a “carbon tax.” I want to first focus on why we
should have a carbon tax, and then at what level it should

be set.
Carbon taxes can aggressively reduce emissions and
thereby limit global warming’s most damaging effects at
fairly low cost. This is not a controversial idea. Most
economists agree that the most effective way to reduce the
worst damage of climate change is to levy a tax on carbon
dioxide emissions. These emissions are simply a by-product
of burning fossil fuels to achieve productive things like
harvesting crops, pumping water, and keeping medicine
cool. The benefits accrue to the person or company making
the emissions, and to the consumers of the products they
make, but the negative effects (carbon dioxide emissions
and their impact on temperatures) are spread over a large
population.
This is a classic example of a “market failure”: one
person gets the benefits, someone else gets most of the
“disbenefits.” On a much smaller scale, imagine that you
burn a fire in your home’s fireplace; it creates a lot of
annoying, dirty smoke that makes you cough, and soot that
covers everything. If you build a tall smokestack, you’ve
solved the problem, for you, and shared it with a much
larger population. The problem itself, though, hasn’t been
solved.
There are various ways to tackle the market failure at
the heart of climate change. The reason a market works in
the first place is that prices are supposed to deliver all the
information we need. When you sit down in a restaurant to
order wild-caught salmon, you don’t need to know whether
this is the right season for salmon fishing in Alaska,
whether the seas have been rough or the trip to the harbor
was particularly difficult, or whether the chef is having
financial problems. You simply look at the price and make
your 
choice 
based 
on 
that, 
which 
should 
already
incorporate all these factors into one number. The market
failure comes when some costs do not show up in the final
price; for instance, the carbon dioxide emitted by the

fishing boat and the planes and trucks that brought the fish
to market, all of which will cause some climate problems.
One solution to the market failure could be to ban the
use of fossil fuels. That would be terribly inefficient, since it
means that humanity would forgo any benefit, no matter
how large, from fossil fuels in order to avoid the negative
impact from climate change.
Another solution would be a set of regulations: the
government could decide how much carbon dioxide the
boat is allowed to emit, restrict flights and what cargo can
be flown where, and control how far trucks are allowed to
drive to deliver the salmon. But to control all these
emissions of carbon dioxide, governments would essentially
need to regulate every minute part of the economy. Every
regulation bears a cost: it ties up businesses and citizens in
a little more red tape. At the required scale, the price tag
would be huge.
Instead, economists point out that we can correct the
market failure with relative ease by putting a cost on the
carbon dioxide that is emitted to make sure the price of any
product or service, including the fish we are ordering at a
restaurant, incorporates the climate damage it will cause.
This is essentially what a carbon tax does. It forces you to
take into account the climate disbenefits that your
purchase is responsible for, so you can weigh these against
the benefit.
Let’s consider what happens to our salmon. Carbon
emissions occur at each stage of the process of getting the
fish from the ocean to the table. With a carbon tax, the
fishing company would pay a little extra for fuel. The
transport company flying the salmon from Alaska might
have to pay quite a bit extra. Even sautéing the salmon in
the kitchen will add a tiny extra cost because the
restaurant pays slightly higher gas prices. The carbon tax
not only encourages each participant in the market to be
more efficient, but the costs are passed on down the line.

Eventually, the extra price that you the consumer pay in
the restaurant reflects all these additional carbon damages.
Now, if you really like fresh Alaskan salmon, you will just
pay the additional cost. But salmon frozen and transported
by ship instead of by plane will be responsible for much
less carbon dioxide emissions and thus incur a much lower
additional tax, so perhaps to save money you will buy
frozen fillets from the supermarket and cook them yourself
at home. In essence, the carbon dioxide tax has helped you
discover that your enjoyment of fresh salmon does not
outweigh the negative effect of the extra carbon dioxide
emissions, and it has helped you change your choice.
If the carbon tax is set at the right level, it corrects the
market failure so that the prices now reflect not just how
difficult it was to catch and transport your salmon, but also
its emissions along the way. Indeed, it doesn’t just show
consumers which products are carbon intensive and should
be used more sparingly, but it helps energy producers
move toward lower carbon dioxide emissions (perhaps
through more reliance on solar and wind energy), and it
encourages innovators to come up with new, lower-carbon
processes and products.1
Unfortunately, another consequence of this tax is that it
makes everyone slightly poorer than they would have been.
It forces people and companies to use more expensive
technologies and fuels than they otherwise would have
done. This is crucial to our discussion of how to set a
carbon tax. Emissions damage the climate, creating costs
over the long term. Climate policy, through a carbon tax,
reduces those costs but also causes its own damage to the
economy. Having a climate policy means that we have to
pay both costs, so we have to work out at what level a
carbon tax should be set in order to minimize the impact of
both.2

LIKE ANY OTHER TAX, a carbon tax can be set at any level
that a government chooses. How does a government decide
on the right carbon tax? There are costs to ignoring climate
change and having no carbon tax, but there are also costs
from exaggerating the impact of climate change and having
a massive tax.
If we don’t implement a carbon tax, we will bear the full
brunt of climate change over the coming centuries. In
chapter 7, we saw that the cost in the year 2100 will be
about 3.6 percent of GDP, and there will be costs in the
eighty years leading up to 2100 and far beyond into the
future. Using Nordhaus’s model, adding up all the costs
throughout the next five centuries as if we had to pay them
today, the bill would be $140 trillion. That is the top bar in
figure 11.1, which shows the total global cost from climate
change damages we would see without any climate policy.3
We can most effectively reduce the damages from
climate change by having one carbon tax across all
countries and goods. That way, producers can’t just shift
their emissions to a factory in another country, and
everyone faces the same costs. Achieving a uniform global
standard means all countries need to set the same carbon
tax for all their emissions. Of course, this will be
challenging to achieve (and we will discuss what happens if
we fail, below), but one global carbon tax is by far the best
approach. It will be much more efficient than if countries
all go it alone and introduce varying levels of taxes.
Moreover, using a single, global carbon tax is how almost
all climate economic models look at the world.
It’s important to note that this isn’t a tax we should set
at one level forever. A carbon tax that starts out low and
increases over time will be able to cut more emissions at
lower 
cost. 
That 
is 
both 
because 
technological
developments will make future carbon cuts cheaper (this
innovation is included in Nordhaus’s model) and because

stronger carbon cuts are more valuable in the future when
temperatures and damages are higher.5
FIGURE 11.1 Total global climate change damage
costs over next five hundred years for different
temperature rises by 2100, using Nordhaus’s Dynamic
Integrated Climate-Economy model (DICE).4
If we aim to reduce the temperature rise to 6.3°F in
2100, we can use Nordhaus’s climate-economic model to
find the most effective, increasing global carbon tax to
achieve this goal. As shown in figure 11.1, successfully
implemented, this tax would cut the total climate change
damage costs from $140 trillion to $87 trillion.
But let’s say that we instead aim for a 5.3°F temperature
rise in 2100. Then we will need a higher, increasing carbon
tax to achieve this lower temperature rise. If the tax is
successfully implemented, we would cut the cost of climate
change damage to $67 trillion.
As we cut the temperature more and more with ever
higher, increasing carbon taxes, the climate change
damage cost declines more and more. If we reduce the
temperature rise to a very low 3.9°F, then damage cost
would be cut by more than two-thirds, to $40 trillion. This
obviously seems to suggest that we should simply cut
temperature as much as possible, because then the climate
change damage costs are the lowest. In fact, this is where
most climate policy debate begins and ends: temperature

rises are bad, therefore we must cut them as much as
possible. But, remember that there is a second cost: cutting
temperatures through a carbon tax reduces economic
output. Let’s call this the climate change policy cost.
FIGURE 11.2 Total global climate change policy costs
over next five hundred years for different temperature
rises by 2100, using Nordhaus’s DICE model.6
For the climate change debate to become more rational
and pragmatic, we need to realize that we have to pay both
costs: the climate change impact cost and the climate
change policy cost. Making the temperature rise smaller
means making the climate change policy cost bigger.
In figure 11.2, we see what happens to the climate
change policy cost under different scenarios. Let’s say that
from 2010 we enact zero new climate change policies. This
means that we allow for the small number of climate
policies enacted around the world before 2010, but we
imagine that no new policies will be introduced by any
government to achieve any of the many climate promises
made in Paris and elsewhere. The climate-economic model
of William Nordhaus shows that doing so implies a
temperature rise of 7.4°F by 2100, with $0 in new climate
change policy cost, as seen in the top bar of the graph.7
However, if we want to limit global temperature rises to
6.3°F by 2100, the model shows that we can most
effectively achieve that with a global carbon tax in 2020 of

$36 per ton of carbon dioxide, increasing to $270 per ton
by the end of the century. This will mean more expensive
energy, which in total will result in costs of $21 trillion.
This is the climate change policy cost shown by the second
bar of figure 11.2.8
As we make climate change policy more ambitious, these
climate change policy costs increase. Keeping temperature
rises to 3.9°F by 2100 requires a global carbon tax that
almost immediately rises to a high $500 per ton of carbon
dioxide. How would that tax level affect your life? Well, you
could expect to pay another $4.50 for every gallon of
gasoline, and there would be similar impacts on all other
items containing energy. And given that it is a global tax,
everyone in the world, even in poor countries, would have
to pay the same extra costs. At those kinds of prices,
carbon dioxide emissions would essentially be eradicated
within a decade. Not surprisingly, this policy will be very
expensive at $177 trillion. (Notice we don’t include the cost
of the 3.6°F (2°C) target here, because it is likely
impossible 
to 
reach 
that 
target 
with 
realistic
technologies.)10

FIGURE 11.3 Total global climate change impact cost
and climate change policy costs over the next five
hundred years for different temperature rises by 2100,
using Nordhaus’s DICE model. Climate policy is,
implausibly, expected to be efficiently implemented
across all countries and centuries. Optimal policy
(with the lowest total cost) indicated.9
But because in setting climate change policy we need to
take into account both climate costs and climate policy
costs, let’s now put both together, in figure 11.3. The
hatched bars on the left show the climate cost, which is
declining with more stringent climate policy. The black
bars on the right show the cost of the climate policy, which
increases as our policies become more stringent.
By adding the costs together at various levels, we can
see the optimal climate change policy: the point where the
combined cost of climate change damage and climate
change policy impact is lowest. This is where the overall
benefits to society are the greatest. If we cut temperatures
beyond this point, the cost of climate change policy rises
faster than the avoided cost of climate damages. If we cut
carbon emissions below this point, climate change damage
costs rise faster than the avoided climate change policy
costs.
In Nobel laureate William Nordhaus’s economic model,

this optimal point is to be found if we keep temperature
rises to 6.3°F in 2100. At 6.3°F, the climate change damage
costs would be $87 trillion, and the climate change policy
costs would be $21 trillion, leading to an overall cost of
$108 trillion: this is the smallest possible combined price
tag the world can achieve.11
MANY CAMPAIGNERS BELIEVE that allowing temperature
rises of 6.3°F is not nearly ambitious enough. But that is
only because it has become commonplace to talk about
incredibly costly or even impossible temperature cap
targets like 3.6°F (2°C) or 2.7°F (1.5°C) without any
acknowledgment of their costs or plausibility.
Look at the emission reductions implied by the 6.3°F and
the 3.9°F policy targets in figure 11.4. On the left-hand
side, we see emissions over the century. The black line
shows how emissions keep increasing if we do nothing. The
gray line shows what would happen to emissions with the
optimal carbon tax identified above. The dashed line shows
emissions under climate campaigners’ favored scenario.
Notice how the optimal tax immediately reduces
emissions as the entire world adopts a common carbon tax
in 2020. This would already constitute an amazing
achievement. Then emissions increase somewhat as poor
countries get richer and emit more, but just a couple of
decades later emissions begin to decline, ending with less
than one-fifth of the level expected by century’s end.
If the world were to successfully adopt this optimal
carbon tax, it would have a transformative impact: in 2100,
the annual global emissions would be cut by more than 80
percent compared to what they would otherwise have been.
Even though the cuts in the early decades are smaller, the
total reduction over the entire century will be half of what
we otherwise expected.12
Nonetheless, the impact on temperature of this intense

emissions reduction resulting from the optimal carbon tax,
as seen on the right-hand side, is rather small. It reduces
the temperature in 2100 from 7.4°F to 6.3°F. This is
because the planet’s climate has a huge amount of inertia
built in, which translates even fairly dramatic reductions in
emissions into rather small temperature changes. Even as
we reduce our annual emissions, the total amount of carbon
dioxide increases, just more slowly. Remember the
metaphor of the bathtub? Even if we pour in less water, the
water level still increases.
FIGURE 11.4 On the left, three possible emissions
scenarios for the rest of the century. The black line is
if we do nothing. The gray line shows the optimal
global carbon tax, discussed above. The dashed line
shows the favorite scenario of climate campaigners,
essentially eradicating carbon dioxide emissions by
2030. On the right are the temperature increases for
these three emission scenarios.13
Moreover, achieving this temperature reduction requires
the entire world to implement a rather steep carbon tax of
$270 per ton by the end of the century. That equates to
your average American motorist paying an extra $2.40 for

every gallon of gasoline, and similarly high costs on all
other uses of energy from fossil fuels. And even more
importantly, it means every Chinese, Venezuelan, and
Nigerian will also have to pay $2.40 more per gallon of
gasoline and will face similar cost hikes on all other fossil
fuels. This will be a tough sell.
Yet, this is nothing compared to what would be required
under the most ambitious 3.9°F climate policy: essentially
outlawing global fossil fuel emissions in a decade. First, it
is practically inconceivable that this policy could be
actually implemented throughout the world. Imagine telling
Americans that they can have no gasoline for their cars by
2030, no trucks or trains running on fossil fuels, no power
from coal or gas, no plastics, cement, fertilizer, and so on.
Now try to imagine telling the Chinese to shut down 80
percent of their power stations. Or telling India and Africa
they will have to forego having plentiful, cheap, and
reliable power in the first place.
Second, even if we somehow managed this feat, the
costs would be spectacular. The temperature will keep
going up, though not quite as much. And the total costs to
society, from climate change damage and climate change
policy, would double (from the optimal cost of $108 trillion
to $218 trillion, as seen in figure 11.3).
When politicians and campaigners talk about extremely
drastic climate policies, they don’t acknowledge, and
perhaps don’t even realize, that those policies have a cost
to society vastly greater than the costs of the damage they
are trying to avoid. We want to avoid climate change
damage. But implementing a climate change policy also has
costs, and the more ambitious the policy, the higher the
costs. The policy that will leave the world best off is the one
where we avoid the worst climate change damages and
avoid the worst climate policy costs.

UNFORTUNATELY, THE OPTIMAL climate policy requires
a globally coordinated carbon tax, and that is possible only
in a fairy-tale world. It doesn’t ever happen in real life. It
would require politicians to set rational, ever more costly
carbon taxes covering every person on the planet, through
the next eighty years. Just in the United States, such
consistency would be impossible. Over the next eighty
years, the US will have forty different congresses and could
have twenty different presidents.
Taxes are not set, nor adjusted, with global coordination
and precision. Instead, they are set and unset nationally
according 
to 
political 
opportunism, 
groundswells 
of
opinion, and political setbacks. Look at France, for
example, where President Emmanuel Macron backed down
in 2018 on a 13¢ per gallon “green” fuel tax in the face of
Yellow Vest protests. Look at President Trump in the
United States, President Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil, and the
many other politicians backtracking on climate policies.14
It beggars belief to think that climate change policy will
follow an optimal path. The chances are basically zero that
there will be one uniform, steadily increasing global carbon
tax carefully coordinated among China, India, the United
States, Iran, Saudi Arabia, the European Union, and every
other nation over the next eighty years and beyond. The
real world will see much muddling through, with some
countries setting carbon taxes too high, others setting them
too low, and all adjusting them up and down according to
local events and political pressures. This will mean that any
actual carbon tax will become more expensive than the
theoretically pure model with a single, global carbon tax.
We have a good sense of how much more expensive
climate policies could get. First, we know that the cheapest
carbon cuts can be made in the developing world.
Unfortunately, most actual carbon cuts are made in the rich
world. It turns out that this alone makes the cost double,

because we insist on cutting where the cost is highest.15
Second, politicians often pick ineffective climate policies.
As we saw in chapter 8, the European Union has seen its
climate change policy cost double from the most effective
level it could have been, because politicians didn’t make
the most efficient choices and couldn’t help but dish out
favors to some industries over others. Similarly, much
climate policy in many US states, including New York,
California, and Hawaii, is based on the renewable portfolio
standard, a regulation that according to economists makes
it at least twice as expensive as the most efficient policy
would have been.16
Thus, it is reasonable to expect that the real cost of
climate change policy will be at least twice as expensive as
the model we used in figure 11.2 and figure 11.3
suggested. (If anything, this is far too low because the
evidence implies a doubling of costs both for coordination
between 
the 
rich 
and 
poor 
world 
and 
for 
bad
implementation in places like the EU and California, thus
suggesting that the real amount could be at least four times
the most efficient cost.)
To adjust for the real world, we can run the numbers
through William Nordhaus’s model again, but this time
allow for policy costing twice as much. Just as before, the
costs of climate change damage still decrease as we reach
lower and lower temperatures by 2100. Figure 11.5 shows
climate 
change 
policy 
costs 
when 
we 
account 
for
inefficiency. If we do no new climate policy, the new
climate policy cost is still zero. But the climate change
policy costs increase much faster when we acknowledge
that 
they 
are 
inefficiently 
implemented 
and 
poorly
coordinated. Now, every other amount is about twice as
big. The plausible cost for achieving the most ambitious
target of keeping temperature rises to 3.9°F by 2100 is a
whopping $350 trillion.

FIGURE 11.5 Realistic global climate change policy
costs over the next five hundred years for different
temperature rises by 2100, reflecting additional cost
due to political inefficiency, using Nordhaus’s DICE
model.17
Now let’s again bring this all together in figure 11.6, this
time including both climate change damage costs and
realistic 
climate 
change 
policy 
costs. 
The 
optimal
temperature rise is now 6.75°F (versus 6.3°F in figure
11.3) because realistic climate change policies are more
expensive. The far costlier climate change policies required
to achieve lower temperatures would be incredibly
onerous. They would force the world to pay close to $400
trillion to achieve a temperature rise of 3.9°F.
In a realistic world starting from the close to no climate
policy that we have today, careful climate policies can save
us $18 trillion (the difference between $140 trillion in no-
policy costs and the $122 trillion from the optimal policy).
Reckless policies, by contrast, could cost us $250 trillion
dollars more (the difference between the no-policy cost of
$140 trillion and the $390 trillion cost for the 3.9°F policy).
Despite everything we are told, climate policies have a
small upside (that we should exploit) and a potentially very
large downside.

FIGURE 11.6 Total global climate damage costs and
total realistic climate change policy costs over the next
five hundred years for different temperature rises by
2100, using Nordhaus’s DICE model. Optimal policy
(with the lowest total cost) indicated.18
LET’S ASSUME THAT we all agree that our common goal is
to create the best possible world for the generations that
succeed us; that is, to create the maximum possible welfare
for subsequent generations.
In this chapter so far, we have calculated the welfare
loss from climate change damage, and the welfare loss
from climate change policies, and we have looked for the
sweet spot where we achieve the smallest welfare loss from
both combined. But Nordhaus’s model actually lets us take
an even broader view and estimate the total amount of
welfare available to society over the next five centuries
under different climate policies. This is a much bigger
picture, and puts the impacts of damages from climate
change and damages from carbon taxes into perspective,
because climate change is just one part of our future.
It may seem very abstract, but future welfare essentially
represents what humanity gets to enjoy—this is all the
“good” that we can make sure is available to future
generations. We have a responsibility to maximize this

good, to help future generations as much as possible.
FIGURE 11.7 Value of total global GDP over the next
five centuries. The hatched cost is the loss due to
climate damage and climate policy; the rest in black
represents remaining human welfare.19
In figure 11.7, the black bars denote the total welfare
available to society over the next five centuries. It is the
total GDP “left over” when we have both endured the cost
of climate damages and paid the cost of climate change
policies (the hatched area).
One important point to note is that humanity’s welfare
(the black) is large, no matter which climate policy we end
up choosing. Even measured over the next five centuries,
climate change damages and climate change policy costs
will not do more than nibble away at the world’s GDP. In
other words, climate change and climate policy are
responsible for only a smaller part of our future welfare.
It is likely that total GDP across the next five centuries
will add up to $4,629 trillion—a huge figure. Damages from
climate change and the costs of climate change policy will
set us back. If we end up doing nothing to tackle climate
change and reach a 7.4°F temperature rise by the end of
the century, climate change damage will be significant at

$140 trillion, or about 3 percent of total future GDP.
Nonetheless, we will have 97 percent of all resources, or
almost $4,500 trillion, left for health, education, food, and
all the other opportunities that build humanity’s welfare.
If we manage to implement a smart but realistic
increasing carbon tax across the centuries, we can do
better. With real-world assumptions, carbon taxes will be
somewhat coordinated but not perfectly aligned, and they
will rise across the century in all nations, somewhat
haphazardly. The average global temperature rise will
reach a slightly lower 6.75°F by the end of the century. The
total costs of climate change policy and damage will be
around $122 trillion, or 2.6 percent of the total GDP. This
means that humanity will have 97.4 percent, or slightly
more than $4,500 trillion, of the world’s future GDP left for
welfare.
Thus, the damage to GDP ends up 0.4 percent less than
that in our scenario with no climate change policy. A
realistic, moderate and increasing carbon tax policy can
definitely make a net benefit for society worth $18 trillion,
or 0.4 percent of GDP.
But what happens if we aim to enact much more
ambitious climate targets, through much higher carbon
taxes? The total costs increase dramatically. Trying to keep
the temperature rise to 3.9°F in 2100 is still less ambitious
than the popular idea enshrined in the Paris Agreement of
keeping temperature rises under 3.6°F (2°C). Yet, the total
loss to humanity from climate change and policy damage
would reach a staggering $391 trillion, or 8.4 percent, of
GDP.
Compared to the $140 trillion, or 3 percent, loss from
doing nothing, doing too much is far worse. In an attempt
to ameliorate climate change, we will end up avoiding more
of the climate damage costs, but saddle the world with
climate policies so expensive that the total costs almost

triple. The cure is much worse than the disease.
CARBON TAXES ARE a good idea, and should be
implemented as efficiently as possible. We need to be
realistic, however, about what they can and cannot do. A
modest, increasing carbon tax can be a very good idea if
globally embraced, even if imperfectly delivered. It can
ensure that we cut the most damaging of our emissions at
low costs. Yet, the impact of optimal policy will be relatively
modest, reducing temperature rises from 7.4°F to 6.75°F,
or by about 0.65°F. The benefit will be worth around 0.4
percent of GDP.20
Realistically, a smart carbon tax will make an impact,
but it can be only a small part of our solution to climate
change, simply because going further means enduring
more costs from taxes than the avoided costs of climate
change.
We should implement a smart, global tax. But if we want
to deal with more of the climate damages, a carbon tax is
far from enough: we need to look at other approaches.

12
INNOVATION: WHAT IS NEEDED
MOST
THE BIGGEST PROBLEM we face when we confront global
warming is that fossil fuels produce carbon dioxide. We
need to reduce emissions to limit warming, but we have no
easy and cheap alternatives to fossil fuels.
That’s a big problem, but it is not humanity’s first big
problem. When we look back in time, we seldom fixed big
problems by telling people to live with less of everything
they wanted. And for a good reason: it is a hard sell.
Instead, we typically managed to solve big problems
through innovation.
We can draw lessons from the time we transitioned our
global economy from one source of light to another. From
the 1700s through the mid-1800s, whale oil provided light
to the United States and much of the Western world. The
US dominated the slaughter of whales, a barbaric practice
by today’s standards. At its peak, whaling employed
seventy thousand people and was the fifth-largest industry
in the United States. Producing millions of gallons of whale
oil each year, the industry was widely seen as unassailable,
offering a brighter and cleaner-burning option to cheaper,
less safe alternatives such as lard oil and camphene. It was
hard to imagine that people would ever agree to live

without whale oil, because that would have meant going
backward toward a sootier, dimmer past.1
In those days, of course, there was no environmental
movement to speak of. But one wonders if the whalers,
finding each year that they needed to go farther from
Nantucket Island to kill whales, ever asked themselves:
“What will happen when the whales run out?”
The Western world was reliant on slaughtering whales
for quality lighting, yet we never did hunt whales to
extinction. Why? We found alternative technologies. First,
kerosene from petroleum replaced whale oil as a source of
lighting. And we didn’t run out of kerosene, either:
electricity supplanted it because it was a superior way to
light our planet.
Exhortations to stop using whale oil, to turn down the
lights, or go back to old, heavily polluting practices were
not what saved the whales. New technology did.
We have consistently underestimated our capacity for
innovation. Before the turn of the last century, there was a
fear that all of London would be covered with horse manure
because 
of 
the 
ever-increasing 
use 
of 
horse-drawn
carriages. Innovation gave us the car. Today, eight million
people live in London, and there’s no horse manure to be
seen on its crowded thoroughfares.2
When automobiles proved to be massive polluters and
Los Angeles was filling up with smog in the 1960s, one
solution would have been to tell everyone to stop driving.
Not only would it have been unfeasible to try to make
people stay at home, but it would also have been
phenomenally ineffective. Instead, the invention of the
catalytic converter made it possible to have many more
people drive many more cars and still have dramatically
better air quality.
Indeed, 
many 
forecasted 
catastrophes 
throughout
human history have been avoided because of innovation

and technological development. Consider the challenge of
hunger in the 1960s and 1970s. The biggest fear then was
Asia’s inability to feed itself, because it wasn’t growing
enough food for a fast-growing population. One of the best-
selling books of the day, The Population Bomb, declared
straight-out that “the battle to feed humanity is over. In the
1970s hundreds of millions of people will starve to death in
spite of any [policies] embarked upon now.”3
The belief was that India was doomed. Conventional
wisdom was that the nation’s 1967 grain output of barely a
hundred million tons could not possibly increase. It was
expected that two hundred million more children would be
born by 1980, so disaster on a massive scale appeared
unavoidable.4
Along came a determined scientist, Norman Borlaug.
Instead of handwringing, he aggressively helped innovate
new, better varieties of wheat, rice, and maize. These new
dwarf plants differed from existing varieties because less
energy was used in the stalk and more energy went into the
grains themselves. As a result, grain yields increased
spectacularly, food prices dropped, and Borlaug’s “green
revolution” 
probably 
saved 
a 
billion 
people 
from
starvation.5
By 1980, India had seen a 47 percent increase in grain
production, while its population increased 34 percent.
Calories available began to increase, not decrease. Today,
India produces 328 percent as much grain as it did in 1967,
when observers thought it couldn’t produce any more.
India is now even the largest exporter of rice in the world.
Innovation breaks through impossibilities.6
Higher crop yields had another advantage: they led to
reduced deforestation. If yields had stayed the same from
1960 onward, most of the world’s forests would be cut
down by now to provide sufficient space to grow enough
grains to keep everyone fed. We would have needed

additional farmland equivalent to all of the United States,
Canada, and China combined. Innovation didn’t just help to
feed billions of people; it also protected biodiversity and the
environment. Yet again, a major challenge was solved not
by telling people to make do with less, but by innovating so
that there was more for everybody.7
The lesson from history is clear. When we innovate and
find a cheap, technological solution, we solve major
challenges and generate broadly shared benefits. We need
to apply that lesson to the problem of climate change.
RIGHT NOW, FOSSIL FUELS are cheap. The global
economy relies on them, and there are currently no
alternative energy sources fully able to compete. We should
be focusing much more on finding and creating those
alternatives.
Solar and wind power, so far, are not the answer. Even
with huge political support and trillions of dollars in
subsidies, solar and wind energy provide just over one
percent of our global energy needs. The International
Energy Agency estimates that by 2040 and even after
another $4 trillion has been spent on additional subsidies,
solar and wind power will deliver only less than 5 percent
of global energy. They are expensive and inefficient
compared to fossil fuels. The cheapness of fossil fuels
explains why they meet about 80 percent of our energy
needs today, and why they will still be providing 74 percent
in 2040, according to the International Energy Agency,
even if every promise made by world leaders in the Paris
Agreement is delivered.8
Reducing our carbon dioxide emissions significantly from
fossil fuels will require innovation. The good news is that
we have managed to innovate in this area already, almost
without trying to. One of the best examples of this in recent
times is the evolution of fracking in the United States.

Fracking has reduced the price of oil and gas. As we saw in
chapter 10, it has lowered the price of heating, allowing
poorer people especially to heat their homes better, saving
about eleven thousand lives each year. It has also
dramatically increased the wealth of the United States—a
2019 study shows that it has increased US GDP by one
percent over what it would otherwise have been in 2015,
adding $180 billion to the US economy each year.9
It 
has 
also 
had 
real, 
negative 
impacts 
on 
the
environment, 
especially 
through 
air 
pollution, 
water
pollution, and habitat fragmentation. The biggest study,
published in 2019, estimates the total environmental cost of
US fracking at $23 billion per year, with air pollution
making up three-quarters of that cost. While overall,
fracking very likely delivers an overwhelming benefit to the
United States, the political conversation for and against it
can be seen as a discussion on the distribution of these
benefits and costs.10
Here, though, we can think about fracking as an example
of innovation to cut carbon dioxide emissions. The
technology of fracking has been around since at least 1947,
but it took public resources to the tune of hundreds of
millions of dollars in innovation support from the US
Department of Energy and perhaps $10 billion in
production tax credits for private entrepreneurs to find
ways to innovate procedures to frack gas profitably. The
fracking innovation was not intended as climate policy, but
simply as a way to make the United States more energy
independent and richer. But it also turned out to have a
huge climate change benefit, because gas became cheaper
than coal. Crucially, gas emits about half the carbon
dioxide of coal. Making gas cheaper than coal has shifted a
large part of US electricity production from coal to gas.
This is the main reason why the United States has seen the
largest reduction in carbon dioxide emissions of any nation

over the past decade.11
One of the most promising innovations that we could
achieve in the next decade is to ensure that China makes
the same shift. China is by far the world’s largest consumer
of coal. In fact, in each year since 2011, China has burned
more than half of all the coal used worldwide; India (12
percent) and the US (8.4 percent) were in distant second
and third places in 2018. If China switched its power
production partly to gas, its emission cuts would be
massive, dwarfing what we have already seen in the United
States.12
Sharing with and adapting fracking technology to China
and elsewhere is just the start of what is needed. We need
to take this experience and look for other areas where the
government can support innovation and the development of
technologies to ease our transition away from fuels with a
high 
carbon 
dioxide 
footprint. 
To 
cut 
emissions
significantly, we need to innovate significantly.
UNTIL WE FIND a green energy source that is cheaper
than fossil fuels, it will be hard to convince the whole world
to fundamentally turn away from fossil fuels. Yet, if we can
innovate the price of green energy down below that of
fossil fuels, we will be on the pathway to fixing climate
change. Everyone, including China, India, and Africa, and
not just the United States and Europe, will switch.
It has long been clear that an economically optimal
carbon tax will solve only a small part of the climate change
problem. That’s why I started work with my think tank, the
Copenhagen Consensus, back in 2009, to identify other
effective solutions to help fix climate change. We worked
with twenty-seven of the world’s top climate economists
and three Nobel laureates to evaluate the costs and
benefits of the whole gamut of possible climate change
responses. These academics found that green energy

research and development is by far the best long-term
investment to solve climate change. The experts concluded
that globally, we need to spend $100 billion on green
energy innovation each year. This would still be much less
than what solar and wind energy are costing us in subsidies
today, and it would likely substantially bring forward the
day when low- or zero-carbon-dioxide energy sources can
take over the world.13
The economists calculated that for each dollar spent on
green energy R&D, we could avoid about $11 of long-term
climate change damages. This is a great deal. Moreover,
besides helping to find a breakthrough green energy
source, 
this 
R&D 
will 
likely 
generate 
many 
other
innovations that can be useful for humanity, such as better
batteries for cell phones and cheaper power for space
exploration.
Since then, my think tank and many others have
campaigned for dramatically ramping up spending on
green R&D. The most promising progress came in 2015,
when twenty world leaders including President Obama
promised to double their country’s green energy research
and development by 2020. They called their agreement the
Mission Innovation.14
Unfortunately, 
those 
countries 
have 
broken 
that
promise. International Energy Agency data shows that in
absolute terms, spending has hardly budged, and rich
countries are spending less than 3¢ for every $100 of GDP
on 
low-carbon-energy 
R&D, 
a 
percentage 
that 
has
fundamentally not changed since the Mission Innovation
promise was made (see figure 12.1). That adds up to six
times less than the amount needed to meet the target of
$100 billion per year outlined by the Nobel laureates
working with the Copenhagen Consensus.15
The frustrating thing is that almost everyone agrees that
we should be investing much more in green innovation. It’s

not a controversial idea. Yet, this spending never seems to
be 
actually 
allocated. 
That’s 
because 
constant
scaremongering and green energy industry lobbying lead to
scarce resources instead being poured into rolling out more
and more of today’s inefficient solar panel and wind turbine
technology.
Indeed, the green energy industry and its backers often
claim that increasing the number of solar panels and wind
turbines today is the best way to encourage more
innovation, because then the companies can invest in
developing better technology. This argument lines the
pockets of lobbyists and green energy giants, but it is a
hugely inefficient, backward way to go about funding
innovation. Globally, private companies spend just $6
billion on renewable energy R&D. As a percentage of global
GDP, private investment in green energy research has been
declining since 2012.17
FIGURE 12.1 Green R&D by the United States and
OECD from 1974 to 2018 in cents per $100 of GDP.
“Promises” signifies what the world leaders promised
to spend under Mission Innovation in 2020.16
To 
achieve 
more 
green 
energy 
research 
and
development, we need to spend our money directly on it,
rather than relying on indirect industry support and a
prayer that it works. Globally, in 2020 taxpayers will pay

$141 billion to subsidize inefficient solar and wind energy.
This will buy us just $6 billion in actual R&D. Instead, we
should spend $100 billion directly on research and
development. It will get us $94 billion more for green R&D,
and it would still leave us with $41 billion to improve the
world in many other ways.18
If we want to change the world, we need to commit to
doing things differently and coming up with new ideas.
Because the old ones aren’t working.
WHEN IT COMES to green innovation, what should we
focus on?
This isn’t an easy question, because no one knows what
new technologies will power the world in 2050 or 2100.
The prognosis from energy analysts is that thirty years
from today we will still be powered mostly by fossil fuels,
simply because we know they work and are cheap and
reliable. They cause climate change, which is why carbon
taxes and other policies will limit their use in the future,
but they will remain the mainstay of the world’s energy
needs. Unless, that is, we manage to innovate better,
smarter, cheaper, and more effective alternatives.
Predicting future innovations is mostly folly. Before the
Chicago World’s Fair in 1893, seventy-four of the foremost
thinkers in the United States were asked to predict what
the world would look like in a hundred years. There were a
vast number of memorable misses, such as predicting that
the US would see minimal taxation and have no standing
army, that everyone would travel everywhere at a hundred
miles per hour on electric trains, that war would be
abolished, and that we would live to 150 years.19
A smaller part of the thinkers got the direction right,
even if the technologies were off. E-mail was foreshadowed
with the concept of letters sent via pneumatic tubes under
the oceans. Air travel would become ubiquitous, although

the technology they foresaw was the use of balloons guided
by wires between cities. Multiple thinkers expected to be
able to store energy in small packages that would enable us
to deliver the energy of Niagara Falls to manufacturers in
Texas.20
Many of these thinkers clearly understood the value of
innovation. One considered how in a century’s time new
technology could see houses cooled in summer, just like
they were heated by fires in winter. Others realized that if
electricity became ten times cheaper, it would become
universal, driving electrical carriages and easing hard
domestic chores like washing clothes, thereby solving the
“servant problem.” But imagining cheaper electricity or air
conditioning doesn’t make it happen. Research and
development across a wide range of technologies does. Had
we just focused on improving pneumatic tubes, we likely
would not have developed the internet, nor would a focus
on better balloon technology have led to airplanes.21
The real lesson is to realize that although we might have
a good idea of where we want to go, we have little sense of
which technologies will get us there. That is why we
shouldn’t focus our R&D just on the currently most
fashionable and glamorous ideas for the future. Instead we
should research a lot of ideas.
Research and development is cheap, and a sixfold
increase in spending for the world really could allow us to
research a wealth of different possible solutions. To show
the breadth and opportunity, let me share just three key
areas. In each of these areas, breakthroughs could be game
changers in the fight against climate change. And in each
area, more R&D funding could help stimulate the
innovation that could lead to a transformation of our
economy.
ENERGY STORAGE IS one area where innovation could

make a huge difference to human welfare. If we could store
virtually unlimited amounts of wind and solar energy, not
only for the seconds or minutes when the wind dies down
and the sun is hidden behind a cloud, nor even just for the
night or a windless week, but across seasons and even
years, storage could deliver energy when we need it rather
than when nature deigns to provide it.
When 
people 
hear 
about 
energy 
storage, 
they
immediately think of rechargeable batteries like those in
electric cars. But these make up less than 1 percent of
global energy storage. Almost all storage today, 96 percent,
is by the old, well-known technology of water storage.
Essentially, this means pumping water up to a reservoir on
a hill when there is too much, or “excess,” energy, and
letting it flow back down through a turbine when the
energy is needed. This works well but relies crucially on
local geography, and many energy networks are not near
suitable sites.22
There is a plethora of new technologies that could help
to store energy. Compressed air storage pushes air into a
salt cavern and then releases it through a generator. A
molten salt battery warms up the salt with surplus
electricity, and uses a heat exchanger to get electricity
back later. Another approach is splitting water with
electricity to produce hydrogen, which is later converted
back into energy in a fuel cell.
Storage can even be provided with a simple flywheel,
essentially a massive rotating drum of steel. The excess
energy that might be generated, for example by wind
turbines on a windy day, is used to get the wheel spinning.
Then a generator captures the energy as electricity again
later.
My personal favorite, and this is just because it is a cool
idea, is a four-hundred-foot-tall crane standing in the
middle of thirty-five-ton concrete cylinders, proposed by

the Swiss company Energy Vault. When excess electricity
needs to be stored, the crane, controlled by a computer,
uses it to stack one concrete cylinder on top of the other,
eventually building up a huge tower. When power is scarce,
a cable lowering back the very heavy cylinders drives a
generator that produces electricity.23
The problem with all of these ideas are capacity and
cost. If we exclude pumped water storage, all of the other
many different solutions in existence today can store just
twenty seconds of the world’s electricity consumption.
Headlines consistently tell stories of how we will see an
amazing increase in storage capacity in just a few years.
The International Energy Agency estimates that over the
next two decades an extra $300 billion will be spent to
increase storage capacity forty-one-fold. Yet, this will still
increase the available storage to only eleven minutes of the
world’s electricity use. And storage is still expensive. While
utility-scale solar panels can produce power when the sun
is shining at as low as 3.2¢ per kilowatt-hour, adding
adequate storage more than triples the cost to at least
10.2¢ per kilowatt-hour.24
Massively investing in R&D for cheaper and better
storage technologies could make a dramatic difference to
both capacity and cost in just a few decades. India is
already leading the way. It has promised a strong policy
push to increase its solar capacity tenfold from 2018 to
2040. (Notice, this won’t end the dominance of coal; its use
will also double, so it will go from producing 45 percent of
India’s energy needs in 2018 to 44 percent in 2040.) A lot
of extra storage will have to be built to make use of the
extra solar power, so India is predicted to become a world
leader in storage. Partly as a result, storage prices globally
are predicted to halve over the next two decades.25
But what if green energy research and development
could drive down this storage cost even lower? What if,

instead of a 50 percent reduction, extra R&D investment
could cut 70 percent off the price of storage? We could
then make solar power significantly cheaper than even coal
in India. After 2030, India would be able to rely even more
on solar and wind power, and stop adding additional coal
power (which it isn’t forecast to do otherwise). The
International Energy Agency estimates that such a low
storage price could make India’s carbon dioxide emissions
peak in 2030, and by 2040 this alone would shave almost
one percent off global emissions.26
Imagine how much more attractive solar power would
look to the world’s other developing countries, if storage
was effective and affordable. Innovation in storage could
help drive down global emissions, make power cheaper,
and unlock more of the potential of fossil fuel alternatives.
THE SECOND OBVIOUS AREA for R&D investment is
nuclear energy. Nuclear energy doesn’t emit carbon
dioxide. Perhaps surprisingly, nuclear energy is also very
safe. Under normal operating conditions, it emits less
radioactivity than coal (yes, there is actually radioactivity in
mined coal that is released when it is burned). Although we
think of the terrible disasters of Fukushima and Chernobyl,
nuclear energy has one of the lowest death risks of any
form of energy; in fact, it kills about two thousand times
fewer people than coal power, because of coal’s massive
pollution.27
The reason why nuclear energy isn’t a silver bullet in its
current form is that new nuclear power plants in developed
countries are much more expensive than continuing to rely
on fossil fuels. Finland’s newest nuclear power unit was
supposed to open in 2010 and cost $3.5 billion. It may open
in 2021 at triple that amount. France’s Flamanville nuclear
power plant was supposed to open in 2012. It may open in
2022, again at triple the cost.28

A 2017 survey shows that in the 1950s and 1960s, when
nuclear power was first developed, plants got less and less
expensive as more were built, as experts learned how to do
so more cheaply and efficiently. But in the 1970s and
onward, nuclear power plants became ever more expensive
to build. Why? In France and the United States, instead of
focusing on a single, standardized unit, designs began to
change, both because of an interest in improving them and
because of increasing regulations. One 2017 study suggests
that had we been able to stick to one or just a few designs
for nuclear power plants, ensuring that costs would
continue to fall, nuclear energy today could cost-effectively
replace all coal and most gas power, and reduce global
carbon emissions by one-fourth.29
Of course, we can’t run the clock backward, but we can
make smarter decisions moving forward. That means
investing in innovation to make the next generation of
nuclear power plants much cheaper and safer.
Philanthropist Bill Gates is investing in TerraPower, a
company developing new reactors that promise to use the
waste of other reactors to generate energy for decades
without additional fuel. China is demonstrating a “pebble
bed” design intended to be very safe. Others are suggesting
modular designs that can be built from standardized
reactor parts in a factory and put together like Legos at the
construction site.30
One 2019 study shows that these new ideas could cut the
cost per kilowatt-hour of nuclear-generated electricity by
almost two-thirds of today’s cost, and the most optimistic
cost estimates would see nuclear power become cheaper
than even the cheapest gas power. Of course, these are
estimates of cost reductions from design improvements. If
we manage to uncover a revolutionary breakthrough, the
cost reductions could be even greater.31
Nuclear innovation could help us find a way to power the

world more cheaply and safely than today, without carbon
dioxide emissions.
A THIRD AREA where additional research could make a
huge impact is air capture. This is simply machinery on the
ground that sucks out carbon dioxide from the air and
stores it safely. If this could work, we could achieve some,
or even all, of our carbon emission reductions without
cutting fossil fuel use. In an extreme (and unrealistic) case,
we could maintain our entire global fossil fuel economy,
and simply suck out the problematic emissions.32
This is often what offsets do today: they represent a
pledge that trees will be planted to soak up carbon dioxide
emissions. Essentially, trees are the low-tech version of air
capture.
Why not just plant more trees? Unfortunately, there is
not enough land on the planet to actually capture all the
excess carbon dioxide, and moreover we need land for
agriculture. Air capture could be a much more efficient
solution, but there is still a long way to go. In 2007,
entrepreneur 
Richard 
Branson 
and 
climate 
change
campaigner former vice president Al Gore proposed the
Virgin Earth Challenge, a $25 million prize to be awarded
to the first team to create a scalable air capture option. The
prize givers have yet to be presented with a solution that
satisfies all the conditions to win.33
In 2011, an influential panel of the American Physical
Society found that air capture would cost $600 or more per
ton of carbon dioxide. That means it would cost $5.33 to
suck up the emissions from just one gallon of gasoline.
Obviously, at that price the technology is not going to get
very far. Since then, though, researchers have explored
many ideas. A 2017 overview shows a huge variance in
projected costs, with some start-up companies suggesting
they can achieve air capture with almost zero costs. We

should take these claims with a grain of salt but
promisingly, a 2018 peer-reviewed study showed that a
viable project could possibly cost less than $100 per ton, or
83¢ per gallon of gasoline.34
Spending more money to innovate to drive down the cost
of air capture could be tremendously advantageous. Right
now, if we were to offset all of humanity’s emissions at
$100 per ton, it would cost $5.5 trillion every year, or more
than 6 percent of global GDP. Imagine if innovation could
drive down the cost of air capture to, say, $5 a ton by
midcentury. Avoiding the emissions from a gallon of
gasoline would then cost just 5¢, which it’s plausible to
imagine most people being willing to pay. If we can achieve
that low cost, we could eliminate practically all of the
world’s emissions from the atmosphere for just 0.2 percent
of global GDP.35
Air capture today is so expensive that it cannot yet be a
serious part of our response to climate change. But
innovation could help lower its price to a point where it
could be an important tool in our response to the problem.
THERE ARE MANY, many more breakthrough technologies
that could possibly play an important role in solving climate
change. Craig Venter, the geneticist who led the first draft
sequencing of the human genome, argues for research into
algae that can be grown on the ocean surface to produce
oil. Because the algae convert sunlight and carbon dioxide
into oil, burning it will be carbon dioxide neutral. This
technology is not yet efficient, but more research and
development could potentially make it so. Fusion power,
mimicking the sun, could provide all the energy humanity
needs, with no carbon dioxide whatsoever. But while fusion
power is nowhere near commercially viable, again, more
R&D could perhaps make it so.36
Indeed, every single one of the ideas we have discussed

could fix a large part or even all of climate change. They
are not yet ready for global rollout because they remain too
expensive, but research and development could push their
price down.
The good thing about R&D is that it is relatively cheap. A
hundred billion dollars could fund innovation across a
broad spectrum of potential technologies. We should expect
most of these ideas to fail. Many will see some progress,
but not enough to become economically competitive. Air
capture’s cost might fall to $70 per ton, say, but remain too
expensive to be used everywhere across the planet. The
cost of nuclear power might be driven down to 6¢ per
kilowatt-hour, but still not be cheap enough to replace
fossil fuels. The Swiss stacking experiment to store energy
could, like any other individual idea, fail to become
anywhere close to cost effective.
But this is okay. When we invest in innovation, most
ideas fail. We don’t need a lot of technologies to power the
world. We don’t need many ways to cut carbon dioxide
emissions to zero. We just need one (or more realistically, a
few).
Imagine if innovation could lead to such a massive
breakthrough in air capture technology that it is priced at
$5 per ton. Fixing global warming would cost less than
what the EU pays for its climate policies today. Of course,
there would still be squabbling among nations about who
should pay what. But we would fix climate change.37
Imagine if innovation could revolutionize the cost of
nuclear power down to 1¢ per kilowatt-hour. Not only
would the entire world switch to this much cheaper
alternative and essentially solve global warming, but also it
would be an incredible boon for humanity, providing more
energy, with cleaner air, at almost zero cost.
What should the model for innovation look like? Over the
past 
half 
century, 
governments 
have 
developed 
an

approach to drive innovation through initial, public “blue
sky” research in universities and research labs. Some of
these innovations have, in partnership with private
businesses, been developed to the point where they can
then be profitably introduced by private companies.
We should recognize that different countries have
different strengths in R&D areas, so individual countries
could focus on different topics. The smartest way forward
would probably be the establishment of national, blue-
ribbon panels to identify interesting energy research
problems that need solving. Funding could be managed
through national organizations such as, in the United
States, the National Science Foundation.
Individuals and groups of researchers could think of
ideas that might solve part of one of the research problems
outlined 
by 
the 
blue-ribbon 
panels—ideas 
from 
oil-
producing algae, to tidal power, to novel carbon dioxide
capture systems such as enhanced weathering rocks, to
new nuclear reactor designs, and everything in between.
These researchers would apply for funding to solve specific
problems. Their peers would decide which applicants would
be more likely to drive research and understanding within
the particular field, so as to help improve the chances that
in the long run, ideas could turn into real progress for clean
energy.
But none of this can happen unless we focus on this one
thing: we need to ensure that R&D investments increase
dramatically. In just a year or two, the United States and
other nations need to at least double their annual
investments in order to meet the level promised in the
Mission Innovation. Over the next five to ten years, R&D
spending globally should increase a further three times to
get close to the $100 billion annually identified by the
Nobel laureates. With a sixfold increase in our budget, we
could help fund so much more. We could dramatically
improve humanity’s chances of innovating down the price

of future solutions to help address or entirely fix climate
change.
Innovation is not the only solution we should pursue to
tackle global warming, but it is one of the most promising.
Finding ways to produce green energy cheaper than fossil
fuels, 
or 
finding 
very 
cheap 
ways 
to 
avoid 
the
environmental impact of fossil fuels, would transform the
fight against climate change. It would eliminate the tension
that exists right now between the twin goals of growth and
reducing emissions. Through innovation, we could solve the
problem of fossil fuels in the old-fashioned and proven way
—by making the alternatives cheaper and better.

13
ADAPTATION: SIMPLE BUT
EFFECTIVE
A WELL-CONCEIVED CARBON TAX can help us avoid the
worst climate change damage, and a large investment in
innovation can bring forward the day when the global
economy ends its reliance on fossil fuels. But even with
both of these policies, the temperature will continue to rise.
Some of future warming comes from past carbon emissions,
which we have no control over today. And neither carbon
taxes 
nor 
innovation 
will 
entirely 
eradicate 
future
emissions, at least not in the short to middle term.
This is why we need to adapt to a warmer planet over
the coming decades. Fortunately, humanity has remarkable
adaptive capacity. There are people living in the icy
extremes of Siberia and northern Canada, in the burning
hot Sahel desert and Australian Outback, in the dry
Atacama desert plateau of South America, and in the rain-
soaked Meghalaya state in India. Not only do people
withstand significant variations in temperature and rainfall,
but falling per capita death rates from natural disasters
show that we have more resilience today than ever before.1
At its simplest, adaptation means that people react
sensibly to challenges—in our case, to a changing climate.
As it gets warmer, more people will adapt by turning on

their air conditioners (and fewer will use their heaters). If
they don’t yet have an air conditioner, more people will buy
one (and more people will be able to buy one as global
prosperity increases). Similarly, tourists will adapt to a
warming world by changing their travel destinations. Warm
places like Sri Lanka will host fewer tourists. On the other
hand, more visitors will choose Finland and Canada for
their next holiday, while fewer Finns and Canadians will
travel abroad.2
Cutting emissions has significant costs, but helps
everyone in the world a little, albeit a half century down the
line. In contrast, adaptation often has immediate and very
localized 
benefits. 
Indeed, 
most 
adaptation 
happens
naturally 
and 
needs 
little 
public 
policy 
focus 
or
investment.3
Businesses often don’t need to be forced to invest in
adaptation, because it makes sound financial sense. There
are plenty of examples of this already. In the rich world the
chemical giant BASF has installed additional water pumps
in the river Rhine, so that even if climate change lowers
water levels, there will be enough water for production.
Unilever works with tomato suppliers to encourage them to
install drip irrigation so they can grow crops even in
droughts.4
In poorer countries, farmers also adapt to a changing
climate. In South America, a study shows that farmers
already tailor what they grow to the climate: farmers grow
fruit and vegetables in warmer locations, and wheat and
potatoes in cooler locations. Where it is wetter, they grow
rice, fruits, and potatoes, and in drier locations they grow
corn and wheat. As climate change drives up temperatures,
farmers will adapt by switching to more fruits and
vegetables, and depending on whether it gets wetter or
drier (the models are still not sure), they will add potatoes
or squash.5

But not all needed adaptation will happen without
specific government actions. Clearly, governments should
make sure that public policies do not hinder private
adaptation, for instance by levying high taxes on air
conditioners or the electricity required to run them. But
governments should do more: they should implement
policies that make adaptation easier. Across the world,
agricultural adaptation is easier if you are better educated,
if you are better off (for instance, if you have a tractor), and
if you have better access to agricultural information. So
governments would do well to make sure there is better
access 
to 
education, 
agricultural 
information—and
tractors.6
In Ethiopia, a 2011 study found that farmers with access
to credit can better adapt to a changing climate, and they
end up with higher food productivity. This is not surprising;
if you can get extra resources to overcome a challenge, you
will be much more likely to do well. So, governments
should make sure that credit opportunities are as widely
available as possible. This doesn’t mean subsidizing the
actual loans, but rather ensuring a well-functioning legal
and institutional framework that will make it easier for
individuals to access the necessary funds to adapt.7
In some areas, adaptation relies on public policy. It is not
realistic to expect individuals to adapt their houses to
rising sea levels or their lives to the threat of catastrophes.
Governments need to step up with flood defenses and early-
warning systems. And while air conditioning can help
during heat waves, the right infrastructure can make whole
cities cool. Moreover, while many people can adapt on their
own, the most vulnerable often can’t. Public policy can be
especially useful in helping elderly and marginalized people
when heat waves hit.
Pursuing policies that enable adaptation seems like
common sense. Yet weirdly, for a long time in climate

change policy discussion, it was considered bad form to
even mention adaptation. Climate change campaigners
have tended to view the idea of adaptation as distracting
attention from cutting carbon dioxide emissions. Perhaps
they also believe that acknowledging the need for
adaptation is an admission of defeat in the battle against
climate change.8
To the contrary, if we are to deal effectively with climate
change, we need to put adaptation at the heart of our
policy response, right alongside a carbon tax and
innovation.
RISING SEA LEVELS get a huge amount of attention in the
media, and they are often portrayed as uncharted territory
for humanity. In fact, sea levels have risen about a foot over
the past 150 years. Around the world, when you ask anyone
what important events happened over that century and a
half, they will talk about wars, medical breakthroughs that
saved lives, perhaps the moon landing, but they won’t tell
you that rising sea levels were a big deal. Why? Because we
adapted to them by protecting our coastlines.9
One of the clearest results of studies of adaptation
around the world is that coastal protection for populations
and valuable land is a great investment. As we saw in
chapter 1, coastal protection costing tens of billions of
dollars can avoid tens of trillions of dollars in flood
damages. That is why a recent 2018 overview shows that
the cost of sea level adaptation almost everywhere will be
much lower than that of not adapting. The study shows that
even if the seas were to rise an improbable six feet seven
inches by 2100—vastly more than the UN panel of climate
scientists expects—it will be economically advantageous to
protect at least 90 percent of the global coastal floodplain
population, along with 96 percent of all assets there.10
For more than half of the population of coastal

floodplains throughout the world, each dollar spent on
protection will avoid more than $100 of damage. The total
cost of coastal protection and of all remaining flood
damage through the rest of the century, even in the
absolutely worst-case scenario, will cost the United States
just 0.037 percent of its GDP, and possibly five times less.11
“Coastal defense” in many cases will mean dikes (a long
wall or embankment built to prevent flooding), but softer
approaches like artificial nourishment (meaning adding
sand to beaches) can be even more effective in dealing with
the impacts of rising sea levels and storm surges. In a 2019
overview of nineteen studies, dikes on average reduce
damages by $40 for each dollar spent, whereas artificial
nourishment can avoid $111 of damages for every dollar
spent.12
Other natural defenses like the restoration of mangroves
can help, too. As well as providing a buffer against tidal
storm surges, mangroves provide critical habitat to sustain
local fisheries. Planting (or reestablishing) mangrove
forests, as is being done in Indonesia and elsewhere, is
several times cheaper than building flood protection
infrastructure. The benefits of mangrove preservation and
restoration are worth up to ten times the cost, including
not just avoided losses from coastal flooding, but also the
benefits 
associated 
with 
fisheries, 
forestry, 
and
recreation.13
People talk about rising sea levels in apocalyptic terms,
but the truth is that there are proven and cost-effective
ways we can defend coastlines to ensure that more people
and possessions are protected.
AS GLOBAL WARMING leads to an increase in heavy
precipitation, we may well see more river flooding and flash
floods. Adaptation can help, but it needs to be coordinated.
If everyone tries to dam the river, it becomes an unpleasant

game of “who has the lowest levee.”
Holland has shown the way by giving “room for the
river,” a program that allows some floodplains to be
flooded so the flood waters don’t destroy cities, and that
deepens and widens rivers so there is room for more water,
making them flood less. The floodplains can even be turned
into parks. In the Netherlands city of Nijmegen, close to
Germany, a new river park and riverfront development
improved the local quality of life, while at the same time
expanding floodplains.14
Across the United States, existing river flood adaptation
definitely works. If there were no flood defenses, nearly
twenty-two million people would experience flooding each
year, but with defenses the actual number is much lower at
half a million people. The National Institute of Building
Sciences finds that each dollar spent adapting to floods in
the US provides benefits worth $6. For the EU, it is
estimated that future benefits of adaptation to more floods
will outweigh the costs seven to one.15
Houston, Texas, is a good example of a city undertaking
actions to reduce its vulnerability to flooding. It has had far
more than its fair share of floods and climate-related
catastrophes. It is in fact the US city most severely affected
by floods. Why? Partly it’s because it is very flat and built
on a swamp. But the city was also very poorly planned. The
population has grown rapidly, and infrastructure—roads,
parks, and sewers—didn’t keep pace.16
Between 
2000 
and 
2018, 
Houston’s 
metropolitan
population jumped from around 4.5 million to nearly 6.3
million. The city today sprawls over 580 square miles. To
claim that space, the city paved over a vast amount of
wetlands and prairie land. These are beneficial because
they soak up huge amounts of rainfall, so they are crucial
to avoiding floods. When they are paved over, heavy rain
means that vast expanses of concrete create runoff. Since

the 1980s, rainfall has increased 26 percent in one Houston
watershed, but runoff has increased by 204 percent. One
2018 study shows that runoff exposed an additional thirty-
five hundred households in the Sims Bayou watershed in
the south of the city to flooding.17
In 2019, Houston decided to use $1.7 billion from its
appropriately named Rainy Day Fund savings on flood
protection. 
Much 
of 
this 
is 
being 
spent 
on 
big
infrastructure: dams and levees, which are important. A
2019 study shows that building a coastal barrier to protect
Houston could cost $400 billion over the century, but avoid
damages around twice that much.18
But there are also many other, simple approaches that
can do a lot of good. One proposal suggests buying out and
demolishing houses on the floodplains to re-create more
absorbent, green spaces. In one area in North Houston, the
city is already planning to buy out two low-income
apartment complexes and covert the area into a flood basin
and park. But the properties being bought out are only a
small fraction of those in flood-prone areas. Houston could
also 
build 
more 
resilient 
infrastructure 
into 
those
neighborhoods by implementing “pervious” pavements that
can soak up rain, and by creating better drainage at the
sides of roads.19
Across the world, there are many sensible adaptations to
avoid flood damage. Planting trees to soak up extra water
is estimated to avoid two dollars of damages for every one
dollar spent. Ensuring that buildings have gutters that
collect and reuse rainwater means the sewers will be less
overloaded, 
with 
slightly 
more 
benefits 
than 
costs.
Encouraging homeowners to make basic changes to their
homes and grounds, such as planting trees and making use
of rainwater, turns out to be both cheap and effective. Of
course, cities like Houston can also choose to clamp down
on future building to ensure the few wetlands and prairies

that are left can still play a role in reducing floods.20
In short, to reduce flood damages, local and national
governments have an array of cost-effective tools at their
disposal.
BEYOND FLOODING, ADAPTATION can protect us from
other natural disasters, including hurricanes. Bangladesh is
more vulnerable to hurricanes than most countries, but it
has reduced its vulnerability with effective investment in
adaptation. The country is the size of Illinois, but has
thirteen times the population, much of it extremely poor. It
is located at the upper end of the Bay of Bengal, which can
funnel hurricanes into the country and amplify flooding.
Early on November 12, 1970, the Bhola hurricane struck
the area as a category 3 storm and became the world’s
deadliest hurricane. Radio broadcasts only started to warn
citizens of danger late on the afternoon before, and most
people disregarded these messages because of mistrust,
fear of theft if they left their homes, and because there
were few shelters available to go to in any case. Although
some 90 percent of the population heard the warnings, just
1 percent fled.21
The hurricane was ferocious. Its winds reached 150
miles per hour, striking at high tide and creating a tidal
wave twenty feet high. At least 250,000 people were swept
away—and quite likely twice that number. The disaster,
along with the government neglect that exacerbated it, was
a major factor in Bangladesh (then known as East Pakistan)
breaking away from Pakistan the following year.
The new nation created the Cyclone Preparedness
Program, and over time invested in early-warning systems
and raising civic awareness, as well as in recovery services
and the creation of many new storm shelters and reinforced
buildings.
In 1991, at which point Bangladesh had still built only

three hundred shelters, it was hit by a much stronger,
category 5 hurricane. The death toll was half that of 1970
because the Cyclone Preparedness Program worked. Since
1991, a strong focus on adaptation and the construction of
a further thirty-five hundred shelters have seen the death
rate cut by more than a hundredfold. In the last three
decades of the last century, about fifteen thousand people
died in Bangladesh each year because of hurricanes. In the
2010s, thanks to widespread adaptation, the average
number is just twelve dead.22
Overall, it has been estimated that modest investment of
around $1 billion a year to improve public awareness,
early-warning systems, and disaster response in developing
countries could deliver total benefits ranging from $4
billion to $36 billion. Indeed, studies show that across a
wide range of climate impacts, adaptation through greater
public awareness of dangers and early-warning systems
can be an excellent investment. For river flooding, warning
systems can reduce damage costs by four times the cost of
the 
warning. 
For 
heavy 
precipitation, 
preparing
communities through training and emergency management
can return $30 on every dollar spent.23
As we saw in chapter 4, climate change is likely to mean
over time that hurricanes are less numerous but more
ferocious. Adaptive measures are necessary to ensure more
people are protected, and they are well within our power—
and our budget—to implement.
WE CAN DO much more, too, to reduce the risks of forest
fires 
through 
adaptation, 
especially 
in 
places 
like
California, where the Camp Fire burned down the entire
town of Paradise in 2018.
One of the best ways to prevent fires from destroying
lives and property is to make sure that people don’t put
themselves in harm’s way by building homes in high-risk

areas. Without so many homes being constructed in
vulnerable areas at the edge of the forest, fires would still
happen, but without the human devastation.
Building codes matter too: California has strict codes for
new buildings, but older homes with more flammable roofs
are quicker to catch fire, endangering the houses around
them. Indeed, the state’s so-called wildland-urban interface
code highlights how to build safer houses by ensuring
better placement, more fire-resistant building materials,
sprinklers, and less vegetation. If this code was adopted
throughout the United States, it is estimated that each
dollar spent meeting code would avoid four dollars in fire
damage, and in Florida and the West avoid more than six
dollars.24
To see the difference that adaptation makes, we need
only look to the city of Montecito, 450 miles south of
Paradise. The city suffered severe fires in the 1960s; in
response, Montecito adopted an approach called “adaptive
resilience.” This strategy included creating spaces around
homes without any wood that could catch on fire. In some
places, cactuses were used to replace fire-prone trees.
Vegetation on the sides of roads that could create a
terrifying “tunnel of fire” for people escaping were
removed. And existing homes were “hardened” by making
sure they used fire-resistant building materials. In addition,
firefighters themselves set carefully prescribed fires to
reduce the amount of wood across the countryside. And
they implemented detailed fire-planning and response
outreach programs.25
In 2017, all these actions were put to the test. The
Thomas Fire, which had already been burning for nearly
two weeks, turned south, and sixty-five-mile-per-hour gusts
of wind began blowing the fire directly toward Montecito.
There was an expectation that hundreds of houses would
be burned to the ground; in fact, only seven were lost. A

fire expert said of the efforts to protect Montecito that “it’s
the difference between living in a matchbox and a place
that’s more resistant.”26
Adopting 
the 
adaptive 
measures 
undertaken 
in
Montecito and rolling out stricter codes for homes in
harm’s way is just common sense.
HEAT WAVES INVARIABLY make the news and are often
invoked as evidence of the coming climate change
apocalypse. 
Temperatures 
are 
increasing—there’s 
no
question—and extreme heat will become a greater problem
in the decades and centuries to come. But as with so much
else, we have tools already in place to mitigate much of the
impact.
Adaptation should start with cities, because rising
temperatures will have the biggest human health impact in
urban environments. Cities are increasingly where we live,
already accounting for more than half the world’s
population, and by the end of the century the figure will be
80 to 90 percent. Moreover, cities are generally much
hotter than surrounding countryside: they are filled with
masses of nonreflective black surfaces that absorb the
sun’s rays and lack green spaces and water features.27
This so-called urban heat effect can be drastic. For
example, during the summer, Las Vegas is 7.3°F hotter
than its surrounding countryside, with summer nights an
astounding 10.3°F warmer. All the asphalt and vast
buildings have made the city’s night temperatures increase
much faster than the surrounding countryside, a rise of
almost 1°F each decade since 1970.28
But there is an amazingly simple adaptation that can
make Las Vegas and other cities cooler. Heat is caused by
black roofs and black roads, so we should make roofs and
roads lighter in color. Heat is exacerbated by an absence of
parks and water features, so we should create more

greenery and oases.
Black roofs are a human health risk. In the aftermath of
the 1995 Chicago killer heat wave, analysis showed that
people living on the top floor of a building with a black roof
were more likely to die. But lessons have been learned.
New York is working with nonprofit organizations and
building owners to apply white reflective surfaces to
rooftops. It has already painted more than five million
square feet of roofs with a light, reflective coating (but that
is only a tiny fraction of the city’s total rooftop space). Los
Angeles has started painting its dark asphalt with a cool,
gray coating that can lower the asphalt’s temperature by
10°F. The city calls these “cool pavements.” Theoretical
models show that making roads and roofs lighter in color
can reduce summer temperatures in California by 2.6°F
and in New York by 3.2°F.29
Planting trees and expanding green spaces and water
features not only make for a far more pleasant city for
inhabitants, 
but 
also 
drastically 
cool 
the 
highest
temperatures. In London, the area around the River
Thames and in urban parks is on average 1.1°F cooler than
neighboring built-up areas.30
The most significant impact of these approaches will be
evident during actual heat waves. If we increase parks and
water 
features 
significantly, 
models 
show, 
high
temperatures three days into a hot-weather spell can be
decreased by as much as 14°F, providing an oasis of
coolness. And analysis from London indicates that painting
asphalt and black buildings white, and thus changing the
entire city’s reflectivity, could decrease the temperature
three days into a heat wave by a whopping 18°F.31
Adaptation is very effective at cooling cities. One 2017
study shows that large-scale adoption of cool roofs and
pavements across the world will cost about $1.2 trillion
over the century, but it will prevent climate damages worth

almost fifteen times as much. Too often, however, the
media treats cool roofs and light-colored pavements as
quirky oddities rather than serious policies. The media pays
far more attention to “green roofs” with gardens, water,
mosses and plants, presumably because these urban oases
seem much more charming. Unfortunately, green roofs are
a poor deal in regards to the climate: their benefits are no
greater than simple cool roofs, but they triple the cost.32
There are many other ways of adapting to rising
temperatures. Information is a crucial one. Better weather
forecasting can help identify the risks, and campaigns can
encourage citizens to take simple measures like using fans,
drinking plenty of water, and wearing hats.
While some people will be able to take measures to
adapt to heat waves by themselves, public measures are
also essential. Those with swimming pools can use them to
beat the heat, but for everyone else, keeping public
swimming pools open for longer hours during a heat wave
can help save lives.33
In the United States, local authorities already work with
national agencies to determine when a heat wave is
approaching and issue heat alerts along with educational
information so that people can plan and keep themselves
safe. In Chicago, such actions led to deaths dropping from
700 to 100 in three years, while a Philadelphia heat wave
plan is estimated to have saved 117 lives over three years.
France has taken similar actions and managed to reduce
deaths during heat waves by 90 percent.34
These adaptive measures are working not just in rich
countries but also in poor countries. After a 2010 heat wave
killed more than thirteen hundred people, the Indian city of
Ahmedabad enacted a Heat Action Plan that included
training health care staff, distributing water, and painting
roofs with white reflective paint to make homes up to 9°F
cooler. A similar heat wave in 2015 claimed fewer than

twenty lives. Unsurprisingly, the Heat Action Plan has been
copied by other cities across India.35
Large numbers of deaths from heat waves are entirely
avoidable if we take sensible adaptive measures.
ALONG WITH A carbon tax and green innovation,
adaptation is crucial if we are to tackle climate change. As
we’ve seen, much of this will happen by itself, simply
because people naturally adapt, including in the simplest
ways from carrying an umbrella to avoid getting soaked to
turning on an air conditioner to avoid getting heatstroke.
But there is still a lot of publicly funded adaptation that can
reduce climate damages, including better coastal and river
protection, early-warning systems for disasters, fire-
proofing communities, and taking steps to cool cities. Most
of 
these 
are 
very 
cost-effective 
investments 
with
considerable returns to society.
Most of the alarmism about climate change tends to
ignore our ability to adapt. Remember the claims in chapter
1 that coastal flooding in the United States could cost more
than our entire current GDP? Such scaremongering relies
on the assumption that we will not adapt. But clearly,
adaptation will happen, and it will not be through some
global treaty, but through local and national decisions.
That’s happening already.
Take the island of Manhattan. When Hurricane Sandy hit
New York City in 2012, lower Manhattan suffered
expensive flooding damage because basic solutions like
storm covers for the subway system were missing. In 2019,
Mayor Bill de Blasio set out a comprehensive plan to
protect lower Manhattan against future flooding damage by
augmenting berms and storm barriers, elevating parks,
creating a coastal extension, and more. This is on top of
other initiatives that include building a five-mile seawall
around 
Staten 
Island 
and 
sand 
dunes 
around 
the

Rockaways.36
Clearly, poorer people have fewer resources to spend on
adaptation. When a hurricane hits poor shanty towns, many
people die. When a hurricane hits rich Florida, it might
have a severe economic impact, but the human devastation
will be far less, because people can afford much more
adaptation. Similarly, we saw that Montecito and Paradise
experienced very different fates from their fires. Yes, the
vegetation that surrounds them differs, but there is another
difference that played a crucial role in the final outcome:
wealth. Paradise is a working-class community, whereas
Montecito is one of America’s wealthiest enclaves. To
maximize everyone’s chances of adapting and reducing
their vulnerability, helping to achieve more prosperity is a
good place to start.37
Perhaps the most remarkable fact about adaptation is
that most of its benefits can be realized fairly cheaply
within just a few days or a few years. Compare this speed
to the delayed impact of worldwide carbon taxes. Adaptive
actions can typically deliver much more protection much
faster and at a lower cost than any realistic carbon-
reduction climate policy.
We should invest far more in planning and infrastructure
to provide protection from natural disasters, rising sea
levels, and changes in temperatures. We must do all of this
with a clear understanding that adaptation is an effective
and necessary climate policy.

14
GEOENGINEERING: A BACKUP
PLAN
CARBON TAXES, INNOVATION, and adaptation can reduce
carbon dioxide emissions, bring forward the day that we
transition away from dependence on fossil fuels, and
reduce our vulnerability to climate change. However, our
track record in delivering effective climate policies is not
stellar—while we have definitely managed to adapt, carbon
taxes and innovation have still not been pushed sufficiently.
But there is another approach that could dramatically
reduce temperature at a very low cost, and in as little as
weeks. It is called “geoengineering,” and essentially means
deliberately adjusting the planet’s temperature controls.
With this solution more than any other, we enter
uncharted territory. Humanity has never purposefully made
planetwide 
efforts 
to 
change 
the 
climate. 
Many
geoengineering technologies sound like science fiction.
Understandably, the entire field of study provokes fear.
It is not a policy we should be implementing right now.
But geoengineering is a partial solution to climate change
that 
is 
worth 
researching. 
We 
should 
think 
of
geoengineering as a backup plan that we could turn to, if
we don’t manage to get everyone to do everything needed
on carbon taxes, innovation, and adaptation. And because it

works so quickly, it could play a role if we found that we
needed fast action to avoid a looming catastrophe.
OVER A LONG WEEKEND in June 1991, Mount Pinatubo in
the Philippines erupted. It was by far the largest volcanic
eruption to affect a densely populated area in the twentieth
century. Producing avalanches of hot ash and gas, the
eruption killed hundreds, damaged thousands of homes,
and displaced hundreds of thousands of people.
As well as causing devastation, the volcano also affected
the climate. The eruption injected enough sulfur dioxide
into the stratosphere to temporarily reduce the amount of
sunlight reaching the earth’s surface by about 2.5 percent;
as a result, temperatures around the globe dropped by an
average of one full degree Fahrenheit over the following
eighteen months.1
As 
concerns 
about 
global 
warming 
increased,
researchers began to investigate whether or not they could
mimic a volcano’s effect on the climate, without the
carnage. 
It 
can 
be 
done 
with 
something 
called
“stratospheric aerosol injection,” which involves spraying
tiny particles such as sulfur dioxide into the upper layer of
the atmosphere to act as a thin reflective barrier against
incoming sunlight. Scientists have come up with a number
of proposed delivery mechanisms to get the sulfur dioxide
where it needs to go—from using powerful artillery guns, to
long pipes suspended by high-altitude balloons, to aircraft
that disperse particles as they fly.2
The idea of pumping sulfur dioxide into the upper layers
of the atmosphere understandably worries many people.
Some fear that darkening the sky in one hemisphere would
have huge, unpredictable effects on tropical climate
patterns, and perhaps lead to more drought in the Sahel
region. Others worry that it will hamper photosynthesis.
But scientists are investigating other geoengineering

options, too.3
One of the cheapest and most effective approaches is
called “marine cloud brightening.” Waves breaking on the
ocean create airborne sea salt particles, and the clouds
above oceans consist mostly of tiny water droplets that
have condensed around these particles. The idea is that if
you can increase the number of sea salt particles in the air
over the oceans, the resulting clouds will end up with more
tiny water droplets. Fewer larger droplets mean darker
clouds (as we know from anytime it is about to rain), while
many smaller droplets make clouds whiter. If we can make
more ocean clouds whiter, they will reflect more solar
energy back into space, thus cooling the planet.4
Marine cloud brightening amplifies a natural process
and would not lead to permanent atmospheric changes,
since switching off the entire process would return the
world to its previous state within a few days. It could
therefore be used only when needed.
Together with John Latham of the National Center for
Atmospheric Research, the University of Edinburgh’s
Stephen Salter has designed a fleet of remote-controlled,
wind-powered catamarans that could mimic the ocean’s
natural wave action and put more sea salt particles into the
atmosphere. This fleet would disperse seawater mist about
a hundred feet into the air, introducing more sea salt
particulates and helping clouds become slightly brighter—
just enough to keep temperatures down.5
THE DELIBERATE MODIFICATION of the climate to suit
human needs has long been regarded as anathema, or at
least the height of hubris, by most environmentalists.
Climate is one of the most complex systems imaginable,
and we are a long way from fully understanding how it
works. Who is to say that in our well-intentioned efforts, we
won’t make things worse—maybe even much worse?

Obviously there is a lot that we do not yet know about
this technology and how it would work on a planetary scale.
But there are three key reasons why we should start
researching geoengineering technologies.
The first argument for researching geoengineering is
that it is the only known approach that allows us to make
dramatic cuts in global temperature at low cost. Research
for Copenhagen Consensus shows that just $9 billion spent
building nineteen hundred seawater-spraying boats could
prevent all of the temperature increase projected in this
century. This is a tantalizing possibility when we consider
the $60 trillion in damages in the twenty-first century that
would come from unmitigated global warming.6
The second argument follows straight from the first. If
changing the planet’s temperature turns out to be
relatively cheap and easy, there is a risk that a single
nation, a rogue billionaire, or even a highly energized
nongovernmental organization could deploy the technology
on their own. Thus, it is important that scientists seriously
investigate its potential impacts now and share this
information, to make sure we all know more about
geoengineering’s potential negative impacts. If there are
severe, negative consequences it would make rogue efforts
to pursue geoengineering less likely.7
The third key argument for exploring this technology is
that it would allow us to change the global average
temperature very quickly. Any standard fossil-fuel-cutting
policy will take decades to implement and half a century to
have any noticeable climate impact. Instead, just like
Mount Pinatubo, geoengineering can literally reduce
temperatures in a matter of weeks.
There is a great deal we don’t know about climate
change, including whether or not it happens in a linear
fashion. Proponents of drastic carbon cuts often make the
case that there could be tipping points that we barely

understand, beyond which the planet could be doomed.
What if they’re right? What if we learn at some point that
we really are five years from disaster? None of the other
weapons in our arsenal work on that time scale. Even
radical cuts of emissions would take decades to achieve
significant results. Geoengineering is the only way to halt
warming quickly. Potential pitfalls are clear, but if we were
faced with a genuine catastrophe, we would certainly want
this option available.8
THERE IS WIDESPREAD opposition to geoengineering
from those you may think would be most in favor: people
who have devoted their careers to tackling climate change.
A 2019 survey of more than seven hundred climate change
scientists and negotiators involved in international climate
policy found that most believe we should not study
geoengineering. 
(Interestingly 
though, 
when 
those
surveyed believe climate change will be bad for their own
country, 
they 
are 
much 
more 
likely 
to 
support
geoengineering.)9
The key arguments made against geoengineering are
that the technology won’t work, that it will work but will
have bad impacts, and that it will distract us from cutting
carbon dioxide emissions.10
The first argument is simply an empirical question.
Maybe geoengineering works, maybe it doesn’t. To find
out, we need scientists to undertake research. Will
geoengineering cause harm? Maybe, which is all the more
reason we should research it. Of course, there are many
things that could go wrong. We could change complex
precipitation patterns, for example, meaning that rainfall
increases where we don’t want it, and decreases where it’s
needed. If we reduce sunlight as stratospheric aerosol
injection would, plants would grow less quickly, so that
could lead to lower agricultural yields.11

However, 
the 
research 
done 
so 
far 
is 
actually
encouraging. One team of researchers looked at two
possible worlds by the end of the century. In one of these
we experience high temperatures because of global
warming. The other is identical except the world has
started using stratospheric aerosol injection, following the
concept of Mount Pinatubo. In the vast majority of places
people live, the second scenario is better than the first:
only a few places, less than 0.4 percent of the planet’s
inhabited surfaces, have more extreme weather. Most
people experience less extreme weather, including lower
temperatures and lower extreme temperatures, along with
less extreme precipitation and less risk of flooding or
drought.12
But the third argument, that somehow geoengineering is
bad because it undermines the “real” solution to climate
change, is deeply flawed. The same reasoning was once
used to dismiss any discussion of adaptation. Campaigners
who argue this point believe that there is only one “right”
way to fix climate change, namely, cutting carbon dioxide
emissions. Surely, we should be open to using whatever
method will be most effective.13
Moreover, it is unreasonable to argue that using
geoengineering will just give us an excuse to keep emitting
carbon. Should we ban coronary bypass surgery or
cholesterol-lowering drugs because they let people get
away with bad behavior like eating too many french fries?
In my experience, nobody eats french fries just because
they know that if it comes to it, they have an option down
the line to get a bypass.
Even in the face of opposition from many climate change
campaigners, it is promising to see increasing support for
geoengineering research from various quarters: under
President Obama, the US government office that oversees
federally funded climate studies actually recommended

geoengineering research, marking the first time that
scientists in the executive branch ever formally called for
it. This also had the backing of President Obama’s science
advisor, John Holdren. And in the wake of the Paris climate
deal, eleven top climate scientists declared that the Paris
Agreement was far too weak to prevent the effects of
climate change, and announced that they supported
geoengineering research.14
IN A COST-BENEFIT STUDY undertaken for Copenhagen
Consensus, researchers estimated the benefit of research
on geoengineering. They found that every dollar spent on
research in this area could lead to a total benefit worth
$2,000. Yet astonishingly, given the potential, very little
government money has been put into researching the
technology. One of the very few organizations in the world
to build prototype boats for salt spraying is not a climate or
governmental body but the Discovery television channel, to
make an entertaining documentary.15
Why are governments reluctant to spend money on
geoengineering? Partly it would seem, because of the
complex international political issues that would arise
should any nation pursue the technology. But it is also
partly 
because 
many 
climate 
change 
campaigners
trenchantly oppose geoengineering. The activists would
rather we cut carbon dioxide emissions at any cost than
invest in a solution that could allow factories to continue
belching carbon dioxide into the air. The campaigners are
less concerned with reducing the rise in temperature than
they are with reducing the use of fossil fuels. This seems
unreasonable.
Of course, just avoiding the temperature rise wouldn’t
solve 
every 
climate-change-related 
problem. 
But
remember, no realistic climate policy promises to solve all
(or even most) climate change problems.

If geoengineering could avoid a significant fraction of
expected climate change damages with few or no side
effects, it would be a phenomenally useful intervention for
humanity. Indeed, given that today we’re contemplating
carbon-cut policies that will cost hundreds of trillions of
dollars yet do little to help, paying instead $0.009 trillion
($9 billion), as Copenhagen Consensus research suggests,
to fix a significant part of climate change would leave an
enormous amount of money available to do good in other
ways.
The researchers working for Copenhagen Consensus
who studied the merits of geoengineering recommend
starting research spending with tens of millions of dollars
now, and increasing this to the low billions in decades. This
would be a sensible level of investment to make sure that
geoengineering in fact can work, will generate as few
downsides as possible, and all of us are well informed.16
We should not commence geoengineering now, since the
technology is not ready and we don’t yet know enough
about it. But we simply can’t afford not to research it. It
might just prove to be the earth’s best backup plan.

15
PROSPERITY: THE OTHER
CLIMATE POLICY WE NEED
WE HAVE LOOKED at how to set a carbon tax, at what we
can achieve with innovation and adaptation, and at the
backstop policy of geoengineering. But there is one other
approach that doesn’t get enough attention, and in fact
isn’t even commonly thought of as a climate change policy.
It’s making countries richer.
The case for seeing prosperity as climate policy is made
clear when we look at two low-lying nations built on river
deltas, Bangladesh and the Netherlands, and examine the
differences in their exposure to climate change. Both
countries are flood prone: 60 percent of Bangladesh is
vulnerable to flooding, and 67 percent of the Netherlands is
similarly vulnerable. Both face considerable challenges
from global warming. Yet their vulnerability to climate
change, and response to it, is very different. This is obvious
when looking at flooding from rising sea levels.1
The Netherlands suffered a devastating flood in 1953,
the Watersnoodramp. More than eighteen hundred people
died when water breached the dikes in the provinces of
Zeeland, South Holland, and North Brabant. The disaster
prompted the Dutch government to invest massively in
flood prevention over the next half century, building an

extensive system of dams and storm-surge barriers. This
program, the Delta Works, ended up costing about $11
billion in total. It was such an enormous project that it was
sometimes referred to as the eighth wonder of the world.
Since 1953, there have been just three floods and one
fatality due to flooding in the Netherlands.2
In contrast, Bangladesh still sees large-scale flooding. In
2019, flooding forced more than two hundred thousand
Bangladeshis to flee their homes, and prompted fears of
food insecurity for four million. In the first two decades of
the twenty-first century, more than three thousand people
have died from flooding. Every year, flooding causes
devastation and claims lives.3
The obvious truth is that rich countries can spend more
money to protect against climate change than poor
countries can. Lifting countries out of poverty is an
essential but underdiscussed approach to mitigating the
damage of climate change.
Let’s take another look at three of the pathways
developed by scientists working for the UN (from chapter
9). In each scenario, Bangladesh is set to become richer. If
we look at the middle-of-the-road pathway, it will by the
end of the century be as rich as Holland is today. If we look
at the best scenarios—sustainable (green) and fossil fuel—
which will see large-scale investment in education, health,
and technology, then by the end of the century Bangladesh
will be much richer still.
In the sustainable scenario, Bangladesh will in the early
2080s become richer than today’s Holland. In the fossil fuel
scenario, 
it 
will 
become 
even 
richer, 
even 
faster,
surpassing today’s Holland in the late 2060s, less than fifty
years from today.
As Bangladesh gets richer, it will be able to spend more
on adaptation. Flood defenses for roads and railways, river
embankments protecting productive agricultural lands, and

drainage systems and erosion control measures for major
towns are estimated to cost almost $3 billion initially and
$54 million in annual costs to 2050. While the initial cost is
about one percent of Bangladesh’s GDP today, it will be
one-tenth or less in the 2050s. Clearly, widespread
adaptation will follow as Bangladesh gets richer, and more
adaptation will follow with more development. Before the
end of the century, it seems likely that if Bangladesh
becomes richer than Holland is today, it will have flood and
sea defenses at least as good as those now found in the
Netherlands.4
Today, Bangladesh spends almost $3 billion annually to
subsidize fossil fuels like gas and electricity production as a
way to provide citizens with energy access. As incomes
rise, it is likely Bangladesh can not only cut its subsidies,
but start taxing carbon emissions and begin spending on
green energy R&D like richer countries already do. If
you’re poor, you burn cheap, dirty fuel. If you’re richer, you
can afford to subsidize wind turbines.6

FIGURE 15.1 Three scenarios for GDP per person in
Bangladesh over the century. Dashed lines show the
actual amount; full lines show the amount when
adjusted for climate damages. Holland in 2020 is
shown for reference.5
Picking the high-growth pathways to ensure that
Bangladesh gets out of poverty and into a better life with
more capacity for adaptation, innovation, and green taxes
is in itself a climate policy. Yes, development will also lead
to more carbon emissions, higher temperatures, and
greater climate damages, as is indicated as the difference
between the dashed and solid lines in figure 15.1. But the
positive effects will vastly outweigh the negative ones, in
terms of higher climate resilience, more sustainable long-
term climate policies, and in terms of development itself.
THE REASON WHY we pursue any climate change policy is
to make the world better than it would otherwise be. Our
goal is to make sure that both people and the world’s
environment are better off than they would have been had
we done nothing. This is why we set a carbon tax to ensure

that emissions are lower and hence temperatures do not
rise as high. We invest in green R&D to find low- or zero-
carbon energy technologies to outcompete fossil fuels,
lower emissions, and reduce temperature rises. We invest
in 
adaptation 
and 
geoengineering 
to 
reduce 
and
counterweigh the negative impacts of global warming.
But it is an unavoidable fact that all these policies also
cost us resources that could have been spent making
people’s lives healthier, longer, and more prosperous. If we
focused some of these resources on effective development
and human capital investments, then people would be more
able to afford expensive green energy sources and more
capable of investing in adaptation. As a society, we would
have more money to respond to climate change.
This is especially true for the world’s poorest. As we saw
in chapter 10, climate change affects the world’s poor
much more than it affects the rich. Indeed, often the
climate travails of the world’s poorest are used as an
explicit reason for cutting carbon dioxide emissions and
diverting development aid to climate projects.
In countries most affected by spikes in temperature, it is
very clear that getting poor people out of poverty means
they will not be nearly as affected by heat waves. Their
societies will be better able to afford air-conditioned
hospitals and community centers that can help especially
vulnerable people cope with the heat. It means their
societies can afford to make urban environments cooler,
with more parks and water features, cool roofs, and cool
pavements. It also means individuals can increasingly
afford to keep cool when it’s hot and keep warm when it’s
cold, because of the increased affordability of cooling and
heating.
Ensuring more widespread prosperity also means fewer
people will be dependent on small-scale farming, in which a
single weather catastrophe can spell disaster for a whole
family. It can help societies change from being mostly

dependent on weather-affected agriculture to a much more
secure 
life 
within 
weather-proof 
manufacturing 
and
services. A more prosperous society will also have better
health services, which can help ameliorate negative
impacts from global warming. They will have better social
protections, making sure fewer are affected by nutritional
deficiencies, 
even 
if 
climate 
change 
harms 
local
agriculture.
History shows, too, that making a society richer means it
can afford to stop deforestation. The Netherlands is
planting forests while Bangladesh is still cutting them
down. As people move out of poverty and don’t have to
focus so much on simply surviving, they become more
interested in safeguarding nature, cutting air and water
pollution, and starting to reforest. While the area of global
wetlands and its biodiversity is expected to decline as sea
levels rise without extra resources spent on wetland
adaptation, richer societies will be more likely to set aside
resources to create new space for wetlands. In total, richer
societies will likely see up to 60 percent more wetlands.7
And of course, a society that is better off enjoys many
other improvements that go far beyond being able to deal
with climate change. Young people will have better
education and more job opportunities, and more money can
be invested in health care and protecting the vulnerable.
The Netherlands has its problems, but extreme poverty is
not among them.
This does not mean we should do nothing to address
climate change. There are plenty of climate policies that
are so cost effective, we should definitely implement them.
But it does mean we need to more explicitly weigh the costs
and benefits of climate policies against all other policies
and ask, where can we help most? We will discuss answers
to this broader question in the next chapter, but not
surprisingly, it turns out that one of the best answers is to

increase the level of well-being in the Bangladeshes of the
world, as fast as we can.
THE IDEA OF prosperity as a climate change policy is
rarely considered. We are much more focused on specific
actions like putting up a solar panel or abstaining from
meat. But the idea has been around for decades. Back in
1992 when climate negotiations were just beginning, Nobel
Prize–winning economist Thomas Schelling (with whom I
collaborated for decades) first posed the question, are poor
people really best helped through cutting CO2 and
adaptation, or could we achieve more if we focused on
making them more prosperous? The so-called Schelling
conjecture suggests that getting richer is likely to be the
better way to help people, even those faced with climate
problems.8
One of the clearest examples of an answer to the
Schelling conjecture is found in a 2018 study that followed
sixteen hundred rural households in Tanzania over six
years, analyzing their vulnerability to weather shocks. The
study found that hotter years affected the very poor
differently than it did others. The very poor households had
less food and opportunity for consumption in hotter years.
But those who were one rung or two higher on the ladder,
who were still poor but slightly less so, turned out not to be
affected by weather shocks. Their food and overall
consumption possibly even increased slightly in hotter
years. Why? These “slightly less” poor have multiple (small)
income streams, not just from agriculture, but often also
from business and retail. They can vary their incomes
better when temperatures spike. They can also better
afford to invest in things like irrigation, or maybe take a
chance on higher-yielding but riskier seed varieties. In
comparison, the absolutely poorest will understandably shy
away from such risky investments, and will be confined to

back-breaking outdoor agricultural work that becomes
harder in temperature spikes.9
The lesson is simple: even if you just want to help the
poorest people in Tanzania reduce their vulnerability to
climate change and nothing else, the best way to help them
is to lift them out of extreme poverty. Get the poorest
people to become, at the very least, slightly less poor.
Indeed, a 2012 study investigating the impact of climate
and prosperity policies for all regions of the world shows
that even when the goal is just to help with climate
impacts, for the poorest regions the best policies focus on
development, not climate. Even if our singular goal is to
reduce the impacts of climate change, one of the best ways
to assist the world’s poorest is to help them escape poverty.
Prosperity can be a highly effective climate policy.10

SECTION FIVE
TACKLING CLIMATE
CHANGE AND ALL THE
WORLD’S OTHER
CHALLENGES

16
CONCLUSION: HOW TO MAKE
THE WORLD A BETTER PLACE
THE GOAL OF climate policy is to make the world a better
place. Right now, we stand at a crossroads. We can charge
on in the same direction, but thirty years of failed climate
policy tell us this approach will not make the world much
better, and it will cost us a lot. Or we can choose a different
pathway that could help people and the planet much more.
Let’s look at the big picture for a moment. Instead of
thinking just about the single issue of climate change, let’s
look at how well humanity is doing right now on all of the
biggest challenges confronting us.
Are things getting better or worse? One way of
answering this question is to look at these challenges,
expressed as costs to humanity.
Figure 16.1 is the result of work I undertook with ten
world-class teams of economists. We set out to establish
what different global problems have cost—and will cost—
from 1900 to 2050, as a percentage of global GDP. This
figure reveals two essential points.1
First, things are generally getting better. From air
pollution to gender inequality to malnutrition, we have
managed to reduce the impact of the biggest challenges
humanity has faced, and we are on target to reduce them

even further. If we think about what the world looked like
in 1900 and what it looks like today, this lesson comes as
no surprise.
Second, the figure shows us that climate change is a
moderate problem in a sea of problems, big and small.2
FIGURE 16.1 How much richer would the world have
been had we solved different issues, 1900–2050. Cost
of climate change with optimal policy added for
reference.3
These two points need to guide us. We have reduced the
scale of other challenges, and we need to continue that
work for the future. We also need to solve global warming.
But we need to do so with the knowledge that climate
change is not the only problem facing the world, nor is it
the largest.
PEOPLE ARE TERRIFIED of climate change, above all else.
Half the world’s surveyed population believes human
extinction 
is 
likely, 
and 
that 
faced 
with 
possible
annihilation, any expenditure is justified.4
But remember, we have been scared witless before. In
the 1960s and 1970s, the good and necessary concern for

the environment took a dark turn. Thought leaders were
supremely confident that the planet faced doom. They
foretold a future of overpopulation, famine, and pollution,
with social and ecological collapse.
No one person did more to preach this pessimistic
message than Stanford ecologist Paul Ehrlich. He was a
favorite on Johnny Carson’s Tonight Show, prophesizing to
the American public that the planet was on the brink of
destruction, not least because ever more people were
gobbling up resources and generating pollution. On CBS
national news in 1970, he explained that the world would
end before 1985: “Sometime in the next fifteen years, the
end will come. And by ‘the end’ I mean an utter breakdown
of the capacity of the planet to support humanity.” Other
influential academics agreed that the end was near,
differing only in how much time was left: as little as five
years or as many as thirty. The media jumped on these
stories. Life magazine, for instance, reported in 1970 that
“horrors lie in wait,” and that within ten years “urban
dwellers will have to wear gas masks to survive air
pollution.”5
But the warnings were completely wrong. Ehrlich
predicted that one to two billion people would die from
starvation in the 1970s. He was off by much more than 99
percent. He claimed that by 1980, the life expectancy of the
average American could be forty-two years. In 1980, it
reached seventy-four years. Los Angelinos didn’t need gas
masks for air pollution but instead breathed easier in the
1980s because of technological breakthroughs like the
catalytic converter and stricter environmental regulations.
The world did not end.6
The 
apocalyptic 
rhetoric 
did 
significant 
damage,
however. If the world was becoming overpopulated, the
conclusion drawn by researchers and politicians was that it
was necessary to make people have fewer children,

especially the poor. Population control came to be seen as
“the only possible salvation of the underdeveloped world,”
as Ehrlich put it. Some researchers started considering
adding chemicals to water supplies or staple foods to make
the world’s poor temporarily sterile. It gave urgency and
legitimacy 
to 
end 
horrific 
abuses 
committed 
by
governments, including forced sterilization campaigns and
coerced abortions. In just one year, in 1976, the Indian
government force-sterilized 6.2 million men.7
And the idea that the world was on the brink of
irrevocable collapse from starvation even made it possible
for some leading environmentalists to consider cutting off
food aid to entire countries and regions. Believing that
continued food aid would allow the births of more children,
who would inevitably die in later hunger catastrophes,
Ehrlich advocated that humanity’s most hopeful scenario
was to cut off food aid to Vietnam, Thailand, Egypt, and
India—and sit back and watch while famine and food riots
killed half a billion people. It is horrific to consider the
human suffering that would have resulted, had we not
instead followed the advice of Norman Borlaug and the
green revolution and pursued a pathway of innovation and
improving agricultural productivity. Ehrlich’s approach is
possibly the most heinous example in modern history of bad
policy advice emerging from unfounded, apocalyptic
worries.8
PANIC DOESN’T JUST lead us toward bad or ineffective
policy solutions—it can also lead us to focus on the wrong
problems. This is a challenge we’ve seen throughout the
history of the environmental movement.
Much 
of 
the 
early 
concern 
of 
environmental
organizations, campaigners, and politicians was with
regulation to protect us from potentially dangerous toxins.
In large part, this focus was due to the outsized impact of

Rachel Carson’s 1962 bestseller, Silent Spring, which made
the case that chemicals like DDT and other toxins were
killing birds and children. Carson was correct in pointing
out that the US government was not doing nearly enough
to 
safeguard 
nature 
and 
humans 
from 
dangerous
chemicals. But even at the time, her concerns were
exaggerated; she feared DDT and other toxins were killing
ever more children and adults from leukemia, although US
death rates from the disease were declining from 1960.
Even the United Nations claimed that DDT and other toxins
were causing more than half of all cancers, although the
correct number was probably lower than 2 percent.9
The resulting nationwide fear led to a large federal focus
on reducing toxin risks. The total cost of regulating toxins
ran to more than $200 billion per year by the mid-1990s.
But these policies had a very poor return on investment. A
research team from Harvard University evaluated the
regulations and found that the majority of them were very
inefficient. Benzene emission controls at rubber tire
manufacturing plants, for instance, cost $100 million per
year, but would save a life only once every four thousand
years.10
The Harvard research team compared toxin controls
with other regulations saving lives through injury control
programs (such as flammability standards for upholstered
furniture) and medical programs (such as cervical cancer
screening).
Across 185 life-saving regulations with sufficient data,
the total annual cost to America was $21 billion and the
regulations saved sixty thousand lives each year. However,
if the focus had been on the most effective regulations—
much less on toxin controls, more on injury control, and
much more on medical programs—the same total cost of
$21 billion could have saved one hundred twenty thousand
people each year. Put bluntly, the outsized toxin fear of the

1960s and 1970s ended up committing at least sixty
thousand annual statistical murders; that is, lives lost that
could have been saved had public policy been focused on
implementing the most effective regulations first.11
We need to stop repeating history. Today’s climate
change 
movement 
explicitly 
calls 
for 
the 
largest
mobilization of resources in history, and for putting
humanity on a “war footing” to combat rising temperatures.
Rather than making fear-based, knee-jerk policy decisions,
we need to make sure that we respond effectively and
efficiently.
WE HAVE ALREADY discussed many of the factors leading
to simplification and scaremongering in the climate debate.
Researchers find it simpler to ignore complex aspects like
humanity’s adaptive ability when they study the effects of
climate change. The media moves swiftly and likes to tell a
simple, clear, terrifying narrative. Politicians gain votes
when they present themselves standing with voters against
an external threat. Everyone wins.
This alignment of interests has led us to bad choices in
the past. You’ve probably heard of the “military-industrial
complex,” a phrase coined by President Eisenhower in 1961
to warn against the undue influence of an immense military
establishment and arms industry creeping into “every city,
every 
State 
house, 
every 
office 
of 
the 
Federal
government.”12
The military-industrial complex arose during the Cold
War as a response to the perceived threat of Soviet
strength. In the 1950s, the conventional wisdom was that
the Soviet Union was experiencing incredibly fast economic
growth and was about to eclipse the United States. The
threat was used as a powerful argument for much more
defense spending.
Statistics on Soviet growth turned out to be dramatically

exaggerated. Yet, at the time it was hard to stand up and
say, “Maybe we should spend more on health and
education instead?” without being labeled a communist
sympathizer. And so the military grew and grew, along with
the industries that supported it and the universities that
provided 
military-related 
research. 
Multiple 
forces
conjoined to create a national panic. Children performed
air raid drills in school, people built bunkers in their
backyards.13
The costs of the panic were immense, not just in actual
resources spent, but also in the amount of forgone
opportunity to invest elsewhere. What if the money poured
into America’s massive military had gone instead to cancer
research? To education? To prenatal care for poor
mothers? 
To 
rebuilding 
infrastructure? 
What 
would
America, indeed the world, look like now had it not been for
this false alarm?
SOMETHING AKIN TO the military-industrial complex is
emerging surrounding climate change, though some of the
players are different this time around. Climate change
needs our attention, but it has become an all-consuming
focus, in part because so many people benefit from the
panic. Politicians and media executives benefit, of course,
but so does big business.
No doubt, many CEOs are genuinely concerned about
global warming, but they also stand to make a great deal of
money from carbon regulations. This interest is particularly
obvious in the energy sector. Go to any climate conference
and you’ll find wind energy manufacturers sponsoring
media segments on the “climate crisis” that increase
support for policies that would significantly add to their
own earnings—while urging governments to invest heavily
in the wind market.
Even companies not heavily engaged in green energy

stand to gain. Some businesses blatantly wrap themselves
in a bright-green mantle for the sake of branding, of
course. But others stand to gain in ways that aren’t always
clear to consumers. In the first decades of European
climate policy, for instance, many energy companies made
billions of dollars in extra profits from Europe’s cap-and-
trade system. The European Union intended for energy
companies to buy certificates to counteract all their
emissions, and the businesses would then pass the cost on
to consumers, thus creating a financial incentive for
company and consumer alike to reduce fossil fuel reliance.
However, it is much easier to get companies to accept
legislation if it makes them money rather than costs them
money. So in practice, European governments gave most of
the certificates to the companies free of charge, but the
companies continued to charge their consumers as if they
had paid for them. In just the first eight years of EU
emissions trading, this made companies, including many
coal-fired power plants, about $80 billion in additional
profits. US energy companies had high hopes that they
could benefit similarly when the United States was
considering cap-and-trade legislation in 2009. Energy
companies’ lobbying costs for climate change action more
than tripled to over $350 million for that year.14
Enron pioneered the cozy corporate relationship with
politicians to support climate change action. It bought up
renewable energy companies and carbon-credit-trading
outfits, with the expectation that they would gain
significantly in value from climate agreements. When the
Kyoto Protocol was signed, a memo written within Enron
stated: “If implemented, [the Kyoto Protocol] will do more
to promote Enron’s business than almost any other
regulatory business.” The moral of the story? Especially
when a company is calling for more environmental
regulation, we need to look very carefully at what they

might stand to gain from it.15
Environmental campaigners also play a part in this story,
sometimes unwittingly, by helping to stoke fear. Enron
boasted of their “excellent credentials with many ‘green’
interests” including Greenpeace and the Climate Action
Network. This relationship boosts companies’ bottom line,
because campaign organizations help increase public
willingness to pay for subsidies and other handouts to fund
expensive climate policies, through visions of catastrophe
and Armageddon.16
I don’t believe that there is some kind of grand
conspiracy to promote scare stories about environmental
crisis. I do believe that companies, the media, and
politicians benefit from those stories. This confluence of
interests 
goes 
a 
long 
way 
to 
explaining 
why 
the
conversation surrounding climate change has become so
detached from scientific reality.
WHAT IS THE POINT of climate change policy? To make
the world a better place for all of us, and for future
generations. To me, that suggests that we need to ask
ourselves a broader question. If the goal is to make the
world a better place, is climate change policy the most
important thing to focus on?
Certainly, it is one thing we should focus on. We must
rein in temperature increases and help ensure that the
most vulnerable can adapt. But today’s popular climate
change policies of rolling out solar panels and wind
turbines have insidious effects: they push up energy costs,
hurt the poor, cut emissions ineffectively, and put us on an
unsustainable pathway where taxpayers are eventually
likely to revolt. Instead, we need to invest in innovation,
smart carbon taxes, R&D into geoengineering, and
adaptation.
But we also need to recognize that reducing global

warming is only one of many things we can do to make the
world a better place.
Making the world richer is also important. If we end up
on a pathway that creates the highest possible welfare for
the planet, we could leave the world $500 trillion better off
each and every year by the end of the century. This is a
virtuous goal in and of itself, but it will also help address
climate change. The richer people are, the more resilient
they will be in the face of global warming.
To make the world richer, we must invest in health care,
in education, and in technology. But we can’t do it all.
Current climate policy is so expensive, and will drain so
much of potential future gains in GDP, that it will leave less
money for policies that will enhance prosperity.
Ultimately, there is a limited amount of money we can
spend on making the world a better place. So we need to
make choices, and we need to make trade-offs. The good
news is that we have a great deal of data indicating what
the best investments are.
The United States, together with almost all other
countries in the world, has adopted the so-called Global
Goals or Sustainable Development Goals. These were set by
the United Nations and list 169 targets encompassing
everything from reducing gender-based violence and
poverty, to increasing nutrition and broadband access, to
fixing climate change and poverty.

FIGURE 16.2 How much do different policies help the
world? Each policy has been analyzed by economists
to estimate its total costs and total benefits. The bars
on the right-hand side show how much social,
economic, and environmental benefits one extra dollar
will achieve—longer bars are better.17
My think tank, the Copenhagen Consensus, worked with
fifty teams of economists and several Nobel laureate
economists to analyze these development investments and
find which initiatives will achieve the greatest “return on
investment” for humanity (see figure 16.2).18
As we have throughout this book, we can think about
these policies in terms of costs and benefits. Smart climate
policies give a good return on investment. But we can
achieve much more for humanity with interventions in
areas other than climate policy.
Top among these is freer trade. Free trade has recently
been criticized by left- and right-wing politicians because it
hurts vulnerable communities like manufacturing workers
in 
“rust 
belts.” 
This 
misses 
the 
bigger 
picture.
Governments could spend billions more supporting the
most vulnerable communities that would be hurt by free
trade deals, and benefits would still vastly outweigh costs.

Globally, freer trade could unleash an amazing $2,000 of
social benefits for every dollar spent. Much of these
benefits would go to the world’s poorest, who would have
far more opportunities if they could become part of the
global market. Unfortunately, the world has almost given
up on the latest round of trade negotiations, called the
Doha Development Round, but if we were to successfully
conclude such a global treaty on freer trade, economists
estimate that it could by 2030 make the average person in
the poor world a thousand dollars richer per person per
year.19
And remember, by making people richer, especially in
the world’s poorest countries, freer trade would also lead
to societies far more resilient to climate shocks, more
capable of investing in adaptation, and far less vulnerable
to rising temperatures. In that way, free trade can be
considered a smart climate policy as well as an excellent
way to promote human thriving generally.
Other policies, too, would be incredibly beneficial for the
world and help us address climate change by making
people better off, and hence more resilient. Avoiding
malnutrition in the first two years of a child’s life costs
about $100. Because good nutrition helps develop the
child’s brain, it leads to better educational outcomes and
phenomenally higher productivity in adulthood. Indeed, this
$100 spent will on average increase each child’s lifetime
income to the equivalent of a onetime amount of $4,500, in
today’s dollars. Every dollar spent on fighting early
childhood malnutrition results in $45 of social good. This
research was cited when governments pledged more than
$4 billion for nutrition investments, but much more is still
needed.20
There is a compelling case, too, to spend more resources
to fight the world’s leading infectious disease killer,
tuberculosis. 
This 
disease 
is 
hugely 
overlooked 
by

philanthropists and governments. It mostly kills adults in
their prime, leaving children without parents. For about $6
billion annually, we could save nearly 1.6 million people
from dying each and every year. Parents could continue to
work, and children would not be orphaned. When the
Copenhagen 
Consensus 
undertook 
an 
analysis 
for
philanthropist Bill Gates, he concluded that his investment
in tuberculosis, immunization, polio, and malaria was the
“best investment I’ve ever made.”21
Closing the contraception access gap would also be a
transformational achievement. There are 214 million
women of reproductive age in poor countries who want to
avoid pregnancy, but do not have access to modern
contraceptive methods. Solving this challenge will cost just
$3.6 billion more each year than what is spent today. That
will immediately save lives, avoiding 150,000 mothers
dying 
in 
childbirth 
each 
year, 
because 
of 
fewer
pregnancies. Better spacing of children from family
planning also allows parents to assign more resources of
money, time, and emotional energy to each child. This
parental investment will make children more productive as
adults. As there will also be fewer adults in any age group,
each child will eventually also be able to use more capital
resources, 
and 
entire 
societies 
will 
become 
more
productive, with greater economic growth. Each dollar
spent on contraception and family planning education will
generate $120 of social benefits across the most vulnerable
societies. This research recently helped convince the
British government to pledge £600 million ($761 million) to
provide 20 million more women and girls in the developing
world with access to family planning. While great, this is
only a drop in the ocean of what is needed.22
What do all these investments have in common, other
than being compelling? The fact that they are underfunded.
We could go far further in solving each of these challenges

if we could allocate more resources. Remember that
approximately one-fourth of aid today is diverted to climate
aid projects. Indeed, the amount spent on climate aid today
could fund all these interventions in contraception,
tuberculosis, malaria, immunization, and nutrition—with
money to spare. The money spent on climate aid is money
we cannot spend twice. Many people deeply committed to
addressing climate change also believe in expanding
women’s access to contraception, in reducing poverty, and
in eliminating disease in the poorest parts of the world. But
too often, they forget that there are trade-offs.
WE DEFINITELY NEED to address global warming—it’s a
real problem and we need to put policies in place both to
limit its extent and to enable the world to best manage its
impact.
But if we truly want to make the world a better place, we
have to be very careful that our preoccupation with climate
change doesn’t distract us from other crucial problems. We
can improve the human condition far more by opening the
world to free trade, ending tuberculosis, and ensuring
access to nutrition, contraception, health, education, and
technology.
Fixating on scary stories about climate change leads us
to make poor decisions. As individuals, we feel compelled to
transform our lives, in ways both minor (not eating meat)
and major (foregoing parenthood). As societies, we are
making treaties that promise to squander hundreds of
trillions of dollars on incredibly inefficient carbon-cutting
policies.
Overspending on bad climate policies doesn’t just waste
money. It means underspending on effective climate
policies and underspending on the opportunities we have to
improve life for billions of people, now and into the future.
That’s not just inefficient. It’s morally wrong.

Over the past century, the world has become a better
place, thanks to human ingenuity and innovation. Our
choice now is whether we want to allow fear to drive our
choices, or if we want to use our ingenuity and innovation
to make sure that we leave future generations the best
world possible.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Writing a book is really leaning on the bright ideas of so
many people who work to further a great world. Thanking
them individually would be impossible, but collectively they
have made our world so much richer.
I’ve spent the last two decades working with some of the
best economists across the world to identify smart solutions
to the world’s big problems. I’ve learned from them all and
thank them deeply.
Within climate science, I want to say thanks to the tens
of thousands of scientists who have invested an enormous
amount of energy into understanding the physical workings
of our world, publishing their findings throughout the
academic literature, and to the thousands of scientists who
have worked to summarize this information in the UN
Climate Panel reports.
But to tackle climate smartly, we not only need to know
about the physical reality of climate change. We also need
to understand its impact on societies when taking
adaptation into account, and we need to understand the
different social strategies available, along with their costs
and benefits. Here, climate economics is invaluable, and I
want to thank the large cohort of academics and analysts
who have made us all know more. Many of you are widely
cited in this book.
In my own organization I’d like to thank the Copenhagen
Consensus Center chief economist, Brad Wong, for many
educating conversations across almost all conceivable
topics, 
from 
government 
procurement 
in 
Haiti 
and

tuberculosis treatment in Ghana, to solar panels and
disaster preparedness in Bangladesh. I also want to say
thanks to David Cooper for helping me prepare this book—
you made almost every sentence better! Thanks to all you
guys who helped me create this book, and also make it
better: David Lessmann, Nancy Dubosse, Saleema Razvi,
Ralph Nordjo, Justin De Los Santos, Cyandra Carvalho,
Krisztina Mészáros, Loretta Michaels, and Scott Calahan.
Roland Mathiasson deserves his own mention—you helped
me every step of the way, making the graphs, the
arguments, and the book much better. Thanks!
But without my editors at Basic Books, this book would
be much less sharp and clear. Thanks go first and foremost
to Lara Heimert, who has consistently pushed me through
rewrite after rewrite to make my text the best possible
version of the argument. Yes, there were times when it felt
like I was banging my head against a wall, but you really
made my book much, much better. Thanks, Lara!
So many others from Basic Books have been helping to
improve the book. Thanks to Roger Labrie for consistently
pointing out how my mumbling can be transformed into
clear text, thanks to Christine Marra for racing the book
through production, to Gray Cutler for a great copy edit,
thanks to Kait Howard and Victoria Gilder for the media
outreach, and to the many others who worked on the
book’s 
behalf: 
Jessica 
Breen, 
Allison 
Finkel, 
Katie
Lambright, Abigail Mohr, and Melissa Raymond.
At the end of the day, writing can be a lonely endeavor.
But all of you helped me make this book better. Of course,
any errors are mine and mine alone. But many of the great
points, good arguments, and insights are thanks to all of
you.
Prague, February 25, 2020

Discover Your Next Great Read
Get sneak peeks, book recommendations, and news about
your favorite authors.
Tap here to learn more.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Charlotte Carlberg Bärg
Bjorn Lomborg is the best-selling author of The Skeptical
Environmentalist and Cool It, along with numerous
academic books and publications. He is a visiting professor
at Copenhagen Business School and a visiting fellow at the
Hoover Institution at Stanford. As the president of the
Copenhagen Consensus think tank, he has worked with
more than three hundred of the world’s leading economists
and seven Nobel laureates, and helped change billions of
dollars in donor spending. His work appears in the New
York Times, the Wall Street Journal, the Washington Post,
the Economist, the Atlantic, the Financial Times, and many
other publications. His monthly column appears in dozens

of the leading papers around the world, reaching tens of
millions of readers. Time has called him one of the hundred
most influential people in the world, he has repeatedly
been named one of Foreign Policy’s Top 100 Global
Thinkers, and the Guardian has identified him as “one of
the fifty people who could save the planet.” He lives in
Prague.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
AAP-Reuter. 1982. “Environment Enthusiasm ‘Less.’” 1982.
https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/page/13937663.
Achenbach, Joel. 2018. “Extreme Weather in 2018 Was a
Raging, Howling Signal of Climate Change.” 2018.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/science/2018/12/31/ex
treme-weather-was-raging-howling-signal-climate-
change/.
ActionAid. 2012. “Biofuels: Fueling Hunger? Threats of
Another 
Global 
Food 
Crisis.” 
2012.
https://www.actionaid.org.uk/sites/default/files/publicati
ons/biofuels_fuelling_hunger.pdf.
Adler, Michael, Samantha Harris, Megan Krey, Loni
Plocinsky, and Jeanette Rebecchi. 2010. “Preparing for
Heat Waves in Boston—A Cool Way to Attack Global
Warming.” 
2010.
https://www.cityofboston.gov/images_documents/Prepari
ng%20for%20Heat%20Waves%20in%20Boston_tcm3-
31986.pdf.
Aerts, J. C. J. H. 2009. “Adaptation Cost in the Netherlands:
Climate Change and Flood Risk Management.” Climate
Research Netherlands—Research Highlights (2009): 34–
44.
http://www.climatechangesspatialplanning.nl/media/defa
ult.aspx/emma/org/10354094/34-
44+Adaptation+cost+in+the+Netherlands+-
+Climate+Change+and+flood+risk+management.pdf.

AFP. 2019. “French Nuclear Power Plant Is Seven Years
Late and Costs Have Tripled.” October 28, 2019.
https://www.thelocal.fr/20191028/french-nuclear-power-
plant-is-seven-years-late-and-costs-have-tripled.
Agrawala, Shardul, Maëlis Carraro, Nicholas Kingsmill,
Elisa Lanzi, Michael Mullan, and Guillaume Prudent-
Richard. 2011. “Private Sector Engagement in Adaptation
to Climate Change: Approaches to Managing Climate
Risks.” 
November 
2011.
https://doi.org/10.1787/5kg221jkf1g7-en.
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. 2016. “Ahmedabad
Heat 
Action 
Plan 
2016.” 
2016.
https://www.nrdc.org/sites/default/files/ahmedabad-
heat-action-plan-2016.pdf.
Akimoto, Keigo, Fuminori Sano, and Bianka Shoai Tehrani.
2017. “The Analyses on the Economic Costs for Achieving
the 
Nationally 
Determined 
Contributions 
and 
the
Expected Global Emission Pathways.” Evolutionary and
Institutional Economics Review 14, no. 1 (2017): 193–
206. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40844-016-0049-y.
Aklin, Michaël, Patrick Bayer, S. P. Harish, and Johannes
Urpelainen. 2017. “Does Basic Energy Access Generate
Socioeconomic Benefits? A Field Experiment with Off-
Grid Solar Power in India.” Science Advances 3, no. 5
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1602153.
AlJazeera. 2019. “Worst Floods in Years ‘Submerge’
Bangladesh 
Villages.” 
2019.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/07/worst-floods-
years-submerge-bangladesh-villages-
190719083053518.html.
Allen, Myles. 2019. “Why Protesters Should Be Wary of ‘12
Years 
to 
Climate 
Breakdown’ 
Rhetoric.” 
2019.
https://theconversation.com/why-protesters-should-be-

wary-of-12-years-to-climate-breakdown-rhetoric-115489.
Amadeo, Kimberly. 2019. “FY 2019 Federal Budget:
Trump’s 
Budget 
Request.” 
2019.
https://www.thebalance.com/fy-2019-federal-budget-
summary-of-revenue-and-spending-4589082.
Anchondo, Carlos. 2019. “Legislation with $1.7 Billion for
Flood Control and Mitigation Projects Goes to Governor.”
2019.
https://www.texastribune.org/2019/05/26/lawmakers-
approve-bill-to-help-fund-floor-control-projects-in-texas/.
Andela, N., D. C. Morton, L. Giglio, Y. Chen, G. R. van der
Werf, P. S. Kasibhatla, R. S. DeFries, et al. 2017. “A
Human-Driven Decline in Global Burned Area.” Science
356, 
no. 
6345 
(2017): 
1356–62.
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal4108.
Anderson, Kym. 2018. “Benefits and Costs of the Trade
Targets for the Post-2015 Development Agenda.” In
Prioritizing Development, edited by Bjorn Lomborg.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2018, 192–
215. https://www.copenhagen.com.
Annon. 1991. “What’s Happening to the World’s Weather?”
Earth Island Journal 6, no. 3 (1991): 38.
Anthoff, David, and Richard S. J. Tol. 2012. “Schelling’s
Conjecture on Climate and Development: A Test.” In
Climate Change and Common Sense: Essays in Honour of
Tom 
Schelling. 
Oxford: 
Oxford 
University 
Press.
https://www.oxfordscholarship.com/view/10.1093/acprof
:oso/9780199692873.001.0001/acprof-9780199692873-
chapter-14.
AonBenfield. 
2019. 
Weather, 
Climate 
& 
Catastrophe
Insight: 
2018 
Annual 
Report. 
2019.
http://thoughtleadership.aonbenfield.com/Documents/20

190122-ab-if-annual-weather-climate-report-2018.pdf.
APS. 2011. Direct Air Capture of CO2 with Chemicals.
American 
Physical 
Society. 
2011.
https://www.aps.org/policy/reports/assessments/upload/
dac2011.pdf.
Arcadia Power. 2014. “15 Things Americans Spend More
on 
Per 
Year 
Than 
the 
EPA 
Budget.” 
2014.
https://blog.arcadiapower.com/15-things-american-
spend-per-year-entire-epa-budget/.
Aronoff, Kate. 2019. “How Much Destruction Is Needed for
Us 
to 
Take 
Climate 
Change 
Seriously?” 
2019.
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/sep/
03/how-much-destruction-is-needed-for-us-to-take-
climate-change-seriously.
Arora, V. K., and G. J. Boer. 2014. “Terrestrial Ecosystems
Response to Future Changes in Climate and Atmospheric
CO2 Concentration.” Biogeosciences 11, no. 15 (2014):
4157–71. https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-11-4157-2014.
Arora, V. K., and J. F. Scinocca. 2016. “Constraining the
Strength of the Terrestrial CO2 Fertilization Effect in the
Canadian 
Earth 
System 
Model 
Version 
4.2
(CanESM4.2).” Geoscientific Model Development 9, no. 7
(2016.): 2357–76. https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-9-2357-
2016.
Arora, Vivek K., and Joe R. Melton. 2018. “Reduction in
Global Area Burned and Wildfire Emissions since 1930s
Enhances 
Carbon 
Uptake 
by 
Land.” 
Nature
Communications 
9, 
no. 
1 
(2018): 
1326.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03838-0.
Arrhenius, Svante. 1896. “On the Influence of Carbonic
Acid in the Air upon the Temperature of the Ground.”
London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine

and Journal of Science 41 (1896): 237–75.
Ashley, Walker S., Stephen Strader, Troy Rosencrants, and
Andrew J. Krmenec. 2014. “Spatiotemporal Changes in
Tornado Hazard Exposure: The Case of the Expanding
Bull’s-Eye Effect in Chicago, Illinois.” Weather, Climate,
and 
Society 
6, 
no. 
2 
(2014): 
175–93.
https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-D-13-00047.1.
Astor, Maggie. 2018. “No Children Because of Climate
Change? Some People Are Considering It.” 2018.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/05/climate/climate-
change-children.html.
Athawes, Simon. 2018. “Five Years On: How Haiyan
Shocked 
the 
World.”
https://www.rms.com/blog/2018/11/08/five-years-on-
how-haiyan-shocked-the-world/.
Auffhammer, M., and E. T. Mansur. 2014. “Measuring
Climatic Impacts on Energy Consumption: A Review of
the Empirical Literature.” Energy Economics 46 (2014):
522–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2014.04.017.
BA. 2006. “Click for the Climate.” BA National Sience Week
2006. 
2006.
https://web.archive.org/web/20080906185155if_/http://
www.the-ba.net/the-
ba/Events/NSEW/AboutNSEW/NSEW_archive/NationalS
cienceWeek2006/ClimateChange/_ClickfortheClimate.ht
m.
Baddour, Dylan. 2017. “High-Tech Flood Study Calls for
Buyouts 
of 
North 
Houston 
Apartments.” 
2017.
https://www.houstonchronicle.com/business/article/High
-tech-flood-study-calls-for-buyouts-of-North-
11198088.php.
Bailey, 
Ronald. 
2013. 
“Peak 
Farmland?” 
2013.
https://reason.com/2013/05/27/peak-farmland/.

Bainimarama, Josaia Voreqe. 2013. “PM’s Speech at the
Opening of the Rukua Smart Solar Power Project.” 2013.
http://www.ruraldev.gov.fj/index.php/19-frontpage-
articles/75-commissioning-of-tissue-culture-lab-at-
koronivia-research-station.
Bakhsh, Khuda, and M. Asif Kamran. 2019. “Adaptation to
Climate Change in Rain-Fed Farming System in Punjab,
Pakistan.” International Journal of the Commons 13, no. 2
(2019): 833–47. https://doi.org/10.5334/ijc.887.
Bakkensen, Laura A., and Robert O. Mendelsohn. 2016.
“Risk and Adaptation: Evidence from Global Hurricane
Damages and Fatalities.” Journal of the Association of
Environmental and Resource Economists 3, no. 3 (2016):
555–87. https://doi.org/10.1086/685908.
Bamat, Joseph. 2015. “France Takes Steps to Avoid Repeat
of 
Deadly 
2003 
HeatWave.” 
2015.
https://www.france24.com/en/20150701-france-paris-
heat-wave-alert-deadly-2003-summer-guidelines.
Bamber, Jonathan L., Michael Oppenheimer, Robert E.
Kopp, Willy P. Aspinall, and Roger M. Cooke. 2019. “Ice
Sheet Contributions to Future Sea-Level Rise from
Structured 
Expert 
Judgment.” 
Proceedings 
of 
the
National Academy of Sciences 116, no. 23 (2019): 11195–
200. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1817205116.
Banerjee, 
Lopamudra. 
2010. 
“Effects 
of 
Flood 
on
Agricultural 
Productivity 
in 
Bangladesh.” 
Oxford
Development 
Studies 
38, 
no. 
3 
(2010): 
339–56.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13600818.2010.505681.
Barcelona Institute for Global Health. 2018. “Decline in
Heat-Related Deaths in Spain despite Rising Summer
Temperatures.” 
2018.
https://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2018-07/bifg-

dih071818.php.
Baron, Jessica. 2019. “Flight-Shaming Is Now a Thing—Will
It 
Keep 
You 
from 
Traveling?” 
2019.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jessicabaron/2019/07/02/fl
ight-shaming-is-now-a-thing--will-it-keep-you-from-
traveling/#60eaa47b71a3.
Baskin, Jeremy. 2019. Geoengineering, the Anthropocene
and the End of Nature. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
https://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?
direct=true&scope=site&db=nlebk&db=nlabk&AN=214
0070.
Bawden, Tom. 2016. “COP21: Paris Deal Far Too Weak to
Prevent Devastating Climate Change, Academics Warn.”
2016.
https://www.independent.co.uk/environment/climate-
change/cop21-paris-deal-far-too-weak-to-prevent-
devastating-climate-change-academics-warn-
a6803096.html.
BEA. 2019. “Table 1.1.9. Implicit Price Deflators for Gross
Domestic Product.” Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2019.
https://apps.bea.gov/iTable/index_nipa.cfm.
Belfast Telegraph. 2014. “OAPs Staying in Bed to Keep
Warm.”
https://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/uk/oaps-
staying-in-bed-to-keep-warm-29890928.html.
Benichou, Léo. 2014. E-Data of Etemad and Luciani, World
Energy Production 1800—1985. http://www.tsp-data-
portal.org/Energy-Production-Statistics#tspQvChart.
Berke, Philip R. 2017. “Why Is Houston So Vulnerable to
Devastating 
Floods?” 
2017.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-41107049.
Bern, C., J. Sniezek, G. M. Mathbor, M. S. Siddiqi, C.
Ronsmans, A. M. Chowdhury, A. E. Choudhury, K. Islam,

M. Bennish, and E. Noji. 1993. “Risk Factors for Mortality
in the Bangladesh Cyclone of 1991.” Bulletin of the World
Health Organization 71, no. 1 (1993): 73–78.
Berners-Lee, M., C. Hoolohan, H. Cammack, and C. N.
Hewitt. 2012. “The Relative Greenhouse Gas Impacts of
Realistic Dietary Choices.” Energy Policy 43 (2012): 184–
90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.12.054.
Berrigan, Frida. 2019. “Parenting in a World Hurtling
Toward 
Catastrophe.” 
2019.
https://www.thenation.com/article/parenting-generation-
hot-global-warming-climate-change/.
Berrittella, M., A. Bigano, R. Roson, and R. S. J. Tol. 2006.
“A General Equilibrium Analysis of Climate Change
Impacts on Tourism.” Tourism Management 27, no. 5
(2006): 
913–24.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2005.05.002.
Berthélemy, Michel, and Lina Escobar Rangel. 2015.
“Nuclear Reactors’ Construction Costs: The Role of Lead-
Time, Standardization and Technological Progress.”
Energy 
Policy 
82 
(July 
2015): 
118–30.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2015.03.015.
Bickel, J. Eric, and Lee Lane. 2009. “Fix the Climate:
Climate 
Engineering 
Assessment.” 
2009.
https://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/publication/fix-
climate-climate-engineering-assessment-bickel-lane.
Biello, David. 2014. “Cool Roofs Might Be Enough to Save
Cities 
from 
Climate 
Overheating.” 
2014.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/cool-roofs-
might-be-enough-to-save-cities-from-climate-
overheating/.
Biribo, Naomi, and Colin D. Woodroffe. 2013. “Historical
Area and Shoreline Change of Reef Islands around
Tarawa Atoll, Kiribati.” Sustainability Science 8, no. 3

(2013): 
345–62. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-013-
0210-z.
Biswas, 
Soutik. 
2014. 
“India’s 
Dark 
History 
of
Sterilisation.” BBC News, sec. India, November 14, 2014.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-30040790.
Bjelle, Eivind Lekve, Kjartan Steen-Olsen, and Richard
Wood. 2018. “Climate Change Mitigation Potential of
Norwegian Households and the Rebound Effect.” Journal
of 
Cleaner 
Production 
172 
(2018): 
208–17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.089.
BNEF. 2019. “Energy Storage Investments as Boom
Battery Costs Halve in the Next Decade.” BloombergNEF.
July 
31, 
2019. 
https://about.bnef.com/blog/energy-
storage-investments-boom-battery-costs-halve-next-
decade/.
Bohringer, Christoph, Thomas F. Rutherford, and Richard
S. J. Tol. 2009. “The EU 20/20/2020 Targets: An
Overview of the EMF22 Assessment.” Energy Economics
International, U.S. and E.U. Climate Change Control
Scenarios: Results from EMF 22, 31, Supplement 2
(December 
2009): 
S268–73.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2009.10.010.
Bolt, Jutta, Robert Inklaar, Herman de Jong, and Jan Luiten
van Zanden. 2018. “Rebasing ‘Maddison’”: New Income
Comparisons and the Shape of Long-Run Economic
Development. Maddison Project Working Paper 10. 2018.
https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/maddiso
n/releases/maddison-project-database-2018.
Bonjour, Sophie, Heather Adair-Rohani, Jennyfer Wolf,
Nigel G. Bruce, Sumi Mehta, Annette Prüss-Ustün,
Maureen Lahiff, Eva A. Rehfuess, Vinod Mishra, and Kirk
R. Smith. 2013. “Solid Fuel Use for Household Cooking:

Country 
and 
Regional 
Estimates 
for 
1980–2010.”
Environmental Health Perspectives 121, no. 7 (2013):
784–90. https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1205987.
Borenstein, 
Severin, 
and 
Lucas 
Davis. 
2015. 
“The
Distributional Effects of U.S. Clean Energy Tax Credits.”
w21437. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research. 2015. https://doi.org/10.3386/w21437.
Bos, Frits, and Peter Zwaneveld. 2017. “Cost-Benefit
Analysis 
for 
Flood 
Risk 
Management 
and 
Water
Governance in the Netherlands: An Overview of One
Century.” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3023983. Rochester,
NY: 
Social 
Science 
Research 
Network, 
2017.
https://www.cpb.nl/sites/default/files/omnidownload/CP
B-Backgrounddocument-August2017-Cost-benefit-
analysis-for-flood-risk-management-and-water-
governance-overview.pdf.
Bouwer, Laurens M., and Sebastiaan N. Jonkman. 2018.
“Global Mortality from Storm Surges Is Decreasing.”
Environmental Research Letters 13, no. 1 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa98a3.
Bowden, Ebony. 2019. “Climate Change Could End Human
Civilization 
by 
2050: 
Report.” 
2019.
https://nypost.com/2019/06/03/climate-change-could-
end-human-civilization-by-2050-report/.
BP. 2019. “BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2019.”
2019. 
https://www.bp.com/content/dam/bp/business-
sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/energy-
economics/statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2019-full-
report.pdf.
Bradford, Tim. 2017. “Geoengineering Could Create More
Problems Than It Could Solve.” EcoWatch. November 24,
2017. https://www.ecowatch.com/geoengineering-more-
harm-than-good-2512157242.html.

Brady, Dennis, and Chris Mooney. 2019. “More Billion-
Dollar 
US 
Disasters 
as 
World 
Warms.” 
2019.
https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/nation/2019/02/06/
more-billion-dollar-disasters-world-
warms/NLkzKh0Ad3kqeuAfCbcbbK/story.html.
Branson, Richard. 2019. “Virgin Earth Challenge.” Virgin.
December 
19, 
2019.
https://www.virgin.com/content/virgin-earth-challenge-0.
Braverman, Blair. 2019. “On Having Kids at the End of the
World.” 
2019.
https://www.outsideonline.com/2395047/having-kids-
climate-change-ethics.
Broughel, James, and W. Kip Viscusi. 2017. “Death by
Regulation: How Regulations Can Increase Mortality
Risk.” 
2017.
https://www.mercatus.org/publications/regulations-
increase-mortality-risk.
Brulle, Robert J. 2018. “The Climate Lobby: A Sectoral
Analysis of Lobbying Spending on Climate Change in the
USA, 2000 to 2016.” Climatic Change 149, no. 3 (2018):
289–303. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2241-z.
Bryant, Benjamin P., and Anthony L. Westerling. 2014.
“Scenarios for Future Wildfire Risk in California: Links
between Changing Demography, Land Use, Climate, and
Wildfire.” Environmetrics 25, no. 6, SI (2014): 454–71.
https://doi.org/10.1002/env.2280.
Burgess, Matthew G., Justin Ritchie, John Shapland, and
Roger Pielke. 2020. “IPCC Baseline Scenarios Over-
Project CO2 Emissions and Economic Growth.” Preprint.
SocArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/ahsxw.
Caldeira, Ken. 2019. “Battery Installation in 2018.” 2019.
https://twitter.com/KenCaldeira/status/11029865563467
57120.

Calvin, Katherine, Leon Clarke, Volker Krey, Geoffrey
Blanford, Kejun Jiang, Mikiko Kainuma, Elmar Kriegler,
Gunnar Luderer, and P. R. Shukla. 2012. “The Role of
Asia in Mitigating Climate Change: Results from the Asia
Modeling Exercise.” Energy Economics 34, Supplement 3
(December 
2012): 
S251–60.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2012.09.003.
Calvin, Katherine, Allen Fawcett, and Jiang Kejun. 2012.
“Comparing Model Results to National Climate Policy
Goals: Results from the Asia Modeling Exercise.” Energy
Economics 
34 
(December 
2012): 
S306–15.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2012.03.008.
Calzadilla, Alvaro, Katrin Rehdanz, Richard Betts, Pete
Falloon, Andy Wiltshire, and Richard S. J. Tol. 2013.
“Climate 
Change 
Impacts 
on 
Global 
Agriculture.”
Climatic 
Change 
120, 
no. 
1–2 
(2013): 
357–74.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-0822-4.
Cama, Timothy. 2015. “Obama Joins 19 Countries to Double
Clean 
Energy 
Funding.” 
2015.
https://thehill.com/policy/energy-environment/261441-
obama-joins-18-countries-to-double-clean-energy-funding.
Campagnolo, Lorenza, and Marinella Davide. 2019. “Can
the Paris Deal Boost SDGs Achievement? An Assessment
of Climate Mitigation Co-Benefits or Side-Effects on
Poverty 
and 
Inequality.” 
World 
Development 
122
(October 
2019): 
96–109.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2019.05.015.
Canberra Times. 1977. UN Environment Day: Cancers
“Environmental.”1977. 
http://nla.gov.au/nla.news-
page12231167.
Carbon Independent. 2019. “Emissions from Home Energy
Use.” 
2019.

https://www.carbonindependent.org/15.html.
Carrington, Damian. 2017. “Want to Fight Climate Change?
Have 
Fewer 
Children.” 
Guardian, 
2017.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jul/12/
want-to-fight-climate-change-have-fewer-children.
. 2018. “Paul Ehrlich: ‘Collapse of Civilisation Is a Near
Certainty within Decades.’” Guardian, sec. Cities. March
22, 
2018.
https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2018/mar/22/collap
se-civilisation-near-certain-decades-population-bomb-
paul-ehrlich.
. 2019. “Why the Guardian Is Changing the Language It
Uses about the Environment.” Guardian, May 17, 2019.
Carson, Rachel. 1962. Silent Spring. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1962.
Carter, Colin, Xiaomeng Cui, Dalia Ghanem, and Pierre
Mérel. 2018. “Identifying the Economic Impacts of
Climate Change on Agriculture.” Annual Review of
Resource 
Economics 
10, 
no. 
1 
(2018): 
361–80.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-resource-100517-
022938.
Caspani, Marla. 2019. “U.S. Democrats and Republicans
Can’t Even Agree on the Weather: Reuters/Ipsos.”
Reuters. 2019. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-
climate-poll/u-s-democrats-and-republicans-cant-even-
agree-on-the-weather-reuters-ipsos-idUSKCN1UK1FY.
CAT. 
2018. 
“Climate 
Action 
Tracker 
Data.” 
2018.
https://climateactiontracker.org/documents/509/CAT_20
18-12-
09_PublicData_EmissionsPathways_Dec2018update.xls.
CAT India. 2016. Climate Action Tracker 2016 India
Assessment. 
2016.

https://climateactiontracker.org/media/documents/2018/
4/CAT_2016-11-02_CountryAssessment_India.pdf.
CBS News. 2006. “2006: Al Gore Does Sundance.” 2006.
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/2006-al-gore-does-
sundance/.
Census, ed. 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States:
Colonial Times to 1970. Washington, DC: US Government
Printing 
Office, 
1975.
https://www.census.gov/library/publications/1975/comp
endia/hist_stats_colonial-1970.html.
. 1992. Population of States and Counties of the United
States: 
1790 
to 
1990.1992.
https://www.census.gov/population/www/censusdata/po
p1790-1990.html.
. 2010. Coastline Population Trends in the United
States: 
1960 
to 
2008. 
2010.
https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2010/demo/
p25-1139.html.
. 2011. Historical Census of Housing Tables. 2011.
https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/housing/census/histo
ric/units.html.
. 
2012. 
USA 
Counties: 
2011, 
Population. 
2012.
https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2011/comp
endia/usa-counties-2011.html.
. 2017. 2017 National Population Projections Tables.
2017.
https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2017/demo/popproj
/2017-summary-tables.html.
. 2018a. Annual Estimates of Housing Units for the
United States, Regions, Divisions, States, and Counties:
April 
1, 
2010 
to 
July 
1, 
2017. 
2018.
https://factfinder.census.gov/bkmk/table/1.0/en/PEP/20

17/PEPANNHU.
. 2018b. Median and Average Sale Price of Houses Sold.
2018.
https://www.census.gov/construction/nrs/historical_data
/index.html.
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters.
2019. “Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT).” 2019.
https://www.emdat.be/.
Chakrabortty, Aditya. 2008. “Secret Report: Biofuel Caused
Food 
Crisis.” 
2008.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/jul/03/
biofuels.renewableenergy.
Challinor, A. J., J. Watson, D. B. Lobell, S. M. Howden, D. R.
Smith, and N. Chhetri. 2014. “A Meta-Analysis of Crop
Yield under Climate Change and Adaptation.” Nature
Climate 
Change 
4, 
no. 
4 
(2014): 
287–91.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2153.
Chambers, Dustin, Courtney A. Collins, and Alan Krause.
2019. “How Do Federal Regulations Affect Consumer
Prices? An Analysis of the Regressive Effects of
Regulation.” Public Choice 180, no. 1–2 (2019): 57–90.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11127-017-0479-z.
Chen, Chi, Taejin Park, Xuhui Wang, Shilong Piao, Baodong
Xu, Rajiv K. Chaturvedi, Richard Fuchs, et al. 2019.
“China and India Lead in Greening of the World through
Land-Use Management.” Nature Sustainability 2, no. 2
(2019): 
122–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-
0220-7.
Chen, Minjie, Bruno Wichmann, Marty Luckert, Leigh
Winowiecki, Wiebke Förch, and Peter Läderach. 2018.
“Diversification 
and 
Intensification 
of 
Agricultural
Adaptation from Global to Local Scales.” PLOS ONE 13,
no. 
5 
(2018): 
e0196392.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196392.
Chen, Wenfang, Yi Lu, Shao Sun, Yihong Duan, and Gregor
C. 
Leckebusch. 
2018. 
“Hazard 
Footprint-Based
Normalization 
of 
Economic 
Losses 
from 
Tropical
Cyclones in China During 1983–2015.” International
Journal of Disaster Risk Science 9, no. 2 (2018): 195–206.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13753-018-0172-y.
China NDC. 2016. “China NDC Submission.” 2016.
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocu
ments/China%20First/China%27s%20First%20NDC%20S
ubmission.pdf.
Chirakijja, Janjala, Seema Jayachandran, and Pinchuan
Ong. 
2019. 
“Inexpensive 
Heating 
Reduces 
Winter
Mortality.” 2019. https://www.nber.org/papers/w25681.
Chiras, Daniel D. 1998. Environment Science with Infotrac:
A 
Systems 
Approach 
to 
Sustainable 
Development.
Wadsworth, 1998.
Christensen, P., K. Gillingham, and W. Nordhaus. 2018.
“Uncertainty 
in 
Forecasts 
of 
Long-Run 
Economic
Growth.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 
115, 
no. 
21 
(2018): 
5409.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1713628115.
City of Atlanta. 2015. “Heat Relief—Cooling Centers Now
Open.” 
2015. 
https://www.atl311.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/City-of-Atlanta-Cooling-
Centers.pdf.
City of New York. 2019. “NYC °CoolRoofs.” 2019.
https://web.archive.org/web/20190630022627/https://w
ww1.nyc.gov/html/gbee/html/initiatives/coolroofs.shtml.
Climate Feedback. 2017. “Scientists Explain What New
York Magazine Article on ‘The Uninhabitable Earth’ Gets
Wrong.” 
2017.
https://climatefeedback.org/evaluation/scientists-explain-

what-new-york-magazine-article-on-the-uninhabitable-
earth-gets-wrong-david-wallace-wells/.
. 2019a. “Claim That Human Civilization Could End in
30 Years Is Speculative, Not Supported with Evidence.”
2019. 
https://climatefeedback.org/evaluation/iflscience-
story-on-speculative-report-provides-little-scientific-
context-james-felton/.
. 2019b. “Prediction by Extinction Rebellion’s Roger
Hallam That Climate Change Will Kill 6 Billion People by
2100 
Is 
Unsupported.” 
2019.
https://climatefeedback.org/claimreview/prediction-
extinction-rebellion-climate-change-will-kill-6-billion-
people-unsupported-roger-hallam-bbc/.
Climate Home News. 2013. “‘It’s Time to Stop This
Madness’—Philippines Plea at UN Climate Talks,” 2013.
https://www.climatechangenews.com/2013/11/11/its-
time-to-stop-this-madness-philippines-plea-at-un-climate-
talks/.
Climate Nexus. 2018. “Experts React to Historic IPCC
Report 
on 
Limiting 
Warming 
to 
1.5°C.” 
2018.
https://climatenexus.org/international/experts-react-to-
historic-ipcc-report-on-limiting-warming-to-1-5c/.
CNN. 2018. “Earth Has 12 Years to Avert Climate Change
Catastrophe, 
Warns 
UN 
Report.” 
2018.
https://edition.cnn.com/videos/tv/2018/10/08/news-
stream-stout-skea-ipcc-report-climate-change-2030.cnn.
. 2019. “Dozens Dead in One of India’s Longest Heat
Waves.”
https://edition.cnn.com/videos/world/2019/06/14/india-
heatwave-kk-lon-orig.cnn.
Colborn, Theo, Dianne Dumanoski, and John Peterson
Myers. 1996. Our Stolen Future: Are We Threatening Our
Fertility, 
Intelligence, 
and 
Survival?: 
A 
Scientific

Detective Story. New York: Dutton, 1996.
Collier, Peter. 1970. “… Ecological Destruction Is a
Condition of American Life… An Interview with Ecologist
Paul Ehrlich.” Mademoiselle 189 (April 1970), 188–189,
291–98.
Colt, Stephen G., and Gunnar P. Knapp. 2016. “Economic
Effects of an Ocean Acidification Catastrophe.” American
Economic 
Review 
106, 
no. 
5 
(2016): 
615–19.
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20161105.
Conforti, Piero, ed. 2011. Looking Ahead in World Food and
Agriculture: Perspectives to 2050. Rome: Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2011.
Connor, Steve. 2014. “Climate Change Is Increasing the
Risk of Malaria for People Living in Mountainous Regions
in 
the 
Tropics.” 
2014.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/science/climate-
change-is-increasing-the-risk-of-malaria-for-people-living-
in-mountainous-regions-in-the-9174448.html.
Copenhagen Consensus Center. 2019. “Experts.” 2019.
https://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/expert.
Corner, Adam. 2014. “Will Geoengineering Make People
Give 
up 
Cutting 
Their 
Carbon 
Footprint?” 
2014.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/17
/geoengineering-co2-carbon-dioxide-earth-climate.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith. 2016.
“Evolving Comparative Advantage and the Impact of
Climate Change in Agricultural Markets: Evidence from
1.7 Million Fields around the World.” Journal of Political
Economy 
124, 
no. 
1 
(2016): 
205–48.
https://doi.org/10.1086/684719.
CPI. 
2019. 
Consumer 
Price 
Index 
1800–. 
2019.
https://www.minneapolisfed.org/about-us/monetary-

policy/inflation-calculator/consumer-price-index-1800-
Crompton, Ryan P., K. John McAneney, Keping Chen, Roger
A. Pielke, and Katharine Haynes. 2010. “Influence of
Location, Population, and Climate on Building Damage
and Fatalities Due to Australian Bushfire: 1925–2009.”
Weather, Climate, and Society 2, no. 4 (2010): 300–10.
https://doi.org/10.1175/2010WCAS1063.1.
Cunningham, William P, and Mary Ann Cunningham. 2017.
Environmental Science: A Global Concern. New York:
McGraw-Hill, NY, 2017.
Dahlgreen, Will. 2016. “Chinese People Are Most Likely to
Feel 
the 
World 
Is 
Getting 
Better.” 
2016.
https://yougov.co.uk/topics/lifestyle/articles-
reports/2016/01/05/chinese-people-are-most-optimistic-
world.
Dannenberg, 
Astrid, 
and 
Sonja 
Zitzelsberger. 
2019.
“Climate Experts’ Views on Geoengineering Depend on
Their Beliefs about Climate Change Impacts.” Nature
Climate 
Change 
9, 
no. 
10 
(2019): 
769–75.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0564-z.
Dasgupta, Susmita, Mainul Huq, Zahirul Huq Khan, Sohel
Masud, 
Manjur 
Murshed 
Zahid 
Ahmed, 
Nandan
Mukherjee, and Kiran Pandey. 2011. “Climate Proofing
Infrastructure in Bangladesh: The Incremental Cost of
Limiting Future Flood Damage.” Journal of Environment
& 
Development 
20, 
no. 
2 
(2011): 
167–90.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1070496511408401.
Davies, Simon. 2018. “Rising Sea Levels Could Cost the
World 
$14 
Trillion 
a 
Year 
by 
2100.” 
2018.
https://ioppublishing.org/news/rising-sea-levels-cost-
world-14-trillion-year-2100/.
Davies, Stephen. 2004. “The Great Horse-Manure Crisis of
1894.” 
2004. 
https://fee.org/articles/the-great-horse-

manure-crisis-of-1894/.
Davis, Lance E., Robert E. Gallman, and Teresa D.
Hutchins. 1988. “The Decline of U.S. Whaling: Was the
Stock of Whales Running Out?” Business History Review
62, 
no. 
4 
(1988): 
569–95.
https://doi.org/10.2307/3115618.
Davis, Lucas W., and James M. Sallee. 2019. “Should
Electric Vehicle Drivers Pay a Mileage Tax?” National
Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper 26072.
2019. https://doi.org/10.3386/w26072.
Davis, Robert E., Paul C. Knappenberger, Patrick J
Michaels, and Wendy M. Novicoff. 2003. “Changing Heat-
Related Mortality in the United States.” Environmental
Health Perspectives 111, no. 14 (2003): 1712–18.
https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.6336.
Davlasheridze, Meri, Kayode O. Atoba, Samuel Brody,
Wesley Highfield, William Merrell, Bruce Ebersole, Adam
Purdue, and Robert W. Gilmer. “Economic Impacts of
Storm Surge and the Cost-Benefit Analysis of a Coastal
Spine as the Surge Mitigation Strategy in Houston-
Galveston Area in the USA.” Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change 24, no. 3 (2019): 329–54.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-018-9814-z.
De Châtel, Francesca. 2014. “The Role of Drought and
Climate Change in the Syrian Uprising: Untangling the
Triggers of the Revolution.” Middle Eastern Studies 50,
no. 
4 
(2014): 
521–35.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00263206.2013.850076.
Deign, Jason. 2019. “Europe’s EPR Nuclear Reactor Model
May Finally Go Live in 2019.” September 1, 2019.
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/epr-
nuclear-reactor-model-may-finally-go-live-europe-2019.
Dennis, Brady, Steven Mufson, and Scott Clement. 2019.

“Americans Increasingly See Climate Change as a Crisis,
Poll 
Shows.” 
2019.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-
environment/americans-increasingly-see-climate-change-
as-a-crisis-poll-shows/2019/09/12/74234db0-cd2a-11e9-
87fa-8501a456c003_story.html.
Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy.
2019. 
“Domestic 
Energy 
Price 
Indices.” 
2019.
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-
sets/monthly-domestic-energy-price-stastics.
Department for International Development, and Alok
Sharma. 2019. “Healthcare for Everyone Must Prioritise
Women’s Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights,
Says 
UK 
at 
UN 
General 
Assembly.” 
2019.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/healthcare-for-
everyone-must-prioritise-womens-sexual-and-
reproductive-health-and-rights-says-uk-at-un-general-
assembly.
Department 
for 
International 
Development, 
Prime
Minister’s Office, David Cameron, and Justine Greening.
2013. “World Leaders Sign Global Agreement to Help
Beat 
Hunger.” 
2013.
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/world-leaders-
sign-global-agreement-to-help-beat-hunger-and-
malnutrition.
Di Falco, Salvatore, Marcella Veronesi, and Mahmud Yesuf.
2011. “Does Adaptation to Climate Change Provide Food
Security? A Micro-Perspective from Ethiopia.” American
Journal of Agricultural Economics 93, no. 3 (2011): 829–
46. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajae/aar006.
Diaz, J., R. Carmona, I. J. Mirón, C. Ortiz, and C. Linares.
2015. 
“Comparison 
of 
the 
Effects 
of 
Extreme
Temperatures on Daily Mortality in Madrid (Spain), by

Age Group: The Need for a Cold Wave Prevention Plan.”
Environmental 
Research 
143 
(2015): 
186–91.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2015.10.018.
Dickinson, Tim. 2019. “How to Survive a Flooded World.”
2019. 
https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-
features/craig-fugate-obama-fema-imelda-flooding-
887712/.
Dinda, Soumyananda. 2004. “Environmental Kuznets Curve
Hypothesis: A Survey.” Ecological Economics 49, no. 4
(2004): 
431–55.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2004.02.011.
Doerr, Stefan H., and Cristina Santín. 2016. “Global Trends
in Wildfire and Its Impacts: Perceptions versus Realities
in a Changing World.” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences
371, 
no. 
1696 
(2016): 
20150345.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0345.
Dolin, Eric Jay. 2008. Leviathan: The History of Whaling in
America. New York: W.W. Norton, 2008.
Doll, Richard, and Richard Peto. 1981. “The Causes of
Cancer: Quantitative Estimates of Avoidable Risks of
Cancer in the United States Today.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 66, no. 6 (1981): 1191–1308.
Dollar, David, Tatjana Kleineberg, and Aart Kraay. 2016.
“Growth Still Is Good for the Poor.” European Economic
Review 
81 
(2016):68–85.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2015.05.008.
Donat, M. G., L. V. Alexander, H. Yang, I. Durre, R. Vose, R.
J. H. Dunn, K. M. Willett, et al. 2013. “Updated Analyses
of Temperature and Precipitation Extreme Indices since
the Beginning of the Twentieth Century: The HadEX2
Dataset.” Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres

118, 
no. 
5 
(2013): 
2098–118.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jgrd.50150.
Downton, M, J. Z. B. Miller, and R. A. Pielke. 2005.
“Reanalysis of U.S. National Weather Service Flood Loss
Database.” Natural Hazards Review 2, no. 4 (2005): 157–
66.
Duan, Hong-Xia, Lü Yan-Li, and Li Yan. 2014. “Chinese
Public’s Willingness to Pay for CO2 Emissions Reductions:
A Case Study from Four Provinces/Cities.” Advances in
Climate Change Research 5, no. 2 (2014): 100–110.
https://doi.org/10.3724/SP.J.1248.2014.100.
Dütschke, Elisabeth, Manuel Frondel, Joachim Schleich,
and Colin Vance. 2018. “Moral Licensing—Another
Source of Rebound?” Frontiers in Energy Research 6
(2018): 38. https://doi.org/10.3389/fenrg.2018.00038.
Duvat, Virginie K. E. 2019. “A Global Assessment of Atoll
Island Planform Changes over the Past Decades.” WIREs
Climate 
Change 
10, 
no. 
1 
(2019): 
e557.
https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.557.
EASA, 
EEA, 
and 
EUROCONTROL. 
2019. 
“European
Aviation 
Environmental 
Report 
2019.” 
2019.
https://ec.europa.eu/transport/sites/transport/files/2019-
aviation-environmental-report.pdf.
Economist. 
2009. 
“Flight 
to 
Value.” 
2009.
https://www.economist.com/business/2009/08/06/flight-
to-value.
. 2017. “Climate Change and Inequality—The Rich
Pollute, 
the 
Poor 
Suffer.” 
2017.
https://www.economist.com/finance-and-
economics/2017/07/13/climate-change-and-inequality.

. 2018. “Air-Conditioners Do Great Good, but at a High
Environmental 
Cost.” 
2018.
https://www.economist.com/international/2018/08/25/ai
r-conditioners-do-great-good-but-at-a-high-environmental-
cost.
ECOS. 2007. “New Zealand to Be Carbon Neutral by 2020.”
2007. 
http://www.ecosmagazine.com/?
act=view_file&file_id=EC136p7b.pdf.
Editors 
of 
Ramparts. 
1970. 
Eco-Catastrophe. 
San
Francisco: Canfield Press, 1970.
Edwardes-Evans, 
Henry. 
2019. 
“Finland’s 
Olkiluoto-3
Nuclear Plant Full Generation Pushed Back to March
2021 
| 
S&P 
Global 
Platts.” 
December 
19, 
2019.
https://www.spglobal.com/platts/en/market-
insights/latest-news/electric-power/121919-finlands-
olkiluoto-3-nuclear-plant-full-generation-pushed-back-to-
march-2021.
EEA. 2018. “Interview—The Dutch Make Room for the
River.” 2018. https://www.eea.europa.eu/signals/signals-
2018-content-list/articles/interview-2014-the-dutch-make.
. 2019. “Climate Change Threatens Future of Farming
in 
Europe.” 
2019.
https://www.eea.europa.eu/highlights/climate-change-
threatens-future-of.
Egan, Patrick J., and Megan Mullin. 2017. “Climate
Change: US Public Opinion.” Annual Review of Political
Science 
20, 
no. 
1 
(2017): 
209–27.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-051215-022857.
Ehrlich, Paul R. 1968. The Population Bomb. New York:
Ballantine Books, 1968.
Ehrlich, 
Paul 
Ralph. 
1971. 
The 
Population 
Bomb.
Cutchogue, NY: Buccaneer Books, 1971.
EIA. 
2012. 
Energy 
Perspectives 
2011. 
2012.

https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/EnergyPer
spectives.xls.
. 2017a. Annual Energy Outlook 2017, with Projections
to 
2050. 
2017.
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/0383(2017).pdf.
. 2017b. “Annual Energy Outlook 2018. Table: Energy-
Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions by Sector and
Source.” 
2017.
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/data/browser/#/?
id=17-AEO2018&region=1-
0&cases=ref2018&start=2016&end=2050&f=A&linecha
rt=ref2018-d121317a.3-17-AEO2018.1-
0~&map=ref2018-d121317a.4-17-AEO2018.1-
0&ctype=linechart&sourcekey=0.
. 2018. U.S. Energy-Related CO2 Emissions Expected to
Rise Slightly in 2018, Remain Flat in 2019. 2018.
https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=34872.
. 
2019a. 
Annual 
Energy 
Outlook 
2019. 
2019.
https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/.
. 
2019b. 
“Electric 
Power 
Monthly.” 
2019.
https://www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly/epm_table_grap
her.php?t=epmt_5_06_a.
. 2019c. October 2019 Monthly Energy Review. 2019.
https://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/browser/index.php
?tbl=T01.03#/?f=A.
EIRP. 2017. What Will Advanced Nuclear Power Plants
Cost? 
2017. 
http://www.innovationreform.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/01/Advanced-Nuclear-Reactors-
Cost-Study.pdf.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. 1961. Military-Industrial Complex
Speech. 
1961.
https://avalon.law.yale.edu/20th_century/eisenhower001.

asp.
Elliott, Larry, and Ashley Seager. 2007. “Cut Carbon by Up
to 
Third 
to 
Save 
Poor, 
UN 
Tells 
West.” 
2007.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2007/nov/28
/climatechange.
EM-DAT. 2020. The International Disaster Database. 2020.
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters.
https://www.emdat.be/database.
Encyclopedia Britannica, “Norman Ernest Borlaug,” 2020.
https://www.britannica.com/biography/Norman-Borlaug.
Environmental Action. 1970. Earth Day: The Beginning: A
Guide for Survival. New York: Arno Press and New York
Times, 1970.
EPA. 1997. The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act,
1970 
to 
1990—Retrospective 
Study. 
1997.
https://www.epa.gov/clean-air-act-overview/benefits-and-
costs-clean-air-act-1970-1990-retrospective-study.
EPI. 2018. 2018 Environmental Performance Index. 2018.
https://epi.envirocenter.yale.edu/2018-epi-
report/introduction.
EPRS. 2019. Mainstreaming of Climate Action in the EU
Budget, European Parliamentary Research Service. 2019.
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2
019/642239/EPRS_IDA(2019)642239_EN.pdf.
Estrada, Francisco, W. J. Wouter Botzen, and Richard S. J.
Tol. 2017. “A Global Economic Assessment of City
Policies to Reduce Climate Change Impacts.” Nature
Climate 
Change 
7, 
no. 
6 
(2017): 
403–6.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3301.
Etemad, Bouda, and Jean Luciani. 1991. World Energy
Production, 1800–1985 = Production Mondiale d’énergie,
1800–1985. 
Publications 
Du 
Centre 
d’Histoire

Économique Internationale de l’Université de Genève 7.
Genève: Librairie Droz, 1991.
EU. 2019. Handbook on the External Costs of Transport:
Version 
2019. 
2019.
http://publications.europa.eu/publication/manifestation_i
dentifier/PUB_MI0518051ENN.
EUNDC. 2016. “European Union NDC Submission.” 2016.
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocu
ments/European%20Union%20First/LV-03-06-
EU%20INDC.pdf.
European Union. 2003. “Directive 2003/30/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 8 May 2003
on the Promotion of the Use of Biofuels and Other
Renewable Fuels for Transport.” 2003. https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?
uri=OJ:L:2003:123:0042:0046:EN:PDF.
Eurostat. 
2019a. 
“Electricity 
Price 
Statistics.” 
2019.
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-
explained/index.php/Electricity_price_statistics.
. 2019b. EU Statistical Database for Public Finance.
2019. 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/government-
finance-statistics/data/database.
Ewers, Robert M. 2006. “Interaction Effects between
Economic Development and Forest Cover Determine
Deforestation Rates.” Global Environmental Change 16,
no. 
2 
(2006): 
161–69.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2005.12.001.
Extinction 
Rebellion. 
2019. 
“The 
Truth.”
https://rebellion.earth/the-truth/. 2019.
Fagerlund, Karin. 2018. “Förra FN-Chefen Vill Förbjuda
Kött På Restauranger: ‘Vill de Äta Kött Får de Göra Det
Utanför.’” 2018. https://www.svt.se/nyheter/utrikes/vill-
forbjuda-kott-pa-restauranger-kottatare-ska-behandlas-

som-rokare-pa-krogen.
Fankhauser, Sam. 2017. “Adaptation to Climate Change.”
Annual Review of Resource Economics 9, no. 1 (2017):
209–30. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-resource-
100516-033554.
FAO. 
2019. 
“FAOSTAT 
Database.” 
2019.
http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data.
Fawcett, Allen A., Leon C. Clarke, Sebastian Rausch, and
John P. Weyant. 2014. “Overview of EMF 24 Policy
Scenarios.” 
Energy 
Journal 
35, 
no. 
01 
(2014).
https://doi.org/10.5547/01956574.35.SI1.3.
Federico, Giovanni. 2005. Feeding the World: An Economic
History of Agriculture, 1800–2000. Princeton Economic
History of the Western World. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2005.
Ferdous, Ruknul, Anna Wesselink, Luigia Brandimarte,
Kymo Slager, Margreet Zwarteveen, and Giuliano Di
Baldassarre. 2019. “The Costs of Living with Floods in
the Jamuna Floodplain in Bangladesh.” Water 11, no. 6
(2019): 1238. https://doi.org/10.3390/w11061238.
Ferguson, 
Alex 
P., 
and 
Walker 
S. 
Ashley. 
2017.
“Spatiotemporal Analysis of Residential Flood Exposure
in the Atlanta, Georgia Metropolitan Area.” Natural
Hazards 
87, 
no. 
2 
(2017): 
989–1016.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-017-2806-6.
Fishbach, Ayelet, and Ravi Dhar. 2005. “Goals as Excuses
or Guides: The Liberating Effect of Perceived Goal
Progress on Choice.” Journal of Consumer Research 32,
no. 3 (2005): 370–77. https://doi.org/10.1086/497548.
Flavelle, Christopher. 2018. “California’s Wildfire Epidemic
Is 
Blamed 
on 
Bad 
Building 
Decisions.” 
2018.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-11-

14/california-s-wildfire-epidemic-blamed-on-bad-building-
decisions.
. 2019. “Even as Floods Worsen with Climate Change,
Fewer 
People 
Insure 
Against 
Disaster.” 
2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/08/climate/climate-
flood-insurance.html.
Ford, Murray R., and Paul S. Kench. 2015. “Multi-Decadal
Shoreline Changes in Response to Sea Level Rise in the
Marshall Islands.” Anthropocene 11 (September 2015):
14–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ancene.2015.11.002.
Ford, Peter. 2019. “Heat Waves: How France Has Cut
Death Toll 90% since 2003.” Christian Science Monitor,
November 
4, 
2019.
https://www.csmonitor.com/World/Europe/2019/1104/H
eat-waves-How-France-has-cut-death-toll-90-since-2003.
Formetta, Giuseppe, and Luc Feyen. 2019. “Empirical
Evidence of Declining Global Vulnerability to Climate-
Related Hazards.” Global Environmental Change 57
(2019): 
101920.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2019.05.004.
Fouquet, Roger. 2009. “A Brief History of Energy.” In
International Handbook on the Economics of Energy,
edited by Lester C. Hunt and Joanne Evans, 1–19.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2009.
Freeman, Ashley C., and Walker S. Ashley. 2017. “Changes
in 
the 
US 
Hurricane 
Disaster 
Landscape: 
The
Relationship between Risk and Exposure.” Natural
Hazards 
88, 
no. 
2 
(2017): 
659–82.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-017-2885-4.
Fricko, Oliver, Petr Havlik, Joeri Rogelj, Zbigniew Klimont,
Mykola Gusti, Nils Johnson, Peter Kolp, et al. 2017. “The
Marker Quantification of the Shared Socioeconomic
Pathway 2: A Middle-of-the-Road Scenario for the 21st

Century.” Global Environmental Change 42 (January
2017): 
251–67.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.06.004.
Friedman, Thomas L. 2005. The World Is Flat: A Brief
History of the Twenty-First Century. First edition. New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2005.
Fu, Sze Hang, Antonio Gasparrini, Peter S. Rodriguez, and
Prabhat Jha. 2018. “Mortality Attributable to Hot and
Cold Ambient Temperatures in India: A Nationally
Representative Case-Crossover Study.” PLOS Medicine
15, 
no. 
7 
(2018): 
e1002619.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002619.
Furness, Hannah. 2019. “We Have 18 Months to Save
World, Prince Charles Warns Commonwealth Leaders.”
2019. 
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/royal-
family/2019/07/11/18-months-save-world-prince-charles-
urges-commonwealth-leaders/.
Furukawa, Chishio. 2014. “Do Solar Lamps Help Children
Study? Contrary Evidence from a Pilot Study in Uganda.”
Journal of Development Studies 50, no. 2 (2014): 319–41.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00220388.2013.833320.
Galbraith, Kate. 2009. “Having Children Brings High
Carbon 
Impact.” 
2009.
https://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/08/07/having-
children-brings-high-carbon-impact/.
Galiana, 
Isabel, 
and 
Amy 
Sopinka. 
2015. 
“Energy
Assessment Paper. Benefits and Cost of the Energy
Targets 
for 
the 
Post-2015 
Development 
Agenda.”
Copenhagen 
Consensus 
Center. 
2015.
https://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/sites/default/file
s/energy_assessment_-_galiana_and_sopinka_0.pdf.
Gallup. 
2019. 
“Crime.” 
2019.
https://news.gallup.com/poll/1603/crime.aspx.

Galvin, J. F. P. 2014. “The Development, Track and
Destruction of Typhoon Haiyan.” Weather 69, no. 11
(2014): 307–9. https://doi.org/10.1002/wea.2458.
Gasparrini, Antonio, Yuming Guo, Masahiro Hashizume,
Eric Lavigne, Antonella Zanobetti, Joel Schwartz, Aurelio
Tobias, et al. 2015. “Mortality Risk Attributable to High
and 
Low 
Ambient 
Temperature: 
A 
Multicountry
Observational Study.” Lancet 386, no. 9991 (2015): 369–
75. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62114-0.
Gasparrini, Antonio, Yuming Guo, Francesco Sera, Ana
Maria Vicedo-Cabrera, Veronika Huber, Shilu Tong,
Micheline de Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho, et al. 2017.
“Projections of Temperature-Related Excess Mortality
under Climate Change Scenarios.” Lancet Planetary
Health 
1, 
no. 
9 
(2017): 
e360–67.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(17)30156-0.
Gates, Bill. 2019. “Bill Gates: The Best Investment I’ve Ever
Made.” 
2019. 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/bill-gates-
the-best-investment-ive-ever-made-11547683309.
Geoengineering 
Monitor. 
2020. 
“Reasons 
to 
Oppose
Geoengineering.” 
Geoengineering 
Monitor. 
2020.
http://www.geoengineeringmonitor.org/reasons-to-
oppose/.
Georgescu, M., P. E. Morefield, B. G. Bierwagen, and C. P.
Weaver. 
2014. 
“Urban 
Adaptation 
Can 
Roll 
Back
Warming 
of 
Emerging 
Megapolitan 
Regions.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111,
no. 
8 
(2014): 
2909–14.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1322280111.
Gettelman, A., D. N. Bresch, C. C. Chen, J. E. Truesdale,
and J. T. Bacmeister. 2018. “Projections of Future
Tropical Cyclone Damage with a High-Resolution Global
Climate Model.” Climatic Change 146, no. 3–4 (2018):

575–85. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-017-1902-7.
Gezie, Melese. 2019. “Farmer’s Response to Climate
Change and Variability in Ethiopia: A Review.” Edited by
Manuel Tejada Moral. Cogent Food & Agriculture 5, no. 1
(2019): 
1613770.
https://doi.org/10.1080/23311932.2019.1613770.
GFDL/NASA. 2019. Global Warming and Hurricanes: An
Overview 
of 
Current 
Research 
Results.
https://www.gfdl.noaa.gov/global-warming-and-
hurricanes/.
Ghosh, Amitav. 2017. The Great Derangement: Climate
Change and the Unthinkable. Paperback edition. Randy
L. and Melvin R. Berlin Family Lectures. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2017.
Global Carbon Project. 2019a. Global Carbon Budget 2019.
2019.
https://www.globalcarbonproject.org/carbonbudget/inde
x.htm.
. 2019b. Terrestrial Emissions for All Nations 1960–
2018. 2019. http://www.globalcarbonatlas.org/en/CO2-
emissions.
Global Commission on Adaptation. 2019. “Adapt Now: A
Global Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience.” 2019.
https://gca.org/global-commission-on-adaptation/report.
Goedecke, Theda, Alexander J. Stein, and Matin Qaim.
2018. “The Global Burden of Chronic and Hidden
Hunger: 
Trends 
and 
Determinants.” 
Global 
Food
Security-Agriculture Policy Economics and Environment
17 
(June 
2018): 
21–29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2018.03.004.
Golden, John, and Hannah Wiseman. 2015. “The Fracking
Revolution: Shale Gas as a Case Study in Innovation

Policy” 64 (2015): 955–1040.
Goldman, Henry, and Christopher Flavelle. 2019. “Bill de
Blasio Seeks to Flood-Proof Lower Manhattan by Adding
Land.” 
2019.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-03-
14/de-blasio-seeks-to-flood-proof-lower-manhattan-by-
adding-land.
Gomes, Leonard. 2010. German Reparations, 1919–1932: A
Historical Survey. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010.
Goodell, Jeff. 2019. “The Coming Flood: A Data Error Is
Corrected, 
and 
Our 
Future 
Is 
Rewritten.” 
2019.
https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-news/sea-
level-rise-climate-central-study-906178/.
Gore, Al. 2015. “Statement by Former Vice President Al
Gore on the Paris Agreement Reached at the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change’s
21st 
Conference 
of 
the 
Parties 
(COP21).” 
2015.
https://algore.com/news/statement-by-former-vice-
president-al-gore-on-the-paris-agreement-reached-at-the-
united-nations-framework-convention-on-climate-change-
s-21st-conference-of-the-parties-cop21.
Grabs, Janina. 2015. “The Rebound Effects of Switching to
Vegetarianism. A Microeconomic Analysis of Swedish
Consumption 
Behavior.” 
Ecological 
Economics 
116
(August 
2015): 
270–79.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.04.030.
Graham, John D. 1995. “Comparing Opportunities to
Reduce Health Risks: Toxin Control, Medicine and Injury
Prevention.” 
Policy 
Report 
192. 
1995.
http://www.ncpathinktank.org/pdfs/st192.pdf.
Gramlich, John. 2019. “5 Facts about Crime in the U.S.”
2019. 
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-
tank/2019/10/17/facts-about-crime-in-the-u-s/.

Greater London Authority. 2006. London’s Urban Heat
Island: 
A 
Summary 
for 
Decision 
Makers. 
2006.
https://www.puc.state.pa.us/electric/pdf/dsr/dsrwg_sub_
ECA-London.pdf.
Greenpeace. 
2014. 
“Tale 
of 
Two 
Worlds.” 
2014.
http://dharnailive.in/stories/tale_of_two_worlds.
Grimm, 
Michael, 
Luciane 
Lenz, 
Jörg 
Peters, 
and
Maximiliane Sievert. 2019. “Demand for Off-Grid Solar
Electricity—Experimental Evidence from Rwanda.” SSRN
Electronic 
Journal. 
2019.
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3399004.
Grübler, A., B. O’Neill, K. Riahi, V. Chirkov, A. Goujon, P.
Kolp, I. Prommer, S. Scherbov, and E. Slentoe. 2007.
“Regional, National, and Spatially Explicit Scenarios of
Demographic and Economic Change Based on SRES.”
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 74, no. 7
(2007): 
980–1029.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2006.05.023.
Grubler, Arnulf. 2010. “The Costs of the French Nuclear
Scale-up: A Case of Negative Learning by Doing.” Special
Section on Carbon Emissions and Carbon Management in
Cities with Regular Papers 38, no. 9 (2010): 5174–88.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.05.003.
Grunwald, Michael. 2019. “Climate Change Could Be a
Problem 
in 
2020… 
for 
Democrats.” 
2019.
https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2019/09/03/cli
mate-change-democratic-candidates-2020-227910.
Guardian. 2006. “Is Cruising Any Greener than Flying?”
2006.
https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2006/dec/20/cruise
s.green.

. 2016. “The Guardian and Observer Style Guide.” 2016.
https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-
guide-c.
. 2018. “The EU Needs a Stability and Wellbeing Pact,
Not 
More 
Growth.” 
2018.
https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2018/sep/16/the-
eu-needs-a-stability-and-wellbeing-pact-not-more-growth.
Guinness. 2019. “First Person Killed by a Car 1896,
Guinness 
World 
Records.” 
2019.
https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-
records/first-person-killed-by-a-car.
Gunatilake, Herath, David Roland-Holst, and Bjorn Larsen.
2016. “Smart Energy Options for Bangladesh.” 2016.
https://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/sites/default/file
s/gunitlake_holst_larsen_energy.pdf.
Guo, Mingxin, Weiping Song, and Jeremy Buhain. 2015.
“Bioenergy 
and 
Biofuels: 
History, 
Status, 
and
Perspective.” 
Renewable 
and 
Sustainable 
Energy
Reviews 
42 
(February 
2015): 
712–25.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.10.013.
Gür, Turgut M. 2018. “Review of Electrical Energy Storage
Technologies, Materials and Systems: Challenges and
Prospects for Large-Scale Grid Storage.” Energy &
Environmental Science 11, no. 10 (2018): 2696–2767.
https://doi.org/10.1039/C8EE01419A.
Gurdus, Lizzy. 2017. “Boeing CEO: Over 80% of the World
Has Never Taken a Flight. We’re Leveraging That for
Growth.” 
2017.
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/12/07/boeing-ceo-80-
percent-of-people-never-flown-for-us-that-means-
growth.html.
Gustin, Georgina. 2018. “Climate Change Could Lead to
Major Crop Failures in World’s Biggest Corn Regions.”

2018.
https://insideclimatenews.org/news/11062018/climate-
change-research-food-security-agriculture-impacts-corn-
vegetables-crop-prices.
Guterres, Antonio. 2018. “At Least $26 Trillion in Economic
Benefits and 65 Million New Low-Carbon Jobs Could Be
Generated 
by 
Ambitious 
#ClimateAction.” 
2018.
https://twitter.com/antonioguterres/status/10374690829
52585216.
Habermeier, H.-U. 2007. “Education and Economy—An
Analysis of Statistical Data.” Journal of Materials
Education 
29 
no. 
1–2 
(2007): 
55–70.
https://arxiv.org/pdf/0708.2071.pdf.
Hahn, Robert William, Randall W. Lutter, and W. Kip
Viscusi. 2000. Do Federal Regulations Reduce Mortality?
American Enterprise Institute. 2000.
Hall, Charles A. S. 2009. “The Ehrlichs Strike Again.”
BioScience 
59, 
no. 
6 
(2009): 
522–24.
https://doi.org/10.1525/bio.2009.59.6.11.
Hallegatte, Stephane, Colin Green, Robert J. Nicholls, and
Jan Corfee-Morlot. 2013. “Future Flood Losses in Major
Coastal Cities.” Nature Climate Change 3 (August 2013):
802.
Hallström, E., A. Carlsson-Kanyama, and P. Börjesson.
2015. “Environmental Impact of Dietary Change: A
Systematic Review.” Journal of Cleaner Production 91
(March 
2015): 
1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.12.008.
Hamilton, Clive. 2015. “Geoengineering Is Not a Solution to
Climate 
Change.” 
2015.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/geoengineeri
ng-is-not-a-solution-to-climate-change/.
Hance, Jeremy. 2017. “Al Gore and Bangladesh PM Spar

over 
Coal 
Plants 
in 
the 
Sundarbans.” 
2017.
https://news.mongabay.com/2017/03/al-gore-and-
bangladesh-pm-spar-over-coal-plants-in-the-sundarbans/.
Hansen, James E. 2011a. “Baby Lauren and the Kool-Aid.”
2011.
http://www.columbia.edu/%7Ejeh1/mailings/2011/20110
729_BabyLauren.pdf.
. 2011b. Storms of My Grandchildren: The Truth about
the Coming Climate Catastrophe and Our Last Chance to
Save Humanity. New York: Bloomsbury, 2011.
. 2018. “Thirty Years Later, What Needs to Change in
Our 
Approach 
to 
Climate 
Change.” 
2018.
https://www.bostonglobe.com/opinion/2018/06/26/thirty
-years-later-what-needs-change-our-approach-climate-
change/dUhizA5ubUSzJLJVZqv6GP/story.html.
Hao, Zengchao, Amir AghaKouchak, Navid Nakhjiri, and
Alireza Farahmand. 2014. “Global Integrated Drought
Monitoring and Prediction System.” Scientific Data 1
(March 2014): 140001.
Haque, Ubydul, Masahiro Hashizume, Korine N. Kolivras,
Hans J. Overgaard, Bivash Das, and Taro Yamamoto.
2012. 
“Reduced 
Death 
Rates 
from 
Cyclones 
in
Bangladesh: What More Needs to Be Done?” Bulletin of
the World Health Organization 90, no. 2 (2012): 150–56.
https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.11.088302.
Hasegawa, Tomoko, Shinichiro Fujimori, Petr Havlík, Hugo
Valin, Benjamin Leon Bodirsky, Jonathan C. Doelman,
Thomas Fellmann, et al. 2018. “Risk of Increased Food
Insecurity under Stringent Global Climate Change
Mitigation Policy.” Nature Climate Change 8, no. 8
(2018): 
699–703. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-
0230-x.

Hasell, Joe, and Max Roser. 2017. Famines. 2017.
https://ourworldindata.org/famines.
He, Xiaogang, Yoshihide Wada, Niko Wanders, and Justin
Sheffield. 2017. “Intensification of Hydrological Drought
in California by Human Water Management.” Geophysical
Research 
Letters 
44, 
no.4 
(2017): 
1777–85.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL071665.
Healey, 
Jenna. 
2016. 
“Rejecting 
Reproduction: 
The
National Organization for Non-Parents and Childfree
Activism in 1970s America.” Journal of Women’s History
28, 
no. 
1 
(2016): 
131–56.
https://doi.org/10.1353/jowh.2016.0008.
Henriksen, Pia. 2019. “Klimaangst Har Bredt Sig Til Børn
Helt 
Ned 
i 
1. 
Klasse.” 
2019.
https://skoleliv.dk/debat/art7240676/Klimaangst-har-
bredt-sig-til-b%C3%B8rn-helt-ned-i-1.-klasse.
Herper, Matthew. 2017. “Can Algae Replace Oil Wells?
Craig Venter and Exxon Take a Step toward Saying
‘Yes.’” 
2017.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/matthewherper/2017/06/1
9/can-algae-replace-oil-wells-craig-venter-and-exxon-take-
a-step-toward-saying-yes/#6ca049221226.
Heutel, Garth, Nolan Miller, and David Molitor. 2017.
“Adaptation and the Mortality Effects of Temperature
Across U.S. Climate Regions.” w23271. Cambridge, MA:
National 
Bureau 
of 
Economic 
Research, 
2017.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w23271.
Hickman, Leo. 2010. “James Lovelock: Humans Are Too
Stupid to Prevent Climate Change.” Guardian, sec.
Environment, 
March 
29, 
2010.
https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/mar/29/jam
es-lovelock-climate-change.
Hicks, Robert L., ed. 2008. Greening Aid? Understanding

the Environmental Impact of Development Assistance.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
Hills, Jeremy M., Evanthie Michalena, and Konstantinos J.
Chalvatzis. 2018. “Innovative Technology in the Pacific:
Building 
Resilience 
for 
Vulnerable 
Communities.”
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 129 (April
2018): 
16–26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2018.01.008.
Hinkel, Jochen, Daniel Lincke, Athanasios T. Vafeidis, Mahé
Perrette, Robert James Nicholls, Richard S. J. Tol, Ben
Marzeion, Xavier Fettweis, Cezar Ionescu, and Anders
Levermann. 
2014. 
“Coastal 
Flood 
Damage 
and
Adaptation Costs under 21st Century Sea-Level Rise.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111,
no. 
9 
(2014): 
3292–97.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222469111.
Hintermann, Beat. 2016. “Pass-Through of CO2 Emission
Costs to Hourly Electricity Prices in Germany.” Journal of
the 
Association 
of 
Environmental 
and 
Resource
Economists 
3, 
no. 
4 
(2016): 
857–91.
https://doi.org/10.1086/688486.
Hodgetts, Katie. 2019. “Boulton, Boris and Brendan, You
Are 
Responsible 
for 
This 
Climate 
Crisis.” 
2019.
https://www.joe.co.uk/comment/adam-boulton-boris-
johnson-brendan-oneill-climate-change-229022.
Hollingsworth, Julia. 2019. “Climate Change Could Pose
‘Existential 
Threat’ 
by 
2050: 
Report.” 
2019.
https://edition.cnn.com/2019/06/04/health/climate-
change-existential-threat-report-intl/index.html.
Holthaus, 
Eric. 
2018. 
“U.N. 
Climate 
Report 
Shows
Civilization Is at Stake If We Don’t Act Now.” 2018.
https://grist.org/article/scientists-calmly-explain-that-

civilization-is-at-stake-if-we-dont-act-now/.
Horton, Susan, and John Hoddinott. 2018. “Benefits and
Costs of the Food and Nutrition Targets for the Post-2015
Development Agenda.” In Prioritizing Development,
edited by Bjorn Lomborg, 367–74. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge 
University 
Press, 
2018.
https://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/publication/post
-2015-consensus-food-security-and-nutrition-perspective-
horton-hoddinott.
Hossain, 
Naomi. 
2018. 
“The 
1970 
Bhola 
Cyclone,
Nationalist Politics, and the Subsistence Crisis Contract
in Bangladesh.” Disasters 42, no. 1 (2018): 187–203.
https://doi.org/10.1111/disa.12235.
Houston 
Chronicle. 
2017. 
“Another 
Flood,” 
2017.
https://www.houstonchronicle.com/opinion/editorials/art
icle/Another-flood-10867145.php.
Hulme, Mike. 2018. “Against Climate Emergency.” 2018.
https://mikehulme.org/against-climate-emergency/.
Humane Research Council. 2014. “Study of Current and
Former 
Vegetarians 
and 
Vegans.” 
2014.
https://faunalytics.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/Faunalytics_Current-Former-
Vegetarians_Full-Report.pdf.
Hurtt, G. C., L. P. Chini, S. Frolking, R. A. Betts, J.
Feddema, 
G. 
Fischer, 
J. 
P. 
Fisk, 
et 
al. 
2011.
“Harmonization of Land-Use Scenarios for the Period
1500–2100: 600 Years of Global Gridded Annual Land-
Use Transitions, Wood Harvest, and Resulting Secondary
Lands.” Climatic Change 109, no. 1 (2011): 117.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0153-2.
IATA. 2018. “Fact Sheet Climate Change & CORSIA.” 2018.
https://www.iata.org/pressroom/facts_figures/fact_sheet
s/Documents/fact-sheet-climate-change.pdf.

ICAP. 
2019. 
“Allowance 
Price 
Explorer.” 
2019.
https://icapcarbonaction.com/en/ets-prices.
IEA. 
2014a. 
“Africa 
Energy 
Outlook.” 
2014.
https://web.archive.org/web/20141021020204/http://ww
w.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/WEO
2014_AfricaEnergyOutlook.pdf.
. 2014b. “Electric Power Consumption (KWh per Capita)
—China.” 
2014.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.USE.ELEC.KH.P
C?locations=CN.
. 
2015. 
“Global 
EV 
Outlook 
2015.” 
2015.
https://web.archive.org/web/20171202223535/https://w
ww.iea.org/media/topics/transport/GlobalEV_Outlook201
5Update_1page.pdf.
. 2017. “Energy Access Outlook 2017. From Poverty to
Prosperity.” 
2017.
https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/public
ation/WEO2017SpecialReport_EnergyAccessOutlook.pdf.
. 
2018. 
“World 
Energy 
Outlook 
2018.” 
2018.
https://www.iea.org/weo2018/.
. 2019a. Energy Prices and Taxes for OECD Countries.
2019.
. 2019b. Global EV Outlook 2019. Paris, France. 2019.
www.iea.org/publications/reports/globalevoutlook2019.
. 2019c. IEA Energy Technology RD&D Statistics. 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1787/data-00488-en.
. 2019d. IEA World Energy Statistics and Balances.
2019. https://doi.org/10.1787/enestats-data-en.
. 2019e. Renewables 2019—Analysis and Forecast to
2024. 2019.
. 
2019f. 
World 
Energy 
Investment 
2019. 
2019.
https://webstore.iea.org/world-energy-investment-2019.

. 
2019g. 
World 
Energy 
Outlook 
2019. 
2019.
https://www.iea.org/weo2019/.
. 2020. IEA Subsidies Database 2000––2018. 2020.
https://www.iea.org/topics/energy-subsidies.
IGS. 2019. “How Much Electricity Do My Home Appliances
Use?” 
2019. 
https://www.igs.com/energy-resource-
center/Energy-101/how-much-electricity-do-my-home-
appliances-use.
IIASA. 
2018. 
SSP 
Database 
Version 
2.0. 
2018.
https://tntcat.iiasa.ac.at/SspDb.
Institute 
for 
Health 
Metrics 
and 
Evaluation. 
2017.
“Household Air Pollution from Solid Fuels.” 2017.
http://ihmeuw.org/4vvu.
. 
2019. 
“GBD 
2017.” 
2019.
https://vizhub.healthdata.org/gbd-
compare/#settings=effbd3025564a7d86e0b5226e963c53
51c445453.
Institutet för nerväxtstudier. 2018. “6th International
Degrowth Conference.” 2018. https://degrowth.se/key-
information.
IPCC. 
2010. 
“Statement 
on 
IPCC 
Principles 
and
Procedures.” 
2010.
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/04/ipcc-
statement-principles-procedures-02-2010.pdf.
. 2013a. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press, 2013. www.climatechange2013.org.
. 2013b. “Summary for Policymakers.” In Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, edited by T.
F. Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen,
J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P. M. Midgley,
1–30. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
www.climatechange2013.org.
. 2014a. Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press. 2014. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/.
. ed. 2014b. Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate
Change: Working Group III Contribution to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. New York: Cambridge University Press,
2014.
. 2014c. Key Economic Sectors and Services. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability.
Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2014.
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIA
R5-Chap10_FINAL.pdf.
. 
2018. 
Global 
Warming 
of 
1.5°C. 
2018.
http://www.ipcc.ch/report/sr15/.
Irvine, Peter, Kerry Emanuel, Jie He, Larry W. Horowitz,
Gabriel Vecchi, and David Keith. 2019. “Halving Warming
with Idealized Solar Geoengineering Moderates Key
Climate Hazards.” Nature Climate Change 9, no. 4
(2019): 
295–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-
0398-8.
Ishimoto, Yuki, Masahiro Sugiyama, Etsushi Kato, Ryo
Moriyama, Kazuhiro Tsuzuki, and Atsushi Kurosawa.
2017. “Putting Costs of Direct Air Capture in Context.”
SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2982422. Rochester, NY: Social

Science 
Research 
Network, 
2017.
https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2982422.
IUCN. 2015. “Ursus Maritimus: Ø. Wiig, S. Amstrup, T.
Atwood, K. Laidre, N. Lunn, M. Obbard, E. Regehr, and
G. Thiemann: The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species
2015: E.T22823A14871490.” International Union for
Conservation 
of 
Nature. 
2015.
https://doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2015-
4.RLTS.T22823A14871490.en.
IUCN. 1986. Polar Bears: Proceedings of the Ninth Working
Meeting of the IUCN/SSC Polar Bear Specialist Group,
Held at Edmonton, Canada, 9-11 August 1985. IUCN
Conservation Library. Cambridge, England: International
Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources,
Conservation 
Monitoring 
Centre.
http://pbsg.npolar.no/export/sites/pbsg/en/docs/PBSG09
proc.pdf.
IUCN Polar Bear Specialist Group, and Working Meeting,
eds. 1985. Polar Bears: Proceedings of the Eighth
Working Meeting of the IUCN/SSC Polar Bear Specialist
Group, Held at the Ministry of Environment, Oslo,
Norway, 
15–19 
January 
1981. 
Gland, 
Switzerland:
International Union for Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources, 1985.
IUCN/SSC Polar Bear Specialist Group. 2019. “Status
Report on the World’s Polar Bear Subpopulations.” 2019.
http://pbsg.npolar.no/export/sites/pbsg/en/docs/2019-
StatusReport.pdf.
Ivanic, Maros, Will Martin, and Hassan Zaman. 2011.
“Estimating the Short-Run Poverty Impacts of the 2010–
11 
Surge 
in 
Food 
Prices.” 
2011.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/5609514683

30321207/pdf/WPS5633.pdf.
Jakobsson, Martin, Antony Long, Ólafur Ingólfsson, Kurt H.
Kjær, and Robert F. Spielhagen. 2010. “New Insights on
Arctic Quaternary Climate Variability from Palaeo-
Records and Numerical Modelling.” Quaternary Science
Reviews 
29, 
no. 
25 
(2010): 
3349–58.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2010.08.016.
Jenkins, Jesse D. 2014. “Political Economy Constraints on
Carbon Pricing Policies: What Are the Implications for
Economic 
Efficiency, 
Environmental 
Efficacy, 
and
Climate Policy Design?” Energy Policy 69 (June 2014):
467–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2014.02.003.
Jevrejeva, S., L. P. Jackson, A. Grinsted, D. Lincke, and B.
Marzeion. 2018. “Flood Damage Costs under the Sea
Level Rise with Warming of 1.5 °C and 2 °C.”
Environmental Research Letters 13, no. 7 (2018):
074014. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aacc76.
Jevrejeva, S., J. C. Moore, A. Grinsted, A. P. Matthews, and
G. Spada. 2014. “Trends and Acceleration in Global and
Regional Sea Levels since 1807.” Global and Planetary
Change 
113 
(February 
2014): 
11–22.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2013.12.004.
Ji, Shuguang, Christopher R. Cherry, Matthew J. Bechle, Ye
Wu, and Julian D. Marshall. 2012. “Electric Vehicles in
China: Emissions and Health Impacts.” Environmental
Science & Technology 46, no. 4 (2012): 2018–24.
https://doi.org/10.1021/es202347q.
Jiang, Leiwen. 2014. “Internal Consistency of Demographic
Assumptions in the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways.”
Population and Environment 35, no. 3 (2014): 261–85.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-014-0206-3.
Johnsen, Reid, Jacob LaRiviere, and Hendrik Wolff. 2019.

“Fracking, Coal, and Air Quality.” Journal of the
Association of Environmental and Resource Economists
6, 
no. 
5 
(2019): 
1001–37.
https://doi.org/10.1086/704888.
Johnson, Becky. 2019. “Climate Change Could Lead to Food
Shortages 
in 
the 
UK 
Say 
MPs,” 
2019.
https://news.sky.com/story/climate-change-could-lead-to-
food-shortages-in-the-uk-say-mps-11811785.
Johnson, Nathanael. 2018. “Next-Gen Nuclear Is Coming, If
We 
Want 
It.” 
Grist 
(blog). 
July 
18, 
2018.
https://grist.org/article/next-gen-nuclear-is-coming-if-we-
want-it/.
Johnson, Stanley. 2012. UNEP: The First 40 Years: A
Narrative. 
Nairobi: 
United 
Nations 
Environment
Programme, 2012.
Jongman, Brenden, Hessel C. Winsemius, Jeroen C. J. H.
Aerts, Erin Coughlan de Perez, Maarten K. van Aalst,
Wolfgang Kron, and Philip J. Ward. 2015. “Declining
Vulnerability to River Floods and the Global Benefits of
Adaptation.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 
112, 
no. 
18 
(2015): 
E2271–E2280.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1414439112.
Kahouli, Sondès. 2020. “An Economic Approach to the
Study of the Relationship between Housing Hazards and
Health: The Case of Residential Fuel Poverty in France.”
Energy 
Economics 
85 
(January 
2020): 
104592.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2019.104592.
Kaiser, Brooks A. 2013. “Bioeconomic Factors of Natural
Resource Transitions: The US Sperm Whale Fishery of
the 19th Century.” 116/13. Working Papers. University of
Southern 
Denmark, 
Department 
of 
Sociology,
Environmental 
and 
Business 
Economics. 
2013.

https://ideas.repec.org/p/sdk/wpaper/116.html.
Kalmus, Peter. 2019. “When I Started Speaking out on
Climate Breakdown as a Scientist, I Was Afraid of Being
Labeled 
‘Alarmist.’” 
2019.
https://twitter.com/ClimateHuman/status/118930054049
4229504.
Kaplan, Sarah, and Emily Guskin. 2019. “Most American
Teens Are Frightened by Climate Change, Poll Finds, and
about 
1 
in 
4 
Are 
Taking 
Action.” 
2019.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/science/most-
american-teens-are-frightened-by-climate-change-poll-
finds-and-about-1-in-4-are-taking-
action/2019/09/15/1936da1c-d639-11e9-9610-
fb56c5522e1c_story.html.
Kashi, Bahman. 2020. “Off-Grid Rural Electrification in
Africa.” Forthcoming. Copenhagen Consensus. 2020.
Kaufman, Mark. 2018. “How a Quiet California Town
Protects 
Itself 
against 
Today’s 
Megafires.” 
2018.
https://mashable.com/article/wildfire-california-
montecito-resistance/.
Kaur, Nehmat. 2017. “Ahmedabad: Cool Roofs Initiative
with 
5th 
Heat 
Action 
Plan.” 
2017.
https://www.nrdc.org/experts/nehmat-kaur/ahmedabad-
cool-roofs-initiative-5th-heat-action-plan.
KC, Samir, and Wolfgang Lutz. 2017. “The Human Core of
the 
Shared 
Socioeconomic 
Pathways: 
Population
Scenarios by Age, Sex and Level of Education for All
Countries to 2100.” Global Environmental Change 42
(2017): 
181–92.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.06.004.
Keeney, Ralph L. 1990. “Mortality Risks Induced by
Economic Expenditures.” Risk Analysis 10, no. 1 (1990):
147–59. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1539-

6924.1990.tb01029.x.
Keith, David W., Geoffrey Holmes, David St. Angelo, and
Kenton Heidel. 2018. “A Process for Capturing CO2 from
the Atmosphere.” Joule 2, no. 8 (2018): 1573–94.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joule.2018.05.006.
Kench, Paul S., Murray R. Ford, and Susan D. Owen. 2018.
“Patterns of Island Change and Persistence Offer
Alternate Adaptation Pathways for Atoll Nations.” Nature
Communications 
9, 
no. 
1 
(2018): 
605.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-02954-1.
Kennedy, Robert. 1968. “Remarks at the University of
Kansas, 
March 
18, 
1968 
| 
JFK 
Library.” 
1968.
https://www.jfklibrary.org/learn/about-jfk/the-kennedy-
family/robert-f-kennedy/robert-f-kennedy-
speeches/remarks-at-the-university-of-kansas-march-18-
1968.
Kenward, Alyson, Daniel Yawitz, Todd Sanford, and Regina
Wang. 2014. “Summer in the City: Hot and Getting
Hotter.” 
2014.
http://assets.climatecentral.org/pdfs/UrbanHeatIsland.p
df.
Khandker, Shahidur. 2012. “The Welfare Impacts of Rural
Electrification in Bangladesh.” Energy Journal 33, no. 1
(2012). 
https://doi.org/10.5547/ISSN0195-6574-EJ-
Vol33-No1-7.
King, Myron, Daniel Altdorff, Pengfei Li, Lakshman
Galagedara, Joseph Holden, and Adrian Unc. 2018.
“Northward Shift of the Agricultural Climate Zone under
21st-Century Global Climate Change.” Scientific Reports
8, no. 1 (2018): 7904. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
018-26321-8.
Kintisch, Eli. 2017. “U.S. Should Pursue Controversial
Geoengineering Research, Federal Scientists Say for

First 
Time.” 
2017.
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/01/us-should-
pursue-controversial-geoengineering-research-federal-
scientists-say-first.
Kloster, Silvia, and Gitta Lasslop. 2017. “Historical and
Future Fire Occurrence (1850 to 2100) Simulated in
CMIP5 Earth System Models.” Global and Planetary
Change 
150 
(March 
2017): 
58–69.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2016.12.017.
Klotzbach, Philip J., Steven G. Bowen, Roger Pielke, and
Michael Bell. 2018. “Continental U.S. Hurricane Landfall
Frequency and Associated Damage: Observations and
Future Risks.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society 
99, 
no. 
7 
(2018): 
1359–76.
https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-17-0184.1.
Knopf, Brigitte, Yen-Heng Henry Chen, Enrica De Cian,
Hannah Förster, Amit Kanudia, Ioanna Karkatsouli, Ilkka
Keppo, Tiina Koljonen, Katja Schumacher, and Detlef P.
van Vuuren. 2013. “Beyond 2020—Strategies and Costs
for Transforming the European Energy System.” Climate
Change Economics 04, supp. 01 (2013): 1340001.
https://doi.org/10.1142/S2010007813400010.
Knorr, W., T. Kaminski, A. Arneth, and U. Weber. 2014.
“Impact of Human Population Density on Fire Frequency
at the Global Scale.” Biogeosciences 11, 4 (2014): 1085–
1102. https://doi.org/10.5194/bg-11-1085-2014.
Kohler, Hans-Peter, and Jere Behrman. 2018. “Benefits and
Costs of the Population and Demography Targets for the
Post-2015 
Development 
Agenda.” 
In 
Prioritizing
Development, edited by Bjorn Lomborg, Cambridge UK:
Cambridge 
University 
Press, 
2018, 
375–94.
https://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/publication/post

-2015-consensus-population-and-demography-
assessment-kohler-behrman.
Kolbert, Elizabeth. 2006. Field Notes from a Catastrophe:
Man, 
Nature, 
and 
Climate 
Change. 
New 
York:
Bloomsbury Publishing, 2006.
Kongsager, 
Rico. 
2018. 
“Linking 
Climate 
Change
Adaptation and Mitigation: A Review with Evidence from
the Land-Use Sectors.” Land 7, no. 4 (2018): 158.
https://doi.org/10.3390/land7040158.
Kotchen, Matthew J., Zachary M. Turk, and Anthony A.
Leiserowitz. 2017. “Public Willingness to Pay for a US
Carbon Tax and Preferences for Spending the Revenue.”
Environmental Research Letters 12, no. 9 (2017):
094012. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa822a.
Koubi, Vally. 2019. “Climate Change and Conflict.” Annual
Review of Political Science 22, no. 1 (2019): 343–60.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-050317-070830.
Kriegler, Elmar, Gunnar Luderer, Nico Bauer, Lavinia
Baumstark, Shinichiro Fujimori, Alexander Popp, Joeri
Rogelj, Jessica Strefler, and Detlef P. van Vuuren. 2018.
“Pathways Limiting Warming to 1.5°C: A Tale of Turning
Around in No Time?” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences 
376, 
no. 
2119 
(2018): 
20160457.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2016.0457.
Kulp, Scott A., and Benjamin H. Strauss. 2019. “New
Elevation Data Triple Estimates of Global Vulnerability to
Sea-Level 
Rise 
and 
Coastal 
Flooding.” 
Nature
Communications 
10, 
no. 
1 
(2019): 
4844.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12808-z.
Kunzig, Robert. 2008. “A Sunshade for Planet Earth.”
Scientific American 299, no. 5 (2008): 46–55.

Lane, Lee, J. Eric Bickel, Isabel Galiana, Chris Green, and
Valentina Bosetti. 2009. “Advice for Policymakers.” 2009.
https://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/sites/default/file
s/cop15_policy_advice.pdf.
Lang, 
Peter. 
2017. 
“Nuclear 
Power 
Learning 
and
Deployment Rates; Disruption and Global Benefits
Forgone.” 
Energies 
10, 
no. 
12 
(2017): 
2169.
https://doi.org/10.3390/en10122169.
Lazard. 2019a. Lazard’s Levelized Cost of Energy Analysis
—Version 
13.0. 
2019.
https://www.lazard.com/media/451086/lazards-levelized-
cost-of-energy-version-130-vf.pdf.
. 2019b. Lazard’s Levelized Cost of Storage Analysis—
Version 
5.0. 
2019.
https://www.lazard.com/media/451087/lazards-levelized-
cost-of-storage-version-50-vf.pdf.
Leahy, Eimear, Seán Lyons, and Richard S. J. Tol. 2010.
“An Estimate of the Number of Vegetarians in the
World.” 
2010.
https://www.esri.ie/system/files/media/file-
uploads/2015-07/WP340.pdf.
Lee, Harry F. 2018. “Measuring the Effect of Climate
Change on Wars in History.” Asian Geographer 35, no. 2
(2018): 
123–42.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10225706.2018.1504807.
Lee, Kenneth, Edward Miguel, and Catherine Wolfram.
2016. “Appliance Ownership and Aspirations among
Electric Grid and Home Solar Households in Rural
Kenya.” American Economic Review 106, no. 5 (2016):
89–94. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20161097.
Letta, Marco, Pierluigi Montalbano, and Richard S. J. Tol.
2018. “Temperature Shocks, Short-Term Growth and

Poverty Thresholds: Evidence from Rural Tanzania.”
World 
Development 
112 
(December 
2018): 
13–32.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2018.07.013.
Li, Fang, David M. Lawrence, and Ben Bond-Lamberty.
2018. “Human Impacts on 20th Century Fire Dynamics
and 
Implications 
for 
Global 
Carbon 
and 
Water
Trajectories.” Global and Planetary Change 162 (2018):
18–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2018.01.002.
Li, J., M. Hamdi-Cherif, and C. Cassen. 2017. “Aligning
Domestic Policies with International Coordination in a
Post-Paris Global Climate Regime: A Case for China.”
Technological Forecasting and Social Change 125 (2017):
258–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.06.027.
Life. 1970. “Ecology: A Cause Becomes a Mass Movement.”
January 30 1970, 22–30. https://books.google.dk/books?
id=bFAEAAAAMBAJ&lpg=PA3&pg=PA22#v=onepage&q
&f=false.
Lim, Wee Ho, Dai Yamazaki, Sujan Koirala, Yukiko
Hirabayashi, et al. 2018. “Long-Term Changes in Global
Socioeconomic Benefits of Flood Defenses and Residual
Risk Based on CMIP5 Climate Models.” Earth’s Future 6,
no. 
7 
(2018): 
938–54.
http://dx.doi.org.stanford.idm.oclc.org/10.1002/2017EF0
00671.
Lincke, Daniel, and Jochen Hinkel. 2018. “Economically
Robust Protection against 21st Century Sea-Level Rise.”
Global 
Environmental 
Change-Human 
and 
Policy
Dimensions 
51 
(July 
2018): 
67–73.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.05.003.
Lino, Mark. 2017. “The Cost of Raising a Child.” 2017.
https://www.usda.gov/media/blog/2017/01/13/cost-
raising-child.

Little, Amanda. 2019. “Climate Change Is Likely to
Devastate 
the 
Global 
Food 
Supply,” 
2019.
https://time.com/5663621/climate-change-food-supply/.
Lo, Y. T. Eunice, Daniel M. Mitchell, Antonio Gasparrini,
Ana M. Vicedo-Cabrera, Kristie L. Ebi, Peter C. Frumhoff,
Richard J. Millar, et al. 2019. “Increasing Mitigation
Ambition to Meet the Paris Agreement’s Temperature
Goal Avoids Substantial Heat-Related Mortality in U.S.
Cities.” Science Advances 5, no. 6 (2019): eaau4373.
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aau4373.
Lomborg, Bjorn. 2001. The Skeptical Environmentalist:
Measuring the Real State of the World. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2001.
. ed. 2010. Smart Solutions to Climate Change:
Comparing 
Costs 
and 
Benefits. 
Cambridge, 
UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
. 2012. “Environmental Alarmism, Then and Now: The
Club of Rome’s Problem—and Ours.” Foreign Affairs 91,
no. 4 (2012): 24–40.
. ed. 2013. How Much Have Global Problems Cost the
World? A Scorecard from 1900 to 2050. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2013.
. 2016. “Impact of Current Climate Proposals.” Global
Policy 
7, 
no. 
1 
(2016): 
109–18.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12295.
. ed. 2018. Prioritizing Development: A Cost Benefit
Analysis of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development
Goals. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2018.
. 2019. “Humans Can Survive Underwater.” 2019.
https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/rising-
sea-levels-media-alarmism-by-bjorn-lomborg-2019-11.
. 2020. “Welfare in the 21st Century: Increasing

Development, Reducing Inequality, the Impact of Climate
Change, and the Cost of Climate Policies.” Technological
Forecasting 
and 
Social 
Change. 
156:119981.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.119981.
Loomis, John, and Michelle Haefele. 2017. “Quantifying
Market and Non-Market Benefits and Costs of Hydraulic
Fracturing in the United States: A Summary of the
Literature.” Ecological Economics 138 (August 2017):
160–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.03.036.
Lovins, Amory B. 1976. “Energy Strategy: The Road Not
Taken?” Foreign Affairs 55, no. 1 (1976): 65–96.
https://doi.org/10.2307/20039628.
Lu, Denise, and Christopher Flavelle. 2019. “Rising Seas
Will Erase More Cities by 2050, New Research Shows.”
2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/10/29/climat
e/coastal-cities-underwater.html.
Lusk, Jayson L., and F. Bailey Norwood. 2016. “Some
Vegetarians Spend Less Money on Food, Others Don’t.”
Ecological Economics 130 (October 2016): 232–42.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2016.07.005.
Lutter, Randall, and John F. Morrall. 1994. “Health-Health
Analysis: A New Way to Evaluate Health and Safety
Regulation.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 8, no. 1
(1994): 43–66. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01064085.
Lutter, Randall, John F. Morrall, and W. Kip Viscusi. 1999.
“The Cost-Per-Life-Saved Cutoff For Safety-Enhancing
Regulation.” Economic Inquiry 37, no. 4 (1999): 599–608.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.1999.tb01450.x.
Lutz, Wolfgang, William P. Butz, and Samir KC, eds. 2014.
World Population and Human Capital in the Twenty-First
Century. First edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press,

2014.
Mach, Katharine J., Caroline M. Kraan, W. Neil Adger,
Halvard Buhaug, Marshall Burke, James D. Fearon,
Christopher B. Field, et al. 2019. “Climate as a Risk
Factor for Armed Conflict.” Nature 571, no. 7764 (2019):
193–97. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1300-6.
MacKay, David. 2010. Sustainable Energy—without the Hot
Air. Reprinted. Cambridge: UIT Cambridge, 2110.
Maddison, Angus. 2006. The World Economy; Volume 1: A
Millennial Perspective, Volume 2: Historical Statistics.
Paris: Development Centre of the Organisation for
Economic Co-Operation And Development, 2006.
Magill, Bobby. 2019. “Miami, Other Coastal Cities May
Drown 
in 
80 
Years, 
Study 
Says.” 
2019.
https://news.bloombergenvironment.com/environment-
and-energy/miami-other-coastal-cities-may-drown-in-80-
years-study-says.
Mann, Michael L., Peter Berck, Max A. Moritz, Enric
Batllori, James G. Baldwin, Conor K. Gately, and D.
Richard 
Cameron. 
2014. 
“Modeling 
Residential
Development in California from 2000 to 2050: Integrating
Wildfire Risk, Wildland and Agricultural Encroachment.”
Land 
Use 
Policy 
41 
(2014): 
438–52.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2014.06.020.
Mao, Jiafu, Aurélien Ribes, Binyan Yan, Xiaoying Shi, Peter
E. Thornton, Roland Séférian, Philippe Ciais, et al. 2016.
“Human-Induced Greening of the Northern Extratropical
Land Surface.” Nature Climate Change 6, no. 10 (2016):
959–63. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3056.
Markanday, Ambika, Ibon Galarraga, and Anil Markandya.
2019. “A Critical Review of Cost-Benefit Analysis for
Climate Change Adaptation in Cities.” Climate Change

Economics 
10, 
no. 
04 
(2019): 
1950014.
https://doi.org/10.1142/S2010007819500143.
Markandya, Anil, and Paul Wilkinson. 2007. “Electricity
Generation and Health.” Lancet 370, no. 9591 (2007):
979–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)61253-7.
Marlon, J. R., P. J. Bartlein, C. Carcaillet, D. G. Gavin, S. P.
Harrison, P. E. Higuera, F. Joos, M. J. Power, and I. C.
Prentice. 2008. “Climate and Human Influences on Global
Biomass Burning over the Past Two Millennia.” Nature
Geoscience 1 (September 2008): 697.
Marlon, J. R., Patrick J. Bartlein, Daniel G. Gavin, Colin J.
Long, R. Scott Anderson, Christy E. Briles, Kendrick J.
Brown, et al. 2012. “Long-Term Perspective on Wildfires
in the Western USA.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 109, no. 9 (2012): E535–E543.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1112839109.
Martinko, Katherine. 2014. “Cut Your Carbon Footprint in
Half 
by 
Going 
Vegetarian.” 
2014.
https://www.treehugger.com/green-food/cut-your-
carbon-footprint-half-going-vegetarian.html.
Matthews, H. Damon, Susan Solomon, and Raymond
Pierrehumbert. 2012. “Cumulative Carbon as a Policy
Framework 
for 
Achieving 
Climate 
Stabilization.”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 370,
no. 
1974 
(2012): 
4365–79.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2012.0064.
Maxwell, Sean L., Richard A. Fuller, Thomas M. Brooks,
and James E. M. Watson. 2016. “Biodiversity: The
Ravages of Guns, Nets and Bulldozers.” Nature 536, no.
7615 (2016): 143–45. https://doi.org/10.1038/536143a.
McAneney, John, Benjamin Sandercock, Ryan Crompton,

Thomas Mortlock, Rade Musulin, Roger Pielke Jr., and
Andrew Gissing. 2019. “Normalised Insurance Losses
from 
Australian 
Natural 
Disasters: 
1966–2017.”
Environmental Hazards 18, no. 5 (April 2019): 414–33.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17477891.2019.1609406.
McKibben, Bill. 2019a. “Climate Change Is Shrinking
Planet, 
in 
the 
Scariest 
Possible 
Way.” 
2019.
https://twitter.com/billmckibben/status/1189277270944
423939.
. 2019b. Falter: Has the Human Game Begun to Play
Itself Out? New York: Henry Holt, 2019.
McLean, Elena V., Sharmistha Bagchi-Sen, John D.
Atkinson, 
Julia 
Ravenscroft, 
Sharon 
Hewner, 
and
Alexandra Schindel. 2019. “Country-Level Analysis of
Household Fuel Transitions.” World Development 114
(February 
2019): 
267–80.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2018.10.006.
McPhate, Mike. 2017. “California Today: A Plan to Cool
Down 
L.A.” 
2017.
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/us/california-
today-cool-pavements-la.html.
Meadows, Donella H., and Club of Rome, eds. 1972. The
Limits to Growth: A Report for the Club of Rome’s Project
on the Predicament of Mankind. New York: Universe
Books, 1972.
Meinshausen, M., S. C. B. Raper, and T. M. L. Wigley. 2011.
“Emulating Coupled Atmosphere-Ocean and Carbon
Cycle Models with a Simpler Model, MAGICC6—Part 1:
Model Description and Calibration.” Atmos. Chem. Phys.
11, no. 4 (2011): 1417–56. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-
11-1417-2011.
Melek, Nida Çakır, Michael Plante, and Mine Yücel. 2019.

The U.S. Shale Oil Boom, the Oil Export Ban, and the
Economy: A General Equilibrium Analysis. Working Paper
1708. 2019. https://doi.org/10.24149/wp1708.
Mendelsohn, Robert, Kerry Emanuel, Shun Chonabayashi,
and Laura Bakkensen. 2012. “The Impact of Climate
Change on Global Tropical Cyclone Damage.” Nature
Climate Change 2 (January 2012): 205.
Mexico NDC. 2016. “Mexico NDC Submission.” 2016.
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocu
ments/Mexico%20First/MEXICO%20INDC%2003.30.201
5.pdf.
Meyer, Robinson. 2018. “A Disappointing New Problem
With 
Geo-Engineering.” 
Atlantic, 
August 
8, 
2018.
https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2018/08/so
lar-geo-engineering-cant-save-the-worlds-crops/567017/.
Mims, Christopher. 2009. “‘Albedo Yachts’ and Marine
Clouds: 
A 
Cure 
for 
Climate 
Change?” 
2009.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/albedo-
yachts-and-marine-clouds/.
Ministry for the Environment (New Zealand). 2019a.
“Latest Update on New Zealand’s 2020 Net Position.”
2019. 
https://www.mfe.govt.nz/climate-change/climate-
change-and-government/emissions-reduction-
targets/reporting-our-targets-0.
. 
2019b. 
“New 
Zealand’s 
Interactive 
Emissions
Tracker.”
https://emissionstracker.mfe.govt.nz/#NrAMBoEYF12Tw
CIByBTALo2wBM4eigDs2AHEltEA.
MIT. 2015. “Energy and Climate Outlook 2015.” 2015.
http://globalchange.mit.edu/research/publications/other/
special/2015Outlook.
Monbiot, George. 2007. “The Western Appetite for Biofuels
Is Causing Starvation in the Poor World.” 2007.

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/nov/
06/comment.biofuels.
Montana State University. 2019. “Best Practices for
Wildfire 
Adaptation 
and 
Resilience.” 
2019.
https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2019/08/190820
101458.htm.
Morgan, Dan. 2002. “Enron also Courted Democrats;
Chairman Pushed Firm’s Agenda with Clinton White
House.” 
Washington 
Post, 
January 
2002.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/wp-dyn/?
contentId=A37287-
2002Jan12&node=&notFound=true&pagename=article.
Morrall III, John F. 2003. “Saving Lives: A Review of the
Record.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27, no. 3
(2003): 
221–37.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1025841209892.
Moss, Todd, and Jacob Kincer. 2018. “Infographic—Are We
Learning the Right Energy Lesson from Mobile Phones?
The 
Energy 
Iceberg 
Says 
No.” 
2018.
https://www.energyforgrowth.org/blog/infographic-are-
we-learning-the-right-energy-lesson-from-mobile-phones-
the-energy-iceberg-says-no/.
Mouillot, Florent, and Christopher B. Field. 2005. “Fire
History and the Global Carbon Budget: A 1°× 1° Fire
History Reconstruction for the 20th Century.” Global
Change 
Biology 
11, 
no. 
3 
(2005): 
398–420.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2005.00920.x.
Munich Re. 2019. The Natural Disasters of 2018 in Figures.
2019. 
https://www.munichre.com/topics-
online/en/climate-change-and-natural-disasters/natural-
disasters/the-natural-disasters-of-2018-in-figures.html.

. 2020. “Tropical Cyclones Cause Highest Losses |
Munich Re.” 2020. https://www.munichre.com/topics-
online/en/climate-change-and-natural-disasters/natural-
disasters/natural-disasters-of-2019-in-figures-tropical-
cyclones-cause-highest-losses.html.
Muñoz, Leslie A., Francisco Olivera, Matthew Giglio, and
Philip Berke. 2018. “The Impact of Urbanization on the
Streamflows and the 100-Year Floodplain Extent of the
Sims Bayou in Houston, Texas.” International Journal of
River Basin Management 16, no. 1 (2018): 61–69.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15715124.2017.1372447.
Murtaugh, 
Paul 
A., 
and 
Michael 
G. 
Schlax. 
2009.
“Reproduction and the Carbon Legacies of Individuals.”
Global Environmental Change 19, no. 1 (2009): 14–20.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.10.007.
Nachmany, Michal, and Emily Mangan. 2018. Aligning
National 
and 
International 
Climate 
Targets. 
2018.
http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/wp-
content/uploads/2018/10/Aligning-national-and-
international-climate-targets-1.pdf.
Narassimhan, 
Easwaran, 
Kelly 
S. 
Gallagher, 
Stefan
Koester, and Julio Rivera Alejo. 2018. “Carbon Pricing in
Practice: A Review of Existing Emissions Trading
Systems.” Climate Policy 18, no. 8 (2018): 967–91.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2018.1467827.
NAS. 2017. A Century of Wildland Fire Research:
Contributions to Long-Term Approaches for Wildland Fire
Management: Proceedings of a Workshop. Washington,
DC: National Academies Press, 2017.
NASA. 2016. “Carbon Dioxide Fertilization Greening Earth,
Study 
Finds.” 
2016.
https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2016/carbon-

dioxide-fertilization-greening-earth.
National Safety Council. 2019. “Vehicle Deaths Estimated
at 
40,000 
for 
Third 
Straight 
Year.” 
2019.
https://www.nsc.org/road-safety/safety-topics/fatality-
estimates.
NCEI. 2019. Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters.
2019. https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/time-series.
NDRC. 2008. Move Over, Gasoline: Here Come Biofuels.
2008.
https://web.archive.org/web/20081105142712/http://ww
w.nrdc.org/air/transportation/biofuels.asp.
. 2009. Homegrown Energy from Biofuels: Fuel and
Electricity Produced from Grass, Wood and Other
Biomass Have the Potential to Help Repower America If
Carefully 
Developed. 
2009.
https://web.archive.org/web/20090805002845/http://ww
w.nrdc.org/energy/biofuels.asp.
NDRRMC. 2014. “Situational Report Re Effects of Typhoon
Yolanda 
(Haiyan).” 
2014.
http://www.ndrrmc.gov.ph/index.php/21-disaster-
events/1329-situational-report-re-effects-of-typhoon-
yolanda-haiyan.
Nebehay, Stephanie. 2008. “Top U.N. Human Rights Forum
to 
Examine 
Food 
Crisis.” 
2008.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-un-food-rights/top-u-
n-human-rights-forum-to-examine-food-crisis-
idUSL0911964320080509.
NEED. 2019. National Energy Efficiency Data-Framework
(NEED): 
Consumption 
Data 
Tables 
2019. 
2019.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uplo
ads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/812400/Consu
mption_headline_tables_2017.xlsx.

Nesbit, Jeffrey Asher. 2019. This Is the Way the World
Ends: How Droughts and Die-Offs, Heat Waves and
Hurricanes Are Converging on America. New York:
Picador, 2019.
New York Times. 1970. “The End of Civilization Feared by
Biochemist,” November 19, 1970.
Newsweek. 1973. “Running out of Everything.” 1973.
http://www.flickr.com/photos/bob_roddis/5665427476/.
Nguyen, Van Kien, Jamie Pittock, and Daniel Connell. 2019.
“Dikes, Rice, and Fish: How Rapid Changes in Land Use
and Hydrology Have Transformed Agriculture and
Subsistence Living in the Mekong Delta.” Regional
Environmental Change 19, no. 7 (2019): 2069–77.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-019-01548-x.
NIBS. 2018. “Natural Hazard Mitigation Saves Documents
—National 
Institute 
of 
Building 
Sciences.” 
2018.
https://www.nibs.org/page/ms2_dwnload.
Nicholls, Robert J., Natasha Marinova, Jason A. Lowe, Sally
Brown, Pier Vellinga, Diogo de Gusmão, Jochen Hinkel,
and Richard S. J. Tol. 2011. “Sea-Level Rise and Its
Possible Impacts Given a ‘beyond 4°C World’ in the
Twenty-First Century.” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences 
369, 
no. 
1934 
(2011): 
161–81.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2010.0291.
NIFC. 2019. Total Wildland Fires and Acres by National
Interagency 
Fire 
Center. 
2019.
https://www.nifc.gov/fireInfo/fireInfo_stats_totalFires.ht
ml.
NOAA. 2019. “U.S. Percentage Areas (Very Warm/Cold,
Very 
Wet/Dry).” 
2019. 
ncdc.noaa.gov/temp-and-
precip/uspa/wet-dry/0.

Nordhaus, Ted, and Alex Trembath. 2019. “Is Climate
Change Like Diabetes or an Asteroid?” Breakthrough
Institute. 2019. https://thebreakthrough.org/articles/is-
climate-change-like-diabetes.
Nordhaus, William. 1975. “Can We Control Carbon
Dioxide?” 
Monograph. 
June 
1975.
http://pure.iiasa.ac.at/id/eprint/365/.
. 1991. “To Slow or Not to Slow: The Economics of The
Greenhouse Effect.” Economic Journal 101, no. 407
(1991): 920–37. https://doi.org/10.2307/2233864.
. 2010. “Economic Aspects of Global Warming in a Post-
Copenhagen Environment.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 107, no. 26 (2010): 11721–26.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1005985107.
. 2013. The Climate Casino: Risk, Uncertainty, and
Economics for a Warming World. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2013.
. 2018. “Projections and Uncertainties about Climate
Change in an Era of Minimal Climate Policies.” American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 10, no. 3 (2018): 333–
60. https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.20170046.
. 2019a. “Economics of the Disintegration of the
Greenland Ice Sheet.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 116, no. 25 (2019): 12261–69.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1814990116.
. 2019b. “Can We Control Carbon Dioxide? (from
1975).” American Economic Review 109, no. 6 (2019):
2015–35. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.109.6.2015.
Nordhaus, William, and Andrew Moffat. 2017. “A Survey of
Global Impacts of Climate Change: Replication, Survey
Methods, and a Statistical Analysis.” w23646. Cambridge,
MA: 
National 
Bureau 
of 
Economic 
Research.

https://doi.org/10.3386/w23646.
Nordhaus, William, and Paul Sztorc. 2013. DICE 2013R:
Introduction 
and 
User’s 
Manual. 
2013.
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~nordhaus/homepage/homepa
ge/documents/DICE_Manual_100413r1.pdf.
Norton, Michael, Andras Baldi, Vicas Buda, Bruno Carli,
Pavel Cudlin, Mike B. Jones, Atte Korhola, et al. 2019.
“Serious Mismatches Continue between Science and
Policy in Forest Bioenergy.” GCB Bioenergy 11, no. 11
(2019): 1256–63. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcbb.12643.
NRC. 2015. Climate Intervention: Reflecting Sunlight to
Cool Earth. Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
2015. https://doi.org/10.17226/18988.
NZ 
Treasury. 
2019. 
Financial 
Statements 
of 
the
Government of New Zealand for the Year Ended 30 June
2019. 2019. https://treasury.govt.nz/publications/year-
end/financial-statements-2019.
NZIER. 
2018. 
“Economic 
Impact 
Analysis 
of 
2050
Emissions Targets—A Dynamic Computable General
Equilibrium 
Analysis.” 
2018.
https://www.mfe.govt.nz/sites/default/files/media/Climat
e%20Change/NZIER%20report%20-
%20Economic%20impact%20analysis%20of%202050%20
emissions%20targets%20-%20FINAL.pdf.
OECD. 
2019. 
OECD 
Development 
Aid. 
2019.
https://data.oecd.org/chart/5Mzc.
OECD-DAC. 2019. Climate-Related Development Finance A
Bilateral 
Provider 
Perspective. 
2019.
https://public.tableau.com/views/Climate-
relateddevelopmentfinance/CRDF-Donor.
Office for National Statistics. 2015a. “Monthly Provisional
Figures on Deaths Registered in England and Wales.”

2015. 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/vsob2/monthly-
figures-on-deaths-registered-by-area-of-usual-residence--
england-and-wales/april-2015--provisional-/rft-monthly-
deaths-april-2015.xls.
. 2015b. “Weekly Provisional Figures on Deaths
Registered 
in 
England 
and 
Wales.” 
2015.
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/vsob2/weekly-provisional-
figures-on-deaths-registered-in-england-and-wales/week-
ending-13-02-2015/weekly-deaths—week-07-2015.xls.
. 2017. “Household Disposable Income and Inequality in
the 
UK: 
Financial 
Year 
Ending 
2016.” 
2017.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/file?
uri=/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseh
oldfinances/incomeandwealth/bulletins/householddisposa
bleincomeandinequality/financialyearending2016/977e7b
6f.xls.
Ofgem. 2018. “Energy Spend as a Percentage of Total
Household 
Expenditure 
(UK).” 
2018.
https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/data-portal/energy-spend-
percentage-total-household-expenditure-uk.
Olivié, D. J. L., D. Cariolle, H. Teyssèdre, D. Salas, A.
Voldoire, H. Clark, D. Saint-Martin, et al. 2012.
“Modeling the Climate Impact of Road Transport,
Maritime Shipping and Aviation over the Period 1860–
2100 with an AOGCM.” Atmospheric Chemistry and
Physics 
12, 
no. 
3 
(2012): 
1449–1480.
https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-12-1449-2012.
O’Neill, Brian C., Elmar Kriegler, Keywan Riahi, Kristie L.
Ebi, Stephane Hallegatte, Timothy R. Carter, Ritu
Mathur, and Detlef P. van Vuuren. 2014. “A New
Scenario Framework for Climate Change Research: The
Concept of Shared Socioeconomic Pathways.” Climatic
Change 
122, 
no. 
3 
(2014): 
387–400.

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-0905-2.
Oreskes, Naomi. 2015. “Playing Dumb on Climate Change,”
2015.
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/04/opinion/sunday/pl
aying-dumb-on-climate-change.html?smid=tw-
share&_r=1.
Oreskes, Naomi, and Nicholas Stern. 2019. “Climate
Change Will Cost Us Even More Than We Think.” 2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/23/opinion/climate-
change-costs.html.
Ortiz-Ospina, Esteban. 2017. “The Size of the Poverty Gap:
Some Hints Regarding the Cost of Ending Extreme
Poverty.” 2017. https://ourworldindata.org/size-poverty-
gap.
Ortiz-Ospina, Esteban, and Max Roser. 2019. “Our World in
Data: 
Child 
Labor.” 
2019.
https://ourworldindata.org/child-labor.
Ostrander, Madeline. 2016. “How Do You Decide to Have a
Baby When Climate Change Is Remaking Life on Earth?”
2016. 
https://www.thenation.com/article/how-do-you-
decide-to-have-a-baby-when-climate-change-is-remaking-
life-on-earth/.
Oxford University. 2011. “Lab-Grown Meat Would ‘Cut
Emissions 
and 
Save 
Energy.’” 
2011.
http://www.ox.ac.uk/news/2011-06-21-lab-grown-meat-
would-cut-emissions-and-save-energy.
Page, Lucy, and Rohini Pande. 2018. “Ending Global
Poverty: Why Money Isn’t Enough.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 
32, 
no. 
4 
(2018): 
173–99.
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.32.4.173.
Palmissano, John. 1997. “Implications of the Climate
Change Agreement in Kyoto & What Transpired.” 1997.
https://web.archive.org/web/20020918131105/http://ww

w.cnsnews.com/specialreports/2002/kyoto_memo.asp.
Panos, Evangelos, and Martin Densing. 2019. “The Future
Developments of the Electricity Prices in View of the
Implementation of the Paris Agreements: Will the Current
Trends Prevail, or a Reversal Is Ahead?” Energy
Economics, 
104476 
(2019).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2019.104476.
Parrish, David, and William Stockwell. 2015. “Urbanization
and Air Pollution: Then and Now.” Eos 96 (2015).
doi:10.1029/2015EO021803.
Pascus, Brian. 2019. “Human Civilization Faces ‘Existential
Risk’ by 2050 According to New Australian Climate
Change 
Report.” 
2019.
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/new-climate-change-
report-human-civilization-at-risk-extinction-by-2050-new-
australian-climate/.
Paul, Bimal Kanti. 2009. “Why Relatively Fewer People
Died? The Case of Bangladesh’s Cyclone Sidr.” Natural
Hazards 
50, 
no. 
2 
(2009): 
289–304.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-008-9340-5.
Paulson, Tom. 2013. “Epidemiology: A Mortal Foe.” Nature
502, 
no. 
7470 
(2013): 
S2–3.
https://doi.org/10.1038/502S2a.
Peterson, Thomas C., William M. Connolley, and John Fleck.
2008. “The Myth of the 1970s Global Cooling Scientific
Consensus.” Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society 
89, 
no. 
9 
(2008): 
1325–38.
https://doi.org/10.1175/2008BAMS2370.1.
Pew Research Center. 2019. “Public’s 2019 Priorities:
Economy, Health Care, Education and Security All Near
Top 
of 
List.” 
2019. 
https://www.people-
press.org/2019/01/24/publics-2019-priorities-economy-

health-care-education-and-security-all-near-top-of-list/.
Pielke, R. A., and C. W. Landsea. 1998. “Normalized
Hurricane Damages in the United States: 1925–95.”
Weather and Forecasting 13, no. 3 (1998): 621–31.
Pielke, Roger. 2019. “Tracking Progress on the Economic
Costs of Disasters under the Indicators of the Sustainable
Development Goals.” Environmental Hazards 18, no. 1
(2019): 
1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17477891.2018.1540343.
Pielke, Roger A. 2009. “An Idealized Assessment of the
Economics of Air Capture of Carbon Dioxide in Mitigation
Policy.” Environmental Science & Policy 12, no. 3 (2009):
216–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2009.01.002.
Pires, J.C.M. 2019. “Negative Emissions Technologies: A
Complementary Solution for Climate Change Mitigation.”
Science of The Total Environment 672 (July 2019): 502–
14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.04.004.
Proctor, Jonathan, Solomon Hsiang, Jennifer Burney,
Marshall 
Burke, 
and 
Wolfram 
Schlenker. 
2018.
“Estimating 
Global 
Agricultural 
Effects 
of
Geoengineering Using Volcanic Eruptions.” Nature 560,
no. 
7719 
(2018): 
480–83.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0417-3.
Qiu, 
Linda. 
2015. 
“Fact-Checking 
Bernie 
Sanders’
Comments on Climate Change and Terrorism.” 2015.
https://www.politifact.com/truth-o-
meter/statements/2015/nov/16/bernie-s/fact-checking-
bernie-sanders-comments-climate-chan/.
Raimi, Daniel, and Gloria Aldana. 2018. “Understanding a
New Study on Oil and Gas Methane Emissions.”
Resources, 
2018.
https://www.resourcesmag.org/common-
resources/understanding-a-new-study-on-oil-and-gas-

methane-emissions/.
Rao, Narasimha D., Petra Sauer, Matthew Gidden, and
Keywan Riahi. 2019. “Income Inequality Projections for
the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs).” Futures
105 
(2019): 
27–39.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2018.07.001.
Rathi, Akshat. 2018. “Stacking Concrete Blocks Is a
Surprisingly Efficient Way to Store Energy.” Quartz.
2018. https://qz.com/1355672/stacking-concrete-blocks-
is-a-surprisingly-efficient-way-to-store-energy/.
Ren, Xiaolin, Matthias Weitzel, Brian C. O’Neill, Peter
Lawrence, Prasanth Meiyappan, Samuel Levis, Edward J.
Balistreri, and Michael Dalton. 2018. “Avoided Economic
Impacts of Climate Change on Agriculture: Integrating a
Land Surface Model (CLM) with a Global Economic
Model (IPETS).” Climatic Change 146, no. 3–4 (2018):
517–31. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-016-1791-1.
Retro Report. 2019. “Population Bomb: The Overpopulation
Theory 
That 
Fell 
Flat.” 
2019.
https://www.retroreport.org/video/the-population-bomb/.
Reuters. 2017. “China National Nuclear, Shenhua Team Up
to Develop Gen-4 Reactor.” Reuters. September 27, 2017.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-nuclear-
idUSKCN1C2088.
. 2019. “No Apologies: Africans Say Their Need for Oil
Cash Outweighs Climate Concerns.” Reuters. November
8, 
2019. 
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-africa-oil-
climate-idUSKBN1XI16X.
Reynolds, Jesse L., and Gernot Wagner. 2019. “Highly
Decentralized 
Solar 
Geoengineering.” 
Environmental
Politics, 
July 
2019, 
1–17.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09644016.2019.1648169.
Reynolds, R. V., and A. H. Pierson. 1941. The Saw Timber

Resource of the United States, 1630–1930. U.S. Forest
Service, 
Division 
of 
Forest 
Economics. 
1941.
https://www.fs.fed.us/research/docs/rpa/pre-
1989/1941%20SAWTIMBER%20RESOURCE%20OF%20T
HE%20US%201630-1930.pdf.
Riahi, Keywan, Detlef P. van Vuuren, Elmar Kriegler, Jae
Edmonds, Brian C. O’Neill, Shinichiro Fujimori, Nico
Bauer, et al. 2017. “The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways
and Their Energy, Land Use, and Greenhouse Gas
Emissions 
Implications: 
An 
Overview.” 
Global
Environmental Change 42 (January 2017): 153–68.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.
Rijke, Jeroen, Sebastiaan van Herk, Chris Zevenbergen,
and Richard Ashley. 2012. “Room for the River:
Delivering Integrated River Basin Management in the
Netherlands.” 
International 
Journal 
of 
River 
Basin
Management 
10, 
no. 
4 
(2012): 
369–82.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15715124.2012.739173.
Ritchie, Hannah, and Max Roser. 2019a. “CO2 and
Greenhouse Gas Emissions.” Our World in Data. 2019.
https://ourworldindata.org/co2-and-other-greenhouse-
gas-emissions.
. 2019b. “Our World in Data: Sanitation Access.” 2019.
https://ourworldindata.org/sanitation.
Ritchie, Justin, and Hadi Dowlatabadi. 2017. “Why Do
Climate Change Scenarios Return to Coal?” Energy 140
(2017): 
1276–91.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.08.083.
Roberts, 
David. 
2019. 
“If 
We 
Still 
Exist.” 
2019.
https://twitter.com/drvox/status/1166772758782414848.
Rojas, Rodrigo, Luc Feyen, and Paul Watkiss. 2013.
“Climate Change and River Floods in the European

Union: Socio-Economic Consequences and the Costs and
Benefits of Adaptation.” Global Environmental Change
23, 
no. 
6 
(2013): 
1737–51.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.08.006.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2010. “The
Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes: Estimates Based
on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks.” American Economic
Review 
100, 
no. 
3 
(2010): 
763–801.
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.100.3.763.
Roser, Max. 2019a. “Our World in Data: Life Expectancy.”
2019. 
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/life-
expectancy?time=1770..2019&country=OWID_WRL.
. 2019b. “Our World in Data: War and Peace.” 2019.
https://ourworldindata.org/war-and-peace.
Roser, Max, and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina. 2019a. “Our World
in 
Data: 
Global 
Extreme 
Poverty.” 
2019.
https://ourworldindata.org/extreme-poverty.
. 
2019b. 
“Our 
World 
in 
Data: 
Literacy.”
https://ourworldindata.org/literacy.
Roser, Max, and Hannah Ritchie. 2019a. “Food per
Person.” 
Our 
World 
in 
Data. 
2019.
https://ourworldindata.org/food-per-person.
. 
2019b. 
“Malaria.” 
2019.
https://ourworldindata.org/malaria.
Roser, Max, Hannah Ritchie, and Esteban Ortiz-Ospina.
2019. 
World 
Population 
Growth. 
2019.
https://ourworldindata.org/world-population-growth.
Rosling, 
Hans. 
2012. 
HDI 
Surprisingly 
Similar 
to
GDP/Capita. 2012. https://www.gapminder.org/news/hdi-
surprisingly-similar-to-gdpcapita/.
Rowlatt, Justin. 2007. “We Are All Ethical Men and Women
Now.” 
2007.

https://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/newsnight/2007/04/we_are
_all_ethical_men_and_women_now.html.
Roy, Avik. 2014. “A Village That Harnessed the Sun.” 2014.
https://www.dailypioneer.com/2014/columnists/a-village-
that-harnessed-the-sun.html.
Sacks, Daniel W., Betsey Stevenson, and Justin Wolfers.
2012. “The New Stylized Facts about Income and
Subjective Well-Being.” Emotion 12, no. 6 (2012): 1181–
87. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029873.
Sandström, Vilma, Hugo Valin, Tamás Krisztin, Petr Havlík,
Mario Herrero, and Thomas Kastner. 2018. “The Role of
Trade in the Greenhouse Gas Footprints of EU Diets.”
Global Food Security 19 (December 2018): 48–55.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2018.08.007.
Sanz-Pérez, Eloy S., Christopher R. Murdock, Stephanie A.
Didas, and Christopher W. Jones. 2016. “Direct Capture
of CO2 from Ambient Air.” Chemical Reviews 116, no. 19
(2016): 
11840–76.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00173.
Satija, Neena, Kiah Collier, and Al Shaw. 2016. “Boomtown,
Flood 
Town.” 
2016.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/boomtown-
flood-town/.
Savage, Luiza Ch. 2019. “The U.S. Left a Hole in
Leadership on Climate. China Is Filling It.” 2019.
https://www.politico.com/story/2019/08/15/climate-
china-global-translations-1662345.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1992. “Some Economics of Global
Warming.” The American Economic Review 82, no. 1
(1992): 1–14.
Schlosser, C. Adam, Kenneth Strzepek, Xiang Gao, Charles
Fant, Élodie Blanc, Sergey Paltsev, Henry Jacoby, John
Reilly, and Arthur Gueneau. 2014. “The Future of Global

Water Stress: An Integrated Assessment: Schlosser et al.”
Earth’s 
Future 
2, 
no. 
8 
(2014): 
341–61.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2014EF000238.
Schobert, Harold H. 2002. Energy and Society: An
Introduction. New York: Taylor & Francis, 2002.
Schuerch, Mark, Tom Spencer, Stijn Temmerman, Matthew
L. Kirwan, Claudia Wolff, Daniel Lincke, Chris J.
McOwen, et al. 2018. “Future Response of Global Coastal
Wetlands to Sea-Level Rise.” Nature 561, no. 7722
(2018): 
231–34. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-
0476-5.
Selby, Jan. 2019. “Climate Change and the Syrian Civil
War, Part II: The Jazira’s Agrarian Crisis.” Geoforum 101
(May 
2019): 
260–74.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2018.06.010.
Sengupta, Somini, and Nadja Popovich. 2019. “More Than
60 Countries Say They’ll Zero Out Carbon Emissions. The
Catch? 
They’re 
Not 
the 
Big 
Emitters.” 
2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/09/25/climat
e/un-net-zero-emissions.html.
Seo, S. Niggol, and Robert Mendelsohn. 2008. “An Analysis
of Crop Choice: Adapting to Climate Change in South
American Farms.” Ecological Economics 67, no. 1 (2008):
109–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2007.12.007.
Sharma, Ashish, Conrad Wasko, and Dennis P. Lettenmaier.
2018. “If Precipitation Extremes Are Increasing, Why
Aren’t Floods?” Water Resources Research 54, no. 11
(2018): 
8545–51.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2018WR023749.
Sharma, Rajesh. 2018. “Health and Economic Growth:
Evidence from Dynamic Panel Data of 143 Years.” PLOS
One 
13, 
no. 
10 
(2018): 
e0204940–e0204940.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0204940.
Shellenberger, Michael. 2019. “The Reason Renewables
Can’t Power Modern Civilization Is Because They Were
Never 
Meant 
To.” 
2019.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/michaelshellenberger/201
9/05/06/the-reason-renewables-cant-power-modern-
civilization-is-because-they-were-never-meant-
to/#5b0849cdea2b.
Shields, Fiona. 2019. “Why We’re Rethinking the Images
We 
Use 
for 
Our 
Climate 
Journalism.” 
2019.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/oct/18/
guardian-climate-pledge-2019-images-pictures-
guidelines.
SIPRI. 2019. “World Military Expenditure Grows to $1.8
Trillion 
in 
2018 
| 
SIPRI.” 
2019.
https://www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2019/world-
military-expenditure-grows-18-trillion-2018.
Sivaram, Varun, and Shayle Kann. 2016. “Solar Power
Needs a More Ambitious Cost Target.” Nature Energy 1,
no. 
4 
(2016): 
16036.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2016.36.
Smil, Vaclav. 2014. “The Long, Slow Rise of Solar and
Wind: The Great Hope for a Quick and Sweeping
Transition to Renewable Energy Is Wishful Thinking.”
Scientific American 310, no. 12014 (January 2014), 52–
57.
Smith, David. 2019. “‘The Poor Are Punished’: Dorian Lays
Bare 
Inequality 
in 
the 
Bahamas.” 
2019.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/sep/13/hurric
ane-dorian-the-mudd-haitians-inequality.
Smith, Joel. 2019. “There Is Harm in Exaggerating Climate
Change 
Risks.” 
2019.
https://www.dailycamera.com/2019/08/24/joel-smith-

harm-exaggerating-climate-change-risks/.
Smith, Matthew. 2019. “International Poll: Most Expect to
Feel Impact of Climate Change, Many Think It Will Make
Us 
Extinct.” 
2019.
https://yougov.co.uk/topics/science/articles-
reports/2019/09/15/international-poll-most-expect-feel-
impact-climate.
Smyth, Jamie. 2019. “Climate Change Is Coming for
Australian Sheep.” 2019. https://www.ozy.com/around-
the-world/climate-change-is-coming-for-australian-
sheep/96774/.
Spratt, David, and Ian Dunlop. 2019. “Existential Climate-
Related Security Risk: A Scenario Approach.” 2019.
https://docs.wixstatic.com/ugd/148cb0_a1406e0143ac4c
469196d3003bc1e687.pdf.
St. John, Jeff. 2019. “Global Energy Storage to Hit 158
Gigawatt-Hours by 2024, Led by US and China.” October
4, 
2019.
https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/global-
energy-storage-to-hit-158-gigawatt-hours-by-2024-with-u-
s-and-china.
Statista. 
2019. 
“Principal 
Rice 
Exporting 
Countries
Worldwide 
in 
2018/2019.” 
2019.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/255947/top-rice-
exporting-countries-worldwide-2011/.
Steckel, Jan Christoph, Narasimha D. Rao, and Michael
Jakob. 2017. “Access to Infrastructure Services: Global
Trends and Drivers.” Utilities Policy 45 (April 2017): 109–
17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jup.2017.03.001.
Sterman, John D, Lori Siegel, and Juliette N Rooney-Varga.
2018. “Does Replacing Coal with Wood Lower CO2
Emissions? 
Dynamic 
Lifecycle 
Analysis 
of 
Wood
Bioenergy.” Environmental Research Letters 13, no. 1

(2018): 
015007. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/aaa512.
Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers. 2013. “Subjective
Well-Being and Income: Is There Any Evidence of
Satiation?” American Economic Review 103, no. 3 (2013):
598–604. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.3.598.
Stieb, Matt. 2019. “Meeting Paris Climate Goals Would
Save Thousands of American Lives During Heat Waves:
Study.” 
2019.
http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/06/paris-goals-
would-save-thousands-of-u-s-lives-in-heat-waves.html.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., Jean-Paul Fitoussi, and Martine Durand.
2018. 
Beyond 
GDP: 
Measuring 
What 
Counts 
for
Economic 
and 
Social 
Performance. 
Paris: 
OECD
Publishing, 2018.
Stocker, Thomas F., and Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change, eds. 2013. Climate Change 2013: The
Physical Science Basis; Summary for Policymakers, a
Report of Working Group I of the IPCC, Technical
Summary, a Report Accepted by Working Group I of the
IPCC but Not Approved in Detail and Frequently Asked
Questions; Part of the Working Group I Contribution to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. New York: Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, 2013.
Strader, Stephen M. 2018. “Spatiotemporal Changes in
Conterminous US Wildfire Exposure from 1940 to 2010.”
Natural 
Hazards 
92, 
no. 
1 
(2018): 
543–65.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-018-3217-z.
Strader, Stephen M., and Walker S. Ashley. 2015. “The
Expanding Bull’s-Eye Effect.” Weatherwise 68, no. 5
(2015): 
23–29.

https://doi.org/10.1080/00431672.2015.1067108.
Strife, 
Susan 
Jean. 
2012. 
“Children’s 
Environmental
Concerns: 
Expressing 
Ecophobia.” 
Journal 
of
Environmental Education 43, no. 1 (2012): 37–54.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00958964.2011.602131.
Sullivan, Arthur. 2018. “To Fly or Not to Fly? The
Environmental 
Cost 
of 
Air 
Travel.” 
2018.
https://www.dw.com/en/to-fly-or-not-to-fly-the-
environmental-cost-of-air-travel/a-42090155.
Syphard, Alexandra D., Jon E. Keeley, Anne H. Pfaff, and
Ken Ferschweiler. 2017. “Human Presence Diminishes
the Importance of Climate in Driving Fire Activity across
the United States.” Proceedings of the National Academy
of 
Sciences 
114, 
no. 
52 
(2017): 
13750–55.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1713885114.
Tengs, Tammy O. 1996. “Dying Too Soon: How Cost-
Effectiveness 
Analysis 
Can 
Save 
Lives.” 
1996.
http://www.ncpathinktank.org/pdfs/st204.pdf.
Tengs, Tammy O., M. E. Adams, J. S, Pliskin, D. G, Safran, J.
E. Siegel, M. C. Weinstein, and J. D. Graham. 1995. “500
Lifesaving Interventions and Their Cost-Effectiveness.”
Risk Analysis 15, no. 3 (1995): 369–90.
Tengs, Tammy O., and John D. Graham. 1996. “The
Opportunity Costs of Haphazard Social Investements in
Life-Saving.” In Risks, Costs, and Lives Saved: Getting
Better Results from Regulation, edited by Robert W.
Hahn. Oxford: Oxford University Press,1996.
TerraPower. 2019. “TWR Technology: Preparing Nuclear
Energy 
for 
Global 
Growth.” 
2019.
https://terrapower.com/productservices/twr.
Terrenoire, E., D. A. Hauglustaine, T. Gasser, and O.
Penanhoat. 2019. “The Contribution of Carbon Dioxide

Emissions from the Aviation Sector to Future Climate
Change.” Environmental Research Letters 14, no. 8
(2019): 
084019. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/ab3086.
Tessum, Christopher W., Jason D. Hill, and Julian D.
Marshall. 2014. “Life Cycle Air Quality Impacts of
Conventional and Alternative Light-Duty Transportation
in the United States.” Proceedings of the National
Academy 
of 
Sciences. 
2014.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1406853111.
Thompson, Megan. 2019. “As U.S. Cedes Leadership on
Climate, 
China 
Steps 
Up.” 
2019.
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/as-us-cedes-
leadership-on-climate-china-steps-up.
Tidman, Zoe. 2019. “New Zealand Passes ‘Zero Carbon’
Law 
in 
Fight 
against 
Climate 
Change.” 
2019.
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/australasia/
new-zealand-zero-carbon-law-emissions-jacinda-ardern-
climate-change-a9189341.html.
Time. 1972. “Environment: The Worst Is Yet to Be?” Time,
January 24, 1972, 32
. 2006. Special Report Global Warming. 2006.
. 
2019. 
Our 
Sinking 
Planet. 
2019.
https://time.com/magazine/us/5606236/june-24th-2019-
vol-193-no-24-u-s/.
Timmers, Victor R. J. H., and Peter A. J. Achten. 2016.
“Non-Exhaust PM Emissions from Electric Vehicles.”
Atmospheric 
Environment 
134 
(2016): 
10–17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosenv.2016.03.017.
Tol, Richard S. J. 2018. “The Economic Impacts of Climate
Change.” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy
12, 
no. 
1 
(2018): 
4–25.
https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rex027.

. 2019. Climate Economics: Economic Analysis of
Climate, Climate Change and Climate Policy. Second
edition. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing, 2019.
Tol, Richard S. J., and Hadi Dowlatabadi. 2001. “Vector-
Borne Diseases, Development & Climate Change.”
Integrated 
Assessment 
2, 
no. 
4 
(2001): 
173–81.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1013390516078.
Trachtenberg, Marc. 2018. “Assessing Soviet Economic
Performance 
during 
the 
Cold 
War: 
A 
Failure 
of
Intelligence?” Texas National Security Review 1, no. 2
(2018). 
https://2llqix3cnhb21kcxpr2u9o1k-
wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-
content/uploads/2018/04/TNSR-Journal-Issue-2-
Tratchenberg.pdf.
Trivedi, Anjani. 2018. “The $6 Trillion Barrier Holding
Electric 
Cars 
Back.” 
2018.
https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2018-11-
04/electric-cars-face-a-6-trillion-barrier-to-widespread-
adoption.
UNAIDS. 2019. Global AIDS Update 2019—Communities at
the 
Centre. 
2019.
https://www.unaids.org/en/resources/documents/2019/2
019-global-AIDS-update.
UNDESA. 2019. UN World Population Prospects 2019.
2019. https://population.un.org/wpp/DataQuery/.
UNEP. 1982. “The State of the Environment 1972–1982.”
1982.
https://wedocs.unep.org/handle/20.500.11822/28253.
. 2014. Progress towards the Aichi Biodiversity Targets:
An Assessment of Biodiversity Trends, Policy Scenarios
and Key Actions. 2014. https://www.cbd.int/gbo4/.
. 2019. Lessons from a Decade of Emissions Gap

Assessments. 
2019.
https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822
/30022/EGR10.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.
UNFCCC. 2015. “Synthesis Report on the Aggregate Effect
of the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions.”
2015.
http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/07.pdf.
. 2018a. “The People’s Seat—Transcript of the Speech
by 
Sir 
David 
Attenborough.” 
2018.
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/The%20Pe
ople%27s%20Address%202.11.18_FINAL.pdf.
. 2018b. “What Is the Paris Agreement?” 2018.
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-
agreement/what-is-the-paris-agreement.
. 2019. “António Guterres: Climate Change Is Biggest
Threat 
to 
Global 
Economy.” 
2019.
https://unfccc.int/news/antonio-guterres-climate-change-
is-biggest-threat-to-global-economy.
United Nations. 2019a. “The World We Want.” 2019.
http://data.myworld2015.org/.
. 2019b. “World Population Prospects 2019.” 2019.
https://population.un.org/wpp/DataQuery/.
United 
States 
Department 
of 
Agriculture 
Economic
Research Service. 2019. “Ag and Food Sectors and the
Economy.” 
2019. 
https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-
products/ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-
essentials/ag-and-food-sectors-and-the-economy/.
U.S. Global Change Research Program, D. J. Wuebbles, D.
W. Fahey, K. A. Hibbard, D. J. Dokken, B. C. Stewart, and
T. K. Maycock. 2017. “Climate Science Special Report:
Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume I.” U.S.
Global 
Change 
Research 
Program. 
2017.
https://doi.org/10.7930/J0J964J6.

USGCRP. 2017. Climate Science Special Report: Fourth
National 
Climate 
Assessment. 
U.S. 
Global 
Change
Research 
Program. 
Washington, 
DC. 
2017.
https://science2017.globalchange.gov/downloads/CSSR2
017_FullReport.pdf.
. 2018. Fourth National Climate Assessment 2018:
Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States. U.S.
Global Change Research Program. Washington, DC.
2018.
https://science2017.globalchange.gov/downloads/CSSR2
017_FullReport.pdf.
USNDC. 2016. “United States NDC Submission.” 2016.
https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstaging/PublishedDocu
ments/United%20States%20of%20America%20First/U.S.
A.%20First%20NDC%20Submission.pdf.
Vaidyanathan, Gayathri. 2015. “Coal Trumps Solar in
India.” 
2015.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/coal-trumps-
solar-in-india/.
van Vuuren, Detlef P., Elmar Kriegler, Brian C. O’Neill,
Kristie L. Ebi, Keywan Riahi, Timothy R. Carter, Jae
Edmonds, et al. 2014. “A New Scenario Framework for
Climate 
Change 
Research: 
Scenario 
Matrix
Architecture.” Climatic Change 122, no. 3 (2014): 373–
86. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-0906-1.
Vassall, Anna. 2018. “Benefits and Costs of TB Control for
the Post-2015 Development Agenda.” In Prioritizing
Development, edited by Bjorn Lomborg, Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge 
University 
Press, 
2018, 
255–65
https://www.copenhagenconsensus.com/publication/post
-2015-consensus-health-perspective-tuberculosis-vassall.
Verkaik, Robert. 2009. “Just 96 Months to Save World, Says

Prince 
Charles.” 
2009.
https://www.independent.co.uk/environment/green-
living/just-96-months-to-save-world-says-prince-charles-
1738049.html.
Veysey, Jason, Claudia Octaviano, Katherine Calvin, Sara
Herreras Martinez, Alban Kitous, James McFarland, and
Bob van der Zwaan. 2016. “Pathways to Mexico’s Climate
Change Mitigation Targets: A Multi-Model Analysis.”
Energy 
Economics 
56 
(2016): 
587–99.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2015.04.011.
Vicedo-Cabrera, Ana M., Francesco Sera, Yuming Guo,
Yeonseung Chung, Katherine Arbuthnott, Shilu Tong,
Aurelio Tobias, et al. 2018. “A Multi-Country Analysis on
Potential Adaptive Mechanisms to Cold and Heat in a
Changing 
Climate.” 
Environment 
International 
111
(2018): 
239–46.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2017.11.006.
Victor, David G., Keigo Akimoto, Yoichi Kaya, Mitsutsune
Yamaguchi, Danny Cullenward, and Cameron Hepburn.
2017. “Prove Paris Was More Than Paper Promises.”
Nature 
548, 
no. 
7665 
(2017): 
25–27.
https://doi.org/10.1038/548025a.
Vidal, John. 2014. “Yeb Sano: Unlikely Climate Justice
Star.” 
2014.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/01
/yeb-sano-typhoon-haiyan-un-climate-talks.
Vidal, John, Adam Vaughan, Suzanne Goldenberg, Lenore
Taylor, and Daniel Boffey. 2015. “World Leaders Hail
Paris Climate Deal as ‘Major Leap for Mankind.’” 2015.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13
/world-leaders-hail-paris-climate-deal.
Wallace-Wells, David. 2017. “The Uninhabitable Earth.”
2017. 
http://nymag.com/intelligencer/2017/07/climate-

change-earth-too-hot-for-humans.html.
. 2019a. The Uninhabitable Earth. New York: Tim
Duggan Books, 2019.
. 2019b. “We’re Getting a Clearer Picture of the Climate
Future—and It’s Not as Bad as It Once Looked.” New
York, 
December 
20, 
2019.
https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/12/climate-
change-worst-case-scenario-now-looks-unrealistic.html.
Walter, David, ed. 1992. Today Then: America’s Best Minds
Look 100 Years into the Future on the Occasion of the
1893 
World’s 
Columbian 
Exposition. 
Helena, 
MT:
American & World Geographic Pub., 1992.
Wang, Jianliang, Lianyong Feng, Xu Tang, Yongmei
Bentley, and Mikael Höök. 2017. “The Implications of
Fossil Fuel Supply Constraints on Climate Change
Projections: A Supply-Side Analysis.” Futures 86 (2017):
58–72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2016.04.007.
Wanner, Brent. 2019. Is Exponential Growth of Solar PV
the 
Obvious 
Conclusion? 
2019.
https://www.iea.org/commentaries/is-exponential-
growth-of-solar-pv-the-obvious-conclusion.
Ward, Daniel S., Elena Shevliakova, Sergey Malyshev, and
Sam Rabin. 2018. “Trends and Variability of Global Fire
Emissions Due to Historical Anthropogenic Activities.”
Global Biogeochemical Cycles 32, no. 1 (2018): 122–42.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2017GB005787.
Ward, Victoria. 2015. “Winter Death Toll ‘to Exceed
40,000.’” 
2015.
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/weather/11382808/W
inter-death-toll-to-exceed-40000.html.
Washington Herald. 1912. “15,000 Die in Philippine
Storm.” 
1912.

https://chroniclingamerica.loc.gov/lccn/sn83045433/191
2-11-30/ed-1/seq-1/.
Washington Post. 2019. “Sea-Level Rise Could Be Even
Worse 
than 
We’ve 
Been 
Led 
to 
Expect.” 
2019.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/sea-level-rise-
could-be-even-worse-than-weve-been-led-to-
expect/2019/05/30/7eb5a7f8-7d9f-11e9-8ede-
f4abf521ef17_story.html.
Watts, Jonathan. 2018. “We Have 12 Years to Limit Climate
Change 
Catastrophe, 
Warns 
UN.” 
2018.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/oct/08/
global-warming-must-not-exceed-15c-warns-landmark-un-
report.
Watts, Nick, Markus Amann, Nigel Arnell, Sonja Ayeb-
Karlsson, 
Kristine 
Belesova, 
Helen 
Berry, 
Timothy
Bouley, et al. 2018. “The 2018 Report of the Lancet
Countdown on Health and Climate Change: Shaping the
Health of Nations for Centuries to Come.” Lancet 392,
no. 
10163 
(2018): 
2479–2514.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)32594-7.
Weinkle, Jessica, Chris Landsea, Douglas Collins, Rade
Musulin, Ryan P. Crompton, Philip J. Klotzbach, and
Roger Pielke. 2018. “Normalized Hurricane Damage in
the Continental United States 1900–2017.” Nature
Sustainability 
1, 
no. 
12 
(2018): 
808–13.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-018-0165-2.
Weise, Elizabeth. 2019. “End of Civilization: Climate
Change Apocalypse Could Start by 2050 If We Don’t Act,
Report 
Warns.” 
2019.
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2019/06/0
5/climate-change-apocalypse-could-start-2050-if-we-do-
noting/1356865001/.
Weiss, Thomas J. 1992. U.S. Labor Force Estimates and

Economic Growth, 1800–1860. NBER Book Chapter
Series, no. c8007. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic 
Research, 
1992.
http://www.nber.org/papers/c8007.
WHO. 2006. Fuel for Life. Household Energy and Health.
2006.
https://www.who.int/airpollution/publications/fuelforlife.
pdf.
. 
2018. 
“Family 
Planning/Contraception.” 
2018.
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/family-planning-contraception.
. 2019. Cancer Mortality Database. 2019. http://www-
dep.iarc.fr/WHOdb/WHOdb.htm.
Wiig, Øystein, Erik W. Born, Gerald Warren Garner, and
International Union for Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources, eds. 1995. Polar Bears: Proceedings
of the Eleventh Working Meeting of the IUCN/SSC Polar
Bear Specialist Group, 25–27 January 1993, Copenhagen,
Denmark. Occasional Paper of the IUCN Species Survival
Commission (SSC) 10. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN, 1995.
Wilby, R. L., and G. L. W Perry. 2006. “Climate Change,
Biodiversity and the Urban Environment: A Critical
Review Based on London, UK.” Progress in Physical
Geography 30, no. 1 (2006): 73–98.
Williams, Rebecca Jane. 2014. “Storming the Citadels of
Poverty: Family Planning under the Emergency in India,
1975–1977.” Journal of Asian Studies 73, no. 2 (2014):
471–92. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0021911813002350.
Williams, 
Timothy. 
2019. 
“Why 
Oregon 
Republicans
Vanished Over a Climate Change Vote.” New York Times,
sec. 
US, 
June 
24, 
2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/24/us/oregon-

climate-change-walkout.html.
Willsher, Kim. 2018. “Macron Scraps Fuel Tax Rise in Face
of 
Gilets 
Jaunes 
Protests.” 
2018.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/dec/05/france
-wealth-tax-changes-gilets-jaunes-protests-president-
macron.
Woerdman, E., O. Couwenberg, and A. Nentjes. 2009.
“Energy Prices and Emissions Trading: Windfall Profits
from Grandfathering?” European Journal of Law and
Economics 
28, 
no. 
2 
(2009): 
185–202.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10657-009-9098-6.
World Bank. 2017. “Bangladesh Continues to Reduce
Poverty 
But 
at 
Slower 
Pace.” 
2017.
https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2017/10/24
/bangladesh-continues-to-reduce-poverty-but-at-slower-
pace.
. 2019a. “Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing, Value
Added (% of GDP)—Low & Middle Income, World.” 2019.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NV.AGR.TOTL.ZS?
locations=XO-1W.
. 2019b. “Employment in Agriculture (% of Total
Employment) (Modeled ILO Estimate)—Low & Middle
Income, 
World.” 
2019.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.AGR.EMPL.ZS?
locations=XO-1W.
. 2019c. “GDP per Capita, PPP (Constant 2011
International 
$).” 
2019.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.PP.K
D.
. 2019d. “GNI per Capita, Atlas Method (Current US$)—
China.” 
2019.
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.CD?
locations=CN.

. 2019e. World Development Indicators Online. 2019.
https://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?
source=world-development-indicators.
World Health Organization, UNICEF, and WHO/UNICEF
Joint 
Water 
Supply 
and 
Sanitation 
Monitoring
Programme. 2015. 25 Years Progress on Sanitation and
Drinking Water: 2015 Update and MDG Assessment.
2015.
World Resources Institute. 2019a. “CAIT Climate Data
Explorer—UNFCCC 
Annex 
I.”
http://cait.wri.org/profile/UNFCCC%20Annex%20I.
2019.
. 
2019b. 
“CAIT 
Climate 
Data 
Explorer—United
Kingdom.”
http://cait.wri.org/profile/United%20Kingdom.
WWF. 2007. WWF Position on Biofuels in the EU. 2007.
http://assets.panda.org/downloads/wwf_position_eu_biof
uels.pdf.
. 
2018. 
“Living 
Planet 
Report—2018.” 
Gland,
Switzerland. 
2018.
https://c402277.ssl.cf1.rackcdn.com/publications/1187/fi
les/original/LPR2018_Full_Report_Spreads.pdf.
Yang, Jia, Hanqin Tian, Bo Tao, Wei Ren, John Kush,
Yongqiang Liu, and Yuhang Wang. 2014. “Spatial and
Temporal Patterns of Global Burned Area in Response to
Anthropogenic 
and 
Environmental 
Factors:
Reconstructing Global Fire History for the 20th and Early
21st 
Centuries.” 
Journal 
of 
Geophysical 
Research:
Biogeosciences 
119, 
no. 
3 
(2014): 
249–63.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2013JG002532.
Yang, Pu, Yun-Fei Yao, Zhifu Mi, Yun-Fei Cao, Hua Liao, Bi-
Ying Yu, Qiao-Mei Liang, D’Maris Coffman, and Yi-Ming
Wei. 2018. “Social Cost of Carbon under Shared

Socioeconomic Pathways.” Global Environmental Change
53 
(November 
2018): 
225–32.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.10.001.
Young, David, and John Bistline. 2018. “The Costs and
Value of Renewable Portfolio Standards in Meeting
Decarbonization Goals.” Energy Economics 73 (June
2018): 
337–51.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2018.04.017.
Zagorsky, Jay L. 2017. “Are Catastrophic Disasters Striking
More Often?” 2017. https://theconversation.com/are-
catastrophic-disasters-striking-more-often-83599.
Zhang, D. D., P. Brecke, H. F. Lee, Y. Q. He, and J. Zhang.
2007. “Global Climate Change, War, and Population
Decline in Recent Human History.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 104, no. 49 (2007): 19214–
19. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0703073104.
Zhang, Zuoyi. 2019. “HTR-PM: Making Dreams Come True
—Nuclear 
Engineering 
International.” 
2019.
https://www.neimagazine.com/features/featurehtr-pm-
making-dreams-come-true-7009889/.
Zhu, Zaichun, Shilong Piao, Ranga B. Myneni, Mengtian
Huang, Zhenzhong Zeng, Josep G. Canadell, Philippe
Ciais, et al. 2016. “Greening of the Earth and Its Drivers.”
Nature Climate Change 6, no. 8 (2016): 791–95.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3004.

ALSO BY BJORN LOMBORG
Cool It: The Skeptical Environmentalist’s Guide to Global
Warming
The Skeptical Environmentalist: Measuring the Real State
of the World
Prioritizing Development: A Cost Benefit Analysis of the
United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (editor)
Haiti Prioritizes: Costs and Benefits for Development
Solutions (editor)
The Nobel Laureates’ Guide to the Smartest Targets for the
World
Prioritizing the World: Cost-Benefit to Identify the Smartest
Targets for the Next 15 Years (editor)
How Much Have Global Problems Cost the World? A
Scorecard from 1900 to 2050 (editor)
How to Spend $75 Billion to Make the World a Better Place

NOTES
INTRODUCTION
1. 
News 
outlets 
refer: 
Roberts, 
2019; 
planet’s
imminent incineration: Hodgetts, 2019; Recently, the
media: Holthaus, 2018; Climate Nexus, 2018.
2. Activists are cordoning: Extinction Rebellion, 2019;
“slaughter, death, and starvation”: Climate Feedback,
2019b.
3. In 2017, journalist: Wallace-Wells, 2017; Although
the article: Climate Feedback, 2017, and Wallace-Wells,
2019a; It could finish: McKibben, 2019b. Field Notes
from: Kolbert, 2006; Storms of My: Hansen, 2011b; The
Great Derangement: Ghosh, 2017; This Is the: Nesbit,
2019.
4. “across the globe…”: Oreskes, 2015; Be worried:
Time, 2006; The British newspaper: Guardian, 2016;
“sounds rather passive…”: Carrington, 2019.
5. In the United Kingdom: Dahlgreen, 2016; In the
United States: M. Smith, 2019.
6. “I know that…”: Astor, 2018; “How Do You…”:
Ostrander, 2016.
7. A 2019 Washington Post: Kaplan and Guskin, 2019;
A 2012 academic study: Strife, 2012.
8. Recently, a Danish: Henriksen, 2019; Parenting in
a: Berrigan, 2019; On Having Kids: Braverman, 2019.
9. The Skeptical Environmentalist: Lomborg, 2001;
Scientists agree that: Indeed, the total impact estimates

of climate change, the so-called social cost of carbon, has
been declining, not increasing from 1996 till today,
suggesting damages are expected to be lower, not higher
(Tol, 2018, 14).
10. Climate change is: I’ll use climate change and
global warming interchangeably in this book, although
climate change has a somewhat broader meaning; “We
risk turning…”: J. Smith, 2019.
11. This is what: J. Watts, 2018.
12. In the United States: National Safety Council, 2019;
If politicians asked: Remarkably, the world’s first traffic
death occurred at four miles per hour, so better set this
limit at three miles per hour (Guinness 2019).
13. In 1900, the: Roser, 2019a; The world is: Roser and
Ortiz-Ospina, 2019b, Ortiz-Ospina and Roser, 2019; Roser,
2019b; Between 1990 and: H. Ritchie and Roser, 2019b.
In 1990, pollution: Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation, 2019; Higher agricultural yields: Ewers,
2006; And since 1990: World Health Organization,
UNICEF, and WHO/UNICEF Joint Water Supply and
Sanitation Monitoring Programme, 2015, 7f.
14. Over the past: World Bank, 2019c; Today, it is:
Roser and Ortiz-Ospina, 2019a.
15. Researchers working for: According to the UN’s
middle-of-the-road scenario, which we will discuss later
(IIASA, 2018); Life expectancy will: United Nations,
2019b; Lutz, Butz, and KC, 2014, 247.
16. The best current: W. Nordhaus, 2018.
17. For most economic: IPCC, 2014c, 662.
18. 
Evidence 
shows 
that: 
This 
is 
a 
severe
underestimate. Just global subsidies to renewables will
reach $176 billion in 2020 (IEA, 2018, 256) and the EU
climate policy will cost on average 1–2.2 percent of GDP, or
$192–$408 billion per year in 2020 (Bohringer, Rutherford,
and Tol, 2009).

19. With 194 signatories: Lomborg, 2020.
20. However, it turns: Lomborg, 2020.
21. Across the world: Kotchen, Turk, and Leiserowitz,
2017; Jenkins, 2014; Duan, Yan-Li, and Yan, 2014; A 2019
Washington Post: Dennis, Mufson, and Clement, 2019.
22. In the rich world: IEA, 2017; For instance, energy:
Belfast Telegraph, 2014; In fact, financial: Borenstein and
Davis, 2015.
23. Not surprisingly, a: Campagnolo and Davide, 2019.
24. the first tons: Here and everywhere I use “ton” as a
metric ton, or 2,205 pounds.
25. Yet, the extra: All of these numbers are explained in
later chapters.
26. Top climate economists: See, for example, the case
made by top economists, including three Nobel laureates,
on the basis of a large number of research articles from
climate economists in the edited work (Lomborg, 2010).
27. The models show: Galiana and Sopinka, 2015.
28. While everyone in: From 0.06 percent of GDP
around 1980 to 0.024 percent in 2017 (IEA, 2019c).
29. A UN global: United Nations, 2019a.
30. United Nations, 2019a.
31. It is instead: T. Nordhaus and Trembath, 2019.

CHAPTER 1. WHY DO WE GET CLIMATE CHANGE SO WRONG?
1. instead, we read: Bowden, 2019.
2. The actual 2019 study: Spratt and Dunlop, 2019;
The report presents: Spratt and Dunlop, 2019, 9; As one
climate scientist: Climate Feedback, 2019a.
3. USA Today: E. Weise, 2019; CBS News: Pascus, 2019;
CNN: Hollingsworth, 2019.
4. Take the June: Time, 2019.
5. But it would: Kench, Ford, and Owen, 2018.
6. The main Tarawa: Biribo and Woodroffe, 2013;
Similarly, the Marshall Islands: M. R. Ford and Kench,
2015.
7. latest research summarizing: Duvat, 2019.
8. A similarly scary story: Lu and Flavelle, 2019; The
headlines stem: Kulp and Strauss, 2019.
9. 
From 
Kulp 
and 
Strauss, 
2019, 
and
coastal.climatecentral.org. Story from the New York Times
in Lu and Flavelle, 2019. Because of the way the database
is set up, you cannot generate a map for 2020, but only for
2030. So, the difference is really between the lowest
emission scenario for 2030 and the highest emission
scenario for 2050.
10. “Climate change is…”: McKibben, 2019a; Climate
scientist Peter Kalmus: Kalmus, 2019.
11. And it is almost: Lomborg, 2019. The picture to the
left is the one shown in Lu and Flavelle, 2019. The picture
to the right is based on Kulp and Strauss, 2019, and their
online tool at https://coastal.climatecentral.org. The left-
hand picture was generated with RCP8.5, 2050, sea level
rise only. The right-hand picture should ideally be the
difference between land at risk now and in 2050. Since the
Climate Central engine doesn’t allow 2020, I’ve used 2030
with the most extreme climate policies. In South

Vietnam’s: Nguyen, Pittock, and Connell, 2019.
12. That’s fine for: Goodell, 2019.
13. As we will: Lincke and Hinkel, 2018.
14. One of the most: IPCC, 2018; CNN told us: CNN,
2018.
15. “policy-relevant but…”: IPCC, 2010; “require
rapid, 
far-reaching…”: 
IPCC, 
2018; 
Simply 
put,
politicians: One of the authors of the IPCC report also
says the twelve-year limit is “misleading,” although it is
clear he is much more in line with wanting to cut as much
carbon dioxide as possible (Allen, 2019).
16. This dramatic misrepresentation: Hulme, 2018. In
order to fight climate change, influential environmentalist
James Lovelock claims that “it may be necessary to put
democracy on hold for a while” (Hickman, 2010).
17. In the United States: Egan and Mullin, 2017.
18. Up until the: Grunwald, 2019.
19. Today, people who: Pew Research Center, 2019.
20. Republican states have: T. Williams, 2019.
21. In the wake: Thompson, 2019; Savage, 2019; China
has tripled: IEA, 2019d; According to official: IEA,
2019g.
22. In 2019, Britain’s: Furness, 2019; he had
“calculated…”: Verkaik, 2009; In 2006, Al Gore: CBS
News, 2006.
23. “win—or lose…”: Annon, 1991; “We all know…”: S.
Johnson, 2012; More catastrophic: Paulson, 2013.
24. Nearly a decade: UNEP, 1982; “devastation as
complete…”: AAP-Reuter, 1982; During the 1970s:
Peterson, Connolley, and Fleck, 2008.
25. “Running Out of…”: Newsweek, 1973; “into
oblivion”: Ehrlich, 1971, xii.
26. “to make mankind’s…”: Time, 1972.
27. The Limits to Growth: Meadows and Club of Rome,
1972.

28. Spoiler Alert: They: Lomborg, 2012.
29. “sea-level rise could…”: Washington Post, 2019;
“swallowed by the…”: Magill, 2019.
30. The headlines come: Bamber et al., 2019; paper
published in 2011: Nicholls et al., 2011.
31. In his influential: Wallace-Wells, 2019a.
32. This was helpfully: Simon Davies, 2018.
33. The authors of: Jevrejeva et al., 2018; standards of
protection: Jevrejeva et al., 2018, 8.
34. Likewise, rapidly growing: Hallegatte et al., 2013.
35. And the evidence: Hinkel et al., 2014.
36. The highly quoted: Hinkel et al., 2014.
37. The study shows the number of people flooded from
2000 to 2100 with and without adaptation, in a rich world
with very high sea level rise (between two to four feet, or
55–123 cm) by 2100. The upper line shows the large
flooding impact without adaptation (when no nation
increases its dike heights, no matter how rich it becomes or
how much the sea level rises). The lower line shows the
flooding impact with realistic adaptation, where all nations
increase dikes as sea levels rise, and richer nations
increase dike heights even more (Hinkel et al., 2014).
38. But the total: Notice that this study relies on
estimates of the number of people vulnerable that are
possibly underestimated by a factor of three, as was the
case in the study discussed above in the New York Times
(Kulp and Strauss 2019). It is hard to estimate how much it
changes the impact, since it is likely that many of the extra
people will be protected by the same dikes that Hinkel et
al., 2014, are already predicting. At best, the cost is the
same. At worst, it will increase the extra dike cost of $24
billion (the difference between the $48 billion under
adaptation to the $24 billion without adaptation in 2100) by
a factor of three. So, the total cost in 2100 under
adaptation would at most run to $38 billion in flood costs,

plus $24 billion in basic maintenance, and 3 × $24 billion in
extra adaptation (or $134 billion per year); or at most,
0.013 percent of a $1,015 trillion GDP, still way lower than
the 0.05 percent spent in 2000.
39. As a result: Bouwer and Jonkman, 2018.
40. “Meeting Paris Climate…”: Stieb, 2019.
41. But here’s a: Lo et al., 2019.; The city will: City of
Atlanta, 2015.
42. Adaptations like improved: R. E. Davis et al., 2003;
France introduced reforms: Bamat, 2015; As a result:
Economist, 2018; And Spain cut: Barcelona Institute for
Global Health, 2018.
43. Well, it turns out: Heutel, Miller, and Molitor, 2017.
44. Ashley et al., 2014.
45. Since then, the: Lomborg, 2020.
46. This is a: Strader and Ashley, 2015; Ashley et al.,
2014.
47. One 2017 study looked: Ferguson and Ashley,
2017.

CHAPTER 2. MEASURING THE FUTURE
1. “We have known”: Arrhenius, 1896.
2. Carbon dioxide gas: Actually, carbon dioxide is not
the only gas that warms up the world—so do methane and
nitrous oxide (laughing gas)—but it is by far the most
important, and often these other gasses will simply be
subsumed as so-called carbon dioxide equivalents. Each
year’s: IPCC, 2013a, 486; So, the amount: IPCC, 2013a,
11.
3. One of these: Meinshausen, Raper, and Wigley, 2011;
Of these, we: Increasingly, arguments are made that
future emissions along a low- or no-policy trajectory will
increase less than expected (Burgess et al., 2020; Wallace-
Wells, 2019b). This is interesting and, if correct, suggests
that the entire challenge of climate change is slightly less
dire. It, however, does not change the logic outlined in this
book. Indeed, if the no-policy total emissions are lower, it
follows that optimal climate policies would be less drastic
than is outlined in the rest of the book.
4. Rich countries are here defined as the members of the
OECD, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.
5. Model based on MAGICC, Meinshausen, Raper, and
Wigley, 2011.
6. Model based on MAGICC, Meinshausen, Raper, and
Wigley, 2011. In the year 2100 business as usual yields
7.449°F, and without OECD carbon dioxide emissions
yields 6.683°F. When rounded, these numbers may seem
slightly 
inconsistent. 
The 
graph 
shows 
the 
2100
temperature of 7.4°F and 6.7°F (difference of 0.7°F), but
the actual difference is 0.766°F, rounded to 0.8°F.
7. They say GDP: Kennedy, 1968; Measuring welfare
in: Stiglitz, Fitoussi, and Durand, 2018.
8. Higher GDP per: Habermeier, 2007; R. Sharma,

2018; Rosling, 2012.
9. Global growth in: Page and Pande, 2018; Dollar,
Kleineberg, and Kraay, 2016; Economic growth has:
Goedecke, Stein, and Qaim, 2018; And when people:
Steckel, Rao, and Jakob, 2017.
10. One of the: Bonjour et al., 2013; Breathing this
foul: WHO, 2006, 8; When people emerge: McLean et al.,
2019; Since 1990, the: Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation, 2017.
11. Put simply, when: Dinda, 2004.
12. We see vast deforestation: Ewers, 2006.
13. Higher GDP not: EPI, 2018, figure 3-1.
14. Even people earning: Stevenson and Wolfers, 2013,
602.
15. Sacks, Stevenson, and Wolfers, 2012; Stevenson and
Wolfers, 2013. Life satisfaction is scored on a satisfaction
ladder. Typically asked: Here is a ladder representing the
“ladder of life.” Let’s suppose the top of the ladder
represents the best possible life for you, a ten, and the
bottom, the worst possible life for you, a zero. On which
step of the ladder do you feel you personally stand at the
present time?

CHAPTER 3. A FULLER STORY ON CLIMATE CHANGE
1. However, on a: IUCN, 2015.
2. They also survived: Jakobsson et al., 2010.
3. There is great uncertainty about the absolute number
of polar bears, so estimates are typically given as an
interval, and here shown as the average between the low
and high estimate (IUCN 1986, 63; Wiig et al., 1995 29;
IUCN/SSC Polar Bear Specialist Group, 2019, 1).
4. At that time: IUCN, 1986, 63. Most of these estimates
from the Polar Bear Specialist Group are intervals, from
18,505 to 27,106. For ease of presentation, we here use the
midpoint of 22,806 (IUCN Polar Bear Specialist Group and
Working Meeting 1985, 40ff). All of the data points are
averages between low and high estimates, from IUCN
1986, 63; Wiig et al., 1995, 29; and IUCN/SSC Polar Bear
Specialist Group, 2019, 1, which references earlier PBSG
estimates from 1997, 2001, 2005, and 2009, along with an
updated estimate for 2016, which is presented as “now,”
here plotted as 2019.
5. The Guardian, a: Shields, 2019.
6. The real threat to: The average number of polar bear
“removals” between 2010 and 2014 was 895 (IUCN/SSC
Polar Bear Specialist Group, 2019).
7. When we look: WWF, 2018; A 2016 study: Maxwell
et al., 2016.
8. Scientists who undertook: Gasparrini et al., 2015.
9. In one recent: V. Ward, 2015; in a single: Office for
National Statistics, 2015b; 2015a.
10. “Dozens dead in…”: CNN, 2019; Indeed, the
biggest: Fu et al., 2018.
11. Vicedo-Cabrera et al., 2018.
12. The latest US data: Vicedo-Cabrera et al., 2018.
13. And since cold: Gasparrini et al., 2017.
14. We don’t have: Heutel, Miller, and Molitor, 2017.

15. A 2015 analysis: Diaz et al., 2015.
16. But global greening: Mao et al., 2016; The biggest
satellite: Zhu et al., 2016.
17. China has seen: C. Chen et al,. 2019.
18. Using the high RCP8.5 emission scenario: V. K. Arora
and Scinocca, 2016; V. K. Arora and Boer, 2014. Vegetation
in 1500 from Hurtt et al., 2011.
19. Researchers find that: NASA, 2016.
20. As we emit more: It also depends on whether the
natural environment runs out of other important fertilizers
like nitrogen and phosphor; If we measure: V. K. Arora
and Scinocca, 2016.
21. But something amazing: V. K. Arora and Boer,
2014; By one estimate: Hurtt et al., 2011.
22. They argue that: For instance, Bernie Sanders has
made this point (Qiu, 2015).
23. “an exaggerated focus…”: De Châtel, 2014; “There
is very…”: Selby, 2019; Senator Bernie Sanders: Qiu,
2015.
24. But as global: Schlosser et al., 2014.
25. “the literature has…”: Koubi, 2019; In fact,
studies: D. D. Zhang et al., 2007; The reason why: We
should be cautious; rising temperatures don’t mean that we
are off the hook. Much of the data comes from temperate
areas like Europe and China, where cold is the bigger
challenge. See H. F. Lee, 2018.
26. More importantly, we: Mach et al., 2019.

CHAPTER 4. EXTREME WEATHER OR EXTREME EXAGGERATION?
1. “A raging, howling…”: Achenbach, 2018.
2. Part of the problem: Gramlich, 2019; Gallup, 2019.
3. Amazingly, that’s not: Caspani, 2019.
4. Indeed, many arguments: The full claim is, as often,
“Ever more frequent and intense droughts, storms and
floods.” We will tackle the others shortly (UNFCCC 2019).
5. “There is low…”: Stocker and Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, 2013.
6. “drought has decreased…”: U.S. Global Change
Research Program et al., 2017, ch. 8.1.2.
7. The US National: USGCRP, 2017, 236: “There has
not yet been a formal identification of a human influence on
past changes in United States meteorological drought”;
One 2014 study even: Hao et al., 2014; N. Watts et al.,
2018; The evidence also: Donat et al., 2013, 2112.
8. For the US: NOAA, 2019.
9. The UN’s climate: IPCC, 2013b, 1032; indeed, at a:
Here we’re using the fact that the so-called RCP8.5 is
extremely unrealistic. See, for example, Wang et al., 2017,
and J. Ritchie and Dowlatabadi, 2017; “is increasingly
possible…”: U.S. Global Change Research Program et al.,
2017, ch. 8.1.3.
10. In fact, in: He et al., 2017.
11. Leonardo DiCaprio’s 2016: Dickinson, 2019;
Flavelle, 2019.
12. “a lack of evidence…”: IPCC, 2013a, 112, 214; The
US Global: USGCRP, 2017, 240. The IPCC 1.5°C report
finds 
that 
“streamflow 
trends 
since 
1950 
are 
not
statistically significant in most of the world’s largest rivers”
and that more streamflows are decreasing than increasing
(IPCC 2018, 201).
13. “have not established…”: USGCRP, 2017, 231.

14. In the future: IPCC, 2018, 203; “trends in
floods…”: IPCC, 2013a, 214.
15. US government scientists: USGCRP, 2017, 231;
“contribute to increases…”: USGCRP, 2017, 242; 2018,
146; “flood magnitudes…”: A. Sharma, Wasko and
Lettenmaier, 2018.
16. It is true: Lomborg, 2020; But the number: Census
2011; 2018a; Since 1970 alone: Klotzbach et al., 2018,
1371; BEA, 2019; Census 2018b.
17. Lomborg, 2020.
18. Every summer in: “Many consider wildfire as an
accelerating problem, with widely held perceptions both in
the 
media 
and 
scientific 
papers 
of 
increasing 
fire
occurrence, severity, and resulting losses. However,
important exceptions aside, the quantitative evidence
available does not support these perceived overall trends”
(Doerr and Santín 2016).
19. The examination of: Marlon et al., 2008; To a
large: NAS, 2017, 13.
20. There is plenty: Vivek K. Arora and Melton, 2018; F.
Li, Lawrence, and Bond-Lamberty 2018; J. Yang et al.,
2014; Andela et al., 2017; And the primary: Knorr et al.,
2014; In total, the: J. Yang et al., 2014. 1.4 million km²,
from almost 5 million km² in the 1900s to just above 3.5
million km² in the 2000s.
21. Overall, that has: D. S. Ward et al., 2018, 135.
22. Annual data from Census 1975, L48–55, and NIFC,
2019; decadal data from Mouillot and Field, 2005, 404–5.
R. V. Reynolds and Pierson, 1941, table 4, indicates that
fire annually consumed even more of the US forests in the
nineteenth century; see also Marlon et al., 2012.
23. “incidence of large…”: USGCRP, 2018, 231.
24. In contrast, climate-related: Syphard et al., 2017.
25. Indeed, when we: Strader, 2018, 557; Moreover,
this growth: Mann et al., 2014, 447.

26. When the damage: Crompton et al., 2010;
McAneney et al., 2019.
27. Compared to the: Using RCP8.5 and changes in
managed lands (Kloster and Lasslop, 2017, 64).
28. For high-risk California: Bryant and Westerling,
2014, figure 2.
29. Hurricanes, scientifically known: According to
global reinsurer Munich Re (Weinkle et al., 2018).
30. “no significant…”: “Current data sets indicate no
significant observed trends in global tropical cyclone
frequency over the past century” (IPCC 2013a, 216); They
do find: IPCC, 2013a, 50, 7, 113; They specifically say:
IPCC, 2013a, 871.
31. This finding is: USGCRP, 2017, 259, 258; Climate
scientists at: They tellingly conclude: “The historical
Atlantic hurricane frequency record does not provide
compelling evidence for a substantial greenhouse warming-
induced long-term increase.” GFDL/NASA 2019.
32. This is true: Klotzbach et al., 2018.
33. Inflation adjusted with CPI, 2019. Downton, Miller,
and Pielke, 2005; Klotzbach et al., 2018; R. A. Pielke and
Landsea, 1998, 199; Weinkle et al., 2018, with 2018–2019
from personal communication with Pielke. Dashed lines are
linear best fit.
34. The coastal population: Data 1900–2010 from
Census 1992, 2010, 2012; and 2020 data for the United
States from the 2017 population prediction, Census 2017.
35. From Texas to: Freeman and Ashley, 2017.
36. And this isn’t: McAneney et al., 2019; W. Chen et
al., 2018.
37. But as the: Gettelman et al., 2018.
38. Hurricane Dorian, which: D. Smith, 2019.
39. Currently, according to: Mendelsohn et al., 2012;
updated with essentially same finding in Bakkensen and
Mendelsohn, 2016.

40. The world’s best: EM-DAT, 2020.
41. Data comes from EM-DAT, 2020, using floods,
droughts, storms, wildfire, and extreme temperatures for
climate-related deaths: average per decade 1920–29, 1930–
39, up to 2010–19.
42. “More billion-dollar…”: Brady and Mooney, 2019.
43. And yes, the: NCEI, 2019.
44. Costs from 1990 to 2017 from Munich Re in R. Pielke,
2019; 2018 costs from Munich Re, 2019; 2019 costs from
Munich Re, 2020, with personal e-mail from Petra Löw,
Munich Re, on distribution of geophysical costs. Global
GDP from World Bank, 2019e, using World Bank Global
Economic Prospects GDP from January 2020 to estimate
global GDP for 2018 and 2019. Linear best estimate;
decline is not statistically significant.
45. If we adjust: Zagorsky, 2017.
46. It finds that: Formetta and Feyen, 2019.
47. For the United States: AonBenfield, 2019, 40;
$39.6B out of a GDP of $20491bn; Floods have cost:
Arcadia Power, 2014; Both nationally for: Formetta and
Feyen, 2019.

CHAPTER 5. WHAT IS GLOBAL WARMING GOING TO COST US?
1. He wrote one: W. Nordhaus, 1991. There is an even
earlier working paper from 1975, W. Nordhaus, 1975,
republished after his Nobel Prize: W. Nordhaus, 2019b.
2. Nordhaus and Moffat, 2017. This is an update of the
UN’s overview (IPCC 2014a, 690, SM10-4). Size of circles
shows the weight of the individual studies (larger circles
for latest estimates, using independent and appropriate
methods; smaller circles for earlier estimates, secondhand
studies, or less appropriate methods). The black line is
Nordhaus’s best estimate, based on median quadratic
weighted regression.
3. Right now, the: About 1°C, or 1.8°F, since the
preindustrial period (IPCC 2018, 51).
4. Indeed, many impacts: Although even lower impacts
can still mean some cost, because the impacts without
global warming would have diminished even faster.
5. Globally, the value: Federico, 2005, 233; FAO, 2019.
6. 
“Climate 
Change 
Threatens…”: 
EEA, 
2019;
“Climate Change Could Lead to Food…”: B. Johnson,
2019; “Climate Change Is Coming…”: Smyth, 2019;
“Climate Change Could Lead to Major…”: Gustin, 2018;
“Climate Change Is Likely…”: Little, 2019.
7. By 2080, in: Conforti, 2011, 114; The FAO expects:
Conforti, 2011, 114. Cereal production in 2020 is 2,668 Mt
(p. 100); in the 2080s about 3,837 Mt; reduction of 2.1–2.2
percent is 76 Mt less, or 3,761 Mt in the 2080s, or 41
percent higher.
8. But this is: Ren et al., 2018.
9. At the same time: King et al., 2018; One study
shows: Challinor et al., 2014.
10. The biggest study: Costinot, Donaldson, and Smith,
2016.
11. The full study: Costinot, Donaldson, and Smith,

2016. Another study finds total costs of 0.29 percent
(Calzadilla et al., 2013). The cost of 0.26 percent is also the
conclusion of the recent review of the climate cost on
agriculture (Carter et al. 2018); And actually, this: This is
an average cost for the globe. Poor, tropical countries will
do worse and industrialized, cold countries will do better.
We’ll discuss this general issue in chapter 10.
12. In the United States: Weiss, 1992; Today, it
employs: 
US 
Department 
of 
Agriculture 
Economic
Research Service, 2019.
13. In 1991, more: World Bank, 2019a; World Bank,
2019b.
14. W. Nordhaus and Sztorc, 2013, 11.
15. While this addition: W. Nordhaus and Sztorc, 2013,
11.
16. However, the UN: W. Nordhaus, 2019a; IPCC,
2013a, 1170; That is why: W. Nordhaus, 2019a.
17. The basic problem: Seawater is slightly basic, so
“acidification” actually means water becomes more neutral,
rather than actually becoming acidic.
18. Economists have tried: Colt and Knapp, 2016.
19. This report estimates: IPCC, 2018, 256.
20. Yet, when you: One good example is a recent
comment in the New York Times (Oreskes and Stern 2019)
based on a pamphlet that quoted the 187 million people
being displaced from sea level rise as a prime example. As
we saw in chapter 1, this number is about six hundred
times higher than the actual, likely displacement.

CHAPTER 6. YOU CAN’T FIX CLIMATE CHANGE
1. Carbon intensity is: Estimating the global carbon
intensity, 1966–2017, from IEA, 2019d, using total primary
energy supply for all energy.
2. Since 1992, humanity: Using data from H. Ritchie
and Roser, 2019a; Global Carbon Project, 2019a.
3. In a surprisingly: UNEP, 2019.
4. “must play their part”: UNFCCC, 2018a.
5. Asked what personal: BA, 2006; But if he: 1.5 w/hr,
12hrs a day = 12 * 0.0015 * 365 = 6.2kWh at 0.527 kg/kWh
(Carbon Independent, 2019) or 3.16kg CO2e, or 0.05% =
3.16/7830kg 
(World 
Resources 
Institute, 
2019b);
Charging makes up: Moss and Kincer, 2018.
6. It is just: Narassimhan et al., 2018.
7. “Don’t be distracted…”: MacKay, 2010, 114.
8. In one 2018 study: Bjelle, Steen-Olsen, and Wood,
2018, using the marginal estimate.
9. Generally, when researchers: All examples are
based on Bjelle, Steen-Olsen, and Wood, 2018.
10. If you’re making: Fishbach and Dhar, 2005; One
study of: Dütschke et al., 2018.
11. What was most: Rowlatt, 2007. His entire family
carbon dioxide savings was 7.3 tons, whereas the whole
family going to Buenos Aires on economy would emit about
18.5 tons of carbon dioxide.
12. “How about restaurants…”: Fagerlund, 2018.
13. That’s especially true: Humane Research Council,
2014.
14. Most are vegetarians: Leahy, Lyons, and Tol, 2010.
15. Many credulous news: Martinko, 2014; This level
of 
reduction: 
Hallström, 
Carlsson-Kanyama, 
and
Börjesson, 2015.
16. And food-related: Sandström et al., 2018,

17. A thorough, systematic: Hallström, Carlsson-
Kanyama, and Börjesson, 2015, table 1; For the average:
Average carbon dioxide emissions per capita for Annex I is
12.44 
tons 
(World 
Resources 
Institute, 
2019a), 
so
4.3%=0.54/12.44.
18. But there’s more: The literature used to advance
the case for cutting out meat clearly says: “When
evaluating 
the 
environmental 
consequences 
of
vegetarianism the rebound effect of the savings should be
taken 
into 
account” 
(Lusk 
and 
Norwood, 
2016);
Vegetarian diets are: Lusk and Norwood, 2016; Grabs,
2015; Berners-Lee et al., 2012; Spending that extra:
Grabs, 2015.
19. You could achieve: Saving 540 kg carbon dioxide,
and losing half on rebound, at $6 per ton as of November
2019 (ICAP, 2019).
20. Artificial meat generates: Oxford University, 2011.
21. The International Energy: IEA, 2019b, 21.
22. So, switching from: IEA, 2019b, 21.
23. This is estimated by the European Union (EU, 2019,
table 69, 136). The climate cost of 2.1¢ is exaggerated. The
EU uses a $110 carbon dioxide cost, which is much higher
than its own trading system at $33. Using the cost of actual
emissions in 2020, estimated as the average cost across all
five SSPs and nine major damage functions, at $20 (P. Yang
et al., 2018) gives a more realistic climate damage of 0.4¢.
Not shown are the damage costs from gasoline production
and transport from well to tank at 0.7¢, and the cost of
habitat destruction at 0.9¢.
24. If you have: Tessum, Hill, and Marshall, 2014; L. W.
Davis 
and 
Sallee, 
2019; 
see 
also
https://www.facebook.com/bjornlomborg/posts/101530194
43493968:0. Even the electric car itself emits about as
much of the most dangerous air-pollution particulate
matter (PM) as gasoline cars (Timmers and Achten, 2016).

Electric cars emit no PM from combustion, but because
they are typically 24 percent heavier they emit more PM
from tires.
25. It is estimated: Ji et al., 2012. The extra pollution for
the electric cars comes from coal-fired power plants
outside the city.
26. 
The 
average 
subsidy: 
Six 
hundred 
fifty-five
thousand electric cars have cost $2 billion in infrastructure
and $5 billion in subsidies, which is a little over $10,000
per car (IEA 2015).
27. The International Energy: IEA, 2019b, 120; Even if
we: IEA, 2019b, 143, estimates a global reduction by 2030
of 220 Mt carbon dioxide, or about 0.4 percent of 2030
global emissions.
28. Because of the: Baron, 2019.
29. But the vast: Gurdus, 2017; In India, where:
Economist, 2009.
30. Even if every: Terrenoire et al., 2019, finds the total
impact of the rapidly increasing number of flights across
the century to result in a temperature increase by 2100 of
0.1°C. However, this is missing the extra impacts from
contrails and aerosols. This is estimated in Olivié et al.,
2012, with low and high estimates of contrails and aerosols
resulting in a total temperature increase by 2100 of
between 0.11°C and 0.24°C. The paper suggests that the
most likely real outcome will be somewhere in between,
here assessed with the midpoint of 0.174°C. However, most
of the temperature increase comes from the many more
people who will start flying much more throughout the
century, resulting in a more than fivefold increase of total
emissions from 2020 to 2100. Cumulative carbon dioxide
emissions from 2020 to 2100 is 247 Gt carbon dioxide,
using Olivié et al., 2012, table 3. If we assume only the
emissions from the current level of passengers, and
expecting the same efficiency gain throughout the rest of

the century as is expected for all air travel, the total
emissions from the current level of passengers flown every
year for the rest of the century is about 40 Gt carbon
dioxide. The share of the 0.174°C temperature increase due
to existing passengers is thus 0.029°C, or 0.05°F.
31. The rebound effect: Bjelle, Steen-Olsen, and Wood,
2018; Sorry, there is: Guardian, 2006.
32. Over the next: IATA, 2018.
33. The overall carbon: EASA, EEA, and Eurocontrol,
2019.
34. 
Billions 
are 
being: 
See, 
for 
example,
https://www.cleansky.eu; And the International Air:
Sullivan, 2018.
35. “Want to Fight…”: Carrington, 2017; “nearly 40
times…”: Galbraith, 2009.
36. In the 1970s: Healey, 2016.
37. The problem with: See, for example, Murtaugh and
Schlax, 2009; The most cited: Murtaugh and Schlax,
2009.
38. Moreover, official expectations: EIA, 2017b.
39. And yet people: And if you still want the cost in
money, the amount of raising a middle-class US child to the
age of seventeen is estimated at $233,610 (Lino 2017),
dwarfing the $8,100 climate impact. And clearly, the value
of having a child is worth far more to parents than this
monetary cost.

CHAPTER 7. WHY THE GREEN REVOLUTION ISN’T HERE YET
1. 
“now 
economic 
or…”: 
Lovins, 
1976, 
83;
Governments around the: IEA, 2018, 256, used for solar
PV and wind.
2. Ending our reliance: We will see the costs of smart
climate policies in chapter 11. The undiscounted costs from
2015 to 2050 of eliminating fossil fuels is close to $400
trillion in lost GDP using Nordhaus’s DICE model.
3. This is almost: Smil, 2014; “Suggesting that…”:
Hansen, 2011a. He restated this point in 2018 in the
Boston Globe: “The notion that renewable energies and
batteries alone will provide all needed energy is fantastical.
It is also a grotesque idea, because of the staggering
environmental pollution from mining and material disposal,
if all energy was derived from renewables and batteries.
Worse, tricking the public to accept the fantasy of 100
percent renewables means that, in reality, fossil fuels reign
and climate change grows” (Hansen, 2018).
4. That is why: A related problem is that all solar panels
produce power at the same time (when the sun is shining).
This means that the dollar value of the solar power quickly
drops, often to zero, because there is an oversupply on
clear days around noon. Models show that when California,
Texas, or Germany gets 15 percent of its electricity from
solar, its average price will drop by half. When California
gets 30 percent of its electricity from solar, the electricity
price from solar will drop by more than two-thirds (Sivaram
and Kann, 2016). This means that solar will find it ever
harder to compete. When solar becomes competitive with
fossil fuels, meaning that solar panels will earn an
unsubsidized profit, adding more solar will make its price
drop and render it uncompetitive again (Wanner, 2019).
The same logic holds for wind power, where all producers
make electricity only when windy.

5. today the United States: Caldeira, 2019.
6. 1900–1948 from EIA, 2012, figure 5; 1949–2018 from
EIA, 2019c; 2019–2050 prediction to 16 percent in 2050
from reference scenario EIA, 2019a.
7. almost unchanged from: EIA, 2017a.
8. 1800–1900 (Fouquet 2009), 1900–1979 (Benichou,
2014; Etemad and Luciani, 1991), 1971–2018 (IEA, 2019g;
2019d). 
The 
International 
Energy 
Agency 
has 
two
predictions, Stated Policies and Current Policies for 2040
(IEA, 2019g). The UN has five main scenarios for the
twenty-first century, here shown up to 2050 (IIASA, 2018;
Riahi et al., 2017).
9. The International Energy: IEA, 2019g.
10. Half a century: IEA, 2014b; Since then, with:
World Bank, 2019d.
11. “Energy is the…”: Reuters, 2019; Indeed, the
International: IEA, 2014a, for sub-Saharan Africa. IEA
finds similar results in 2019 (IEA, 2019g), calling it the
“Africa Case,” with a GDP increase per person of $3,600,
but the analysis treats it more as independent growth
leading to more energy consumption.
12. “Dharnai refused to…”: Greenpeace, 2014; The
world’s media: Roy, 2014.
13. Because solar power: Vaidyanathan, 2015.
14. When he showed up: Vaidyanathan, 2015.
15. “no doubt that…”: Bainimarama, 2013.
16. “meet the resilience…”: Hills, Michalena, and
Chalvatzis, 2018.
17. One common anecdote: Furukawa, 2014; It also
shows: Aklin et al., 2017; In Tanzania: Lee et al., 2016.
18. Moreover, when asked: Grimm et al., 2019; Even
when including: Kashi, 2020.
19. The Energiewende has: Shellenberger, 2019;
Electricity costs have: IEA, 2019a, 128; and IEA, 2019a;
Germans will have: Shellenberger, 2019.

20. This massive expenditure: Shellenberger, 2019.
21. In the first: IEA, 2019d.
22. In the larger: IEA, 2019d; In total, solar: IEA,
2019d; The problem for: Norton et al., 2019; Needless to
say: Norton et al., 2019; Sterman, Siegel, and Rooney-
Varga, 2018.
23. Yet, the cost: The average of three models shows a
1.03 percent of GDP cost of EU’s 20-20-20 climate policy at
its most effective, but realistically a 2.19 percent cost
(Bohringer, Rutherford, and Tol, 2009). This is about $408
billion; Indeed, about 20 percent: EPRS, 2019.
24. Today, residential: Thirteen cents for the United
States (EIA, 2019b), 23 euro cents, or 25.6 cents for the EU
(Eurostat, 2019a); Over the next: Panos and Densing,
2019.
25. “clean our clocks”: Friedman, 2005.
26. “at least $26 trillion”: Guterres, 2018.
27. The UN estimates: IPCC, 2018, 154; A 2018
Goldman Sachs: Trivedi, 2018.
28. If the European Union: The average estimated cost
of the EU 80 percent greenhouse gas emissions reduction
by 2050 is a loss of 5.14 percent of GDP as estimated by
seven regional models (Knopf et al., 2013). This assumes all
policies are perfectly effective. More realistically, the costs
will double, as they did for the EU’s 20-20-20 climate policy
(Bohringer, Rutherford, and Tol, 2009). That leads to a 10.3
percent cost, or €2.514 trillion or $2.8 trillion; This is
more: Eurostat, 2019b, table gov_10a_exp.
29. This is why: UNEP 2019, 3: “The current level of
global greenhouse gas emissions is by now almost exactly
at the level of emissions projected for 2020 under the
business-as-usual, or no-policy, scenarios used in the
Emissions Gap Reports, which are based on the assumption
that no new climate policies are put into place from 2005
onwards. In other words, essentially there has been no real

change in the global emissions pathway in the last decade.”

CHAPTER 8. WHY THE PARIS AGREEMENT IS FAILING
1. It was hailed: UNFCCC, 2018b; French president:
Vidal et al., 2015; “This is a historic…”: Vidal et al., 2015;
Al Gore saw: Gore, 2015.
2. In promises made: USNDC, 2016; Work from the:
Fawcett et al., 2014.
3. The EU promised: EUNDC, 2016; There is no: Knopf
et al., 2013.
4. It set a 2030: China NDC, 2016; Its results suggest:
Calvin et al., 2012; Calvin, Fawcett, and Kejun, 2012.
5. Mexico has enacted: Mexico NDC, 2016; Although
Mexico: Veysey et al., 2016.
6. For instance, back: It also made a number of other
promises, but this was the most important one; Stanford’s
Energy Modeling: Bohringer, Rutherford, and Tol, 2009.
The “forever” part means that the EU would now be on a
lower growth path, so even if growth rates without new
climate policies were similar from 2021 and onward, it
would always be about 1 percent behind; In total, the:
Bohringer, Rutherford, and Tol, 2009. Notice, the EU itself,
using one very optimistic model, estimated the total cost at
an unbelievable 0.5 percent of GDP.
7. Whereas the cheapest: Young and Bistline, 2018.
8. Thus, without: If anything, this is likely a low-ball
estimate. A new study indicates that the annual global cost
of the Paris Agreement could be $5.4 trillion (J. Li, Hamdi-
Cherif, and Cassen, 2017).
9. No matter which: SIPRI, 2019; Every year, the:
Gomes, 2010, 47; And to put: UNEP, 2014, 435; It is also:
UNAIDS, 2019, 174.
10. The UN estimates: IPCC, 2013b, 27. With the
transient climate response to cumulative carbon emissions
likely in the range of 0.2°C to 0.7°C per 1,000 Gt carbon

dioxide (0.8°C–2.5°C per 1,000 GtC, IPCC, 2013b, 16–17),
and 0.45°C being perhaps the most realistic (Kriegler
Elmar 
et 
al., 
2018, 
3; 
Matthews, 
Solomon, 
and
Pierrehumbert, 2012, 4369).
11. This estimates: UNFCCC, 2015; According to the:
A reduction of maximally 63.8 Gt carbon dioxide will reduce
global temperatures about 0.029°C and certainly less than
0.045°C (similar to Lomborg, 2016).
12. From Lomborg, 2020.
13. A 2017 landmark: Victor et al., 2017.
14. The story is: Victor et al., 2017.
15. In contrast, the: CAT India, 2016.
16. A 2018 study: Nachmany and Mangan, 2018.
17. Translated into an: The UN relation of 0.8°F per
1,000 Gt carbon dioxide reduced gives 0.43°F (0.24°C),
with two runs showing 0.36°F (0.2°C) (MIT, 2015) and
0.3°F (0.17°C) (Lomborg, 2016).
18. The global warming: CAT, 2018.
19. Indeed, it turns out: Lomborg, 2020.
20. More than sixty: Sengupta and Popovich, 2019.
21. In 2007, Prime Minister: ECOS, 2007; The latest
official: Ministry for the Environment (New Zealand),
2019a, shows 81.4 Mt versus 81.0 Mt in 2007 (Ministry for
the Environment [New Zealand], 2019b). New Zealand is:
Using 1990 as 100 percent, her promise was 0 percent of
the 1990 level, but the actual emissions in 2020 will likely
be 123 percent of 1990 emissions; Legislation aimed at:
Tidman, 2019.
22. For a small: NZ Treasury, 2019, table 4. All of the
dollar amounts for New Zealand costs are converted into
US dollars.
23. Getting all the: NZIER, 2018, 16. Average of three
ZNE scenarios, top table 11 (NZD 87.3 billion). All the
dollar amounts are in USD; That is more: NZ Treasury,
2019, table 4. All Core Crown expenses, and given that the

NZIER $87.3 billion is in 2015 dollars, the cost would be
even higher in 2019 dollars.
24. To achieve their: A $1,500 carbon dioxide tax is
equal to $8.33 per gallon ($3.5/liter).
25. If the policies: This is using the report’s own GDP
growth, linearly scaling in the cost of 16 percent from zero
in 2020 to 16 percent in 2050, and then staying at 16
percent for rest of the century. The per person cost uses
the average population of New Zealand over the century,
which the UN expects to be 5.6 million people (UNDESA,
2019).
26. As a back-of-the-envelope: US GDP in 2050
according to UN SSP2 (IIASA, 2018) is 27 trillion PPP$
2010; adjusted to 2018 dollars, 16 percent is $5 trillion.
That is higher: Amadeo, 2019.
27. If we assume: Total reduction is about 5.4 Gt carbon
dioxide over the century; using 0.8°F per 1,000 Gt carbon
dioxide 
means 
a 
0.004°F 
(0.0025°C) 
temperature
reduction; Given the expected: As the temperature rises
by 0.0675°F per year in the decade 2090–2100 for the
SSP2 
(IIASA, 
2018), 
this 
means 
that 
the 
0.004°F
temperature reduction will push forward the temperature
rise seen on January 1, 2100, by 23.5 days.

CHAPTER 9. PICK A PATH: WHICH FUTURE IS BEST?
1. By 2030, the: As we saw in the cost estimate for the
Paris Agreement in chapter 8.
2. This sounds like: The SSP work was outlined from
2014 (O’Neill et al., 2014, and van Vuuren et al., 2014, and
published in a special issue in 2017 (Riahi et al., 2017);
They examined five: (Riahi et al., 2017).
3. That prediction is: Bolt et al., 2018; Maddison, 2006.
4. All amounts are in $2011 PPP. To the right, the
increase in GDP per person in 2100 compared to GDP per
person in 2020. In 2100, the average person in the fossil
fuel scenario will see a GDP per person worth 1,040
percent of the average person in 2020 (IIASA, 2018; Riahi
et al., 2017).
5. There is slow: Fricko et al., 2017; In a 2018 survey:
Christensen, Gillingham, and Nordhaus, 2018.
6. The final pathway: Jiang, 2014.
7. That may sound: Christensen, Gillingham, and
Nordhaus, 2018.
8. Both of these: Rao et al., 2019; over the next: This is
an average over the years 2020–2050., some years more,
some years less; But especially the: Riahi et al., 2017
figure 2D; By 2100 under: Lomborg, 2020.
9. In the bottom: KC and Lutz, 2017, 189; Illiteracy,
which is: Riahi et al., 2017, 158; Globally, life
expectancy: Lutz, Butz, and KC, 2014, 669.
10. Global GDP per person for the green and the fossil
fuel scenarios (IIASA, 2018). The dashed lines show GDP
per person without taking climate into account. The full
lines show GDP per person minus climate damages as
Nordhaus has estimated in figure 17. Thus, the cooler
sustainable scenario results in a temperature rise of 5.83°F
in 2100. This implies a 2.5 percent reduction of nominal
GDP per person to estimate actual welfare. The warmer

fossil-fuel-driven scenario will reach a temperature of
8.75°F in 2100, which will result in a more damaging 5.7
percent reduction from nominal GDP per person.
11. In late 2018: Guardian, 2018; They and global:
Institutet för nerväxtstudier, 2018.
12. Researchers have looked: Keeney, 1990; Lutter and
Morrall, 1994; Lutter, Morrall, and Viscusi, 1999; Broughel
and Viscusi, 2017; Hahn, Lutter, and Viscusi, 2000; Using
the estimates: Lomborg, 2020. Since all humans die, we
don’t actually avoid these three million deaths, but we
avoid three million people dying prematurely.

CHAPTER 10. HOW CLIMATE POLICY HURTS THE POOR
1. “The Rich Pollute…”: Economist, 2017.
2. “Cut Carbon…”: Elliott and Seager, 2007.
3. Typically, whatever the: Aronoff, 2019.
4. Let’s look at: NDRRMC, 2014. Built on flat:
Athawes, 2018; In 1912, a: Galvin, 2014; Washington
Herald, 1912. Indicating that “half the population” was lost,
of a Tacloban population of twelve thousand.
5. According to the Guardian: Vidal, 2014; The
diplomat vowed: Climate Home News, 2013.
6. One 2016 study shows: Twenty-seven percent,
according to Bakkensen and Mendelsohn, 2016.
7. Nonetheless, investment in: Assuming that GDP per
capita and vulnerable infrastructure grow at same rate.
8. It also helps: Bakkensen and Mendelsohn, 2016.
9. But a comprehensive: Hasegawa et al., 2018.
10. A 2019 study: Campagnolo and Davide, 2019.
11. Data from IIASA, 2018. Climate damages estimated
by Nordhaus’s RICE model (W. Nordhaus, 2013).
12. Using a regionally: W. Nordhaus, 2010; 2013.
13. Campaigners used to: Connor, 2014; We don’t
often: Roser and Ritchie, 2019b.
14. A study shows: Tol and Dowlatabadi, 2001.
15. Yet higher costs: Tol and Dowlatabadi, 2001.
16. Twenty years ago: Guo, Song, and Buhain, 2015,
716; The European Union: European Union, 2003, Article
3 (b), ii; Developing nations, even: Monbiot, 2007.
17. This movement originally: WWF, 2007; NDRC,
2008; The charity ActionAid: ActionAid, 2012.
18. The huge growth: Chakrabortty, 2008; After food
prices: Nebehay, 2008; The World Bank: Ivanic, Martin,
and Zaman, 2011.
19. 
Many 
environmental 
groups: 
Witness 
the

difference in tone from the NDRC just from 2008 to 2009
(NDRC, 2008; 2009); Guardian columnist and: Monbiot,
2007.
20. One 2019 study: Chambers, Collins, and Krause,
2019.
21. The International Energy Agency: IEA, 2017, 25.
22. Cold homes are: Kahouli, 2020; The study
estimates: Chirakijja, Jayachandran, and Ong, 2019.
23. People will be: The actual increase in deaths will
likely be larger, since this study only looked at natural gas
use, whereas a comprehensive climate policy also will
affect the many other ways to heat one’s home.
24. In the United Kingdom: Ofgem, 2018; Ever more
stringent: Department for Business, Energy & Industrial
Strategy, 2019. Using 2006–2016; and Office for National
Statistics, 2017, latest UK numbers for individuals. Not
surprisingly: NEED, 2019.
25. One poll in: Belfast Telegraph, 2014.
26. The amount measures both aid spent on mitigation
and adaptation, and both as a principle and a significant
objective (Hicks, 2008, 37; OECD-DAC, 2019; OECD, 2019).
27. In general, studies: Lomborg, 2018.
28. Indeed, they will: IEA, 2017, 53; That is half: IGS,
2019; It won’t even: Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation, 2019.
29. It means households: Khandker, 2012.
30. In one 2016 study: Gunatilake, Roland-Holst, and
Larsen, 2016.
31. Denying Bangladesh this: Of course, the actual
costs for Bangladesh are much higher, because it also has
to pay for the power plants. For Bangladesh, the benefits
outweigh the costs by about twenty-five times; And
Bangladesh is: World Bank, 2017.
32. We have to: Hance, 2017.
33. Today there are: Roser and Ortiz-Ospina, 2019a; It

turns out: Ortiz-Ospina, 2017. They estimate this with
eight hundred million poor; the cost would be even lower at
650 million poor.

CHAPTER 11. CARBON TAX: THE MARKET-BASED SOLUTION
1. Indeed, it doesn’t: W. Nordhaus, 2013, 6–7.
2. Unfortunately, another: This is true of any tax, e.g.,
Romer and Romer, 2010; It forces people: Tol, 2019, 32.
3. Using Nordhaus’s model: We get the $140 trillion by
taking the full cost across five centuries and expressing it
as if it all had to be paid today. This means that if we put
$140 trillion into an account today with an interest of about
4 percent per year, we would have exactly enough to pay
out for all the net damages from climate change for the
next five hundred years.
4. W. Nordhaus, 2018.
5. A carbon tax: Tol, 2019, 35–39.
6. W. Nordhaus, 2018.
7. 
The 
climate-economic 
model: 
Notice 
that
Nordhaus’s model actually includes the slight cost of
policies already enacted.
8. This will mean: Notice that this policy cost is also
expressed as if we were to pay all of it today, to be
comparable with the climate cost discussed above.
9. W. Nordhaus, 2018.
10. Notice, we don’t: As Nordhaus puts it: “A limit of
2°C appears to be infeasible with reasonably accessible
technologies 
even 
with 
very 
ambitious 
abatement
strategies” (W. Nordhaus, 2018, 334).
11. In Nobel laureate: W. Nordhaus, 2018.
12. Even though the: W. Nordhaus, 2018.
13. W. Nordhaus, 2018.
14. Look at France: Willsher, 2018. Thirteen cents per
gallon, four cents per liter of gasoline, or three euro cents
per liter.
15. It turns out: Akimoto, Sano, and Tehrani, 2017.
16. As we saw: Bohringer, Rutherford, and Tol, 2009;
Similarly, much climate: Young and Bistline, 2018.

17. Lomborg, 2020.
18. Lomborg, 2020.
19. The total value of the next five hundred years of GDP
is expressed in net present value. It is $4,629 trillion,
which, if invested today at realistic interest rates, would be
able to exactly pay out the expected GDP each year over
the next five hundred years.
20. Yet, the impact: If we do not manage global buy-in
for carbon taxes, the impacts will be even smaller, although
the costs will likely similarly decrease. Carbon taxes of the
same magnitude would probably still be effective for
individual nations, although some carbon emissions would
likely migrate to nations with low or no carbon taxes.

CHAPTER 12. INNOVATION: WHAT IS NEEDED MOST
1. From the 1700s: Throughout most of the 1700s,
whale oil was only for the very rich, but by 1850 it had a
65.5 percent market share of oil and gas illuminants
(Kaiser 2013, 9). Kerosene, just one year after the first
petroleum drilling in Pennsylvania, had a 20 percent
market share in 1860; At its peak: Dolin, 2008, 242; L. E.
Davis, Gallman, and Hutchins, 1988.
2. Before the turn: Stephen Davies, 2004.
3. “the battle to…”: Ehrlich, 1968, 11.
4. The belief was: Ehrlich, 1968, 160; Conventional
wisdom: Ehrlich, 1968, 40–41.
5. As a result, grain: Encyclopedia Britannica, 2020.
6. By 1980, India: FAO, 2019; Roser, Ritchie, and Ortiz-
Ospina, 2019; Calories available: Roser and Ritchie,
2019a; Today, India is: Statista, 2019.
7. We would have: Bailey, 2013.
8. 
The 
International 
Energy: 
IEA, 
2019g; 
The
cheapness of: IEA, 2019g.
9. Fracking has reduced: Chirakijja, Jayachandran, and
Ong, 2019; It has also dramatically: Melek, Plante, and
Yücel, 2019.
10. It has also had: Loomis and Haefele, 2017; The
biggest study: This cost appears to ignore that fracking
will also lead to lower particulate air pollution where the
gas is burned instead of coal (often not in the United
States, where fracking took place, or where the study
focuses). This estimate is a benefit of about $17 billion per
year, cancelling about three-quarters of the disbenefits
from fracking (Johnsen, LaRiviere, and Wolff, 2019).
11. The technology of: Golden and Wiseman, 2015; The
fracking 
innovation: 
Golden 
and 
Wiseman, 
2015;
Crucially, gas emits: Fracking also emits more methane

(which is a greenhouse gas), and some had speculated that
the extra emissions of methane could outweigh the lower
carbon dioxide emissions. All the major studies, including
from the US Environmental Protection Agency, show that
this is extremely unlikely, and that after taking methane
into account, switching from coal to natural gas in the
power sector produces climate benefits over all time
frames (Raimi and Aldana, 2018); This is the: EIA, 2018;
and using data from the Global Carbon Project, 2019b,
showing a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions of 511 Mt
CO2, with the UK reducing 166, Italy reducing 129, and
Ukraine reducing 101 Mt CO2.
12. In fact, in: BP, 2019; If China switched: Given that
air pollution from coal in China is massive, more fracking
for gas would likely also lead to cleaner air for most people
in most places, although worse air pollution at fracking
sites.
13. We worked with: Lomborg, 2010.
14. Since then, my: We even managed to get the cover
story on the Guardian in 2010, calling for the $100 billion
R&D fund (August 10, 2010); The most promising: Cama,
2015.
15. International Energy Agency: IEA, 2019c.
16. Green investment is taken as all R&D investment
minus 
fossil 
fuel 
investment 
(so 
energy 
efficiency,
renewables, nuclear, hydrogen, and fuel cells, other power
and 
storage 
technologies, 
other 
cross-cutting
technologies/research and unallocated) (IEA, 2019c). GDP
from the World Bank, 2019e, adjusted to 2018 dollars with
BEA, 2019.
17. Globally, private companies: IEA, 2019f, 160; As a
percentage: IEA, 2019f, 160.
18. Globally, in 2020: IEA, 2018, 256.
19. Before the Chicago World’s Fair: Walter, 1992;
There were a: Walter, 1992, 117; Walter, 1992, 59;

Walter, 1992, 67; Walter, 1992, 26.
20. E-mail was foreshadowed: Walter, 1992, 66; Air
travel would: Walter, 1992, 187; Multiple thinkers
expected: Walter, 1992, 213.
21. One considered how: Walter, 1992, 66; Others
realized that: Walter, 1992, 60, 144. Actually, since then
electricity became forty to sixty times cheaper and indeed
powered the United States and the world. The retail price
of a kilowatt-hour in the 1880s was 28¢ (Schobert, 2002,
188), or in today’s money $7.60 (CPI, 2019). In 1902, the
price was 16.2¢ (Census, 1975, vol. 2, S116) or $5. In 2018,
the average retail price was 12.87¢ (EIA, 2019a).
22. But these make: Gür, 2018, 2699.
23. My personal favorite: Rathi, 2018.
24. If we exclude: BNEF, 2019, estimates 7 GWh today,
with the world using 0.84 GWh per second (IEA, 2019g);
Headlines 
consistently 
tell: 
John, 
2019; 
The
International Energy Agency: IEA, 2019g, 253; Yet, this
will: The IEA doesn’t express its 330 GW capacity in
energy, but using the same conversion from BNEF, 2019, it
is equivalent to 859 GWh, which at the higher electricity
consumption of 1.3 GWh per second is almost eleven
minutes. The much higher BNEF estimate of 2,850 GWh is
equivalent to thirty-six minutes in 2040; While utility-
scale solar: Lazard, 2019a, 2; Lazard, 2019b, 4.
25. It has promised: Sixty-two GW in 2018 (IEA, 2019e,
31) to 620 GW in 2040 (IEA, 2019g, 295); Notice, this
won’t: IEA, 2019g; A lot of: IEA, 2019g, 294; Partly as a:
IEA, 2019g, 296.
26. The International Energy Agency: IEA, 2019g,
296–97. Seeing a cut of 320 Mt carbon dioxide, or a little
less than one percent of global fossil fuel emissions.
27. 
Nuclear 
energy 
doesn’t: 
It 
actually 
emits
greenhouse gasses when built and decommissioned, but on
a life cycle basis this is a tiny contribution (IPCC, 2014b,

539); Under normal operating: Because coal has trace
amounts 
of 
radioactive 
materials, 
released 
during
combustion (Chiras, 1998, 266); Although we think:
Markandya and Wilkinson, 2007.
28. 
The 
reason 
why: 
Lazard, 
2019a. 
And
decommissioning of nuclear power plants can cost ten
times 
their 
construction 
costs 
(Cunningham 
and
Cunningham, 2017, 441); Finland’s newest nuclear:
Deign, 2019; It may open in 2021: Edwardes-Evans,
2019; It may open in 2022: AFP, 2019.
29. A 2017 survey: Lang, 2017; In France and:
Grubler, 2010, 5182–83, and Berthélemy and Escobar
Rangel, 2015; One 2017 study suggests: Lang, 2017.
30. Philanthropist Bill Gates: TerraPower, 2019;
Reuters, 2017; China is demonstrating: Z. Zhang, 2019;
Others are suggesting: N. Johnson, 2018.
31. One 2019 study: Lazard, 2019a, 2, finds nuclear at
11.8¢–19.2¢ per kWh, whereas EIRP, 2017, finds average
costs of 6¢, with the best case at 3.6¢, below gas at 4.4¢.
32. A third area: Sanz-Pérez et al., 2016; Pires, 2019;
Roger A. Pielke, 2009.
33. In 2007, entrepreneur: Branson, 2019.
34. In 2011, an: APS, 2011; A 2017 overview: Ishimoto
et al., 2017; We should take: Keith et al., 2018.
35. If we can: This is at the UN’s middle-of-the-road
scenario with 79 billion tons of carbon-dioxide-equivalent
emissions, $5 per ton (or $395 billion in total cost) of a
$231 trillion economy (IIASA, 2018).
36. Because the algae: Herper, 2017.
37. Fixing global warming: An annual cost of $192–
$408 billion, or 1.03–2.19 percent of GDP (Bohringer,
Rutherford, and Tol, 2009).

CHAPTER 13. ADAPTATION: SIMPLE BUT EFFECTIVE
1. Not only do: Formetta and Feyen, 2019.
2. At its simplest: Auffhammer and Mansur, 2014; On
the other hand: Berrittella et al., 2006.
3. In contrast, adaptation: Kongsager, 2018, 8;
Indeed, most adaptation: Fankhauser, 2017, 215.
4. In the rich world: Agrawala et al., 2011, 29.
5. Where it is: Seo and Mendelsohn, 2008.
6. Across the world: M. Chen et al., 2018; Gezie, 2019;
Bakhsh and Kamran, 2019.
7. In Ethiopia, a: Di Falco, Veronesi, and Yesuf, 2011.
8. Yet weirdly, for: Kongsager, 2018.
9. In fact, sea: Thirty-one cm, or 1.01 foot, from an
average of 1850–1870 up to 2010 (Jevrejeva et al., 2014).
10. One of the: Lincke and Hinkel, 2018; Markanday,
Galarraga, and Markandya, 2019; Hinkel et al., 2014; The
study shows: Hinkel et al., 2014.
11. The total cost: Lincke and Hinkel, 2018, table S1.
12. “Coastal defense” in: Markanday, Galarraga, and
Markandya, 2019, 19.
13. The benefits of: Global Commission on Adaptation,
2019, 14, 31.
14. Holland has shown: EEA, 2018; Rijke et al., 2012.
15. If there were: Numbers for the United States and
Canada (Lim et al., 2018, figures 2a and 3a); The National
Institute: NIBS, 2018; For the EU: Rojas, Feyen, and
Watkiss, 2013.
16. It is in fact: Satija, Collier, and Shaw, 2016.
17. To claim that: Berke, 2017; Since the 1980s:
Houston Chronicle, 2017; One 2018 study: Muñoz et al.,
2018.
18. In 2019, Houston: Anchondo, 2019; A 2019 study:
Davlasheridze et al., 2019.

19. In one area: Baddour, 2017.
20. Encouraging homeowners: Markanday, Galarraga,
and Markandya, 2019.
21. Although some 90 percent: Hossain, 2018.
22. In 1991, at: Bern et al., 1993; Since 1991, a: Paul,
2009, and Haque et al., 2012; In the 2010s: Centre for
Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, 2019.
23. Overall, it has: Global Commission on Adaptation,
2019, 49; For river flooding: Markanday, Galarraga, and
Markandya, 2019; For heavy precipitation: Markanday,
Galarraga, and Markandya, 2019.
24. Building codes matter: Flavelle, 2018; If this
code: NIBS, 2018, 2, 58.
25. The city suffered: Montana State University, 2019.
26. A fire expert: Kaufman, 2018.
27. Cities are increasingly: IIASA, 2018.
28. For example, during: Kenward et al., 2014.
29. In the aftermath: Biello, 2014; It has already: City
of New York, 2019; Los Angeles has: McPhate, 2017;
Theoretical models show: Georgescu et al., 2014.
30. In London, the: Wilby and Perry, 2006, 92.
31. If we increase: Greater London Authority, 2006, 11;
And analysis from: Greater London Authority 2006, 12.
32. One 2017 study: Estrada, Botzen, and Tol, 2017.
Unfortunately, green roofs: Estrada, Botzen, and Tol,
2017. Another study finds “green measures” deliver about
two dollars back on the dollar (Markanday, Galarraga, and
Markandya, 2019).
33. Those with swimming: Adler et al., 2010.
34. In Chicago, such: Adler et al., 2010, 33; France has
taken: P. Ford, 2019, 20.
35. After a 2010: Kaur, 2017; A similar heat wave:
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation, 2016.
36. In 2019, Mayor: Goldman and Flavelle, 2019.

37. Paradise is a working-class: Kaufman, 2018.

CHAPTER 14. GEOENGINEERING: A BACKUP PLAN
1. The eruption injected: Proctor et al., 2018.
2. Scientists have come: Baskin, 2019.
3. Some fear that: Bradford, 2017; Others worry that:
Meyer, 2018.
4. One of the cheapest: NRC, 2015, 101ff.
5. This fleet would: Mims, 2009.
6. This is a tantalizing: The $140 trillion discussed
earlier is the cost over the next five centuries.
7. If changing the: J. L. Reynolds and Wagner, 2019.
8. What if they’re right?: Catastrophic impacts was one
of the reasons Nordhaus added 25 percent to the cost of
climate change, and it is included in the models we have
used to find the best carbon tax; Potential pitfalls are:
Geoengineering wouldn’t be straightforward to implement,
because not all countries would actually have the same
interests. Imagine if humanity actually had the power to
control the global thermostat. In whose hands should this
power be held? Tropical countries might very well want to
turn the temperature down, but colder Russia, Canada, and
Norway might want it cranked up. Bear in mind that for
some nations like the United Kingdom and Poland, short-
term global warming means net benefits, especially for
agriculture. Reducing the average global temperature isn’t
in every nation’s short-term interest, making negotiations
even more delicate. It is hard to imagine leaders actually
agreeing on the “right” temperature for the world. In that
sense, the only realistic goal will probably be to return to
what the temperature “used” to be, because this is a focal
point for the world (providing the only obvious temperature
to agree on) and also what most of the world has already
adapted to.
9. A 2019 survey: Dannenberg and Zitzelsberger, 2019.
10. The key arguments: Geoengineering Monitor, 2020.

11. If we reduce: Proctor et al., 2018.
12. Most people experience: Irvine et al., 2019.
13. The same reasoning: Corner, 2014; Hamilton, 2015.
14. Even in the face: Kintisch, 2017; And in the wake:
Bawden, 2016.
15. They found that: Bickel and Lane, 2009; One of
the: Kunzig, 2008.
16. This would be: Lane et al., 2009.

CHAPTER 15. PROSPERITY: THE OTHER CLIMATE POLICY WE NEED
1. Both countries are: Bos and Zwaneveld, 2017, 12;
Dasgupta et al., 2011, 168.
2. the Delta Works: Aerts, 2009, 40; Since 1953,
there: EM-DAT, 2020.
3. In contrast, Bangladesh: Notice that “normal”
flooding is actually beneficial in Bangladesh, as it supplies
water for crop production, recharges the groundwater
table, replenishes soil fertility, and supports fish production
(Banerjee, 2010). The problems come from extreme
flooding, which happens every four to five years (Dasgupta
et al., 2011); In 2019, flooding: AlJazeera, 2019; In the
first: EM-DAT, 2020; Every year, flooding: Ferdous et al.,
2019.
4. As Bangladesh gets: This is a global phenomenon
(Jongman et al., 2015); Flood defenses for: Dasgupta et
al., 2011,
5. IIASA, 2018; W. Nordhaus, 2013.
6. Today, Bangladesh spends: IEA, 2020.
7. The Netherlands is: The World Bank, 2019e, shows
that Bangladesh lost forests on 0.3 percent of its land area
in this century, while the Netherlands planted extra forest
on 0.5 percent of its land area; While the area: Schuerch
et al., 2018; In total, richer: Schuerch et al., 2018.
8. Back in 1992: Schelling, 1992.
9. One of the clearest: Letta, Montalbano, and Tol,
2018.
10. Indeed, a 2012 study: Anthoff and Tol, 2012.

CHAPTER 16. CONCLUSION: HOW TO MAKE THE WORLD A BETTER PLACE
1. 
Figure 
16.1 
is: 
Lomborg, 
2013. 
To 
ensure
comparability, all analyses estimated the cost of not solving
the problem, so the cost of malnutrition is calculated by
establishing how much richer the world would have been
every year if everyone were well fed, hence more
productive and healthier. Likewise for health (how much
richer the world would be if easily curable diseases were
healed) or for education (if much of the world had not been
illiterate for generations). To ensure the costs were
comparable 
across 
long 
periods 
of 
time, 
only 
the
“permanent” 
part 
of 
the 
problem 
was 
investigated
(education has many challenges, but the estimate only
shows the cost of illiteracy), so these are definitely
underestimates. Bearing this in mind, the figure shows that
the world has moved dramatically toward less costly
problems.
2. Second, the figure: The original analysis included the
cost of global warming from 1900 to 2050, but as I outlined
in chapter 5, the costs were so small (and were even
slightly positive in the past) that they wouldn’t have been
visible in this graph. It also included the cost of biodiversity
and water and sanitation, both of which were also very
small, and not shown here. Instead, the graph shows the
cost of climate change with an optimal policy from 2015 to
2100, as calculated by William Nordhaus. It reaches a cost
of 2.86 percent of GDP in 2100. The equivalent cost if the
world were to do no climate policy whatsoever would be
3.98 percent by 2100.
3. Based on estimates in Lomborg, 2013, the estimate
for each problem shows how much richer the world could
have been, had the problem been addressed (so the cost of
all the problems can add to more than 100 percent). For
reference, the cost in percentage of global GDP of

Nordhaus’s optimal 3.5°C scenario 2015–2100 is shown.
4. Half the world’s: M. Smith, 2019.
5. He was a: Hall, 2009; “Sometime in…”: Retro
Report, 2019, 5:40. “Nonetheless, Ehrlich continues to
claim that civilizational collapse is just a couple of decades
away” (Carrington 2018); Other influential academics:
Environmental Action, 1970, 25; New York Times, 1970;
Life magazine: Life, 1970.
6. Ehrlich predicted that: Predicted “the death rate will
increase until at least 100–200 million people per year will
be starving to death during the next ten years” (Collier
1970, 293); He was off: About 3.3 million people starved to
death in the 1970s, more than half from Vietnam’s invasion
of Cambodia in 1979 (Hasell and Roser, 2017); He claimed
that: Editors of Ramparts, 1970, 7; Los Angelinos didn’t:
Parrish and Stockwell, 2015.
7. “the only possible…”: Editors of Ramparts, 1970, 9;
Some researchers started: Ehrlich, 1968, 135; It gave
urgency: R. J. Williams, 2014, 485; In just one: Biswas,
2014.
8. Believing that continued: Ehrlich, 1968, 78–80.
9. In large part: Carson, 1962; But even at: Carson,
1962, 227; WHO, 2019; Even the United Nations:
Canberra Times, 1977; Doll and Peto, 1981, 1256.
10. The resulting nationwide: This was not least true
for EPA in its first decades (Colborn, Dumanoski, and
Myers, 1996, 202); The total cost: Graham, 1995, 1; A
research team: Tengs et al., 1995; Tengs, 1996; Tengs
and Graham, 1996; Benzene emission controls: Graham,
1995.
11. Across 185 life-saving: Tengs and Graham, 1996;
However, if the: Tengs and Graham, 1996; Put bluntly,
the: And this number is undoubtedly much too low, since
the Harvard study could only assess regulations already
evaluated for costs and benefits. A different way to see this

imbalance is that in the first decades of EPA, its typical
lifesaving regulations delivered benefits worth just 4¢ on
each dollar of public expenditure (Tengs et al., 1995),
findings generally reconfirmed in Morrall III, 2003. The
cost-benefit estimate is based on the median cost for the
EPA and other agencies, using the EPA’s own estimate of
the value of saving one life in one year—$324,000 ($293K
in 1990$) (EPA, 1997, ES-6)—updated to 1993$ with CPI
2019. Other federal agencies, not affected by toxin fear,
wasted far fewer resources; typically they saw benefits of
three to fourteen times their costs.
12. “every city…”: Eisenhower, 1961.
13. Statistics on Soviet: Trachtenberg, 2018.
14. In just the: Woerdman, Couwenberg, and Nentjes,
2009; Hintermann, 2016; Energy companies’ lobbying:
Brulle, 2018, 295.
15. “If implemented…”: Morgan, 2002. The memo can
be found in Palmissano, 1997.
16. Enron boasted of: Palmissano, 1997.
17. For instance, doubling renewable energy will produce
economic 
benefits 
of 
better 
energy 
access, 
and
environmental benefits of lower CO2 emissions; for each
dollar spent, the total social, environmental, and economic
benefits are worth 80¢. Universal access to contraception
will 
reduce 
maternal 
and 
child 
mortality, 
increase
investment in child rearing, and lead to higher economic
growth; for each dollar spent, the total benefits are worth
$120. All from Lomborg, 2018.
18. My think tank: Copenhagen Consensus Center,
2019.
19. Globally, freer trade: Anderson, 2018.
20. Every dollar spent: Horton and Hoddinott, 2018;
This 
research 
was: 
Department 
for 
International
Development et al., 2013.
21. For about $6 billion: Vassall, 2018; “best

investment…”: Gates, 2019.
22. There are 214 million: WHO, 2018; Each dollar
spent: Kohler and Behrman, 2018; This research
recently: Department for International Development and
Alok Sharma, 2019.

