1

2
FUN WITH A PENCIL
ALSO BY ANDREW LOOMIS
Figure Drawing for All It’s Worth
Creative Illustration
Drawing the Head and Hands
Three-Dimensional Drawing

3
Spacer

4
FUN
WITH A PENCIL
ANDREW LOOMIS

5
COPYRIGHT 1939 BY ANDREW LOOMIS
FIRST PUBLISHED BY THE VIKING PRESS IN MAY 1939
BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY OF CANADA LIMITED
REPRODUCED FOR EDUCATIONAL USE IN DECEMBER 2001
All drawings and text within this book are the property of
their respective copyholders and should not be reproduced
for any reason. They may only be used for the
purpose of practice and study.

6
DEDICATED TO EVERYONE WHO LOVES A PENCIL

7
MR. WEBSTER DEFINES DRAWING
AS DELINEATION.  THAT DOESN’T
TELL YOU HOW MUCH OF A REAL
“BANG” THERE IS IN IT.  MAYBE
HE NEVER KNEW.  MOST FOLKS
LOVE TO DRAW EVEN WHEN
THEY KNOW LITTLE ABOUT IT.  IT
STARTED WITH THE CAVE MAN,
AND STILL SURVIVES ON THE
WALLS OF PUBLIC PLACES... BE-
CAUSE IT’S SO MUCH FUN, AND
SO EASY, IT’S A SHAME NOT TO BE
ABLE TO DO IT BETTER.
ANDREW LOOMIS

8
ALL THAT YOU NEED TO KNOW, TO START
THIS BOOK, IS HOW TO DRAW A CIRCLE. . . .
Don’t start out with that old gag, “I couldn’t draw a straight
line.”  Neither can I, freehand.  If we need a straight line, we
can use a ruler.  Now please try it, just for fun.
And it can be as lopsided as the family budget, and
still work out.

9
HOWDY
FOLKS!
Who am I? Oh, just one of Andy’s little funny folk.
But I’m important! He gave me a job. I’m the spirit
of the book, by jeeminy, big nose and all. I represent
all the blue in here. My right name would be Basic
Form, but that’s much too high-sounding. He thinks
that name would scare you away. So he just calls me
"Professor Blook’’ and lets it go at that. Now, I’ve got
a few interesting things to tell you.

10
Since Andy cannot talk to you personally, he put me in
here so we can really get together. It’s tough on Andy,
for that guy really loves to talk, especially "shop talk.’’
Now this plan of action is based on the use of simple
forms that are already known and familiar to you, and
which you can certainly draw.
From these simple, known forms, we build other
forms, which without some constructive plan would
be too complicated to draw. For instance, the top of
the head, or cranium, is nearer to a ball in shape
than anything else. So we start with a bull, and add
to it the shapes we want. We thus "arrive’’ at the out-
lines that are needed instead of guessing at them. Only
the most talented end experienced artist can draw at
once the final outlines. That procedure is most diffi-
cult, and is the reason most people give up drawing.
But knowing how to "construct’’ makes drawing simple
and easy, and a delightful pastime to anybody. By build-
ing preliminary shapes and developing the outlines on
them, we know WHERE TO DRAW OUR REAL
LINES. There is hardly anything that cannot first be
constructed by the use of simple forms.
“Santa had a belly, like a bowl full of jelly.’’ Now that
was a real observation. We know just whet it must hove
looked like. In fact we can see it shaking! Now, the idea
is to draw the bowl before the belly. If the observation
is correct, it ought to be a simple matter to make it fairly
convincing as an abdomen for old Nick. Of course we
will cover it with his coat and pants, but we’ll be pretty
sure the pants don’t spoil the big idea. I
picked on Santa because he’ll never complain that I’m
being too personal over his appearance. I might just
as well have chosen your next-door neighbor, his lunch
basket may be equally rotund, and shake some too.
Every form is like some simpler form, with this or that
variation, and with pieces added on. The simplest

11
Forms we know are the sphere, the cube, and the egg.
Before we could walk we recognized the sphere in
Dad’s new golf bulls; the cubes were in the sugar bowl;
as for the eggs, well, the nicest ones were Easter eggs.
I say, “Draw a line.’’ You cannot know just what I
mean. A straight line? A curved line? A jagged line? A
wiggly line? There are a thousand kinds of lines; be
more specific. But it I say draw a ball, a cube, an egg,
a cylinder, a pyramid, a cone, a rectangular block, in
each case the image you get is perfect. You know ex-
actly what I mean. Instead of “line,’’ we shall think in
terms of concrete and tangible “form,’’ and proceed
as if we were handling lumps of clay. You can appreci-
ate the value of such a method, for you know the fun-
damentals even before you start; they are obvious to
anybody. If you never saw a ball, you should quit right
now.
As you proceed to build all sorts of shapes out of
simpler ones, it is amazing what you can do with
them, and how accurate and "solid’’ the resulting draw-
ings will appear. The surprising part is that, when the
construction lines are erased, very few could guess how
it had been done. Your drawing appears us complicated
and difficult to the other fellow as mine might seem to
you now. It takes on a look of professional workman-
ship, which indeed it has, since the professional artist
has by some method had to “construct’’ his work to
make it “professional.’’
If you will give the following pages even your amused
attention, I am satisfied you will find much that will
surprise you in the way of ability but perhaps you here-
tofore never guessed you had. If it absorbs your inter-
est, you might find yourself clever enough to amaze
those about you. Just now take my word for it that the
method is simple, practical, and, I believe, possible for
anybody to follow.

12
TAKE A GOOD LOOK AT THIS PAGE
A circle is a flat disk. If you draw the “inside” contours, it
becomes a solid ball, with a third dimension. We shall
build other forms, like lumps of clay, onto this solidity.
The construction will be erased, but the solid appearance
will remain, giving form or the appearance of reality.

13
Get a pencil and paper quickly! Draw lightly all you see printed in
blue. Take one stage at a time, on one drawing, until the last stage;
then finish, with strong lines over the light ones, the lines we have
printed in black. That is all there is to learn! These are "selected’’ or
"built in’’ from the basic forms. I call the basic drawings “Blooks,’’
after myself .
PART ONE
HOW TO DRAW FUNNY FACES

14
HERE WE GO!
I promised you that all you need to know, to start this book, is how to draw a
lopsided ball.  Whatever shape you draw can be used as a foundation for a funny
face.  Do the best you can, even if the ball looks more like a potato.

15
THE FUN STARTS!
The big idea is to start with a “form.”  Then develop other “forms”
on it.  Build your final lines in by selecting, eliminating the lines
you do not use.  I leave mine in to show how it’s done.

16
A SURE METHOD FOR ANYBODY

17
IT’S REALLY GOING TO BE EASIER THAN YOU EXPECTED
Now, if the first drawings you do are not the last word in cleverness, don’t be
discouraged.  You will soon get the idea.  When you begin to sense form, you
will have the whole works.  Then we’ll polish up, and they will have to admit
you are good.

18
THE “BLOOK BALL”
If you will now turn back to page 12 and look at the string of balls, you will see
that we are getting right into big business.  You need some practice on these.
Never mind if they are a little off.
The better you can draw these balls in any old position you wish, the better you
are going to be.  The line from the top to bottom is the “middle” line of the face.
The horizontal line, which looks like the equator, is the “eyeline,” and it also
locates the ear.

19
JUST PRACTICE ON THESE “BLOOKS”

20
THE BEST WAY TO GO ABOUT IT

21
WE ADD ANOTHER LINE TO THE BALL
Look at the diagram.  This last line goes completely
around the ball, thought the axis at each end, and cuts
the eyeline just halfway round on each side of the middle
line.  The ear joins the head at the point of intersection of
the eyeline and the earline.

22
THERE IS NO LIMIT TO THE VARIETY
I am a lot more anxious to have you understand the method and
create your own forms than to copy mine.  But copying mine
now will get you started.
Always construct the head from the cranium down. There is no
other satisfactory way.  You can see by now that the position of
the ball determines the pose of the head.  The  pieces you build
on determine the character.

23
“BLOCKY” TREATMENT LENDS CHARACTER
“Blocky” shapes always combine interestingly with round shapes.
It is a good idea to make the final lines angular even around curves.
It gives a sense of bone and ruggedness of character.  You would
not do this when drawing pretty girls or babies.
Now I’ve got a surprise for you.  Instead of drawing all there
lunkheads, let’s try something real.  I’m going to pose for you.

24
BLOOK POSES

25
EXPRESSION

26
EXPRESSION

27
DIFFERENT EXPRESSIONS OF THE FACE

28
TRICK STUFF
Try this on the folks.  Tell them draw two overlapping circles, any
size.  Draw a middle line through both and build on your own pieces.
You can make a head out of any combination.  Of course, tell them
to draw lightly.

29
TRICK STUFF
Draw a circle.  Attach two smaller circles, not far apart, any-
where.  You can put a third above and between them.  Then
draw the middle line so it passes between the two small circles.
Proceed as usual.

30
HERE’S A STUNT
Draw three balls, one of them small, in any position.  Con-
nect the larger balls.  Draw a middle line under the small ball.
This suggests a head.  Now use your imagination to complete
the drawing.

31
DON’T MISS THIS PAGE
Here we combine the ball with other basic forms.  With “solid
forms” to build on, the head begins to take on more reality.
You can almost anything you want to with the supplemen-
tary forms, and come out all right.  The is real character draw-
ing, and a challenge to you.

32
PROJECTION
This page is for the clever folks.  It is a method of projecting
the characters you have created into various poses.  Try it with
very simple heads at first.  You must use your eye and build
very carefully.

33
VARIETY BY DISTORTION
Take any head.  You can distort it by the following methods.
This is valuable in caricature.  You can trace a photo, and draw
from the tracing, or take any of your own drawings and dis-
tort them.
Here again is a chance for your own invention.  Draw a square
around your subject.  Divide each way into eight or more parts.
If you wish to distort separate features, change the size of the
squares into which they fall.  Make the line cut through each
square as it does in your copy, but changed to fit the new
proportion of your squares.  1/2, 1/3 square, etc.

34
BABIES

35
BRATS

36
THE DIVIDED BALL AND PLANE METHOD
The Method Developed by Andrew Loomis,  Which Makes
Construction  Simple for Any Type of Head.
We go now into the most important section of the
book. The method here worked out is a develop-
ment of the simple groundwork you have already
accomplished. It need not frighten you, since it is
but slightly more complex than the work up to this
point.
The cranium, as you perhaps have realized, is never
a perfect ball in shape. To draw it correctly we must
make alterations, some slight and others quite exag-
gerated, to fit the various types of skull. Neverthe-
less, we can take as a basic form a ball sliced off at
the sides, leaving it a little wider one way than the
other, and adding to it or taking some away. The
forehead may be flattened, cut down, or built up as
the case may be. The cranium may be elongated,
widened, or narrowed. The facial plane may also be
altered as we see fit without destroying our working
principle. The plane simply attaches to the ball
wherever we want it, which makes our method
entirely flexible, so that we can represent any type
of head we choose. All other methods I have yet seen
do not start with a form anything like the skull, or
make any allowance for the variety of shapes.
After this book was pub-
lished, I learned with inter-
est that a similar basic
head form has been used for
years by Miss E. Grace
Hanks of the Pratt Insti-
tute, Brooklyn, and that she
has written a book based
on this method.

37
THE DIVIDED BALL AND PLANE METHOD

38
It is this flexibility and freedom built into the
method that should make it of certain value. On
page 37 I have given a set of measurements I con-
sider ideal, but these need not be adhered to. To
me the real value of the method is that it makes
possible the accurate construction of the head
without copy or model or, when a model is used,
that it allows you to render the type recognizably
and with certainty. It possesses powers of exag-
geration for comic drawing and caricature as well
as of serious interpretation. It opens an avenue of
approach to the novice, dispenses to a large ex-
tent with the necessity for tedious and prolonged
study, and gives almost at the outset the much
needed quality of solidity which usually comes
only with a knowledge of bone and muscle struc-
ture.
If you glance at page 39, it will be evident how
the ball and plane is designed to give that appear-
ance of actual bony structure. The skull lies within
this basic form. But over and above this in impor-
tance is the helpful guidance it gives in placing
the features in their correct positions, in relation
to the pose of the head. This will come very
quickly, and soon the eye will detect anything
obviously “out of drawing.”
Many years ago I sensed the lack of any method
of approach having any marked degree of accu-
racy. I was told to draw the head as an egg or oval,
and to proceed from there. Fine for a straight front
view. But what of the jaw in a profile? There is
but a slight hint of the skull formation in an egg
shape alone. Again, I was told to build the head
starting with a cube. While this aided one in sens-
ing the perspective, it gave no hint of the skull.
How much of the cube was to be cut away? Since
then I have heard of “shadow methods” and oth-
ers, yet in every case a previous knowledge of the
head was necessary.
THE DIVIDED BALL AND PLANE METHOD

39
THE DIVIDED BALL AND PLANE METHOD

40
What I wanted was a method whereby, if a head
looked wrong, I could find out what was wrong
with it, Tampering with a painted head to correct
some bad construction or drawing usually ruined
the work done. The necessity of starting the head
correctly in the first place was obvious, so that the
finishing could be approached with the confidence
that after hours of work it would not go “sour.” With
closing dates of publications imminent, it is risky
business to proceed without a full knowledge of
what you are doing.
So this method evolved from personal necessity. I
might state here that in the beginning I had not the
slightest intention of putting it in book form. How-
ever, when the plan did work itself out finally, I
was struck with its simplicity. It was one of those
instances that make you wonder why you or some-
body else had not thought of it before. The fact that
it tied up with our first childish scribbles, which
after all are a crude statement of form unhampered
by superficial detail, only increased my enthusiasm.
Why, then, could not such a plan be made avail-
able to all, from the child scribbler to the profes-
sional artist? The plan changes but slightly from
the first round ball and added forms to the profes-
sional piece of work, the difference lying in the
ability of the individual. It all hinges on the proper
building of the ball and its divisions. Approached
with the understanding that one is drawing solids
instead of lines, the method becomes surprisingly
simple.
I do not doubt but that these few pages will prove
of inestimable value to many practicing artists, who
I know have been confronted with the same diffi-
culties of bad drawing and closing dates. But pri-
marily the book is for John Jones, who always
wanted to draw but could not.
THE DIVIDED BALL AND PLANE METHOD

41
AS APPLIED TO DIFFERENT TYPES

42
SOME HEADS BASED ON PAGE 41
This page must give you some idea of the unlimited va-
riety of types and characters possible through building by
the Divided Ball and Plane method. There are thousands of
types, and each looks different mostly because of the skull
rather than the features. It’s fun to study an individual, and
try to figure out what kind of ball and plane go together to
make up his face. You really learn to look deep into charac-
ter, and beneath the surface. This method calls for no clair-
voyance, but a quick eye and a skillful hand.

43
COMIC HEADS BY THE DIVIDED BALL AND PLANE
The above are simple applications of the method. These are no
more difficult than by the previous plan of attaching forms
directly to the ball. However, the chance of error is greatly less-
ened. You might as well have the complete method as part of
it. Time spent on these pages will prove of sound value to any-
one sincerely interested in the drawing of the head. It is sug-
gested that you go on with the book and come back to this
section at intervals. As you try you will improve. By all means
do not give up. That hand of yours will be doing surprising
things before long.

44
THE PRETTY GIRL
A pleasing head of a girl depends ninety-nine percent on how well
you draw it. More exactly, the ball must be drawn well, the con-
struction lines correctly placed on the ball and plane, and the fea-
tures nicely placed. Remember there is the width of an eye be-
tween the eyes. Do not place the mouth too low or get the nose too
long. I have used a pen here. Try it sometimes.

45
A METHOD OF CHECKING
The blue lines in the diagram above are our same construction lines.
They may be done on tracing paper over any face. You can thus quickly
find a feature that has been incorrectly placed. You can also “find” the
ball and plane position in a photographic head this way. Whether you
are building or tearing down, the method applies.

46
THE WOMEN FOLKS

47
TWENTY KIDS

48
ETERNAL YOUTH

49
THE OLD FOLKS

50
OH, BOY, OH, BOY!  NOW THE FUN REALLY STARTS

51
PART TWO
PUTTING THE HEAD ON THE BODY

52
THE COMIC FIGURE
You know, I’ve a hunch you have been itching to
get into this portion of the book. Well, it is really
going to be great fun to create little people of your
own, doing anything you want them to. There is
nothing hidebound in this plan either. Take it in easy
doses for the fun that’s in it. Whether the folks you
draw will ever bring home the bacon is a matter of
circumstance and how clever you get to be. But it’s
worth the effort to get that bang out of being able to
do it.
When you were a very little boy or girl your brain
children probably looked like these. If they did,
you had a great deal of undeveloped talent, and if
you have not been drawing ever since, it’s a real
shame. When the little youngster starts to draw,
he instinctively does a better job than he does later
on. He goes to essentials, a crude representation
of the bulk without the detail. Soon he forgets the
body and starts drawing buttons and clothes with
a face on them. Result: he gets discouraged and
transfers his attention to some pretty blond curls
or a new bicycle.
In all seriousness, I say that Nos. 1 and 2 of the
marginal drawings have great possibilities; 3 and
4 still have hope. But 5 verges on those awful draw-
ings in public places.

53
Now we start with something very much like 1 and 2.
For want of a better name we shall call him
“Doohinkus.” All we need do is add some sort of box
for a pelvis, some pads for hands and feet, some balls
at the joints, and a straight line across for shoulders.
We thus give him the following characteristics.
Head is a ball.
Chest is a ball.
Pelvis is a box slanted out at back and in at the sides.
The spine does not go through the chest ball but
around the back of it.
The legs are not straight but curve in to the knees
and out toward the foot.
Forearm is slightly curved.
Chest ball is divided by a line through the middle
and flaring lines at the bottom, like a Y upside down.
The reason for the curve on the bones is that they
thus become “springy” and shock-absorbing.
Without those curves we would be nervous wrecks
before we were in short pants or panties as the case
may be.
Every limb is movable in practically all directions.
The chest ball is fixed to the spine but the spine bends
in all directions. It can also twist or turn, so that there
is a wide range of movements possible between spine
and pelvis.
The human body is just about the nicest bit of me-
chanics we have in the world. We can walk, run, jump,
climb, stand erect, sit, all without any oiling or burnt-
out sparkplugs. Our motor starts and stops once. If
we take care of the engine it will outlast any metal
one. Let’s go!

54
HERE WE GO!
The proportions of your little figures may be varied in any
sort of way.  Below we show a variety of comic exaggerations.

55
WE START ON THE FIGURE
We shall start at once to put them into action.  There will always
be movement of the parts.  Draw this page carefully and become
thoroughly familiar with the movement of each part.

56
DOOHINKUS MOVES ABOUT.  STUDY THE FRAMEWORK

57
PURPOSELY OFF BALANCE

58
DO SOME OF THESE

59
TRY THESE, THEN INVENT SOME OF YOUR

60
BUILDING ON THE FRAMEWORK

61
BUILDING ON THE FRAMEWORK

62
A WAY TO SET UP THE ACTION
Take any jointed doll if possible, one jointed at the
waist. This fellow was a plain wooden art-store man-
nikin. In order to make him exist for you as some-
thing more than wooden chunks, I dolled him up, with
paint, putty, and a bit of hair from the bathroom rug.
Then I got busy with my candid camera. He is a queer-
looking little guy, a sort of cross between Groucho
Marx and a cigar-store Indian; but he is made of parts,
and it is the appearance of these parts in action that
we are interested in. In this way Doohinkus Manni-
kin is better than a live model. The black lines on
him help you his bulk, just as they do on the ball.
Take some of these poses. Start by drawing the frame-
work in the approximate action. It is not important
that you maintain the same proportions, and you can
substitute any head. Change him to suit yourself, but
watch the positions of the parts carefully. Build on
each part as you it. Note whether lines at joints curve
up or down, how the part is tipped toward or away
from you, you can exaggerate the action of the hips
and shoulders, as those actions were quite limited in
the mannikin. You can also, if you wish, render the
light and shadow on the parts.
Tracing these, or copying without building, will do
you no good. But if you will “build” a dozen or so,
you will be able to set up figures of your own, in al-
most any action. The correct assembling of the parts
of the figure is much more important than actual
knowledge of the bones and muscles. You cannot put
clothes on your figures properly without knowing the
action of under the clothes, and the flexing and pull-
ing of the material over them from one part to an-
other.
Pages 66 and 67 will show how to go about it.

63
DOOHINKUS MANNIKIN SHOWS YOU THE PARTS IN ACTION

64
BUILD FIGURES FROM THESE
START WITH THE FRAMEWORK

65
AFTER DRAWING THESE, TRY SOME OF YOUR

66
HOW YOU USE THE DOOHINKUS POSES
Here is the way to go about the preceding poses.  I have chosen figure
No. 8 at random. First, it is a good idea to know  what the normal
figure is like. You needn’t draw this unless you are interested.  The
bottom figures illustrate how the exaggerated  is based on the normal.

67
JUST PLAY WITH THE FIGURES
The main idea is to enjoy yourself. Some day you may just
put clothes right over the framework. But it is better always
to sketch in the figure. Do not follow the photos literally. Do
a lot of inventing, I wish I had more space here, but perhaps
these will give you a working basis.

68
THE SUIT

69
THE DRESS

70
HOW TO DRAW A HAT CORRECTLY

71
FREAK HATS

72
THE HAND

73
FEET

74
NOW WE BUILD THE FIGURE AND PUT ON SOME CLOTHES

75
EXPERIMENT ON FELIX THE ICE

76
TRICK STUFF

77
TRICK

78
NOW HAVE SOME FUN

79
TRY TO WORK OUT THE CONSTRUCTION YOURSELF

80
EXPERIMENT WITH THESE

81
I’M PUTTING YOU ON YOUR OWN

82
THESE OUGHT TO BE INTERESTING

83
BUILD THEM UP; DON’T JUST COPY

84
NOW LET’S MIX UP THE RACES

85
YOU CAN DRAW THEM ALL BY OUR METHODS

86
ALSO THESE

87
AMONG US MORTALS

88
DOWN ON THE FARM

89
WHEN YOU AND I WERE YOUNG, MAGGIE

90
ANNABELLE

91
JUST NATURALLY ATHLETIC

92
VAMPS

93
AND MORE VAMPS

94
FORESHORTENING
Unless one has a sound method of building,
foreshortening is very difficult. In the figure at the
right, the parts resemble the Doohinkus photos. If
you think of the figure as sections fitted together,
foreshortening takes
fully as we built the head in Part One. Think of
solids
Below, we obtain foreshortening by projecting a pro-
file into a front view, or the reverse, as we did with
the head. Establish the desired tilt and position of
the parts, then by parallel lines build the other posi-
tion of the figure so that all important points coin-
cide. When the figure is close, increase the parts
that are closest and diminish the parts that are away
from you. I did not do this, fearing it might confuse
you. I personally prefer the method at the top, us-
ing the eye, but often a difficult problem can be
worked out easily this way, and it is well to know
how.

95
THUS ENDETH PART TWO
Here’s Gas House Nellie back with us, and what a
wallop! She’s here to show you there’s no foolin’
about those little Doohinkuses, You can get more
real stuff into your figures in two minutes this way
than in two days of trying to horse around with the
finished drawing that has not been planned out. If
Nellie isn’t really slamming this guy, I’m a
Chinaman. I can almost hear it.

96
NOW THAT I’VE GOT ALL OF YOU, WHAT TO DO!

97
PART THREE
A WORLD FOR YOUR FIGURES TO LIVE IN

98
PERSPECTIVE

99
HOW TO ESTABLISH FIGURES ON THE GROUND

100
PERSPECTIVE IN THE FIGURE

101
COMMON FAULTS

102
FURNITURE

103
HOW TO PROJECT FURNITURE ONTO THE GROUND PLANE
Here is an excellent method for building furniture and figures on a ground plane. It
is simpler

104
BUILDING AN INTERIOR FROM A GROUND PLAN-I

105
BUILDING AN INTERIOR FROM A GROUND PLAN-II

106
BUILDING AN INTERIOR FROM A GROUND PLAN-III

107
BUILDING AN INTERIOR FROM A GROUND PLAN-IV
And here is the finished drawing. It’s fun to try inking in some of your
pencil drawings. Get a bottle of waterproof black drawing ink. You
can get a box of school water colors, also, and get still more fun out
of it. Knowing just what is the correct perspective helps so much to
give that solid, finished, and professional look. This procedure opens
up a whole world for the little figures you have learned to draw. It is
worth while to see what you can do with this method. It offers a possi-
bility of setting some work, besides the thrill of doing it. Now we shall
take up a new subject.
BEDTIME

108
Rays of light travel in straight lines. From any spot, the middle ray, the “per-
pendicular to source,” would meet the earth and pass through its center. At the
point directly under the source we establish the point DL, meaning “direction of
light.” S will mean “source” at the top of the perpendicular,
From the farthest limit of the shadow to DL, then up to the source and back to the
shadow, forms a triangle. The third corner of the triangle will be called At, mean-
ing “angle of light.” DL may be the vanishing point of the shadow or the base from
which it proceeds outward.
LIGHT AND SHADOW: THE PRINCIPLE

109
A SIMPLIFIED METHOD FOR GROUND SHADOWS

110
LIGHT AND SHADOW

111
LIGHT AND SHADOW

112
LIGHT AND SHADOW

113
THE LAST HILL
I have a chosen a problem here that would be very difficult without some under-
standing of the fundamentals given in Part Three. By the use of perspective, to-
gether with the effect of light and shadow, we create the illusion of space, form, and
a quality of existence.
This drawing may have the “feel” of having been sketched from life, because of the
fundamental principles applied to it. However, it was done from the imagination,
without any copy, simply to show you the possibilities.
It is a great storehouse of material. By all means, draw from that great source. Do
not just copy. “Build” with what you observe for yourself to be true. Try to get the
individual quality of each thing you draw. It is that quality that makes the artist
interesting.

114
TIME’S UP, FOLKS.  WE GOTTA GO.  ‘BY.

115
THE AUTHOR’S CORNER
I guess all you folks will forgive me for reserving a tiny
corner of the book as my own. Everything must eventu-
ally come to an end, and so with this book, my first effort
of this kind. It has been a concentrated effort. At times I
have seen the daylight fade and come back again with-
out sleep. I’ll never tell anybody the actual time it took
me to make these (it seems) thousands of drawings. I’m
sure he would not believe me. I’m dreadfully tired but
immensely happy. It has been intensely interesting, for I
have retraced the ground of years ago. It has carried me
back to the first struggle for knowledge that might earn
me a living. It has reminded me of the early drawings
which so often came back.
How simple it all might have been, had I in the beginning
been able to assemble these working principles, put them
in order, and work with them as I do now. But they were
bits of knowledge plucked out of the air like bits of fluff
from a seed pod. Only a few within your grasp, just a
few to take root and flourish. Strangely, the simplest facts
always are the latest in being understood. And when they
are. Their utter simplicity is the best reason for their
acceptance, even at the cost of having to sweep out the
pet theories and ideas accumulated over half a lifetime.
At best, how do I know that I’m any more right now than
in my student days? The answer is that of the con-
valescent who has suffered and got well again. Lack of
knowledge can be greater torture than the effort of ac-
quiring it. I know only that I am happier in my work than
I was then. It has gained publication in places that once
seemed hopeless for me. I can approach the work with
peace of mind and confidence boon of experience. This
book is an effort to transplant that peace of mind to some
few thousand others who otherwise must fall victims to
the selfsame devices which contrive to make before they
can make even a meager start.

116
WHEN ALL IS SAID AND DONE, NATURE IS YOUR
BEST INSTRUCTOR

117
LEARN TO DRAW FROM LIFE

118

119
I can think of no field of endeavor so sadly lacking in simple
organization of its working principles. Nothing quite so hap-
hazard, hit-or-miss, as the whole field of artistic endeavor. I
am not a cartoonist, but I choose caricature for the beginner:
principally because there is fun in it, and from the start I
want him to feel a little of the creative joy he is entitled to.
When artists begin to compile and set down their combined
experience, give freely and humbly what little they can add,
as do the other sciences, then art may have some chance to
reestablish itself in the hearts of everyday people even against
the mechanical perfection of the camera; even in a period of
social adjustment and financial depression. The mental de-
pression of our era weighs heavier on our race and future
than do our dollars or lack of them. A little joy from the in-
side must be welcome to almost anybody. Perhaps my book is
a step in that direction.
Yes, folks, I’m tired, but I’m happy. My little job, feeble as it
may be, is done. I wait as breathlessly to see how you will like
it as 1 ever waited for the verdict of any art editor or director.
I’d give many more sleepless hours just to feel with you that
first thrill of having created
even if it be mere lines of a pencil. You’ll get to love those
little folks you draw, even if they are a bit unwieldy and only
a little bit human.

120

121

122

