M-COMMERCE 
CRASH COURSE
P.J. LOUIS

McGraw-Hill Telecommunications
Ali
Digital Switching Systems
Ash
Dynamic Routing in Telecommunications Networks
Azzam/Ransom
Broadband Access Technologies
Azzam
High Speed Cable Modems
Bartlett
Cable Communications
Bates
Broadband Telecommunications Handbook
Bates
Optical Switching and Networking Handbook
Bayer
Computer Telephony Demystified
Bedell
Wireless Crash Course
Clayton
McGraw-Hill Illustrated Telecom Dictionary 3/e
Collins
Carrier Class Voice Over IP
Davis
ATM for Public Networks
Gallagher
Mobile Telecommunications Networking with IS-41
Harte
Cellular and PCS: The Big Picture
Harte
CDMA IS-95
Harte
GMS Superphones
Harte
Delivering xDSL
Heldman
Competitive Telecommunications
Macario
Cellular Radio 2/e
Muller
Bluetooth Demystified
Muller
Desktop Encyclopedia of Telecommunications
Muller
Desktop Encyclopedia of Voice and Data Networking
Muller
Mobile Telecommunications Factbook
Lachs
Fiber Optics Communications
Lee
Mobile Cellular Telecommunications 2/e
Lee
Mobile Communications Engineering 2/e
Lee
Lee’s Essentials of Wireless Communications
Louis
Telecommunications Internetworking
Pattan
Satellite-Based Cellular Communications
Pecar
Telecommunications Factbook 2/e
Richharia
Satellite Communications Systems 2/e
Roddy
Satellite Communications 3/e
Rohde/Whitaker
Communications Receivers 3/e
Russell
Signaling System #7 3/e
Russell
Telecommunications Protocols 2/e
Russell
Telecommunications Pocket Reference
Shepard
Telecommunications Convergence
Shepard
Optical Networking Demystified
Simon
Spread Spectrum Communications Handbook
Smith
Cellular System Design and Optimization
Smith
Practical Cellular and PCS Design
Smith
Wireless Telecom FAQs
Smith
LMDS
Turin
Digital Transmission Systems
Winch
Telecommunications Transmission Systems 2/e

M-COMMERCE
CRASH COURSE
THE TECHNOLOGY AND
BUSINESS OF NEXT
GENERATION INTERNET SERVICES
P.J. LOUIS
McGraw-Hill
New York • Chicago • San Francisco • Lisbon
London • Madrid • Mexico City • Milan • New Delhi
San Juan • Seoul • Singapore • Sydney • Toronto

Copyright © 2001 by P.J. Louis. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America.
Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, with-
out the prior written permission of the publisher. 
[eISBN 0-07-138289-5 
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN 0-07-136994-5. 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit
of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales pro-
motions, or for use in corporate training programs. For more information, please contact George
Hoare, Special Sales, at george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted
under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon,
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use;
any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you
fail to comply with these terms. 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS”. McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUAR-
ANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF
OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMA-
TION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE,
AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the func-
tions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or
error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccu-
racy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom.
McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work.
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental,
special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the
work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of lia-
bility shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort
or otherwise.
DOI: 10.1036/[0-07-138289-5
 
abc
McGraw-Hill 

DEDICATION
D
edicated to my darling wife Donna and our children Eric and Scott.
Their love, tolerance, and support keep me going.
In memory of my late father Richard Louis.  Who raised me in the best way
he knew how; by giving me an appreciation for history, setting rules and
goals for myself, learning from his mistakes, learning from others’ mistakes,
and learning from my own mistakes.  He was unrelenting in his views. I miss
him.
In memory of my late mother Jennie Chin Louis.  Although she has been
gone since 1966, she is still in my mind and heart.  My late mother was an
artist who painted, sketched, and sculpted.  She passed on to me the ability
to see/perceive the abstract as tangible.
In memory of the late Harry E. Young; my friend, superior, and mentor, who
encouraged me to keep an open mind and be prepared for the unexpected.
Harry opened a whole new part of the telecommunications business for me
when he allowed me to team up with him.

This page intentionally left blank.

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
xiii
CHAPTER 1: NETWORKS AND THE INTERNET:
WHAT ARE THEY?
1
Network Components
4
Routers or Switches
5
Transmission Facilities
7
Network Management Systems
8
Subscriber Billing Systems
11
Customer Care and Provisioning
12
Network Signaling
14
The Internet: What Is It?
15
Internet Network Architecture
18
Understanding the Network Architecture: 
Understanding the Market First
20
Components of the Internet
24
Hardware
24
Hosts
24
Networks
24
Routers
24
Computers/Terminals with Modems
25
Software
26
Internet Access and Network Interconnection
28
Internet Models
32
Summary
38
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

CHAPTER 2: BUSINESS MODELS
39
The Relationship between Technology and Business
41
Business Models
42
Internet Service Provider (ISP)
43
Access: Commerce Models
60
The Evolving Business Model
68
Summary
72
CHAPTER 3: CHALLENGES OF THE INTERNET
BUSINESS—BUSINESS AND TECHNOLOGY
75
Business Challenges
75
Positive and Negative Effects of the Internet
78
Basics of Running a Business
81
Planning the Business: The Basics
83
The Most Important Part of the Business: 
The Customer
86
Analyzing Customer Needs
88
Defining Customer Value and Satisfaction
92
The Value Chain
97
Primary Activities/Events
97
Secondary Activities/Events
98
Internet Marketing
100
Retail Markets
102
Planning and Execution
104
Measuring Market Demand
106
The Business Models
107
Technical Challenges
109
Summary
114
viii
Contents

CHAPTER 4: INTERNET— TECHNOLOGY 
AND SERVICE PROVISIONING IN THE
INFORMATION MARKETPLACE
115
Network Planning
116
Architectural Switching Plan
117
Routing Techniques
122
Hierarchical/Alternate Routing
124
Dynamic Routing
125
Packet Routing
127
Network Routing and Financial Relationships
129
Transmission Plan
131
Addressing/Numbering Plans
133
Network Signaling Plan
135
Network Management Plan
137
Subscriber Billing/Customer Support Plan
140
Mobile Issues
151
Summary
151
CHAPTER 5: NETWORK SIGNALING: 
MOBILE AND WIRED BUSINESS SPACE
153
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet 
Protocol (TCP/IP)
154
The OSI Model
156
TCP/IP Model
157
Network Layer
159
Transport Layer
159
Philosophical Difference between the Internet 
and Non-Internet World
162
Internet Protocol — Version 4 versus Version 6
164
Internet Protocol (IP) Version 4
165
Contents
ix

IPv4 Summary 
169
Internet Protocol (IP) Version 6
169
Transitioning from IPv4 to IPv6
172
Wireless Internet Protocols
173
Wireless Application Protocol (WAP)
174
WAP and Non-WAP Architectural Comparisons 
(WWW)
178
WAP and Non-WAP Terminology
184
What are WAP’s Limitations?
187
WAP Protocol Architecture
188
Wireless Se
190
Bearer Services
193
iMode
194
iMode Protocol Structure
195
WAP versus iMode
196
WAP versus iMode versus Next Generation Wireless
200
Internet Convergence
201
Summary
202
CHAPTER 6: E-COMMERCE AND MOBILE 
E-COMMERCE
203
What is M-Commerce?
207
M-Commerce Issues
209
What Is Mobility?
210
M-Commerce Technical Issues
214
M-Commerce Business Issues
217
The Danger of Moving without Proper Planning
219
M-Commerce Services
222
Mobility and M-Commerce
225
Mobility Location Information: an Asset
227
Summary
229
x
Contents

CHAPTER 7: CUSTOMER CARE, BILLING, 
AND REVENUE ASSURANCE
231
Customer Care: What Is It?
232
What Comprises Customer Care?
235
External View
235
Internal View
238
Mobility and Customer Care
241
Customer Care: Challenge
241
Billing
244
Billing Costs
246
Operational Support System (OSS) Integration
248
Revenue Assurance
252
Revenue Assurance and Fraud
255
Summary
256
CHAPTER 8: THE INTERNET BUSINESS 
MODEL: THE FUTURE AND ITS ECONOMICS
259
Convergence and the Open Pipe
259
The Public Right
261
Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act
(CALEA)
264
Wireless 9-1-1
265
Universal Service Fund (USF)
266
The Public and Regulation
269
The Internet Business Model
269
Internet Retailers versus Brick and Mortar Retailers
271
Application Service Provider (ASP)
273
The Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) Provider
275
Customer-Relationship Management (CRM)
276
The Network Service Provider
279
The Content Provider
280
Contents
xi

The Other Provider (OP)
281
The Next Generation Internet: Mobile Internet
283
Economics
284
Summary
286
APPENDIX A: ACRONYMS, DEFINITIONS, 
AND TERMINOLOGY
289
APPENDIX B: NETWORK INTERCONNECT
323
Interface Types
325
INDEX
331
BIBLIOGRAPHY
329
INDEX
329
xii
Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
T
o Charles P. Eifinger, a 40 year veteran of the Bell System
who retired in 1990, my friend and mentor; "Stop and think
about what needs to be done.  Then do it."
To the late Howard Schuster, Vice President of Engineering
and Planning for New York Telephone (circa 1975–1985) and
my former boss.  He gave me the opportunity to be recognized.
To the late Carl Ripa, former chief engineer for New York
Telephone (1985–1989) and my former boss. A fine leader who
challenged me.
To Robert Mandell, my friend, superior, and mentor.  His
advice to me: "Don’t sweat the small stuff," "Just Do It,” and,
"Cool heads prevail."
To Lawrence J. Chu, friend but more boss than colleague.
To this day, he continues to challenge the boundaries of the
telecommunications business; even after retiring from the Bell
System.
To the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) and
John Marinho, former Chairperson of TIA TR45 Committee,
for teaching me the business of standards and expanding my
view of wireless.
To all of my colleagues who have influenced me through our
interactions and debates.
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank.

C H A P T E R
1
NETWORKS AND THE
INTERNET: WHAT ARE
THEY?
A
ll telecommunications networks, regardless of the services
they provide, share the following common characteristics.
1. Communications networks transport information (for
example, voice, data, video) between the source and
destination. Broadcast television and radio are examples
where the information from one source is distributed to
many different destinations.
2. Networks concentrate information. In other words,
networks contain entities that concentrate information
from multiple information sources prior to transmission.
3. Networks have entities that distribute information among
multiple destinations.
4. Networks have entities that simply carry information from
one point in the network to another. These elements are
called transmission facilities or simply, facilities.
5. Networks may modify the information to improve
transmission quality. Simple examples of this are analog-to-
digital conversion, line coding, and modulation.
6. Networks exchange information with other networks. For
example, when a caller initiates a long-distance call, the
information flows through at least two local exchange
1
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

networks and one long-distance network. Another example
is when a wireless caller calls a wireline subscriber; the
information flows through a wireless network and a
wireline network. The Internet transports information
between people and places. It supports the transmission
(real time) of text, voice, and video. The traditional voice
wireline network can support the same types of information
as the Internet.
Local Area Networks (LANs), Wide Area Networks (WANs),
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), the Internet, and Broadcast
television are just some examples of networks.
The terms “call” and “information” are used interchange-
ably. Whether information is voice, video, or an electronic
text/graphic file, it is all information. Networks carry informa-
tion from one place to another. The Internet is a medium for
information exchange and is composed of highly intelligent ter-
minal devices that communicate across low-speed and high-
speed transmission paths. The Internet’s power is in the
terminal devices.
The wireless industry is an outstanding example of how the
terminal device has become an integral part of the Internet
business space. The devices currently in use appear to be the
same mobile handsets that were used prior to the introduction
of the mobile Internet. The user cannot physically see the dif-
ferences. As far as the user is concerned, the handset looks and
feels like the non-Internet models. The differences can only be
seen via the services provided to the user. More information on
the mobile Internet will be discussed later in this book.
Figure 1-1 is a diagram that provides a high-level view of a
common telecommunications signaling network.
The reader will find that as the telecommunications net-
work is generalized as an information network, the devices that
enable information to be generated or transported are described
in generic functions. Figure 1-1 describes the more traditional
2
Chapter 1

telecommunications signaling network that carriers voice and
data. This network diagram represents a non-packet and non-
internet network. The Internet is similar in nature to current
and more established wireline and wireless networks. The most
glaring difference is that the Internet network is not controlled
by a single large provider or even by a few large network
providers. The Internet’s power is in the terminal device. Figure
1-2 is a high-level illustration of the Internet and its basic com-
ponents. It should be noted that the basic functional compo-
nents of the Internet are similar to that of any other network.
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
3
FIGURE 1-1
The telecommunications signaling network

NETWORK COMPONENTS
Telecommunications networks (including the Internet) are
comprised of devices that tend to perform the same general
functions. These devices or elements fall into the following
general categories:
•
Routers or switches
•
Databases
•
Transmission facilities
•
Subscriber billing systems
•
Customer care and provisioning
•
Network management systems (NMS)
The aforementioned categories are applicable to both a
wireless and wired (non-wireless) environment. These broad
4
Chapter 1
Internet
Internet
FIGURE 1-2
The Internet

generalizations enable an individual to visualize and understand
network architectures. As noted in Telecommunications
Internetworking, by viewing the network as an entity that can be
described as a set of functions rather than boxes with names,
one will see the network as a dynamic entity. The Internet is the
most dynamic, flexible, and user accessible network currently
deployed today. The Internet does not require an Internet
Service Provider (ISP) to have a spectrum license, file quarterly
reports with a state regulatory commission, or maintain com-
mon service quality standards. However, this does not mean
that the ISP is exempt from the aforementioned requirements.
These types of requirements are driven by good or bad customer
perceptions.
ROUTERS OR SWITCHES
Networks contain network elements that physically route infor-
mation. These network elements are called switches or in the
world of the Internet, they are called routers. Multiple devices
may share the routing function. Depending on the type of net-
work being addressed, the element may be a mainframe com-
puter or a desktop computer. Routing is an activity or function.
A router is a computer that directs information traffic among
the network nodes from source to destination. Industry laymen
often use their own industry specific terms in order to describe
the same function. Routing or switching is sometimes separated
by perceived network intelligence. In other words, routing
implies intelligence and decision-making, whereas switching is
merely a physical activity. This is a minor difference when one
considers this from a high-level view.
Some networks employ fixed routing, meaning that a partic-
ular pair of users always communicates using the same cir-
cuit(s) or path(s) through the network. In other networks,
dynamic routing is employed, and therefore, a different path is
used each time. The Internet employs dynamic routing.
Unlike other types of telecommunications networks, the
Internet has the bulk of its intelligence spread throughout the
network in various terminal devices used by the customers.
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
5

Terminal devices can be as small as a laptop computer, which
has so much processing power that the only limiting factor is
the transmission network. Figure 1-3 illustrates the routing
function.
DATABASE
Multiple routing elements may be required for a single connec-
tion. Routers use routing tables to determine how and where to
send a particular information signal. These routing tables are
communication roadmaps that reside in a database. The routing
type employed in the Internet is dynamic routing. In other
words, the Internet does not employ fixed or predetermined
routing paths to route packets of data. The Internet database is
a storage device for information. The database may be inte-
grated within the host computer or exist externally to the com-
puter, thereby serving multiple computing devices. When a
single database serves multiple computers, the scenario is sim-
ilar to that of the corporate Intranet. The database may even
6
Chapter 1
Other 
Networks 
(Internet)
Routers
Other Networks 
(Internet)
FIGURE 1-3
Routing and Internet component intelligence

store subscriber profile information, which may include billing
preferences, subscriber features, restricted numbers, restricted
Web sites, and so on. Figure 1-4 depicts the ways in which the
database is utilized.
TRANSMISSION FACILITIES
As noted in Telecommunications Internetworking, transmission
facilities are used to interconnect the end-user (subscriber) to
the network, one network to other networks, and switching or
concentrating transmission points within the network.
Networks are often designed with a duplication of transmission
facilities between two points. The Internet’s ability to commu-
nicate with a multiplicity of Web sites is based partially on the
way the transmission network has been designed. Today, high
bandwidth networks are being constructed to support data.
However, when the Internet began its commercial life, the net-
work was a wireline telephone company designed and built
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
7
Other 
Networks 
(Internet)
Routers
FIGURE 1-4
The database in the Internet

voice transmission network. The redundancy built into the
older voice network enabled a large number of Web sites to
communicate with one another with minimal difficulty.
However, the Internet’s dynamic routing strength was not being
fully taken advantage of and was limited by the paths and band-
width of the voice transmission network. The Internet is a
packet data network. Packet data networks are dynamic routing
networks. The wireless networks are employing hierarchical
routing to route Internet traffic. The packet routing techniques
have almost no value to the wireless network. More information
on routing will be discussed later in this book.
The practice of multiple transmission path routing is called
diversity routing and is used to improve reliability. Transmission
facilities come in many different sizes and flavors–everything
from 56 Kbps to many gigabytes per second. Transmission facil-
ities are either metallic or glass. These facilities carry informa-
tion in either analog or digital format.
The information carried by the transmission facilities is
either out-of-band or in-band. An out-of-band information
stream refers to a situation where call control information is
physically carried over one path, while the actual call or content
information is sent over another path. In-band information
refers to a situation where call control and call/content infor-
mation is physically carried over the same path in serial fashion.
In the case of the Internet, information is carried in-band and
digitized. Figure 1-5 is an illustration of the transmission net-
work employed by the Internet.
NETWORK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Service providers need some way of managing the various ele-
ments within their network. The management of the network
elements may be done on-site or remotely. All systems must be
managed. How that is done will vary from industry to industry
and even within an industry. Network management practices
and systems are as numerous as the number of service
providers.
8
Chapter 1

The majority of the ISPs currently maintain practices that
are considered unheard of in the older wireline voice service
provider or wireless service provider community. This refers to
the frequently used ISP practice of taking the ISP network
nodes off-line for maintenance. The older wireline voice service
providers (the local exchange carriers) have a legacy of service
that dates back to the nineteenth century, where service had to
be maintained 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The wireless
carriers, although not as old as the wireline carriers, have a phi-
losophy of service that is the same as their wireline brethren.
The mere thought that a customer could be removed deliber-
ately from service on a periodic basis for maintenance was and
still is considered “heresy.” The reader should note that state
regulatory agencies monitor the wireline carriers and not the
ISP. Therefore, the standard of service for the ISP is lower.
Remember that from the user’s perspective and the regulatory
agency’s perspective, the standard of service is based primarily
on availability, not bandwidth. Most user complaints about an
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
9
Switch
STP
Access
Tandem
Subscriber #1
Subscriber #2
The voice conversation will 
be handled by the out-of-
band network.
The computers will be 
handled by the in-band 
network.
In-band: voice and data path
Out-of-band signaling path
FIGURE 1-5
Transmission network

ISP are not about the bandwidth provided or the speed, but
about the inability to gain access to the ISP. Not too long ago,
in the late 1990s, a very large national e-mail ISP encountered
the “busy signal” problem. Users would call into the ISP and
discover that they could not reach the provider because the ISP
modems were busy. The user’s inability to access this ISP
resulted in lost business, and the ISP received bad national
press over the issue of inaccessibility (constant busy tones over
the user’s modem). A NMS would have been a massive help; of
course, a NMS can only be employed if the ISP owns the phys-
ical network. Modems can report to a NMS where all lines to
them are active; therefore, the modem cannot provide anymore
service.
Industry 
standardization 
(Transmission 
Management
Network (TMN) standards) notwithstanding, NMSs and prac-
tices are considered highly proprietary among service providers.
An efficient NMS and set of practices may be the difference
between a service provider’s ability to show profit or none at all.
NMSs enables a service provider to operate efficiently, control
network element functions, and provide visibility to alarm con-
ditions.
The Competitive Local Exchange Carrier (CLEC) is a type
of carrier that was created as a result of the Telecommuni-
cations Act of 1996. The opening of the local loop has enabled
new entrants into the business of providing local exchange ser-
vices. One of the challenges that these CLECs have been 
facing is in the area of network management. An ISP is a type
of CLEC: in other words, a data CLEC.
Starting up a CLEC forces one to focus on very specific
areas of need first. These areas of need are identifying the mar-
ket, business plan, marketing, core product, sales, and revenue.
Unfortunately, network management was the last aspect of the
business to focus on for many of the early ISPs. ISPs do not
usually require a sophisticated NMS early in an ISP’s operation;
however, one should not expect to be in business for long unless
a type of NMS is in place. Network management enables an
10
Chapter 1

ISP to monitor a network and network element health and
occupancy (level of activity). Figure 1-6 depicts the functions of
network management.
SUBSCRIBER BILLING SYSTEMS
Service providers of all types need to be paid for the services
rendered. All networks must record usage by the subscriber and
bill the subscriber for the usage. Billing can be a function of
usage volume, call volume, destination, or feature invocation.
Service providers can offer service based on a variety of differ-
ent parameters and subscriber activities. These parameters and
subscriber activities may include calling party pays plans, toll-
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
11
Network 
Management
Other 
Network 
Elements
FIGURE 1-6
Network management

free numbers (that is, 800 and 888 numbers), credit card
billing, geographic regional calling plans, time sensitive promo-
tional plans, and other types of billing arrangements. The
Internet is currently providing voice access through the use of
Voice over IP (VoIP) technology. Most ISPs charge a flat rate for
all of their services. The flat rate may only be used under spe-
cific calling conditions. The ISP changed the way telecommu-
nications services are rated and billed. The paradigm for
revenue generation in the world of the Internet is based par-
tially on advertising and usage. This will be discussed in greater
detail in later chapters.
As noted in Telecommunications Internetworking, billing is
an area of operations that is often overlooked. Billing systems
are treated as after thoughts. In fact, the billing system is as
important as the switching/routing capability of the ISP. A
billing system needs to do more than simply create a bill. It
should apply company billing rates to a call, state, and local gov-
ernment surcharges, access charges, interconnect charges, and
applicable discounts. These tasks apply to all service providers
including the ISP. Figure 1-7 is a high-level depiction of the
billing function.
CUSTOMER CARE AND PROVISIONING
Customer care and provisioning are activities and systems that
may appear separate, but are directly related to billing systems.
Both maintain a record of the subscribers’ names and
addresses, types of features subscribed to, and are used to sup-
port customer support activities by customer care personnel.
These systems will be used by customer care personnel to
answer questions about a subscriber’s bill or the type of service,
reflect payments, remove or add new services, request repair
services, and most importantly, file customer complaints.
Customers perceive all of this as a single system. However, they
are typically separate, but interconnected data systems.
Customer care is an activity that service providers of all types
must support.
12
Chapter 1

ISPs divide customer care into two categories. The cate-
gories listed are also supported by other types of carriers, but
use other names.
Customer care/complaint
The ISP interacts with the
customer on the following types of matters: new service
activation, billing inquiries, billing complaints, access
telephone numbers, rating plans, and purchased feature
capabilities.
Technical Support
The ISP often maintains a separate
“hotline” for technical questions. These technical questions
can include ones concerning software installation, software
troubles, access telephone numbers, and practically any
question that the ISP cannot classify as a non-technical
question. Often, the ISP will request that all questions be
submitted to them via e-mail.
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
13
Users
Users
Information
Mediation
Billing
Network 
Management
• Billing can be
usage based or
flat rate.
• Billing can be a
function of usuage, 
volume, destination,
or feature invocation.
Users
Router
FIGURE 1-7
Billing

Successful ISPs understand that customer interaction is
important. Without the customer, no revenue and therefore, no
ISP exists. See Figure 1-8 for a depiction of customer care in
the ISP.
NETWORK SIGNALING
Network signaling is the language used to communicate with
other service providers and to communicate with network ele-
ments within one’s network. As noted in Telecommunications
Internetworking, two dominant forms of signaling to support
network-to-network communications are available: Multi-
Frequency (MF) and Signaling System 7 (SS7). In fact, the cur-
rent and dominant form of communication used within the
Internet is the same signaling used by the wireline telephone
companies.
14
Chapter 1
Customer 
Care
In the end it's 
about the 
Customer
FIGURE 1-8
Customer care and the ISP

Today, users have their computers dial a specific telephone
number. The dominant and incumbent local exchange carrier
(ILEC) allocates this telephone number to the ISP. Note that a
national organization is responsible for the overall administra-
tion of telephone number exchanges (area codes) and the mon-
itoring of local ILEC administration. Essentially, the ISP is
treated like a customer asking for a telephone number. The ISP
obtains numbers within various area codes to ensure that their
customers do not have to pay long-distance access charges.
Today, the ISP customer must pay the ILEC or CLEC for local
access usage.
The user’s computer communicates via a modem to the
ISP’s local host computer (server). The modem is a device that
communicates via a series of tones. It is a modulator and
demodulator device. The ISP can communicate with other ISPs
via modems; however, it is more efficient for ISPs to communi-
cate information between each other via a specific language.
Note that until the late 1990s, the Internet could be character-
ized as a few large ISPs that provided only e-mail service and
hundreds of small local/regional ISPs that also provided e-mail
service. A specific ISP network signaling protocol is used called
the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP),
which will be discussed in later chapters. Figure 1-9 illustrates
how ISPs communicate with their users and with other ISPs.
THE INTERNET: WHAT IS IT?
The Internet was conceived in the 1960s. The United States
government had retained the Rand Corporation to outline its
vision of the future information network. The result was a
report that described information as becoming a material good
and the principal commodity of the twenty-first century. The
U.S. government agency called the Defense Advanced Research
Project Agency (DARPA) and invested several billion dollars in
developing packet switching networks starting in the mid-1960s
through the early 1970s. Initially, the customer for these
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
15

switching networks was the U.S. Department of Defense.
However, many of the researchers who had been contracted to
carry out the research and development were academics. These
academics became enamored of the test systems they built and
realized their work had applications beyond defense. As a
defense initiative, this packet switching effort had a great deal
to offer. During times of national emergency, relying on a pub-
lic telecommunications network with known routing pat-
terns/paths is not the most secure way of passing national
security information. Initially, the research network was called
the Advanced Research Project Agency Network (ARPANET),
and later the Internet (Inter Network). The first e-mail was sent
in 1972. Figure 1-10 is another rendering of the Internet.
By the early 1980s, two other important pieces of technol-
ogy in the United States had emerged. The first was the 
workstation/server computer system, which emerged as the way
to provide cost effective computing to the desktop. The second
16
Chapter 1
• The Internet is filled with
   multiple terminal/device
   vendors and multiple ISPs. 
• Wireline Internet is
   migrating to IPv6.0
Common Language is 
used to interconnect the 
multiple ISP networks.
TCIP is used throughout 
the telecom industry.
TCP/IP
IP version 4.0
FIGURE 1-9
Network signaling

was the Ethernet LAN. The Ethernet had been widely accepted
as the way of providing communication between the desktop
and server computers in the same organization (local area net-
work). The computer and information technology researchers
involved with Internet development had used all these systems
for computing, local, and national communications. The
United States government had funded most of the initial imple-
mentations of the Internet technology on the basis that it would
be made freely available to others.
By the mid-1980s, a large number of universities and
research labs in Europe and the United States had access to the
Internet through largely government subsidized network links
leased from the Public Network Operators. Today, most
Internet connections are paid for directly by the subscribing
organization. Unlike most telecommunications standards that
are developed under the auspices of “recognized” groups (in
other words, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
17
• Cable Television
• Cellular
• Personal 
   Communications 
   Services
• PSTN
• Paging
Structured
Requires large 
amounts of money
Controlled by 
companies
Internet
• The Internet is highly interconnected.  
Individuals can become Internet Service 
Providers.
• First e-mail sent in 1972
Internet
Internet
FIGURE 1-10
The Internet

and the International Telecommunications Union (ITU)), the
Internet protocols were literally being developed out of sight.
Even though the members of the ANSI and ITU are both large
and small, massive corporate entities dominate ANSI and ITU
in reality. During its initial development, the Internet was not a
major economic force. Because no economic incentives existed
for a large corporation to become involved in the Internet, ANSI
or the ITU had no incentive to get involved.
The Internet was and still is an information network struc-
ture that is not controlled by a single entity. As a result of this
lack of centralized control, most individuals in the telecommu-
nications sector ignored the Internet. Internet protocol work is
still defined outside of the jurisdiction of the dominant stan-
dards bodies. Current work on the Wireless Access Protocol
(WAP) is actually done in other forums: specifically the WAP
Forum.
Internet users and companies interested in providing
Internet equipment recognized the need to develop protocol
standards. Hence, the Internet Society, an International not-
for-profit professional body, formed to give individuals, govern-
ment agencies, and companies a direct say in the direction that
the protocols and the technology could move. The Internet
Society is not controlled by ANSI or ITU. Figure 1-11 illustrates
the apparent free flowing nature of the Internet.
INTERNET NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
The Internet is an open pipe of information that allows access
to anyone who uses a computer or some type of access terminal
device. Currently, the Internet carries voice, data, and video
(real time and stored). It has become the point of convergence
for the telecommunications industry. Every telecommunica-
tions business segment is working diligently to find some way of
obtaining the economic rewards of the Internet.
The Internet is not a single network, but rather a web of net-
works. One could also say it is a network of networks.
Intelligence does not reside within a single component of the
18
Chapter 1

Internet, but is embedded within the components of individual
network elements. When comparing the Internet with the older
and traditional voice networks, one will find that the Internet is
decentralized in its intelligence and control. The power of the
Internet is in the software supporting the applications and
within the protocol itself. The lack of centralized control has
enabled many people who did not have the financial resources
to start their own telecommunications business to create their
own telecommunications business. The individual engineer has
an opportunity to create a software application or build his/her
own Web site with minimal financial investment or sacrifice.
The small businessperson wanting to find a way of making some
of the money that only large monolithic telecommunications
carriers or e-mail companies made could now buy a low cost
desktop and start his/her own local ISP serving the community
in which he/she lived.
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
19
Internet
The Internet is not controlled by a handful of 
companies or associations.
The Internet is the home of the new telecom 
mavericks.
FIGURE 1-11
The Internet–Home of the new telecom mavericks

In the world of the Internet, no one controls the informa-
tion pipe. This lack of control has created an enormous busi-
ness opportunity for entrepreneurial engineers and business
people. The Internet is quite literally unexplored territory for
both the technical and business community.
Figure 1-12 highlights the major differences between the
Internet and other telecommunications industry segments.
UNDERSTANDING THE NETWORK
ARCHITECTURE: UNDERSTANDING THE
MARKET FIRST
Another way of looking at the Internet is that the traditional
public telecommunications networks (PSTN and Wireless voice
networks) look at voice as their principal business and data
(non-voice information) as a line of business they enter heavily.
The Internet, on the other hand, looks at data (non-voice 
20
Chapter 1
• The Internet is not a service.
• The Internet is a network 
medium.
• The Internet is a medium 
that other telecommunications 
segments are attempting to 
utilize.
• The Internet was designed as 
a packet communications 
network with defense 
applications.
• The Internet’s power is 
harnessed via software 
applications for terminal 
equipment.
• The Internet exists in both 
the wireline and wireless 
environments.
A Flexible Information Highway
FIGURE 1-12
The Internet: An open pipe, opportunity, and unexplored territory

information) as its principal line of business and voice as a line
of business it is beginning to enter. The traditional public
telecommunications, carriers, satellite, and cable television are
all seeking ways of entering the Internet business. Many of
these companies do not even have a complete understanding of
what they will be providing on the Internet. For example, a tele-
phone company (wireline carrier) starts its own Internet busi-
ness. The following questions need to be addressed within the
wireline carrier:
•
What is the wireline carrier providing on the Internet? Is it
e-mail?
•
How will the wireline carrier make any money? Will it
charge for e-mail? Will it charge companies for advertising
via banner advertisements? If the carrier seeks some of its
revenue from advertising, is the Web site a kind of
“electronic yellow pages?”
•
Other existing e-mail companies are already charging low
monthly flat rates. How will the wireline carrier bill for its
services?
•
What new services will the wireline carrier’s engineers
create that will enable the carrier to sell and charge money
for?
•
Who is the customer of the wireline carrier that is entering
the Internet business? Does this customer already buy
service from the wireline carrier? Does the wireline carrier
need to conduct market research to find out who this
customer is?
These may not seem like technical questions, but in reality,
they are. Telecommunications engineers develop network capa-
bilities and products for the sole purpose of making money for
the company they work for. If the engineers are working without
this kind of focus, the carrier will be “out of business.” A brief
side note: Product marketing, product management, and tech-
nology must work together in order to create services that peo-
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
21

ple wish to purchase. The market consists of people who are
seeking to have desires fulfilled. These people have their desires
fulfilled by having their needs met through the creation, offer-
ing, and exchanging of products. Figure 1-13 illustrates the
need for an Internet “wannabee” to understand the marketplace
it is serving.
The challenge for the Internet “wannabee” is deter-
mining what product he/she will be providing. The Internet 
is not a product. It is an information medium that supports 
bi-directional transmission. Figure 1-14 illustrates these points.
In terms of opportunity, the Internet is a “blank slate” waiting to
be filled in.
22
Chapter 1
• E-Commerce
• M-Commerce
• On-Line Shopping
• ERP
The Internet is a medium – Shopping is 
one application.
Back office support
FIGURE 1-13
Understand the marketplace: Creating services

The differences between the Internet business and other
telecommunications business segments are deep; network
architecture, traffic engineering profiles, and even the pricing
mechanisms are different. This subject will be discussed in
more detail later in the chapter. The hardware and software of
the Internet can be defined within the functional framework
described earlier in this chapter. The components and software
used by ISPs is different than that used by the wireline and
wireless (satellite, cellular, Paging, PCS, and so on) carrier com-
munities. The following paragraphs outline the components
used by an ISP.
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
23
• Web Browsing
• Research
• Publishing
• Commerce
• Entertainment
Physical newspapers 
replaced by OnLine news 
FIGURE 1-14
The Internet–The new information medium

COMPONENTS OF THE INTERNET
The following sections describe the basic components of the
Internet.
HARDWARE
The Internet is a collection of computing devices and transmis-
sion facilities communicating with one another. The Internet is
basically made up of four pieces of hardware:
•
Hosts
•
Networks
•
Routers
•
Computers/Terminals with modems
HOSTS
Hosts are computers that serve as central nodes for
information processing and transactions. They can be worksta-
tions, PCs, servers, and mainframes that run applications. They
are the central computer systems used to support users who
wish to connect to a network or the Internet.
NETWORKS
The networks are the transmission roadways built
to connect a host and its subscribers to other hosts and their
subscribers. In this case, networks are not any different con-
ceptually than the traditional voice networks in a wireline or
wireless voice service provider business.
LANs (Ethernets), point-to-point leased lines, and dial-up
(telephone, ISDN, X25) links are all transport mechanisms that
carry traffic between one computer and another. These glue
together all the different network technologies to provide a
ubiquitous service to deliver information packets.
ROUTERS
Routers are special purpose computers that are good
at talking to network links. Some people use general purpose
computers as low performance (low cost) routers, that is, PCs
24
Chapter 1

or Unix boxes with multiple LAN cards, serial line cards, or
modems. Routers are akin to wireline tandem switches. Routers
direct traffic but are smart traffic switches that select the best
route possible. They provide network management capabilities
such as load balancing, dynamic route selection, trouble alert,
and trouble identification.
COMPUTERS/TERMINALS WITH MODEMS
Intelligence and capa-
bility within the Internet are embedded within the terminal
devices; this includes the users’ computers as well as the routers
and hosts. The distributed intelligence and capability have
enabled the Internet to flourish faster than the centrally con-
trolled/owned networks. Think of this as analogous to moving a
large mound of dirt 50 feet high and 50 feet wide from one
place to another place by one person using only one shovel in a
very short period of time. The amount of physical and mental
energy needed to complete this task is enormous. (Completing
this physical task in a short period of time requires similar con-
centration and focus as playing sports.)
Now imagine the same effort being accomplished by a thou-
sand people each using a shovel. The overall amount of energy
expended should be the same, but the difference is that each
person will handle the shovel differently because each person
will have a different level of experience in using a shovel. Some
of the shovelers will have more experience using their body in
physical activity and as a result, the effort will be accomplished
far faster than one could calculate. These experience levels are
random factors that a single large company could never tolerate
in a large-scale development effort. Coordinated development
efforts within a large corporate entity must work within a spe-
cific, defined process; this reduces waste and avoids disorgani-
zation. However, by tapping the total individual experiences of
a population of engineers, the Internet business has exploded
into the marketplace.
The result is faster computers, faster modems, unique net-
work configurations, and unique applications of existing tech-
nology (for example, audio engineers who develop speakers for
use in gaming technology thereby enhancing the market value
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
25

of the computer). The power of the terminal exists because of
the software developed. Software will be discussed next.
The typical network configuration of the Internet appears as
follows. Figure 1-15 is a generic representation of the Internet.
The Internet is a conglomeration of computers and LANs. All of
the above is designed to communicate with the other.
SOFTWARE
For many people in the non-technical community, software
refers to games, word processing programs, or graphics art 
programs. For many in the technical community, software refers
to games, word processing programs, engineering design 
programs, or CAD/CAM programs. These programs are the
products that helped generate interest, revenue, and investment
26
Chapter 1
Routers
Internet
FIGURE 1-15
Typical network configuration

in the Internet business. However, the underlying software that
has facilitated the growth of the Internet is the software that
enabled banner advertising and interactive icons.
Banner advertising jump-started the revenue stream for the
ISP. The ability for a user to interact with an icon in order to
move from one screen to another or to initiate an activity made
the Internet a user friendly place for the non-technical and
technical (but not computer literate) to work and play.
Software is no different than any other product. Different types
of software are available such as user software (like a word pro-
cessing program or a utility program), operating software, game
software, software that runs a telephone switch, software that
creates a voice service like Call Forwarding, and software that
enables a Web site to interact with a user. Figure 1-16 depicts
the various types of software from a functional perspective.
Later chapters will discuss software in more detail.
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
27
• Operating System
Software
• User Applications
• Utility Software
• Web Scripting
Software is needed 
to operate and run 
the system.
Software is needed 
to facilitate the use 
of the equipment.
FIGURE 1-16
Software

INTERNET ACCESS AND NETWORK
INTERCONNECTION
The Internet is accessed and used by corporate users and home
users. The corporate user typically accesses the Internet via
their corporate Intranet. The corporate Intranet interconnects
the company LAN via a host. Further information on the
Intranet is available later in this book. The home user accesses
the Internet via an ISP. The host uses TCP/IP to access the
Internet. Today, the home user accesses via a modem in the
home computer.
As indicated earlier, the Internet is a network of networks.
Each network communicates with the other using computers as
the principal terminal device. The corporate user is using a data
network to communicate with the Internet also known as the
World Wide Web or the Web. Typically, the data network is con-
nected to the PSTN. The home user purchases access from an
ISP. The ISP serves as the host to subscribers of their service.
The ISP is reached by home computers using modems that dial
telephone numbers associated with the ISP. The modem makes
these ISP calls on twisted pair wire. Even though the Internet
is a packet-switched network, the link between a home PC and
an ISP through a modem is still circuit-switched. New technol-
ogy, such as DSL, is changing this environment. DSL makes it
possible to have Internet access "always on." The ISP and the
corporate Intranet are connected to several Domain Name
Servers (DNSs). The DNSs enable the users to find the desti-
nation/requested Web site (another host). Figure 1-17 illus-
trates the standard network interconnect.
The aforementioned represents two distinct ways to connect
the various Web sites, yet a common node still exists called the
Packet Switched Telephone Network (PSTN). The role of the
PSTN is changing in the world of Internet. The wireless carrier
community is working to enable the mobile handset to interact
with the Internet. The PSTN plays a major interconnect role to
date. However, the Internet is not a single entity or a manage-
able number of entities that can be controlled by the PSTN
(this includes CLECs, ILECs, or interexchange carriers). The
28
Chapter 1

construction of a network to support Internet users can take the
form of a single ISP owning telecommunications hubs
throughout the nation while leasing the nationwide transport
from another company (that may not even be a major long dis-
tance company or an ILEC).
The wireless Internet is evolving differently than the wire-
line-based Internet. Wireless license holders are converting
their networks to support either the WAP or i-mode signaling
protocols. The proliferation of wireless devices has caused those
in the wireline worlds to worry about lost market share. Rather
than being the second communication device in the home, the
wireless device is being positioned to take the lead as a user’s
principal way of communicating. The wireless Internet has not
only expanded the wireless business, but it has also impacted
the network interconnect to the wireline community. Network
interconnect to the wired community becomes less essential as
the wireless base not only grows, but also becomes a more
important form of communication. Even more so, no industry
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
29
Wired
End 
Office
Tandem
Standard interconnect 
is the typical Dial Line 
connection.
Internet
Internet
Internet
Non-Internet networks
Corporate Intranet
FIGURE 1-17
The typical network interconnect

work has been done to address network interconnect to the
wireless Internet. The wireless Internet is evolving as a stand-
alone network. Given its growth, the need for interoperability
(interconnect) may be unnecessary.
The corporate Intranet is a LAN that is an effective internal
company Internet. The Intranet supports everything that the
Internet user has access to, but its principal function is to sup-
port corporate communications. The Intranet obtains a
dataline, probably a facility at T1 or T3 rates, from the wireline
telephone company. The Intranet is most likely interconnected
to an ILEC end office. The wireline telephone company assigns
a dialable number to the company. The dialable number is asso-
ciated with a domain name and address that hosts can access
via their TCP/IP connection.
The home user accesses the ISP via dialable numbers. The
home user essentially calls the ISP via the home computer and
reaches other Web sites through this ISP. The standard inter-
connect to the Internet for an ISP is via a typical dial line from
the end office. Today, the telephone companies have installed
routers in their networks that do nothing but interconnect
Intranets and ISPs. Network interconnect in the realm of the
Internet is no different than that of any other type of carrier.
The potential business spin on ISP network interconnect is that
all of the other telecommunications segments are working
towards the Internet model. The convergence toward the
Internet model will force all other carrier types to expend
resources for developing a Web presence of some kind. Figure
1-18 is an illustration of a generic network interconnect involv-
ing the ISP.
See Appendix B for information on network interconnect. At
this time, the only industry standards and defacto standards
that dictate network interconnect are Bellcore’s (now Telcordia)
GR-145-CORE specficiation and the Telecommunications
Industry Association’s (TIA’s) ANSI standard ANSI-93. It should
be noted that network interconnect is about communication
between networks. Network interconnect does not need to
address user technical interaction with an ISP. Users always
30
Chapter 1

interact directly with their service provider. The issue is how the
user’s ISP communicates to other networks; this is network
interconnect.
ISPs are interested in network interconnection as much as
any other carrier. They are required to pay for long-distance
access. Every time an ISP reaches out into the Internet web
outside of the LATA boundaries of the ILEC, the ISP is
required to pay an access charge to the ILEC. Some ISPs usu-
ally pass on the cost of the long-distance portion via some type
of long-distance transport charge. This charge would be over
and above any hourly fee the ISP would levy on the sub-
scriber/user for use of the ISP services. Note that some ISPs
simply charge the subscriber/user for access to the ISP services
and hold the subscriber/user responsible for the cost of the
local telephone call via the normal monthly telephone bill.
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
31
PCS
Cable TV
Paging
Cellular
End 
Office
Access 
Tandem
STP
SCP
Type 2D
Type 1
Type S
Type 2B
Type 2A
E911 
Tandem
Type 2C
Type 2C
End Office
Internet
Today, most of the other 
network types are working 
to find ways to access the 
Internet.
FIGURE 1-18
The Internet and network interconnect

Anyone can be an ISP. Many understand this and as a
result, the Internet has been flooded with a plethora of ISPs.
ISPs can serve local communities, regions of the country, the
nation, and provide international access. The word “web” was
used to describe the Internet. The thousands of ISPs and
Intranets, if interconnected to one another, would form a pic-
ture of a spider web. Many people speak of the Internet back-
bone. This is a hard scenario to imagine, for no single company
is in control of the Internet. However, long-distance carriers
who own nationwide transmission networks and non-telecom-
munications companies who have internal communication net-
works capable of supporting telecommunications traffic of
other companies exist. In this way, the Internet does have a
backbone. Figure 1-19 is an illustration of the “loose” nature of
the Internet business. This situation will change as content
monitoring becomes a necessity in order to protect children
from various unsavory influences.
Without connectivity to other networks, the Internet rapidly
loses value. Figure 1-20 emphasizes the need for a nationwide
backbone network in order to support nationwide Internet con-
nectivity.
The Internet today is marketed as an enabler of services,
better services, point of sale, e-mail, and information research.
Remember that the Internet is accessible by all and is con-
trolled by no one. Even though ISPs must seek ILEC intercon-
nection, the fact remains that the growing CLEC community is
slowly taking away the ISP interconnect business. Therefore,
network visibility is and will be maintained through the CLECs.
Figure 1-21 illustrates the role of the CLECs.
INTERNET MODELS
A variety of business models and network configurations are
supported in the Internet community. The great challenge for
Internet players is determining what it is that they will provide.
Because no one company owns or controls the Internet and the
job of the carriers is to sell voice and data usage on their net-
32
Chapter 1

Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
33
The Internet 
is a web of 
companies.
FIGURE 1-19
The Internet is a web of various companies
ILECs
ILECs
Interexchange 
Carriers
Backbone 
Network
Internet
Internet
Internet
FIGURE 1-20
Nationwide connectivity

34
Chapter 1
CLECs
ILECs
Interexchange 
Carriers
Backbone 
Network
Internet
Internet
Internet
Potential 
Competitors 
of the ILECs
FIGURE 1-21
CLEC’s and the Internet
works, what exactly are the carriers providing with their Web
sites? Are the carriers providing physical products, access to
purchasing physical products, or other types of services? The
following chapters will look to answer these questions further.
The Internet is a medium that enables communication
between users of computers. The Internet is not an application
per se, rather the Internet is a medium that is a blank slate as it
relates to subscriber value. No one individual can say what
product the Internet provides. To many, it seems to be the prin-
cipal form of communication. The Internet supports a variety of
capabilities, but it is not a product. For example, the following
are functions, not products and services, of the Internet. These
functions are not purchased by subscribers:

Research
Library access.
Advertising
Advertising space is sold as banners on a Web
page. No ISP subscriber purchases the service of an ISP
simply because it has “cool looking” interactive point and
click banners. The advertising might attract them, but it
certainly will not generate “solid, recurring, and
dependable” revenue for the ISP.
Web page publishing
This refers to any type of text
material that can be found on a Web page.
Applets
Software applications that are either found on the
computer or downloaded off of a Web site for use at that
moment.
Web Browsing
Search engines are used to search in an
organized fashion for other Web sites or topics. URL
support.
Communication between people and computers
E-mail.
Figure 1-22 highlights the various applications of the
Internet.
Even though the aforementioned services are not purchased
by Internet users, they are still value added capabilities that
make the Internet attractive to users. The question still
remains, what products and services do the users buy from the
Internet? The answer is that the Internet itself is not a product,
but it provides a service, which is access to people and infor-
mation (databases). This access is what makes the Internet a
valuable tool. The information obtained may be used for a vari-
ety of purposes including purchasing products from the data-
base holder. The user is limited by what the targeted database
will allow and by the software on either the desktop computer
or the targeted host site.
The purchasing of products is an activity that has come to
be known as e-commerce (Electronic Commerce). E-commerce
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
35

is catalog purchasing off of the Internet where the selling party
displays pictures of its products, interactive (point and click)
icons, and provides online purchase order forms. These product
sellers even have their databases tied into credit card validation
databases. E-commerce is an activity/application and not a
product to be sold to an Internet user. E-commerce has grown
to become the buzzword describing all of the Internet money
making business activity. It has become the model for many
companies wishing to use the Internet for doing business and to
base their business models on. The challenge for the ISP is
determining how it makes its money from e-commerce. Does
the ISP charge the retailer a fee per e-commerce Web site hit?
36
Chapter 1
• Research
• Advertising
• Web page 
   publishing
• Applets
• Browsing
• E-mail
Functions not product
FIGURE 1-22
Applications

Does the ISP charge the retailer a flat fee? How does the ISP
make money from e-commerce? E-commerce has generated
tremendous interest and revenue from the marketplace, but it
has caused most of that revenue to flow into the hands of the
retailer. At the time of this writing, m-commerce is fairly new to
Internet business space. M-Commerce can be described as
mobile e-commerce. The impact of the mobility attribute has
yet to be fully understood.
Figure 1-23 highlights how the Internet has become a
medium for retail shopping and making money for the ISP.
The question remains, what business models can the ISP
base its business on? The following chapters will examine the
various models that the ISP community can follow.
Networks and the Internet: What Are They?
37
FIGURE 1-23
Online shopping and e-commerce

SUMMARY
The Internet can be characterized as a wide-open playing field.
The large established mega-carriers do not control the Internet.
The mega-carriers may own a lot of network infrastructure, but
they still are working to determine how to make money off of
the Internet. The ISP faces many challenges that are no differ-
ent than any other company trying to provide some kind of ser-
vice to the marketplace. The ISP has the following concerns:
•
Identifying the market segment to serve.
•
Identifying the product/service to sell.
•
Creating differentiation between itself and other ISPs.
•
Identifying the location to launch the service.
•
In general, determining what business the ISP is in.
The Internet has become a massive opportunity for software
developers, retailers, computer manufacturing companies, com-
puter retailers, banner advertising companies, and venture cap-
italists. Early in its birth, the Internet was making money for
everyone involved, even if the Internet company was providing
another e-mail service. However, as the activity on Wall Street
has shown, the patina on the Internet business has become a
little tarnished. Investors were seeking revenue originally and
not necessarily profit. The financial community has done a
“mental reset/reboot” of its perception of the Internet. Investors
are seeking longer-term plays and commitments from the entre-
preneur, which has resulted in hard “looks” at the business
models of the various ISPs and other Internet companies.
However, one should not worry about the “tarnish” on the
Internet business because the Internet is here to stay. Intuitively,
one can see the opportunity the Internet brings–access to the
people and information access by the people. The challenge for
the ISP is to figure out how to make a business out of the
Internet. The ISP is the new carrier of the future.
The following chapters will look at the entire Internet busi-
ness and will examine the technical and business pieces of the
ISP.
38
Chapter 1

C H A P T E R
2
BUSINESS MODELS
T
he years 1999 and 2000 have been marked with financial
change for the entire CLEC community including the ISPs.
Whereas once the ISP was able to obtain money from venture
capitalists (VCs) for simply saying they would provide e-mail,
the money became scarcer in 1999. In 2000, the money
became impossible to obtain unless that ISP business plan had
substance.
Today, a startup Internet company, no matter what it might
be doing or providing for the Internet, cannot compete unless
some substance backs the business plan. Until 1999, a startup
ISP could simply advertise that it was supplying e-mail service
with great looking graphics and a free prize just for signing up.
The startup ISP could execute its business plan by such meth-
ods because the marketplace was still in a learning phase. The
customer was willing to try every flavor and kind of ISP service.
The customer had become more daring because the dominant
e-mail service company (no names shall be given) had inflicted
the worse kind of trouble on it subscribers–the busy tone.
During 1997-1999, the dominant e-mail service company was
unable to provide access for most of its subscribers unless the
customer dialed into to its server at 2:00 A.M. The lack of access
drove millions of subscribers to other e-mail service companies.
To this e-mail company’s credit, its single rate plan (with unlim-
ited usage) exponentially grew its customer base. This lack of
access created a new opportunity for the Internet “wannabees.”
39
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

The new startup Internet Service Providers (ISPs) took
advantage of the situation and launched their own e-mail ser-
vices. These services were local, regional, and national in flavor.
Until 1999, these new ISPs were primarily either local or
regional. However, these startups presented enough of a chal-
lenge to the dominant national ISPs that the venture capital
community poured billions of dollars into the Internet market.
The financial community’s outpouring of interest helped spur
massive growth in Internet technology and business. The mas-
sive mistake of one e-mail company did not serve as the primary
driver for the growth of the Internet, but it did open up an
opportunity for new money to find its way into Wall Street.
Figure 2-1 is a rendering of the financial community’s interest
in the Internet.
40
Chapter Two
Venture 
Capitalists
Investment 
Bankers
FIGURE 2-1
The growth of the Internet

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
TECHNOLOGY AND BUSINESS
Growth in any technology or business is a relationship.
Technology that needs money for development must have a
business reason for the investment. A business dependent on
new technology requires financial investment in the technology.
Investors are now asking ISPs and other Internet-related
companies, “What is your company providing over the Internet
or to the Internet customers?”
It may seem a little odd to ask such a question, however,
until 1999, Wall Street was dumping money into any company
that had the words “dot com” in its name. Many companies in
the xDSL provisioning business even benefited because the
investment community believed that they were in the “dot com”
business. To the casual observer looking in from the outside,
the “dot com” was all the rage and no one was actually asking
the kinds of questions an investor should ask of any new oppor-
tunity. The kinds of questions that should have been asked of
these new startups and their founders were:
•
What are you selling?
•
Why would anyone want to buy it?
•
What makes you think they will buy from you?
•
How big is the market?
•
Are you already operating as a company?
•
Are you looking for seed capital or are you further along in
the search for financing?
•
How much of this market do you expect to capture for your
company?
•
Why do you think you will be successful?
•
What do you plan on doing with this company? Do you
plan on taking it public?
Business Models
41

•
If you plan on going public, when do you expect to do so?
•
If you do not plan on taking the company public, what do
you plan on doing in increasing value to your investor?
•
What does your team look like? (In other words, who are
your team members?)
•
What do you want from me (the investor)?
•
What are you bringing to the bargaining table other than a
good idea? Do you have any “skin” in the game? “Skin”
refers to an individual’s personal stake in the business
(usually the stake is one’s life savings).
•
How much money do you want?
•
How much of the company will I get if I invest in you?
In the year 2000, the investor has become very “Internet
savvy” by asking all of these questions, which will each have a
sub-listing of questions. The people seeking financing must be
able to answer all of the questions. However, it is important to
note that the “idea” being promoted must get the attention of
the investor. If the “idea” does not capture the interest of the
investment community, the entrepreneur wannabee will not
even hear the rest of the questions that need to be asked. Many
of the pre-2000 startups did very little in terms of returning any
value to the investor. In fact, many startups simply lined the
pockets of the founders with money. Figure 2-2 depicts the
investor’s relationship with the startup.
BUSINESS MODELS
The Internet business models to date can be classified in two
broad categories:
•
ISP
•
Access
42
Chapter Two

Figure 2-3 depicts these two categories of business models.
Within the two categories of models are sub-categories of mod-
els. This section of the book will lay the groundwork for
Chapter 3, “Challenges of the Internet Business-Business and
Technology.”
INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDER (ISP)
The ISP is generally the company that provides the service
directly to the user/subscriber. The ISP can be even further bro-
ken down into sub-categories of ISP types. This is similar to the
traditional telecomm service provider community. Several dif-
ferent kinds of service providers are available; some provide
local service or long-distance, some provide both, and so on. In
the book Telecommunications Internetworking, the wireline
telephone carriers were referred to as the traditional telecom
player. In this book, wireless (cellular and PCS) are included in
that category. It is a matter of perspective; today, every carrier
Business Models
43
Risk
Ideas
Planning
Execution
FIGURE 2-2
The investor and the startup

wants to be in the Internet business. The other carriers are per-
ceived to be Internet “wannabees;” they are old hat and the
Internet is the new game in town.
Currently, ISPs provide the following types of services and
capabilities:
•
E-mail
•
File storage
•
Web site creation
•
World Wide Web (WWW) access
•
Search engine
•
Chat rooms
•
Internet Portal access
•
Voice over IP (Voice over Internet Protocol)
Figure 2-4 represents the current ISP services and 
capabilities.
44
Chapter Two
ISP
Access
• E-mail
• File Storage 
• Other services
• E-Commerce
• M-Commerce
FIGURE 2-3
Business models

E-MAIL
For those in the Internet business, this may be very
apparent, but for those wishing to enter the Internet commu-
nity, the aforementioned listed services and capabilities may not
be as obvious. In the mid-1980s, the dominant ISPs simply pro-
vided e-mail services. During the formative (technological and
business) years of the Internet, very few people had a desktop
computer, let alone a laptop computer. In order for the Internet
business to grow, a critical mass of customers with computers
had to develop first. As people began to find more uses for the
computer beyond simple letter writing, more uses could be
found for the Internet.
This is not to discount or minimize the importance of the e-
mail service to the Internet. E-mail is to the Internet as plain
old voice service is to the telephone and cellular businesses. It
is the staple product of the Internet. E-mail has assumed an
identity that cannot be easily equated to that of voice in the tra-
ditional telecom business (telephone and cellular). E-mail is the
only service to date where a simple communiqué between fam-
ily and friends may be nothing more than a joke or a poem. It is
Business Models
45
• E-mail
• File Storage
• Web Site Creation
• WWW Access–surfing 
    the Web
• Search Engine
• Chat Rooms
• Internet Portal Access
• Voice over IP
FIGURE 2-4
ISP services and capabilities

also unique in its ability to enable a user to be brief and to say
nothing of substance. Not even a short voice conversation over
a telephone or cellular handset can boast that kind of commu-
nication brevity. E-mail has added a whole new dimension to
communication between parties. In some ways, it provides less
than letter writing on paper, but in another way, provides more
than letter writing of old.
E-mail enables one to carry on a conversation in near-real
time. The e-mail letters enable people to engage in quick dis-
cussions about important and benign topics. Copies of letters
and other documents can also be transmitted with an e-mail.
The use of instant messaging, which is possible between
subscribers (customers or users) of the same ISP, enables real-
time communication.
FILE STORAGE
File storage refers to the storage of files that
belong to ISP subscribers. File storage is performed to a limited
extent today by ISPs. Files are typically stored within e-mail
messages and not as separate archival data backups. Today, the
majority of files that an ISP agrees to store are only stored in a
temporary e-mail storage area under the user’s e-mail logon
name.
Some ISPs are beginning to offer archival data storage.
These new ISPs offer a service that a corporate management
information system (MIS) organization would offer to its corpo-
rate users.
WEB SITE CREATION
Web site creation is a service that many
ISPs offer their subscribers. The subscriber pays a small fee to
use software tools that can be found online with the ISP. The
software tools enable a customer to create a customized Web
site with pictures, word font styles, colors, and interactive icons.
This is an interesting, useful, and helpful tool as it allows the
ISP’s customer to take advantage of the Internet by enabling
46
Chapter Two

them to become more than just simple e-mail customers. This
tool enables the customers to become Web information
providers themselves.
Web site creation promotes the use of the Internet. Even
better, the ISP becomes the host of the customer’s Web site for
a small fee. The ISP’s computers become the physical address
of the customer’s Web site. The customer does not have to pur-
chase or manage his/her own computers for the purpose of serv-
ing as a host. The Web site creation tool generates Internet
usage.
Web site tools are used to create advertising. Normally, this
advertising is not requested by the user, but is embedded within
information or entertainment that the user has chosen to view
or listen to. Advertising on the Internet is most often delivered
by e-mail or in the form of banners embedded in Web pages.
Advertisers normally pay the media or content providers for
space or placement within the content that attracts users/cus-
tomers. Interactive banners are now used to catch the attention
of some customers.
WORLD WIDE WEB (WWW) ACCESS
To explain World Wide
Web (WWW) access, an explanation of the WWW is first in
order. The WWW is not a single object, but a collection of
Internet sites. The ISP enables a user to access multiple
Internet sites. Pretend you are in orbit about the planet Earth.
You look down on Earth and see thousands of Internet host
computers scattered all over the planet. Figure 2-5 depicts the
various hosts computers scattered throughout the Earth. If you
were to connect all of the host computers using a pencil, the
picture you would have drawn would look like a spider web;
hence, the use of the word “web” as it relates to the Internet.
The term “World Wide Web” is an accurate description of the
relationship between all of the Internet sites. Figure 2-6 repre-
sents the web that has been described.
Business Models
47

48
Chapter Two
FIGURE 2-5
Internet sites all over the planet
FIGURE 2-6
The World Wide Web

The carriers’ ability to enable its users to communicate with
other ISPs is a product of the ISP; access is a product. Users
have no need to purchase service from an ISP if it cannot
access the site of a company that is selling products they want.
Note that the ISP may not be selling any products beyond e-
mail. However, an ISP that simply offers e-mail and not the
ability for its users to surf other Internet sites will not be in
business for long. At first, the ISPs only provided e-mail and
limited Web site access unless it hosted the Web site for that
company. Note that customers had limited access to other sites
during the early days of the Internet because of the limited pen-
etration of computers and existence of commerce-related
Internet sites.
Telecommunications networks, including data networks like
the Internet, form webs. Today, the Internet is attempting to
create a level of traffic management order within itself. The
management order referred to involves the use of the “hub”
concept, where single ISPs are working to act as aggregators of
information for users. The hub concept, which is heavily used
by other telecommunication carriers (for example, wireline and
wireless carriers), has taken on the form of the “portal” in the
Internet world. A hub acts as a focal point of traffic. A further
discussion on the portal will appear later in this chapter.
Web access enables users to surf the ocean of information
that exists at various Internet sites. Companies, libraries,
schools, universities, and other institutions that have their own
Internet sites are providing Websurfers information. The infor-
mation is provided for a variety of reasons as shown in the fol-
lowing list. Some of the information is useful and some of it is
harmful. The greatest challenge for parents of children is polic-
ing appropriate Internet usage.
•
Self-promotion Advertising and marketing. Institutions
are using the Internet to get users to sign up for some type
of subscription or even to apply for membership in the
institution (for example, a university).
Business Models
49

•
Product sales
•
Good will Many institutions provide information over the
Internet for the sole purpose of disseminating information.
Some of this information is good and some of it is clearly
immoral or illegal.
More discussion on products and services will appear in
later chapters. A key point to remember is that the Internet has
become a phenomenal place to obtain information or do
research.
SEARCH ENGINE
Search engines are a powerful attractor for
Internet usage. Search engines are software-defined products
that are normally provided at no charge to the subscriber
(Internet user). The search engine is an application that
enables the user to find information from various Web sites.
The user types in a keyword(s). The search engine uses the key-
word to find sites that are associated with a specific identifier.
Typically, a site, which can be promoting products or view-
points, will have specific word identifiers with which it
associates (hyperlink). The unfortunate thing about keyword
searches today is that the user ends up with hundreds of thou-
sands or millions of “hits.” These hits refer to the number of
sites found that are associated with the keyword.
The fault does not necessarily lie with the ISP. Rather, the
fault lies with the search engine. The search engines used today
by the search engine companies have no way of distinguishing
between a good hit or a bad hit. The following is an example of
the confusion that arises when a user types in the words “red
car Chrysler.” One would assume that the search engine would
come up with sites that list red, Chrysler cars. In fact, what
appears is an enormous list of sites that address things or 
people that are red, have something to do with cars, or are
called Chrysler. The problem is that the owners of the refer-
enced sites can tag themselves with a variety of keywords that
may have absolutely nothing to do with what the site is actually
promoting. Figure 2-7 depicts what function the search engine
performs.
50
Chapter Two

Search engines lose their value when a user has to scroll
through dozens, let alone hundreds or even millions of site hits.
ISPs (primary product is e-mail) normally have their own lim-
ited search engines; the user can type in a keyword and it usu-
ally steers him/her to a very limited number of sites typically
under the ISPs control. All ISPs provide access to hosts that
provide access to search engine ISPs that provide only the
search function. ISPs that provide only the search function
receive their revenue from corporate advertising. The surprising
thing about the e-mail ISP that had its own search engine is
that as limited as it was, these ISPs had stumbled upon the cor-
rect idea. The correct idea was that the user did not want to see
hundreds of thousands of hits. The e-mail ISP had stumbled
upon the portal concept: controlled access.
CHAT ROOMS
Chat rooms have been both a blessing and a
curse to the Internet community. Pedophiles and other morally
twisted individuals have taken to the chat room to wreak havoc
Business Models
51
Search 
Engine
Web Sites
FIGURE 2-7 
The search engine–A web of site hits

on people’s lives. No more needs to be said about this. On the
upside, the chat room has become more than a place for people
to meet and chat. It has become a place where celebrities
(movie stars, television stars, famous folks, and authors) can
meet fans and promote movies, books, television shows, and
other products.
As a promotional tool, the chat room has brought the
celebrities closer to their “public” than ever before. On televi-
sion, one will see advertisements for chat room meetings with
one’s favorite celebrities. The chat room has become a popular
tool for promoting new movies and television specials. In some
cases, viewers of certain television specials are even able to
meet (in chat rooms) at a specific time and day to discuss
important issues that have been raised by a television special or
movie. Although this form of marketing is a bit self-serving (pro-
moting the television program or movie), it does enable an
important issue to be discussed whether it is a political or social
issue. To some extent, the Internet chat room has added to the
social dialogue of today.
The chat room’s impact on the Internet should not be min-
imized. Next to e-mail, the chat room is the next major product
of the Internet. If one looks at how ISPs are charging for their
services today, typically a flat fee is charged per month for
accessing the ISP’s site. It should be noted that early in an ISP’s
life, users were paying for e-mail. Today, the ISPs have success-
fully recreated themselves into being more than e-mail compa-
nies; therefore, e-mail is just one of many things an ISP sells.
Chat rooms are so popular that many users obtain service from
an ISP based on the technical sophistication (some chat rooms
enable users to use real-time, slow motion video) of the chat
room and the type of people who are in the chat room. If one
logged on and entered a chat room, one might meet some fairly
interesting people who also will not be physically threatening.
The bottom line is that chat rooms are where strangers meet
and chat.
Most ISPs have added a twist to the chat room through the
provisioning of an instant messaging/writing capability. The
52
Chapter Two

instant messaging/writing capability enables one to write
directly to a friend or family member that is also logged on to
the same ISP. The great thing about this type of instant mes-
saging is that it is a real time form of communication. An inter-
esting aspect of this form of real time communication is that it
enables users to carry on brief conversations about “nothing,”
that is, a casual conversation. Unlike paper letter writing of old,
but very much like e-mail, instant messaging/writing assumes
the characteristics of real conversations. One can have a dis-
cussion about anything from weather to one’s deepest darkest
secrets. In other words, one has as much chance of having a
conversation about nothing as one could have about something.
INTERNET PORTAL ACCESS
The portal is a concept that became
popular back in 1999. In early 1999, the IEEE published arti-
cles in a number of their societal magazines detailing research
that had been performed by various computer equipment man-
ufacturers. The issue addressed in these magazines was, “How
to make surfing the Web more efficient for the user.” The
answer was simple and elegant: Build Internet Web site gate-
ways. The problem with nearly all of the search engines today
(and in 1999) is that the keyword search by a user would almost
always result in hundreds if not millions of site listings. People
do not have the time to sit and surf through that many sites.
Furthermore, the searches would often end up listing sites that
never had anything to do with the topic of interest.
As noted in the aforementioned sub-section on search
engines, keyword searches often result in a number of site list-
ings that simply have the keyword in question in its title or sub-
ject heading. For example, a user decides to seek an antique
“Buck Rogers” toy gun that is red and made in 1930. For those
who are unfamiliar with “Buck Rogers,” this fictional character
was a twentieth century pilot who was in suspended animation
up until the twenty-fifth century. Buck Roger could be
described as a combination of Indiana Jones (intelligent and
resourceful), Neil Armstrong (astronaut), Charles Lindberg
(intrepid pilot), Rip Van Winkle (asleep for decades), and
Business Models
53

Batman (he fought evil aliens and other bad guys). A search for
such a toy could result in a Web search listing of sites that sold
toys, guns (real and toy), anything red, anything about the year
1930, anything with the word “Buck” or “Rogers,” and anything
“Buck Rogers.” The problem or challenge for the user who
made the query is that they would be forced to search the entire
list. The reality is that the user would probably stop after
searching a dozen or so sites. The user probably should have
typed in different keywords like “antique, toy guns, Buck
Rogers.” However, this may not help either because the user
could end up seeing sites that sold antiques (of all kinds), sites
that sold toy guns (antique, new, and even pre-owned), and any-
thing with the word “Buck,” “Rogers,” or “Buck Rogers.”
Remember that the challenge is finding the right site listed.
Figure 2-8 is a pictorial of how exhaustive the list could be.
Many search engine companies claim they do not favor sites
and therefore, provide objective lists. This is a laudable attitude
54
Chapter Two
Thousands of Web sites; endless searching 
FIGURE 2-8
A list of Web sites–Uncontrolled Web searches

for an industry (the Internet) that is the home of open infor-
mation access. Unfortunately, from a practical standpoint, too
much of anything can be bad. Users of the Internet should be
treated like customers; their time and money are valuable.
Without the user, the Internet companies have no business.
The portal is an organized way of facilitating the users’ searches.
It should be viewed as controlled and managed information
access. Portals are designed to focus on specific needs. For
example, a children’s portal may focus on new toys being mar-
keted this year. Another portal may focus on sports cars made in
the United States between the years 1950 through 1999.
Another portal may focus on charities in a given geographic
area. Another portal may focus on specific medical issues. One
can see that portals can be and are established for a variety of
products, issues, and activities. Figure 2-9 illustrates this point
regarding what portals support.
The portals are managed in such a way that one can visual-
ize the portal-Web site relationship as an organization chart
where specific positions are related to other positions (simply
Business Models
55
Fashion
Children
Automobiles
Portals
Web sites
Portals serve as doorways
Portals have organized Web searches
FIGURE 2-9
Portals support a variety of products, issues, and activities

follow the lines of organization). Another way of viewing a por-
tal is in the same way as viewing a highway toll both. As multi-
ple lanes of vehicular traffic approach tolls booths, the cars are
often forced to merge into fewer lanes. In telecommunications
terms, this is called traffic aggregation. Tandem switches aggre-
gate traffic from multiple points into itself for the purpose of re-
distributing traffic into the local network. Portals are essentially
points of search and information access aggregation. Figure 2-
10 is an illustration of the portal concept.
The portal is an excellent application of basic traffic man-
agement, however, downsides exist for the user. The portal is
managed access; therefore, one has to trust that the portal man-
ager has established links to the appropriate sites, otherwise the
user will be forced to search through hundreds of sites. This is
a challenge for the portal manager.
Portal management is a new opportunity for Internet entre-
preneurs. Rather than providing content on the Web, the portal
manager can collect a fee for obtaining information hits on cus-
tomer sites. This type of portal business model has its weak
56
Chapter Two
Fashion
Children
Automobiles
Portals
Web sites
Portals serve as doorways
Portals manage and control access
FIGURE 2-10
The portal

spots because managing information access does not necessar-
ily mean any intellectual property enables the portal manager to
differentiate itself from other portal managers. The newness of
the portal has captured the imagination of investors and tech-
nologists. The ability to control the flow of information is a key
function of any service provider (both non-Internet and
Internet carriers). Both the business and technical communi-
ties have yet to fully explore the opportunities behind the por-
tal. Figure 2-11 illustrates the control aspect of the portal.
The portal manager can be considered an application service
provider (ASP). The ASP is a new term that the Internet indus-
try is still defining within itself. In the traditional voice telecom
world, the ASP is the software and hardware vendor who is sell-
ing software and hardware that is connected to the carriers’
main switching system. Typically, ASPs are not the same ven-
dors as the ones who provide the main switch or infrastructure.
ASPs in the Internet world sell services to users; however, the
ASPs are not the ISPs or other type of Internet carrier. These
non-Internet ASPs provide services and capabilities such as:
Business Models
57
The Internet
Managed and controlled access to the Internet
Portals serve as gateways
FIGURE 2-11
The portal is an information access gateway

•
Database Management
For instance, subscriber profile
storage. The Service Control Point (SCP), the Home
Location Register (HLR), and Visitor Location register (VLR)
are examples of outboard systems that can be attached to
the main switch.
•
Voice Mail
•
Fax Mail
•
Wireless finger printing
•
Service bureaus
As noted in Telecommunications
Internetworking, the service bureaus provide a variety of 
needs to the carrier.
Figure 2-12 is a representation of how non-Internet ASPs
work with non-Internet carriers.
ASPs will be discussed in greater detail later in the book.
The point to keep in mind is that the industry that services
Internet carriers is growing and blossoming quickly.
58
Chapter Two
ASPs host delivered content
Non-Internet ASPs have existed for 
years in the voice telecom world.
Switch/
Router
Subscribers
Subscribers
Voice
Mail
Intelligent
Database
Voice
Activated
Dialing
Information
Mediation
Billing
Network
Management
Fraud
Management
Customer
Care
FIGURE 2-12
The non-Internet ASP

VOICE OVER IP (VOICE OVER INTERNET PROTOCOL)
Voice ser-
vice has the broadest appeal to the marketplace. The voice 
service is the lowest common denominator in the telecommu-
nications service provisioning equation. In other words, it
defines what all customers are looking for. Internet compa-
nies/carriers realize this for they are all seeking to look like the
telephone company by providing voice. One should remember
that not everyone is using the Internet. The power of the wire-
line telephone company is its familiarity with all people. Voice
is the telephone company’s primary service. Although one could
easily make a technological case stating that the telephone
company is an information processing carrier, voice is the big
service to the non-technical user (which is the majority of the
marketplace).
The challenge for the ISP is a technological one. Voice and
video can be provided over the Internet today; however, the pro-
tocol today, known as both IP and IP version 4 (Ipv4), has sev-
eral flaws or perceived flaws. The flaws or challenges are related
to the following:
•
Reliability
•
Security
•
Service quality
•
Guaranteed service levels
•
Addressing schemes
The Internet Protocol (IP), currently IPv4, is not at all well-
suited for time sensitive (delay sensitive) information. Voice and
video is time sensitive information. Note that time delays dis-
rupt the sound and look of voice and video transmissions.
Disruption of quality can be so extensive that the distortions in
voice quality and video quality are unacceptable annoyances.
ISPs wishing to become the primary provider of telecommuni-
cations services to the marketplace will need to provide voice as
a service and work toward the one quality benchmark that the
entire marketplace knows: the telephone company.
Business Models
59

More information on VoIP will appear later in the book.
Figure 2-13 is a representation of voice in the non-Internet and
Internet worlds.
ACCESS: COMMERCE MODELS
The Internet is an information medium that enables users to
access many different databases. The search engines employed
in the industry facilitate users’ search capabilities. Buying prod-
ucts over the Internet from a retailer or wholesaler requires one
to access the database of the seller. Sending and receiving e-
mail is also an attribute of access because the users allow oth-
ers to gain access to them via this messaging service. Access is
a capability that lies at the heart of the Internet business. This
access capability is what makes the Internet a valuable tool.
A child or adult can quickly obtain information from a
library on the availability of a book, find out airline flight sched-
ules, train schedules, movie time schedules, and information on
almost any topic. The information obtained may be used for a
60
Chapter Two
• Reliability
• Security
• Service 
    Quality
• Guaranteed 
    Service Levels
• Addressing 
    Schemes
Voice will be the lowest 
common denominator for the 
ISP.
In the minds of the customer, 
voice is the most basic service 
need.
FIGURE 2-13
Voice: Common Issues

variety of purposes including purchasing products from the
database holder. The user is limited by what the targeted data-
base will allow. The user is also limited by the software on either
the desktop computer or by what the targeted host site will
allow. The purchasing of products is an activity that has come to
be known as e-commerce (Electronic Commerce). E-commerce
is normally seen as catalog purchasing off of the Internet,
where the selling party displays pictures of its products, inter-
active (point and click) icons, and provides online purchase
order forms. These product sellers even have their databases
tied into credit card validation databases. Figure 2-14 illustrates
access and its fundamental importance to the Internet.
E-commerce is an activity/application and not a product to
be sold to an Internet user. However, it is an activity/application
that has captured the interests of both the commerce and
investment sides of the business community. E-commerce has
given birth to a number of different business relationships over
the Internet:
Business Models
61
• Access to stores
• Access to people
• Access to places
Dining
Books
Travel
Information
FIGURE 2-14
Internet and access

Business-to-Business (B2B)
The B2B relationship
describes the relationship between two or more businesses
selling services to one another. Suppliers of small parts to an
automobile manufacturer like General Motors would be one
example of a B2B relationship. Another example would be
the supplier of pencil erasers to the pencil manufacturer.
One can take the supplier of ink to the newspaper publisher
or to the magazine publisher (news is still supplied to people
on paper). Today, the sub-division of relationships has also
resulted in the Business-to-Small Business relationship, B2SB.
Business-to-Consumer (B2C)
The B2C relationship is the
one with which the average consumer is familiar: retailers
selling products online. Consider this online catalogue shopping.
Business-to-Government (B2G)
The B2G relationship is 
a new one that is growing over the Internet. This relationship
is about the business community doing business with sectors
of the government. The government, whether local, state,
national, or international, is the single largest customer of
goods and services. To many in the telecommunications
business, the government is the single largest customer of
telecommunications goods.
Exchange-to-Exchange (X2X)
The X2X relationship is 
the linkage of multiple B2B relationships/marketplaces. X2X
e-commerce is the next logical step beyond B2B or B2SB.
Companies are able to purchase supplies/products at
competitive prices. X2X can be likened to a farmers’ market,
where large food distribution companies bid for farmers’
products. Manufacturers and vendors of all kinds seek to
purchase supplies and services over the Internet. Steel is an
example of a product that was often sold between companies
and countries via a network of dealers. Now, steel can be
bought and sold over an Internet based exchange. X2X 
e-commerce could ultimately result in lower prices to the
consumer because of the lower costs to the retail outlets and
to the distributors (that is, the middleman).
Figures 2-15, 2-16, 2-17, and 2-18 are illustrations of the
various business relationships.
62
Chapter Two

Business Models
63
Office 
supplies
Demand
Businesses supply one 
another.
Businesses create strategic 
alliances with one another.
Auto parts
Airplanes
FIGURE 2-15
Business-to-Business (B2B)
Businesses sell 
goods to consumers.
FIGURE 2-16
Business-to-Consumer (B2C)

64
Chapter Two
Supplying the government
FIGURE 2-17
Business-to-Government (B2G)
Selling goods in bulk on the open market.
FIGURE 2-18
Exchange-to-Exchange (X2X)

Actually, these relationships existed before the Internet. The
names just look modern and cool. However, the Internet has
been able to support and even nurture these relationships. The
ability to communicate information between various businesses
can either expand some businesses or put others out of busi-
ness. The Internet marketplace has become an integral compo-
nent of commerce. Many of the related sites are serving as
portals for members of the site. 
A recent twist to the B2C marketplace was a Web site I
recently saw that supported the carpenter business. I was
recently seeking carpenters willing to work in my hometown.
The town has a nearly crippling number of building codes that
frighten off contractors. I was able to access the Web site and
was given a list of carpenters who expressed interest in working
in my town. This Web site reduced my search by a thousand
fold; rather than searching through a telephone book, I was able
to enter my parameters and other related project information
and received an answer within minutes. A county-based trade
association administered this carpenter Web site. It can only be
assumed that the trade association members pay for this ser-
vice. This does not mean I saw every contractor willing to work
on my home because some of the members may not have
wanted their names listed on the Web site. However, it is impor-
tant that my search time was reduced. The fact is that most
consumers seeking contractor estimates will only call about
three or four companies at most for the job cost estimates.
E-marketplaces are still growing. It should be noted that the
Internet has open and established relationships between com-
panies and consumers as never before. Nearly instantaneous
price quotes, inventory queries, sales discounts, and order
placements can be made over the Internet. The ability of the
Internet to provide accurate information is limited by whatever
data is made available to the users. In the end, it is all about
access. At some point in the near future, the Internet will be the
most vital component of doing business. Figure 2-19 is an illus-
tration emphasizing the role of the Internet in the marketplace.
Business Models
65

Although it may sound facetious, a potential area of growth
is the Taxpayer-to-Government (T2G) relationship. Today, tax-
payers can file their income taxes over the Internet. They can
find a variety of information from the various government data-
bases. Furthermore, taxpayers can file any number of requests
for information (from government agency) over the Internet. It
is unlikely that the government will use the Internet as its pri-
mary way of conducting business with the taxpayer because the
government can never be faceless, but it does enhance the flow
of communication between the government and the people it
serves. Figure 2-20 illustrates the T2G concept.
Another way of looking at the various e-marketplace rela-
tionships is by simply categorizing all of the previous relation-
ships as Information/Product-to-Consumer (IP2C) relationships.
All of the aforementioned relationships have one common fac-
tor; they send information or product to someone else. In any
business relationship, someone is the consumer or customer.
Figure 2-21 illustrates the IP2C concept.
66
Chapter Two
The Internet has become an 
integral part of the marketplace.
FIGURE 2-19
The marketplace and the Internet

Business Models
67
• Filing taxes
• Requesting 
  information 
• Nationwide 
  traffic safety 
  alerts 
• Filing reports to 
  the government 
• Communicating 
  over the Internet 
FIGURE 2-20
T2G
Information and Product sold over the Internet
FIGURE 2-21
IP2C

The two broad categories can be further broadened as being
one of or a combination of both:
•
Service Provisioning
ISPs provide service to the mass
market.
•
Access
ISPs and the various other Internet players are all
providing access to some type of database.
This short list is not meant to give the reader the impression
that the Internet is a business of simplicity. However, these
views are meant to provide a way of understanding the Internet
business. The Internet is a new medium for doing business. The
rules for conducting business do not change. The business
community is still working on how to create opportunities for
the Internet.
Basic micro- and macro-economic rules have not changed.
The rules of supply and demand are still underlying principles
of the sale of products. The customer still pays the bills. All of
the aforementioned models and sub-categories have been built
around what people already know and understand. Some
believe that the Internet has created a new kind of economy
called e-economy or e-conomy. The recent stock market col-
lapse of the Internet stocks is proof that rules of doing business
over the Internet or not over the Internet are the same. Figure
2-22 is a representation of the e-conomy/e-economy.
THE EVOLVING BUSINESS MODEL
Up to this point, this book has described where the Internet
industry has gone to date. The question remains, where is the
Internet business going? The answer to the question is simple.
The Internet business model is at the beginning of its evolution
and will evolve into anything the marketplace will drive it
toward. The marketplace will drive the Internet’s technological
development down a path that is guided by business/market
68
Chapter Two

parameters familiar to all of us. The challenge for the Internet
players is to find that niche or mass market idea that will gen-
erate revenue for themselves while providing a useful service. A
guiding principle for the Internet player is to first look at how
things are done today and then look at how the Internet can add
value, which is a very basic way of approaching any matter.
Today, the Internet space is filled with companies all claim-
ing to provide some kind of Internet service. Some of these
company types are as follows:
•
ISPs
•
Gateways
•
ASPs
•
Content providers
In the end, all companies claim to have some control over
the access to the customer and provide some kind of service to
the customer.
Business Models
69
FIGURE 2-22
E-conomy/E-economy

The marketplace will find a multitude of ways to find uses
for the Internet. As an information medium that is in its
infancy, thousands of opportunities are available for a system
that supports the manipulation and transmission of informa-
tion. The Internet’s single greatest attribute is its ability to facil-
itate access. By focusing on the access aspect of the medium,
investors and entrepreneurs will be able to find new opportuni-
ties. The reader should remember the old axiom: Information is
power. The Internet enables everyone, both the individual and
the large corporation, to manage the flow of information or
product between parties. This is called “access,” and this is ulti-
mately “power.”
The marketplace is always seeking new ways to improve the
quality of life by making things:
•
Easier to do.
•
Easier to find.
•
Faster to do.
•
Less expensive to do.
•
Quicker to travel to.
•
More fun to do.
•
More interesting to perform.
•
More interesting and higher in quality to view.
•
More interesting and higher in quality to listen to.
Figure 2-23 illustrates the aforementioned points about
access and the basic goals of the marketplace.
The parameters that were just described impact all products
that are sold or created whether they are over the Internet or
not. People will not deviate from these parameters. To a great
extent, e-commerce has done an excellent job in meeting the
marketplace’s basic goals. However, people must see continuing
value in the Internet approach, otherwise no financial value
exists to the provider. People like doing business with those
companies that provide continuing value rather than one time
70
Chapter Two

discount sales. The markets can be broken down and combined
in any number of ways; however, the following are broad 
categories:
•
Home
•
Office
•
Travel for business
•
Travel for vacation
•
Entertainment for the home
•
Entertainment in publicly accessible areas such as
amusement parks and movie theaters
•
Education at home, in the school, museums
The Internet will evolve down two paths: technological and
business. The technology of the Internet will change in order to
meet the needs of the marketplace. The business of the Internet
will evolve in order to ensure the generation of revenue.
Technology and business work hand in hand to achieve the
same goal: creating value in our lives.
The future of the Internet will depend on how both tech-
nology and business work together to achieve value. Focusing
Business Models
71
• Easier
• Faster
• Less Expensive
• More Fun
• Better Looking
Why the Internet?
FIGURE 2-23
Goals of the marketplace

on access will enable all Internet industry players to find and
create opportunities. These new opportunities will be focused
around access. Figure 2-24 re-emphasizes the importance of
access in the world of the Internet.
SUMMARY
In the late 1990s, people were amazed and bewildered by the
growth of the Internet. A number of things worked in favor of
the Internet industry’s growth and it all took place over a period
of nearly 40 years. These factors and innovations occurred com-
pletely independent of one another and were all initially driven
by different reasons:
The mainframe computer
Faster way of performing
business (accounting) and scientific calculations.
The ARPANET
A way of ensuring more secure national
security communications.
The desktop computer
First bringing games to the home
(remember the first Atari, the Texas Instrument 99-4A, and
the Commodore) and then improving the workplace (the
word processor increased the productivity of the steno pool
and the secretary).
The laptop computer
Facilitated the usefulness of the
computer for the businessperson. This usefulness first took
the form of letter writing by the worker thereby reducing
the need for secretaries, and increasing the timeliness of
letters by eliminating one person in the process.
Local area network (LAN) concept
Linking a
mainframe electronically.
The Ethernet
Linking the LANs.
72
Chapter Two

Netscape
Netscape the computer industry’s first (and
innovative) and successful attempt to find a useful way of
speaking to the various educational research Web sites. This
first search engine gave the Internet weight for research of
all kinds, both educational and commercial.
E-mail
E-mail opened the Internet to the mass market.
The industry was built upon a variety of innovations and ini-
tiatives. The entire telecommunications industry like any
industry is built upon the work and creativity of various people
and other industries. All of the previously mentioned innova-
tions and factors had one thing in common: access. Access is
about moving information and product between people. The
Business Models
73
• Access to stores
• Access to people
• Access to places
Dining
Books
Travel
Information
FIGURE 2-24
Access and the Internet

Internet, both wireless and wireline, has become the primary
means of accessing the home and business. Figure 2-25 is
another depiction of the Internet business.
The next chapter will address the technical and business
challenges of the future ISP.
74
Chapter Two
FIGURE 2-25
Who occupies the Internet business space?

C H A P T E R
3
CHALLENGES OF
THE INTERNET
BUSINESS—
BUSINESS AND
TECHNOLOGY
T
he Internet has been a haven for investment money, entre-
preneurs, and established companies seeking new markets.
The Internet has gone from a text-based, e-mail only medium to
an interactive, multi-media communication medium. However,
a great deal of work is needed on the technical side in order to
fully explore the multi-media business opportunities. The
reader should understand that the information in this chapter is
applicable to the wireless and wireline Internet industries. The
business challenges of the Internet industry are as daunting as
the technical challenges. The challenges can be divided into
two categories: technical and business.
BUSINESS CHALLENGES
The danger of doing business over the Internet is that people
like speaking with other people. Recently, a large toy company
had a disastrous circumstance befall itself when it could not fill
toy orders placed through its own Internet site. The toy com-
pany not only failed to fill the orders, but also could not address
75
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

customer complaints over missing orders and unfilled orders for
toys. Customers became so angry that they refused the toys
when they finally did arrive and as a result, many people no
longer shop online with this company. Many of these people
also refuse to go to the brick and mortar stores of this company.
The Internet can be impersonal. Before the Internet, compa-
nies lost customers who felt they had been mistreated by cus-
tomer care personnel. Today, in a world filled with ISPs and
retailers with their own Web sites, customers still want to speak
with a human when a problem arises. It should be noted that
other service providers like wireless and wireline carriers have
received numerous complaints when their automated directory
assistance, repair service, and operator service centers failed to
respond quickly or adequately enough to the customer.
ISPs may believe that their customer base is more sophisti-
cated and more tolerant of automated/e-mail driven customer
care systems. This view holds true only for the high-tech users
who tend to be first or early adopters of technology. In reality, if
an individual walks into any brick and mortar store for elec-
tronics (retail music and video equipment or computers) and
watches the customer care line, he/she will see customers of all
kinds shouting at salespeople and store managers. People who
spend money want to be treated like “kings” and “queens.” The
provider of service wants the customer’s money, so he/she must
learn quickly the most basic of all business credos, “The cus-
tomer is always right.” This is not some old and outdated idea.
If an individual watches what happens when a customer does
not like the attitude of a salesperson, he/she will see how a per-
son can go from calm to mad in 60 seconds flat. Figure 3-1 is
an illustration of the customer relationship.
Retailers doing business over the Internet have the same
problems with inventory as the brick and mortar stores. When
a customer cannot find a product in a brick and mortar store,
they simply look elsewhere. The Internet has set the expecta-
tions of the consumer higher than if they were going to a shop-
76
Chapter 3

ping mall looking for a product. To many people, the word
“Internet” has come to mean “instantaneous.” From a busi-
ness/commerce perspective, the consumer expects instanta-
neous service over the Internet. Stores cannot be expected to
maintain an unlimited inventory for online shoppers. This is a
basic rule of supply and demand. However, the consumer does
not care about the store’s accounting issues. The Internet
opened up the marketplace for retailers. Where once a retailer
would never have been doing business with a person in a par-
ticular location because a brick and mortar store was not pre-
sent, the Internet now has made it possible for the retailer to do
business worldwide. However, the rules of business and cus-
tomer care have not changed. This point will be discussed
futher, later in this section. Figure 3-2 is a depiction comparing
the Internet and brick and mortar stores.
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
77
• Products
• Services
• Online Shopping
The customer generates 
the income for internet 
business.
FIGURE 3-1
The customer is king/queen

POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE EFFECTS OF
THE INTERNET
The positive effects of the Internet on the retail marketplace
and business community in general have been:
Greater access to new geographic markets
Enables new
places and people to sell products.
Facilitation and speed of communication between
parties
Instead of spending hours and days writing and
sending memos, e-mail provides real time communication.
The mobile telephone and wireline telephone enable real
time communication, but e-mail enables one to send large
documents along with the message. E-mail has sped up 
and facilitated communication of complex issues. Group
communication is especially made easier. Advertising is 
also made easier, and even interactive.
78
Chapter 3
The brick and mortar store enables customers to
interact with the store in person.
Even speaking to customer care over the 
telephone is more desirable than Internet 
communication.
How do you 
express your 
frustration and 
anger over the 
Internet?
FIGURE 3-2
Expectations: The Internet and brick and mortar stores

E-mail has enabled many people to discuss issues without
anger or emotion. Often times issues cannot be resolved when
the parties involved in a verbal discussion are emotional. E-mail
can bring professionalism to an otherwise charged situation.
However, e-mail communication is only as effective as the com-
municator's ability to articulate their views.
The negative effects of the Internet on the retail market-
place and business community in general have been:
Greater access to new geographic markets
Greater
access to new markets means greater opportunity for not
meeting the demands of more people.
Facilitation and speed of communication between
parties
In the business world, when once writing a memo
on paper meant taking time and therefore facilitating
careful thought, writing a message (e-mail) out of anger
comes easier and faster over the Internet. The Internet has
wreaked havoc in some business offices. Some employees
lose their sense of reason and write memos filled with anger
towards superiors and co-workers.
One example occurred not to long ago with a colleague of
mine. An employee received a memo from my friend, praising
the employee for the fine job this person had performed all year.
As this person’s organizational superior, it was incumbent upon
her to send this note of praise. This person was considered the
organization’s top performer. Unfortunately, when this person
had received the memo, she had apparently had a rough week
in the office. Rather than simply accepting the memo without
comment, she responded to her own office mate via e-mail with
cynicism and disdain for “corporate officers who claimed they
knew of their fine work and wished to express their gratitude for
the person’s work via a bonus.” This employee went so far as to
say to her friend that my friend would not know them from “a
hole in the wall.” What the employee did not realize until too
late was that out of anger, she apparently hit the “reply all” icon
and sent my friend the message, and not her friend. My friend
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
79

did not respond directly to the note. This person apparently
realized (too late) what had happened via a conversation with
the originally intended party of the “cynical response” memo.
The person who the memo was intended for voluntarily
approached my friend and claimed that they did not put this
other employee up to writing the first memo. My friend did not
approach her direct reports or their direct reports about the
memo; however, she did walk over to this employee in the com-
pany cafeteria and introduced himself. My friend told me the
employee was so flustered that they could not speak. My friend
advised the employee that as tough as some weeks are, they
should always maintain self-control: “Take a deep breath and
count to ten before you do anything rash again.” In her opinion,
e-mail made it simple for people to simply express their anger.
E-mail lends itself to brevity. As a result, some employees
use the tool as a way of communicating messages that seem ill-
thought out. It has also become an outlet for passing jokes
(some tolerable and others inappropriate for the workplace) and
other inappropriate material (pornography).
An unfortunate aspect is that e-mail has become a replace-
ment for voice conversations and paper written memos (includ-
ing good manners). It is much easier to write an e-mail than to
deal with emotional human beings who are either not thinking
clearly and are excited or are simply being difficult and obnox-
ious. Further, some folks use e-mail just to be plain rude and
obstructive. However, at some point, people will need to speak
to one another. Voice conversation cannot be replaced entirely.
Higher expectations
Many consumers have come to believe
that the Internet means faster and better, which is not
necessarily true. Unfortunately, the Internet has caused
retailers to expend enormous time, energy, and resources
trying to meet customer requests. Furthermore, companies
that use the Internet to communicate to the marketplace have
found that maintaining their Web sites requires a full-time
staff dedicated to the Web site.
Figure 3-3 illustrates the Internet’s pros and cons.
80
Chapter 3

Pros and cons always exist in any business. It is important to
be aware of those aspects of the business that can negatively
impact the customer. The challenges of any business, including
the Internet, are technical and business-related. Knowing what
you want to sell, how you want to sell it, where you want to sell
it, how to make the product, and where to obtain the resources
to make the product are among the questions that one needs to
address in order to start and run a business. The ultimate chal-
lenge of any business is having an effective plan. The next sec-
tion looks at the basics of running a business.
BASICS OF RUNNING A BUSINESS
In the year 2000, investors have come to their senses and real-
ized that even though the Internet opened up new market-
places, it did not change the rules of economics, financing,
accounting, inventory control, debt analysis, or equity analysis.
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
81
• Access to all places and people
• Facilitating communications
• Overstepping capabilities of 
    Internet retailer
• Too much communication
• Brevity in communication  
   Meaningless communiques
• Higher customer expectations
FIGURE 3-3
Pros and cons

One cannot overstress the need to understand what the
Internet is as a business medium. During the early days of the
Internet gold rush, it appeared that Wall Street and investors
were not looking deeply into the business plans and organiza-
tions of new startups. It was easy just to invest because the rush
for investment opportunities could easily find another
“Microsoft.” Many banks and investors failed to ask the right
questions and look for basic mechanisms and management
team skill sets.
The following are basic questions and issues one needs to
address in order to run a business:
•
Know what you are selling.
•
Understand why anyone would want to buy your product or
surf your Web site.
•
What makes you think they will buy from you? Your
Internet Web site could be so hard to surf that the user
simply goes to another site.
•
Know how big your market is.
•
How much of this market do you expect to capture for your
company?
•
Why do you think you will be successful?
•
What does your team look like? (In other words, who are
your management team members?)
•
What financial control mechanisms are in place? Such
mechanisms would include things like inventory control,
expense travel allowance rules, equipment purchases,
signature level requirements, managing benefit package
costs to the company, creative ways of not paying taxes, and
identifying and quantifying operations costs.
•
What are the company’s hiring practices?
•
What customer care processes are in place?
Plan one’s Internet-related business follows the form of
82
Chapter 3

standard product or business planning practices. The planning
cycle for any endeavor is the same for effort in all disciplines of
science, engineering, development, or business. The terminol-
ogy may differ, but the basics of logical planning are the same.
Figure 3-4 illustrates the basic planning process as described in
the aforementioned list.
PLANNING THE BUSINESS: THE BASICS
Planning is a structured activity. Planning takes the form of
project management, the scientific method of experimentation,
medical diagnosis, financial planning, career planning, plan-
ning for the future of one’s children, planning home finances,
and so on. Planning is a structured activity that establishes a
course of action. It starts with a desire for a result and hopefully
ends with the desired result. Those entering the Internet busi-
ness or an Internet player entering the mass-market voice/verti-
cal services telecom business should not be intimidated with
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
83
Asking the right questions.
Who?
What?
When? 
Where?
Why?
Making the right decisions.
FIGURE 3-4
Who, what, when, where, and why: Asking the right questions.

the business segment that they are looking at because every
opportunity can be approached logically. Planning for any
endeavor involves five aspects:
Problem/Goal Identification
What is the problem you
are trying to solve? What goal are you trying to accomplish?
Problem/Goal Analysis
Gathering the necessary data
needed to take that first step to ensure movement forward
on one’s action plan. The data needed to create a solution
may include customer requirements, data about
competitors’ solutions, or data about current practices.
More importantly, this step is needed to identify what
information one does not know. Recognizing one’s
limitations is essential to success.
Solution Design
Designing a solution to attain one’s
goals or resolving the problem to one’s satisfaction. This
step can include writing software, policies, or procedures, or
designing the hardware or building.
Implementation/Action
Identify the steps and people
needed to act on the proposed solution. For many people,
this step is known simply as the action plan. To those in
product development, this step includes testing the
solution.
Ongoing Operations and Maintenance
Any business or
endeavor requires the knowledge and understanding of
what will happen after the solution has been implemented.
Does the solution have an ongoing life? Is the solution a
one-time event that does not have any recurring or ongoing
role? Every story has some kind of ending. In a scientific or
medical endeavor, the effort results in either a published
paper or perhaps a cure. However, what happens after the
solution has been implemented the first time? In a business,
this step means identifying all of the necessary resources to
continue the business. The necessary resources of a
business can include equipment, land, people, financing,
84
Chapter 3

software, an organizational structure that supports the
business, marketing, a viable market segment, and so on.
Figure 3-5 is another illustration of the planning process.
Each of the aforementioned steps can be further subdivided
into other steps or phases. The Internet player can view enter-
ing the telecom business as a planning effort similar to the one
used to create their original Internet endeavor. For those seek-
ing to enter the Internet business, the planning process is the
same. It is important to keep things in perspective. As different
as the traditional wireline and wireless telecommunications
businesses appear to be from the Internet business, they are
very much the same. Both the non-Internet and Internet indus-
tries work to serve a customer. The customer is the most impor-
tant person to the non-Internet and Internet companies.
Serving the customer is the common goal for both telecommu-
nications segments. Planning for this customer service requires
the same logical thought process. Figure 3-6 illustrates the
commonality in the non-Internet and Internet communities.
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
85
Identify
Analyze
Solution
Implement
Maintain
FIGURE 3-5
The planning process

THE MOST IMPORTANT PART OF THE
BUSINESS: THE CUSTOMER
The customer is an important focus for any company.
Surprisingly, the customer is often the most overlooked partici-
pant in the business community. Companies can easily inter-
nalize their views about their product and forget the customer
in the process. Many companies internalize their market views
of their product and essentially end up believing in their own
marketing hype. It is important for companies to support their
product and believe in their product’s ability to have value; how-
ever, a point is drawn where people can stop listening to the
customer and only listen to themselves. Companies that have
been in business and are doing well usually use a combination
of salespeople, product marketing folks, and focus groups to
gather data and updates about the customer. The incident men-
tioned earlier in this chapter concerning the toy company leaps
out as the most glaring example of the retail Internet market-
place going wrong.
86
Chapter 3
FIGURE 3-6
Serving the customer: The common goal

During the early days of the Internet, ISPs and other
Internet users could easily identify their customers. These cus-
tomers were the “early adopters.” Early adopters are customers
or users of products who tend to like to be either the first on the
“block” to own or do something or those who love to play with
the newest gadget on the market. Early adopters are brave by
comparison to non-early adopters. The early adopter market is
smaller than the mass market, making it easier to identify ways
in which to satisfy the market. Figure 3-7 is a depiction of the
early adopter versus the mass market.
Internet retailers need to be observant when their customer
base shifts from the early adopters to the mass market. When
the shift to the mass market occurs, it is important to shift one’s
marketing programs and effort so that the entire base is being
advertised to or communicated with. The mass market shift
may occur independent of anything the retailer is doing in
terms of marketing itself. The shift may have occurred simply
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
87
Mass Market
Early Adopters
FIGURE 3-7
Early adopter versus the mass market

because of a market ground swell for the product type. The
Internet is an interesting study from a consumer market per-
spective. First, the overall customer base needed to become
Internet conversant. Second, customer segments within the
entire customer base needed to find their shopping Web site.
Surprisingly, the Internet industry is at a point where many
retailers are not even online. Therefore, customers are looking
but not finding. As time passes, increasingly more members of
the retail community will go online. At some point in the distant
future, every retailer will be online. However, it seems unlikely
that every retailer will be online unless an ISP works with the
small business community. For now, the quick money is in the
large business community.
In order to plan a retail business, ISP business, Internet
back office support (equipment suppliers), or an e-commerce-
related site, one needs to apply standard business planning
practices. The first practice is identifying with which market to
do business. The next is to understand the customer segment’s
needs. Identifying the market to do business with is easy.
Understanding what the customer is seeking is more difficult.
As noted earlier, companies often internalize their views of the
market; this is typically called “looking into the mirror.” Looking
into the mirror has its benefits if someone takes an honest look
at his or herself.
ANALYZING CUSTOMER NEEDS
A variety of analytical tools are at the disposal of a company. It
is important that the correct tool is used and applied properly.
My preferences for marketing tools are two types of market
analyses that an ISP can perform. The first is a method of com-
petitive analysis and the second is called a customer satisfaction
survey. Performing a structured analysis of the marketplace is a
necessary administrative evil. During the late 1990s, hundreds
of ISPs leaped into the telecommunications community at an
alarming rate without carefully looking at the marketplace.
Performing a series of market analyses will not guarantee suc-
88
Chapter 3

cess for any business, but without a structured review of the
market, the ISP (or any company for that matter) runs the risk
of failing.
The competitive analysis method referred to here is known
as SWOT. SWOT is shorthand for Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, and Threats. The SWOT analysis reviews the
company from an internalized viewpoint. SWOT examines the
company’s strengths (S), weaknesses (W), potential market
opportunities (O), and external threats (T). The purpose of such
an analysis is to make a company take a close and honest look
at itself. The company performing a SWOT examines its own
strengths, which could be software writing, hardware develop-
ment, or Web page creation. Once those strengths are identi-
fied, the company then examines its own weaknesses. These
weaknesses could be in areas where the company should be
strong. The opportunity review is an examination of the oppor-
tunities in the marketplace for the company’s product. The
examination could result in identifying opportunities that had
previously gone unnoticed. The opportunity analysis may even
result in identifying opportunities for products that are still on
the drawing boards. The threat analysis examines the company’s
external threats. The external threats may include other com-
petitors, national or global economic forces, supply shortages,
or even shifts in customer needs.
A SWOT is not simply an identification process; it is an
analysis that is coupled with a plan. The plan is strategic and
tactical in nature. The plan must also outline a specific course
of action. Figure 3-8 for an outline of this plan.
Customer surveys are often the last marketing tool a com-
pany views. Companies often believe that customer surveys are
simply tools that justify one’s position. Unfortunately, many sur-
veys are worded in such a way that they tend to skew a respon-
dent’s views in a way that justifies a company’s existing position.
Nevertheless, if the survey is properly constructed, an unbiased
set of answers and valuable information can be provided to the
company. The marketing process is a process by which people
obtain what they need and desire through creating, offering,
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
89

and exchanging products with other people (or companies).
These products have some value to the purchaser. Marketing is
a social process. The customer survey is the ideal way of gaug-
ing and understanding one’s customer base.
The problem many companies face is listening to “their own
hype” and not paying attention to the customer. Technologists
are especially good at “drinking their own bath water.” Many
technologists tend to dismiss any comments unless they are
words of agreement or praise. Once the company stops listening
to the customer, the company is finished. Many Internet com-
panies have gone out of business for several reasons. One rea-
son is that they often provide a service or product that no longer
has any value to the customer. Unfortunately, many of these
Internet companies fail to understand the circumstances of
their failures. Some blame the stock market and others even
blame themselves. Before any business blames someone else for
its failure, it must first look at whether or not they met the cus-
tomers’ needs. Figure 3-9 is a representation of how important
customer surveys are to a business.
Focus groups are like customer surveys in that they obtain
customer reactions and opinions. However, conducting focus
groups is expensive compared to sending out a survey. Some
marketing companies specialize in focus group meetings.
90
Chapter 3
Strengths – Your own company's strengths
Weaknesses – Your own company's weaknesses
Opportunities – Examining the marketplace for opportunities
Threats – A competitive analysis and external forces review
Analyzing the competitive market by looking at the 
environment, starting with an internal look at 
oneself and then looking outward.
FIGURE 3-8
SWOT

However, the task of finding people to survey is a daunting one.
Furthermore, the people who are taking part in a focus group
study must be paid.
The following is a secondary set of tools that an ISP or 
e-commerce company can use for measuring customer 
satisfaction:
Complaint and Suggestion Systems
Such a system not
only enables a company to handle customer complaints, but
also gathers information regarding a customer’s likes and
dislikes.
Analysis of Lost Customers
Companies that lose
customers ought to survey those customers that have
decided to no longer do business with the company. Many
lost customers would jump at the chance to let the
disobedient ISP or other company have a piece of their
mind. The complaints should be viewed as valuable
customer input.
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
91
Customer surveys 
enable the 
gathering of 
critical customer 
focused data on 
needs.
Survey data can 
result in a new or 
modified product.
• Telephone surveys
• Mail-in forms
• Survey via e-mail
• Customer contact sales 
    meetings
FIGURE 3-9
Customer surveys

A customer in the Internet world can be examined, viewed,
perceived, and understood in the same manner as one would in
the non-Internet world.
DEFINING CUSTOMER VALUE AND SATISFACTION
In order to define the value of a product to a customer and the
customer’s satisfaction with that product, one needs to under-
stand consumer behavior. Consumer behavior is a complex
study of how people select, buy, sell, use, and dispose of prod-
ucts, services, or ideas in order to satisfy wants and needs. In
one form or another, everyone is a consumer to some other
party. Unlike the brick and mortar stores, the B2C Internet
stores do not have face-to-face interactions with their cus-
tomers. The lack of personal and physical interaction means
that the B2C Internet store cannot obtain real time customer
opinions. The question now is, how does the Internet-based
retailer or commerce company obtain customer reaction? The
answer is via customer surveys and real people conducting
focus groups with customers. These tools are not perfect and
very dependent on how the questions are asked. The Internet
world operates by the same rules as the non-Internet world.
Consumer behavior can be characterized in a structured
model. The consumer behavior model is known as the “seven
O’s”:
Occupants
Who constitutes the market?
Objects
What product(s) is the market purchasing?
Objectives
Why does the marketplace purchase the 
product(s)?
Organizations Who participates in the purchasing of the 
product(s)?
Operations
How does the market go about purchasing 
the product(s)?
Occasions
When does the market purchase?
Outlets
Where does the market conduct its 
purchasing?
92
Chapter 3

Figure 3-10 illustrates the framework for modeling con-
sumer behavior. The reader should note that in the world of e-
commerce, the exact same factors in modeling consumer
behavior appear as in a brick and mortar store.
The previous framework of questions requires an Internet
company or a non-Internet company to understand their cus-
tomers’ backgrounds, personalities, and culture. The lack of a
physical interaction with the customer presents a truly difficult
obstacle to overcome. People’s real time reactions are often
times a more accurate gauge than a well-thought out response.
Emotion is an important way of measuring customer satisfac-
tion. When people are given an opportunity to “clean up” their
language, the marketing research company loses the instanta-
neous reaction that is a true measure of customer reaction.
The Internet company must identify in detail those factors
that influence the behavior of the consumer:
•
Cultural
Cultural factors have the deepest and strongest
influence on the behavior of any consumer. Race, religion,
region of birth, the values one grew up with, occupation,
education, caste (social status), the socio-economic status
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
93
• Occupants
7 O’s for Modeling Human Behavior
• Objects
• Objectives
• Organizations
• Operations
• Occasions
• Outlets
Real time reactions are more useful to 
Important to understand the 
customers’ backgrounds, 
personalities, and cultures.
FIGURE 3-10
Framework for modeling consumer behavior

in which one grew up, and the current socio-economic
status of the individual are all cultural factors that
influence behavior. The list is very broad and examines a
person in total.
•
Social
Social factors include reference groups, family,
roles, and statuses. Reference groups include groups that
influence a person’s behavior such as unions, professional
societies, school clubs, social groups like the Knights of
Columbus or the Masons, or even church groups. In
general, families are considered the most influential group
in one’s life and also the most influential in buying
disposable/perishable (food) and non-disposable products
(homes, clothes, vehicles, and so on). Families encompass
all of the aforementioned factors and even the following
factors. They are a complete reflection of the individual
buyer. Roles and statuses include those parts/roles one
must play in public and in private.
•
Personal
Personal factors include the consumer’s age,
occupation, economic circumstances, personal hobbies,
lifestyle, and self image. The reader may wonder what
“lifestyle” means here. The word “lifestyle” is nebulous to
many people. Lifestyle refers to a pattern of living.
Specifically, it refers to how a person expresses themselves
via their activities, interests (for example, likes and dislikes,
what they read, and so on), hobbies, and opinions. Lifestyle
represents how a person interacts with their environment.
•
Psychological
Four psychological factors influence a
consumer’s buying decisions: motivation, perception,
learning, and beliefs and attitudes.
•
Motivation is a need that has reached a sufficient level of
intensity in a person’s mind, which has caused the
person to take action to satisfy the need.
•
Perception is reality. Perception is a process by which a
person makes decisions, organizes, and interprets
information in a way that has meaning to the person.
94
Chapter 3

•
Learning is a process of personal growth whereby an
individual learns via experience. One’s experiences may
include formal education or simply the process of living,
working, interacting with people, and performing
activities. People may buy a product or perform an
action based on what they learn. Sometimes people learn
when they take an action.
•
Beliefs and attitudes are acquired when people learn or
act. A belief is a thought that represents a person’s
opinion. An attitude is a person’s evaluation of an event,
and a lasting feeling towards an object or idea.
•
Buying Behavior
Buying behavior refers to the different
types of purchasing based on the involvement of the buyer
and the degree of brand differentiation. Four types of
buying behavior exist.
•
Complex Buying Behavior occurs when a consumer is
highly knowledgeable of a product and its competing
brands and makes a purchase based on this body of
knowledge.
•
Dissonance-Reducing Buying Behavior refers to the
situation where a consumer makes a purchase and then
discovers problems with the purchase. The consumer
becomes so aware of the problems with the product that
they begin seeking information justifying their decision.
Usually, this occurs when the product purchased is very
expensive.
•
Habitual Buying Behavior occurs when consumers often
buy specific product brands out of habit.
•
Variety Seeking Buying Behavior is demonstrated by
consumers that frequently switch brands for the sake of
change, boredom, feeling of the moment or for any kind
of reason.
Figure 3-11 is an illustration of the factors that influence
buying behavior. Note that the illustration depicts how inter-
related these factors are to one another.
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
95

The Internet business environment has become an active
and crowded space. Thousands of companies are seeking a mul-
titude of opportunities in the Internet business. Companies are
entering the business as middleware providers, end user appli-
cation providers, terminal device manufacturers (especially the
wireless device vendors), banner advertising companies, and
ISPs. Each one of these companies fills a need or role in the
overall picture of building a product or providing service. Today,
Internet companies have sought to create a variety of relation-
ships that will enable them to jump-start and expand their busi-
nesses. The idea of creating business relationships that are
synergistic and enhance one’s company is not a new idea. The
96
Chapter 3
• Cultural
Factors Influencing Buying Behavior
• Social
• Personal
• Psychological – motivation, perception, learning, 
    and beliefs & attitudes
FIGURE 3-11
Factors influencing buying behavior

maverick nature of the Internet entrepreneur and the newness
of the Internet industry had led many early investors to believe
that basic business practices are not applicable. In reality, what
has been observed in 1999 is that basic business practices (such
as finding allies) and rules of finance are not only applicable,
but also undeniable realities of any business. In the year 2000,
Internet companies are working feverishly to bring products
and services to market by creating alliances. The Internet space
is so crowded that many companies have been forced to develop
a value chain analysis in order to determine how to best identify
their place in the Internet business model and potential partner
types. This examination should result in the creation of a value
chain analysis.
THE VALUE CHAIN
A value chain is a business tool that is used to describe the
value of a sequence of events or relationships. The value chain
concept can be applied internally and externally. From an inter-
nal perspective, a company would look within itself and identify
a set of specific activities/events that create value and cost in its
own company. These internal activities/events are classified into
two categories. Each of the categories can be further subdivided
into activities/events:
PRIMARY ACTIVITIES/EVENTS
Inbound Logistics
Material or information that has been
shipped into the company.
Operations
Departments that convert the material or
information into some other form either for internal
processing or for sale to the customer.
Outbound Logistics
The shipping of product, whether a
physical product or information, to the customer.
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
97

Marketing and Sales
An external activity that results in
the sale of the product to the paying customer.
Service
The servicing of the customer. All products,
physical or informational, need some kind of servicing to
the customer. Service can include repair and maintenance,
customer complaint desks, 24 hours seven days a week
network support, or even free monthly software updates.
SECONDARY ACTIVITIES/EVENTS
Procurement
Procurement is the purchasing of products,
material, information, and so on. for the support of each of
the primary activities.
Technology Development
Technology development is
usually seen as hardware or software. I tend to look at this
from a broader perspective. An individual should look at the
primary business of the company and he/she will find that a
kind of structured development always can occur to improve
the product. For example, a cookie manufacturer is always
looking at how to make a tastier cookie. The process of
making this cookie is always under review and requires a
structured process. Development is a process of creation
that ultimately results in a product. Making a cookie is food
science. Making furniture is carpentry, which is a skill that
has to be translated from a manual operation to a mass
produced function. In summary, technology development
should be viewed as something more than electronics and
software. In the world of the Internet, it is software.
Human Resource Management
Human resource (HR)
management is an often overlooked and under-rated
activity. In fact, HR management is an important activity.
HR is the department that finds all of the skilled labor,
which ultimately produces the company’s product. An
Internet company requires highly skilled labor. Finding
highly skilled labor requires a good HR department.
98
Chapter 3

Infrastructure
Any company’s infrastructure includes
general management, finance, strategic planning,
accounting, public relations, and government and legal
affairs. Infrastructure activities are a result of all the
primary activities and other support activities.
A company’s success depends on how well each department
performs its respective function and how well each department
coordinates with one another. The ultimate goal for each
department is to do their jobs well in order to deliver, in a timely
fashion, a product that a customer wants to spend money on.
Figure 3-12 is a depiction of the value chain model.
The challenge the Internet companies face is the pace at
which the business is moving. The pace is so fast that Internet
companies are working to create strategic alliances with other
companies at a pace the general business community has not
experienced since the days of the space race (circa 1959–1969).
The value chain model can be applied to external relationships,
that is, strategic alliances. In the case of the external applica-
tion of the value chain model, one would overlay the model of
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
99
Inbound logistics
Operations
Outbound logistics
Marketing & Sales
Service
Value Chain
FIGURE 3-12
Generic value chain model

one company with the model of the other company. An inter-
company value chain model would focus on the product and
the areas of internal expertise of each company. Focusing on
internal expertise enables companies to find ways of helping
one another bring their products to market and possibly create
new products. In the case of the strategic alliance, one com-
pany wants to have the role of the primary customer contact.
The Internet is filled with a variety of players all wanting to
get customers to buy from them. Today, the large telecom carri-
ers are working feverishly to become the ISP of choice. Internet
hardware and software companies want these carriers to buy
their software platforms, information databases, and hardware.
However, this flurry of activity has caused the large carriers to
say, “I want to deal with one company that has the relationships
I want to help me be successful. I am tired of speaking to hun-
dreds of companies that are all providing the same thing and
claim to be better than the other.” Today, the Internet software
and hardware business has created the role of integrator. The
integrator is a company that serves as a primary point of contact
and service and hardware integration for the carrier to commu-
nicate with. It becomes incumbent upon the integrator to
ensure that their partners are the “best of breed.” The value
chain model analysis identifies the points of synergy for the
respective allied Internet companies.
The value chain model can also be used to overlay revenue
flows for the companies allied together. In the case of provi-
sioning to the telecommunications carrier, the value chain
model can also be used to explain how the revenue will flow to
the telecommunications carrier. Figure 3-13 is an illustration of
the external application of the value chain model.
INTERNET MARKETING
As the reader may have noted by now, I do not see marketing
the Internet any differently than marketing any other product
or services. Marketing is a process by which people obtain what
100
Chapter 3

they need and desire through creating, offering, and exchanging
products with others. These products have some value to the
purchaser. Marketing is a social process, that involves commu-
nicating a message to the masses of people. The sales process is
about closing “the deal” with a specific customer. Salespeople
use marketers to identify target market segments.
Marketing to the Internet customer base is no different than
marketing in any other industry. It is about fulfilling needs,
wants, and demands. As cliché as this statement appears, it is
the truth. Salespeople merely close the deal. However, the sales
effort would fail if the marketing effort was not at least ade-
quate. Identifying customers, market segments, demographics,
demand levels, profitably levels, and future needs are all part of
the marketing effort. Salespeople focus on their own needs–
specifically, converting the product into hard cash. Salespeople
assume that customers will not buy unless they are convinced,
sold on, and promoted to about a product. Marketing people
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
101
Inbound logistics
Operations
Outbound logistics
Marketing & Sales
Service
Value Chain
A Value Chain analysis can be performed of 
the value two or more companies bring to 
one another in a relationship.
Overlay revenue flows to analyze the 
revenue relationship between two or more 
companies.
FIGURE 3-13
External application of the value chain model

take an outside-in look at their own company, where they are
concerned about satisfying the needs of the customer base first,
followed by examining (and executing) all the activities associ-
ated with satisfying the customer’s needs. Salespeople look
from inside their company and then outside to the specific cus-
tomer. They are focused on selling because their salaries are
normally commission-based. Any reasonable person selling
would not care about the overall needs of the market. Figure 3-
14 illustrates the marketing concept.
Marketing and sales are two diametrically opposed efforts
that cannot exist without one another.
RETAIL MARKETS
Marketing across the Internet is functionally no different than
marketing any other product. The Internet is a medium, so the
marketer promoting the product needs to determine how to use
the medium to their advantage. Companies selling products
must understand that any company needs an image or message
102
Chapter 3
Marketing people want to satisfy the 
needs of the customer first and then 
worry about how their company will 
meet their needs.
Marketing people are focused on 
understanding a market, not a specific 
customer.
FIGURE 3-14
Marketing concept

to communicate to its customer base. The Internet retailer
must create and maintain an image. Some Internet retailers are
known for selling books. These same retailers have opened up
their site to the sale of other kinds of products. Suddenly, the
nation is joking that this Internet retailer is selling barbecue
grills. The result just described might have been part of that
retailer’s market plan. However, it is doubtful that this Internet
retailer was seeking to become the target of jokes. Image is
everything in marketing.
The retail chain Sears, Roebuck & Co. is known for items
such as vehicular tires, hardware, and home appliances. This
chain of stores is very successful in its market space. Internet
sites that retail products to the consumer are no different than
brick and mortar stores. The customer must associate him-
self/herself with the Internet retailer with a specific product
type, otherwise the retailer becomes everything to everyone.
The reality is that the shopping patterns of people are affected
by the image of the store. Some people would never be caught
in a discount store known for selling clothes that are not man-
ufactured by high-priced fashion houses. Discount brick and
mortar stores even segment their market space. Some discount
stores focus on appliances whereas others focus on popcorn,
junk food, and clothing. Internet retail sites are no different.
Internet retailers should know the customer segment to which
they are communicating. Figure 3-15 depicts the need to estab-
lish and communicate an image.
During the 1999-2000 holiday season, a large national toy
store started selling products over the Internet. To many people,
this event was a confusing one. The toy store promoted itself as
a place where any toy a person wanted could be purchased. The
toy store even promoted fast moving checkout lines. The toy
store was a national chain, discount store that had a presence in
nearly every community in the United States. However, the toy
store’s Internet site was not adding any additional discounts.
The question everyone was asking was why bother selling over
the Internet? This resulted in confusion on Wall Street. The
final result was total disaster for the toy store chain. Customers’
orders were either filled late or unfilled. Customers became
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
103

angry and the toy store’s stock (Wall Street) took a nose dive.
Selling over the Internet does not mean instant success.
Planning and execution are still important.
PLANNING AND EXECUTION
The planning process described earlier in this chapter portrays
the overall planning process. Planning is an activity that can be
divided into strategic and tactical categories.
Strategic planning
The process of developing and
maintaining a viable fit between the company’s objectives
and resources and the changing marketplace. Strategic
planning looks at the future of both the company and the
marketplace.
104
Chapter 3
Images are as fragile as glass.
FIGURE 3-15
Image

Tactical planning
The process of developing and
maintaining a viable fit between the company’s objectives
and resources and the marketplace at the moment. Tactical
planning is a management process that supports the
strategic plan of the company. Simply put; tactical planning
is putting the company's strategic plan into action—here
and now. It is a short-term activity.
Execution is the process of implementation. The execution
of plans requires a day-to-day management of resources in
order to fulfill company objectives. The best-laid plans will fail
if the execution is not flawless. Execution requires identifying
resources, assigning resources, meeting established timelines,
and care. Execution is comprised of four basic elements that
must exist in harmony, otherwise the chance of a successful
implementation is lessened:
Common way of thinking and behaving
Refers to style
and corporate culture.
Staff
Refers to the type of talent the company has
employed to execute the plan.
Skills
Refers to the specific training the staff has
undergone and the skill sets they currently possess.
Shared values
Means that all of the employees share the
same values and work ethics.
When all four elements are present and in harmony, one will
find companies that are likely to succeed. Investors who have
seen Internet companies fail can usually recognize the absence
of these elements as a reason for failure. A brief note: Many of
the ISPs that failed in 1999 and 2000 failed because of poor
management and leadership. Poor management and leadership
have a direct and deadly effect on the four elements of execu-
tion. Figure 3-16 depicts the elements of execution.
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
105

MEASURING MARKET DEMAND
Market demand means the total volume of product that would
be bought by a defined customer in a defined geographical area
over a defined period of time in a defined marketing environ-
ment. Forecasting tools, sales figures, sales projections, and
surveys are used to measure the market demand. The Internet
employs site hits as a way of measuring customer demand or
interest in its site.
The type of Internet site will determine the importance of
the site hit. The site hit is merely the user entering the Internet
company’s Web site. This does not mean that the user has pur-
chased anything. It just means that he/she has seen the primary
Web page of the Internet site. The site hit is similar to a televi-
sion entertainment program’s rating. The rating determines the
popularity of a program by counting the number of people in a
defined pool of people watching the program. Using statistical
analysis, a national viewing percentage is calculated. Internet
companies that are nothing more than search engines use the
106
Chapter 3
• Common way of thinking
• Talent
• Skills
• Shared corporate values
Just Do It!!
FIGURE 3-16
Elements of execution

hit as a way of determining their popularity. This number can
then be used to charge companies fees for advertising space.
The more hits, the higher the advertising fees. A television news
program that also has a Web site can use the hits to help deter-
mine which kinds of stories to give greater weight. The hit is the
easiest method of determining a level of consumer interest.
Figure 3-17 represents how market demand is measured in the
Internet business space. Market research companies are already
employing more advanced methods to predict demand more
accurately. These methods include internal processes review,
purchased external research, observational research, focus-
group research, and a number of quantitative tools such as dis-
criminant analysis and sales-response modeling.
THE BUSINESS MODELS
The business models to date have kluged together efforts. Some
Internet companies have failed and others have thrived. The
successful models have taken on the form of existing business
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
107
Many Web sites measure 
market demand based on 
the number of hits, number 
of resultant purchases, and 
a group of other variables.
FIGURE 3-17
Market demand

models in the non-Internet world. These models have taken on
new names such as those in the following list:
•
B2C
•
B2B
•
X2X
•
B2G
The Internet models are different than non-Internet busi-
ness models in that the Internet reaches a larger audience and
does not have the benefit of real time personal interaction. The
revenue layer of the model is no different than any other rev-
enue model. People and companies perform a service or sell a
product and expect to get paid. One of the important things to
understand is that the value chain model must clearly articulate
108
Chapter 3
Future business models will 
require strategic alliances 
between companies.
Mining value out of the 
relationship.
Future Business Models
FIGURE 3-18
The future business model for the Internet

the parties involved in bringing the product to market.
Furthermore, in the Internet business environment, the ele-
ments of value are often software and not hardware.
The business models of the future will depend on a frame-
work in which people can clearly see the various chains of rev-
enue. The application of existing business principles will serve
as a foundation for all future Internet business models. Figure
3-18 is a depiction of the future Internet business model.
TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
Much of the interest in the Internet is on the business side. The
technological aspect of the Internet will be given attention later
in this book. The reader should note that to many people, the
technology is much further along than the business. For many
years, especially the last few years, the technology community
spoke voluminously about the benefits of the Internet. The real-
ity is that the business side has spent the late 1990s and the
year 2000 catching up. The entire nation is undergoing a cul-
tural transformation simultaneously; the Internet has infiltrated
the business, home, and now the schools. However, the tech-
nology community is facing challenges.
These challenges are only becoming more defined in 2000.
As the business opportunities become more apparent, so will
the technical challenges. To the layman, the technical hurdles
are as follows:
More bandwidth to the home
People want more than
just 57,600 bits per second over the telephone lines. More
bandwidth translates into video and voice applications. In
the year 1999, video and voice applications became
increasingly popular. The customer base is expressing
interest in voice and video to the extent that the incumbent
local exchange carriers ( telephone companies) have
launched an all out effort to enter the Internet business.
Faster computers
Today, the desktop computers operate
at speeds up to 700 MHz. People want more speed.
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
109

More memory
The more memory in a computer, the
more complex the applications one can place on their home
and office computer.
Bigger hard drives
The need for storage has increased to
the point where companies are selling external hard drives
and external disk systems capable of storing hundreds of
megabytes of data.
The reader should not think the previous customer per-
ceived technical challenges as trivial. In reality, the aforemen-
tioned list impacts the buying decisions of the consumer. The
buying decisions ultimately have an effect on their ability to use
the Internet. Perception is reality in marketing. Consumers will
perceive an ISP as having problems if the consumer’s interac-
tion with the ISP appears slow or flawed, even if it is due to a
slow computer or a computer that does not have the software to
view programs because of missing computer applications.
Customer frustration has a way of impacting all parties in a ser-
vice provisioning chain. See Figure 3-19 for a depiction of the
customer satisfaction model from the technical perspective.
To the technology community, the challenges are exactly the
same. However, their list is longer. In addition to the aforemen-
110
Chapter 3
Customers want:
More bandwidth
Faster computers
More memory
Bigger hard drives
Customers perceive technology 
and its challenges differently 
than the technical expert.
FIGURE 3-19
Technical challenges—Customer perception

tioned, the following can be added to the list of technological
challenges faced by the Internet community:
Network Security
The current Internet protocol, known
as IPv4, does not contain security features that ensure
private transmissions. Note the message one receives from
their ISP when they access a Web site that is not under the
control of the ISP. The current protocol does not enable the
ISP or the other Web site provider from wrapping the
transmission with encryption algorithms. Every network,
whether it is the wireline or wireless voice network, is
vulnerable to security breaches. The new network protocol,
known as IPv6, is far more secure than IPv4. IPv6 is
theoretically capable of providing an environment
conducive for creating defenses against active attacks,
passive attacks, and replay attacks.
The Encapsulating Security Payload (ESP) is a fundamental
element that provides integrity, authentication, and
confidentiality for IP datagrams. The ESP works between
hosts, between a host and a security gateway, or between
security gateways. The support for security gateways permits
trustworthy networks behind a security gateway to omit
encryption while using security gateways to obtain
confidentiality for transmissions over untrustworthy
network segments.
Service Level Performance
Service level performance
objectives or quality of service objectives are a
commonplace measurement of performance in the wireline
telephone community. The various public utility
commissions measure the telephone companies against a
pre-defined set of performance parameters. If the telephone
company fails to meet those objectives, they are fined or
penalized by the utility commission in some manner. These
performance parameters keep the telephone companies
focused on serving the customer. ISPs do not have that
culture of service ingrained in them. IPv4 is not robust
enough to maintain a voice conversation without
information bits arriving at the incorrect times.
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
111

The problem with packet networks is that the static and
warbling are an annoyance, but a reality, in a network type
whose primary asset is in its ability to packetize voice and
transmit the packets across different routes. One can buffer
non-voice data, but one cannot buffer voice. Buffering voice
results in delayed speech, static, and to some people, a
warbling type of sound.
Scalability
One could say that the current Internet is
highly scalable. However, for those ISPs attempting to enter
the voice business, the issue of scalability becomes a
challenge. Voice traffic has characteristics that are different
than non-voice data. It is true that the average Internet call
lasts approximately two hours and that the average wireline
telephone call lasts for approximately 10 minutes. One
would assume that the Internet is far more robust given the
length of time a user will stay on the Internet. However, a
network undergoes far more usage stress when it must
respond to multiple requests for service. Compare the
robustness of a single network switch capable of handling
400,000 calls in one hour versus a single network host
capable of handling 40,000 users in one hour.
Network Management
Network management in the
world of the Internet has no central point of network
management. Internet providers manage their own
networks, but do not communicate with one another at the
network management level. In the wireline telephony
environment, network management centers are monitoring
traffic between each other. Network operation centers in
wireline telephone companies communicate congestion
situations to one another. Neither wireline telephone
company type (local and long-distance) wishes to be blamed
for poor service; therefore, it is incumbent upon them to
ensure good service.
Sometimes network congestion reaches a point where a
wireline telephone user hears the words “all circuits busy.”
This does not help either the local or long-distance
telephone companies. Customers encountering delays tend
112
Chapter 3

to get mad at both carrier types. Add video and the
challenge becomes even greater.
Network Reliability
No ubiquitous network reliability
standards are employed in the Internet community.
Network reliability standards exist in the traditional
telecommunications carrier world. Reliability is defined as
availability, throughput, and latency (time delay). The
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) oversees a
national forum known as the Network Reliability Council,
where carriers and infrastructure vendors participate in the
establishment and maintenance of network reliability
standards. The FCC performs this function in order to
ensure that the various networks maintain a common
standard of reliability for the purposes of national security.
The focus of the Network Reliability Council is the health
of the physical infrastructure and the associated practices.
ISPs have no forum and do not participate in the FCC’s
Network Reliability Council. ISPs have an additional
concern that the wireline and wireless carriers do not have
currently; ISPs must be capable of supporting third party
applications. ISPs cannot easily control the impact of third
party applications on reliability. Today, most of the ISP
solutions are proprietary. ISPs wishing to enter the larger
market of voice provisioning must be capable of meeting the
standards of reliability that the other telecommunications
carriers are required to meet.
It should not be assumed that any of the challenges listed
are “show stoppers” for an ISP wishing to expand his/her busi-
ness beyond the e-mail business. Technology usage in the
Internet is more than the use of applets, Web page creation
software, search engines, audio programs, video viewing pro-
grams, streaming audio and video programs, or any other desk-
top software. Technology in the Internet also means network
connectivity and communication. The biggest technical prob-
lem for the Internet industry is bandwidth. The bandwidth
shortages affect every Internet player, whether they are an ISP,
Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and Technology
113

ASP, e-commerce player, or an m-commerce player. The inabil-
ity to move vast amounts of data quickly is the Internet’s biggest
problem and is the one that is currently under the control of
other carriers—namely the large, wireline telephone carriers.
Figure 3-20 illustrates the technical challenges faced by the
Internet community. The technological challenges of the
Internet will be further explored in Chapters 4, “Internet
Technology and Service Provisioning in the Information
Marketplace” and Chapter 5, “Network Signaling: Mobile and
Wired Business Space.”
SUMMARY
The Internet is a new telecommunications medium that has
just begun to be understood, explored, and/or exploited by the
technical or business communities. The need to expand the
Internet business will require the business community to find
ways of finding new market opportunities, improving current
businesses and ways of doing business. The technology com-
munity must find ways to meet the needs of the marketplace. As
of 2000, the Internet is still in its infancy. What we do under-
stand is that every sector of the telecommunications business is
attempting to be in the Internet space.
114
Chapter 3
• Network Security
• Service Level Performance
• Scalability
• Network Management
• Network Reliability
FIGURE 3-20
Technical challenges of the Internet community

C H A P T E R
4
INTERNET—
TECHNOLOGY AND
SERVICE
PROVISIONING IN
THE INFORMATION
MARKETPLACE
T
he Internet players, specifically the ISPs (Internet Service
Providers), are currently working toward entering the voice
business space. The ISPs are facing an uphill battle. A major
issue that an Internet player faces when entering the voice
space, which is occupied by the existing wireline and wireless
carriers, is lack of understanding of the voice business. The
voice business is not a primitive technology or business space.
It represents the mass market. E-commerce and m-commerce
notwithstanding, the mass market is a market of voice users. 
E-commerce and m-commerce mine enormous additional
value out of the network. However, before the ISPs reach 
that point, they are attempting to provide the most basic 
need—voice.
Voice is the most basic and sought after service across the
entire telecommunications marketplace. Despite the various
data tools and services available, people need to communicate
verbally. Internet companies understand that voice is the most
important means of communication, which is why the ISP is
115
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

seeking ways of provisioning voice. Once the ISP has the user,
he/she can take full advantage of providing e-commerce and m-
commerce opportunities. The Internet players must understand
the technology basics of their competitors’ networks: the exist-
ing wireline and wireless carriers. However, the important point
to understand is that network planning in both the Internet and
non-Internet world is fundamentally the same.
This chapter will focus on helping the reader understand
the wireline and wireless carriers’ basic network technologies
and practices. A startup ISP needs to understand that voice is
more than just Voice over IP (VoIP). Many non-technical and
technical issues should be considered when providing voice.
The primary purpose of this chapter is to assist the Internet pro-
fessional in understanding the importance of voice.
Understanding voice will equip an ISP with the fundamentals
of providing any service to the user.
The role and impact of the Application Service Provider
(ASP) will be described later in the chapter.
NETWORK PLANNING
Planning a network involves understanding the technical needs
of the service provider’s network and the financial realities of
fulfilling the technical requirements. ISPs face the same prob-
lems.
To the wireline and wireless carrier, the single largest com-
ponent of the network tends to be transmission facility-related
(trunks, signaling links, and so on). Wireless carriers are wire-
less only between the radio base station and the handset.
Communication connectivity between the base station and
switch is made by physical and in some cases, air-link trans-
mission technologies. Planning the physical network involves
understanding how to achieve a balance between network opti-
mization and cost control. Network planning is an exercise in
achieving a balance between technical functionality (facility
and switch) and cost control.
Network planning is essential to any service provider,
whether or not they are an ISP. When planning a network,
116
Chapter 4

whether it is to support Internet service, satellite service, or
paging service, a set of common planning (design) activities are
available. A description of the planning stages should give the
reader a better understanding of just how common or synergis-
tic many networks are.
Some basic tools are needed to design a voice network.
These tools are applicable to all network types. They are not
software or hardware, but are conceptual in nature:
•
Architectural switching plan—This refers to the efficient
routing of calls or data packets based on network efficiency
or business arrangements. Route diversity is a major
concern for many service providers. But this requires a
dollar cost.
•
Transmission plan—Types of facilities used and
transmission design requirements.
•
Addressing plan, numbering plan, point codes, and the like.
•
Network signaling plan (more detail in a later chapter).
•
Subscriber services plan (more detail in a later chapter).
•
Subscriber billing/customer support plan.
•
Network management and operational support systems
plan.
This book will not address all of these tools in detail. The
intent of listing these planning tools is for informational pur-
poses only. More detail on this subject can be found in my book
Telecommunications Internetworking.
ARCHITECTURAL SWITCHING PLAN
Until 2000, most ISPs were only concerned about the following
architectural issues:
•
Geographic placement of the servers in a local market—
The location of the ISP’s point of presence determined the
telephone numbers the ISP was able to obtain.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
117

•
The local exchange carrier’s (LEC’s) local switch had
enough capacity to handle the traffic to the ISPs servers.
The aforementioned list of issues explains why so many indi-
viduals and “mom-n-pop” shops (local drug store, shoe store,
candy store, and so on) were able to enter the ISP business
space. At one time, anyone could install a computer and
modem, and receive a telephone number from their local tele-
phone company in order to become an ISP. It was and still is
that simple to become an ISP providing e-mail and Web search
capabilities.
The largest e-mail company today faces staggering adminis-
trative overhead in order to manage services and servers in every
telephone area code. ISPs want their customers to dial into
their systems without having to incur long-distance charges.
The creation of the mega-carrier, where local and long-distance
telephone companies and wireless carriers have merged, has
changed the carrier landscape. ISPs will be charged long-
distance access fees by the local telephone company because
the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and state laws enable the
local telephone company to recover its cost of providing the
ISPs network access to the long-distance companies. However,
the mega-carriers wishing to provide Internet service will not
have those same fee issues.
If ISPs are hoping to become more than just e-mail compa-
nies, they will need to engineer and install network systems that
provide more control over their costs and ability to create ser-
vices and deliver services. The existing wireline and wireless
carriers understand how important it is to have control over
their own customer accounts and access to the customer. This
is why the wireline and wireless carriers own their switches and
transmission networks.
Owning one’s own network is an expensive option com-
pared to leasing a transmission network. However, to the cus-
tomer, owning the transmission network enables the service
provider to more accurately control overall network costs. To
118
Chapter 4

the wireline and wireless carriers, paying a leasing fee for the
use of a transmission facility means a loss of control over how
to optimize the network for performance. Leasing has its ben-
efits, but if one had to lease their entire transmission network,
his/her costs would be astronomical. The overall cost of being
an ISP is enormous because all of the ISPs are pouring money
into another service provider’s pockets for local and long-dis-
tance access. Installing your own network represents a high
initial capital cost, but it also represents long-term savings in
outside fees and surcharges. In 1999, the United States gov-
ernment allowed the LECs to charge the ISPs access fees for
long-distance connectivity. Achieving a balance between net-
work performance and cost control is a complex, but essential
task for any provider of services. This exercise is called network
planning.
The wireline and wireless carriers use three basic network
configurations to move voice traffic: Tree, Ring, and Star. The
configurations were designed for non-packet, hierarchical rout-
ing schemes. Hierarchical routing is a must in non-packet ser-
vices. In a packet data world, these configurations are
applicable to both the local loops and the regional routing con-
figurations that an ISP would be concerned about. These con-
figurations can also be used to support services, such as voice,
that require a fixed routing time period. In a packetized world,
disaster recovery is an old concept. Alternate routes are always
a necessity. ISPs rely on nationwide network providers that have
routing diversity designed into their networks.
The nationwide network providers are not Internet or packet
network providers, but are long-distance carriers selling net-
work time to another service provider. These long-distance net-
works are still point-to-point networks. It is true that these
carriers are working to install packet technologies. However,
$200 billion of embedded capital is in the network today, and it
is not going to be that simple to replace in total. The following
sections represent how these nationwide network providers
make nationwide connectivity for the Internet.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
119

TREE ARCHITECTURE
The Tree architecture looks like a tree.
The characteristics of the Tree architecture are the same as
those of a typical local area network (LAN), some landline tele-
phone company networks (party lines), or even cellular carrier
networks. The Tree architecture is the most efficient way of dis-
tributing the same set of communication signals to multiple ter-
minals. Figure 4-1 illustrates the Tree architecture.
RING ARCHITECTURE
The Ring architecture loops traffic (voice
or data) so that it returns to its original starting point. Some
examples of the Ring architecture are the Token Ring and the
Self-healing Ring. Service providers (wireline and wireless car-
riers) most commonly use the Self-healing Ring.
The Self-healing Ring is a ring architectural configuration
in which the same messages are transmitted simultaneously in
opposite directions on parallel rings. In case of a service inter-
ruption on the ring, the messages are automatically transferred
to the other ring. This provides a high degree of redundancy. At
each port, node, or drop on the ring, messages can be trans-
120
Chapter 4
FIGURE 4-1
Tree architecture

ferred to a Tree, Star, or another Ring network. The Self-heal-
ing Ring is a network design used to ensure that the network
continues to provide service in the event of a network failure.
This design methodology/philosophy is called disaster recovery
planning. The ISP must understand that no network is failure
proof. Therefore, steps must be taken to ensure continued ser-
vice. The concept of redundancy in the world of computer sys-
tems is not a new concept. However, to a service provider,
disaster recovery capability means more money and higher
operating costs.
Ring networks for cable television, landline telephone com-
panies, or wireless carriers normally utilize fiber optic facilities
for digital transmission. The Self-healing Ring is expensive
because one must support at least two networks that are carry-
ing the exact same messaging for the sake of redundancy.
However, the expense is worth the disaster recovery capabilities
inherent within this architecture.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
121
FIGURE 4-2
Ring architecture

STAR ARCHITECTURE
The Star architecture is the most typical
wireline telephone company configuration. The Star topology
enables separate transmission paths to be established to each
subscriber. Each path can be designed to carry the same or dif-
ferent messages.
The Star architecture is the most efficient way for the net-
work switch to communicate to a large number of end users.
The Star network configuration can be likened to an airport
hub. In this case, the hub would be a telecommunications hub.
ROUTING TECHNIQUES
Although the Tree and Star architectures are common in the
cable television and telephone industry, the Ring architecture is
being increasingly used. The need to recover from network fail-
ures and damage is important and is becoming increasingly dif-
ficult to meet as the networks grow in complexity. The
architecture of a network plays an integral role in maintaining
122
Chapter 4
Switch
Switch
FIGURE 4-3
Star architecture

network health. Many people may believe that the data in
packet networks are safe from loss during network failures.
That is not true; all networks can fail. Packet networks use a
routing technique known as dynamic routing. However,
dynamic routing does not necessarily mean that the data pack-
ets will reach their destination. Physical transmission routes
fail. Disaster recovery is a network planning methodology in
which networks are designed with “imminent failure” in mind.
Disaster recovery requires one to design redundancy in his/her
network.
The questions of how much redundancy and how much net-
work protection to design into a network are difficult to answer.
A crossover between network cost and network disaster recov-
ery occurs. The point at which a carrier or Internet carrier
reaches too much network protection depends on network
design policies and corporate financial objectives. In other
words, it is left up to the carrier to decide what is enough or not
enough.
It is a useful mental device to think of networks like vehic-
ular roadways. Networks have figurative signs instructing dri-
vers when to Stop, Yield, make a Left Turn, make a Right Turn,
Merge, Go, and Slow Down. Figure 4-4 illustrates this mental
device.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
123
FIGURE 4-4
Networks: Vehicular roadways

Routing is the action of directing information from one
point to another point. Three principle forms of routing are
used in the traditional telecommunications world:
•
Hierarchical routing (also known principally today as
Alternate routing)
•
Dynamic routing
•
Packet routing
However, by taking a more expanded view of telecommuni-
cations and including the data world, a third type of routing
exists. This form of routing is called packet routing (that is,
packet switching of information).
Routing is not a transport technology. It is a methodology of
moving information around the transport structure, which will
be discussed in this chapter. The network configuration is inter-
related to the routing methodology that can be optimally exe-
cuted. Given its importance, the next section will elaborate
further on this topic.
The original form of routing first used in the old, wireline
voice telecomm environment was hierarchical routing also
known today as alternate routing. Alternate routing is applied to
voice traffic by providing a first choice (high usage trunk route)
and one or more alternate routes if the first route is unavailable.
This form of routing is hierarchical in nature because the
switching system follows a predetermined order of routing.
Dynamic routing lends itself to flexibility and grew out of the
need for more efficient routing and management of the enor-
mous volumes of traffic crossing the nation. Dynamic routing is
similar to packet routing in the area of flexible management.
Packet routing entails the routing of information where each
packet takes a different route to the final destination.
HIERARCHICAL/ALTERNATE ROUTING
A pure Internet configuration does not lend itself to the struc-
tured and planned routing methodology of hierarchical/alter-
124
Chapter 4

nate routing. This form of routing has its advantages and disad-
vantages. However, it is important for all Internet companies to
understand that the embedded wireline network is intercon-
nected to all ISPs and providers of other Internet services and
therefore, becomes a potential “chokepoint” for high-speed ser-
vices. Figure 4-5 is an illustration of a hierarchical network.
DYNAMIC ROUTING
Dynamic routing refers to the updating of routing patterns on a
real time or near real time interval on the basis of traffic statis-
tics collected by a network management system (NMS).
Dynamic routing is a traffic routing method in which one or
more central controllers determine near real time routes for a
switching network based on the state of network congestion
measured as trunk group bust/idle status and switch conges-
tion. The choice of traffic routes is not predetermined.
Dynamic routing schema are used in situations where the
complexity of routing the call is so high that applying the fixed
rules and structure of hierarchical network configurations make
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
125
High Usage 
Transmission 
Facility
Alternate 
Route
Alternate 
Route
Original form of routing
Structured and fixed 
routing methodology
FIGURE 4-5
Hierarchical/Alternate routing

it difficult for a network manager to properly manage call flow.
To some extent, a degree of intelligence must be embedded
within the network.
The following diagrams compare the complexity of routing
information in a hierarchical routed network versus routing
information in a dynamic routed network. Figure 4-6 is an illus-
tration of the dynamic nature of the dynamic routing schema.
Figure 4-7 exhibits an even more complex set of network
relationships. It is a pictorial description of the Internet,
exhibiting a number of networks. These networks are intercon-
nected in a variety of ways. Given the changing regulatory envi-
ronment, the networks will be interconnected in this seemingly
random fashion. Business relationships dictate how the net-
works of various service providers are interconnected.
Therefore, even though the networks appear to be intercon-
nected in a seemingly random fashion, they are connected in 
a realistic fashion. Applying the rules of hierarchical routing 
is nearly impossible in the Figure 4-6, yet it is this 
routing methodology that enables today’s ISPs to route across
the country.
126
Chapter 4
Intelligent routing
Real-time traffic management
Multiple routes
FIGURE 4-6
Dynamic routing

PACKET ROUTING
Packet switching represents one step beyond traditional voice
telecom switching and is suitable for a data environment.
Packet switching involves the transport of information in dis-
crete packets or packages of information. Each packet is tagged
for identification with its label, origination, and destination.
The packet is launched into a network conditioned to support
packets of information (rather than a continuous stream of
information), and ultimately, it finds its way to the destination
of choice. Each packet takes a different route to the final desti-
nation. This is not exactly a dynamic routing schema, but fairly
close to one because the routes are not predetermined and
change constantly. Figure 4-8 depicts how a stream of data
packets will traverse the Internet from its point of origin to its
destination.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
127
Internet routing is complex and flexible.
FIGURE 4-7
The Internet: Complex network routing

The wireline Internet is conceptually supposed to be a
packet network. In reality, hierarchical networks interconnect
the Internet with other networks. The packets stream across the
nation via a fixed route across the wireline telephone network.
When the packets reach the local market, in other words the
ISPs’ servers, the data stream may traverse the local market via
a packet network. At this time, the financial realities show that
the wireline telephone companies are the dominant network
providers, the dominant telecommunications carrier presence
in all local markets, and control the local loop. Due to the wire-
line telephone company’s dominant presence, the ISP reaches
the home and small businesses via a twisted pair of local loop
wire. Figure 4-9 is an illustration of how the ISP is intercon-
nected to the overall larger and dominant wireline telephone
network.
128
Chapter 4
Packet network routing is far more 
complex and flexible than Internet 
routing. 
The Internet is 
interconnected 
with other 
networks by 
hierarchical 
networks.
FIGURE 4-8
Packet data networking

The topic of network interconnection is a separate topic that
requires a separate book alone. Further information on network
interconnection can be found in my book Telecommunications
Internetworking.
NETWORK ROUTING AND FINANCIAL
RELATIONSHIPS
A relationship exists among the number of trunks, the financial
cost of the direct route and alternate route, and the total dollar
cost for serving the given offered load. The high usage facility
cost is proportional to the number of high usage trunks. If no
high usage trunks are available, all of the traffic must be sent on
the alternate route, making the incremental alternate route
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
129
Class 1
Class 2
Class 3
Class 4
Class 5
FIGURE 4-9
The Internet and network interconnection

money cost high. If a high usage group is available, the incre-
mental cost of the alternate route is lower because theoretically,
less traffic is sent over the alternate route.
The cost of alternate routing decreases the minute the first
trunk is added to the high usage trunk group. The flip side of
this cost picture is that a point is drawn where too many high
usage trunks exist in the high usage group. As more high usage
trunks are added to the high usage group, each additional high
usage trunk will theoretically carry less traffic, while each alter-
nate route trunk will continue to carry a significantly larger
amount of traffic. At some point, it becomes cost prohibitive to
add any more high usage trunks.
Network costs are a component of any decision in building
a network. No matter how much route diversity is built, a point
is drawn where a network provider must claim enough is
enough. Today, ISPs require national network providers in order
to go from point A to point B. ISPs need to pay these long-
distance providers for the privilege of interconnection. ISPs’
cost structures can blossom beyond all expectations resulting in
bankruptcies.
The various routing schema described is applicable to net-
works of different service providers. A set of rules that defines
how the flow of information is managed between networks
must be present. This does not refer to signaling protocol like
TCP/IP, but rather the management process of sending infor-
mation between networks.
Regardless of the regulated or non-regulated nature of any
information service provider, a methodology of how information
is sent from point A to point B must be enforced. Today, some
ISPs own the servers in a local area, but do not own the trans-
mission media connecting the servers. In fact, some companies
transport information across the nation yet do not have visibil-
ity to the consumer (the individual). The methodology behind
the flow of information affects how the information will be
transported and who it will be transported by, which ultimately
impacts the cost of the network. Figure 4-10 illustrates the
need to understand the financial aspects of planning a network.
130
Chapter 4

TRANSMISSION PLAN
One should always keep the following in mind in relation to
transmission facilities:
•
Should I lease or buy?
•
What is the initial capital outlay for owning the
transmission facility?
•
What are the maintenance costs?
•
What are the recurring fees (if you do not own the
transmission facility)?
•
How do I get to point B from point A with minimal
financial exposure?
One cannot overstress the importance of financial aware-
ness in the managing of any business. Technology and ideas are
important to a business, but money pays the bills.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
131
Money
Cost
Total
High Usage
Alternate Route
N
Number of High Usage Trunks
$$$
Other Costs
• Servers
• Software
• Data Archiving 
FIGURE 4-10
Network costs

In the case of non-voice telecommunications networks (that
is, data or the Internet), a pattern appears to the way network
information flows. Currently, ISPs need to connect to a LEC in
order to transport their call/information from one point to a
point outside of, or even inside the LEC’s jurisdiction. Even in
the current world of the Internet, the flow of information from
an ISP to another ISP maintains order.
Once the routing schema has been determined, the follow-
ing questions should be asked about the network and the
number of connections required:
•
What are these connections?
•
What transport technologies and protocols are available to
support the network configuration?
•
What type of transmission facilities should be used?
The aforementioned questions comprise the transmission
plan. When a call is made, data and video are transmitted, and
whether it is wireless or landline-based, facilities are used for
transmitting the call. These facilities are also called transmis-
sion facilities.
Transmission facilities can be broken down into the follow-
ing basic types:
•
Metallic
•
Fiber optics (glass)
•
Microwave
The major difference among facility types is speed (some-
times referred to as bandwidth). Speed refers to the speed at
which information is transmitted. Time is money and the higher
the information speed supported by the facility, the more money
is made and saved.
132
Chapter 4

Transmission facilities’ sole function is to serve as the dis-
tribution media for information. However, the bulk of the trans-
mission facilities in use today throughout the plethora of
networks is a limited bandwidth local loop wire, DS-0 (supports
up to 57,600 bits per second), or a T-1 (supports up to 1.544
mega bits per second).
VoIP is possible over the limited bandwidth transmission
facilities because of buffering. Despite the speed of the com-
puter and the various network elements comprising an ISP’s
system, the transmission facilities used by the telephone com-
panies in the local loop do not enable high quality (perceived by
the listener) voice. A few missing bits of information will cause
the listener to hear static. What hurts VoIP as a service cur-
rently is that the packets of voice data will arrive out of
sequence and at different times, resulting in delayed speech.
Missing packets of voice data makes it worse for the listener.
Even digital transmission does not mean that a data network
does not suffer lost bits. All data network providers follow net-
work performance standards. Selecting the right transmission
medium is an important step that is often overlooked. Today,
most ISPs are grateful for connectivity to the user, which is no
small feat given the fact that the facility being used is either
leased or resold from the telephone company. The type of
medium dictates the speed or in other words, the bandwidth
capacity that is possible.
ADDRESSING/NUMBERING PLANS
A numbering plan or destination address describes the location
of the originator and receiver of the call.
PUBLIC
TELECOM
SERVICE
PROVIDERS: THE
TELEPHONE
COMPANIES AND WIRELESS CARRIERS
The first numbering plan
originated in the wireline telephony world. A numbering plan is
simply the telephone number of the subscriber. In North
America, the telephone number is a 10-digit number. The for-
mat of this 10-digit number is:
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
133

•
Numbering Plan Area (NPA) + Number Exchange (NXX) +
four digit station number (XXXX)
•
The NPA is the three-digit area code and its format is NXX.
•
N is any digit two through nine.
•
X is any digit zero through nine.
•
The Number Exchange is a three-digit code that is typically
associated with the service provider’s switch. Its format is
NXX.
•
N is any digit two through nine.
•
X is any digit zero through nine.
In North America, the NPA defines a specific geographical
area. Given the growing shortage of numbers, a new numbering
format has been adopted called the Interchangeable NPAs. The
Interchangeable NPA format involves interchanging an NPA
and an NXX. In other words, in the past, the NPA-NXX combi-
nation 301-555 would not be re-used as 555-301 because it vio-
lated past numbering format rules, which stated that the first
digit could be any number from two through nine; the second
digit could only be a zero or a one; the third digit could be any
number from two through nine. Those rules made sense at the
time. However, given the massive growth of telecommunica-
tions services and products requiring telephone numbers, a new
format needed to be adopted (the Interchangeable NPAs).
These services range from office fax machines, home fax
machines, new service providers requiring numbers, and so on.
As of 2000, the wireline and wireless carrier environments
are running out of 10-digit telephone numbers. The FCC is
currently administering the process through industry selected
third companies. Carriers once were able to hold onto tele-
phone number blocks for years without ever using them, but
the FCC has stopped this practice. The list of measures being
taken by the FCC in cooperation with the carrier community is
extensive. At some point, the industry will have to expand the
telephone number beyond 10 digits.
134
Chapter 4

INTERNET ADDRESSING
The Internet uses an addressing
scheme that appears to the layman as a fairly flexible identifi-
cation plan. A subscriber can select a name or number that has
meaning only to the subscriber or one that identifies the sub-
scriber. The only limitation is that someone else cannot be
using the Internet address already. The Internet is a whole new
type of network that does not seem to fit the traditional
telecommunications business or network model. However, the
Internet is the new major player on the block. This will be dis-
cussed in more detail later in the book.
The Internet uses TCP/IP for transmission. TCP/IP is a sim-
ple data protocol. The mapping of mobile station addresses to
an Internet server can be approached in the same manner as
approaching protocol conversion, for example, X.25 to SS7 or
GSM MAP to IS-41 MAP. The Internet address is composed of
a source IP address, source TCP port, destination IP address,
and destination TCP port. The new Internet protocol, IPv6,
expands the addressing scheme even further. More on this sub-
ject will appear later in the book.
As ISPs take a larger role in the provisioning of services to
the user, at some point, all of the public obligations that the
wireline telephone companies and the wireless carriers are held
accountable for will also apply to the wireless carriers. These
obligations include 9-1-1, law enforcement surveillance, and a
quality of service standard.
NETWORK SIGNALING PLAN
A service provider communicates with other service
providers and network elements in its own network using a spe-
cific type(s) of network signaling. Network signaling refers to
the language (protocol) the network “speaks” to other networks
and within its own framework. Network signaling plans identify
the signaling protocols that will be supported by the service
provider.
Several different network signaling protocols are in use
today. Each signaling protocol is optimized to function in spe-
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
135

cific environments for specific reasons. The following repre-
sents the more popular protocols in use today:
•
Signaling System 7 (SS7)
•
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)
•
Frame relay
•
TCP/IP
•
Multi-Frequency (MF)
More information on these protocols will appear in the next
chapter. Today, industry work is examining how to overlay the
Internet protocol over some of the aforementioned protocols.
The wireless industry is currently working toward implementing
Wireless Access Protocol (WAP) and i-mode. Figure 4-11 repre-
sents the various protocols in use today.
136
Chapter 4
• Signaling System 7 (SS7)
• ATM
• ISDN
• IPv4
• IPv6
• Frame Relay
• X.25
• X.400
• Multi-Frequency (MF)
The network of networks utilizes a variety of 
network signaling protocols.
FIGURE 4-11
Network protocols

NETWORK MANAGEMENT PLAN
The network management plan refers to the systems used to
manage the service provider’s network. The NMSs would
include the following:
•
Network element management
•
Network systems management
•
Service management
Planning of these systems requires coordinating functions
between each of the systems listed. If the plan is executed prop-
erly, the result will be a well-run Network Operations Center
(NOC). In general, the network operations manager is con-
cerned with information and system tools that enable him/her
to run/manage the network. Managing the network involves
scheduling activities and resources, managing network traffic
load, routine maintenance, trouble reporting, and diagnostics. A
generic description of network management would be “network
maintenance and health.”
All of the following are applicable in the managing of any
network, including an ISP network.
NETWORK ELEMENT MANAGEMENT
As noted in Chapter 1,
“Networks and the Internet: What Are They?”, network element
management requires the ability to monitor and manage spe-
cific network elements. A network element can be defined as a
database, the switch, a router, a voice mail recording system, an
adjunct system, or an application service provider.
•
Maintenance schedules
Maintenance schedules refer to
the scheduling of activities concerned with the provisioning
of high quality subscriber service and network stability.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
137

•
Routing table update schedules
Routing table update
schedules refer to the scheduling of updates to the
switching system’s routing tables. The term “routing table”
has its historical roots in the traditional public telecom
world.
•
Number of subscribers being served by the system
Knowing the number of subscribers should be a given.
Without knowing how many customers are being served,
the network manager cannot properly manage the traffic
load of the network. Traffic load management entails
moving telecommunications traffic from one part of the
network to different parts of the network and even blocking
new traffic to ensure that existing traffic is routed properly.
•
Services being provided to the subscribers
Network
managers need a complete picture of the services being
made available to the subscriber base. These managers are
not concerned about who specifically has what subscriber
service, but are concerned about the services available to
the population of subscribers as a whole.
•
Performance objectives for the network element
Measuring the performance of a network element is way of
measuring network health. The network manager must
have an understanding of how each element in the network
is expected to behave. Using these benchmarks, the
network manager can address malfunctions or anomalous
conditions.
•
Transaction processing time thresholds
Processing time
of any transaction is another indicator of network health.
•
Types of diagnostic tools are available to him/her
•
Operating procedures documentation
•
Failure levels/indications
Network elements will fail at
some point in the life of the device. The failure needs to be
reported to the network manager.
138
Chapter 4

•
Alarm conditions indications
As indicated earlier,
failures and anomalous conditions need to be announced in
some manner. The alarm indications should reflect via
visual or audible means.
NETWORK SYSTEMS MANAGEMENT
Network systems manage-
ment involves the way one manages the entire collection of 
elements and all the functions within the business that affect
the physical network. Network systems management is about
the total managing of the network and its components.
Network operations managers seek to have the same ques-
tions and issues addressed about the whole network as they
would the individual network element. These questions/issues
are as follows:
•
Service objectives for the system.
•
Network monitoring software tools.
•
Network diagnostic tools.
•
Anticipated traffic load on the system.
•
Overall traffic profile of the system on an hourly and daily
basis.
•
Types of subscribers being served.
•
Level of network system control—can the entire system be
re-booted or does is an involved element-by-element
process involved?
•
Can traffic be re-routed?
•
Types of alarm indications.
•
Types of network failure indications.
•
Overall network operating procedures documentation.
•
Any disaster recovery plans.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
139

Managing a network is similar to taking care of one’s own
physical health. Some medical doctors specialize in specific
areas of medicine and specific parts of the body. Other doctors
(even today) are generalists; they look at the person as a whole.
Managing a network requires the network manager to be a
generalist. The network manager should be able to understand
each network component while simultaneously understanding
how each network element relates to each other. He/she needs
to assess the health of the network from a micro and a macro
level.
SERVICE MANAGEMENT
Service management links the network
systems management function with the customer care function.
This includes performance metrics and customer satisfaction
metrics. Service management requires direct involvement with
the customer. It involves every mechanism and process required
for delivery of services to the customer, that is, operational sup-
port systems, sales, and marketing. Service management links
the network to the financial/revenue portion of the telecommu-
nications service business.
SUBSCRIBER BILLING/CUSTOMER SUPPORT PLAN
The customer has a role throughout all aspects of a service
provider’s business. The customer is at the heart of the carrier’s
product offerings, the managing of the network, and even the
network architecture of the network. Yet most providers create
plans that address subscriber billing/customer support. The
customer is so vital to any business that the treatment of the
customer is singled out as a major planning effort. This type of
plan does not involve marketing to the customer exactly. More
information on customer support is available later in this book.
The following diagram, Figure 4-12, illustrates the relation-
ship of customer support with the overall business:
APPLICATION SERVICE PROVIDERS
The application service
provider (ASP) is a company that writes software that is used on
a carrier’s network. The ASP in the Internet world writes not
140
Chapter 4

only the enabling software but also provides, in some manner,
content or some type of content-related service. ASPs today are
serving as gateways to customer bases. Thousands of ASPs
claim to have access to huge pools of customers either directly
or through their own service partners. The services are provided
using ASP-specific software tools. The ASP may provide a vari-
ety of services such as:
•
Internet directory access
•
Video and audio content
•
Internet radio
•
Polling
•
Games
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
141
Data Warehousing
Recording & Billing
Network Management
Customer Care
FIGURE 4-12
Customer support

•
Stock exchange monitoring
•
Online purchasing
•
Online stock trading
The ASP is the layer of value that the large Internet carriers
cannot bring to the customer themselves. The ASP is focused
on a specific service or set of services that enhances the need
for the network. ASPs develop software applications that do the
following for the customer or enable the customer to perform
activities better or differently:
•
Make certain activities easier to perform
•
Information that is easier to find
•
Faster to do
•
Less expensive to do
•
Quicker to travel to
•
More interesting and higher in quality to view
•
More interesting and higher in quality to listen to
The ASP will typically sign an agreement with a large
Internet carrier. This agreement will often times state that for a
price, the ASP will give the large carrier access to a pool of sub-
scribers and use the ASP software to enable the service. This
pool of subscribers has already expressed a desire to purchase a
service from the ASP, but the ASP needs the carrier to physi-
cally access the customers. The service in question is usually an
application that the ASP has written but will not license to the
carrier for its use. To many ASPs, the agreements maintain their
control and ownership of the customer. This belief is a fallacy,
for in the end, companies that can find a better way of provid-
ing the application will always exist. Furthermore, the carrier is
the one with brand name recognition, bills the customers, and
has the physical network in place. The goal of the ASP is to
dominate the market and use that market power to either buy
out a competitor or outsell them in the marketplace.
142
Chapter 4

The ASP has changed the way the ISPs and other Internet
“wannabees” do business and manage their networks. To a large
ISP or other carrier, the ASP is a huge database with customers.
The need to understand how these ASPs impact the ISPs’ net-
work is a new facet of network planning. Rather than simple
network connectivity, the Internet business requires an intense
level of database activity that has never been seen before. The
Internet business has added inter-company database interac-
tion as a major component of network planning. Figure 4-13 is
a depiction of the ASP in the current network.
Typically, large carriers do not have their own in-house soft-
ware development areas. Therefore, it makes perfect sense to
purchase services or partner with an ASP that specializes in
some specific type of software development. As indicated earlier
in this book, administering a customer base requires an enor-
mous expenditure of resources. ASPs enable a carrier to add
value without the administrative overhead.
QUALITY OF SERVICE
Quality of service (QoS) is a perception.
In the case of the telecommunications industry, which the
Internet is a part of, perception means customer perception.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
143
• Database Querying
• Intelligent Call Routing
• Data Warehousing
• Games
• Traffic & Weather
• Billing Support
• Network Management
• Gateway
Switch/
Router
Subscribers
Subscribers
Subscribers
Video 
Driver
OnLine 
Trading 
API
Traffic 
& 
Weather
Information 
Mediator
(Gateway)
ASPs host content delivery 
FIGURE 4-13
Application Service Providers

QoS is subjective; however, QoS can be measured using quali-
tative tools. From a customer perspective, QoS involves the
following subjective needs:
•
Does the service meet the customer’s needs?
•
Is the service easy to use?
QoS can be defined as the standard measurement used to
determine whether or not the service provider is providing the
service in a manner that meets the expectations of the cus-
tomer. Despite the subjective nature of QoS, objective ways
exist of establishing QoS levels. QoS is typically measured from
the network standpoint. Measuring QoS from the network per-
spective is far easier than attempting to guarantee performance
from a terminal device. The service provider does not normally
provide terminal devices; therefore, the service provider should
not be held to a standard of performance that involves terminal
performance. Figure 4-14 illustrates how QoS is an objective
and subjective measurement focused on the customer, yet
based in the network.
QoS parameters can be divided into the following cate-
gories:
•
Availability
•
Mean time between failure (MTBF)
•
Reliability
•
Delay—both perceived and measured
•
Security
•
Bandwidth
•
Information loss—bit error rate; video and audio
The aforementioned parameters measure specific things or
levels of performance. Individually, the parameters mean noth-
ing to a customer. However, when one views the parameters in
total, the result is some overall perceived level of performance.
144
Chapter 4

QoS affects all players in the Internet business: ASPs, content
providers, e-commerce and m-commerce providers, and so on.
The reality is that users of e-commerce and m-commerce sites
expect availability of a site 24 hours a day, 365 days per year.
Figure 4-15 is a depiction of the QoS parameters. The follow-
ing section is an explanation of these parameters.
AVAILABILITY
Availability is the amount of time a system
(computer, network, and so on.) is available for processing
transactions. The way to measure availability is by taking the
ratio of the total time a system is capable of being used during
a given time period (the industry norm is one year). Therefore,
availability of a Web site or some system providing an applica-
tion would be measured as some number of hours over the
total number of hours in a year. The result is typically pre-
sented as a percentage. The wishful objective of all system
operators is 99.9999 percent availability. An availability of
99.9999 percent means that the system is only unavailable 
for 31.536 seconds per year. Most telecommunications 
companies can reasonably expect an availability of 99.97 
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
145
•Quality of Service (QoS) is a subjective 
measurement of system/service performance.
•QoS is a perception.
•QoS can be measured using qualitative tools.
•QoS is measure from a network perspective.
QoS is a mission critical standard to meet.
FIGURE 4-14
Quality of Service

percent, which translates into a yearly unavailability of 2.628
hours.
MEAN TIME BETWEEN FAILURE (MTBF)
Mean time between
failure (MTBF) is the average time a manufacturer estimates a
failure will occur in a piece of equipment. Individual compo-
nents of a system have MTBFs that are different than other
system components. Overall system MTBFs occur. These sys-
tem MTBFs need to be qualified as total system outage. The
time period given for a MTBF should be on the order of sev-
eral months or years.
The MTBF will impact system overall system maintenance
costs, which eventually impacts the cost of service to the cus-
tomers andultimately, profit margins.
RELIABILITY
Reliability is very different than either avail-
ability or MTBF. Reliability is a measure of performance or
dependability, whereas the system is operational. It is a subjec-
tive measure that takes into account availability, MTBF, and
consistent quality of product. Reliability is a subjective mea-
surement because how much weight is placed over one 
measurement compared to another depends on the person.
TRANSACTION DELAY
If a customer perceives that a particu-
lar Web transaction or even making a telephone call takes too
146
Chapter 4
Quality of Service Parameters
•Availability
•MTBF
•Reliability
•Delay
•Security
•Bandwidth
•Information Loss
The QoS parameters 
individually have no meaning.
QoS parameters are viewed in 
total for an overall 
understanding of performance.
FIGURE 4-15
QoS parameters

long to complete, the company must determine what that per-
ceived human limit is. Human factors engineering has always
been a component of telecommunications network design.
The human ear/customer perceives a delay within a range of
250 milliseconds to 500 milliseconds. After the user has
entered the last digit, a telephone call may take as long as
three full seconds to complete (the calling party hears ring-
ing). However, a user who hears a delay in receiving dial tone
longer than 500 milliseconds will perceive a problem with
telephone service. A user is double clicking on icons to enter a
Web site and it takes nearly a minute to actually see the next
Web page. However, because the user has either experienced
delays this long or even longer, he/she does not perceive a
problem in this case. The delays are perception-based, but are
indeed valid transaction delays that customers encounter.
Measured network delays can affect the QoS. These delays
are in information transmission and packet data assemblage.
These kinds of delays are information delay variations. Packet
data is not an ideal way of supporting real time applications like
voice conversations or video streaming. The delay variations
must have defined limits set for each application so that no per-
ceived degradation in QoS occurs. The delay variation limit may
be 50 milliseconds. This would mean that the application being
supported must have all of the data transported across the net-
work within a 50-millisecond window. This window would
require that the beginning and the end of a Web page reach the
destination all within a 50-millisecond time period. The fact is
that no industry standard governs the way in which Web pages
are presented.
The initial transmission of voice over a packet network
requires a sufficient number of voice samples to be collected
before it is placed inside a data packet and then launched. The
Internet Protocol (IP) data packet will place about 20 voice sam-
ples inside a packet. Voice is sampled at a rate of one every
1/8000 seconds in a digital wireline network. The math is very
simple. A normal packet is approximately 600 bytes in length. 
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
147

A voice sample is generated at a rate of one every 125 micro-
seconds. Therefore, a packet delay would equate to 125
microseconds  600 bytes = 75,000 microseconds. In reality,
the IP packet can vary in length up to 64,000 bytes. When look-
ing at the way packets are routed, one will recall that the pack-
ets are typically buffered at the destination end until a
sufficient number of packets are assembled for final presenta-
tion. In other words, the delays can add up.
The problem with the Internet is that most people have
come to expect delays. This is an unfortunate circumstance for
it leaves many users with the perception that the Internet just
cannot do it all. In reality, the industry has worked to meet the
high consumer perceived standards of excellence by overcom-
ing technical barriers and setting high operating standards.
Transaction delays can be due to limited bandwidth trans-
mission facilities or inefficient and poorly designed Web sites.
SECURITY
No telecommunications network is totally
secure from fraud, computer viruses, and privacy threats. The
wireline network used to live by the axiom: “The telephone
network is inherently secure.” This old saying was touted
before the days of the computer virus, but even then it was
untrue. Wire tapping and telephone bugging has been around
for decades. The “bad guys” might not have been able to listen
in on a phone conversation by tapping into a line while atop a
telephone pole, but the “good guys” could tap into your phone
lines from the switching center. Therefore, from a certain per-
spective, the telephone is inherently secure.
The information networks today are using a variety of meth-
ods to secure the network. These methods entail the following:
•
Anti-viral software
•
Passwords
•
Encrypted transactions
•
Network validation procedures
148
Chapter 4

•
User identification authentication procedures
•
Fire walls
Security as a QoS parameter is an important one that is con-
stantly being threatened by the hackers and criminals of the
world. It is an unfortunate state of affairs that over a thousand
new computer viruses are being discovered each month. These
viruses threaten the personal security of the user as well as the
security of the nation. A Web site that is not secure from unau-
thorized access invites trouble.
Security is even a bigger threat now to the Internet than it
was a few years ago. The proliferation of ASPs has created a
series of new opportunities for the hacker and criminal to wreak
havoc on the network. Today, ASPs must pass a variety of
requirements before an ISP will even consider connecting their
network to the ASP’s database.
E-commerce and m-commerce sites interact with users
gathering data such as credit card information, home addresses,
and home telephone numbers. Today, all information entered
into most commerce sites is preceded with the statement: “You
are entering a Web site that this provider cannot guarantee is
secure from privacy threats.” More users would exist if the e-
commerce and m-commerce sites had a way of ensuring end-to-
end security.
BANDWIDTH
The more bandwidth available for transmis-
sion, the faster the download and upload speeds for data. The
biggest complaint from Internet users is slow speed. The fact
is that most ISPs have access to homes over a twisted pair of
local loop telephone wire, which can only reliably support
transmission speeds of up to 57,600 bits per second.
The lack of bandwidth has affected users’ perceptions of a
large number of Web sites that support video and audio appli-
cations. As a result of the lack of bandwidth, users cannot or
will not bother accessing Web sites that provide high quality
video and audio content. The larger the bandwidth, the greater
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
149

the volume of data that can be transmitted per second. Voice
and video require network access that supports real time appli-
cations. Network access refers to the modem, the local network,
and the long-distance network. The lowest bandwidth device
used in the network will limit the application.
INFORMATION LOSS
Information loss is defined as missing
bits within an information stream. This could be a large multi-
megabit size file that is missing some information due to noise
over the transmission facility, some flaw at a network node, or
even a node failure. Packet networks could suffer a network
node failure, yet not lose all of the data because most of the
data would be transiting the network via a different path. The
network has no way of knowing that it contributed to a loss of
information. The destination end would have to request the
information file be resent.
Information loss parameters could be set where a transmis-
sion node or facility would have an operating standard 
with which to comply. The banking industry uses a standard of
1x10-9 bit error rate, which means that for every 1,000,000,000
bits of data, one can lose one bit of data. A standard of opera-
tions quality for a network element or facility should always be
present.
The impact of data loss will vary from file to file and appli-
cation to application. In a perfect world, one would not lose any
data; however, this is not a perfect world and therefore, one will
lose data despite operations standards. Transmitting the lost
data would be possible in a text file. Some applications can
recover from data loss and a retransmission request would
enable a user to recover lost data. These applications could be
a video or audio application; in such instances, the user would
not be using these applications for real time two-way commu-
nications. The application itself cannot recover if the missing
bits were sent; however, a retransmission request would enable
the application to be resent in its entirety.
The potential for information loss increases with the 
number of parties now involved with the provisioning of an
Internet-based service. Imagine the loss of information due to
150
Chapter 4

multiple network elements embedded within multiple Internet
companies.
MOBILE ISSUES
All of the aforementioned sections contain information that is
applicable to the mobile market. The mobile Internet faces a
number of its own unique issues, which will be discussed in
greater depth in the next chapter. Some of these challenges are
as follows:
•
Bandwidth
•
Security
•
Handset
•
Reliability
•
Development
•
Time to market
These challenges are being addressed as the industry is
rolling out services to the marketplace. The mobile Internet
space faces challenges that the wireline Internet did not face.
SUMMARY
The marketplace for the Internet players is wide open. The ISPs
are looking for subscribers. The e-commerce and m-commerce
companies are looking to partner with ISPs. ISPs are planning
to use voice as a way of grabbing customers. The e-commerce
and m-commerce opportunities are a major portion, possibly
even the majority, of the value the ISPs are seeking. However,
without provisioning the most basic need, the ISP has no way of
becoming that principal means of communication for the user.
Internet—Technology and Service Provisioning
151

The following chapter will examine the network signaling
and transport technologies available to the Internet player. The
kinds of players entering the Internet space will be discussed.
Chapter 5, “Network Signaling: Mobile and Wired Business
Space,” will look at how current network signaling will support
the Internet. Future signaling and Internet-specific protocol
languages will also be discussed in this chapter.
152
Chapter 4

C H A P T E R
5
NETWORK
SIGNALING: MOBILE
AND WIRED
BUSINESS SPACE
T
his chapter examines the network signaling available to the
Internet player and will look at how current and future net-
work signaling will support the Internet. Future signaling and
Internet specific protocol languages will also be discussed.
One of the binding forces of network interconnection is the
signaling. This network signaling is the language by which all
service providers will communicate with other service providers
and with network elements within their own network. A more
technically precise definition of signaling is the exchange of
information in a telecommunications network (public and pri-
vate) that establishes and controls the connection of a call or a
communication between subscribers or computing systems. It
also establishes and controls the transfer of subscriber/end-to-
end and management (subscriber and network) information.
The signaling protocol of the Internet is the TCP/IP protocol
suite.
Other networks supported by the wireline and wireless car-
riers support the following protocols:
•
Multi-Frequency (MF).
•
Signaling System 7 (SS7).
153
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

•
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM).
•
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP).
•
Frame Relay.
•
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN).
The wireline and wireless carriers are seeking ways of deploy-
ing Internet capabilities in their networks. Some of their ideas
involve the overlay of IP over their existing signaling infrastruc-
tures, whereas other ideas involve the creation of something
entirely different. The wireless carriers have taken the bold step
of creating new protocol suites to access the Web.
Unfortunately, for wireline Internet users, the wireless Web pro-
tocol is not interoperable with the wireline Internet protocols.
The following section will provide an explanation of the
underlying protocol suite, TCP/IP, in the wired Internet, and
will explain the wireless protocol suite. Further details on the
wireline network signaling protocols in the aforementioned
paragraphs can be found in my book Telecommunications Inter-
networking: Delivering Services across the Networks.
TRANSMISSION CONTROL
PROTOCOL/INTERNET 
PROTOCOL (TCP/IP)
The TCP/IP protocol suite was originally and currently is used
for the internetworking of Local Area Networks (LANs). All of
the signaling protocols used in the Internet are part of the
TCP/IP protocol suite. The TCP/IP protocol suite was devel-
oped as a result of work first begun by the United States
Department of Defense’s Advanced Research Project Agency
(ARPA) in 1957. The ARPA’s objective was to develop science
and technology in response to the military threat posed by the
former Soviet Union. More information on the history of the
Internet will appear later in this book.
154
Chapter 5

TCP/IP protocol suite is composed of multiple protocols.
The TCP/IP protocol suite is layered more than SS7 or even
ATM. TCP and IP are just two of the protocols in the suite of
Internet protocols. The term “TCP/IP” refers to this family of
protocols. The TCP/IP protocol suite’s multiple layers facilitate
future development of new Internet protocols. Whether or not
this was by design is irrelevant for this discussion; however, it is
fortunate that the suite was constructed by the Internet
Engineering Task Force (ITEF) in this manner because it has
enabled software engineers across the globe to find new appli-
cations for the Internet.
The protocol architecture of TCP/IP was designed for use
by the United States military. Given its roots, the protocol suite
is capable of interconnecting multiple pieces of equipment
from multiple vendors. The TCP/IP protocol suite has four lay-
ers:
•
Physical/Link
•
Network
•
Transport
•
Application
These layers correspond to the layers described in the Open
Systems Interconnection (OSI) model. The OSI model was cre-
ated by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO)
for use in a computing environment. When communication is
desired among computers from different manufacturers/ven-
dors, the software development effort can be very difficult.
Different vendors use different data formats and data exchange
protocols that do not allow computers to communicate with
one another. The OSI model is an engineering model that
breaks everything down into simple and discrete tasks or layers.
It serves as a framework for all telecommunications signaling
protocol development.
Network Signaling
155

THE OSI MODEL
The OSI model consists of seven layers. The communication
functions are broken down into a hierarchical set of layers.
Each layer performs a related subset of the functions required
to communicate with another system. Each layer also relies on
the next lower layer to perform more primitive functions and to
conceal the details of those functions. It also provides services
to the next higher layer. The layers are defined in such a man-
ner so that changes in one layer do not require changes in other
layers. By partitioning the communication functions into layers,
the complexity of the protocol becomes manageable.
The following is a description of the layered architecture
starting from the bottom of the stack.
Physical
Concerned with transmission of an unstructured
bit stream over the physical link. It invokes such parameters
as signal voltage swing and bit duration. It deals with the
mechanical, electrical, and procedural characteristics to
establish, maintain, and deactivate the physical link.
Data Link
Provides for the reliable transfer of data across
the physical link. It sends blocks of data (frames) with the
necessary synchronization, error control, flow control, and
other overhead information.
Network
Provides upper layers with independence from
the data transmission and switching technologies used to
connect systems. It is responsible for establishing,
maintaining, and terminating connections.
Transport
Provides reliable, transparent transfer of data
between end points. It provides end-to-end error recovery
and flow control.
Session
Provides the control structure for communication
between applications. It establishes, manages, and
terminates connections (sessions) between cooperating
applications.
Presentation
Performs generally useful transformations
on data to provide a standardized application interface and
156
Chapter 5

common communications services. It provides services 
such as encryption, text compression, and reformatting.
Application
Provides services to the users of the OSI
environment. It provides services for FTP, transaction
server, network management, end users services, and so 
on. Figure 5-1 illustrates the OSI model. Notice that 
the following model represents a stack of layers. The
foundation layer is the Physical Layer. Every other layer is
built on top of the Physical Layer and each other. One can
see how these layers are interdependent upon each other
TCP/IP MODEL
When one overlays the TCP/IP protocol model over the OSI
model, direct correlations can be drawn between the two mod-
els. The TCP/IP protocol architecture is described as a four-
layer model. Figure 5-2 is a comparison of the TCP/IP model
with the OSI model. The layers of the TCP/IP model are
described in the following list:
Network Signaling
157
Application
Presentation
Session
Transport
Network
Data
Physical
FIGURE 5-1
OSI Model

Physical/Data Link Layer
(as it corresponds to the OSI
model’s Physical Layer and Data Layer) also known as the
Network Interface Layer, manages and routes the exchange
of data between the network device and the network. The
data or information referred to includes header
information/overhead information.
Network Layer
(as it corresponds to the OSI model) also
known as the Internet Layer. This layer is responsible for
managing the IP. The IP provides the Internet addressing
for routing. The IP is a connectionless protocol that
provides datagram service. A datagram is a method of
transmitting information. The datagram is broken up into
sections and is transmitted in packets across the network.
More information on this layer will follow.
158
Chapter 5
Application
Presentation
Session
Transport
Network
Data
Physical
Applications 
& Services
TCP
UDP
IP
Data
Physical
OSI Model
TCP/IP
FIGURE 5-2
The OSI model compared with the TCP/IP model

Transport Layer
Corresponds to the same Transport
Layer in the OSI model, transports the data. The TCP is
run at the Transport Layer. More information on this layer
will also follow.
Application Layer
Responsible for managing all services.
This layer corresponds to the Session, Presentation, and
Application Layers of the OSI model.
The bulk of the capabilities behind the power of the
Internet is found in the Network and Transport Layers.
Therefore, additional detail is provided in the following subsec-
tions.
NETWORK LAYER
The Network Layer, also known as the Internet Layer or the IP
Layer, supports connectionless datagram routing. Each data-
gram is routed along an independent path. Unfortunately, the
IP does not guarantee delivery or even in-sequence delivery of
the datagrams. Typically, a datagram is comprised of header
information and the information packet itself. The header infor-
mation is comprised of the packet’s destination and source
address.
In general, the problem with packet switching is that it has
no way of guaranteeing the arrival of all the datagrams.
Furthermore, packet switching does not even guarantee that
the information delivered can even be assembled in the correct
order. The IP is a packet switching protocol. Figure 5-3 is an
illustration of a datagram.
TRANSPORT LAYER
The Transport Layer in the TCP/IP suite is comprised of two
protocols: the TCP and the User Datagram Protocol (UDP).
Network Signaling
159

The TCP performs the Transport Layer functions of the IP.
The TCP is designed to provide for data connection services to
support applications. It contains parameters to ensure reliable
and error-free delivery of datagrams. The TCP also ensures that
the datagrams are delivered in sequence and without missing
packets. Assume that an application sends a file to the TCP.
The TCP adds a header to the datagram. The datagram is now
called a segment. The TCP will receive incoming data from the
IP Layer and then determine which application should receive
the segment.
The UDP is a connectionless function that is normally used
by database lookup applications. The UDP supports stand-
alone messages like a simple query. Figure 5-4 depicts the
Transport Layer.
IP PROTOCOL ARCHITECTURE
The TCP/IP protocol suite is comprised of a number of proto-
cols that support a variety of functions such as applications and
network management. The following is a list of dominant and
popular members of the TCP/IP protocol suite.
•
File Transfer Protocol
FTP supports the transfer of files
between computers that are remote from each other.
•
Simple Message Transfer Protocol
SMTP supports
electronic mail transmission and reception.
•
Simple Network Management Protocol
SNMP supports
network management.
160
Chapter 5
IP Header:
Destination IP 
Address
Source IP Address
Information
FIGURE 5-3
Datagram structure

•
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP).
•
User Datagram Protocol
UDP is normally bundled with
the IP. UDP supports connectionless transmission.
•
Internet Control Message Protocol
ICMP supports
diagnostic functions.
•
Internet Group Management Protocol
IGMP supports
group management on a router.
•
Routing Information Protocol
RIP is a popular routing
protocol in use today.
These protocols are all part of the TCP/IP protocol suite.
The following diagram highlights the layering of these protocols
in a way that enables them to complement one another. See
Figure 5-5.
The TCP/IP protocol suite was designed to interconnect dis-
similar network elements and networks. In other words, one
could be looking at a series of LANs or Wide Area Networks
(WANs) interconnected together. To the wireline or wireless
telecommunications engineer, it would look a like a jumble of
networks hobbled together. TCP/IP enabled the interconnec-
tion of private networks, which ultimately led to the Internet.
Early in the life of the TCP/IP protocol suite, these private net-
Network Signaling
161
TCP
UDP
Data
Data
IP Layer
The IP Layer will transmit 
data to the appropriate 
Transport Layer sub-layer.
FIGURE 5-4
Transport Layer TCP

works had been stand-alone networks that performed a variety
of different tasks, ranging from academic to business functions.
The beauty of TCP/IP was its ability to enable this jumble of
networks to communicate with one another. The physical trans-
lation of the protocol architecture is the series of hosts and
routers used to bring the Internet to life. The router, like the
tandem in the voice telecommunications world, is the central
piece of switching equipment that enables the interconnection
of these dissimilar networks.
PHILOSOPHICAL DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE INTERNET AND NON-
INTERNET WORLD
The Internet stresses flexibility, not reliability. In a traditional
telecommunications environment, which encompasses the
wireline and wireless carriers, the stress is on reliability. Due to
this stress on reliability, the wireline and wireless carriers main-
tain an exhaustive set of operating and technical requirements,
which govern what can be interconnected into their networks.
During the early 1990s, a large wireline carrier suffered a mas-
sive network failure affecting multiple states, resulting in a loss
162
Chapter 5
Application
Transport
Network
Physical
FTP
SNMP
SMTP
TELNET
TCP
UDP
ICMP
IGMP
IP
ATM
Ethernet
X.25
Frame Relay
FIGURE 5-5
The TCP/IP protocol: Layered with multiple protocols

of service for several hours. The outage could not have been
anticipated even with the exhaustive simulation tools available
at the time. ISPs have suffered network outages that have lasted
hours. However, in the case of the wireline network, one hour
of outage is unacceptable. This incident was resolved quickly by
the wireline carrier, but not without public and industry reper-
cussions. In the traditional telecommunications environment, if
a piece of equipment does not meet specific operating and tech-
nical standards, then it will be prohibited from use in the net-
work. The Internet, however, stresses flexibility; therefore, the
need for stringent standards does not exist. The Internet play-
ers’ concentration on flexibility has enabled multiple equipment
vendors to manufacture a variety of computers, hosts, routers,
storage devices, laptop computers, software utilities, and net-
work management tools without having to account for national
standards of performance. If an Internet company’s product
does not satisfy the marketplace, it usually goes out of business.
By looking at how the Internet is configured with multiple
network types and multiple configurations, it is difficult not to
be amazed at the Internet’s ability to adapt. Figure 5-6 is an
illustration of the role of the router and the hosts in the
Interconnection of the networks.
The IP is a “best effort” protocol. The focus on the moving
of data in the Internet world is on the flexibility of intercon-
nection, not the reliability of the data at the destination point.
In other words, the only guarantee of the Internet is that a “best
effort” will be made to ensure the data arrives intact. Many
“Internet bred” telecommunications pundits bask in the
Internet’s ability to enable the communication of so many dif-
ferent devices quickly. However, these same industry pundits
discount the voice telecommunications experts need to ensure
data integrity (bit error rates on the order of one in every billion)
as overkill. In the world of banking, making claims of anything
less than one bit error in every billion bits is suicidal. Many of
the current Internet players are early pioneers, so the view of
the world is focused on technology. However, one should
remember the focus is on the customer, not the technology.
Network Signaling
163

INTERNET PROTOCOL — VERSION 4 
VERSUS VERSION 6
The original intent of the Internet (inter-network) as defined by
the Department of Defense had been to support the telecom-
munications needs of the government and the military. The
original concept of the Internet made sense especially during
the Cold War. From a national security perspective, the Internet
continues to be applicable. One cannot depend solely on the
wireline and wireless carriers for telecommunications needs.
Alternative arrangements are prudent steps to take.
Conceptually, the Internet has not changed its requirements or
capabilities. Figure 5-7 illustrates the capabilities of the
Internet. The Internet is capable of supporting the following:
•
A multitude of computers, hosts, routers, and other devices
made by multiple vendors.
•
Network growth without regard to end-to-end planning.
164
Chapter 5
The Internet 
is a flexible 
and adaptable 
network.
The non-Internet 
providers stress 
reliability.
FIGURE 5-6
The Internet – Flexibility

•
Network growth without affecting the (public) Internet.
•
The implementation and deployment of all types of
subscriber-based applications without affecting the various
networks interconnected to the Internet.
•
Operational flexibility. Maintain operation regardless of the
network health/status of any interconnected networks.
•
Backward and forward compatibility. This means more than
just network growth. The ability to maintain
communication between network types, regardless of the
software or hardware versions in place, is an enormous
benefit to Internet users.
INTERNET PROTOCOL (IP) VERSION 4
The IP currently in use today (year 2000) is called Internet
Protocol Version 4 (IPv4). To the layman, IPv4 is simply called
IP. However, IPv4 has encountered a number of challenges. To
those people who only know the Internet world, these chal-
Network Signaling
165
The Internet:
• Is Adaptable.
• Can support a multitude of
  terminal devices.
• Can support growth without
  end-to-end network planning.
• Can support multiple user
  applications.
• Can support back and forward
  compatibility.
• Is flexible.
FIGURE 5-7
Internet capabilities

lenges or problems are viewed as only perceived challenges or
problems. To those in the wireline and wireless telecommuni-
cations worlds, these challenges or problems are not perceived,
but real. As the multitude of carriers work to bring voice and
other services to the residential and business user, the following
issues have come to light. IPv4 is viewed as limited in the fol-
lowing areas:
•
Security
Encryption and authentication are not required
in IPv4 implementations. Internet users and MIS
departments will implement their own security measures,
which may result in the erection of simple firewalls. Some
basic security measures can be executed. More on this
subject will appear later.
•
Reliability
Reliability is a subjective measure of
dependability. Reliability is one of those soft, “touchy-feely”
words that means different things to different people. As
defined in Chapter 4, “Internet and Technology Service:
Provisioning in the Information Marketplace,”: “Reliability
is very different than either availability or MTBF. Reliability
is a measure of performance or dependability, whereas the
system is operational. It is a subjective measure that takes
into account availability, MTBF, and consistent quality of
product. Reliability is a subjective measurement because
how much weight is placed over one measurement
compared to another is dependent on the person.” IPv4
does not maintain a set of control protocols for network
management purposes.
•
Quality of Service (QoS)
Service quality is another
subjective term that can be measured using objective tools.
An Internet carrier should establish specific levels of
service quality, whether it is fair, good or bad, or levels one
through 10. IPv4 is good for some applications although
not good for others. IPv4 has difficulty supporting real time
data transmissions like voice. It supports buffering of data
without regard to the need for real time interactions, which
is fine for non-voice data applications. Unfortunately, IPv4
166
Chapter 5

has no way of being stopped from buffering data or taking
network paths that add to the time delays. Under the
current IPv4 schema data, voice data and non-voice data
are treated the same.
•
Addressing schemes
Addressing schemes refer to the
terminal device identifications. In the wireline and wireless
telecommunications world, the addressing scheme is called
the telephone number and mobile identification number.
IPv4 only supports a 4-byte (32-bit) addressing scheme,
which means that up to 4.2 billion terminal devices can be
supported. If one believes in the strong future of the
Internet, he/she can visualize a worldwide shortage of
addresses for Internet terminal devices.
The current IP is not a telecommunications protocol like
SS7 or MF signaling. SS7 and MF signaling have strict operat-
ing parameters under which they operate. They maintain strict
procedures for setting up, transmitting, and tearing down calls
or low-speed data calls. If these rules are not adhered to, the
communication (call) is either not set up or is torn down in the
middle of the communication (call). In comparison, IPv4 is a
forgiving protocol. It enables a network manager to maintain an
established transmission link with “spit and baling wire.”
However, IPv4 does not guarantee delivery of any datagram. An
Internet network manager can only guarantee that a datagram
is launched. As indicated previously, an Internet company has
no way of guaranteeing the arrival of all the datagrams.
Furthermore, one cannot even guarantee that the delivered
information can even be assembled in the correct order. Figure
5-8 represents IPv4’s limitations.
None of what has been stated should be construed as a neg-
ative review of IP. In fact, it is IP’s flexibility and adaptability
that has facilitated the growth of the Internet. Specifically, four
features exist: fragmentation, reassembly, encryption, and adap-
tive/dynamic routing.
Network Signaling
167

FRAGMENTATION AND REASSEMBLY
Datagrams can vary in size.
As a result of this size variation, it is possible that the datagram
can get stuck in an intermediate network while in transit to its
destination. Routers are preset to accept datagrams of a specific
size. However, in order to ensure that the information is not
lost, the router in the intermediate network will chop the data-
gram into smaller pieces.
The destination router takes the responsibility of reassem-
bling all of the pieces. This capability ensures that no matter
what operational parameter may have been established by
another network manager, the datagram still continues its jour-
ney. It is unfortunate that the fragmentation and reassembly
capability drastically increases the amount of time it takes for
the ultimate destination to obtain the full datagram.
ADAPTIVE/DYNAMIC ROUTING
Adaptive/dynamic routing refers
to the IP ability to determine the best path of transmission in
real time. In other words, as the datagrams are traversing the
network in a multitude of paths, every network router is making
a decision (in real time) as to the next best intermediate desti-
nation of the datagram. This means that any physical change in
one of the many intermediate networks would not affect the
datagram. In other words, a change in any one of the networks
would cause the datagram to take a different route. The capa-
bility of real time adapt routes is a fantastic capability that
serves to increase the flexibility and usefulness of IP. Figure 5-
9 is an illustration of the IPv4 datagram.
168
Chapter 5
Limitations
Security
Reliability
Quality of Service
Addressing Schemes
FIGURE 5-8
IPv4’s limitations

IPV4 SUMMARY
A number of weaknesses and issues exist concerning IPv4’s
ability to support time sensitive applications like voice.
However, these limitations do not diminish the power of the
protocol in any way. If IPv4 was not as flexible in its ability to
support the interconnection of multiple vendors devices and in
its ability to adaptively route, the Internet would not exist. The
next section will take a brief look at Internet Protocol Version 6
(IPv6). 
INTERNET PROTOCOL (IP) VERSION 6
Many industry pundits are claiming to find salvation with the
arrival of IPv6. However, one should note that in the world of
telecommunications (of which I claim the Internet is a part),
nothing is static. IPv6 is still under development by the Internet
Network Signaling
169
DATA
OPTIONS
Destination IP Address
Source IP Address
Time
Protocol
Header Checksum
Identification
Flags
Fragment Offset
Version
Header 
Length
Service 
Type
Length of 
Datagram
FIGURE 5-9
IPv4 datagram

Engineering Task Force (IETF) and various industry consor-
tiums. So much hope has been placed in IPv6 that many call it
“IP Next Generation.” IPv6 brings a number of innovations to
the Internet:
•
The current 32-bit (8-byte) address has been expanded to
128 bits (16 byte). The expanded format now enables
hierarchical addressing, which is helpful in routing
schemas requiring more structured and faster routing. 
The IPv6 format also supports private Internet site
addresses for use within a company. This is similar to a
telephone company’s allowance for PBX dialing extensions.
The expanded format also enables the use of multicast
addressing where multiple people and locations receive
information simultaneously.
•
Self-configuration of addresses.
•
Enhances the protocol’s ability to detect the next-hop
routers and determine whether or not the routers are active,
which can reduce latencies arising from transit times.
•
Enhances the protocol’s ability to detect a healthy and
usable transmission path.
•
The addresses can now be structured to simplify address
delegation and routing. The addressing methods used in
IPv6 are similar to bulk addressing of signaling points in a
SS7 network, where the nodes can be addressed as either a
cluster of nodes or as individual nodes. This addressing
methodology simplifies routing plans.
•
Supports a new flow label that effectively introduces the
concept of information flows, which can be used to support
voice and maybe even video. Packets can now be tagged
with just the origin and destination so the packet does not
need to have its entire header read, just the tag.
•
Authentication.
•
Data integrity.
170
Chapter 5

•
Encryption can now be supported.
•
Extension headers are introduced to simplify the main
header.
•
Improved congestion control.
•
Enhances the ability to encapsulate and transport other
protocols.
The changes in the IP have gone as far as changing a great
deal of the terminology. The most significant change is the
change from “datagram” to “packet.” Currently, datagrams only
transport information payloads to support the IP. However, in
IPv6, the datagrams can carry payloads from other protocols;
hence, the more general term of “packet” is used. Figure 5-10
is an illustration of the IPv6 packet.
Network Signaling
171
DATA
OPTIONS
Destination IP Address (128 bits)
Source IP Address (128 bits)
Payload Length
Hop Limit
Version
Traffic 
Class
Next 
Header
Flow Label
FIGURE 5-10
IPv6 packet structure

TRANSITIONING FROM IPV4 TO IPV6
This book does not intend to examine the details of IPv6. IPv6
is a work in progress. The important detail to understand is that
the IP is undergoing changes that enable it to support data and
voice services. However, the arrival of IPv6 does not mean that
the entire Internet community will change overnight. In fact,
the transition to IPv6 will be filled with challenges and troubles.
The new addressing format will be the source of almost all of
the issues.
Networks of all kinds face the same issues when a protocol
has been updated. Current client (user applications) applica-
tions perform transactions using 32-bit (4-byte) addresses.
Clients, like a telephone or wireless switch, expect to see an
address (or telephone number) in a specific format. When a dif-
ferent format is used without properly making the appropriate
software changes, the clients will not be able to perform their
functions. Therefore, it becomes imperative to upgrade all of
the applications in use. The changes will be gradual for the fol-
lowing reasons:
•
The cost of converting in a “flashcut” manner would be
prohibitive.
•
Millions of clients exist in the network today; therefore, it
would be impossible to coordinate any kind of flashcut.
For a period of time, IPv4 and IPv6 will co-exist in the net-
work. Fortunately, the creators of IPv6 understood the practical
realities of industry and customer-wide software upgrades and
created a set of procedures that will support the use of address
converters. Figure 5-11 illustrates how Network A and Network
B will communicate with one another if one network is IPv6
operational and the other network is still IPv4 operational.
The next section will address the new wireless protocols. At
this moment, two industry news-making protocols are available.
This book will describe the protocols; however, for the purposes
172
Chapter 5

of this book, a keener interest in the business implications of
the protocols will be taken.
WIRELESS INTERNET PROTOCOLS
The wireless industry is going through a major technology and
consumer product shift. Until 1999, the wireless industry in the
United States was considered a growing industry that was going
from exponential growth to a steady, but less dramatic growth.
Being able to make or receive calls at anytime was one of the
drivers in wireless growth in the United States. Throughout the
rest of the world, the wireless industry is growing for a number
of different reasons ranging from convenience to a novelty to
primary communication needs. During 1999, the entire global
Internet community was all the rage on the financial markets.
The Internet was an untapped market for the wireless commu-
nity. The reader should remember that the Internet is an infor-
Network Signaling
173
IPv4 Network
IPv6
IPv6
Conversion 
Tunnel
Gradual implementation 
of IPv6 will require 
interim measures.
FIGURE 5-11
Interworking IPv4 and IPv6 networks

mation medium; therefore, it is natural for the wireless carrier
to take advantage of this medium.
Two principal wireless Internet protocols are under
development. The Wireless Application Protocol (WAP) is being
developed in North America, South America, and several other
countries, and iMode is being developed in Japan. Both proto-
cols are being deployed in some fashion as commercial prod-
ucts. However, both are still undergoing development work. For
those unfamiliar with the telecommunications industry, prod-
ucts tend to hit the marketplace before anything is considered
finished. The telecommunications business is constantly under-
going change. The WAP is being developed via a large, industry-
wide consortium called the WAP Forum that includes wireless
carriers and vendors from several nations. One must be reluc-
tant to say that the protocol has definitive, global support from
all carriers and manufacturers. The iMode protocol is a com-
pany proprietary protocol being developed by NTT DoCoMo,
yet NTT DoCoMo is a member of the WAP Forum.
Competition and the need for profits have a way of changing
the landscape of cooperation.
This chapter will not espouse a position of which protocol is
better or worse. However, it will look at the differences from a
customer perspective. Customers do not care how the product
works. They just care that the product works well, is usable, 
and is “cool to use.” Services will be addressed in Chapter 6, 
“E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce.”
WIRELESS APPLICATION PROTOCOL
(WAP)
The WAP is the result of an ongoing effort to define an indus-
try-wide standard for developing data and Internet-based appli-
cations that operate over wireless telecommunications
networks. This effort takes the form of an industry forum
known as the WAP Forum.
174
Chapter 5

The WAP Forum is comprised of nearly 500 members,
which include switching manufacturers, computer manufac-
turers, terminal device manufacturers, content providers, ser-
vice providers, and software developers. The membership list is
impressive. To enable operators and manufacturers to meet the
needs of highly dynamic markets, the WAP (protocol) was
designed in a layered fashion. In other words, the protocol
model is similar to the OSI model in that each functional layer
supports a discrete set of functions. As previously mentioned,
the OSI model consists of seven layers. The communication
functions are broken down into a hierarchical set of layers.
Each layer performs a related subset of the functions required
to communicate with another system. Each layer also relies on
the next lower layer to perform primitive functions and conceal
the details of those functions. It also provides services to the
next higher layer. The layers are defined in such a manner that
changes in one layer do not require changes in other layers. By
partitioning the communication functions into layers, the com-
plexity of the protocol becomes manageable. In the case of the
wireless Internet, the complexity of delivering services is enor-
mous due to the mobile feature of the customer. Figure 5-12
illustrates the WAP reference model. The protocol is somewhat
similar to the OSI model. Figure 5-13 is a comparison of the
two models.
WAP is completely new to the telecommunications industry.
Unfortunately WAP is not compatible with the current wireline
IP (IPv4 or IPv6) or any of the wireline Internet Web site script-
ing languages. This is not entirely bad or good. WAP has proven
that wireless is so popular that interoperability is not needed at
this time. However, interoperability will be needed if the full
power of the Internet is to be realized. More information on
interoperability will be discussed later. WAP has two goals:
•
To enable wireless users to easily access and interact with
information and related services.
•
Access the Internet using a wireless handset.
Network Signaling
175

The WAP Forum was created with the following objectives
in mind:
•
To create a protocol specification to bring Internet 
content and data services to the digital wireless 
telecommunications users.
•
To create a protocol specification that works across
multiple wireless technologies.
•
To enable the creation of applications and content that
scales across a wide range of networks and devices.
As this chapter is being written, a business war is being
waged across the oceans, domestically, across technologies, and
across industry segments for domination of the Internet busi-
176
Chapter 5
Application - Service Access Point
Application Layer Protocol
Session - Service Access Point 
Transaction - Service Access Point 
Session Layer Protocol
Wireless Transaction Protocol
Security - Service Access Point 
Security Layer Protocol
Transport - Service Access Point 
Wireless Datagram Protocol
Underlying Bearer 
Service
Management Entities
FIGURE 5-12
WAP reference model

ness space. This war is being waged on both a wireless and wire-
line front. The wireless carrier community faces the challenge
that the Internet was designed for the wireline world.
The wireline world’s version of the Internet is comprised of
the following:
•
Desktop computers
•
Laptop computers
•
High-bandwidth transmission
•
Larger displays on the computers
•
Heavy use of graphics
•
Interactive icons
•
Interactive graphics
•
Streaming video
•
Streaming audio
Network Signaling
177
FIGURE 5-13
WAP model versus OSI model

The wireless world began its protocol development effort
with an eye toward early commercialization. Therefore, early
implementations of WAP cannot support the heavy graphics
used by the wireline Internet. The real issues of small display
screens, mono color screens, and limited video capabilities (lim-
ited pixel density) in the handset prevented handsets from sup-
plying the kind of Internet activity the user is used to on the
wired computer. This situation does not mean Internet access is
unavailable. WAP devices are capable of sending and receiving
e-mail from wired Internet users. Remember the principal use
for the Internet today is for e-mail.
WAP AND NON-WAP ARCHITECTURAL COMPARISONS (WWW)
The openness to the individual software programmer (amateur
and professional) for the purposes of Web site creation or con-
tent access distinguishes the Internet. The World Wide Web
(WWW) is the killer user application of the Internet. It is the
physical reality of multiple hosts connected and communicating
with one another. The WWW is an Internet application that
enables the user to exchange documents, access servers owned
by multiple numbers of people, use multiple viewing formats,
access the Web, and manipulate the content using any one of a
multitude of applications.
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is a global indus-
try-wide voluntary organization of companies and individuals
dedicated to creating and maintaining an environment that is
supportive of the growth of the Internet. Specifically, the W3C
is promoting the following programming model represented in
Figure 5-14.
The W3C has created a set of standards that has enabled
software developers to write applications and create content so
that they are presented in a set of standard formats. These stan-
dards have also enabled the creation of the Web browser. The
Web browser is an application that enables a user to send out
requests for information (data queries) to any Web site. The
Web browser is capable of supporting the access of data from
178
Chapter 5

multiple information sources. The W3C has promoted a series
of Application Layer tools that ride over the Internet protocol.
Many of these popular tools are focused on the presentation of
the data. These are some of the tools:
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML)
HTML is a
language that describes how a document is to be
displayed/presented to the user.
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
HTTP is a 
protocol that defines how the Web client and a Web 
server communicate with one another.
Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML)
SGML is a language that describes elements in portable
documents.
Extensible Markup Language (XML)
XML is a subset 
of SGML. XML facilitates how new document formats are
defined; that is, XML describes the data itself. XML is a
vendor neutral format.
Document Object Model (DOM)
DOM provides a
standard object model for the presentation of HTML and
XML documents. The DOM enables programs and
document scripts to access and update the structure,
content, and style of documents.
Network Signaling
179
Client
Browser
Web Server
Content
Request
Response
FIGURE 5-14
WWW programming model

If it were not for the work of the W3C, the Internet would
simply be a world of e-mail and visually unexciting, interactive
Web pages. The way in which the W3C has approached the
WWW concept is open for growth. Figure 5-15 is an illustration
of the Web.
In general, the W3C has created a series of standards that
support the following:
Naming Models
All servers and Web content are named
with a Uniform Resource Location (URL), Uniform Resource
Name (URN), or Uniform Resource Identifier (URI). These
naming models are unifying concepts that provide servers
and content names, tell where the various items are located,
and tell how to get the items (identifies the protocol needed
to get the items). The URL is the underlying naming model.
An example of the URL would be
http//servername/filename/html. As the reader can see, the
URL starts by using the access protocol, followed by a
180
Chapter 5
FIGURE 5-15
The WWW

Network Signaling
181
sentence delimiter, followed by the server, followed by the
name, and lastly followed by the resource to be accessed to
view the item.
Content Typing
A certain type identifies all content on
the Web. This content type identification enables Web
browsers to process content appropriately.
Content Formats
All content must be presented in a
format that can be understood by the various Web sites.
HTML and JavaScript are such formats. JavaScript is the
market leader in scripting languages and a benchmark for
scripting languages.
Standard Protocols
The Internet protocol suite supports
a variety of application protocols. The application protocol
called HTTP is the most commonly used transaction and
session protocol.
The WWW is more than just an Internet application. The
WWW has become a software template for the concept of dis-
tributed computing. The WWW has become a software infra-
structure programming model for the industry. This use of the
term “infrastructure” is in recognition of the foundational role
of the WWW work. The infrastructure model is depicted in
Figure 5-16.
The model has defined three classes of servers. These
classes are as follows (see Figure 5-17):
Origin Server
The Origin server is the home of the user.
Proxy Server
The Proxy server is an intermediary
program that acts as a client and server in those instances
where direct communication between the server and client
are not possible.
Gateway Server
The Gateway server is like a Proxy server
in that it makes requests. However, a Gateway server acts as
if it is the Origin server. The Gateway server is a face for
Origin servers.

The WWW work has served as a basis for all wireless
Internet work to date. Like the WWW, the wireless community
has created a series of models and tools through which the
wireless communities’ needs are met. The WAP software infra-
structure programming model looks similar to the one used in
the WWW work. See Figure 5-18.
182
Chapter 5
Infrastructure Model
Origin server – The user
Proxy server – Intermediary 
program, where direct 
communication between server and 
client are not possible.
Gateway server – Intermediary 
program that acts as both Origin 
server and Proxy server.
The Infrastructure 
model serves as a 
basis for 
programming.
The work of the W3C 
has served as a 
lighthouse for the 
Internet industry.
FIGURE 5-17
Server classes
Proxy
Origin 
Server
Gateway
User 
Agent
Intermediary
Encoders
Decoders
Content
Foundation 
programming model 
for the industry
Three Protocol Classes
FIGURE 5-16
Infrastructure model

Network Signaling
183
Proxy
Origin 
Server
Gateway
User 
Agent
Intermediary
Encoders
Decoders
Content
Three Protocol Classes
FIGURE 5-18
WAP software infrastructure programming model
The WAP Forum has defined a similar set of programming
mechanisms. These mechanisms or conventions are based on
the WWW work. These mechanisms are as follows:
Naming Models
All servers and Web content are named
with a WWW URL.
Content Typing
A certain type identifies all content on
the Web. This content type identification enables Web
browsers to process content appropriately.
Content Formats
All content must be presented in a
format that can be understood by the various Web sites.
HTML is a format used in the WWW. XML is also used in
the WWW; however, as of 2000, XML has not reached a
level of predominance. Due to the unique physical
attributes of wireless handsets, the WAP supports a format
called Wireless Markup Language (WML). WML is
designed to support the compressed data needs of the
wireless network. This use of the word “compressed”
addresses the small information pipe nature of the wireless
handset.

Standard Protocols
The IP suite supports a variety of
application protocols. The application protocol called HTTP
is the most commonly used transaction and session
protocol. In the case of the wireless community, HTTP 1.1
is used, which is based on HTTP.
WAP AND NON-WAP TERMINOLOGY
The various Internet programming and document format lan-
guages deserve further attention before proceeding. This dis-
cussion will focus on the main topics of industry conversation.
Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) is the universal 
language of the WWW. It was first introduced in 1995. The
current version, in the year 2000, is HTML version 4.0. HTML
tends to function or behave differently with different browsers.
The occurrence of differences is normal for any standard that is
being interpreted by a wide variety of vendors.
Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a new technology for
the WWW. The W3C created XML to simplify business trans-
action on the Web. HTML is used today; however, it supports
communication between the user and the computer. HTML
tags are used to support browsing. HTML tags describe the pre-
sentation of the data. See Figure 5-19 for a rendering of an
HTML tag.
In the case of XML, the tag describes the kind of informa-
tion that is presented in the data. XML enables the programmer
and the computer to understand what the data contains.
Furthermore, whereas HTML tags are predefined and therefore
unchangeable, the XML tags are definable by a developer.
Therefore, any data item can be identified. This also means the
Web pages can function like database records. The data item
defined could include the followiing:
•
Product type
•
Product name
•
People’s names
184
Chapter 5

•
Price of product
•
Final product sales price
•
Amount of money wed
•
Directories of files
XML is a rigidly defined language that has caused the estab-
lishment of a common method of identifying data. XML has
been able to support business-to-business transactions. XML
will likely become the defacto standard for data interchange.
Figure 5-20 is a rendering of a XML tag.
Given the fact that most companies and even organizations
within the same company do not use the same set of software
tools, XML can serve as a way of bridging the communication
gap. XML supports business-to-business communications and
will be able to support the creation of “smart agents.” A smart
agent (intelligent software application) interprets information
and then acts on the information based on the smart agent’s
Network Signaling
185
HTML defines:
Section headers
Document titles
Paragraph definitions
Quotations
Links using URLs
Lists
Executable scripts
Point-n-Click icons
Tables and Formulas
Pointers to applets
HTML tags define the data 
that is presented.
HTML tags consist of the element name and 
element attributes enclosed in brackets. Tags 
come in pairs.
Example:
<Title>Hello There</Title>
<!First Created on January 1, 2000>
<Head.>
</Head.>
<Body>
</Body>  Note: The “/” denotes the closing tag,
which must mirror the opening tag.
FIGURE 5-19
HTML tag

understanding of the data. XML can make it far easier than it is
today for the smart agent to understand what the data is.
Search engines can also benefit from the use of XML.
XHTML stands for Extensible Hypertext Markup Language.
As noted previously, HTML is the universal language of the
WWW. It is used to support communication between the user
and the computer. XHTML is a combination of HTML and
XML. The combined format will define the data and the pre-
sentation of the data. Essentially, a programmer would be able
to create HTML documents with XML functions combined.
This could result in a HTML document with video and music
incorporated. Figure 5-21 is a rendering of a XHTML tag.
Many have compared WML to HTML, but this comparison
is incorrect. WML is more similar to XML than it is to HTML.
The creators of WML, the WAP Forum, will explain that WML
is based on XML. WML is designed to support Web transac-
tions on low-bandwidth, small handheld devices (that is, mobile
handsets) that have small viewscreens. WML defines the type
186
Chapter 5
XML tags are definable by 
the programmer.
XML tags define 
items such as:
Product Type
Product Name
People’s names
Price of Product
Directories of Files
Money owed
HTML tags are geared towards 
supporting Web browsing by the human 
user.
XML tags enable programmers to 
granularize and customize the data 
definitions.
XML Sample Code:
<address>
<name>
<title>Doctor</title>
<first-name>PJ</first-name>
<last-name>Doe</last-name>
<street-name>1 Main Street</street-name>
<city-name>Mayberry</city-name>
<state>NC</state>
<zipcode>11111</zipcode>
FIGURE 5-20
XML tag

Network Signaling
187
XHTML tags are definable 
by the programmer.
XHTML tags define items 
such as:
Product Type
Product Name
People’s names
Price of Product
Directories of Files
Money owed
XHTML combines the structure of 
HTML and flexibility of XML.
XHTML tags enable programmers to 
granularize and customize the data 
definitions.
XHTML Sample Code:
<address>
<name>
<title>Doctor</title>
<first-name>PJ</first-name>
<last-name>Doe</last-name>
<street-name>1 Main Street</street-name>
<city-name>Mayberry</city-name>
<state>NC</state>
<zipcode>11111</zipcode>
<file-type>audio</file-type>
FIGURE 5-21
XHTML tag
of data traversing the wireless Internet. Unlike XML, WML
must support data transactions that are not only being displayed
on small handsets, but also live with limited computing memory
in the handset. Figure 5-22 is a rendering of a WML tag.
WHAT ARE WAP’S LIMITATIONS?
At this time in the year 2000, the WAP networks in place are
completely independent of the WWW. Although an individual
can browse Web sites on his/her wireless handset, he/she can
only browse Web sites that are supported by the wireless carrier
or its gateway provider. This is not good in the long run for the
wireless user.
The WWW is the dominant application of the Internet and
should remain the model upon which all Internet work is per-
formed. However, the WAP Forum is working toward converg-

ing its work with that of W3C. For now, the WAP in its current
form is more than sufficient. In fact, WAP has actually reinvig-
orated the entire wireless industry. Critics of WAP should
remember that little steps are important in the beginning. The
WAP in its current form is a significant little step.
WAP PROTOCOL ARCHITECTURE
The WAP Forum has created an architectural schema that
supports scalability and flexibility for applications development
in the wireless arena. The protocol architecture is a functional
layered model. The layered approach enables development work
to occur in various areas of the WAP protocol. Note that this is
the same approach supported by the OSI model. The WAP
architectural model is depicted in Figure 5-23.
The components of the WAP protocol architecture are
described below as follows:
WIRELESS APPLICATION ENVIRONMENT (WAE) LAYER
The
WAE Layer supports a general-purpose development environ-
ment for applications. The WAE Layer enables a developer to
combine aspects of the WWW technologies and the current
188
Chapter 5
WML is based on XML.
WML does not define 
processing instructions beyond 
what is defined by XML.
WML must support 
transactions that are displayed 
on small handheld device 
screens.
WML Sample Code:
<address>
<name>
<title>Doctor</title>
<first-name>PJ</first-name>
<last-name>Doe</last-name>
<street-name>1 Main Street</street-name>
<city-name>Mayberry</city-name>
<state>NC</state>
<zipcode>11111</zipcode>
FIGURE 5-22
WML tag

wireless voice/data technologies. It is primarily focused on
interoperability between the multitude of wireless technologies
in use. The WAE Layer contains the Web browser supported by
the wireless carriers. The browser in the wireless world is actu-
ally called a microbrowser, which emphasizes the fact that the
wireless handset is supporting a limited form of Web browsing
on the small display screen of the wireless handset. This partic-
ular layer supports the following:
•
WML
•
WMLScript—Similar in function to JavaScript, which is
used in the WWW. However, WMLScript is not JavaScript.
•
Telephony applications.
•
Content formats—Supporting data, images, and text.
It must be noted that WML and WMLScript are not com-
patible with HTML or JavaScript. WML and WMLScript,
respectively, embody the same concepts as HTML and
JavaScript, but that is all. A movement exists to converge the
efforts of the WAP Forum with those of the W3C.
Network Signaling
189
Underlying Radio Technologies
Other 
Services
Application (WAE)
Session (WSP)
Transaction (WTP)
Security (WTLS)
Transport (WDP)
FIGURE 5-23
WAP protocol architecture

WIRELESS SESSION PROTOCOL (WSP) LAYER
The WSP Layer
supports the interface of the WAE Layer with that of the
Transport Protocol Layer, while also providing the basic net-
working protocols used to support browsing. The following
browsing functionalities are supported:
•
HTTP/1.1 functionality.
•
Feature negotiation.
•
Data push from the WAP server to the client (handset),
which includes broadcasting of data.
•
Long-lived sessions.
•
Session suspend and resume functionality.
Beyond browsing, the WSP Layer is capable of supporting
the WAE in the following ways:
•
Establishes the session between the WAP server and the
user.
•
Tears down the session between the WAP server and the
user.
•
Negotiates between the user and the WAP server.
•
Supports compact encoding of information.
•
Supports multiple and simultaneous asynchronous
transactions.
•
Supports low-bandwidth.
WIRELESS TRANSACTION PROTOCOL (WTP) LAYER
The WTP
Layer supports the transport mechanism suitable for “thin”
clients (wireless handsets) and the low-bandwidth in the wire-
less network. The use of the term “low-bandwidth” is appropri-
ate when comparing the wireless Internet to that of the wired
Internet. The word “transaction” is appropriate because the
WTP supports the exchange of information between entities or
applications. One example of a transaction would be interactive
browsing.
190
Chapter 5

In general, WTP supports the following:
•
Improved the reliability of data transfers by ensuring that
the number of handshakes and acknowledgments are
reduced, which is the concatenation of WTP protocol
control information, also known as a PDU. It also supports
retransmission of lost data packets. Selective
retransmission and flow control are also supported.
•
Improves the efficiency of connection-oriented services by
eliminating any explicit connection setup or tear down
instructions.
•
Message-oriented services, excluding streaming services.
•
Three classes of transaction services.
•
Class 0
Unreliable one-way requests. This class of
service is intended to support a datagram that is
transmitted within the same context of an existing
session. This is not intended to serve as a primary
method of transmitting datagrams.
•
Class 1
Reliable one-way requests. This class of
service supports a “reliable push” service.
•
Class 2
Reliable two-way request-reply transactions.
This service provides for the normal message transaction
where an invocation or request results in some kind of
response or reply.
•
Optional user-to-use reliability.
•
Asynchronous transactions.
•
Aborting outstanding transactions.The WTP rides on top of
a datagram service. 
WIRELESS TRANSPORT LAYER SECURITY (WTLS) LAYER
The
Wireless Transport Layer Security protocol layer is security 
protocol based upon the industry standard known as the
Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol. WTLS supports WAP
over narrow bandwidth channels. WTLS provides the following
capabilities:
Network Signaling
191

•
Data Integrity.
•
Privacy.
•
Authentication of the user and terminal device, which
supports transactions like credit card transactions.
•
Denial-of-service protection, in which the WTLS is capable
of detecting and rejecting data that has been replayed or
unsuccessfully verified.
Not much else can be said about this layer because it is
understood, especially in today’s age of hacking and security
violations, that security is needed. Security addresses both the
privacy and data integrity aspects of the Internet.
WIRELESS DATAGRAM PROTOCOL (WDP) LAYER
The Wireless
Datagram Protocol (WDP) Layer is a Transport Layer protocol.
This layer supports communication between the bearer services
layer, which is underneath the WDP, and the upper layers of the
WAP. The WDP is capable of interfacing with the upper layers
in a variety of ways (protocol stacking) in order to execute an
application. This is similar to the way in which non-Internet
telecommunications services function today. The OSI model,
which is used to support networking and the creation of ser-
vices in the non-Internet world, supports this type of stacking of
protocols.
Like the other protocol stacks in WAP, this one is also
designed to support narrow bandwidth applications. The WDP
is capable of supporting data capable bearer services that in
turn are supported by a variety of radio interfaces. In other
words, WAP can be used to support radio technologies like
Group Special Mobile/Global System for Mobile Communi-
cations (GSM), TDMA, and CDMA. See Figure 5-24 for an
illustration of the WDP’s relationship with the bearer service
and the radio technology.
The WDP is capable of mapping itself to bearer services in
such a way that the bearer services’ specific characteristics are
192
Chapter 5

optimally addressed. Therefore, the protocol’s performance will
vary accordingly. This also means that this layer is responsible
for communication with physical devices or terminals. Within
the WDP Layer is another protocol layer called the Adaptation
Layer. The Adaptation Layer is the layer of the WDP that maps
the WDP directly onto the bearer service.
The WDP Layer is a highly flexible and adaptable protocol
layer that is capable of supporting a bearer service like Cellular
Digital Packet Data (CDPD). CDPD is an existing service pro-
vided by the cellular carriers over separate cellular data net-
works. The WDP enables the cellular carriers to continue
providing existing services over WAP networks. Even more
importantly, the WAP is designed to support all of the radio
technologies in the marketplace. This flexibility adds to the
financial attractiveness of WAP technology.
BEARER SERVICES
The range of bearer services supported by WAP is quite broad.
WAP’s list of services that are supported include short messag-
ing services, circuit switched data services, and packet data ser-
vices. WAP is designed to support the varying levels of
performance and operating requirements of all bearer services.
Network Signaling
193
Underlying Radio Technologies
Transport (WDP)
CDMA  TDMA  IDEN  GSM  CDPD  etc.
FIGURE 5-24
WDP architecture

WAP has become so entrenched in some technical circles
that the term “WAP” has become synonymous with the words
“products and applications.”
iMode
Many people claim that iMode is similar to WAP, which is true
from a basic marketing perspective. Data and Internet access is
supported by iMode just as it is by WAP. However, the most
glaring difference is that iMode was designed to interface with
the WWW. The iMode protocol is a proprietary protocol and
service provided by NTT DoCoMo; therefore, little can be writ-
ten of its protocol structure or the protocol’s functional layers.
However, the public and market evidence of how the system
performs can be addressed.
The most obvious difference to a user is that an iMode
handset displays graphics. Now graphics do not “an Internet
make.” The important concept is that the NTT DoCoMo iMode
portal site serves as the gateway to other iMode Web sites or
non-imode sites. The iMode service is compatible with the
technologies supported by W3C.
The imode handset has a display just as small as a non-
iMode handset. However, the iMode portal strips out the unus-
able data from a WWW Web page and presents it to the user in
a coherent format. In order to realize this, the iMode service
provider asks the user to provide his/her user profile. The user
profile enables the iMode service provider to facilitate access to
WWW IP Web sites. One may ask what is the difference
between WAP and iMode? The WAP service provider can do
the same activity. However, the WAP service provider does not
currently support this kind of portal service. The challenge for
a WAP service provider is that even if a portal of this kind were
provided, the current scripting and markup languages used by
WAP are not compatible with the WWW’s scripting and
markup languages; therefore, stripping out WWW IP Web site
pages will be difficult, if not impossible. Figure 5-25 is a ren-
dering of how the iMode network interfaces with the WWW IP
network.
194
Chapter 5

The iMode network supports push technology like the WAP
network. Both support similar services such as travel, directory
assistance, and concierge/directional services. The kinds of ser-
vices provided have differences, which will be covered in
Chapter 6, “E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce.” However,
the iMode network supports interconnection with the larger
wired WWW Internet far more easily than the WAP network.
This does not mean that the WAP network will not easily sup-
port interconnection with the WWW Internet. In reality, the
market forces will drive network(s) evolution.
iMode PROTOCOL STRUCTURE
Little can be said of this subject. One can only assume that the
protocol model follows the functional layer approach of the OSI
model. It makes sense that the NTT DoCoMo approach follows
a layered approach. If the iMode model were not layered, it
Network Signaling
195
i-Mode
Provider
i-Mode
Servers
HTTP and cHTML,  
ISP
ISP
ISP
The servers could also serve 
as interoperability gateways.
FIGURE 5-25
iMode interconnection with the WWW IP network

would make applications development nearly impossible and
definitely economically unfeasible. The specifics of the iMode
protocol model are unclear, but one can assume that it is simi-
lar to the WWW IP model and may resemble the model shown
in Figure 5-26.
Based on information that has been presented in various
industry forms, iMode supports a subset of the HTML used by
the WWW. This subset of HTML is known as compact HTML
(cHTML). This makes sense given the physical limitations of a
handset viewscreen.
WAP VERSUS iMODE
The technical merits of one technology over the other are
arguable. Discussing technology with engineers regarding the
technical aspects of any technology seems pointless. In other
words, one should not attempt to convince another of the mer-
196
Chapter 5
Applications 
& Services
TCP
UDP
IP
Data
Physical
FIGURE 5-26
IP model

its of another religion. However, the merits of the technologies
will be discussed from a business perspective, which is a more
realistic approach.
One should consider a number of issues when looking at the
value of any technology as it relates to its commercial value:
•
Does the product have commercial value?
•
Is the technology ready for commercialization?
•
Does the product do something useful?
•
Does the product facilitate an activity that makes a paying
customer’s life simpler or easier?
•
Does the service provider know which market segment it
will be selling its “wares”?
•
Is the product affordable in the targeted market segment?
•
Can the product be produced and sold at an acceptable
profit margin?
Many other issues should be addressed. These issues are
generically addressed in Chapters 1 through 3. However, for the
purpose of this chapter, the main point raised is that the mar-
ketplace does not care about technology. The marketplace cares
whether or not the money spent on buying the product has
been well spent. Consumers do not care how the product was
made or that the product uses the most sophisticated hardware
or software. The consumer only wants value for the money
he/she has spent.
Figure 5-27 focuses on the services offered by WAP and 
iMode. Both support the following services:
•
E-Mail
•
News
Current events, breaking news reports, weather,
horoscopes, traffic, and so on.
•
Finance
News, online trading, stock watch, banking (at
this moment iMode supports retail banking transactions),
and so on.
Network Signaling
197

•
Shopping
Retail, travel, musical concerts, entertainment
shows, and so on. The wireless handset becomes a
transaction processing point.
•
Messaging
•
Screen savers
Like a “real computer,” only iMode
supports GIF images. Moving pictures are also supported
by only iMode at this time.
•
Games
•
Portals
•
Entertainment
Online music, movies, online radio, and
so on.
WAP and iMode support and present these services differ-
ently. However, despite the technical differences and the
compatibility issues, the consumer seems enchanted with both
product offerings. For now, the consumer is “playing with a
brand new toy” in the wireless marketplace. The games offered
by iMode appear to be more numerous, but it seems that this
198
Chapter 5
E-mail
News
Finance News
Online Trading
Banking Transaction
Shopping
Screensavers
Games
Portal Access
Music
Others
WAP and iMode provide similar services. 
FIGURE 5-27
Wireless Internet Services—iMode and WAP

does not matter for now. Graphics capabilities of iMode are
superior to WAP currently, but that should be only temporary
because of WAP’s evolution.
The WAP service providers are providing value to their exist-
ing customer base. WAP service providers are evolving their
platforms so that they will be W3C (and therefore, WWW)
compatible. This will enable WWW Internet sites and WAP to
adapt their services to one another for cross marketing more
easily. The iMode supporters already claim WWW compatibil-
ity. Cross marketing will enable both market segments to bene-
fit.
At the time of this writing, it has been rumored that the
iMode supporters are evolving their platforms to support WAP
users by enabling WAP phones to access iMode content. This is
being done in Japan today. It is one way for iMode manufactur-
ers and service providers to sell more equipment and services.
By enabling a WAP user to get iMode content, an iMode service
provider could use the product as a way of convincing the WAP
user to buy their primary service from the iMode carrier. More
than likely, a gateway function will be used to act as a mediation
and conversion access point. Figure 5-28 illustrates this con-
cept.
Network Signaling
199
FIGURE 5-28
iMode—WAP interoperability

Converging technology has become a commonplace activity
in the global economy. Convergence has become the business
of many startups both in the software and hardware businesses
as well as in the service provisioning businesses. As noted in
Telecommunications Internetworking: Delivering Services across
the Networks, convergence has become a necessity if one wants
to survive and thrive in this business.
In its current form, WAP is limited by comparison to iMode.
WAP does not have the breath of access to the WWW as
iMode. One can even make an argument, albeit a poor one, that
iMode is Japan-centric, but iMode is also being sold outside of
Japan. However, this WAP situation seems temporary and
barely noticeable to a user. He/she is too busy experiencing the
variety of information services. The user understands that
“change is inevitable” and he/she will get cost effective, usable,
and useful product. Furthermore, the user usually does not care
who provides it.
WAP VERSUS iMODE VERSUS NEXT
GENERATION WIRELESS
To those in the industry, the issues of next generation wireless
were originally conceived to be a packet data enhanced version
of current wireless. Until WAP and iMode took hold as realiz-
able applications, the next generation took the form of various
debates on which radio technology was better. The investment
community was looking for something to wrap technology
efforts around and hang their flags on such as 3G (third
Generation wireless supported by the CDMA carrier commu-
nity) or EDGE (the TDMA carrier community’s next generation
wireless effort). WAP has become that flagpole for most people
in the investment community. Although iMode is widespread,
WAP appears to be more widespread at this time. One approach
is a proprietary effort whereas the other has a wider breath of
industry support. Note that at the time of this writing, a debate
is occurring between the pioneers of WAP over patent rights.
200
Chapter 5

One should not focus on intellectual property ownership. The
proprietary nature of an approach is not an issue for many
investment houses. In the end, it is the marketplace that will
decide who wins. As trite as this may sound, it is the truth.
INTERNET CONVERGENCE
Convergence is a term that the telecommunications industry
has used to describe the fading business and technical distinc-
tions between the various telecommunications services seg-
ments. The Internet is causing the telecommunications
industry to converge the various segments onto the provisioning
of Internet services. In fact, the Internet industry must face that
same convergence within itself: The internal convergence
referred to within the Internet concerns WAP, iMode, and the
WWW. The Internet and the users will benefit more from a
wireless Internet that communicates (talks) with the wireline
Internet than from a wireless Internet that is proprietary.
More than likely, XHTML will become the common markup
language for both iMode and WAP. As noted previously, HTML
is the universal language of the WWW. HTML is used to sup-
port communication between the user and the computer.
XHTML is a combination of HTML and XML. The combined
format will define the data and the presentation of the data.
Common tools and standards (industry established and defacto)
will serve as a lightning rod for convergence and growth.
One cannot overstress the need to ensure compatibility
between WAP, iMode, and the WWW standards. The Internet
industry has the opportunity to grow beyond all expectations.
By creating synergies between the wireless Internet and the
wireline Internet, the two industry segments can grow. The
more customer utility/usefulness the Internet has that crosses
market boundaries, the greater the value to the customer and
hence, the larger the overall market. This scenario is akin to one
in which a company spends money to grow the subscriber base
in order to grow the revenue stream. Cross sales and marketing
has beneficial effects on revenue.
Network Signaling
201

SUMMARY
The Internet is a new information medium that is undergoing
drastic changes within itself, as well as galvanizing an entire
global economy. As the Internet technologies change, so will the
economy. Until 1999, one could only dream of the Internet sup-
porting voice. The wireline Internet was growing, but looking
for a way of becoming the consumer’s primary means of com-
municating. In 2000, it is moving toward reality because of
IPv6. In 1999, the entire wireless community was looking at
enhancing its networks; however, without any clear develop-
ment goals, the correct evolutionary path was anyone’s guess. In
2000, the excitement of the Internet galvanized the entire wire-
less industry toward a common set of goals.
202
Chapter 5

C H A P T E R
6
E-COMMERCE 
AND MOBILE 
E-COMMERCE
W
hat is e-commerce? E-commerce is shorthand English 
for electronic commerce. It is a realization of doing busi-
ness using Internet technologies. As noted in Chapter 
2, “Challenges of the Internet Business—Business and
Technology,” e-Commerce is an activity/application and not a
product to be sold to an Internet user. E-commerce has become
an activity/application that has captured the interests of both
the commerce and investment sides of the business community.
E-commerce has been able to serve as a new home for existing
ways of doing business. The new ways of doing business are
translations of current ways of doing business and their associ-
ated relationships. These relationships are as follows:
Business-to-Business (B2B)
The B2B relationship
describes the relationship between two or more businesses
selling services to one another (see Figure 6-1). A steel
manufacturer buys coal from one company to use in
smelters to turn iron ore into steel. The market has even
created a sub-division of the B2B called Business-to-Small
Business (B2SB) relationship.
Business-to-Consumer (B2C)
The B2C relationship is
the one the average consumer is familiar with: Retailers
selling products online (see Figure 6-2). Consider this
203
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

204
Chapter 6
Business-to-Business
Businesses can sell one another 
products, raw materials, and services.
FIGURE 6-1
B2B
Business-to-Consumer
FIGURE 6-2
B2C

E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
205
online catalogue shopping for clothing, books, vehicles, 
and so on.
Business-to-Government(B2G)
The B2G relationship is
a new one that is growing over the Internet (see Figure 6-3).
This relationship is about the business community doing
business with sectors of the government. Sectors of the
government have been able to use the Internet to pur-
chase supplies and broadcast industry-wide bulletins. The
government, whether local, state, national, or international,
is the single largest customer of goods and services. To
many people in the telecommunications business, the
government is the single largest customer in the
marketplace.
Exchange-to-Exchange (X2X)
The X2X relationship is the
linkage of multiple B2B relationships/ marketplaces (see
Figure 6-4). X2X e-commerce is the next logical step 
beyond B2B or B2SB. Companies are able to purchase
supplies/products at competitive prices. X2X can be likened
to a farmers’ market; where large food distribution
companies bid for farmers’ products. Manufacturers and
vendors of all kinds seek to purchase supplies and services
over the Internet. X2X e-commerce could ultimately result
in lower prices to the consumer because of the lower costs
to the retail outlets and to the distributors (that is, the
middleman).
Although it may sound facetious, another relationship exists
called the Taxpayer-to-Government (T2G) relationship (see
Figure 6-5). Today, taxpayers can file their income taxes over
the Internet. They can find a variety of information from the
various government databases. Furthermore, taxpayers can file
any number of requests for information (from government
agency) over the Internet. For example, during 2000, a global
vehicle tire recall was put into effect. The various national gov-
ernments involved communicated with the public via the news

206
Chapter 6
Business-to-Government
FIGURE 6-3
B2G
Animal
Vegetable
Mineral
Fossil Fuels
Others
Bought and
sold in bulk. 
Exchange-to-Exchange
FIGURE 6-4
X2X

media and the Internet. Many individuals filed complaints to
the various national transportation safety authorities via the
Internet.
These relationships exist today in the non-Internet business
world; however, the Internet has been able to assist business
people in reaching a much broader audience faster than before.
The aforementioned relationships are finding their way into the
wireless marketplace. These relationships form the basis of m-
commerce.
WHAT IS M-COMMERCE?
The changes that are occurring in the Internet have been
occurring on several business and technical fronts, which are as
follows:
•
New and improved Internet protocol (IP) called IP 
Version 6.
•
Overlaying the IP over existing network signaling protocols
such as SS7 and ATM.
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
207
Paying taxes
Filing complaints
Speaking to the local representative
Responding to polls
Citizen communicating with 
government
Taxpayer-to-Government
FIGURE 6-5
T2G

•
Faster and bigger routers.
•
Faster network access.
•
Creating business alliances that result in merging new
types of content in the Internet business.
•
New companies focused on serving specific pieces of the
Internet business, such as outsourcing operations, Web site
creation, Web site administration, and e-mail.
•
Improved Internet encoding formats and scripting
languages.
•
Wireless Internet technologies.
•
New types of terminal devices such as mobile handsets, 
Internet-only desktop and laptop computers, small, 
palm-sized terminals, and so on.
The changes are occurring at an eye-blurring, neck-breaking
pace, yet the most daunting effort is finding a way to bring the
Internet to the mobile user. The mobile (wireless) marketplace
has been growing at an explosive rate. The wireless marketplace
is highly competitive and expanding. Today, wireless is seeking
to replace the wireline telephone via wireless local loop tech-
nologies. The Internet has added a whole new dimension to the
wireless market. The Internet community has even coined a
new term to identify wireless’ place in e-commerce. The term
m-commerce is short for mobile e-commerce. Figure 6-6
depicts the mobile e-commerce marketplace.
M-commerce brings wired e-commerce to the user via a
wireless handset. M-commerce is just being introduced now.
However, it faces some challenges. To most users, m-commerce
is simply a new way of shopping for durable and non-durable
goods. This is not a trivial application. A nation’s economic
health is partially based on the amount of retail products sold.
However, m-commerce can bring far more to the marketplace.
The challenges facing the mobile e-commerce marketplace are
both technical and business-related.
208
Chapter 6

M-COMMERCE ISSUES
M-commerce is an application that has the potential of bringing
the Internet and wireless telecommunications to the average
consumer. However, consumers that use the wired Internet for
shopping are currently able to:
•
See pictures of the product they are purchasing.
•
Print copies of the Web pages they are viewing.
•
View multiple windows showing products.
•
Have easy to view instructions on purchasing.
•
Have colored pictures.
•
View consumer product information, that is, the label
information most consumers read on the back of a box.
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
209
Mobile E-Commerce
Ordering by mobile computing 
device
Online trading
Others
SALES
FIGURE 6-6
M-commerce

The previous list should not be discounted. Consumers only
buy when they can see the product. Recent retail shopping dis-
asters over the Internet have caused many to shy away from
Web site shopping. However, these disasters have not caused a
decline in shopping. Rather, the consumer is even more knowl-
edgeable now than before. Consumers want to see the product
they wish to purchase, especially if they cannot touch the prod-
uct. The challenge for the wireless community is that mobile
handsets have limited screen real estate. The displays are typi-
cally no bigger than one inch by two inches. One can make a
bigger display, but that would result in either a larger handset or
less space for the physical keypad. Neither option is acceptable.
The question remains: How do you give the wireless Internet
user the same kinds of service that the wired Internet offers?
The wireless carriers are pursuing two different wireless
Internet protocols. One is a stripped down version of IPv4 and
other WWW technologies, whereas the other is totally incom-
patible with the existing WWW. In order to expand the wireless
Internet, full access to the WWW is essential. The entire
Internet customer base surfs the WWW. Without interoper-
ability between the two Internet types, the wireless Internet will
suffer. Before going any further, it is necessary to discuss mobil-
ity.
WHAT IS MOBILITY?
Mobility has certain attributes that create challenges for
Internet Web browsing. It is important to understand mobility
before delving any deeper into the subject of m-commerce.
Mobility can be described in a number of ways. One could call
cordless telephones mobile devices because they are wireless.
On the other hand, a cordless user cannot leave the vicinity of
their home (that is, the cordless base station), which limits
range and therefore, possibly limits the device’s utility. Mobility
has the following attributes:
•
Call delivery to a mobile subscriber (home and visiting in
another network).
210
Chapter 6

•
Roaming (supporting calls to and from visiting subscribers).
•
Authentication
Authentication is the process of user
identity confirmation. Identity confirmation can involve
checking handset/terminal device identity by interpreting
“secret” keys/data messages. If the data keys/data messages
have been altered or do not show a specific format, the call
will not be completed.
•
Validation
Validation is often confused with
authentication. Authentication essentially certifies the user
as a either “real” or “fake” and either “good” or “bad.”
Validation certifies the “permission” to complete the call.
For example, a user calls another party using a mobile
handset. The carrier certifies that the handset is the real
one and is not a clone being used by an unauthorized
person. After the handset has been given the “thumbs up,”
the carrier checks if the call is allowed under the user’s
billing plan. This next step is validation (the final “green
light” to complete the call).
•
Handoff
Handoff is the process of reassigning subscriber
handsets to specific radio channels as the handsets move
from cell site to cell site.
•
Path minimization (efficient routing of a mobile call)
Path minimization is the process of the efficient fixed
network (the non-wireless portion of the call) routing of
wireless call tables in the wireless carrier switches.
Figures 6-7 and 6-8 illustrate the concept of mobility. The
reader should understand that unlike wired computers, mobile
handsets should be viewed as moving IP addresses. More infor-
mation can be found on wireless in Telecommunications
Internetworking: Delivering Services across the Networks.
Mobility comes in two types: personal mobility and terminal
mobility. Personal mobility is defined as the subscriber’s (user’s)
ability to make and receive calls regardless of location and the
type of terminal equipment the call is being made from or to.
Personal mobility supports independence from specific ter-
minal devices and locations. At this time, most users of
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
211

212
Chapter 6
Mobility
Wireline
Wired and Cordless
FIGURE 6-7
Mobility
FIGURE 6-8
Mobility: Handoff and path minimization

telecommunications services are tied to a specific handset or
fixed termination point (for example, termination at a home or
business). Personal mobility requires the use of personal num-
bers or some other form of personal identification (for example,
smart cards) to identify the user.
Terminal mobility is defined as the subscriber’s (user’s) abil-
ity to make and receive calls regardless of location. Terminal
mobility infers that the network will authenticate and validate
the terminal and not the person (user).
Figure 6-9 illustrates the concept of personal and terminal
mobility.
Mobility adds a unique dimension to the Internet. The
Internet must somehow find the user. The user can be any-
where. The visited network needs to communicate the user’s
location to the home system so that the home system knows
how to route calls to the user. In the case of the wireless
Internet, the network needs to be able to find the user as well.
The IP has no parameters to support this attribute. WAP and i-
mode are designed to support mobility. IPv4 and IPv6 do not
support mobility. In order for WWW IP networks to communi-
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
213
Personal Mobility - Personal numbers or 
ID numbers.  Calls delivered to the person.
Terminal Mobility - Calls directed to 
devices with unique numbers.  Calls 
delivered to the device.
FIGURE 6-9
Personal mobility versus terminal mobility

cate with WAP or i-mode networks, the mobile characteristics
of the user must be accounted for. In all likelihood, the mobil-
ity information will be managed by the wireless carrier’s net-
work. Operating basics of a wireless carrier can be found in my
book, Telecommunications Internetworking: Delivering Services
across the Networks.
M-COMMERCE TECHNICAL ISSUES
The following list includes some of the technical issues sur-
rounding m-commerce that have been identified up to this
point:
•
Handset display screen’s limited small size.
•
Mono-color display screens.
•
M-commerce “wannabees” should be educated on the
nuances of mobility.
•
User interface—Voice commands and prompts are
supported. Human factors engineering will find this a
challenge because if wireless Internet is going to rise above
and beyond movie listings, concierge services, and stock
reports, an easier way of browsing the Web must be found.
These technical issues concern form, not signaling.
Remember that the user’s focus is usability and not the nuances
of technology. These issues are not minor issues, but are in fact
potential “show stoppers” if they are not properly addressed.
See Figure 6-10 for an illustration of the aforementioned 
points.
The form factor issue has two views. One view, called the
“anti-wireless Internet” view, is that the handset is used for
direct communication with other people. Furthermore, voice
navigation through a series of menus is difficult on a regular
wireline telephone; making a wireless user do it for Web-based
services will be no different. This view also purports that the
desktop and laptop computers lend themselves to the “network
effect” of the Internet. In other words, one can view multiple
214
Chapter 6

screens while on the Internet. One can also transmit a URL to
multiple people easily. Note that these same people also remind
users that the reason why the computer industry is working so
hard to expand the viewing real estate (viewscreen size) of the
display screen is because people want to see as much as they
can.
The “anti-wireless Internet” view also believes that pagers
provide the kind of stock quote information, news, and text
messaging services that the wireless Internet supporters want to
provide.
The other view, called the “pro-wireless Internet” view, sup-
ports the development of Internet access via the wireless hand-
set. This group of supporters, which is everyone in wireless, is
conducting a variety of market and technical research to find
the best way of packaging this product for the consumer. From
a technical perspective, the handset manufacturers and carriers
are conducting various research to determine what the wireless
Internet users want and how to present the information to
them.
Applications service providers (ASPs) and content providers
currently work in the wireline Internet and are attempting to
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
215
•Handset display screen's 
limited size
•Mono-color display screens
•User Interface
FIGURE 6-10
M-Commerce—Mobile issues

find a place in the mobile marketplace. The challenges these
ASPs and content providers face are as follows:
•
Understanding the wireless technical challenges of
mobility, which includes handoff and roaming. Many ASPs
and content providers lack the knowledge of the basic
operating characteristics of a wireless system. How can one
expect to provide the most basic support if one cannot
understand how the customer’s network works?
•
Modifying existing software and hardware to support
mobility.
The previous list is not an exhaustive one and it should not
be at this time. M-commerce is so new that all of the wireline
Internet vendors are rushing into the mobile space without
understanding the fundamentals of wireless communications
technology. Figure 6-11 is a rendering of the need to under-
stand the fundamentals.
216
Chapter 6
 • TDMA
 • CDMA
 • GSM
 • PACS
 • DCT-1800
 • DECT
 • Wideband CDMA
 •  Compositie
    TDMA/CDMA 
Cell Site A
Cell Site B
Cell Site C
Cell Site D
MSC
MSC
Gateway 
MSC
The automobile initiated the call in Cell Site A.  The automobile was handed off to B. 
As the automobile travels to its ultimate destination of Cell Site D, the call is physically
routed through the fixed network to another MSC via a tandem called the Gateway MSC.
The call remains up and the second MSC is handling the call.
Understanding the 
fundamentals is critical.
FIGURE 6-11
The wireless fundamentals

M-COMMERCE BUSINESS ISSUES
The business issues surrounding m-commerce are far more dif-
ficult to grasp than the technical issues. Before a service or
product is introduced into the marketplace, market trials are
conducted. Mobile-based Internet services are being sold today.
However, the industry has yet to understand the extent of the
market opportunities. The din of noise created by the rush into
the mobile business space has been caused by thousands of
companies claiming they are working in the m-commerce
space. Many people in the investment community are unsure of
the opportunity, but it is understood that wireless is growing. It
seems logical to assume that if wireless is growing, so will every
other opportunity that is associated with it. However, this is a
poor assumption to make.
As noted in Chapter 3, “Challenges of the Internet
Business—Business and Technology,” the danger of doing busi-
ness over the Internet is that it is impersonal and people like
speaking with other people. Questions should be asked such as:
Does your existing wireless customer want to access the
Internet? If the answer is yes, then what does the customer
want from Internet access?
These questions are not trivial. They go to the heart of
whether or not one should pursue m-commerce. Market
research also needs to be conducted. The Internet space is so
crowded on the wireline Internet side of the business that the
wireless carriers’ only difference is mobility. Mobility is a major
difference, but Internet users have become accustomed to surf-
ing high-bandwidth multimedia Web sites. What kind of Web
access will the wirelss carriers provide?
The value chain analysis that the wireless carriers must con-
duct must account for the current players in the Internet space.
ASPs and content providers need to conduct the same value
chain analysis. As noted in Chapter 3, a value chain is a busi-
ness tool that is used to describe the value of a sequence of
events or relationships. A value chain analysis is just one of the
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
217

many market analyst tools that should be employed. See
Chapter 3 for additional information on general marketing
issues. The m-commerce space is new, and time is limited for a
business analysis.
The following are basic questions that should be raised
when entering the m-commerce business space:
•
What is the product?
•
Who is your customer? This would include demographics,
buying behavior, decision-making process, and so on.
•
Is the product easy to use?
•
Does the product fill an existing need?
•
Does the product make a task easier to perform?
•
Does the product enhance the way a task is performed?
•
How will you deliver the product or service to the user?
•
Does a market large enough to warrant making the product
exist?
These are basic questions that many people in the mobile
business may be ignoring in their rush to provide wireless
Internet access. Figure 6-12 is an illustration of these basic
questions.
218
Chapter 6
Basic Questions
What is the product?
What does the product do?
Who is the customer?
How is the product delivered?
How is the service delivered?
Who?
What?
When?
Where?
Why?
How?
FIGURE 6-12
Asking basic questions

Scanning through the various trade journals, one will find
various Internet accessible products being deployed while the
WAP standard and the i-mode specification are under develop-
ment and enhancement. One should ask the question: Will this
equipment be useable in a year from now?
The potential danger of rushing into any technology-based
business endeavor is incompatibility between equipment and
standards. For those whose telecommunications career began
in the world of the Internet, this occurrence may sound impos-
sible. These same people may claim that a particular company’s
market dominance will dictate which standard will be followed.
Such claims may be true; however, similar thoughts have
occurred in other high-stake, technology-business gambits.
Figure 6-13 depicts the question of selling products ahead of
the market.
THE DANGER OF MOVING WITHOUT PROPER PLANNING
An example of rushing ahead without proper industry-wide
planning concerns the service Integrated Services Digital
Network (ISDN). ISDN development began in 1976 and was
not completed until the mid-1990s with the deployment of the
Regional Bell Operating Companies’ National ISDN-1. Until
that moment, small and scattered deployments were available.
The problems faced by ISDN proponents concerned timing.
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
219
SWOT
Thinking through the 
operational issues
Thinking through the market 
issues
Market dominance is a goal
Size doesn’t matter
Planning
Execution
Good Business Plan
FIGURE 6-13
Rushing ahead

ISDN aimed to provide the subscriber voice, video, and data
on a single pair of wires. In its early days, ISDN was radical and
would be the first protocol to introduce out-of-band signaling in
the wireline local loop and the first to bring this set of services
to the home and business user. The tragic state of affairs that
took place in the mid-1980s was that carriers were selling ISDN
services before terminal equipment had been developed and
sold. ISDN terminals had been developed, but no terminal
equipment was available that had standard interfaces for the
user or network interconnect. This situation did not prevent
vendors and carriers from selling ISDN services and terminals.
Ultimately, the situation created a problem with the customer
in the areas of customer care, repair, installation, and training.
Even though ISDN was meant to function as an end-to-end
service (people to people), it could only do so within a local
exchange carrier’s (LEC’s) central office. The LEC network at
that time could not support out-of-band signaling interswitch or
intranetwork. Therefore, without a Signaling System 7 (SS7)
network, the full capabilities of ISDN could not be realized.
The vision of ISDN overwhelmed the technical, business, and
market realities, and created mayhem in the development of the
market and technology. ISDN and SS7 were meant to function
together. Unfortunately, they were treated as separate LEC
planning efforts and deployment efforts; the disconnection in
planning and deploying hurt the roll outs of both technologies.
During the 1980s, ISDN was considered the subscriber inter-
face to access the power of the SS7 network. Ultimately,
because only a few large equipment manufacturers could pro-
vide SS7, the industry standardization discussions were far
more orderly to manage. However, in the case of ISDN, dozens
of small, mid-size, and large manufacturers providing ISDN ter-
minal equipment were available. This is similar to the current
state of the m-commerce and wireless Internet environment.
So much time and money had been invested in ISDN ter-
minal devices in the manufacturing community and the sub-
scriber base that bringing the industry together was a nearly
220
Chapter 6

impossible task. Eventually, the industry found a way to work
together. However, the two victims in the 20-year industry effort
were the technology and the customer.
Part of the problem with the early ISDN marketing efforts
was the technology focus. Subscribers do not care how the ser-
vice is provided; they simply care if the services have value and
work consistently. Unfortunately, by the time all of the ISDN
marketing efforts took flight, the industry and the subscriber
base had new technology alternatives that provided them with
voice, video, and data. The danger being faced by those rushing
to enter the m-commerce business space is the same danger
suffered by ISDN. Even closer to “home” is the recent spate of
Internet-based company bankruptcies. M-commerce is another
business opportunity that has the potential of losing “steam”
unless careful planning is done to understand the market and to
meet the market needs. Figure 6-14 is a rendering of the need
to plan properly.
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
221
Market 
Idea
Match 
Customer 
Needs
Service 
Definition 
by 
Marketing
Service 
Defined
 Technology 
 Review
Technology 
Evaluation & 
Plans
Budget 
& 
Revenue
Financial 
Analysis
 Technology 
 Needs
Delivery
Financial 
Analysis
FIGURE 6-14
Proper industry planning

M-COMMERCE SERVICES
The m-commerce marketplace is new. M-commerce is a mobile
version of the e-commerce marketplace and both are in their
infancy. If one picks up a wireless handset and wanders through
its Web services, he/she will find the following available to the
user (see Figure 6-15 for a depiction of m-commerce services):
•
Financial news
General business information that is
updated on a periodic basis.
•
Personalized stock portfolio watch
The user identifies
specific stocks about which the m-commerce site is to
transmit stock quote information.
•
News media reports
Current events. Often broken down
into the categories of national and international news.
•
Online stock trading
Trading on the stock market via
specific online trading companies.
•
Banking transactions
Depositing money or transferring
money between accounts.
•
Entertainment
Ticket purchases, horoscopes, movie
listings, lottery results, and movie reviews.
•
Directory assistance
Telephone number and address
display.
•
Retail store sales information
Based on location
information obtained from the carrier’s network.
•
Location of the nearest store or place of business
As of
mid-2000, the location information element appears to
have the potential for enhancing the wireless Internet for
the user.
•
Auction locations
Some people consider auctions a great
place to shop.
•
Traffic reports
Vehicular road conditions and airport
status.
•
Weather reports.
222
Chapter 6

•
Internet search engines
Via business relationships,
specific Web search engine companies agree to create
abbreviated versions of their Web pages for the sole
purpose of searching the Internet.
•
E-commerce Web sites
Those that are normally accessed
via the wireline Internet.
•
Portal access
Many wireless carriers have created their
own portals to specific “hot types of sites.”
•
E-mail.
The question that has arisen with many wireless carriers
providing Web access is: Are you providing the same broad level
of access to various sites as the wireline WWW? The answer is
no; however, most people who are currently buying the service
do not care because expectations at this stage of m-commerce
growth are low and wireless users do not know what they want.
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
223
FIGURE 6-15
M-commerce services

Currently, the accessible Web sites are restricted to limited
number of sites via a contractual relationship with the wireless
carrier. Without total compatibility with the WWW, the various
versions of wireless Internet and the associated m-commerce
applications will be restricted to a limited number of sites. This
may actually be a blessing in disguise because so many Web
surfers are offended by the poor quality of the search engines
that a carrier willing to filter out the unpopular sites may be
perceived as performing a useful service. See Chapters 2,
“Business Models” and 3, “Challenges of the Internet
Business—Business and Technology,” for additional informa-
tion on search engines and portals.
As noted in Chapters 2 and 3, the current basic and generic
ISP services include the following:
•
E-mail
•
File storage
•
Web site creation
•
WWW access
•
Search engine
•
Chat rooms
•
Internet portal access
•
Voice over IP (Voice over Internet Protocol)
The aforementioned services may be offered by the wireless
carrier, but the question remains of whether or not this is nec-
essary. E-commerce is a subset of the aforementioned listed ISP
services. Furthermore, all of the services listed as being provi-
sioned by the wireless handset are also provided within the
structure of services listed as residing on the wireline Internet
platforms.
The services listed earlier in this section are accessible over
Web-enabled handsets. However, many of these handsets have
no graphics capability and only support text. These handsets do
224
Chapter 6

not support audio or video streaming at high-bandwidth rates.
This raises the following questions:
•
Does the wireless user want to have the same kind of
Internet services that he/she has on his/her wireline
Internet computer terminal, also on his/her mobile
handsets? This question is being answered in the
marketplace at this time.
•
Is m-commerce nothing more than mobile wireline 
e-commerce or is it something more or different?
Figure 6-16 illustrates the aforementioned questions.
MOBILITY AND M-COMMERCE
Rather than thinking about how to duplicate what the wireline
Internet provides now, the wireless industry should think about
how to further enhance the wireless carrier’s greatest asset:
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
225
•Wireless systems and wireline systems have 
different attributes.
•Wired e-commerce serves customers that are 
stationary.
•Wireless (mobile) e-commerce serves customers 
that are moving.
•A basic and inherent difference exists between
the customer segments. 
Mobile e-commerce does not have to look 
or act like wired e-commerce.
FIGURE 6-16
Does m-commerce need to look like wireline e-commerce?

mobility. The wireless industry raises the following questions
concerning mobility:
•
What kind of information does a mobile user want to see
on a moment’s notice?
•
How much time does a mobile user want to spend
punching in information one keystroke at a time?
•
How much useful and useable information can be
displayed on a small display?
•
Can the mobile user access the wireless Internet via
another kind of terminal device?
•
Does the mobile user really care about receiving local retail
sales notices like one receives news media pages on his/her
wireless devices? Local sales notices will be presented
based on the user’s location.
•
Does a mobile user buy a product over the Internet without
seeing a picture of it?
•
Is the mobile user willing to use his/her handset as the
principle means of accessing the Web?
•
Does the mobile user have any desire to trade stock over
the wireless Internet?
•
Because people like to keep a hard copy of transactions,
can the mobile user print his/her transactions on a printer?
Figure 6-17 depicts the need to focus on wireless’ strength.
It is a difficult sell to convince a current WWW surfer to
suddenly translate his/her Web surfing habits from a 19-inch
display screen into surfing on a display screen of one inch to 2.5
inches. In order for the wireless carriers to expand their
Internet opportunity, they must exploit wireless service’s great-
est attribute: mobility. In other words, rather than simply pro-
viding wireline services that can be used over a wireless
handset, the carriers ought to find a way to provide an Internet
service that is either dependent on or directly related to mobil-
ity. The next section will provide a brief explanation of this view.
226
Chapter 6

MOBILITY LOCATION INFORMATION: 
AN ASSET
Since 1994, the wireless industry has been working to deploy
location technology in order to meet a United States Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) mandate for cellular and
Personal Communications Service (PCS) carriers to implement
location technology for the purposes of determining the geo-
graphic location of  9-1-1 calls. The primary purpose of the
equipment is to support public safety; however, the location
technology can be used to support location-based services. Both
the mobile and Internet industries came upon the idea of using
geographic location information to enhance the value proposi-
tion of wireless Internet.
Geographic location is an information element that the net-
work can use to trigger an action within the network. This
thought process was the basis for intelligent networking in the
wireline telecommunications world. The wireless Internet can
also use location to act as a trigger for the network to perform a
specific action supporting a specific service. The following types
of services can use location information:
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
227
Serving 
Cell Site
Target 
Cell Site
MSC
M-Commerce must focus on wireless’ 
strength: the ability to move.
M-Commerce must focus on 
exploiting mobility.
Deploy an Internet service 
dependent on mobility.
People who are moving 
have expectations and 
needs that are different 
than those who are 
stationary.
FIGURE 6-17
Mobility: Asset and difference

Directed advertising
A wireless user drives or walks into
an area that has four shopping malls. The wireless provider
registers his/her presence in the area, but more importantly,
determines that the user is near a specific shopping mall.
The wireless provider then issues a wireless sales coupon to
the user over his/her Internet device for a store located in
one of the malls.
Enhanced concierge 4-1-1 service
A wireless caller
requests driving or walking directions to a specific location.
Traffic directions
A wireless user is instructed via his/her
Internet device on a route to avoid a traffic accident.
Figure 6-18 is an illustration of how location information
can be used to support the wireless Internet.
The previous list is a small sample of what wireless Internet
pundits are considering for deployment in the mobile Internet
space. Location information is a necessary element in order to
make any type of wireless call setup or data transaction. The
wireless network, including the wireless Internet, must know
228
Chapter 6
Serving 
Cell Site
Target Cell Site
Advertising and sales can be 
improved (and made more 
efficient) if one can direct 
these efforts to an individual 
at a specific time and 
location. 
•Concierge
•Traffic reports
•Weather reports
•Dispatch
•Others
FIGURE 6-18
Location information and the wireless Internet

where a person is in order to ensure that the call or datagram
arrives at the right location. The location technology being
deployed for public safety purposes provides the network with a
granularity of location information (and in a format) that it
never had access to before. The mobile Internet business space
has been seeking some way to differentiate itself from the wire-
line Internet to entice mobile users to buy Internet access from
the wireless provider. The mobile Internet community has come
to understand that they should exploit the biggest difference
between wireline and wireless user communities; one is mobile
and one is not. Location technology is the key to mining the
value out of the mobility attribute and ultimately creating value
for the wireless Internet.
SUMMARY
The obvious benefits of purchasing over the wireless handset
are:
•
No more waiting in check-out lines.
•
Real-time checking of product sales.
•
Shipping product to the home.
•
The handset is a highly transportable device.
M-commerce is still in its infancy. To many people, m-com-
merce is a boondoggle. To others, m-commerce is a positive
economic force. I believe that the m-commerce market will take
off when the carrier community changes the view of what a
mobile handset is. In other words, PDA-like devices have a
place in the world of m-commerce. Also, the display screen
should be bigger in order to display a larger breath of informa-
tion. However, the information displayed does not have to be an
exact replica of what is seen on the wireline Internet Web sites.
The fact is many of the Web sites today are so cluttered with
advertisements that viewing them is painful to the eye. A small
display screen may be an asset for the millions of users who find
E-Commerce and Mobile E-Commerce
229

banner advertising a major annoyance. Thinking out-of-the box
will be a necessity. M-commerce players must do what they can
do avoid trapping themselves within the operating paradigm of
the wireline Internet; a problem for one is not necessarily a
problem for the other industry segment. Figure 6-19 is a depic-
tion summarizing all of the issues surrounding m-commerce.
Finding the correct services will be a challenge in an envi-
ronment that is not necessarily giving the industry time to con-
duct proper research. The market research conducted today is
primarily empirical: gathering data while selling the service.
230
Chapter 6
•Small display screens
•Replicating the wired Internet
•Does the wired Internet have to be 
completely duplicated?
•Incompatible standards
•Identifying services
•Identifying markets
•Is the wireless Internet competing with 
the wired Internet?
•Can wired e-commerce co-exist with m-
commerce?
•Is there a synergy between wired e-
commerce and m-commerce?
FIGURE 6-19
M-commerce issues

C H A P T E R
7
CUSTOMER CARE,
BILLING, AND
REVENUE
ASSURANCE
C
ustomer care and billing are the least understood areas of
business in the Internet space. Both wireless and wireline
Internet communities have been rushing into the marketplace
with brand new services without a clear understanding of how
to handle customer complaint issues or how to bill the user.
This does not mean that customer care and billing are not
important. Customer care and billing are not “sexy” technology
issues to write or even talk about. Customer care and billing are
not the core services of the various Internet companies in the
marketplace. However, without customer care and billing sys-
tem processes in place, these Internet companies will go out of
business. As noted earlier in this book, the inability to execute
business plans has been as much, if not more to blame for Wall
Street’s wariness of the Internet than the lack of ideas. This
inability to properly execute extends to the lack of proper cus-
tomer care and billing systems. Figure 7-1 is a depiction of the
perceived role of customer care and billing.
Revenue assurance is new to the telecommunications
industry, having been aggressively introduced in the late 1980s.
No single revenue assurance process or platform exists. This
will be discussed later in this chapter.
231
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

CUSTOMER CARE: WHAT IS IT?
Customer care is simply what the title implies; it refers to every
aspect of caring for the customer’s questions and needs.
Customer care is a process that links the customer directly to
the core functions of the service provider. To properly under-
stand customer care, one should immediately stop thinking that
the customer understands, let alone even cares about how a
company’s technology or equipment platforms function. Much
of the hype in the investment community is about the technol-
ogy and the ability to turn intellectual property into a profitable
business opportunity. The problem with the various sales
pitches in Wall Street and elsewhere in the financial commu-
nity is about technology, not about what it takes to bring the
technology to life. In the case of service providers, the sales
pitch is about technology and how it can differentiate the
provider from other providers. However, these carriers fail to
realize that if one’s service looks like another carrier’s wireless
232
Chapter 7
24x7
Customers expect to be treated 
courteously.
The customer relationship can be 
shattered easily and quickly due 
to a misspoken word.
The customer pays the bills.
Customer care and billing 
systems are usually the 
last things considered by a 
provider.
FIGURE 7-1
Customer care and billing: Perceptions

technology, the user perceives it as being the same. This is the
same type of issue that PCS faced (unsuccessfully) when it was
compared to cellular. Everyone in the wireless community
talked about how different cellular and PCS technology were.
The tragedy was many investors wasted so much time trying to
understand that PCS was another wireless opportunity in
another frequency band that precious time was lost in properly
assessing the various PCS opportunities. Figure 7-2 highlights
the importance of focusing less on the idea and more on the
need to maintain the customer.
M-commerce and e-commerce have taken over the current
headlines. However, it is likely that the multitude of failures in
the areas of m-commerce and e-commerce will soon appear.
Some of the reasons why these commerce sites will fail include
a weak business plan and poor execution. However, the trade
press will not discuss the poor customer care and billing sys-
tems. This is not only because customer care and billing are
media “un-sexy,” but also because something so basic is embar-
rassingly overlooked.
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
233
Providing service is not about 
the best technology, it is about 
serving the customer.
The customer relationship must be 
priority one.
FIGURE 7-2
Focus on the customer

Customer care processes address the following issues and
questions:
•
Customer orders for service—The provisioning of service
for customers requires a structured framework to process
those orders.
•
Customer service order fulfillment process—A customer
must be able to easily place an order for services. The
harder it is for the customer to obtain what they want, the
easier it becomes for the customer to decide not to do
business with the service provider.
•
Customer complaint reception process—Who does the
customer call when a problem arises?
•
Customer complaint resolution process—How a complaint
is generally resolved must be clear to the customer at the
beginning of the customer’s call for new service or repair.
Customers must feel that they will not be shuffled off from
one menu to another or one person to another. This is
linked directly to repair services for the customer.
•
Methodology for addressing customer questions over the
customer bill for services.
Figure 7-3 illustrates the customer care process.
234
Chapter 7
•Customer order for service
•Service order fulfillment process
•Complaint desk
•Complaint/Trouble resolution 
process
•Billing Q&A
Know the customer.
Communicate constantly with 
the customer.
“Speak with” and “not to” the 
customer.
Respect the customer, because 
they pay one’s salary.
FIGURE 7-3
Customer care process

WHAT COMPRISES CUSTOMER CARE?
The aforementioned must be supported internally and exter-
nally. The external view is what the customer sees. The internal
view is what the customer cannot be allowed to see. The general
rule of thumb is that the customer really does not care about
“how one gets it done” just that “it is done.”
EXTERNAL VIEW
Customers want or expect a few basic things from a service
provider:
•
Questions answered quickly.
•
Questions answered with as few carrier/ISP employees as
possible.
•
Issues resolved in a timeframe that is perceived as
reasonable to the customer.
•
The customer must have a high level of confidence that
their questions will be professionally addressed. Therefore,
the customer care professional’s presentation is extremely
important.
Generally, customers do not want to hear any “lip service,”
“sass,” or “attitude” from the service provider. The customer
care employee/professional is the face of the ISP, ASP, or other
type of Internet company. Professionalism is a must in all
aspects of dealing with customers and is essential in all busi-
ness dealings. Figure 7-4 depicts customer expectations from
customer care.
As noted previously in this book, ISPs divide customer care
into the two following categories. The ISP maintains these
external functions as the face of his/her company.
•
Customer care/complaint
The ISP interacts with the
customer on the following matters: new service activation,
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
235

billing inquiries, billing complaints, access telephone
numbers, rating plans, and purchased feature capabilities.
•
Technical support
The ISP often maintains a separate
“hotline” for technical questions. These technical questions
can concern software installation, software troubles, access
telephone numbers, and almost any question that the ISP
cannot classify as a non-technical question. Often, the ISP
will request that all questions be submitted to him/her via
e-mail. This is not the most timely way of handling
customer complaints because it can take 24 hours to
respond to the customer.
The need for personal interaction cannot be overstated. A
technical aspect of customer care also exists. Customer care
systems are not single pieces of equipment, but are tightly cou-
pled with an array of other systems. These other systems are as
follows:
236
Chapter 7
•Answer questions quickly.
•Be professional and courteous.
•Tolerate the screaming customer.
•Customers do not like having to be passed on to 
other people; therefore, answer the question.
•Remember the customer satisfaction is Job One.
FIGURE 7-4
Customer expectations

•
Service order provisioning systems
Provisioning of new
service.
•
Accounts payable
Customer account status.
•
Accounts receivable
Customer account status.
•
Trouble ticket reporting systems
Customer reporting of
troubles. However, the system also reflects system troubles
that are not necessarily reported by customers, but instead
are reported by employees.
•
System recent change
Customer care professionals are
kept apprised of system changes and updates. In the event
a customer calls and wants to report a trouble, the
customer care professional may be able to explain that the
trouble is only a temporary situation due to system
changes.
•
Customer recent change
This system reflects customer
changes to his/her own service profile.
•
Customer service profile
This system reflects the
customer’s current service profile.
•
System flashes
The system flashes are a reporting tool of
activity within a provider’s core switching/system
infrastructure.
The aforementioned systems are integrated into a single
interface platform for the customer care professional. Figure 7-
5 is a rendering of the customer care systems. This platform
enables the customer professional to input information that
another organization must act on. For example, a customer calls
for a new function called “unlimited online time per month.”
This new function or service is a simple billing rate plan
change, which must be reflected in the customer service pro-
file, which in turn automatically generates a customer recent
change, and finally sends a message to accounting (payable and
receivable). All of these events are automated. The customer
will note that they spoke to a customer care professional, which
is all the customer should see.
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
237

INTERNAL VIEW
Different departments can operate the various systems that
comprise a customer system. However, these systems must ulti-
mately communicate relevant information to the customer care
professional in order to address any questions or concerns artic-
ulated by the customer. The internal operation of a service
provider will vary from provider to provider. The key point to
understand about customer care is that it must communicate
relevant information to the customer. The challenge for a ser-
vice provider is that internal firewalls must be constructed in
the respective systems in order to enable the responsible depart-
ment to act on the request for change or service without over-
whelming the customer care professional with information that
is not relevant to a customer.
For example, a customer reports a trouble. The customer
care professional opens a trouble ticket. The ticket is automat-
ically downloaded to the technicians (hardware or software) for
action. The technicians incorporate the information in their
tracking system. The tracking system will be populated with the
name of the personnel assigned to act on the ticket, the time
when the ticket was issued, the time when the ticket was
238
Chapter 7
Subscribers
Subscribers
Subscribers
Video 
Driver
OnLine 
Trading 
API
Traffic 
& 
Weather
Operational 
Support 
Systems
Customer Care
•Service Order Provisioning
•Accounts Payable
•Accounts Receivable
•Trouble Ticket
•Recent Change
•Service Profiles
•System Flashes/Alerts
Customer care systems must be integrated 
into all core and operational systems.
Switch/
Router
FIGURE 7-5
Customer care systems

closed, the name of the technical supervisor, and specific
actions taken by the technician to resolve the ticket. Half of the
information listed is not automatically listed by the customer
care professional’s system. The customer care professional
serves as the face of the company and as a means of controlling
information in and out of the company.
As noted previously, customer care systems are not single
pieces of equipment, but are tightly coupled with an array of
other systems. These other systems are as follows:
•
Service order provisioning systems
Provisioning of new
service. This system accepts customer orders for a new
service or modifications to the existing service. This system
is tied to a technical support desk that activates the new
service, whether it is a new screen name for an existing
account or a new account.
•
Accounts payable
Customer account status. This system
is tied directly to the accounting/billing department.
•
Accounts receivable
Customer account status. This
system is tied directly to the accounting/billing department.
•
Trouble ticket reporting systems
Customer reporting of
troubles. However, the system also reflects system troubles
that are not necessarily reported by customers, but instead
are reported by employees. A technical support desk is the
recipient of all customer complaints. This desk is then tied
to a group or organization that works to resolve the user’s
complaint.
•
System recent change
Customer care professionals are
kept apprised of system changes and updates. In the event
a customer calls and wants to report a trouble, the
customer care professional may be able to explain that the
trouble is only a temporary situation due to system
changes. Every department acting on either a trouble or a
modification to the software or hardware notes this activity
in the customer care system. An informed customer is a
happy customer.
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
239

•
Customer recent change 
This system reflects customer
changes to his/her own service profile. This system is tied
to the technical support desk and accounting/billing
departments. This is a line of data on the customer care
professional’s display screen reflecting changes regarding
the customer.
•
Customer service profile
This system reflects the
customer’s current service profile. It is tied directly to all
departments.
•
System flashes
The system flashes are reporting tools of
activity within a provider’s core switching/system
infrastructure. This system is tied normally to a technical
support desk or technical organization. Changes in the
system of any kind are reflected in the event that service to
the customer is affected. Once again, an informed
customer is a happy customer.
Figure 7-6 is a depiction of how these support systems are
integrated with one another.
240
Chapter 7
Switch/
Router
Subscribers
Subscribers
Video 
Driver
OnLine 
Trading 
API
Traffic 
& 
Weather
Customer Care
•Service Order Provisioning
•Accounts Payable
•Accounts Receivable
•Trouble Ticket
•Recent Change
•Service Profiles
•System Flashes/Alerts
Customer care systems must be integrated 
into all core and operational systems.
Customer care is typically integrated into 
a multitude of operational support 
systems.
Accounts 
Payable/Receivable
Service 
Profile
Other 
Support 
Systems
FIGURE 7-6
Support system integration

MOBILITY AND CUSTOMER CARE
Internal communications and operational effectiveness is
essential in order for the customer care process to work. The
new mobile Internet adds a new dimension to the care and
feeding of the customer. Mobile customers obtaining Internet
service today are restricted to obtaining it from their wireless
provider. However, at some point, the customer will be able to
obtain Internet access regardless of whether they are in his/her
home system or roaming. Roaming became essential to the
growth of wireless. In the mid-1980s, it became clear to the
wireless providers that without roaming, the user could not
travel out of his/her home system. Without the ability to roam,
the usefulness of wireless was dampened. The same will occur
in the wireless Internet.
The user will need to have his/her customer needs
addressed in a roaming system. It is easy for the wireless carrier
to rely heavily on its third party partners to help address ques-
tions and concerns. In all likelihood, the wireless carrier will be
branding the home Web pages and access/gateways/portals with
its name, whereas the actual content site will be provided by
some third party that will co-brand the content site with the
carrier. The point is that the wireless carrier can reduce its cus-
tomer care role in the wireless Internet by focusing only on its
primary access points/pages. Figure 7-7 illustrates this concept.
CUSTOMER CARE: CHALLENGE
Customer care is undergoing changes throughout the telecom-
munications industry. Much of customer care is outsourced to
third parties claiming to know the provider’s business. The cost
of customer care is driving ISPs to outsource. The bulk of the
cost for maintaining an internal and fully staffed customer care
department is in the people. The less one pays, the less talent
the ISP gets. In other words, “you get what you pay for.”
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
241

Outsourcing customer care has its advantages on the oper-
ational side. Typically, outsourced firms tend to serve a wide
breadth of customers (that is, ISPs) and therefore, have gained
a great deal of experience in dealing with a wide variety of cus-
tomer personalities and questions. This can only help the ISP.
The challenge is the automation of customer care. Figure 7-8 is
an illustration of customer care automation.
Many ISPs rely on both e-mail to the technical support desk
and menu-driven telephone call-in desks. The problem is that
as the complexity of communication increases, the more the
customer will want to speak with a person. In the Internet ser-
vice provisioning business environment, early adopters and
technical people will find using an automated system great, dif-
ferent, and even fun to use. However, the novelty is unseen with
most users and eventually, even the early adopters and techni-
cal people will find the novelty of an automated system tired
after one of their complaints has gone unresolved in a quick
fashion. Most ISPs have found that heavy e-mail users or Web
surfers have a tolerance for unresolved complaints within a few
242
Chapter 7
•Roaming
•Branding that crosses borders
•Easy Access
•Open Access
•Standard user interface and procedures
FIGURE 7-7
Wireless Internet: Mobility and customer care

hours. The customer care challenge is to maintain a cost effec-
tive and useful customer care center without losing sight of the
customer. In regard to customer care effectiveness, a direct cor-
relation exists between customer care and subscriber growth
and retention.
Customers do not do business with providers that do not
treat the customer with courtesy and respect. Often times a
poorly trained customer care representative will say all of the
wrong things, which angers the customer and results in the loss
of business. One should remember to place him/herself in the
shoes of the poorly served customer in order to understand the
needs of the customer.
The next section will deal with the issue of billing. Billing is
the next touch point related to customer care. This is the reason
for including customer and billing together in this chapter.
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
243
•Automating customer care removes the 
human interaction factor.
•Automation can be limited.
•Automation cannot replace the human 
customer care professional.
FIGURE 7-8
Customer care automation

BILLING
Billing is a generic term. However, billing as it is used by the
layperson is comprised of two activities: recording and bill ren-
dering. Recording concerns the recording of all call or transac-
tion details related to a user’s network usage. Bill rendering
involves the processing, rating, bill creation, rendering, and col-
lection of money associated with the network usage.
Recording of network usage data for the ISP would appear
relatively simple; however, a network time usage count is 
not that simple. ISPs must maintain an accurate record of the
following:
•
The user’s real name
•
Password
•
Logon name
•
Multiple logon names (if any)
•
Credit card account number
•
Date and time stamp—start and end
•
Service profile
Mistakes are made far more often than one can imagine.
Maintaining a correctly correlated record of usage and user pro-
file is an enormous undertaking. Creating a bill or invoice that
makes sense and is correct is also an enormous undertaking.
The collected information is used for corporate revenue report-
ing as well as customer bill creation. The information is also
used to support activities related to network usage leased from
other carriers. It is also used to support all revenue assurance
investigations. More discussion on revenue assurance will con-
tinue later. Figure 7-9 is a depiction of how call/activity detail
information is used.
The most common mistakes of customer billing are as 
follows:
244
Chapter 7

•
Incorrect rates—Unlimited monthly versus fixed time
monthly.
•
Incorrectly reported paid usage versus free usage—Some
ISPs make claims of “zero charges” for entering certain
Web sites. The question is, how many people actually check
the amount of time they are in the free usage site?
•
Incorrectly spelled names.
•
Incorrect addresses.
•
Incorrectly listed debits and credits.
Figure 7-10 is a rendering of common billing errors.
The previously  mentioned errors were so prevalent in the
earliest days of ISPs that they ended up moving to signature-on-
file accounts and flat rate accounts. In other words, the ISPs
charged the customer’s credit card directly as opposed to send-
ing him/her a bill. Signature-on-file accounts enable the ISP to
charge a credit card without ever having to send a customer a
detailed bill in which the ISP would have to explain every
charged item or event line item. Signature-on-file customers
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
245
Database
Billing databases gather and record a 
myriad of customer information and 
call related information.
•Corporate revenue reporting
•Financial analyses
•Future growth projections
•Revenue assurance
•Marketing studies
•Customer behavioral studies
FIGURE 7-9
Call/Activity detail information uses

simply pay the bill and do not ask questions; if the bill looks rea-
sonable, they pay it. Very few people do an item-by-item check
of their credit card bills. If it were not for signature-on-file
accounts and flat rate billing, Voice Over IP (VoIP) would pre-
sent numerous challenges for the ISP. Users have become
accustomed to detailed bills for voice.
BILLING COSTS
Customer billing is a necessary cost center. The activity does
not cause one to want to buy a service; rather, billing, if done
properly, brings the revenue into the service provider. The tra-
ditional costs of billing are:
•
Labor.
•
Computer processing—Involves identifying the type of
usage and assigning rates to the usage.
246
Chapter 7
•Incorrectly applied rates
•Incorrectly recorded 
billing services
•Incorrect spelling
•Incorrect names
•Incorrectly reported 
credits
•Incorrectly applied 
surcharges and taxes
FIGURE 7-10
Common billing errors

•
Product development—Rate plan creation and
maintenance.
•
Paper.
•
Bill format/presentation—Large amounts of time and
money are spent to create a suitable way of displaying
information that accurately communicates the billing
information without confusing the customer.
•
Cost of mailing.
•
System testing.
•
Collection process—The check or credit card transaction
must be processed.
•
Record storage.
Figure 7-11 is an illustration of the costs associated with
customer billing.
Costs are associated with all of those activities. Electronic
billing over the Web does not necessarily remove all of the
aforementioned obstacles. The cost components are the same,
but different in degrees of intensity/emphasis. With flat rate
plans and signature-on-file, the costs associated with electronic
billing are:
•
Labor.
•
Computer processing.
•
Product development—Rate plan creation and
maintenance.
•
Bill format/presentation.
•
System testing.
•
Collection process.
•
Record storage.
Customer billing is not simple, but is essential.
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
247

OPERATIONAL SUPPORT SYSTEM (OSS)
INTEGRATION
Integrating the functions of the various operational support
departments is a major task that cannot be trivialized. The lack
of “back-office” support has destroyed voice and data CLECs
(ISPs). The inability to monitor and manage the network has
left customers without service for hours. The inability to prop-
erly bill has resulted in revenue leakage for the ISP. The exist-
ing wireline and wireless carriers have spent years working to
master their own operational support systems (OSSs) with many
failures. In fact, many, if not all of the startup Internet compa-
nies, have neglected to address OSS because it is considered a
cost, not a profit generator. This is an improper and dangerous
view to hold. Hundreds of cases since 1998 have occurred
where ISPs were unaware of their own network failures and
248
Chapter 7
Cost of Billing
•Reading & Processing
•Labor
•Posting Charges
•Rendering Bills
•Cost of Mailing
•Record Storage
•System Testing
Billing Processes
FIGURE 7-11
Cost of billing

unaware of whether their customers were being properly billed.
In some cases, people had service even though the ISP billing
department noted that due to lack of payment (for a flat rate
service), all service had been discontinued. In other cases, ser-
vice would be disconnected due to non-payment of bills when
the accounts had not been properly credited. Part of this was
due to lack of the appropriate systems and in some instances,
the situation was due to a complete lack of communication
between OSSs.
Conceptually, OSSs are comprised of the following systems:
•
Network Management Systems (NMSs)
•
Service Management Systems—service provisioning
•
Customer care systems
•
Billing systems
Integration of these systems involves the creation of com-
mon platforms that enable the easy flow of information between
all of these systems. Customer care systems receive data from a
variety of support systems involved in the activation and main-
tenance of a customer account. Much of this information is
transmitted between systems via personnel who physically type
information into a variety of display screens to which multiple
departments have access. A fully integrated OSS enables the
automated flow of information from one system to another. In
such a case, a user would type information into a screen regard-
ing a specific customer order. The inputted information would
automatically be merged from the inputted system to all associ-
ated systems. Figure 7-12 depicts the nonintegrated and inte-
grated OSS.
Integrating the OSS would ensure a flow of information
throughout the ISP operation. It assumes total intersystem
interoperability. Communication between systems is seamless.
Figure 7-13 illustrates the concept of  integration. The transfer
of information at the presentation level appears seamless.
However, integrating OSSs is currently an arduous task.
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
249

250
Chapter 7
Customer Care
Accounts 
Payable/Receivable
Service 
Profile
Other 
Support 
Systems
Customer Care
Accounts 
Payable/Receivable
Service 
Profile
Other 
Support 
Systems
Without integration the flow of 
information between systems and 
interaction with the customer are 
drastically hindered.
Integration improves communication 
between departments and systems.  
Integrations speeds up provider 
response to customer queries.
Switch/
Router
OnLine 
Trading 
API
Traffic 
& 
Weather
Switch/
Router
OnLine 
Trading 
API
Traffic 
& 
Weather
FIGURE 7-12
The integrated and nonintegrated OSS
Customer Care
Accounts 
Payable/Receivable
Service 
Profile
Other 
Support 
Systems
Integration improves communication 
between departments and systems.  
Integrations speeds up provider 
response to customer queries.
Seamless communication between 
systems and departments is 
nearly impossible given the 
plethora of vendor operational 
support systems.
In reality, Customer Care 
integration is slowly being 
implemented throughout the 
industry.
Switch/
Router
OnLine 
Trading 
API
Traffic 
& 
Weather
FIGURE 7-13
Interoperability and Seamlessness

Different vendors manufactured most of the OSSs in place
today. No thought was given to ensuring intersystem communi-
cation.
A variety of mediation devices are in the marketplace today.
Mediation involves the provisioning of a network element that
communicates to all of the back-office systems. In a sense, the
mediation device is an interoperability device or gateway com-
municating to multiple systems. Mediation is a step toward
integration. It supports the following:
•
Intersystem communication
Mediation systems facilitate
communication of information between different
operational support systems.
•
Single point of control and system access
A mediation
system supports a single point of control and access to all
interconnected support systems.
•
Facilitates human interface to the systems
A good
mediation system is user friendly.
•
Information availability between support systems
A
mediation system not only receives information, but it
communicates information to the interconnected OSSs.
•
Measures individual system metrics
A mediation device
monitors system health and measures system performance.
•
Operational information analysis
Because a mediation
system measures and records operating data, it serves as an
ideal analysis tool.
Figure 7-14 is an illustration of the mediation concept.
Mediation is not integration; it is an interim step toward inte-
gration. Integration involves the use of single platforms and sin-
gle programming languages. Mediation enables existing systems
(legacy systems) to continue operating without change.
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
251

REVENUE ASSURANCE
Revenue assurance is a company-wide process in which every
process is reviewed for effectiveness. Revenue assurance is an
art in which a provider is seeking to maximize revenues via
effective management practices that affect the entire revenue
process. The revenue process includes the following activities:
•
Marketing strategies
•
Sales strategies
•
Customer care
•
Provisioning
•
Accounts payable
•
Accounts receivable
•
Network planning
•
Network operations
252
Chapter 7
Mediation
Accounts 
Payable/Receivable
Service 
Profile
Other 
Support 
Systems
Customer 
Care
•Mediation serves as an interim 
step toward a fully integrated 
OSS approach.
•Mediation devices can meter 
system performance information.
Switch/
Router
OnLine 
Trading 
API
Traffic 
& 
Weather
FIGURE 7-14
Mediation

Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
253
Strategy
Planning
Operations
Finance
Accounting
•Marketing Strategies
•Sales Strategies
•Customer Care
•Provisioning
•Accounts Payable
•Accounts Receivable
•Network Planning
•Business Planning
•Network Operations
The Heart 
of the 
Business
Impacts the 
entire business
FIGURE 7-15
Revenue assurance
Revenue assurance is focused on protecting the revenue
stream by ensuring that money (revenue) is not spent waste-
fully on inefficient processes. Revenue assurance is customer
centric. Without customers, no revenue exists. Figure 7-15
illustrates the revenue assurance flow.
Each and every one of the aforementioned areas can cause
revenue leakage throughout the company. Internal auditors
focused on operations efficiency examine the operating proce-
dures of each department and make the appropriate recom-
mendations to improve departmental operations. Revenue
leakage is not just about operations efficiency. Revenue assur-
ance is different for different providers. Some providers 
will focus on different ways of plugging revenue leakage. Fig-
ure 7-16 is a rendering of how revenue assurance can affect a
company.

Revenue assurance is a process that can result in the 
following:
•
Changes in billing systems to ensure data integrity.
•
Redefining the billing for a product.
•
More cost efficient ways of delivering the service.
•
Better ways of validating transactions.
•
More efficient and faster credit worthiness checks of the
users.
•
Revenue reports for a service can result in identifying new
potential target markets, which can result in new marketing
strategies.
254
Chapter 7
•Improved financials
•Improved revenue collection
•New marketing strategies
•New sales strategies
•Identify operational problems
•Improved customer care
•Improved external 
communications
•Improved emergency response
•Improved overall efficiency
FIGURE 7-16
The effects of revenue assurance

•
New marketing strategies can result in re-examining
current business relationships with other companies.
•
Customer care problems may be identified.
•
Service provisioning may be identified as a trouble. Service
orders may be processed incorrectly resulting in customers
not receiving the correct service. One example is the
individual who expects a monthly flat rate rather than
hourly usage-based service. Another example could involve
incorrectly restricting a screen name. Another example
could involve misidentifying access to a free site as a paid
site.
•
Sales departments can have Web pages redesigned to better
communicate the product message.
•
Web site access can be improved to enable faster access.
REVENUE ASSURANCE AND FRAUD
Revenue assurance is often associated with fraud prevention.
Whole departments have been established to combat customer
fraud. Fraud can take on many forms. It is a broad term 
to define illegally obtained service. Fraud can encompass the
following:
•
False credit card numbers.
•
False customer identities.
•
Rotating customer accounts—Fraudulent users may rotate
through a variety of stolen credit card numbers in order to
hack into Web sites for the sole purpose of stealing
products online.
•
Hacking.
•
Identity theft.
•
Simply taking advantage of every operational hole a
customer can find in the ISP’s network.
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
255

Fraud is not a trivial matter. In the early days of cellular, it
had been estimated that hundreds of millions in dollars of rev-
enue were lost each year to fraud. The fraud had been so severe
that many cellular carriers could not even estimate how much
revenue was lost. Even the wireline voice telephone network
still encounters fraudulent users. The fraud situation in the
world of the wireline Internet is also quite severe. The wireline
Internet has encountered all of these situations just mentioned.
One cannot deny the fraud in the Internet industry. In many
areas of the country and many other countries, it is a crime to
hack.
The Internet crime has become synonymous with “white
collar crime.” Fraud is a “white collar crime.” The use of signa-
ture-on-file accounts has made it easier for individuals to com-
mit Internet fraud. The credit card number can be checked
quickly; however, an Internet criminal only needs a couple of
hours to commit millions of dollars of theft before a stolen
credit card is reported.
Revenue assurance is a thought process that should be inte-
grated throughout the provider’s business processes. Figure 
7-17 stresses the role of revenue assurance.
SUMMARY
The Internet industry rapidly understands the need to focus on
the customer. Some Internet companies have recently discov-
ered what bad publicity can do when the public feels it has been
misled or lied to. The customer is a king or queen. The cus-
tomer pays the bills and ultimately pays the salaries of the
provider. Processes are needed to not only check the way in
which a company does business, but also the way in which a
company does not do business. A provider cannot outright
accuse a customer of misdeeds. However, an unofficial and
unspoken understanding exists between provider and customer
256
Chapter 7

that gives the provider the right to check a customer’s credit
worthiness. Customer care, billing, and revenue assurance are
multifaceted internal and external processes that are focused on
the provider-customer relationship.
Whether Internet access is wireline or wireless, the basics of
doing business with a customer are the same. The unglamorous
world of customer care and billing are essential components of
the glamorous world of the Internet. At the end of the day, the
Internet is like any other business, and the mechanisms used to
manage the business are the same.
The next chapter will summarize the positions taken in the
book and take a closer look at the evolution of the Internet.
Customer Care, Billing, and Revenue Assurance
257
•Improved financials
•Improved revenue collection
•New marketing strategies
•New sales strategies
•Identify operational problems
•Improved customer care
•Improved external 
communications
•Improved emergency response
•Improved overall efficiency
Revenue assurance is a thought 
process.
Revenue assurance affects every 
aspect of a company’s operations.
Revenue assurance is both 
internally and externally focused.
Many service providers will view 
differently from one another.
FIGURE 7-17
The role of revenue assurance

This page intentionally left blank.

C H A P T E R
8
THE INTERNET
BUSINESS MODEL:
THE FUTURE AND ITS
ECONOMICS
T
he Internet is not a product or a service. The Internet is a
different thing to different people. It is a medium for
change in the telecommunications industry. The Internet is
transforming the telecommunications industry into an open
information medium.
CONVERGENCE AND THE OPEN PIPE
The Internet is the embodiment of convergence. It is an open
pipe of information that enables access to and from anyone 
who uses a computer or other terminal device. No single tech-
nological breakthrough in the last 20 years has caused such
excitement in the computing and telecommunications indus-
tries. However, the Internet is under attack because of those
individuals who misuse the medium for nefarious schemes and
acts resulting in personal, emotional, and physical assaults. The
Internet did not cause the problems per se, but it provided the
avenues to fuel the resultant actions. One can find out how 
to make a bomb, design a gun, spread hate messages, torture,
and even kill. The Internet was meant to enhance, not hurt
259
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

communications. Due to these abuses, governments around 
the world are seeking ways of controlling the Internet and its
contents.
Government control of this resource as advocated by
numerous lobbying groups can be destructive to the growth of
the Internet. A balance must be maintained that allows for the
creativity of the business and technical communities, which
cause the Internet to grow in capability and market penetration.
Too much control can be stifling, but not enough control can be
just as detrimental.
The Internet is an issue for society. As cliché as it may
sound, this man-made creation has permeated all aspects of
society and all nations within a few short years. This book is not
about morality. It does not purport to know all or proclaim to
even know a great deal about what is morally correct for society.
However, it is understood that the Internet has been used to
hurt and illegally profit. Groups across the globe are working to
find ways of securing the safety of children via restricted access
methods. Groups that spread hate messages are being forced
into bankruptcy by court actions in the hope of stopping the
spread of hate messages. Consumer advocacy groups now surf
the Web for scams that bilk the elderly and others out of a life-
time of savings. Individuals set up their Web sites to spread the
word about something bad or something good. These individu-
als are creating public dialogue on a variety of issues.
The Internet possesses both positive and negative attributes.
A typical engineer’s point of view would be, “The people are the
ones to blame, not the technology.”
Internet professionals need to stand up and take charge of
how the Internet is used. If the various nefarious and criminal
users of the Internet are allowed to continue unmonitored, the
government will step in and heavily regulate the medium. As it
stands now, a great deal of activity is present to regulate the
Internet via government legislation. However, many of the gov-
ernment measures can be easily bypassed. The “open” attribute
of the Internet makes it difficult to stop people from launching
negative Web sites. The only way to control the content of the
Internet is to prohibit individuals from participating in the
260
Chapter 8

delivery of Internet content. In short, make it illegal for non-
government certified providers to provide any kind of content or
Internet access. This step would be an extreme measure that
can be avoided if the industry takes control of the matter at
hand with self-regulation.
The industry is at the cusp of explosive growth.  If the indus-
try does not take matters into its own hands, the commercial
growth that experts expect will not occur.  The Internet grew,
partly, because it was not regulated.  If the government heavily
regulates the operation of the Internet, then we may see
investors abandoning the market faster than they are doing so
already.  The result could be limited industry growth.
Any Internet provider providing voice service should be held
accountable to the same standards that the existing wireline
carriers are held to. Figure 8-1 is an illustration of the Internet
and its impact on society.
THE PUBLIC RIGHT
In the wireline telephony world, voice service is perceived as a
public right. The state and federal regulatory agencies, and even
the customer hold this view. This dates back to the wireline
telephony days in which the telephone was the principal means
for all people to communicate over distances. Government reg-
ulations in Canada and the United States regulate a wireline
telephony environment in which the local telephone company
is held accountable and in some instances, criminally liable for
communication failures that result in injury or death.
In the early 1970s, a large United States city on the East
Coast suffered communication problems so severe that many
people could not get a dial tone. One year, a fire occurred that
resulted in loss of service for tens of thousands of subscribers.
This resulted in several hospitalizations, government investiga-
tions, threats of criminal prosecution, and eventually the dis-
missal of several telephone company executives. In the end, the
industry discovered to their happiness and dismay that the tele-
phone was now perceived to be a public right. This 1970-ish
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
261

service disaster resulted in a public outcry that reshaped the
thinking of the entire telephony community. Forty years ago,
one could find people who could remember when the world did
not have the telephone. No one alive today can say that they
lived in a world where a telephone did not exist. The Internet
will become a common way of communicating like the tele-
phone. The Internet notwithstanding will be held to the same
unofficial standard (customer perception) or expectation if it
becomes the primary medium for voice. The motto for voice
service provisioning companies ought to be “service, service,
service.”
The voice is the most basic form of telecommunications 
service. If an ISP decides to provide voice as one of its anchor
products, it must be prepared to deal with the public per-
ception set by the wireline telephony world. E-commerce and
m-commerce will not save any ISP from bankruptcy if the voice
262
Chapter 8
The Internet is a medium for convergence and creation.
FIGURE 8-1
The Internet—Society and convergence

service is mishandled so badly that the user believes the
provider is incompetent in the provisioning of voice.
ISPs wishing to provide voice as part of their service offer-
ings will need to meet federal and state regulatory commit-
ments. Once voice becomes part of the ISPs' service offering,
the government agencies will demand that the ISP be classified
a CLEC. Some regulation will be required if the public expects
quality and protected treatment. Each state regulatory agency
should be able to provide safety for children surfing the Web.
Today, state regulatory agencies ensure fairly priced, quality ser-
vice for the subscriber. The wireline and wireless carriers must
support a number of federal commitments. The Internet is a
medium that deserves some kind of regulation, but definitely
not the same kind of federal and state regulation to which the
wireline telephone companies are subject.
However, an aspect of the Internet exists that the voice-only
world does not have to deal with. This aspect is already being
dealt with by the legislation: protecting children. Unlike the
telephone or wireless handset, the Internet has become a way
for the criminal to lure and emotionally abuse children. In some
cases, the evilness has gone as far as pornography involving
children. Regulation has already begun with laws being passed
to protect children.
Given all of the negative publicity the Internet has received,
as evidenced by a number of horrible and unfortunate incidents
resulting in the shooting deaths of children and adults, one
should expect some form of regulation of the industry. Some of
the steps taken by the industry to self-regulate have resulted in
the following:
•
Restricted access by children, which can be done by
assigning restrictions based on screen name.
•
Self-monitoring ISPs—ISPs that monitor the types of sites
being accessed by users. This is done at the request of
parents.
•
ISPs refusing to display Web pages of undesirable Web
sites.
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
263

In the United States, a carrier must comply with other com-
mitments in order to be a wireline or wireless carrier. These
commitments are laws that were passed outside of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, but still carry the same/equal
weight of legal obligation as the Act of 1996. These acts include
Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act (CALEA)
signed into law in 1994, FCC rules for Ensuring Wireless
Carrier Compatibility with Enhanced 9-1-1 Emergency Calling
Systems (FCC Docket No. 94-102), and the Universal Service
Fund. The CALEA law and the FCC rules on wireless carrier
location for 9-1-1 are requirements for all carriers entering the
marketplace. The Universal Service Fund as redefined by the
Act of 1996 has the potential of having the most far-reaching
impact at every income level in the Untied States.
COMMUNICATIONS ASSISTANCE FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT ACT
(CALEA)
In October 1994, Congress passed and the President signed the
CALEA. The law was designed to position law enforcement to
better respond to the rapid advances in telecommunications
technology. The law was also designed to eliminate obstacles
faced by law enforcement agencies in conducting electronic
surveillance. Electronic surveillance is defined as “both the
interception of communications content (wiretapping) and the
acquisition of call-identifying information (dialed-number
information) through the use of pen register devices, traps, and
traces.” The rapid advancement of communications technology,
the growth of new types of services, and the increase in the
number of carriers has complicated the work of law enforce-
ment to the extent that surveillance is hampered.
Since 1970, U.S. telecommunications carriers have been
required to cooperate with law enforcement personnel in con-
ducting electronic surveillance. CALEA took this one step fur-
ther requiring telecommunications carriers to modify and
design their switching systems and other support equipment,
facilities, and services to ensure that authorized electronic sur-
veillance can be performed.
264
Chapter 8

The CALEA law affects wireline, cellular, and PCS carriers.
The question now is, how will the Internet be affected, espe-
cially in the mobile market?
CALEA requires telecommunications carriers to ensure that
their equipment, facilities, and services will meet four func-
tional, or assistance capability, requirements that enable law
enforcement to conduct authorized electronic surveillance.
These requirements are as follows:
•
Carriers must be capable of expeditiously isolating and
enabling the government to intercept all wire and
electronic communications within that carrier’s network to
or from a specific subscriber of such a carrier.
•
Carriers must be capable of rapidly isolating and enabling
the government to access call-identifying information that
is reasonably available to the carrier, except to the extent
that the telephone number alone may determine the
location.
•
Carriers must be capable of delivering intercepted
communications and call-identifying information to a
location specified by the government, other than the
premises of the carrier.
•
Carriers must be capable of conducting interceptions and
providing access to call-identifying information
unobtrusively. Furthermore, telecommunications carriers
are required to protect the privacy and security of
communications and call-identifying information not
authorized to be intercepted, as well as information
concerning the government’s interception of the content of
communications and access to call-identifying information.
WIRELESS 9-1-1
The FCC rules for wireless telecommunications calling party
location in support of 9-1-1 emergency calls were passed in
1994 and reaffirmed in 1996 and 1999. The FCC rules on wire-
less 9-1-1 require wireless carriers to provide the location of the
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
265

party calling for help in a two-stage process. Stage 1, known as
Phase 1, requires the wireless carrier to provide the calling
party’s telephone number, cell site, and sector location (the cell
site and sector from which the emergency call is being made).
Phase 2 requires the wireless carrier to provide the latitude and
longitude of the calling party upon initiation of a 9-1-1 call.
Issues regarding liability and cost recovery (for the installation
and operation of these systems) have been continuing for a
number of years. The deadline to comply with the FCC’s rules
is October 1, 2001.
This mandate is not going to change whether or not the
wireless carrier is providing Internet access. The wireless carri-
ers understand their responsibility in this area.
UNIVERSAL SERVICE FUND (USF)
The Universal Service Fund (USF) was established under the
direction of the FCC in support of the Telecommunications Act
of 1996. The Act redefined the universal service policy as it had
been defined by the Communications Act of 1934, the forebear
of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. The Act of 1934 had
created the FCC and noted the following:
The purpose of the Act of 1934 was “ . . . to make available,
so far as possible, to all the people of the United States, with-
out discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, or sex, a rapid, efficient, Nation-wide, and world-wide
wire and radio communication service with adequate facilities
at reasonable charges, for the purpose of the national defense,
for the purpose of promoting safety of life and property through
the use of wire and radio communication, and for the purpose
of securing a more effective execution of this policy by central-
izing authority heretofore granted by law to several agencies and
by granting additional authority with respect to interstate and
foreign commerce in wire and radio communication, there is
266
Chapter 8

hereby created a commission to be known as the ‘Federal
Communications Commission,’ . . . .”
The Act of 1934 defined universal service as consisting of
the following principles, as quoted in the Act of 1934:
“ . . . and the Commission shall base policies for the
preservation and advancement of universal service on
the following principles:
(1) QUALITY AND RATES
Quality services should be
available at just, reasonable, and affordable rates.
(2) ACCESS
TO
ADVANCED
SERVICES
Access to
advanced telecommunications and information ser-
vices should be provided in all regions of the Nation.
(3) ACCESS
IN
RURAL
AND
HIGH
COST
AREAS
Consumers in all regions of the Nation, including
low-income consumers and those in rural, insular,
and high cost areas, should have access to telecom-
munications and information services, including
interexchange services and advanced telecommunica-
tions and information services, that are reasonably
comparable to those services provided in urban areas
and that are available at rates that are reasonably
comparable to rates charged for similar services in
urban areas.
(4) EQUITABLE AND NONDISCRIMINATORY CONTRIBU-
TIONS
All providers of telecommunications services
should make an equitable and nondiscriminatory con-
tribution to the preservation and advancement of uni-
versal service.
(5) SPECIFIC AND PREDICTABLE SUPPORT MECHANISMS
There should be specific, predictable and sufficient
Federal and State mechanisms to preserve and
advance universal service.
(6) ACCESS TO ADVANCED TELECOMMUNICATIONS SER-
VICES
FOR
SCHOOLS, HEALTH
CARE, AND
LIBRARIES
Elementary and secondary schools and classrooms,
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
267

health care providers, and libraries should have
access to advanced telecommunications services as
described in subsection (h).
(7) ADDITIONAL PRINCIPLES
Such other principles
as the Joint Board and the Commission determine are
necessary and appropriate for the protection of the
public interest, convenience, and necessity and are
consistent with this Act.”
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 redefined the concept
of universal service and expanded it to include access to
advance telecommunications services and all kinds of informa-
tion services. All regions and income levels of the United States
are required to be included. Regardless of the economic level of
the region, every person, child, school, health care facility, and
library shall be provided the same level and type of telecommu-
nication and information service provided in areas that have the
economic infrastructure to support the most advanced infor-
mation services.
In order to support this government initiative, a fund was
established by the FCC and administered by the National
Exchange Carrier Association (NECA) to pay for the installation
of computers in classrooms and subsidize carriers in low-
income rural or urban areas to enhance the telecommunica-
tions infrastructure. This fund is paid by all wireline LECs.
Some individuals call it a “government entitlement;” however,
this is not an entitlement program. This fund is a necessity to
ensure the education of the nation’s young and the economic
viability of the nation itself. Payments into the fund are based
on a fixed formula that requires every carrier to pay a portion of
its gross revenue into the fund.
The Internet has the potential of becoming bigger than the
existing wireline and wireless voice-only network services. The
Internet carrier may have to step up “to the bar” and acknowl-
edge some level of responsibility to serving the public well by
paying into the USF. However, the mechanism that one would
use to measure the Internet carriers does not exist.
268
Chapter 8

THE PUBLIC AND REGULATION
This section of the chapter is not meant to cause a movement
toward regulation. Rather, it is meant to educate those Internet
players entering the market. The minute the ISP enters the
marketplace, he/she has an implied responsibility to the public.
This is how existing non-Internet carriers run their businesses.
These carriers understand that they possess some level of oblig-
ation to the public and whether right or wrong, the customer
perceives it as his/her right. For those people who have lived
through service disasters, it is clearly understood that this per-
ception dominates all thought and action the minute a taxpayer
says the loss of service has resulted in a loss of business 
or resulted in injury. The next thing the service provider hears is
requests for public explanations in front of a variety of govern-
ment committees.
THE INTERNET BUSINESS MODEL
As noted in Chapter 2, “Business Models,” the Internet can be
classified into two broad categories: access and ISP. The cate-
gories are meant to help filter out the noise of Wall Street’s hype
about the uniqueness of the various Internet plays.
The Internet Service Provider (ISP) is the company that pro-
vides the service directly to the user/subscriber. The ISP can be
further broken down into sub-categories of ISP types. ISPs pro-
vide e-mail, Web surfing, limited file storage, and chat rooms.
Access is a capability that lies at the heart of the Internet
business. This access capability is what makes the Internet a
valuable tool. Information can be obtained on almost any topic.
Much of the database access that is being touted in the trade
journals has been focused on commerce, specifically e-com-
merce and mobile e-commerce. Doing business across the
Internet has proven to be a primary driver of the Internet’s
growth.
Figure 8-2 is a rendering of the two basic categories of
Internet companies.
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
269

E-commerce and mobile e-commerce are activities/applica-
tions that make use of the Internet’s natural and inherent dis-
tribution network, that is, access. Wired and wireless
e-commerce has given birth to a number of different business
relationships over the Internet:
•
Business-to-Business (B2B)
•
Business-to-Consumer (B2C)
•
Business-to-Government (B2G)
•
Exchange-to-Exchange (X2X)
•
Taxpayer-to-Government (T2G)
Figure 8-3 is a rendering of the business relationships.
E-commerce and mobile e-commerce have changed the way
people shop.
270
Chapter 8
Internet
The Internet connects people.
Everyone can access one 
another.
FIGURE 8-2
The ISP and access provider

INTERNET RETAILERS VERSUS BRICK AND MORTAR RETAILERS
Despite the rash of Internet shopping that takes place, a brick
and mortar store has distinct advantages over an Internet Web
store:
•
Physical locations can be passed on the way to work and on
the way home from work. One can stop quickly and shop.
•
Established brick and mortar retail chains spend billions of
dollars on inventory. Internet sites do not. Suppliers tend to
listen to the people who spend the most money. Therefore,
when supplies are low, the supplier will supply the big
spenders first.
•
Existing brick and mortar retailers have huge warehouses to
store the billions of dollars of inventory it just purchased.
The Internet sites have to build these warehouses, which
means higher operating costs for storing inventory.
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
271
Office 
supplies
Demand
Businesses supply one another.
Consumers
Exchanges
Government
Taxpayers
Autoparts
Airplanes
FIGURE 8-3
Business relationships

•
Brick and mortar stores have a brand presence, whereas
Internet sites do not.
•
Brick and mortar stores have a human presence, whereas
Internet sites do not.
•
People like to feel and touch the product.
•
Very few people like to wait days for a product to arrive by
mail. However, if the Internet site can ease the burden of
the act of looking through half a dozen stores to find the
right product, why not shop the Internet?
None of this information should give the reader the impres-
sion that the brick and mortar store has won the war over the
consumer. The Internet shopping sites have advantages over the
brick and mortar stores:
•
Labor costs are less because salespeople do not have to be
paid.
•
Lower training costs involved for salespeople.
•
No building maintenance costs.
•
Advertising costs are lower than the brick stores.
•
Product returns are easier.
•
One can find lower prices on the Internet for the same
product.
•
Now it has gone wireless (mobile).
Figure 8-4 illustrates the relationship between the Internet
retailer and the brick and mortar store.
The Internet has created an opportunity for the consumer
and the telecommunications professional. As of mid-2000, four
communities of Internet vendors are available: the ASP, the
ERP provider, the CRM provider, and the content provider.
These vendor groups are part suppliers to ISPs and part
providers to the end user.
272
Chapter 8

APPLICATION SERVICE PROVIDER (ASP)
The Internet industry has even given birth to a new type of ven-
dor: the application service provider (ASP). The ASP is a com-
pany that writes software that is used on a carrier’s network.
ASPs have always existed in the telecommunications industry,
but they had been hardware vendors until the birth of the
Internet.
The ASP in the Internet world writes not only the enabling
software, but also provides in some manner content or some
type of content-related service. ASPs today are serving as gate-
ways to customer bases. Most of the ASPs claim to have direct
access to huge pools of customers either directly or through
their own service partners. The services are provided using ASP
specific software tools. Another way of describing the ASPs is
that they host delivery of content to carriers. The following list
includes examples of services that the ADP may provide:
•
Internet directory access
•
Video and audio content
•
Internet radio
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
273
Advantages Over the Brick -n- Mortar Store
•Lower labor costs
•Minimal training costs
•Lower advertising costs
•Product returns are easier (in most cases)
The Internet has broadened the marketplace for the retailer.
The Internet has made buying easier: You can do it from 
home.
FIGURE 8-4
The Web versus the brick

•
Polling
•
Games
•
Stock exchange monitoring
•
Online purchasing
•
Online stock trading
•
Weather
•
Traffic reports
•
Local advertising
The ASP is a value-added vendor for the carriers, such as
the Internet carrier or the voice carrier. In a strong sense, the
ASP is also an access provider. The ASP provides access to cus-
tomers for the carrier. One issue exists with the ASP; it is a sin-
gle application-approach provider. Figure 8-5 is an illustration
of the ASP and its role in the Internet.
274
Chapter 8
•Internet directory
•Video
•Audio
•Music
•Games
•Financial News
•Online Trading
•Weather
•Traffic
•Advertising
•Event News
Hosting Delivery of Content
FIGURE 8-5
The application service provider (ASP)

THE ENTERPRISE RESOURCE PLANNING (ERP) PROVIDER
A new type of Internet player is helping to shape the informa-
tion landscape: the Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
provider. The ERP provider is the ASP plus. The ASP provides
a solution to a specific service or set of services, whereas the
ERP is a platform that provides operations support, services,
and service specific access gateways (portals) for the ISP (wired
and wireless). ERP platforms are integrated information sys-
tems that can serve all departments or multiple departments
within an enterprise (business).
The ERP is a new business segment within the Internet
community, but they are a little bit of everything that manage
the resources of the client company or ISP. Some ERPs provide
software solutions, services, billing services, data warehousing,
operations management, Web site hosting, and portal manage-
ment. Unlike the ASPs, the ERPs have a relationship that is
theoretically closer to the wireline and wireless carriers. The
ERPs are much like the service bureau and wholesaler in the
non-Internet telecommunications environment. However, in
the case of ERP, software and hardware integration are compo-
nents of the business.
The ERP concept arose out of the manufacturing industry
where software platforms were used to integrate activities such
as accounts receivable, accounts payable, manufacturing
processes, order entry, general ledger, purchasing, logistics, and
inventory control.
Integration is what sets ERP apart from the old-style service
bureau model. An ERP provider is a network within a network.
The components of the ERP provider can serve as the main
switching and processing elements, and support mechanisms
within the carrier’s infrastructure. Inside a carrier’s business,
ERP would support finance, human resources, project man-
agement, customer service management, and workflow man-
agement. ERP would also support gateway management for the
Internet carrier. An Internet gateway functions like a tandem
(in the voice wireline world) or a doorway to other networks; it
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
275

is essentially a traffic control point to different networks. An
Internet gateway would manage the information flow/relation-
ship to radically different types of networks. Gateways serve as
secure traffic points.
Figure 8-6 is a rendering of an ERP.
The ERP is another twist to the Internet and if one took a
closer look at the business relationship, he/she would see that
the ERP relationship has existed for many years in the non-
Internet world. The ERP and the ASP prove that existing
knowledge and experience can be transferred to the Internet
medium. Figure 8-7 is another rendering of the ERP model in
the Internet business.
CUSTOMER-RELATIONSHIP MANAGEMENT (CRM)
As of this writing, this is a new addition to the Internet business
forms. Customer-Relationship Management (CRM) is out-
sourced customer interfacing/customer care. This is a specific
area of business opportunities for experienced customer care
276
Chapter 8
Managing resources of client companies
FIGURE 8-6
The enterprise resource provider (ERP)

people who are looking to transfer their body of knowledge into
the Internet arena. The complexity of the customer-to-business
relationship has increased due to the Internet. The relationship
between the customer and the provider has become more com-
plex due to the following factors:
•
The Internet has raised expectations for customers who
shop over the Internet. Internet shopping is now
synonymous with a low-cost product; get what you want
and get it right away. In other words, those who shop over
the Internet believe that they can find product quickly,
product of superior quality, and product at substantially
lower prices.
•
Compressed marketing windows—The customer’s attention
span has decreased due to the immediate nature of the
Internet. So many companies use the Internet to advertise
that Web surfing has extended into the area of shopping as
well.
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
277
ERP in the Internet can involve:
•Managing Web sites
•Managing databases
•Managing network equipment
FIGURE 8-7
The ERP in the Internet

•
Higher marketing costs—The Web does not necessarily
lower advertising costs. The need to get the attention of the
customer requires companies to spend money on
advertising agencies in order to figure out better ways of
reaching the consumer. Some of the Internet shopping sites
have responded with marketing “pitches” touting that they
are more responsive and friendlier.
•
The Web has responded with the customers’ need for
product. The Internet is filled with hundreds of companies
that sell a wide variety of products. Therefore, the
environment has become more competitive for sellers.
The CRM is a software-based approach to customer care.
The thinking behind CRM is optimizing responsiveness to the
customer.
As the reader will recall, customer care is simply what the
title implies; it refers to every aspect of caring for the customer’s
questions and needs. Customer care is a process that links the
customer directly to the core functions of the service provider.
In the case of the Internet, software platforms have been devel-
oped to fully automate customer care. In the case of a CRM,
the customer fills out his/her own trouble ticket. This particu-
lar aspect of CRM does not seem capable of lasting this long.
This is taking the concept of the Extranet too far. Customers
want to be catered to, not given more work to do. Creating one’s
own trouble ticket has its benefit. For instance, the MIS pro-
fessional may find this a quick way of filing a trouble ticket
rather than waiting for several minutes to speak with someone.
The amount of time spent resolving a trouble over the phone
could have been handled more efficiently by sending in the
trouble ticket oneself. Extranets are a way for companies to pro-
vide a window into their operations and customer support desks
from the outside without penetrating any critical areas of the
company’s operations. Firewalls serve as protective barriers
between the company and the consumer.
The problem with a fully automated system is that con-
sumers who are frustrated due to a problem with service want
278
Chapter 8

to scream at a person. The upside of a fully automated system
is that one does not have to pay or train people to address cus-
tomer questions and concerns.
The CRM is analogous to the voice driven menu used by
telephone companies for customer complaints. Except in the
case of the CRM, the complaint is filed over the Internet into
the company’s Extranet.
Figure 8-8 is a rendering of the CRM.
THE NETWORK SERVICE PROVIDER
The Network Service Provider (NSP)is a new term to describe
an old concept/existing type of telecommunications player. A
NSP provides backbone services to an ISP. The NSP provides
an ISP with network connectivity either between the ISP’s
points of presence or to other ISPs.
Many concepts used within the ISP or Internet realm are re-
packaged, non-Internet telecommunications ideas. Much of the
knowledge and the experience within the non-Internet worlds is
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
279
Automated customer care
FIGURE 8-8
The customer-relationship management (CRM)

transferable to the Internet world. Figure 8-9 illustrates the
NSP concept.
THE CONTENT PROVIDER
To some extent, the ASP and the ERP provide some type of con-
tent to the users they serve. Content providers are also sources
of material for ISPs and ASPs. Content can be defined as:
•
Video.
•
Voice.
•
Text.
•
Telephone numbers.
•
Domain names.
•
Any information about the call or data file.
•
Information that has been manipulated to provide
additional value. Data warehousing is one example of
information that is mined out of other information. Another
example is supermarkets now providing discount cards for
either frequent purchases or for sale items. The value of
the discount cards is the information filed by the customer
to receive the card. This information not only provides
buying pattern information about the user, but also
provides a wealth of information about buying patterns
when all of the cards are examined in total.
•
Information that has been enhanced to provide additional
value. One example is knowing the location of a mobile
handset. First, the public safety value exists. Second, the
commercial value exists in knowing where the mobile user
is so that directed advertising or even wireless sales
coupons can be delivered.
Content is the substance of the service. Content has value
because it is about the customer or it is information the cus-
tomer wants. It only has value if the customer wants to spend
280
Chapter 8

The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
281
Content is many things; 
video, voice, music, and
so on.
Content is information 
that has value to a 
customer.
FIGURE 8-9
The network service provider (NSP)
money on it. Figure 8-10 is an illustration of the content
provider.
THE OTHER PROVIDER (OP)
A generic statement can be made about the telecommunica-
tions industry when it comes to the types of business models
followed; one is either doing it themselves or having someone
else doing it for them. The generic provider can be called the
Other Provider (OP).
This is not intended to be facetious. The telecommunica-
tions business, of which the Internet is a part, is comprised of
those who do it for themselves and those who do it for others.
As the software platforms proliferate, so will the number of
other providers; therefore, new opportunities will arise. Figure
8-11 illustrates the OP concept.

282
Chapter 8
Wholesale
Retail
Selling your own product or selling 
someone else’s product.
Build it yourself.  Build it for someone else 
and then let someone else brand it with their 
name.
FIGURE 8-10
The Content Provider
The next generation 
Internet must able to 
support information 
of all kinds.
FIGURE 8-11
The next generation Internet

THE NEXT GENERATION INTERNET:
MOBILE INTERNET
Many people have made predictions about the next generation
Internet. Some believe it is the next generation wireless net-
work. Others believe it is the next generation wired network.
Some people believe that the Internet will not grow beyond sim-
ple online shopping. The number of opinions about the future
of the Internet coincides with the number of people working in
the industry.
The next generation Internet must be one step closer to
total market penetration. It must be as commonplace as every-
one hopes it will be with a computer and Internet access in
every home. The next generation Internet must be accessible
from any place. If the next generation Internet is just a faster
way of buying collectable baseball cards, the telecommunica-
tions industry will have big problems. The Internet has been
able to bring the world to places that had no television sets and
few, if any telephones. The Internet’s biggest challenge is keep-
ing the investment community interested in investing money.
The number of failures in 1999 and 2000 is staggering.
However, one should consider the failures as typical of the early
development of any new business model.
The next generation Internet must be able to do the 
following:
•
Support voice.
•
Support video.
•
Be WWW compatible.
•
Be secure.
•
Support broadband data of all kinds.
•
Be accessible by all kinds of terminal devices.
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
283

•
Be ubiquitous throughout the nation.
•
Support mobile and wireline Web access.
The key thing to bear in mind is that the next generation
Internet will have a mobile component. The aforementioned list
represents a list of attributes that the next generation Internet
must have. The next generation Internet will be accessible by
information brokers and users of all kinds.
ECONOMICS
The government and marketplace are still trying to understand
the economics of the Internet. The marketplace has spent a
great deal of time making errors, which is a natural process in
any early stage industry, while the government has been busy
trying to understand how the Internet can generate tax rev-
enues.
The Internet is such a booming business space that it is only
a matter of time before the government finds a way of mining
tax revenues out of this new business arena. This is why the
Advisory Commission on Electronic Commerce was estab-
lished. This group was established by the United States
Congress under the Internet Tax Freedom Act of 1998 to rec-
ommend a plan for taxing sales made over the Internet. This is
only the beginning. It is fantasy to believe that new accounting
rules will not be established for tracking, accounting, depreci-
ating assets, or expensing assets associated with the Internet.
Currently, Internet shopping involves a user shopping on a com-
puter; no salespeople are involved, just a computer terminal.
This also means fewer jobs in one sector of the economy and
hopefully more jobs in a different sector. This can also mean a
shift in jobs away from one region to another region of the
nation, which means less income tax for one state (if a state
income tax exists). The economies of the large industrial pow-
ers are now service-oriented and not based on heavy industry.
This affects the government’s tax base.
284
Chapter 8

The government will continue to examine the way in which
revenue is generated on the Internet. Income and other taxes
need to be collected in order to pay for the various programs in
place and envisioned. By understanding how the Internet is
used, the government will likely develop new tax rules to ensure
that both state and federal tax structures are not bypassed in
any way.
Until 1999, Wall Street was dumping money into any com-
pany that had the word “dot-com” in its name. To the casual
observer looking in from the outside, the “dot-com” was all the
rage, and money was pouring into every idea that had the word
“dot-com,” even if the company had nothing to do with the
Internet. The kinds of questions that should have been asked
were as follows:
•
What are you selling?
•
Why would anyone want to buy it?
•
What makes you think they will buy from you?
•
How big is the market?
•
Are you already operating as a company?
•
Are you looking for seed capital or are you further along in
the search for financing?
•
How much of this market do you expect to capture for your
company?
•
Why do you think you will be successful?
•
What do you plan on doing with this company? Do you
plan on taking it public?
•
If you plan on going public, when do you expect to do so?
•
If you do not plan on taking the company public, what do
you plan on doing to increase value to your investor?
•
What does your team look like? (In other words, who are
your team members?)
•
What do you want from me (the investor)?
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
285

•
What are you bringing to the bargaining table other than a
good idea? Do you have any “skin” in the game? “Skin”
refers to an individual’s personal stake in the business.
Usually the stake is one’s life savings.
•
How much money do you want?
•
How much of the company will I get if I invest in you?
Today, the investor has become very “Internet savvy” by ask-
ing all of these questions. The challenge for the startup is mak-
ing sure the business idea becomes a reality.
Wall Street has returned to a level of normalcy, exploring
new opportunities at a pace that is less frenetic than it was in
1999. However, this does not mean that no investment oppor-
tunities exist. It means the investors are going to take a closer
look at the business plan and the people executing that plan.
SUMMARY
The growth of the Internet is based on a number of different
factors:
•
Technology evolution
•
Technology standardization
•
New business ideas
•
Freedom of creativity on the technical and business fronts
•
Market demand
Many of the Internet failures have occurred due to poor exe-
cution, not a lack of good ideas. The use of traditional business
tools will support the creation of new opportunities and new
companies. The Internet is not a mystical object that cannot be
understood. Early in the Internet’s development, the investment
286
Chapter 8

community jumped on to every idea that had the word “dot-
com” associated with it. The frenzy for new opportunities had
been so great that every rule in the investment book was
ignored. Plenty of good ideas were available, but an equal num-
ber of people existed who could not execute those ideas. It took
a major downturn on the stock market to wake up the invest-
ment community.
The primary driver for the Internet’s growth will be busi-
ness/commercial-based. Unless services for which customers
want to spend money are available, the Internet will be nothing
more than a library and an e-mail service opportunity. The 
evolution of the Internet has taken a turn into the world of 
wireless. The growth of the Internet depends on its ability to be
used in the two major mediums of telecommunications: wire-
line and wireless. Unless the Internet can exist in the wireline
and wireless worlds, its future will be limited. E-commerce and
m-commerce are dependent on one another.
The most important thing for the Internet player or investor
to understand  is to not lose sight of the basics of doing busi-
ness. Huckseters of the Internet have used this period of
Internet  growth and development to create investment oppor-
tunities and trouble. New lexicons have been created to
describe established “language.” Mobile commerce runs the
risk of going through the same hype-building that can over-
shadow good judgment.
Between 1998 and 2000 wireless Internet began to show up
on commercial radar screens.  Prior to 1998, wireless Internet
was purely a standards arena topic, however, it was called wire-
less data.
Some may take the attitude that “If you build it (bandwidth
auctions), they will come and find a billion uses for it.” Others
take a more pragmatic approach and have the attitude that says,
"If you show me the money (for example, show me how this will
make money), I will find lots of folks willing to throw billions of
dollars into it in order to mind the value.” A technical issue can
The Internet Business Model: The Future and its Economics
287

be worked to death in standards or not worked enough in stan-
dards. M-commerce is at that point in which the industry is
working to transition the technology into the business space as
quickly as possible without losing that valuable technical integ-
rity and sacrificing a commercial windfall.
The success of m-commerce is not in question. However,
what is in question is: When will m-commerce take off?
288
Chapter 8

A P P E N D I X
A
ACRONYMS,
DEFINITIONS, AND
TERMINOLOGY
A
AAA server
A server that provides authentication, authoriza-
tion, and accounting security services.
Above the fold
The top portion of a Web page that can be
seen without scrolling.
Acceptable use policy
A policy established for a computing
resource (for example, a Web site) that describes how users may
access and use the facility.
Access network
A portion of a public switched network that
connects access nodes to individual subscribers.
Access profile
The information maintained by an AAA server
for each user. It includes information needed for authentication
and accounting. It also specifies the user’s access privileges.
Access Tandem (AT)
An EC switching system that provides
a traffic concentration and distribution function for inter-
exchange traffic originating or terminating within an access ser-
vice area.
Active attack
An attempt to break security by altering infor-
mation. An active attack may or may not require decrypting the
information attacked. See passive attack and replay attack.
289
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

Ad
See advertisement.
Ad serving system
A system that inserts ads into Web pages
when a user accesses the pages. Different companies may
deliver the Web page and the ad using geographically separated
servers. The system requires that the designated Web pages
have links embedded in them that correspond to certain sizes of
ads and categories of products or services. The company deliv-
ering the Web page will often receive compensation for attract-
ing users who view the advertising. This same company will
have little or no control or interest in the specific advertising
messages delivered. Often the company operating the ad serv-
ing system is not advertising any of its own products or services,
but is acting as a middleman between the advertiser and the
company that supplies the Web pages.
Advertisement
A message from a company (the advertiser) to
potential customers (market) that attempts to influence or rein-
force the customers’ attitudes and/or behavior toward purchas-
ing the advertiser’s products or services, or toward obtaining
more information, including further marketing messages, from
the advertiser.
Advertising
The planning for, development of, and placement
of advertisements. Also, the set of advertisements placed by a
merchant in a given campaign.
Advisory Commission on Electronic Commerce
A group
set up by the U.S. Congress under the Internet Tax Freedom
Act of 1998 to recommend a plan for taxing sales made over the
Internet.
Ad auction
A service that enables Web publishers to sell pre-
viously unsold ad space at the last minute for whatever price the
market will bear. Advertisers are able to buy space at exception-
ally low cost-per-thousand. (See also advertisement.)
290
Appendix A

Ad network
A company that contracts with a number of Web
sites to sell advertising space on the sites. Some ASPs are noth-
ing more than ad networks.
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
A non-
profit organization that coordinates voluntary standards activi-
ties in the United States. The institute represents the United
States in two major telecommunication organizations: the
International 
Standards 
Organization
(ISO) 
and 
the
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).
American Standard Code for Information Interchange
(ASCII)
A widely accepted standard for data communica-
tions that uses a seven-bit digital character code to represent
text and numeric characters. When companies use ASCII as a
standard, they are able to transfer text messages between com-
puters and display devices regardless of the device manufac-
turer.
Analog signal
A signal that is modified in a constant fashion,
such as voice or data.
Applet
An application written in Java ( see Java) and inserted
in an HTML program.
Application Service Provider (ASP)
A company that hosts
an application and data for one or more customers, providing
the hardware, software, infrastructure, and basic maintenance.
The service provider supports remote access to the application
by the customer, usually over the Internet. The provider usually
has expertise in the specific application hosted and may provide
enhancements to it. Advantages to the customer versus running
the application in-house include guaranteed performance, a
robust data center, in-depth support from a skilled staff, and
better economics.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
291

ASP
See Application Service Provider
Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL)
Modems
attached to twisted pair copper wiring that transmit from 1.5
Mbps to 9 Mbps downstream (to the subscriber) and from 16
Kbps to 800 Kbps upstream, depending on the line distance.
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)
A multiplexing and
switching technique that organizes information into 53 byte
cells.  Each cell of data is transmitted asynchronously.
Audit trail
Information on the major steps in the progress of
a transaction that allows an auditor to determine that no errors
appear in the reporting of the transaction. In electronic com-
merce, an audit trail can help resolve programming errors and
discrepancies in how a transaction is recorded by the parties to
the transaction.
Authentication
A process where information is exchanged
between a communications device (typically a mobile phone)
and a communications network that enables the carrier or net-
work operator to confirm the true identity of the unit. This
inhibits fraudulent use of the mobile unit. Another way of view-
ing authentication: Authentication is the process of user identity
confirmation. Identity confirmation can involve checking hand-
set/terminal device identity by interpreting “secret” keys/data
messages. If the data keys/data messages have been altered or do
not show specific format, the call will not be completed.
B
B2B
Business-to-Business marketing and commerce.
B2SB
Business-to-Small Business marketing and commerce.
B2C
Business-to-Consumer marketing and commerce.
292
Appendix A

Backbone
A common distribution channel that carries analog
or digital telecommunications signals for many users. Also, the
central distribution cable from an interface.
Bandwidth
The width of a radio channel (in Hertz) that can
be modulated to transfer information.
Banner
A graphic element on a Web page used to title the
page, head a new section, present a company’s or advertiser’s
message, or provide a link to another page.
Basic Rate Interface (BRI)
In ISDN, the network interface
that provides 144 Kbps information transfer to the consumer
premises on twisted pair as defined in ANSI Standard T1.607.
Bearer
In the communications industry, this term refers to a
transmission channel that is used to carry data. In ISDN, 64
Kbps bearer channels are used. These channels are used to
carry data.
Beta software
Software that has been developed to the point
where it can be tested for reliability and usability in customer
environments, but not to the point where it can be commer-
cially sold, used, or supported. Beta sites are customer sites
where the software is tested. Beta customers are often given
some form of preferential treatment or “Most Favored Nation”
status.
Bill presentation
The delivery of a bill (invoice) to a cus-
tomer for payment. Third party specialists compete with banks
to provide electronic bill presentment over the Internet, espe-
cially for companies that serve large numbers of consumers
(that is, utility companies).
Billing system
A system that records the occurrence of a call
or some event, the identity of the originating party, the identity
of the destination party, and the time length of the call. This
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
293

system must also process the data for the rendering of a bill to
the subscriber.
Bit
The smallest part of a digital signal, typically called a 
data bit. A bit usually assumes two levels: either a zero (0) or a
one (1).
Bit error rate (BER)
A measurement used to determine the
quality of a digital transmission channel. BER measures the
ratio of bits received in error compared to the total number of
bits transmitted.
Brand
A name or symbol chosen by a company to uniquely
identify a set of products and/or services that the company has
established or hopes to establish in the minds of its customers.
The brand name is meant to serve as an indication of quality
and trustworthiness. It is usually legally registered as a trade-
mark with a governmental organization to prevent other com-
panies from using it. A brand is usually established in
customer’s minds through marketing, particularly advertising,
and by satisfying customer experiences with the product or ser-
vice. A brand is valuable to a company in encouraging repeat
purchases and extending the brand, with its aura of quality and
trustworthiness, to new products and services. Examples of
widely known and successful brands include Coca-Cola (a
trademark of the Coca-Cola Company) and Amazon (a trade-
mark of Amazon, Inc.). Branding (the establishment of a brand)
is generally judged to be extremely important in electronic com-
merce because of the ease with which customers can find, com-
pare, and do business with a wide variety of competitive
companies offering similar products and services on the
Internet.
Brick and mortar
A traditional business operation that 
commonly deals with its customers face-to-face in an office 
or storefront that the business owns or rents (for examples, a
294
Appendix A

retail store or a bank branch). Internet businesses usually have 
lower costs and greater flexibility than brick and mortar 
operations.
Bridge
A data communications device that connects two or
more networks and transmits information between the net-
works.
Broadband
Typically refers to voice, data, and/or video com-
munications at rates greater than wideband communications
rates (1.544 Mbps).
Broadband Integrated Services Digital Network (B-ISDN)
A digital network with ATM switching operating at data rates in
excess of 1.544 or 2.048 Mbps. ATM enables the transporting
and switching of voice, data, image, and video over the same
infrastructure.
Broker
An individual or company that is an intermediary
between a seller and a buyer. A stockbroker specializes in
stocks, bonds, and other investments.
Button
A small advertisement that can provide a constant
presence on a Web site although costing considerably less than
a banner. Buttons can build brand awareness and attract traffic
to the sponsor’s Web site, but their message must be limited and
simple.
Bursty data
Describes data rates that fluctuate widely with no
predictable pattern.
Busy hour
A time-consistent hour in a specific measurement
period when the total load offered to a group of trunks, a net-
work of trunks, or a switching system is greater than at any
other time-consistent hour during the same measurement
period.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
295

C
Call processing
Steps that occur during the duration of a
call. These steps are typically associated with the routing and
control of the call.
Call routing
In circuit switching, the process of determining
the path of a call from the point of origination to point of desti-
nation.
Cache
High-speed memory that stores data for relatively
short periods of time under computer control in order to speed
data transmission or processing. Web pages that are used fre-
quently are often cached close to users so that they can be
delivered quickly without requiring repeated transmissions over
the entire network between the Web server and the client
machine.
CCS (One Hundred Call Seconds)
A measurement of tele-
phone usage traffic used to express the average number of calls
in progress or the average number of devices used.
CDR
See Call Detail Reporting
Cell site
A transmitter-receiver tower operated by a wireless
carrier (typically cellular or PCS) through which radio links are
established between a wireless system and mobile and portable
units.
Central Office
A term to describe local switches used by the
local telephone companies. The term is also synonymous with
end office.
CLEC
See competitive local exchange carrier.
296
Appendix A

Click on the Web
The act of selecting and following a link by
placing one’s mouse cursor on the text, graphics, banner, or but-
ton identifying the link and depressing a button on the mouse.
Click-through rate
The percent of individuals viewing a Web
page who click on a specific banner ad appearing on the page.
Overall, click-through rates have declined substantially since
the early days of electronic commerce on the Web.
Click stream
The Web sites and Web pages a user visits,
either in a single online session or over a longer period of time.
Information about a user’s click stream on a single site and
some information about the click stream over multiple sites 
can be collected by specialized organizations using cookies. 
The information can be used to improve Web sites, customize
Web sites, and target appropriate marketing messages from ad-
serving systems.
Closed loop reporting
The ability to measure the effective-
ness of a particular ad on the Web by tracking which ad viewers
actually bought which product, requested a catalog, or took
other specific actions on the Web site.
Co-branding
Loosely, the appearance of two company names
on a Web page or Web site, implying that a product or service is
provided jointly by the two companies. Often the site belongs to
a company with a significant customer base, market awareness,
or marketing power although the other company on the page or
site is actually providing the bulk of the product or service. In
another variety of co-branding, an advertiser provides informa-
tion about its offering in the midst of ostensibly objective infor-
mation on the site.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
297

Community
In the context of the Internet and electronic
commerce, people who participate in an online discussion
group or bulletin board or who return frequently to a Web site
because of a common interest in a given subject. One business
strategy developing on the Internet is to create a community
and then sell access to the group for marketing purposes. (See
bulletin board system in the hard copy dictionary.)
Common Channel Signaling (CCS)
Also known as “Out-of-
Band” signaling. Describes a scheme where the content of the
call is separated from the information used to set up the call
(signaling information).
Competitive Access Provider (CAP)
A company that com-
petes with local telephone companies to provide access from
the customer’s premise to long-distance carriers.
Competitive Local Exchange Carrier (CLEC)
A descrip-
tion of the new competitive carriers (as encouraged by the
Telecommunications Act of 1996) that are competing in the
local loop marketplace.
Control signals
Control signals are used for special auxiliary
functions that are beyond a service provider’s network. These
signals communicate information that enables or disables cer-
tain types of calls. One example would be call barring.
Convergence
Addresses the technical and business aspects of
integration of technology and business.
Cookie
A capability of some Web browsers that enables Web
servers to store information about user visits to the Web site on
the hard disk in the user’s PC or workstation. Because it can be
used to identify repeat visitors, the cookie enables on the fly
customization of a Web site to feature items the user showed an
interest in during previous visits. The cookie also enables a Web
server to track the sequence of a session on a Web site, includ-
ing how long the user spent on each Web page. Although a boon
298
Appendix A

to marketing on the Web, the cookie raises some privacy issues
because it removes some of the traditional anonymity associ-
ated with viewing Web sites and uses a small portion of the
user’s hard disk.
Cost-per-click (CPC)
A method of charging for banner
advertisements on the Web on the basis of how many viewers
click on the ad rather than charging on a flat rate basis for the
advertising space. The CPC model is generally considered to
favor advertisers rather than publishers because it ignores the
brand building value of an ad that is seen, but not clicked on.
Generally, it gives the publisher no control over the content or
appearance of the ad and may require the publisher to allocate
space to poorly performing ads until the contracted number of
clicks have been achieved.
Cost-per-thousand (CPM)
The cost in any given media for
a thousand impressions. On the Web, the CPM for impressions
on a Web site that attracts an undifferentiated variety of con-
sumers (for example, a typical search engine) is on the order of
$5. The CPM for advertising on a Web site with a specific audi-
ence that is likely to make sizable purchases (for example, cor-
porate telecommunications managers) can be in the
neighborhood of $100.
Country code
A one-, two-, or three-digit number that iden-
tifies a country or numbering plan to which international calls
are routed. The first digit is always a world zone number.
Additional digits define a specific geographic area, usually a
specific country.
CPC
See cost-per-click.
CPM
See cost-per-thousand.
Customer care system
A customer profile database system
used to support customer complaints, add new subscribers,
remove subscribers, and contain customer profile information.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
299

Customer premises equipment (CPE)
All telecommunica-
tions terminal equipment located on the customer’s premises,
including telephone sets, private branch exchanges (PBXs),
data terminals, and customer-owned, coin-operated telephones.
D
Data compression
A technique for encoding information so
that fewer data bits of information are required to represent a
given amount of data. Compression enables the transmission of
more data over a given amount of time and circuit capacity. It
also reduces the amount of memory required for data storage.
Data protection
The prevention of the passing of an individ-
ual’s personal information from one computer system where the
information legitimately resides to other computer systems
without the consent of the individual. In the United Kingdom,
the Data Protection Act of 1984 requires the registration of
every data user who processes personal information.
Data terminal equipment (DTE)
In a data communications
network, the data source such as a computer, and the data sink
such as an optical storage device.
Data warehouse
An information management service that
stores, analyzes, and processes information that is derived from
transaction systems.
Database
A collection of interrelated data stored in computer
memory with a minimum of redundancy. Database information
held in a computer-accessed memory usually is subdivided into
pages, with each page accessible to all users unless it belongs to
a closed user group.
Demographics
In marketing, the description of a group of
consumers, most often age, gender, household income, level of
300
Appendix A

education, marital status, employment status, number of people
in the household, and region of the country. More loosely, a
description of any group of customers whether consumers or
businesses.
Descriptive billing
A system of credit card billing in which
individual charge slips are not returned with the bill. Federal
Reserve Board Regulation Z requires that if a charge slip is not
enclosed, the bill must provide the date, the amount, the seller’s
name, and the location where the transaction took place for
each transaction.
Diffie-Hellman
A public key algorithm that can be used for
deriving and distributing private keys over insecure networks.
Diffie-Hellman itself cannot be used to encrypt or decrypt mes-
sages. The patent on the algorithm expired on April 29, 1997.
Digital signal
A signal that has a limited number of discrete
states, usually two. In contrast, an analog signal varies contin-
uously and has an infinite number of states.
Digital Signal 0 (DS0)
A 64-Kbps digital be it voice or data.
Digital Signal 1 (DS1)
Twenty-four voice channels packed
into a 193-bit frame and transmitted at 1.544 Mbps. The
unframed version, or payload, is 192 bits at a rate of 1.536
Mbps.
Digital Signal 2 (DS2)
Four T1 frames packed into a higher
level frame transmitted at 6.312 Mbps.
Digital Signal 3 (DS3)
Twenty-eight T1 frames packed into
a level frame transmitted at 44.736 Mbps.
Digital subscriber line (DSL)
A two-wire, full-duplex trans-
mission system that transports user data between a customer’s
premises and a digital switching system or remote terminal at
144 Kbps.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
301

Directory
A structure for organizing files on a computer or
network. Directories may be protected or shared using various
methods for information security.
Domain name
The unique name that identifies an Internet
site.
DSL
See Digital Subscriber Line.
DVD
A technology that uses five-inch discs similar to CD-
ROMs, but can hold much more data. A DVD disc can deliver
multichannel sound and TV images three times sharper than
videotape. DVD players, expected to debut in late 1996, will be
interoperable with televisions, stereos, personal computers, and
some video games. Unlike CDs, DVDs can hold data on both
sides and can provide either one or two layers of data on each
side. A single-sided, single layer DVD holds 4.7 gigabytes of data
while a double-sided, double layer DVD holds 17 gigabytes.
E
Economic profit
Return on investment in excess of the aver-
age cost of capital in the overall market. Alternatively, profits
excluding profits from the increase in value of inventory that
the company holds.
Electronic mail (E-mail)
Messages, usually text, sent from
one person to another via computer.
Electronic tax filing
An offering of the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) that enables taxpayers to file their tax returns on
diskette or over a network. In 1994, 11.8 million tax returns
were filed electronically or about 11 percent of all individual tax
returns. The number was down 15.8 percent from 1993
because of increased IRS efforts to prevent fraud, which can be
302
Appendix A

facilitated when tax returns are filed electronically. Fraud has
caused the IRS to question its goal of getting 80 percent of
Americans to file electronically by the year 2001.
Element
The basic building block of an HTML document.
When an element consists of a start tag, end tag, and text or
some other content, it can also be referred to as a “container.”
An “empty element,” such as that commanding a line break, has
only one tag and no content.
Encryption
A process of a protecting voice or data informa-
tion from being obtained by unauthorized users. Encryption
involves the use of a data processing algorithm (formula pro-
gram) that uses one or more secret keys that both the sender
and receiver of the information use to encrypt and decrypt the
information. Without the encryption algorithm and key, unau-
thorized listeners cannot decode the message.
End office (EO)
An EC switching system that terminates
station loops and connects the loops to each other and to
trunks.
Engineered capacity
The highest load level at which service
objectives are met for a trunk group or a switching system.
Erlang
Amount of voice connection time with reference to
one hour. This is used to describe the aggregate traffic flowing
over the transmission facility. For example, a six minute call is
.1 Erlang.
Ethernet
A transmission protocol for packet-switched local
area networks (LANs). Ethernet is a registered trademark of
Xerox Corporation.
Exchange carrier
A telephone company, generally regulated
by a state regulatory body, that provides local (intraLATA)
telecommunications services.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
303

Extensible Markup Language (XML)
A document descrip-
tion language, primarily used to define Web pages and applica-
tions that are compatible with Hypertext Markup Language
(HTML), but provide more capabilities and flexibility. XML
removes presentation constraints imposed by HTML and does
not necessarily require a Web browser. Although both languages
are platform independent, XML is also database and file format
independent. To display an XML document (or run the XML
application), the user’s machine must be equipped with an
XML parser. For basic XML documents, any XML parser can
infer the document rules by the way the elements are pre-
sented. For more complicated documents or applications, the
author must develop or utilize a document-type definition
(DTD) that defines the structure and rules for a given type of
document. The XML parser refers to the DTD in order to deter-
mine how to display the document or run the application. More
or less standard DTD’s have been developed for engineering,
law, medicine, and other areas of knowledge.
F-G
Facilities
The transmission parts (elements) of a service
provider. Sometimes used in more general terms to describe
buildings and utilities.
Firewall
A term that refers to a physical and electronic
method of protecting a computer from outside attack. This pro-
tection involves hardware and software.
Flat rate
Price setting principles for a service provider that
wishes to charge the same fee for calls regardless of the number
of calls made or the duration of each call. Usually, flat rates are
single monthly or periodic charges.
First-time visitor
A visitor of a Web site who has never visited
the site before.
304
Appendix A

Gateway
A device or facility that enables information to be
exchanged between two dissimilar computer systems or data
networks. A gateway reformats data and protocols in such a way
that the two systems or networks can communicate.
Grade of Service (GOS)
An estimate of customer satisfac-
tion with a particular aspect of service. It also refers to the prob-
ability that a call will fail due to the unavailability of links or
circuits.
H
Handoff
The process of reassigning subscriber handsets to
specific radio channels as the handsets move from cell site to
cell site.
Hard copy
A physical document, usually text on paper.
Hard handoff
A “break-before-make” form of call handoff
between radio channels. In this scenario, the mobile handset
temporarily (time measured in milliseconds) disconnects from
the network as it changes channels. The radio protocols,
AMPS, TDMA, and GSM, support only hard handoff.
Header control
Information inserted in front of data when
the data is encapsulated for network transmission.
Helper
A program used by a WWW browser to process files
that the browser itself cannot, for example, a sound file, JPEG
image, MPEG movie, or a compressed file. Also known as a
viewer.
High data rate Digital Subscribe Line (HDSL)
Modems
on either end of one or more twisted pair wires that deliver T1
or E1 speeds. At present, T1 requires two lines and E1 requires
three. (See SDSL for one line HDSL.)
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
305

High Usage Trunk Group
A transmission facility used only
for routing large volumes of traffic to a single point or set of
points.
I
Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier (ILEC)
A telephone
service carrier that was operating in the local loop market prior
to the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and the divestiture of
the AT&T bell system. In other words, it was the local telephone
company most people grew up with.
Information service
The offering of a capability for generat-
ing, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, uti-
lizing, or making information available via telecommunications.
This includes electronic publishing, but does not include any
use of any such capability for the management, control, or oper-
ation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
Inline image An image that appears in the midst of text on a
Web page.
Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN)
A structured
all digital telephone network system that was developed to
replace (upgrade) existing analog telephone networks. The
ISDN network supports for advanced telecommunications ser-
vices and defined universal standard interfaces that are used in
wireless and wired communications systems.
Interconnection
The connection of telephone equipment or
communications systems to the facilities of another network.
The FCC regulates interconnection of systems to the public
switched telephone network. (See also: bypass.)
306
Appendix A

Inter-exchange carrier (IXC)
A carrier company in the
United States, including Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands,
that is engaged in the provision of interLATA, interstate, and/or
international telecommunications over its own transmission
facilities or facilities provided by other inter-exchange carriers.
International Carrier (INC)
A carrier authorized to provide
inter-exchange communications services outside World Zone 1
using the international dialing plan; however, the carrier has the
option of providing service to World Zone 1 points outside the
48 contiguous states of the United States.
International Gateway Facilities (IGFs)
Transmission facil-
ities used by International Gateway Switches. An International
Gateway Switch is used by the long-distance (inter-exchange
carrier) to interface with international telecommunications net-
works.
International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
A
European telecommunication standards body. A counterpart of
ANSI.
Internet
The major network running the Internet protocol
across the United States and Canada. The Internet consists of
more than 30,000 hosts and includes sites at universities,
research laboratories, corporations, and nonprofit agencies.
Internet Advertising Bureau (IAB)
An association of com-
panies that advertise on the Internet. Key activities include
establishing terminology and standards for measuring advertis-
ing, conducting research relevant to electronic commerce and
advertising, and addressing industry issues such as privacy and
taxation.
Internet Service Provider (ISP)
A vendor that provides
access to the Internet and the World Wide Web.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
307

Internet Tax Freedom Act of 1998
A law passed by the U.S.
Congress that placed a three-year moratorium on new taxes on
Internet access fees and prohibited multiple and discriminatory
taxes on electronic commerce. The Internet appears likely to
drive major simplification of the sales tax laws, which vary
greatly between different states and local governments across
the country. The act also set up the Advisory Commission on
Electronic Commerce.
Intranet
A private network inside a company or organization
that not only serves as the company’s information network, but
also access to the public Internet. The Intranet appears like
another server to the Internet.
IP telephony
Technology that supports voice, data, and video
(both broadcast and interactive) over IP-based LANs, and
WANs and over the Internet.
IP service
The carrying of data traffic using the Internet pro-
tocol for a fee. This is the essential service provided by Internet
Service Providers and Network Service Providers.
IP-SEC
An IETF standard for encrypted sessions between
corporate firewalls.
J
Java
A 
programming 
language 
developed 
by 
Sun
Microsystems to support widespread software distribution, par-
ticularly over the Web. It is a slimmed down and more secure
version of the C++ programming language. Java was originally
developed for use with set-top boxes (see set-top boxes in the
hard copy dictionary). Java runs on Web servers and downloads
small application programs called applets (see applets) to Web
308
Appendix A

browsers on an as needed basis. Because of strict built-in con-
trols over software distribution, the Java design protects against
the delivery of incompatible software or viruses.
JavaBeans
A software component model associated with the
Java programming language. A JavaBean component is an
object that can be used repeatedly by visually manipulating it
into larger solutions. JavaBeans can range from low-level com-
ponents such as a scroll bar to complete products like Corel’s
Office for Java.
JavaScript
A cross-platform, Web-based scripting language
that will enable a layperson to author HTML pages that use
Java applets, objects, and classes without having to know how to
program in Java. It can also be used to build stand-alone appli-
cations that can run on either clients or servers.
L
Local Access and Transport Area (LATA)
As designated by
the Modification of Final Judgment, an area in which a local
exchange carrier is permitted to provide service. It contains one
or more local exchange areas, usually areas with common
social, economic, or other interests.
Local area network (LAN)
A private network offering high-
speed digital communications channels for the connection of
computers and related equipment in a limited geographic area.
LANs use fiber optic, coaxial, or twisted-pair cables or radio
transceivers to transmit signals.
Local exchange carrier (LEC)
A company that provides
telecommunications service within a local access and transport
area (LATA).
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
309

M
Metadata
A description of a set of useful data, usually in dig-
ital form and conforming to a well-defined template. Also, an
index composed of such descriptions. Analogous to a card in a
library card catalogue system, a metadata description of a set of
data might include an abstract of the data and the data’s format,
multimedia content, location, and usage fees.
Metcalfe’s Law
The total value of a network to its users
grows as the square of the total number of users. The law was
developed by Bob Metcalfe originally to convince people of the
value of Ethernet and has also been referred to by George
Gilder as the law of the telecoms. An important consequence of
the law is that the ratio of value to cost for adding one more net-
work user grows disproportionately (increasing returns) as the
network gets bigger.
N
Navigation
The actions of a user exploring a Web site (or
multiple Web sites) or searching for information or resources.
Also, the design of a Web site, including links, text, graphics,
and page layouts to facilitate navigation by users.
Netcasting
The broadcasting of information over the Internet
using server push technology. Generally, limited to Web casting.
Netizen
A citizen of cyberspace. An Internet user.
Nettop
An alternate term for Internet appliance (see Internet
appliance).
310
Appendix A

Network
A series of points interconnected by communica-
tions channels, often on a switched basis. Networks are either
common to all users or privately leased by a customer for some
specific application.
Network Access Server (NAS)
A device providing tempo-
rary, on-demand access by individuals to a network. NAS most
commonly refers to a remote access server providing dial-up
access over analog or ISDN telephone lines.
Network element
A facility or the equipment used in the pro-
vision of a telecommunications service. The term includes sub-
scriber numbers, databases, signaling systems, and information
sufficient for billing and collection or used in the transmission,
routing, or other provision of a telecommunications service.
Network interconnection
The interconnecting of two more
networks to one another.
Network Operations Center (NOC)
A center responsible
for the surveillance and control of telecommunications traffic
flow in a service area.
Network Service Provider
As opposed to Internet Service
Providers who sell to end-users, Network Service Providers sell
high volume Internet backbone capacity to Internet Service
Providers. Network Service Providers often sell to end users as
well. Sometimes called “carriers,” Network Service Providers
include MCI, AT&T, Sprint, and European Postal, Telegraph,
and Telephone (PTT) agencies.
NSP
See Network Service Provider.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
311

O
Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Model
The OSI
model is an internationally accepted framework of standards for
telecommunications between different systems made by differ-
ent vendors. The model organizes the telecommunications
functions into seven different layers. This model enables engi-
neers to isolate and classify telecommunications into discrete
functions or activities.
Opt-in
The expressed act by a customer of granting a mar-
keter permission to deliver marketing messages to the customer.
The permission is typically granted by registering on a Web site
or responding to an unsolicited e-mail. The messages are typi-
cally delivered by e-mail.
Opt-out
The instruction by a customer to a marketer to halt
the delivery of marketing messages, typically periodic e-mails.
Most responsible marketers embed opt-out procedures in their
marketing messages and make it easy for customers to opt-out.
P
Packet switching
A mode of data transmission in which mes-
sages are broken into increments, or packets, each of which can
be routed separately from a source and reassembled in the
proper order at the destination.
Page view
A unit for measuring Web site readership that cor-
responds to one person viewing one page, or at least a portion
of a page, one time. If a person leaves a certain page and returns
to it in the same visit to the Web site, two page views are
counted. Page views are more difficult to measure than hits, but
are a much more useful and relevant measure of the attention
a page garners from viewers.
312
Appendix A

Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995
An act that requires all
federal agencies to use electronic filing forms to reduce
demands on the public for paperwork 10 percent by 1996-97
and five percent annually through the year 2000.
Partial URL
A Uniform Resource Locator that refers to loca-
tions in relation to the document currently being viewed, typi-
cally a location on the same server or Web site.
Passive attack
An attempt to break security by capturing
information without altering it. See active attack, one-time
password system, and replay attack.
Path minimization (efficient routing of a mobile call) 
Path
minimization is the process of efficient fixed network (the non-
wireless portion of the call) routing of wireless calls tables in
the wireless carrier switches.
Pay-per-click
The ability to pay, typically in small amounts or
micro-payments (see hardcopy dictionary) for information or
entertainment received over the Internet or the Web. The term
implies that each payment is automatic and that simply request-
ing the information provides agreement to pay for it.
Plug-in
Software that runs on a client processor and in con-
junction with a Web browser to provide specialized manipula-
tion of data obtained over the network. Plug-ins and ActiveX
components have the advantages over Java applets because they
run faster and do not have to be downloaded because they
already exist on the client machine. Plug-in and ActiveX disad-
vantages from applets are that they must be manually acquired
and installed by the user before they can be used.
Point of Interface (POI)
The physical location marking the
point at which the local exchange carrier’s service ends.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
313

Point of presence
A physical location established by an inter-
exchange carrier within a LATA for the purpose of gaining
LATA access. The point of presence is usually a building that
houses switching and/or transmission equipment, as well as the
point of termination. (See also: point of termination.)
Primary rate interface
In the Integrated Services Digital
Network (ISDN), a channel that provides digital transmission
capacity of up to 1.536 Mbps (1.984 Mbps in Europe) in each
direction. The interface supports combinations of one 64-Kbps D
channel and several Kbps B channels, or H channel combinations.
PRI is the inter-switch component of ISDN and is the compliment
of BRI.
Private branch exchange (PBX) 
A private switching system
serving an organization, business, company, or agency, and usu-
ally located on a customer’s premises.
Protocol (1 - rules) 
A precise set of rules and a syntax that
govern the accurate transfer of information. (2 - connection) A
procedure for connecting to a communications system to estab-
lish, carry out, and terminate communications.
Protocol conversion
The translation of the protocols of one
system to those of another to enable different types of equip-
ment, such as data terminals and computers, to communicate.
Provisioning
The operations necessary to respond to service
orders, trunk orders, and special-service circuit orders, and to
provide the logical and physical resources necessary to fill those
orders.
R
Registration
A Web site visitor’s input of personal or business
information into a form provided on the Web site. Registration
enables the Web site owner to better understand viewers and
314
Appendix A

customers, increases the likelihood of users returning to the
site, and usually gains permission to send marketing messages
to the visitor. The Web site owner may provide the registrant
with access to restricted information (for example, a research
report), a Web site customized for the user, a free service (for
example, free e-mail), a discount on products or services, entry
in a sweepstakes, or some other enticement to register. Users
generally expect and Web sites generally provide a privacy state-
ment describing how the information will be used.
Registration service
A generally free service on the Internet
that requires registration by the user, sometimes including
detailed user information, in return for access to the service.
Ring network
A data network of circular topology in which
each node is connected to its neighbor to form an unbroken
ring. A ring network in which one of the nodes exercises central
control often is called a loop.
Router
See routing switcher.
Routing switcher (1 - general) 
An electronic device that con-
nects a user supplied signal (audio, video, and/or data) from any
input to any user selected output. Inputs are called sources.
Outputs are called destinations. (2 - network) A device that for-
wards packets of a specific protocol type (such as ‘P) from one
logical network to another. These logical networks can be the
same type or different types. A router receives physical layer sig-
nals from a network, performs data link and network layer pro-
tocol processing, then sends the information to the next
network node.
S
Search engine
On the World Wide Web, a Web site that cat-
alogues a vast number of Web pages and other documents on
the Internet, and provides links to them and descriptions of
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
315

them for users. The search engine provides a list of hopefully
relevant documents and Web pages in response to queries by
users, usually in the form of words or phrases that indicate the
topic in which the user is interested. Search engines are often
the key element in a portal.
Security gateway
A system that acts as the communications
gateway between external, untrusted systems and trusted hosts
on their own sub-network. It provides security services for the
trusted hosts when they communicate with external untrusted
systems. When a security gateway is providing services on
behalf of one or more hosts on a trusted sub-net, the security
gateway establishes the Security Association on behalf of its
trusted host and provides security services between the security
gateway and the external systems. In this case, the gateway uses
the IP Authentication Header, while all of the systems behind
the gateway on the trusted sub-net may take advantage of IP
Authentication Header services without having to implement
them.
Server (1 - telecommunications network) 
The equipment or
a call carrying path that responds to a customer’s attempt to use
a network. (2- LAN) A processor that serves users on a local
area network, for example, by storing and managing data files or
by connecting users to an external network.
Service provider
A generic name given to a company or orga-
nization that provides telecommunications service to customers
(subscribers). (See also Network Provider and Reseller.)
Signaling System Number 7 (SS7) 
An out-of-band com-
mon-channel signaling protocol standard that is designed to be
used over a variety of digital telecommunication switching net-
works. It is optimized to provide a reliable means for informa-
tion transfer for call control, remote network management, and
maintenance.
316
Appendix A

Soft handoff
The reverse of the hard handoff scenario. Soft
handoff is a “make-before-break” form of call handoff between
radio channels, whereby the mobile handset temporarily com-
municates with both the serving cell site and the targeted cell
site (one or more cell sites can be targeted) before being
directed to release all but the final target cell site radio chan-
nel. Currently, only CDMA supports soft handoff.
Star network
A data network with a radial topology in which
a central control node is the point to which all other nodes join.
Switching (1 - general) 
The process of making and breaking
(connecting and disconnecting) two or more electric circuits. (2
- telecommunications) The process of connecting appropriate
lines and trunks to form a communications path between two or
more stations. Functions include transmission, reception,
monitoring, routing, and testing.
Synchronous (1 - general) 
In step or in phase, as applied to
two or more devices: a system in which all events occur in a pre-
determined timed sequence. (2 - data communications) An
operation in which all involved parties are driven by a single
master clock. All actions begin and end in compliance with the
beat of this master clock.
T
Tag
A command in HTML, enclosed within the lesser than
and greater than signs (< . . . >), which marks specified text as
a heading, paragraph, list, and so on, and used for including
images, forms that accept user input and hypertext links within
a document. Usually, a start tag and end tag are paired around
the content they refer to and form a “container.”
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
317

Tandem switch
A switch that supports a network topology
where connectivity between locations is attained by linking sev-
eral locations together through a single point. The tandem
switch is similar to the “traffic cop”: directing traffic from sev-
eral streets into other groups of streets. Tandems are similar to
gateways.
Targeting
The design of a Web site or of a marketing cam-
paign (primarily the selection of Web sites in which advertise-
ments are placed, but also the content of the advertisements) to
reach and appeal to certain classes or types of customers.
Telecommunications
The transmission between or among
points specified by the user of information of the user’s choos-
ing (including voice, data, image, graphics, and video), without
change in the form or content of the information.
Telecommunications carrier
Any provider of telecommuni-
cations services. A telecommunications carrier shall be treated
as a common carrier under this Act only to the extent that it is
engaged in providing telecommunications services.
Telecommunications service
The offering of telecommuni-
cations for a fee directly to the public or to such classes of users
as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of
the facilities used.
Terminal equipment
Refers to the computers, telephones,
and other data or voice devices at the end of a telephone line.
Terminals
Devices that typically provide the interface
between the telecommunications system and the user.
Terminals may be fixed (stationary) or mobile (portable).
Traffic
Communication over a network and especially the
amount of communication over a network. In network technol-
ogy, traffic is usually measured in bits per second or packets per
second. In Web-based marketing, traffic refers to the number of
318
Appendix A

customer visits to a site or page and is measured in a variety of
ways.
Traffic engineering planning
An activity that determines the
number and type of communication paths required between
switching points and the call processing capacity of the switch-
ing equipment.
Translation (1 - general) 
The conversion of information from
one form to another. (2 - switching system) The conversion of
all or part of a telephone address destination code to routing
instructions or routing digits.
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP)
The protocol that manages the bundling of outgoing data into
packets, manages the transmission of packets on a network, and
checks the bundles for errors. This protocol is a networking pro-
tocol that supports communication across interconnected
information networks, that is, the Internet.
Tunneling An architecture that enables the point-to-point
transmission of electronic data in a format different from the
format in which it originated and was ultimately received.
Tunneling can be used to send non-IP protocols (for example,
IPX or AppleTalk) over an IP network such as the Internet. It
can also be used to transmit unencrypted data over the trans-
mission media in encrypted format without requiring encryp-
tion by the host or application at either end. The Point-to-Point
Tunneling Protocol encapsulates the Point-to-Point Protocol
for control purposes.
Type 1
A connection that is a trunk-side connection to an end
office. The end office uses a trunk-side signaling protocol in
conjunction with a feature known as Trunk with Line Treatment
(TWLT).
Type 1 with ISDN
An ANSI standard ISDN line between the
LEC end office and the MSC. The ISDN connection should be
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
319

capable of providing connectivity to the PSTN that will support
ISDN Primary Rate Interface (PRI) and ISDN Basic Rate
Interface (BRI). The ISDN connection is a variation of the Type
1 connection.
Type 2A
A trunk-side connection to the LEC’s access tan-
dem. This connection enables the MSC to interface with the
access tandem as if it were a LEC end office. This connection
enables the wireless carrier’s subscribers to obtain pre-
subscription. The service provider will have access to any set of
numbers within the LEC network.
Type 2B
A similar inter-connection type to the high usage
trunk groups established by the LEC for its own internal rout-
ing purposes. In the case of wireless carrier interconnection,
the Type 2B should be used in conjunction with the Type 2A.
When a Type 2B is used, the first choice of routing is through
a Type 2B with overflow through the Type 2A.
Type 2C
A telephone system inter-connection that is
intended to support interconnection to a public safety agency
via a LEC E911 tandem or local tandem. This connection
enables a wireless carrier to route calls through the PSTN to
the Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP). This connection sup-
ports a limited capability to transport location coordinate infor-
mation to the PSAP via the LEC.
Type 2D
A telephone system interconnection that is intended
to support interconnection to the LEC’s operator service posi-
tion. This connection enables the LEC to obtain Automatic
Number Identification (ANI) information about the calling
wireless subscriber in order to create a billing record.
Type S
A telephone system interconnection that only carries
control messages. The Type S is a SS7 signaling link from the
wireless carrier to the LEC. The Type S supports call setup via
the ISDN User Part (ISUP) portion of the SS7 signaling pro-
320
Appendix A

tocol & TCAP querying. The Type S is used in conjunction
with the Type 2A, 2B, and 2D.
U–X
Uniform Resource Location (URL)
This is a naming model
that gives the servers and content names, tells where the vari-
ous items are located, and tells how to get the items (identifies
the protocol needed to get the items).
Validation
Often confused with authentication. Authenti-
cation essentially certifies the user as an either “real” or “fake”
and also as either “good” or “bad”, whereas validation certifies
the “permission” to complete the call. For example, a user calls
another party using a mobile handset. The carrier certifies that
the handset is the real one and is not a clone being used by an
unauthorized person. Once the handset has been given the
“thumbs up,” the carrier checks to see if the call is even allowed
under the user’s billing plan. This next step is validation: being
given the final “green light” to complete the call.
Video
An electrical signal that carries TV picture information.
(See also: video signal.)
Video on demand (VOD)
A service that telephone compa-
nies were seeking to bring to their subscribers. VOD would
enable a subscriber to request any video they wished to see.
Visit
The act of accessing and viewing a World Wide Web site.
Visitor An individual who views a Web site.
Voice Mail (VM)
Provides the subscriber with voice mail ser-
vices, which include not only the basic voice recording func-
tions, but also time of day recording, time of day
announcements, menu driven voice recording functions, and
time of day routing.
Acronyms, Definitions, and Terminology
321

Voice over IP
Technology that supports the transmission of
voice over networks running the IP protocol, such as the
Internet, with sufficient speed and continuity to permit two-way
conversations such as a telephone call. The voice quality is not
as good as standard telephone calls placed over the Public
Switched Telephone Network (PSTN), but the cost of calls using
voice over IP is extremely low regardless of distance.
Wideband
The passing or processing of a wide range of fre-
quencies. The meaning varies with the context. In an audio sys-
tem, wideband may mean a band up to 20 kHz wide; in a TV
system, the term may refer to a band many megahertz wide.
xDSL
A set of large-scale, high-bandwidth data technologies
that can use standard twisted-pair copper wire to deliver high
speed digital services (up to 52 Mbps).
X.25
The X.25 protocol is a data link layer protocol.
Specifically, X.25 uses the LAPB portion of this layer.
322
Appendix A

A P P E N D I X  B
NETWORK
INTERCONNECT
T
his appendix has been included in order to highlight the
interconnection issues surrounding the Internet and other
networks. I had briefly touched on the issue of interconnection
in the discussion surrounding the wireline and wireless
Internet. Interconnection is not just the act of connecting net-
works together; interconnection is the act of communication
between networks. The communication between networks is
seamless when the network are interoperable (compatible). The
lack of compatibility between the wireline and wireless network
resulted in the creation of two primary interconnection docu-
ments. These documents define how the two networks are con-
nected and communicate to one another. The levels of
communication vary. The desire of the different subscriber
bases to communicate with one another drove network inter-
connection between the two network types. Total interoperabil-
ity means total seamlessness between the networks.
Seamlessness is good for the consumer and ultimately good for
the industry.
The Internet will face the same issues unless the compati-
bility issue is faced head on between the different Internet
types. Unless the industry wishes to see separate and distinct
Internets form, the only choice is to view the Internet as a net-
work compatibility imperative.
323
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

Work on TIA’s IS-93 began in 1992 when it became clear
that technology development had elevated the wireless switch
from the technical functionality of a PBX to that of a switching
system equal to that of a telephone company switch. A number
of wireless industry players had hoped to use IS-93 as a way of
forcing the RBOCs into renegotiating their interconnection
agreements. The most significant difference between IS-93 and
TR-NPL-000145 Issues 1 and 2 was the acceptance of a bi-
directional signaling relationship between the cellular carriers
and the PSTN. By acknowledging that the SS7 signaling
occurred in two directions, the RBOCs could interact with the
cellular carrier as a co-carrier, and therefore, the cellular carri-
ers could force acceptance of mutual compensation. GR-145-
CORE was written (by Bellcore) in response to IS-93 Revision
A. Bellcore’s GR is a proprietary product sold by Bellcore (now
known as Telcordia).
The reason the documents were written is really not of any
consequence. The relevant point is that both documents sup-
port the interconnection business.
Both documents were written to support technical and busi-
ness perspectives and objectives of their respective interest
groups: GR-145-CORE supports the objectives of the RBOCs
and IS-93 supports the objectives of the wireless industry
(specifically, the Cellular Telecommunications Industry
Association (CTIA) and the Telecommunications Industry
Association (TIA). IS-93 is intended to support the entire wire-
less community. IS-93 is a standard. GR-145-CORE is a com-
pany proprietary document sold for profit.
GR-145-CORE is service- and implementation-oriented. In
another words, GR-145-CORE interconnection descriptions
provide more information than just technical signaling protocol
and parameter information. GR-145-CORE addresses inter-
connection from the perspective of how the LEC is or is not
capable of providing information. For example, GR-145-CORE
describes how the LEC provides Feature Group A, B, C, and D
support. Essentially, GR-145-CORE is an implementation doc-
ument for LEC interconnection where the LEC is at the center
of the interconnection view. GR-145-CORE also promotes
Bellcore document products. TIA’s IS-93 addresses the inter-
324
Appendix B

connection not only from an implementation perspective, but
also from the perspective of a wireless carrier “wish list” where
the wireless carrier is at the center of the interconnection view;
the wireless carrier is assumed to be a network to which other
carriers wish to interconnect.
Both documents are undergoing rapid changes in order to
maintain market relevance. The following information may be
out of date by the time of this book’s publication.
Given its long history, Bellcore’s GR-145-CORE is still the
predominantly quoted industry specification. The documents
are officially titled:
•
EIA/TIA IS-93 Revision A, September 1998, “Cellular
Radio Telecommunications Ai-Di Interfaces Standard.”
•
GR-145-CORE Issue 1, March 1996, “Compatibility
Information for Interconnection of a Wireless Services
Provider and a Local Exchange Carrier Network.”
INTERFACE TYPES
GR-145-CORE focuses on 10 specific categories of intercon-
nections. IS-93 focuses on 13 specific categories of intercon-
nection. The categories of both documents are largely the same
from a protocol perspective. GR-145-CORE supports the fol-
lowing categories:
1. Direct Wireless Service Provider (WSP) connection
through a LEC end office using Multi-Frequency (MF)
signaling, called Type 1.
2. Direct WSP connection through a LEC end office using
the Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN) protocol,
also known as Type 1 with ISDN.
3. Direct WSP connection with a LEC tandem office using
MF signaling, called Type 2A.
4. Direct WSP connection with a LEC tandem office using
SS7 signaling, called Type 2A with SS7.
Network Interconnect
325

5. Direct WSP connection with a LEC Common Channel
Signaling (CCS) Signaling Transfer Point (STP), called
Type S.
6. Direct WSP connection with a specific LEC end office
using MF signaling, called Type 2B.
7. Direct WSP connection with a specific LEC end office
using SS7 signaling, called Type 2B with SS7.
8. Direct WSP connection with a LEC tandem office
arranged for 911 emergency calls, called Type 2C.
9. Direct WSP connection with a LEC tandem office
arranged for LEC operator assisted calls or directory
service using MF signaling, called Type 2D.
10. Direct WSP connection with a LEC tandem office
arranged for LEC operator assisted calls or directory
service using SS7 signaling, called Type 2D with SS7.
TIA’s IS-93 supports the following categories:
1. Trunk with Line Treatment using MF signaling, called
Point of Interface (POI) -T1.
2. General Trunk Access Signaling using MF signaling,
called POI-T4.
3. General Trunk Access Signaling using SS7 signaling,
called POI-T5 and POI-S5.
4. Direct Trunk Access Signaling using MF signaling, called
POI-T6.
5. Direct Trunk Access Signaling using SS7 signaling, called
POI-T7 and POI-S7.
6. Operator Services Access Signaling using MF signaling,
called POI-T10.
7. Operator Services Access Signaling using SS7 signaling,
called POI-T11 and POI-S11.
8. Call Management Features Signaling using MF signaling,
called POI-T12.
326
Appendix B

9. Call Management Features Signaling using SS7 signaling,
called POI-T13 and POI-S13.
10. Basic Signaling Transport using SS7 signaling, called
POI-S14.
11. Global Title Signaling Transport using SS7 signaling,
called POI-S15.
12. Cellular Nationwide Roaming Signaling using SS7
signaling, called POI-S16.
13. TCAP Applications using SS7 signaling, called POI-S17.
Network Interconnect
327

This page intentionally left blank.

B I B L I O G R A P H Y
Azmak, Okan, (1996-2000), telecommunications expert. Senior net-
work architect for Flash Networks.
Bates, Regis J. and Gregory, Donald (1998), “Voice and Data
Communications Handbook,, McGraw-Hill.
Berson, Alex; Smith, Stephen; and Thearling, Kurt, (2000),
“Building Data Mining Applications for CRM,” McGraw-Hill.
Chu, Lawrence (1984-1999), currently President of Mediacom
Ventures Consulting.  Consolidated work and teachings of L.
Chu, New York Telephone, NYNEX, and Bell Atlantic-engineer-
ing and regulatory.
Eifinger, Charles P. (1984-2000), consolidated teachings of Charles
Eifinger, telecomm engineering consultant.
Feit, Sidnie Dr. (1999), “TCP/IP,” McGraw-Hill.
Fix, Michael S. (1996-1999), United States Air Force retired, for-
mer Director of engineering for Excel, currently Director of
Technology for Lucent.
Goralski, Walter J. and Kolon, Matthew C. (2000), “IP Telephony,”
McGraw-Hill.
Jeffrey, Stu (1998-2000), telecommunications expert
Kotler, Philip (1997), “Marketing Management,” Prentice-Hall.
McGrath Hadwen, Eileen (1998-2000), consolidated work.
President of McGrath Hadwen Associates; Boulder, CO.
Notes on the Network 1980, AT&T.
“Official Wireless Application Protocol,” by Wireless Application
Protocol Forum, Ltd.; Wiley.
O’Neill, James (1999-2000), former vice president for ITDS, cur-
rently international billing consultant.
329
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

Proffitt, James (2000), former vice president of engineering for
AirTouch Cellular and Verizon Wireless.  Consolidated work of
J. Proffitt.
Russell, Alicia (1996-2000), formerly of SBC Corporation, currently
Director for Technology for Mobileum.  Consolidated work of A.
Russell.
Spragg, Mark (2000), Price Waterhouse Coopers.
St. Laurent, Simon and DeLong, B.K. (2000), “XHTML, Moving
Towards XML,” M&T Publishing.
Standing, Craig (2000), “Internet Commerce Development,” Artech
House.
Taylor, Carlyn (2000), Price Waterhouse Coopers.
Telecommunication Transmission Engineering (1977), AT&T.
Wilder, Floyd, Guide to the TCP/IP Protocol Suite, (1993),
ARTECH House.
Work of the World Wide Web Consortium, (1998-2000).
Young, Harry (1992-1999), consolidated work of Harry Young, inter-
connection consultant.
330
Bibliography

INDEX
331
Symbols
9-1-1 call location, 266
A
access options, 70
Internet, 28
commerce models, 60
ISPs, 9
portals, 53
providers, 43, 269
accounts payable/receivable 
systems, 239
action plans, business 
planning, 84
adaptability of Internet, 164
adaptive routing, IP 
datagrams, 168
addresses
IP. See IP addresses.
IPv4 limitations, 167
network design plans, 
133-134
advantages of brick and 
mortar stores over Internet
retailers, 271
advertising, 35
banner advertisements, 27
on the Internet, 49
aggregating traffic, 56
alternate routing, network 
design, 124
analyses
customer needs, 88-89
lost customers, 91
problems and goals, business
planning, 84
ANSI (American National
Standards Institute), 17
anti-wireless Internet 
perspective, 214
applets, 35
Application layer
OSI model, 157
TCP/IP, 159
architectural switching plans, 
118–119
architecture
Internet, 18–19
networks, 120–122
ARPA (Advanced Research
Project Agency), 154
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

ARPANET (Advanced Research
Project Agency Network), 
16, 72
ASPs (Application Service
Providers), 57, 141–142, 
215, 273
attitudes and consumer 
behavior, 95
automated customer care 
systems, 242
availability
ISPs, 10
networks, 145
B
B2B relationships (business to
business), 62, 203
B2C relationships (business to
consumer), 62, 65, 203
B2G relationships (business to 
government), 62, 205
B2SB relationships (business to
small business), 62, 203
backbone of Internet, 32
bandwidth, network planning, 
109, 149
banner advertising, 27
bearer services, WAP, 193
beliefs and consumer 
behavior, 95
bidirectional transmissions, 22
billing, 231
common mistakes, 244–245
costs, 246–247
recording, 244
rendering, 244
brick and mortar retailers,
advantages over Internet
retailers, 271
buffering, VoIP, 133
business issues
e-commerce, 75–76
m-commerce, 217
business models, 107–108
access providers, 43
Internet, 32, 68, 269–270
ISPs, 39, 43
business planning, 83
action plans, 84
business relationships, 96
complaint systems, 91
customers, 86
analyzing needs, 88–89
lost customer analysis, 91
satisfaction, 92
designing solutions, 84
early adopters, 87
human resource 
management, 98
identifying problems/
goals, 84
infrastructure, 99
integrators, 100
Internet presences, 88
market demand, 106
marketing, 100
networks
management, 112
reliability, 113
security, 111
operations, 84
332
Index

retail markets, 102
sales, 101
scalability, 112
services, performance, 111
store image, 103
strategic alliances, 99
tactical planning, 104–105
technical challenges,
109–110
value chain, 97–99
business rules, 81–82
buying behavior, 95
C
CALEA (Communications
Assistance for Law
Enforcement Act), 264
categories of markets, 70–71
CDPD (Cellular Digital Packet
Data), 193
challenges to e-commerce 
success, 75–76
characteristics of networks, 1
chat rooms, 52
child restrictions, 260, 263
CHTML (Compact HTML), 
i-mode, 196
CLECs (Competitive Local
Exchange Carriers), 10
commerce models and Internet
access, 60
common mistakes in billing, 
244–245
competitive market analysis,
88–89
complaint systems, 13, 91, 
235, 239
complex buying behavior, 95
components
Internet, 24
networks, 4
connections to the Internet, 
25, 28
consumer behavior, 93–94
content formats, WAP, 181–183
content providers, 280
controlled access, 51
controlling Internet 
content, 260
convergence, 200–201
corporate Intranets, 30
costs of billing, 246–247
CRM (Customer-Relationship
Management), 276–278
cultural factors in customer 
behavior, 93
customer billing. See billing.
customer care. See customer 
service.
customer change systems, 240
customer service, 12, 76,
231–234
automated systems, 242
basic customer needs, 235
complaint systems, 235
CRM (Customer-
Relationship 
Management), 276
Customer satisfaction, 
88–89, 92
Index
333

internal operations, 238–239
mobility, 241
outsourcing, 241–242
primary access points, 241
profile systems, 240
services provided, 236
technical support, 236
customers
analyzing needs, 88–89
business planning, 86
cultural factors in 
behavior, 93
D
Data Link layer, OSI 
model, 156
databases, 6
access options, 68
management, 58
datagrams, IP, 168
delays on networks, 147
designing
business planning 
solutions, 84
networks. See network 
planning.
desktop computers, 72
directed advertising, 228
disaster recovery planning, 121
dissonance-reducing buying 
behavior, 95
diversity routing, 8
DNSs (Domain Name 
Servers), 28
DOM (Document Object 
Model), 179
dynamic routing, 5–6
IP datagrams, 168
network design, 125–126
E
e-business. See e-commerce.
e-commerce (electronic 
commerce), 36, 60, 203
business challenges, 75–76
inventory, 76
investors
questions, 41
relationships, 42
negative effects, 79
positive effects, 78
technical challenges, 109
early adopters, 87
economics and the Internet, 
284–285
electronic surveillance, 265
email, 35, 45, 73
access problems, 39
ISP services, 40
negative effects, 79
enhanced concierge 4-1-1 
services, 228
equipment and standards 
compatibility, m-commerce,
219–220
ERPs (Enterprise Resource
Planning), 275
ESP (Encapsulating Security
Payload), 111
Ethernet, 17, 72
execution of business 
plans, 105
334
Index

F
FCC (Federal Communications
Commission), 267
file storage options via ISPs, 46
firewalls, 278
flat rate billing, 245–247
flexibility of Internet, 162
flow labels, IPv6, 170
focus groups, 90
fragmentation, IP 
datagrams, 168
fraud prevention, 255
FTP (File Transfer 
Protocol), 160
functions of Internet, 34
G
gateway servers, 181
gateways, 276
goals of business planning, 84
governmental controls and 
regulations for the Internet,
260–262
GR-145-CORE 
specification, 30
H
habitual buying behavior, 95
handsets, 2
i-mode, 194
services, 222–224
hardware, ISPs, 24
hierarchical addresses, 
IPv6, 170
hierarchical routing, 8, 124
history of Internet, 15–17
hits, search engines, 50
HLRs (Home Location 
Registries), 58
home users, ISP access, 30
hosts, ISPs, 24
HTML (HyperText Markup
Language), 179, 184
HTTP (HyperText Transfer
Protocol), 179
human resource 
management, 98
hyperlinks, 50
I
i-mode, 29, 174, 194
cHTML (compact 
HTML), 196
differences from next 
generation wireless, 200
differences from WAP,
197–198
handsets, 194
ICMP (Internet Control
Message Protocol), 161
IETF (Internet Engineering
Task Force), 155
IGMP (Internet Group
Management Protocol), 161
ILECs (Incumbent Local
Exchange Carriers ), 15, 109
implementation plans, business
planning, 84
in-band transmissions, 8
inbound logistics, 97
Index
335

information flows, IPv6, 170
information loss, network 
planning, 150
infrastructures, 99
infrastructure model, 
WWW, 181
instant messaging, 52
integrating OSS systems, 251
integrators, 100
interchangeable NPAs 
(numbering plan areas), 134
interconnections between 
networks, 30
internal operations, customer 
care, 238–239
Internet
access, 28, 70
adaptability, 164
addresses, network 
design, 135
advertising, 49
architecture, 18–19
ASPs, 57, 273
B2C relationships, 65
backbone, 32
banner advertising, 27
bidirectional 
transmissions, 22
business models, 32, 43, 68,
269–270
business rules, 81–82
chat rooms, 52
child restrictions, 260
commerce models and 
access, 60
components, 24
content formats, 181
content providers, 280
content types, 181
convergence, 259
CRM, 276, 278
DNSs, 28
dynamic routing, 5
e-commerce, inventory, 76
economics, 284–285
email, 45
ERPs, 275
file storage, 46
flexibility, 162
functions, 34
gateways, 276
governmental controls, 260
history, 15, 17
instant messaging, 52
marketing, 100
modems, 25
naming models, 180
negative retail effects, 79
next generation, 283
NSPs, 279
portals, 49–55
positive retail effects, 78
programming models, 178
pros and cons, 80
retailers, advantages over
brick and mortar stores, 272
sales, 101
search engines, 50
self-regulation of 
content, 261
software, 26
starting businesses, questions
336
Index

to ask, 21
terminals, 25
URLs, 180
voice services, 116
VoIP, 59
Web sites, 46
wireless protocols, 
173–175, 178
WWW access, 47
Internet layer, TCP/IP, 158
Internet Society, 18
intranets, 30
investor relationships with 
e-business, 42
IP (Internet Protocol), 160, 163
addresses, 135
datagrams, 168
packets, 147
reliability of voice/video 
transmissions, 59
IP2C relationships 
(information/product to 
consumer), 66
IPv4 (Internet Protocol 
version 4), 165–167
IPv6 (Internet Protocol 
version 6), 169–172
ISDN (Integrated Services
Digital Network), 
equipment and standards
incompatibilities, 220
ISO (International Organization
for Standardization), 155
ISPs (Internet Service 
Providers), 40
accessibility, 9
databases, 68
ASPs, 142
banner advertising, 27
billing
common mistakes, 244–245
costs, 246–247
business models, 39
chat rooms, 52
complaint systems, 13
customer service, 12, 76, 
241–242
email, 40, 45
file storage, 46
governmental 
regulations, 262
hardware, 24
home user access, 30
hosts, 24
instant messaging, 52
Internet connections, 28
investor questions, 41
network interconnect, 31
networks, 24
architectural switching
plans, 118–119
planning, 116
NMSs (network management
systems), 8, 125
OSSs (operational support 
systems), 248–249
mediation systems, 251
portals, 49–55
provisioning services, 68
public responsibility, 269
routers, 25
search engines, 50
servers, 15
services provided, 43
Index
337

signaling, 15
software, 26
subscriber billing systems, 11
TCP/IP, 15
technical support, 13
telephone numbers, 15
voice services, 115–116
VoIP, 59
Web sites, 46
WWW access, 47
ITU (International
Telecommunications
Union), 18
K–L
keywords, search engines, 
50, 53
LANs (Local Area Networks), 
2, 72, 154
laptops, 72
law enforcement and electronic
surveillance, 265
leakage of revenue, 253–255
learning consumer behavior, 95
LECs (local exchange 
carriers), 118
lifestyle, influence on consumer
behavior, 94
limitations of WAP, 187
location technology, wireless
industry implementations,
227–229
lost customer analysis, 91
M
m-commerce (mobile 
e-commerce), 37, 208–209
business issues, 217
equipment and standards 
compatibility, 219–220
services, 222–223
technical issues, 214
value chain analyses, 217
mainframes, 72
maintenance schedules for 
networks, 137
management plans, network
design, 137
managing
databases, 58
networks, business 
planning, 112
portals, 56
services, 140
marketing, 98–100
markets
analyses, 88–89
categories, 70–71
demand, 106
mediation systems, 251
MF signaling 
(Multi-Frequency), 14
mistakes commonly made in
billing, 244–245
mobility, 210
customer care, 241
personal, 211
terminal, 213
wireless issues, 225–226
338
Index

modems, 15, 25
motivation and consumer 
behavior, 94
MTBF (Mean Time 
Between Failures), 
network planning, 146
N
naming models
Internet, 180
WAP, 183
NECA (National Exchange
Carrier Association), 268
negative e-commerce effects of
Internet, 79
Netscape, 73
network element 
management, 137
Network layer
OSI model, 156
TCP/IP, 158–159
network planning, 116
alternate routing, 124
architectural switching 
plans, 118–119
availability, 145
bandwidth, 149
dynamic routing, 125–126
information loss, 150
Internet addresses, 135
maintenance schedules, 137
management plans, 137
MTBF (Mean Time Between
Failures), 146
numbering plans, 133–134
packet routing, 127–128
performance, 138
QoS (Quality of Service), 
reliability, 146
ring architectures, 120
routing, 122–123
financial relationships, 
129–130
routing tables, update 
schedules, 138
security, 148–149
services, 138–140
signaling plans, 135
star architectures, 122
traffic load management, 138
transaction delays, 147
transmission facilities,
131–132
tree architectures, 120
networks
common characteristics, 1
components, 4
databases, 6
interconnections, 30–31
Internet connections, 28
ISPs, 24
management, 112
reliability, 113
routers, 5, 25
routing tables, 6
security
business planning, 111
servers, 16
Index
339

signaling, 15, 153
switches, 5
systems management, 139
transmission facilities, 7
workstations, 16
next generation Internet, 283
next generation wireless, differ-
ences from WAP/i-mode, 200
NMSs (network management 
systems), 8, 125
NOCs (Network Operations
Centers), 137
NSPs (Network Service 
Providers), 279
numbering plans, network
design, 133–134
O
operations, business planning, 
84, 97
OPs (Other Providers), 281
origin servers, 181
OSI model (Open Systems
Interconnection), 155–157
OSSs (operational support 
systems), 248–251
out-of-band transmissions, 8
outbound logistics, 97
outsourcing customer care, 
241–242
P
packet  routing, network 
design, 127–128
packet data networks, 8
perception and consumer 
behavior, 94
performance, network 
planning, 138
personal factors, consumer 
behavior, 94
personal mobility, 211
Physical layer
OSI model, 156
TCP/IP, 158
planning business, 83
action plans, 84
analyzing customer needs,
88–89
business relationships, 96
complaint systems, 91
customers, 86
satisfaction, 92
designing solutions to 
goals, 84
early adopters, 87
human resource 
management, 98
identifying problems/
goals, 84
infrastructure, 99
integrators, 100
Internet presences, 88
lost customer analysis, 91
market demand, 106
marketing, 100
networks
management, 112
reliability, 113
security, 111
operations, 84
340
Index

retail markets, 102
sales, 101
scalability, 112
service level 
performance, 111
store image, 103
strategic alliances, 99
strategic planning, 104–105
technical challenges,
109–110
value chain, 97–99
planning networks, 116
alternate routing, 124
architectural switching plans,
118–119
availability, 145
bandwidth, 149
dynamic routing, 125–126
information loss, 150
Internet addresses, 135
maintenance schedules, 137
management plans, 137
MTBF (Mean Time Between
Failures), 146
numbering plans, 133–134
packet routing, 127–128
performance, 138
QoS, 143–144
reliability, 146
routing, 122–123, 129–130
routing tables, update 
schedules, 138
security, 148–149
services, 138–140
traffic management, 138
transaction delays, 147
transmission facilities,
131–132
portals, 49–56
positive e-commerce effects 
of Internet, 78
Presentation layer, OSI 
model, 156
preventing fraud, 255
primary access points, 
customer care, 241
problems, identifying during
business planning, 84
procurement, 98
programming models for the
Internet, 178
pros and cons of Internet, 80
protocols
FTP, 160
HTTP, 179
i-mode, 174, 194
ICMP, 161
IGMP, 161
IP, 160
IPv6, 169
RIP, 161
SMTP, 160
SNMP, 160
TCP/IP, 15, 135, 153–154
UDP, 160
WAP, 18, 174–175
wireless, 173–175, 178
proxy servers, 181
PSTNs (Packet Switched
Telephone Networks),
Internet connections, 28
psychological factors and 
consumer behavior, 94
Index
341

Q–R
QoS (Quality of Service), 
143–144, 166
recording billing, 244
regulations for Internet voice 
communications, 262
relationships with other 
businesses, 96
reliability
IPv4 limitations, 166
networks, business planning,
113, 146
voice/video transmissions, 59
wireline/wireless carriers, 162
rendering billing, 244
research, 35
retailers
advantages of various types,
271–272
inventory, 76
markets, 102–103
revenue assurance, 231,
253–255
revenue leakage, 253, 255
ring architecture, network 
design, 120
RIP (Routing Information
Protocol), 161
routers, 5, 25
routing
alternate, 124
dynamic, 125–126
network design, 122–123
financial relationships, 
129–130
packet, 127–128
routing tables, update 
schedules, 6, 138
S
sales, 98, 101
scalability, business 
planning, 112
SCPs (Service Control 
Points), 58
search engines
hits, 50
keywords, 50, 53
security
IPv4 limitations, 166
network planning, 111,
148–149
self-healing ring networks, 120
self-promotion on the 
Internet, 49
self-regulation of Internet 
content, 261
servers, 15–16
service bureaus, 58
service order provisioning 
systems, 239
service providers. See ISPs.
services, 98
customer care, 235–236
ISP provisions, 43
m-commerce, 222–223
management, 140
performance levels, business
planning, 111
provisioning, 68
network planning, 138
WAP and i-mode 
provisions, 198
Session layer, OSI model, 156
seven OÕs of consumer 
behavior, 92–93
342
Index

SGML (Standard Generalized
Markup Language), 179
signaling, 15, 135, 153
signature on file billing,
245–247
SMTP (Simple Message
Transfer Protocol), 160
SNMP (Simple Network
Management Protocol), 160
social factors and consumer 
behavior, 94
software, 26
solutions to problems, 
business planning, 84
SS7 (Signaling System 7), 14
staffing and customer care, 242
standards and equipment 
compatibility, m-commerce,
219–220
star architecture, network 
design, 122
strategic alliances, 99
strategic planning, 104
subscriber billing systems, 11
suggestion systems, 91
surveillance options and the
Internet, 265
switches, 5
switching plans, network
design, 118–119
SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, Threats), 89
system change reporting, 239
T
T2G relationships (taxpayer 
to government), 66, 205
tactical planning, 105
TCP/IP (Transmission Control
Protocol/Internet Protocol),
15, 135, 153–155
Application layer, 159
Internet layer, 158
Network Interface layer, 158
Network layer, 158–159
Physical/Data Link layer, 158
Transport layer, 159
technical issues
business planning, 110
e-commerce, 109
m-commerce, 214
technical support, 13, 236
technology development, 98
telecommunications 
networks, 2
common characteristics, 1
components, 4
telephone numbers, ISPs, 15
terminal mobility, 213
terminals, 2, 25
TIA ANSI-93 standard
(Telecommunications
Industry Association), 30
Token Ring networks, 120
traffic
aggregation, 56
direction services, 228
network management, 138
transaction delays, 
networks, 147
transitioning from IPv4 to 
IPv6, 172
transmission facilities, network
planning, 7, 131–132
Index
343

Transport layer
OSI model, 156
TCP/IP, 159
tree architecture, network 
design, 120
trouble ticket reporting 
systems, 239
U
UDP (User Datagram
Protocol), 160–161
update schedules, routing 
tables, 138
URLs (Uniform Resource
Locators), 180
URNs, (Uniform Resource
Names), 180
USF (Universal Service Fund),
266–268
V
value chain, 97–100, 217
variety-seeking buying 
behavior, 95
VLRs (Visitor Location 
Registries), 58
voice services, 115–116
voice transmissions, IP 
reliability, 59
VoIP (Voice over Internet
Protocol), 59, 116, 133
VPNs (Virtual Private
Networks), 2
W
W3C (World Wide Web
Consortium), Internet 
programming model, 178
WAE layer (Wireless
Application Environment),
WAP, 188
WANs (Wide Area Networks), 
2, 161
WAP (Wireless Application
Protocol ), 18, 174–175
architecture, 188
bearer services, 192–193
CDPD support, 193
content formats, 183
differences from i-mode, 
197–198
differences from next genera-
tion wireless, 200
limitations, 187
naming models, 183
WAE layer, 188
WDP layer, 192
WSP layer, 190
WTLS layer, 191
WTP layer, 190
WDP layer (Wireless Datagram
Protocol), WAP, 192
Web browsers, 35, 178
Web pages, publishing, 35
Web sites, 46
B2C relationships, 65
hyperlinks, 50
wireless industry
9-1-1 call location, 266
handsets, 222–224
344
Index

location technology, 227–229
mobility issues, 225–226
wireless Internet protocols, 29,
173–175, 178
wireless networks
hierarchical routing, 8
reliability, 162
wireline carriers, starting
Internet business, 21
wireline networks, 162
WML (Wireless Markup
Language), 183
workstations, 16
WSP layer (Wireless Session
Protocol), WAP, 190
WTLS layer (Wireless Transport
Layer Security), WAP, 191
WTP layer (Wireless
Transaction Protocol), 
WAP, 190
WWW (World Wide Web), 28,
47, 178, 181
X
X2X relationships (exchange to
exchange), 62, 205
XHTML (eXtensible 
HTML), 186
XML (Extensible Markup
Language), 179, 184–185
Index
345

This page intentionally left blank.

A B O U T
T H E
A U T H O R
P.J. Louis has nearly a quarter of a century’s worth of experience
in the telecom business.  Mr. Louis is currently Vice President
of Carrier Marketing & Product Management with
TruePosition, Inc., a leading provider of wireless location 
services.  Mr. Louis had also served as chief of staff for engi-
neering in NYNEX.  He has held a number of leadership posi-
tions within Bell Communications Research and NextWave
Wireless. Mr. Louis is a former officer of the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Communications
Society—New York Section. Mr. Louis is a registered engineer
in the State of New York. Mr. Louis is also the author of
"Telecommunications Internetworking."
Copyright 2001 P.J. Louis.   Click Here for Terms of Use.

This page intentionally left blank by Jacktw.

