
MacBook Pro: For Seniors
 
Copyright © 2014
Conceptual Kings.
All are rights reserved.
This book or any portion thereof may not be reproduced or used in any manner
whatsoever without the express written permission of the publisher except for
the use of brief quotations in a book review.
Introduction
The MacBook Pro is one of the releases of the Apple computer line that was initially
introduced to the market as far back as January 2006. It is a powerful computer unit that
allows users to be able do whatever they need in an easy and efficient way. 
Senior citizens are defined as people who are over the age of 55 years old and may not be
particularly technologically inclined. They may have challenges in using computers but
with the latest Apple technology, they have made it somewhat easier for them to
understand new concepts.
One of the main aims of Apple is to make their devices more user friendly and allow
persons to easily achieve what they want to do. There should be no bells and whistles in
getting their activities done. They aim to be the leader in computing and with their
innovative devices they are certainly getting there.
Related specifically to the MacBook Pro, it has many features that give seniors a
comfortable experience in using computers. From the display of the device to the
applications that can be downloaded, it provides efficiency that cannot be overlooked. The
senior will have a unit that is mobile and quite powerful that can do anything for them
practically anywhere there is a Wi-Fi signal.
Also coupling with the other iOS devices, this will make the senior very useful as all of
their devices will be working in tandem with each other. The continuity feature will allow
them to start something on one device and complete it on the next.
The MacBook Pro is also thin which a great feature that all users especially for senior
citizens. This book will explore the various features of the MacBook Pro as it relates to
senior citizens.
1. Display
The display of the MacBook Pro is brilliant and with a multi-million pixel view it is

quite stunning for senior citizens. It is quite bright and allows them to clearly see
what is being displayed and prevents any confusion on their part. Therefore, if the
user has a visual challenge, they will be helped by various display options that can
be enhanced on the machine.
 
2.       Screen Glare
There is a retina display version of the MacBook Pro which reduces glare on the
user based on the new display technology. In reducing the glare, it is great for
seniors that may wear glasses and the glare would have created an issue for them. In
addition to this, the colors are quite distinct so they will always be certain of the
color variation that is displayed on the screen.
 
3.       Processor
The MacBook Pro comes with a powerful processor that will allow the senior to
quickly carry out their desired activity. It has superior power with capabilities that
will enhance the performance of the machine and in turn increase the productivity of
the senior. They generally do not like to wait to get things done so having a
powerful machine will encourage them to use and incorporate technology more into
their lives.
 
4.       Technology
Anytime the senior user is utilizing the MacBook Pro, they can be assured that they
will be doing it with the latest technology. The applications that are on the system
will use the fastest and efficient method to complete a task. The senior’s efficiency
will be increased due to the use of the unit.
 
5.       Graphics
The amazing graphics capabilities will assure the senior that the system will be able
to run anything they choose to open on the machine. They will always be given the
highest graphics output they can possibly get. This will even be useful when their
grand-children are with them and would love to run games on their machine.
 
6.       Battery Life
The MacBook Pro will give the senior great battery life so they can use their
machine without cords for a long time. Usually, a senior will not want to be
restricted so this is a great feature for them. The time of use may range up to 9 hours
of battery use and this allows them to be flexible and free to use their machine
wirelessly wherever they desire.

 
7.       Faster Start up
The machine has been designed to provide a fast start up so users can get going
faster. This is great for an older computer user who may not have much patience and
really wants to complete their task in the shortest possible time. They will
experience faster speed than they believe and will be satisfied with the response and
the output.
 
8.       Storage Space
The unit comes with over 1TB storage space so the senior user will almost never be
able to exhaust that space. This is more than sufficient space to store all their
documents, photos, videos and music files. After the file has been stored, it can be
searched for easily when the user needs it.
 
9.       Energy Efficiency
The MacBook Pro utilizes improved technology that minimizes the use of movable
parts. While the machine is durable and quiet it is highly energy efficient which will
be sure to delight the senior citizen. It works well with them as when they are not
using it, sleep mode will be activated which does not use much electricity once it is
in sleep mode.
 
10.   Wi-Fi
The MacBook Pro has powerful Wi-Fi features which allows the senior citizen to go
almost anywhere there is a signal. Once they log on to a network they can be
assured the machine will be giving them the fastest possible connection. While
connected in the network they will also have file sharing options.
 
11.   Thunderbolt 2
The machine comes integrated with Thunderbolt 2 which is one of the latest input
and output technologies. The senior citizen will be able to keep on the fore front of
technology by using the MacBook Pro. It is one of the leaders in processing data
from peripheral devices.
 
12.   Audio Output
The audio output from the MacBook Pro is immaculate and clear so the senior can
hear the sound output clearly. If there is any discrepancy in the sound they can
increase the sound output until it is loud enough to hear. Even if they have some

hearing impairment, it can be facilitated as the sound can be further enhanced to suit
their needs.
 
13.   Microphone
There is a built in microphone that allows the senior to input their voice into the
machine. This can be used to facilitate meetings on the computer or to record audio
as required by the user. When in use, it eliminates background noise, therefore if
they are making audio, background interference will be reduced.
 
14.   HD Camera
The MacBook has an HD Camera that the senior can use to capture their special
events. These pictures can then be shared with their friends or family easily via
social media. In addition to pictures the camera can be used to capture video as well
in high definition.
 
15.   Touchpad
The touchpad is one of the main ways that the user can interact with the computer.
The senior citizen will find it quite easy and convenient to use due to the technology
that is behind it. It uses intuitive gestures to operate and the actions are all natural so
there is nothing much for them to learn but to do what feels right. Some of these
gestures include pinching, tapping, swiping and clicking.
 
16.   Keyboard Lights
Sometimes a senior citizen may be using the machine in an area where there is poor
lighting. The machine comes with the feature of backlit keys which can be adjusted
automatically based on the surrounding conditions.
 
17.   iCloud
The iCloud service allows the seniors to back up their many years’ worth of
information. As a senior they will have many important documents that they will
want to preserve. With the iCloud service, you will be guaranteed that information
will be stored to the cloud service and will be protected and stored forever without
worry.
 
18.   App Store
The MacBook has access to the app store where the senior user can choose to
download any app they desire to achieve their needs. There are over one million

apps that are available that cover many areas of interest that can help the senior
achieve their needs.
 
19.   Customer Support
There is great customer service for Apple products which are second to none. The
senior user can access phone support, in store support or online support. Any way
they chose they can be assured that they will be directed as to how to achieve what
they need without any difficulty.
 
20.   Compact, Stylish and Powerful
The MacBook Pro was engineered to be stylish while being compact and useful. The
makers placed emphasis on a thin design that will have the user conveniently using
the device anywhere they go.
 
21.   OS X
The OS X operating system is perfect for seniors as it makes tasks easier while the
environment is very user friendly. The senior can use this to easily find their apps
without any bells and whistles that complicate the operation. The apps are clearly
laid out and can be easily accessed when they are necessary.
 
22.   Apple Communication
The Apple devices will communicate easily with each other through the improved
technology. This allows seamless interaction with each other so the senior user can
start a process on one device and then complete the same process on another without
losing what they were doing.
 
23.   Least Effort
The device is perfect for a senior citizen as in all features it takes the least amount of
effort to get anything accomplished. With the use of the applications, they have been
programmed to get input and produce output as how the user expects to see it.
 
24.   Operation of Apps
The operation of the applications are made simpler by having the icons in an easy to
locate area. Once the application has been opened it will automatically update
without any human intervention necessary.                          
 

25.   Security
The MacBook Pro will offer security to the senior citizen and ensure that their data
is protected and kept safe at all times. The encryption is always active so the user
can always feel confident that anything they use will not be interfered with by
unauthorised third parties.
 
26.   Connectivity
While the senior has great options to use on their MacBook, the system can also be
compatible with Windows as well. It can be easily connected to a Windows network
to share files, photos, music and other content.
 
27.   Accessibility Features
There are options that allow the OS to assist persons who may have a disability
preventing them from efficiently using the machine. There are features such as voice
readers, magnification and scalable screens that cater to hearing impaired or visually
impaired users respectively.
 
28.   Functionality
The functionality of the MacBook Pro is the best you can find as there is an app
available to do almost anything a senior citizen will require. By default, it comes
with standard apps that are centred on creativity and productivity. If that is not
enough, they can download additional ones that will increase their productivity.
 
29.   Pictures
The MacBook Pro can help the senior citizen to take pictures and carry out various
operations on the photos. The pictures can be indexed or organized in different
ways. There are apps that can allow the user to edit the pictures and enhance them in
any way they desire.
 
30.   Movies
The senior user can also use the MacBook Pro to record movies as they desire. This
could be their favorite moments that they can record and then share it with their
family and friends through social media.
 
31.   Music
For the seniors who love music, they can access all their favorite songs on the

MacBook Pro. They can also create music files if they desire by using the Garage
band app. This could be for the more technologically savvy senior citizen who wants
to maximize their use out of the system.
 
32.   Typing
There are word processing applications that will allow the senior to create their
documents on the fly. The way the apps are designed, they flow naturally and allow
them to operate it in the most natural way possible. They can also enhance the
created documents by adding pictures, shapes or charts.
 
33.   Spreadsheets
The numbers app allows the senior to calculate and manipulate their financial data.
They can see their data visually using charts which can give a better depiction of the
data. This can be a useful way to manage their pensions, budgets or any other
financial matter.
 
34.   Internet
The senior can use the internet to access any type of information they desire. As a
senior citizen, they will have varied interests and these things are what they use to
occupy their time. Therefore, using the internet, they would want to read and see
things that are of interest to them. The internet is filled with content that they will
never be able to exhaust all that is available on any particular topic.
 
35.   Communication Methods
All of the senior citizens messaging needs can be all done from the MacBook Pro.
They can email, chat or text message all from the unit. The machine can also
manage various inboxes if the user has more than one email account. They are
allowed to add all their accounts and the system will manage it for them.
 
36.   iMessage
There is a feature called iMessage which allows the user to be able to instant
message anyone who uses an iOS device. Therefore, anyone who has an iPhone,
iPad, iPod touch can share messages amongst each other. The messages can contain
music, photos, documents or contacts.
 
37.   Calendar
The calendar app allows the senior to always be coordinated with what they need to

be done at a particular time. The senior can setup the calendar to function how they
want it to view at a particular time. They can also add features such as weather and
maps to enhance the calendar experience.
 
38.   Contacts
The contacts on the MacBook Pro can be used to maintain all the contacts of the
senior on all of their iOS devices. Once the record is updated on the system it will
synchronise on all times to ensure that the record is kept up to date. It works on the
premise that you update one area and it updates all records.
 
39.   iTunes
The iTunes app allows the senior to have access to entertainment, education, music
and many other options. The content can be organized just how they desire it and
can be shared with other members of their family.
 
40.   iBooks
The senior can access different books that will suit their interests. They can read
multiple books on the machine and save them for later. The book can viewed in a
reader and gestures can be used to navigate the books by swiping or pinching to
advanced pages or zoom in. The books will be accessible on all the seniors’ iOS
devices.
 
41.   Navigation
There are navigation apps that can help the senior to plot a route to anywhere they
desire to go. They will never be lost again by using the available applications to help
them. They may also get emailed directions or print outs that will help them to find
their destination.
 
42.   Photo Booth
The Photo booth application will allow the senior to capture photos of their special
moments and then create short videos using them. The application has built in
features that allow them to easily share the content on Facebook or Twitter without
complications.
 
43.   Backups
While keeping the senior’s information protected, they can also rest assured that
they will not lose their information due to the ability to back up to the Time

Machine. This allows them to save the entire contents of their computer which
includes their files, applications, accounts and system preferences.
 
44.   Screenshots
Screenshots can be a useful feature to a senior citizen as they can conveniently
capture what is being displayed on the screen. This is helpful when they may need
help with an issue and cannot describe it, they can take a screen capture and share it
with someone who can help them.
 
45.   New Apps
The seniors can access the news they like to see by downloading the application
related to the station they want. A senior likes to keep up to date with the latest news
stories and their MacBook can be configured to keep them in the loop as new stories
come up.
 
46.   TV Shows
There are TV Show applications such as Netflix that allows the senior user to access
movies and TV shows as desired. They may have older shows that they remind them
of the old days and they can easily access. This is a useful app that will keep them
occupied and interested for a long time.
 
47.   Magazines
Again, the senior may have various interests that they enjoy to partake in. That
interest may be associated with visual content such as online magazines in which
they can access. If they subscribe they can read their magazines online and always
remain knowledgeable on the latest developments.
 
48.   Cooking Apps
There are also cooking apps that allow the user to locate various dishes and the
recipes to make them. Along with the recipe, they may get instructional videos that
show how the steps should be done as well.
 
49.   Vintage Radio Applications
The senior will also have applications that will link them to original programming
that aired years ago in their younger days. This can allow them to hear programming
that reminds them of that time and enjoy music that they listened to in the past.

 
50.   Medication applications
There are also medication apps that may help the senior to remember when to take
their medications. The app may also give information on the medication they take so
they can ensure that the medicine is right for them and treating the right symptoms.
 
 

