
MacBook Air: For Beginners 2015
Copyright © 2014
Conceptual Kings.
All are rights reserved.
This book or any portion thereof may not be reproduced or used in any manner
whatsoever without the express written permission of the publisher except for
the use of brief quotations in a book review.
Introduction
At the company’s Worldwide Developer Conference in June 2013, Apple Inc. released the
updated MacBook Air device to the public. The MacBook Air is available in two models;
the 13 inch and 11 inch. The MacBook Air notebook boasts innovation and continued
quality for technology consumers.
The new design offers users the standard storage of 4 GB, secondary storage of up to
128GB, 3.3 GHz of Turbo Boost and improved battery life. It also has as a part of its
design a thin full-sized keyboard, retina display, and the new Force-Touch track-pad. Also
included is a 1.4-1.6GHz dual-core, 720p FaceTime camera and Bluetooth 4.0.
Apple Inc.’s new MacBook Air and its many features will be the focus of this book. We
will explore the various ways in which the use of the notebook may be maximized to
increase consumer enjoyment. It is hoped that at the end of the piece, the knowledge base
surrounding the product will be increased among users.
Facts/Features
1. Accessories
When opening your MacBook Air from its packaging for the first time, users should
check for the power adapter, an AC wall plug and the power cord. Should any of the
items be missing, users are encouraged to return to their dealer store or contact
Apple Inc. directly for further instructions.
2.       Battery Life 
The new MacBook Air has been equipped with a larger battery. This new feature is
facilitated by more condensed storage area being placed inside the new device.
When allowed to become fully charged, the 11 inch model offers users battery life in
excess of 9 hours. The 13 inch model of the MacBook Air, when fully charged with
allow for internet surfing, movie watching and music listening for up to 12 hours.

3.       Power Source
The MacBook Air 11 inch model is powered by a built-in 38 watt per hour lithium-
polymer battery and the 13 inch model by the 54 watts per hour lithium-polymer
battery. Both models also work along with a 45 watts MagSafe 2 power cable cord
and port.
4.       Dimensions
The MacBook air is among the most compact yet powerful computers now on the
market. The 11 inch model has a height of approximately 0.3-1.7 centimetres, width
of 3 centimetres and depth of approximately 19.2 centimetres. The weight of this
model is estimated to be about 2.38 pounds or 1.8 kg. The 13 inch model is just as
compact and weighs in at approximately 2.96 pounds or 1.35 kg. The dimensions for
this model are 1.7 cm x 32.5 cm x 22.7 cm (H x W x D).
5.       Audio Features
The audio function on this device comes in four separate forms; stereo speakers,
headphone port, dual microphones and the support provided for the Apple iPhone
headset.
6.       Standby Mode/ Power Nap
This power saving feature of the new device allows the device to enter Power Nap
mode after 3 hours of sleep. When allowed to stay in Power Nap or Sleep Mode, the
MacBook Air can maintain battery life for approximately 3 days once the device is
connected to an AC power. During Power Nap the device is designed to still allow
access to emails, notes, contacts, calendar and reminders.
7.       Turning Power Nap On/Off
This feature comes as a default setting on the new device. To adjust the settings,
users are asked to view the System Preferences settings, followed by the Energy
Saver option. Be sure to remove the indicator from the ‘Enable Power Nap’ option
to deactivate.
8.       Processors
The MacBook Air has as part of its design a fifth generation Intel core 1.7 and 1.5
processors. This feature offers to users, superior performance, efficiency and speed.
It allows for the playing of games and graphic designs at all levels.
9.       Built-In Wi-Fi
This built-in feature is designed to enable speedier and more convenient browsing
range. The MacBook Air supports Wi-Fi range of up to 802.11ac and at least 3 times
that speed when the device is connected to a base station.
10.   Bluetooth Technology
The design of the MacBook Air also includes Bluetooth capabilities. When
Bluetooth is activated, the device allows users to connect and interact with other

devices that are Bluetooth enabled.
11.   Fast-Flash Storage
Among the newest innovations included in the MacBook Air device is Flash
Storage. This feature not only allows for increased storage capabilities of up to
512GB but also brings to users ease of access that is purportedly 17 times faster
when compared to a regular hard drive.
12.   Connectivity
The device has a number of options for connecting to other devices. This feature
brings the workstation home, while offering efficiency and comfort. The 13inch
MacBook Air is designed with 1 Thunderbolt 2, 2 USB 3 and 1 MagSafe 2
connection ports. It is also equipped with a slot for SDXC cards. The 11inch
MacBook Air offers similar connection features with the exception of the SDXC
slot.
13.   MagSafe 2
This is a unique and innovative feature of the MacBook Air. This power connector
allows the power cables to be attached using this magnetic strip. What the MagSafe
2 offers is a secure yet convenient attachment as well as clean and easy removal.
This feature can be found to the left side of both the 11 inch and 13 inch models. 
 
14.   Dual Microphones
This feature is located to the left of both the 11inch and 13inch models. There are
now microphones which increase clarity during movies watching or creation, using
Skype or listening to an audio. The design of the microphones also sees background
noises reduced during calls and ignored during dictations/recordings.  
15.   HD Camera
The MacBook Air is also equipped with a 720p FaceTime HD camera. With its crisp
resolution, enjoying video chats are made clearer.
16.   Backlit Display
The device has as a part of its features a 4.86 mm/ 0.19 inch display with LED
backlighting. This presents colors in a clearer and brighter format and is ideal for
enjoying a movie or playing back through those favourite family photos. 
17.   Display Resolution
The display is designed with superior resolution for viewing enjoyment. The 11inch
model has a resolution of approximately 1366 x 768 MP, while the 13inch model
boasts resolution of 1440 x 900 MP. 
18.   Multi-Touch Trackpad
This feature facilitates ease of use with its multi-touch capabilities. It allows users to

easily swipe to access all their apps and documents as well as the Mission Control
feature. The multi-touch options are click, double-click, tap to zoom, two-finger
scroll, swipe to activate and view Mission Control.
19.   View Mission Control Touch
To easily view the active features on the device, simply swipe the three inner fingers
of the hand in an upward motion on the trackpad.
20.   Tap to Zoom Touch
The Tap to Zoom touch feature allows the user to amplify images that appear on the
display; whether while surfing a favourite website or when reading through
tomorrow’s presentation.
21.   Fast Memory
Memory on the MacBook Air comes in the form of a LPDDR3, 8 gigabytes, 1600
MHz spread. This super powered feature facilitates speed, efficiency and
convenience for accessing apps and for web browsing.
22.   Backlit Keyboard
This feature allows users to utilize the device even in environments that are poorly
lit. The keyboard is also equipped with an ambient light sensor that is designed to
sense adjustments in the room’s lighting and automatically modify the brightness of
the display and keyboard accordingly.  
23.   AppleCare Support
The MacBook Air comes with free 90 days telephone tech-support. Included in this
support is a limited one year warranty. To increase the tenure of the tech-support,
users are provided with the option of purchasing the AppleCare Protection Plan.
With this plan the AppleCare support is offered for an additional 3 years from date
of initial purchase.
24.   Genius Bar Support
This feature is available to users at any Apple Retail Store in the form of expert
advice from the Tech-Representatives. Where the device was purchase directly from
the Apple stores, personal trainers can be assigned for easy transferring of files and
documents.
25.   iCloud Storage
This feature is the ideal, easy access storage currently available in world of
technology.  It allows users to conveniently store photos, movies, work or school
documents and important events and dates. With all the important pieces of data
safely amassed, users are able to easily access it all from other devices and then
share with family or friends whenever desired.
26.   Current iCloud Storage Plans

Users of the MacBook Air are offered a range of storage plans from which to
choose. The first is free and offers approximately 5GB of storage space. The other
options are 2GB; now available for $.99 per month, 2GB for $3.99 per month,
500GB for approximately $9.99 per month and 1TB, offered to users for
approximately $19.99 per month.
27.   Setting up iCloud
To set up the iCloud feature on your MacBook Air first ensure that the newest
version of OS X is installed on your device then select the iCloud icon from your
display screen and enter your Apple ID and password. The user will then be
provided with a list of Apple services from which the desired options should be
chosen. The next step involves setting up a fee iCloud email account and then
moving on to enable streaming capabilities. Music, books and application
preferences may then be selected and the feature activated on your other devices to
allow for easy movement from one to the other.
28.   Family Sharing
This innovative feature of the MacBook Air is ideal for families. It allows a user;
also called the originator to use their iCloud to enable the Family Share. Users are
able to share with a maximum of six persons, features such applications, eBooks and
iTunes. Photos and calendar of events can also be shared across devices. This is also
ideal for parents who need to monitor app and music purchases desired by younger
children. For each attempted purchase by children, the parents must provide
permission. 
29.   Lost Mode
With the iCloud feature of the MacBook Air, your lost device is easily tracked. To
activate, first access the Lost Mode feature. This feature will provide the user with
four options from which to choose; Lock Your Screen, Display a Message, Get
Notified and Track Location.
30.   Remote Erase
This feature prevents secure or personal data from getting into the wrong hands.
Should your MacBook Air become lost and access is somehow gained, the remote
erase feature deletes all personal data from the device and returns it to the original
factory settings.
31.   Backup
This feature allows for automatic backup of all newly added data on your device.
This will happen as soon the device is connected to a Wi-Fi connection. The auto
backup keeps panic at bay should the device develop a malfunction or become
infected with a virus. Where this happens, the backup feature allows all stored data
to be restored to your device. 
32.   OS X

This is the software that powers the operations of the MacBook Air. Its design
facilitates compatibility with iOS devices, enabling seamless performance of the
MacBook Air during activities. This compatibility with iOS devices allows users to
take a call on the MacBook Air that is ringing on your iOS enabled smart phone or
use the Mac to power on features on the smart phone.
33.   Intuitive Gestures
The gestures for searching and easily accessing applications and documents on the
MacBook Air are Finder, Launchpad and Spotlight.  The finder is designed to allow
for organization of documents being stored on the device. Spotlight enables
searching at its easiest and the Launchpad displays the full library of applications;
making access easier.
34.   Force Touch
This is another unique feature of the new MacBook Air device. It allows the
trackpad of the computer to automatically detect downward disparities and
consequently adjust. The Force Click; applied pressure to the Force Touch, on a
word allows direct access to a number of dictionary definitions. When Force Click is
used on a property address, the feature is designed to initiate a map popup with
directions attached.
35.   Security Features
Security on the MacBook Air is pertinent to keeping personal documents, photos
and videos protected. The MacBook comes equipped with a number of security
features designed for this purpose. The FileVault uses encryption to defend against
intrusions into data on the device. The Gatekeeper does just as its name suggests and
stands guard over information and applications being downloaded on to the Mac.
Sandboxing separates the various apps and system data while Find My Mac allows
for easy locating of a misplaced or stolen MacBook Air.
36.   Magic Mouse
This feature is a button-less, multi-touch device. It connects to the MacBook Air
through wireless connection and provides easy access to all areas of the computer
with simple gestures. The mouse is covered with a fully multi-touch surface. To
scroll through pages or images on the device, simply swipe with one or two fingers
or click and double-click on the display. The beauty of this feature lies in its laser
tracking capabilities, which are ultra sensitive to enable seamless movement and
functionality. 
Accessibility Features
37.   Voice Over
This is a phenomenon text-to-speech tool. Its design is ideal for the visually
impaired owners or users of the MacBook Air. It works by reading the data as it
appears on the display and enabling the user to apply gestures and interact. The
MacBook voice speaks to the user and explains all that occurs while in use.

38.   Zoom
This feature of the MacBook Air facilitates screen magnification of up to 20 times
its original size. It allows the user to choose between full screen display and picture
in picture for review of specific areas of the screen. This feature is also ideal for
users with poor eye sight or other visual challenges.
39.   Dictation
This feature is ideal for both the visually impaired and the everyday user. It allows
the user to speak into the device rather than typing with the keyboard. This is useful
for typing a class paper, sending an email or completing the presentation for
tomorrow’s board meeting; all without having to type. The Dictation feature will
simply turn your words into text format. The user is also able to instruct the
Dictation to punctuate, bold, underline or highlight where deemed necessary. The
feature functions in over 40 languages and has more than 50 formatting and editing
commands available to its users.
40.   Messages with iMessage
This is Apple’s version of messenger; allowing for seamless and convenient
conversations using only the fingers for typing or the Dictation feature. There is no
limit on the number of messages allowed and these can be sent not only to other
MacBook Air users but also users of the iPod touch, iPhone and iPad. This feature is
designed to meet the needs of the hearing or orally challenged users. Users are also
afforded the opportunity to share images and videos through this medium as well as
engage in group chats.
41.   Screen Flash
This feature is designed to replace alert sounds that accompany system or
application requests. It works by simply flashing the screen and is automatically
activated once set up on your new MacBook Air. The Screen flash is ideal for the
hearing impaired consumer.
Applications
42.   iPhoto
This feature is photo organization at its best. The iPhoto options include organize,
enhance, customize and print. Users are able to create slideshows of specific group
shots and also share those with family and friends via social media sites like Twitter
and Facebook. The iPhoto app also allows the user to create calendars, scrapbook
and e-cards using the desired photo/s.
43.   iMovie
The iMovie application is ideal for the creation and storage of home movies on your
MacBook Air. With the browse option, users can easily search for organized clips
and select the one they desire to watch. The app also allows for the compilation of
any number of clips into one big movie and the iTheater allows for crystal clear

watching of these creations.
44.   Garage Band
This app is perfect for the music performer and lover. It comes equipped with an
enormous number of amp and stompbox selections for the creation of your feelings
into words. The app also features a sound library and virtual drummer. To complete
the dream of making music, the GarageBand also offers music lessons for all users;
whether a beginner, intermediate or master. The available options include Make
Music, Learn to Play, Record and Mix and Share your Song.
45.   Numbers
This is the ideal application for budgeting and recording of figures. The template
allows users to simply input the pertinent figures and see it transform to a tabular or
chart format for ease of use and referencing. There are a number of templates from
which to choose or one can simply opt to start from a blank screen.       
46.   Keynote
This application creates the presentation for tomorrow’s board meeting in style.
There are a number of themes from which to choose and users are allowed the
opportunity to add personalized or theme-specific photos and videos to enhance the
presentation. The app also enables animation and the inclusion of interactive charts
and dramatic effects.
47.   FaceTime
This app allows the user to conduct video chats directly from their MacBook Air.
Activating the app is relatively easy. First identify the person you wish to speak to
by searching for either their name, contact number or email address, click the face
and commence the conversation. Receiving or declining a FaceTime call is just as
easy. Whenever a call is being received, the device will send a notification.  The
options, accept, set callback reminder or decline will appear on screen. Simply tap
the preference to proceed.
48.   Calendar
The Calendar app makes keeping important dates and planned events on track. The
app allows for the user to share the calendar of events with other users and allows
the location of the planned event or meeting to be saved and attached to the
reminder. The calendar is automatically synced with your other iOS devices.
49.   Contacts
This application is the MacBook Air’s address book. It allows for the user to search
for friends in the contact list to chat on FaceTime, iMessage or to send an email. The
contact list is automatically updated and can be sorted and stored into specific
groups such as family, co-workers and friends. Call can also be made using your
MacBook Air once your contact is tapped to activate.
50.   iBooks

This is the MacBook Air’s e-reader. The store is open to users and allows books
from every genre to be downloaded to your computer. The option is also made
available for users to highlight special passages or even take notes for future
reference.

