Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering
José Machado
Filomena Soares
Justyna Trojanowska
Sahin Yildirim   Editors
Innovations in 
Mechatronics 
Engineering

Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering
Series Editors
Francisco Cavas-Martínez, Departamento de Estructuras, Universidad Politécnica
de Cartagena, Cartagena, Murcia, Spain
Fakher Chaari, National School of Engineers, University of Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia
Francesco Gherardini, Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Università di Modena e Reggio
Emilia, Modena, Italy
Mohamed Haddar, National School of Engineers of Sfax (ENIS), Sfax, Tunisia
Vitalii Ivanov, Department of Manufacturing Engineering Machine and Tools,
Sumy State University, Sumy, Ukraine
Young W. Kwon, Department of Manufacturing Engineering and Aerospace
Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering and Applied Science, Monterey,
CA, USA
Justyna Trojanowska, Poznan University of Technology, Poznan, Poland
Francesca di Mare, Institute of Energy Technology, Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Bochum, Nordrhein-Westfalen, Germany

Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering (LNME) publishes the latest develop-
ments in Mechanical Engineering—quickly, informally and with high quality.
Original research reported in proceedings and post-proceedings represents the core
of LNME. Volumes published in LNME embrace all aspects, subﬁelds and new
challenges of mechanical engineering. Topics in the series include:
• Engineering Design
• Machinery and Machine Elements
• Mechanical Structures and Stress Analysis
• Automotive Engineering
• Engine Technology
• Aerospace Technology and Astronautics
• Nanotechnology and Microengineering
• Control, Robotics, Mechatronics
• MEMS
• Theoretical and Applied Mechanics
• Dynamical Systems, Control
• Fluid Mechanics
• Engineering Thermodynamics, Heat and Mass Transfer
• Manufacturing
• Precision Engineering, Instrumentation, Measurement
• Materials Engineering
• Tribology and Surface Technology
To submit a proposal or request further information, please contact the Springer
Editor of your location:
China: Ms. Ella Zhang at ella.zhang@springer.com
India: Priya Vyas at priya.vyas@springer.com
Rest of Asia, Australia, New Zealand: Swati Meherishi at
swati.meherishi@springer.com
All other countries: Dr. Leontina Di Cecco at Leontina.dicecco@springer.com
To submit a proposal for a monograph, please check our Springer Tracts in
Mechanical
Engineering
at
http://www.springer.com/series/11693
or
contact
Leontina.dicecco@springer.com
Indexed by SCOPUS. All books published in the series are submitted for
consideration in Web of Science.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/11236

José Machado
• Filomena Soares
•
Justyna Trojanowska
• Sahin Yildirim
Editors
Innovations in Mechatronics
Engineering
123

Editors
José Machado
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of Minho
Guimarães, Portugal
Justyna Trojanowska
Poznan University of Technology
Poznan, Poland
Filomena Soares
Department of Industrial Electronics
University of Minho
Guimarães, Portugal
Sahin Yildirim
Department of Mechatronics Engineering,
Faculty of Engineering
Erciyes University
Kayseri, Turkey
ISSN 2195-4356
ISSN 2195-4364
(electronic)
Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering
ISBN 978-3-030-79167-4
ISBN 978-3-030-79168-1
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether
the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained
herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard
to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Preface
This volume of Lecture Notes in Mechanical Engineering gathers selected papers
presented at the ﬁrst International Scientiﬁc Conference ICIE’2021, held in
Guimarães, Portugal, on June 28–30, 2021. The conference was organized by
School of Engineering of University of Minho, throughout MEtRICs and
ALGORITMI Research Centres.
The aim of the conference was to present the latest engineering achievements
and innovations and to provide a chance for exchanging views and opinions con-
cerning the creation of added value for the industry and for the society. The main
conference topics include (but are not limited to):
• Innovation
• Industrial Engineering
• Mechanical Engineering
• Mechatronics Engineering
• Systems and Applications
• Societal Challenges
• Industrial Property
The organizers received 213 contributions from 24 countries around the world.
After a thorough peer review process, the committee accepted 126 papers written by
412 authors from 18 countries for the conference proceedings (acceptance rate of
59%), which were organized in three volumes of Springer Lecture Notes in
Mechanical Engineering.
This volume, with the title “Innovations in Mechatronics Engineering,” specif-
ically reports on innovative control and automation concepts for applications in a
wide range of ﬁelds, including industrial production, medicine and rehabilitation,
education and transport, with a special focus on cutting-edge control algorithms for
mobile robots and robot manipulators, innovative industrial monitoring strategies
for industrial process, improved production systems for smart manufacturing, and
discusses important issues related to user experience, training and education, as well
as national developments in the ﬁeld of mechatronics. Last but not least, it provides
a timely overview and extensive information on trends and technologies behind the
v

future developments of mechatronics systems in the era of Industry 4.0. This book
consists of 41 chapters, prepared by 147 authors from 10 countries.
Extended versions of selected best papers from the conference will be published
in the following journals: Sensors, Applied Sciences, Machines, Management and
Production Engineering Review, International Journal of Mechatronics and Applied
Mechanics, SN Applied Sciences, Dirección y Organización, Smart Science,
Business Systems Research, and International Journal of E-Services and Mobile
Applications.
A special thank to the members of the International Scientiﬁc Committee for
their hard work during the review process.
We acknowledge all that contributed to the staging of ICIE’2021: authors,
committees, and sponsors. Their involvement and hard work were crucial to the
success of ICIE’2021.
José Machado
June 2021
Filomena Soares
Justyna Trojanowska
Şahin Yildirim
vi
Preface

Contents
Screwing Process Monitoring Using MSPC in Large Scale Smart
Manufacturing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Humberto Nuno Teixeira, Isabel Lopes, Ana Cristina Braga,
Pedro Delgado, and Cristina Martins
Comparison of Neural Networks Aiding Material
Compatibility Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Izabela Rojek, Ewa Dostatni, and Piotr Kotlarz
Parameterized State Feedback Control Applied to the 1st Degree
of Freedom of a Cylindric Pneumatic Robot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Marcos G. Q. Rijo, Eduardo A. Perondi, Mário R. Sobczyk S.,
and Carlos A. C. Sarmanho Jr.
Building a Mobile Application by Combining Third Party Platforms
in Order to Reduce Time, Costs and Improve Functionality . . . . . . . . .
37
Marian Tanasie and Ionel Simion
Conveyor Belts Joints Remaining Life Time Forecasting with the Use
of Monitoring Data and Mathematical Modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
Edward Kozłowski, Anna Borucka, Yiliu Liu, and Dariusz Mazurkiewicz
Experience in Implementing Computer-Oriented Methodological
Systems of Natural Science and Mathematics Research Learning
in Ukrainian Educational Institutions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
Olena Hrybiuk
Optimal Preventive Maintenance Frequency in Redundant Systems . . .
69
Guilherme Kunz
Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Mass Load on Flight
Performance of an Octorotor and Dodecarotor UAV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
Şahin Yildirim, Nihat Çabuk, and Veli Bakircioğlu
vii

Indoor GPS System for Autonomous Mobile Robots Used
in Surveillance Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
Philip Coandă, Mihai Avram, Victor Constantin, and Bogdan Grămescu
Incorporating Inteco’s 3D Crane into Control
Engineering Curriculum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Frantisek Gazdos and Lenka Sarmanova
Design of Laser Scanners Data Processing and Their Use in Visual
Inspection System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
Ivan Kuric, Matej Kandera, Jaromír Klarák, Miroslav Císar,
and Ivan Zajačko
Monitoring System of Taekwondo Athletes’ Movements: First Insights . . . 119
Tudor Claudiu Tîrnovan, Pedro Cunha, Vítor Carvalho, Filomena Soares,
Camelia Avram, and Adina Aștilean
Performance Evaluation of the BioBall Device for Wrist
Rehabilitation in Adults and Young Adults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
129
Bárbara Silva, Ana Rita Amorim, Valdemar Leiras, Eurico Seabra,
Luís F. Silva, Ana Cristina Braga, and Rui Viana
Smart Packages Tracking System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
141
Camelia Avram, Mihai Modoranu, Dan Radu, and Adina Aştilean
Automatic Warehouse for Workshop Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
154
Marco Ferreira, Miguel Rodrigues, and Caetano Monteiro
New Reﬁnement of an Intelligent System Design
for Naval Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
164
M. Filomena Teodoro, Mário J. Simões Marques, Isabel Nunes,
Gabriel Calhamonas, and Marina A. P. Andrade
ICT4Silver: Design Guidelines for the Development of Digital
Interfaces for Elderly Users . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
178
Nuno Martins, Sónia Ralha, and Ricardo Simoes
Dynamic Analysis of a Robot Locomotion for an External Pipe
Inspection and Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
189
Bogdan Grămescu, Adrian Cartal, Ahmed Sachit Hashim,
and Constantin Nițu
The Choice of the Electric Energy Storage Device Type for the Hybrid
Power Drive of Military Wheeled Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
201
Dmitriy Volontsevich, Sergii Strimovskyi, Ievgenii Veretennikov,
Dmytro Sivykh, and Vadym Karpov
Machinery Retroﬁting for Industry 4.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
213
Pedro Torres, Rogério Dionísio, Sérgio Malhão, Luís Neto,
and Gil Gonçalves
viii
Contents

Conceptual Design of a Positioning System for Systematic Production
of Needle Beds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
221
Luis Freitas, Rui Oliveira, Teresa Malheiro, A. Manuela Gonçalves,
José Vicente, Paula Monteiro, and Pedro Ribeiro
Selection and Development of Technologies for the Education
of Engineers in the Context of Industry 4.0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
236
Pedro José Gabriel Ferreira, Silvia Helena Bonilla,
and José Benedito Sacomano
An Exploratory Approach with EEG – Electroencephalography
in Design as a Research and Development Tool . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
245
Bernardo Providência and Rute Silva
Modelling IT Specialists Competency in the Era of Industry 4.0 . . . . . .
257
Maciej Szafrański, Selma Gütmen, Magdalena Graczyk-Kucharska,
and Gerhard Wilhelm Weber
Original Constructive Solutions for the Development of Industry 4.0
in Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
270
Gheorghe Gheorghe, Badea Sorin-Ionut, Iulian Ilie, and Despa Veronica
Metrology Information in Cyber-Physical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
285
João Sousa, João Silva, and José Machado
Overview of Collaborative Robot YuMi in Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
293
Jiri Vojtesek and Lubos Spacek
Reliability of Replicated Distributed Control Systems Applications
Based on IEC 61499 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
301
Adriano A. Santos, António Ferreira da Silva, António Magalhães,
and Mário de Sousa
Inspection Robotic System: Design and Simulation for Indoor
and Outdoor Surveys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
313
Pierluigi Rea, Erika Ottaviano, Fernando J. Castillo-García,
and Antonio Gonzalez-Rodríguez
Dutch Auction Based Approach for Task/Resource Allocation . . . . . . . .
322
Eliseu Pereira, João Reis, Gil Gonçalves, Luís Paulo Reis,
and Ana Paula Rocha
MOBEYBOU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
334
Hugo Baptista Lopes, Vítor Carvalho, and Cristina Sylla
Model of Acquiring Transversal Competences Among Students on the
Example of the Analysis of Communication Competences . . . . . . . . . . .
351
Marek Goliński, Małgorzata Spychała, and Marek Miądowicz
Contents
ix

Mobile Applications in Engineering Based on the Technology
of Augmented Reality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
366
Tetiana Zhylenko, Vitalii Ivanov, Ivan Pavlenko, Nataliia Martynova,
Yurii Zuban, and Dmytro Samokhvalov
A Review in the Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Textile Industry . . . . . .
377
Filipe Pereira, Vítor Carvalho, Rosa Vasconcelos, and Filomena Soares
HiZeca: A Serious Game for Emotions Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
393
Pedro Santos, Vinícius Silva, João Sena Esteves, Ana Paula Pereira,
and Filomena Soares
Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
406
M. Leonor Castro-Ribeiro, A. A. Vilaça, Mariana A. Pires,
Karolina Bezerra, Cândida Vilarinho, and Ana Olival
Manufacture of Facial Orthosis in ABS by the Additive
Manufacturing Process: A Customized Application in High
Performance Sports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
422
Anna Kellssya Leite Filgueira, Isabella Diniz Gallardo,
Ketinlly Yasmyne Nascimento Martins, Rodolfo Ramos Castelo Branco,
Karolina Celi Tavares Bezerra, and Misael Elias de Morais
E-Health in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
433
M. Irfanullah Arfeen, Adil Ali Shah, and Demetrios Sarantis
Environmental Parameters Monitoring System with an Application
Interface for Smartphone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
449
Jorge Ramos, André Teixeira, Carlos Arantes, Sérgio Lopes,
and João Sena Esteves
Mechatronic Design of a Wall-Climbing Drone for the Inspection
of Structures and Infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
460
Erika Ottaviano, Pierluigi Rea, Massimo Cavacece,
and Giorgio Figliolini
Inﬂuence of Magnitude of Interaction on Control in Decentralized
Adaptive Control of Two Input Two Output Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
468
Karel Perutka
Author Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
481
x
Contents

Screwing Process Monitoring Using MSPC
in Large Scale Smart Manufacturing
Humberto Nuno Teixeira1(B), Isabel Lopes1, Ana Cristina Braga1, Pedro Delgado2,
and Cristina Martins2
1 ALGORITMI Research Centre, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
b6440@algoritmi.uminho.pt
2 Bosch Car Multimedia Portugal SA, Braga, Portugal
Abstract. The ability to obtain useful information to support decision-making
from big data sets delivered by sensors can signiﬁcantly contribute to enhance
smart manufacturing initiatives. This paper presents the results of a study per-
formed in an automotive electronics assembly line. An approach that uses Mul-
tivariate Statistical Process Control based on Principal Component Analysis
(MSPC-PCA) was applied to early detect undesirable changes in the screwing
processes performance by extracting relevant information from the torque-angle
curve data. Since the data of different torque-angle curves are not aligned, the
proposed approach includes the linear interpolation of the original data to enable
Principal Component Analysis (PCA). PCA proved to be an appropriate tech-
nique to obtain signiﬁcant information from the process variables, which consist
of the successive value of the torque at constant angular intervals. Score plots and
multivariate control charts were used to detect defective tightening and identify
behaviors that represent inefﬁcient tightening. This is a new approach that can
be applied to effectively monitor screwing processes in the assembly of different
products either periodically or in real-time.
Keywords: Multivariate Statistical Process Control (MSPC) · Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) · Screwing process · Smart manufacturing
1
Introduction
Modern manufacturing systems need to provide high quality products developed in
efﬁcient, fast and cost reduced processes [1]. The increased diversity of products also
implieslesstimetoensurethattheprocessiscapableofproducingappropriatequality[2].
Problems that affect quality are often related to assembly errors [3]. There are two basic
categories of assembly tasks: parts mating and parts joining. Fasteners are commonly
used to join components together in industry. The screwdrivers allow tightening of
threaded fasteners with a speciﬁed torque value [4]. The usage of modern equipment
involves complex parameter settings of and assessment requirements [5].
Assembly process control is a complex problem whose solution must consider all
the particularities and connection requirements of a given mating [6]. Therefore, a high
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 1–13, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_1

2
H. N. Teixeira et al.
level of process automation demands a high level of automated monitoring and control
[2]. Errors detection should occur at an early stage of the process to avoid any damage
and to ensure that the assembly is completed according to the requirements and speci-
ﬁcations [7]. Thus, to prevent technical risks, it becomes important to develop methods
for providing process related information to the operator [8].
Most automatic screw fastening processes are monitored using torque sensors and
a target torque for a consistent assembly is usually established. However, monitoring
torque alone does not ensure the required clamping force. The torque applied to provide
the desired clamping force in bolted joints can differ signiﬁcantly for the same bolt type
due to the combined effect of several factors, such as thread and under head friction,
thread deformations and variations in bolt diameter. Therefore, problems during the
tightening operation must be detected to avoid wrong conclusions about the screwing
process quality. To obtain more complete information about the tightening operation
performance, both torque and rotation angle should be monitored [9]. The torque-angle
curves provide relevant information to properly qualify the capability of tightening tools
[10].
Smart manufacturing aims to support accurate and timely decision-making from real-
timedatadeliveredbysensors[11].Thequickdetectionofchanges,particularlyincreases
in process variability, is essential for quality control [12]. Statistical Process Control
(SPC) is frequently employed to monitor and detect relevant changes in manufacturing
processes [13]. When Principal Component Analysis (PCA) technique is implemented to
monitorindustrialprocesses,Hotelling’sT2 andSquaredPredictionError(SPE)statistics
are used for the detection of process disturbances which can originate failures. However,
although control charts allow to detect deviations from normal operating region, they do
not indicate reasons for the deviations [14]. Once the fault is exposed, the contribution of
each original variable for T2 or SPE statistics can be determined based on contribution
plots. The contributions plot shows the most affected variables, so that the causes can
be identiﬁed and actions to bring the process to the statistical control region can be
implemented [15].
The monitoring and control of screwing process parameters has been addressed by
several studies [7–9, 16]. Many of the proposed methods were designed to control the
screwing process of speciﬁc parts and their generalization ability has not been proven. It
was also noticed that error detection effectiveness is often assessed based on simulated
experiments. Furthermore, the multivariate nature of the screwing processes is not con-
templated by the exiting monitoring approaches. In industrial context, the monitoring
strategies for automated tightening processes are generally focused on torque, torque-
angle, torque rate and variation of rate monitoring [17]. For this purpose, an individual
analysis of each monitored variable is usually performed to verify their conformance to
speciﬁcations during each tightening operation. The investigation of causes of variation
is not an integral part of these strategies. Therefore, a more extended application in real
scenarios is still needed in most cases. For this reason, methods that provide a broader
understanding of the screwing processes to the operator should be developed to sup-
port the deﬁnition of more informed improvement initiatives and analyze their impact
over a sequence of tightening operations. This is particularly relevant for processes with

Screwing Process Monitoring Using MSPC
3
short operating cycles, since when a change in the process is veriﬁed a high number of
tightening operations can be affected.
In this paper, an approach is proposed to monitor screwing processes’ through a
visual representation of their performance over time and to assist the identiﬁcation of
factors responsible for inefﬁcient tightening based on torque-angle curves data. This
approach was tested and reﬁned based on its application to the screwing process of an
assembly line of Bosch Car Multimedia Portugal. PCA was performed using the torque-
angle curves data collected by the screwing machine controller. To enable PCA, the
data of different torque-angle curves were aligned by performing linear interpolations.
Then, the process was monitored in different periods using multivariate control charts.
The structure of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the approach
steps through its application on the assembly line screwing process and the respective
results. In Sect. 3, the main results of the study are discussed. Section 4 summarizes the
conclusions derived from the study and presents recommendations for future research.
2
Screwing Process Monitoring and Analysis
2.1
Sample Deﬁnition
The screwing process analysis was performed using a data set composed of 12327 obser-
vations (Table 1). All observations belong to the same product type and were executed
in a unique workplace. The product is an automotive electronics system which is assem-
bled by placing seven screws according to a predetermined sequence. The overall data
set includes data concerning defective (“bad”) and non-defective (“good”) tightening
operations. The ﬁrst sample includes only 7 non-sequential cases classiﬁed as “bad”.
These data were included in the analysis to better test the accuracy of the PCA model
by considering a higher diversity of unsuccessful cases. Samples 2 to 5 are composed
of sequential cases and include all operations performed in a working day.
Table 1. Description of the screwing process data samples.
Sample
1
2
3
4
5
Date
22/09/2017
29/09/2017
02/10/2017
11/10/2017
12/10/2017
Result
Good
–
2273
3189
2959
3880
Bad
7
5
7
2
5
Number of cases
7
2278
3196
2961
3885
2.2
Data Interpolation
A preliminary analysis of original data collected from a screwdriver at regular time
intervals revealed signiﬁcant ﬂuctuations in the amplitude of the rotation angle intervals
(Table 2), since the angular displacement of the screw is not constant. Therefore, linear

4
H. N. Teixeira et al.
interpolation was the method selected to align the data and generate a torque value to
each rotation angle of the predeﬁned scale. To provide a quick result, an algorithm in R
code that performs linear interpolations was developed. The obtained information allows
to represent the different torque-angle curves in the same scale.
Table 2. Extract from a screwing process data set.
Angle
4
6
11
15
17
21
22
28
30
35
38
39
44
Torque
10,9
11
11,1
11,2
11,5
11,6
11,7
12
12,1
12,2
12,3
12,4
12,4
Angle
51
55
58
62
72
73
83
89
93
96
99
103
106
Torque
12,3
12,4
12,6
12,8
12,9
12,8
13
13,3
13,4
13,5
13,6
13,8
13,9
Angle
1
3
4
9
14
16
20
24
28
34
37
42
45
Torque
10,3
10,4
10,4
10,4
10,6
10,4
10
9,4
9,2
9 
9,1
9 
9,3
In this study, the linear interpolation was performed to determine values of torque in
a range between 0 and 2300° at intervals of 10°. Since the considered variables consist
of the successive value of the torque at constant angular intervals (Fig. 1), a data set
composed of 231 primary variables was obtained.
Fig. 1. Generic representation of a set of variables from a tightening operation.
2.3
Data Segmentation
The PCA model was formed by the values of 504 torque-angle curves (Fig. 2a). Only
cases classiﬁed as “good” were included in the Normal Operating Conditions (NOC)
data set and each screw, considering its position in the product, is represented by the
same number of observations. Firstly, a set of 252 observations from a sequence of 36
consecutive products obtained in sample 3 was selected. Then, to endow the NOC data
with a higher variety of behaviors, another group of 252 cases selected from samples 2
to 5 was added. Figure 2b shows three distinctive zones of a typical torque-angle curve,
classiﬁed by Shoberg [17] as Rundown (R), Snugging (S) and Elastic Clamping (EC).
The torque-angle curves were represented with the Unscrambler® and the data
analysis was performed using ProSensus MultiVariate software.

Screwing Process Monitoring Using MSPC
5
Angle (degrees)
Torque (N.cm)
b
a
Fig. 2. NOC torque-angle curves (a) and typical torque-angle curve (b).
2.4
Principal Components Identiﬁcation and Interpretation
The number of principal components extracted by the PCA model was deﬁned based
on the cumulative explained variation by the ordered components (Table 3). Since the
fourth principal component has little relevance, only the ﬁrst three were considered.
Table 3. Variation explained by the ﬁrst four principal components.
Principal component
Variation explained
Cumulative variation explained
First
62.24%
62.24%
Second
20.40%
82.64%
Third
3.70%
86.34%
Fourth
2.06%
88.40%
The interpretation of the principal components was performed by statistics and pro-
cess experts, based on the variables loadings’ (Fig. 3) and considering technical knowl-
edge about the process. In order to obtain a broader perspective of the tightening oper-
ation, the loadings of six secondary variables were also analyzed. These variables are
maximum torque, absolute angle, total time, end torque, end angle and screwing energy.
b
c
Secondary variables
Secondary variables
Secondary variables
a 
Fig. 3. Loading plots of the ﬁrst (a), second (b) and third (c) principal components.

6
H. N. Teixeira et al.
The loading plot of the ﬁrst principal component (Fig. 3a) shows high loadings over
the rundown zone and a signiﬁcant decrease after 1740°, that represents the instant in
which the snugging zone is reached. The higher loadings correspond to rotation angles
wherein friction was higher. As at the elastic clamping zone, tightening is mainly affected
by the elastic deformation of the screw, the corresponding variables’ loadings tend to
be substantially lower. After 1790°, the loadings become negative and start to assume
a decreasing trend, as more tightening operations are completed. The negative loadings
exhibited in this period are due to the decision of extending the tightening curves up to
0 after the ﬁnal torque is achieved. The secondary variables’ loadings are represented
on the left side of the plot and shown with more detail below in Fig. 3a. Absolute
angle, total time and end angle have negative loadings. All the other variables assume a
positive correlation with the ﬁrst component, since higher friction losses entail greater
energy expenditure and higher torques to complete the tightening operation. However,
the required clamping force is reached within a shorter period. Thus, the ﬁrst principal
component refers to the torque variation during the rundown zone. It allows to distinguish
screws that exhibit high torques at the rundown zone, which is a behavior that can be
caused by differences between screws or tighter threads.
In the second principal component loading plot (Fig. 3b), negative loadings until the
angle 830 can be identiﬁed. The lowest loadings are exhibited at the beginning of the
rundownzone.Afterwards,agrowingtrendismanifested.However,adecreaseisveriﬁed
in the approximation to the snugging zone and after 2090°. The secondary variables that
show higher loadings are maximum torque, end torque and screw energy, since greater
torques are needed to produce the required clamping force. The screwing energy loading
is signiﬁcantly higher in this principal component. Thus, the second principal component
enables to differentiate screws that have low torques at the rundown zone, a relatively
high ﬁnal torque and whose tightening operation is concluded later. This behavior can
be caused by more open threads due to rework, since the tightening operation must be
repeated. Furthermore, this principal component also represents delays in engagement,
manifested by the presence of positive loadings in the absolute angle, total time and end
angle.
The third principal component loading plot exhibits several ﬂuctuations over the
entire scale of rotation angles (Fig. 3c). These shifts reﬂect slope variations in the torque-
angle curves. Nevertheless, the loadings’ value remains close to 0 along the angles that
correspond to the ﬁrst two-thirds of the tightening operation. Between 1260 and 1780°,
the loadings become negative and reveal a decreasing trend until the snugging zone. At
the snugging zone, the loadings are positive and signiﬁcantly higher. Negative loadings
are also obtained after 2130° when most operations were already completed. The end
angle is the secondary variable which assumes the higher loading, and both end torque
and maximum torque are the only variables with negative loadings. Thus, this principal
component represents screws that manifest a gradual growth of the torque with some
ﬂuctuations at the rundown zone followed by an interval in which the increase of the
torque ceases before the snugging zone is reached. This circumstance contributes to the
delay of the tightening operation and leads to a lower end torque. In conclusion, the third
principal component refers to differences between threads. The thread crests can often

Screwing Process Monitoring Using MSPC
7
exhibit irregularities or slightly different formats (e.g., rounded, sharpened, ﬂat) that can
result in sudden variations in the torque evolution.
2.5
Control Limits Deﬁnition
To identify both defective and inefﬁcient tightening, control limits deﬁned by the conﬁ-
dence intervals of 99% and 99.73% were determined and represented using ProSensus
MultiVariate. In order to test the reliability of the PCA model, the defective cases were
represented with the NOC observations in the Hotelling’s T2 and SPE control charts
deﬁned based on the ﬁrst three principal components (Fig. 4). Both charts show all the
observations classiﬁed as “bad” above the control limits. However, in the SPE control
chart the distance to the limits is shorter for a set of 8 cases that reached higher torques.
Fig. 4. Hotelling’s T2 (a) and SPE (b) control charts of the defective tightening cases.
2.6
Behavior Identiﬁcation
The scatter score plot formed by the ﬁrst two principal components (Fig. 5) was used
to analyze the NOC observations. This analysis allowed to identify nine cases outside
the limit deﬁned by the conﬁdence interval of 99.73%. Three correspond to signiﬁcant
delays at the beginning of the tightening operation (nearly 2 turns), ﬁve exhibit low
torques during the entire tightening operation, and one case manifests a delay of nearly
1 turn in which the torque values are low at the rundown zone and high at the end. The
ﬁrst group is closer to the negative side of the ﬁrst principal component axis. Whereas
the second group is located at a similar distance from the negative side of both principal
components’axes.Thesebehaviorscorrespondtodelaysinengagementandwellsucceed
reworks. The latter case is the observation that is further away from the limits. Although
these behaviors resulted from special causes of variation, they cannot be completely
removed. Thus, the cases that fall outside the limits were included in the NOC.

8
H. N. Teixeira et al.
Fig. 5. Scatter score plot of the NOC observations.
2.7
Process Monitoring
The process was monitored with the data from the samples described in Table 1, except
those included in the NOC. The sequential set of 11823 observations was represented
in scatter score plots, time series score plots and multivariate control charts.
In the scatter score plot formed by the ﬁrst two principal components several outliers
were identiﬁed (Fig. 6a). The observations that deviate most from the distribution mean
are the cases classiﬁed as “bad” and delays in engagement. Although this plot allows to
identify unusual behaviors in each sample, it does not reveal their distribution over time.
Thus, the scores were also represented in time series score plots. These plots exhibit
the scores distribution over time with respect to each principal component, allowing to
determine if there are any trends or ﬂuctuations and differences between samples.
Fig. 6. Scatter score plot formed by the ﬁrst two principal components (a); time series score plot
of the ﬁrst (b), second (c) and third (d) principal components.

Screwing Process Monitoring Using MSPC
9
In the ﬁrst principal component time series score plot (Fig. 6b), several ﬂuctuations
are shown. Furthermore, the scores tend to align above the origin of the plot. However,
this trend is more marked in the interval formed by the observations of samples 4 and 5.
At this period, the duration of the tightening operations was shorter and higher torques
at the rundown zone were attained. Since the ﬁrst principal component represents the
torque variation during the rundown zone, the scores of the cases with higher torques
are located above the origin. In contrast, the scores that fall below the lower limit mainly
correspond to defective tightening, delays and observations that exhibit low torques
during the rundown zone. The scores distribution is more centered around the origin
and shows lower dispersion in the second principal component time series score plot
(Fig. 6c), which has lower accuracy in detecting delays. Thus, only observations that
represent delays of approximately 3 turns or more comparing to the mean are outside
the limits. Nevertheless, this plot is more effective in detecting observations with low
torques during the entire tightening operation and shows all the defective cases below
the lower limit. The existence of low torques during the rundown zone can be caused by
product rework, since in most cases this behavior is veriﬁed in the torque-angle curves
of the seven screws applied to the same product. The period formed by the observations
of samples 4 and 5 includes a considerable number of cases with low torques at the
rundown zone. This characteristic also occurs in a signiﬁcant number of cases of sample
2 and is less frequent in sample 3. The third principal component time series score
plot (Fig. 6d) manifests high dispersion in the scores’ distribution in all the analyzed
samples. However, at short periods the process becomes slightly more stable. The greater
dispersion reﬂects a higher diversity of slope variations in the torque-angle curves. The
observations identiﬁed above the upper limit comprise defective cases and the most
extreme delays, whereas below the lower limit only a group of four observations that
reveal very atypical variations in the torque-angle curve was detected.
The data sample in which greater instability is observed is sample 3. In the interval
between observations 3435 and 3729, most of the scores lie above the origin in the
plot of Fig. 6b. At the same time, a steep decrease of the scores related to the second
principal component is veriﬁed and a higher number of observations below the origin
is shown in the plot of Fig. 6d. Based on the analysis of the torque-angle curves that
correspond to the observations of this interval (Fig. 7a) it was found that high torques are
exhibited during the entire tightening operation and no delays occurred. A signiﬁcant
number of delays was veriﬁed thereafter in the period between observations 3730 and
4025 (Fig. 7b). This fact is reﬂected by the number of observations outside the limit
deﬁned by the conﬁdence interval of 99.73% in the three time series score plots.
a
b
Fig. 7. Torque-angle curves: between 3435 and 3729 (a), and between 3730 and 4025 (b).

10
H. N. Teixeira et al.
The Hotelling’s T2 control chart (Fig. 8a) shows several observations above the
limits. The highest points correspond to the screwing cases classiﬁed as “bad”. However,
some observations which relate to delays and low torques at the rundown zone are also
above the limits. In the SPE control chart (Fig. 8b), the observations which are further
away from the control limits refer to defective tightening. Whereas observations that
correspond to delays, although they are above the limits, reveal much lower deviations
from the principal components’ subspace. In addition, a small group of observations that
were concluded considerably earlier are also outside the limits of this chart.
Fig. 8. Hotelling’s T2 control chart (a) and SPE control chart (b)
3
Discussion of Results
In this study, an approach for screwing processes monitoring using Multivariate Sta-
tistical Process Control based on Principal Component Analysis (MSPC-PCA) was
developed and tested with data collected from a manual screwdriver of an automo-
tive electronics assembly line. A PCA model that is deemed to represent the NOC of the
process for a speciﬁc product type was deﬁned and validated according to the proposed
approach. The results show that 86.34% of the total variation can be explained only by
three principal components. Since the analysis involves 231 primary variables, a univari-
ate analysis would be extremely time consuming and would not consider correlations
between variables. The interpretation of the principal components’ physical meaning
enabled to more accurately analyze the information provided by the monitoring tools.
Moreover, it was possible to develop a detailed understanding of the process and to
ascertain the causes of unusual behaviors. The structure of the principal components
was partially inﬂuenced by the decision of assigning 0 to the variables that succeed the
ﬁnal torque to avoid missing values in the scale of rotation angles. Another option could
be to maintain the value of the ﬁnal torque until the end of the scale.
The time series score plots enabled to observe ﬂuctuations in the scores’ distribution,
which represent sudden or gradual changes that affect the tightening behavior over time.
These shifts are more visible in the ﬁrst and second principal components time series
score plots, since they are related to delays and increase of the number of reworks. The
Hotelling’s T2 and SPE control charts show all the observations related to defective
tightening above the control limits. In addition, cases that exhibit unusual behaviors,
such as delays or low torques at the rundown zone, were also easily identiﬁed both in

Screwing Process Monitoring Using MSPC
11
the score plots and control charts. Some of these observations formed distinct groups of
outliers in the scatter score plot of the ﬁrst two principal components. Comparing both
control charts, it can be veriﬁed that delays are more easily detected in Hotelling’s T2,
since those cases reﬂect more signiﬁcant deviations from the distribution mean.
MSPC-PCA can be applied using an appropriate software available in the market.
If the proposed approach is used to monitor screwing processes in real-time, this func-
tionality must also be provided by the software package. The screwdriver operator and
the responsible by the screwing process should be able to monitor the process using four
main tools, such as the scatter score plots formed by pairs of principal components, time
series score plots concerning each principal component, Hotelling’s T2 and SPE control
charts. The uncommon behaviors depicted in the scatter score plots should be promptly
identiﬁed and classiﬁed considering the principal components’ physical meaning and
making comparisons with the NOC observations scores, namely groups that are fur-
ther away from the distribution mean. Furthermore, the knowledge acquired from the
PCA model deﬁnition must also be used to interpret points outside the control limits,
patterns and trends both in the time series score plots and multivariate control charts.
Whenever signiﬁcant anomalies are detected, their causes should be investigated con-
sidering the process variables which contributed most to the identiﬁed shifts or inferred
based on experience. Subsequently, appropriate corrective actions must be planned and
implemented.
4
Conclusion
This paper proposes an approach that provides the ability to monitor the overall screw-
ing process behavior over time and considers the multivariate nature of each tightening
operation. The deﬁned approach uses PCA to extract relevant information from corre-
lated variables that consist of the successive values of the torque at constant angular
intervals. Afterwards, scatter score plots, time series score plots and multivariate control
charts developed based on the deﬁned PCA model are applied to enable the process
monitoring in different perspectives. The application of the proposed approach to the
study data showed the capacity of these tools to detect defective tightening. Screwing
cases that reveal unusual behaviors are also identiﬁed and classiﬁed. Thus, performing
linear interpolations to align the screwing process data proved to be an essential and
appropriate decision for the successful application of PCA.
The case study enabled to deﬁne and validate a PCA model that represents the NOC
of a workplace for a speciﬁc product type. Considering the obtained results, Bosch Car
Multimedia Portugal decided to monitor its screwing processes in real-time based on the
deﬁned approach. The same procedure will be adopted to deﬁne NOC models to monitor
other combinations of products and workplaces. It is expected that real-time monitoring
will contribute to achieve signiﬁcant improvements, particularly the reduction of oper-
ating cycles due to a higher awareness to delays and the identiﬁcation of components
out of speciﬁcations (e.g., tighter threads, irregularities in thread crests) which can often
result in defective tightening. Each NOC model must be updated whenever adjustments
are made in the process. This task requires considerable time and effort from the people
involved. Therefore, the ability to perform self-adaptive model updating is highly desir-
able in this context. The PCA model used to enable the MSPC is based on data related

12
H. N. Teixeira et al.
to screws placed in seven different positions. In order to guarantee greater homogeneity,
a PCA model for each screw joint can be deﬁned. However, a more signiﬁcant techni-
cal and human effort would be needed to coordinate the process monitoring due to the
increase of the amount of data and tools involved.
Future work will address the development of an automatic classiﬁer which performs
feature recognition of the screwing process observations and their prompt association to
speciﬁc behavior categories. Furthermore, it is intended to identify patterns or trends in
the monitored data that can be associated with failure modes of the screwing equipment
by analyzing the process evolution over time. Afterwards, this information will be used
to prevent or early detect failures in the screwing equipment.
Acknowledgements. This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e
Tecnologia within the R&D Units Project Scope: UIDB/00319/2020.
References
1. Foehr, M., Lüder, A., Wagner, T., Jäger, T., Fay, A.: Development of a method to analyze
the impact of manufacturing systems engineering on product quality. In: 2011 IEEE 16th
Conference on Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation (ETFA), Toulouse, France,
pp. 1–4. IEEE (2011)
2. Wolter, B., Dobmann, G., Boller, C.: NDT based process monitoring and control. Strojniški
Vestn. – J. Mech. Eng. 57, 218–226 (2011)
3. Tsarouchi, P., et al.: Robotized assembly process using dual arm robot. Procedia CIRP 23,
47–52 (2014)
4. Longwic, R., Nieoczym, A.: Control of the process of screwing in the industrial screwdrivers.
Adv. Sci. Technol. 10, 202–206 (2016)
5. Yuliya, L., Ulrich, B.: Development of an information system with maturity degree man-
agement for automated screwing processes. In: Nunes, M.B., Isaías, P., Powell, P. (eds.)
Proceedings of the IADIS International Conference Information Systems 2012, pp. 49–56.
IADIS Press, Berlin (2012)
6. Chumakov, R.: Optimal control of screwing speed in assembly with thread-forming screws.
Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 36, 395–400 (2008)
7. Deters,C.,Lam,H.K.,Secco,E.L.,Wurdemann,H.A.,Seneviratne,L.D.,Althoefer,K.:Accu-
rate bolt tightening using model-free fuzzy control for wind turbine hub bearing assembly.
IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 23, 1–12 (2015)
8. Lebedynska, Y., Berger, U.: Intelligent knowledge-based system for the automated screwing
process control. In: Proceedings of the 11th WSEAS International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Knowledge Engineering and Data Bases (AIKED 2012), Cambridge, pp. 175–
180 (2012)
9. Saygin, C., Mohan, D., Sarangapani, J.: Real-time detection of grip length during fastening
of bolted joints: a Mahalanobis-Taguchi system (MTS) based approach. J. Intell. Manuf. 21,
377–392 (2010)
10. Cristalli, C., et al.: Integration of process and quality control using multi-agent technology.
In: 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics, Taipei, Taiwan, pp. 1–6
(2013)
11. He, Q.P., Wang, J.: Statistical process monitoring as a big data analytics tool for smart
manufacturing. J. Process Control. 67, 35–43 (2018)

Screwing Process Monitoring Using MSPC
13
12. Yeh, A.B., Li, B., Wang, K.: Monitoring multivariate process variability with individual
observations via penalised likelihood estimation. Int. J. Prod. Res. 50, 6624–6638 (2012)
13. Siddiqui, Y.A., Saif, A.-W., Cheded, L., Elshafei, M., Rahim, A.: Integration of multivariate
statistical process control and engineering process control: a novel framework. Int. J. Adv.
Manuf. Technol. 78(1–4), 259–268 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-014-6641-6
14. Lin, W., Qian, Y., Li, X.: Nonlinear dynamic principal component analysis for on-line process
monitoring and diagnosis. Comput. Chem. Eng. 24, 423–429 (2000)
15. Babamoradi, H., van den Berg, F., Rinnan, A.: Conﬁdence limits for contribution plots in
multivariate statistical process control using bootstrap estimates. Anal. Chim. Acta. 908,
75–84 (2016)
16. Mura, M.D., Dini, G., Failli, F.: An integrated environment based on augmented reality and
sensing device for manual assembly workstations. Procedia CIRP 41, 340–345 (2016)
17. Shoberg, R.S.: Engineering Fundamentals of Threaded Fastener Design and Analysis. RS
Technologies, a Division of PCB Load & Torque, Inc., Farmington Hills (2000)

Comparison of Neural Networks Aiding
Material Compatibility Assessment
Izabela Rojek1(B)
, Ewa Dostatni2
, and Piotr Kotlarz1
1 Institute of Computer Science, Kazimierz Wielki University, Bydgoszcz, Poland
izarojek@ukw.edu.pl
2 Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Poznan University of Technology, Poznan, Poland
Abstract. A new method of selection of materials at the design step is presented in
this paper. The method takes into recyclability of materials. The authors compare
the effectiveness of neural networks (a multilayer perceptron, radial basis function
networks, and self-organizing feature map - SOFM networks) as modelling tools
aiding the selection of compatible materials in ecodesign. The best artiﬁcial neural
networks were used in an expert system. The input data for the selection of mate-
rials was start point to initiate the study. The input data, speciﬁed in cooperation
with designers, include both technological and environmental parameters which
guarantee the desired compatibility of materials. Next, models were developed
using the selected neural networks. The models were assessed and implemented
into an expert system. The authors show which models best ﬁt their purpose and
why. Models aiding the compatible materials selection help boost the recycling
properties of designed products. Neural networks are a very good tool to support
the selection of materials in the ecodesign. This has been proven in the article.
Keywords: Compatibility · Neural networks · Classiﬁcation models · Expert
system · Materials selection
1
Introduction
Nowadays, fast development of environmental awareness is observed. Enterprises are
increasingly focusing on environmentally friendly solutions due to legal regulations.
Producers’ attitudes are also shaped by marketing campaigns that promote eco-friendly
products. Creating customer demand, they force manufacturers to supply eco-friendly
products to the market. Some customer groups due to greater awareness are even willing
to pay a higher price for an eco-friendly product. Manufacturers also sell products in
ecological versions cheaper.
The study, exploring the materials selection in ecodesign, is a follow up on previous
research into the application of artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in the selection of materials
in product design to provide for their recycling compatibility. The research has been
described in [1–4]. Based on the decision tree induction methods and MLP artiﬁcial
neural networks, the proposed tools automate the materials selection in the process of
design, building upon the designer’s knowledge gained through experience.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 14–24, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_2

Comparison of Neural Networks Aiding Material Compatibility Assessment
15
A new method supporting designers at the design stage in choosing materials that are
compatible ensures that the product is recyclable and environmentally friendly. The aim
of the authors study was to create expert system similar to human thinking in the concept
of reasoning. Functions of the created expert system allows to solve certain tasks, in the
similarly like a man who is an expert in the domain. The creation of such a system was
possible to the use of artiﬁcial neural network methods.
2
Review of Literature
The ecodesign concept combines many aspects of traditional and environmental design.
The main goal is to develop sustainable solutions that meet human needs [5]. Product
recyclability is one of the basis of ecodesign. Recycling is one of the methods of envi-
ronmental protection. It consists to reduce the amount of waste and the consumption of
natural resources [6]. Therefore, at the initial stages of the product life cycle, you should
consider what will happen to it after its end of life.
More and more ecodesign supporting tools use intelligent solutions, such as neural
networks. The article [7] presents models of life cycle assessment (LCA) based on a
BPNN, which allow estimating the amount of hazardous chemicals and the consumption
of electronic product for the entire product lifecycle. The solution described in [8] uses
the artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) for forecasting and performance of product lifecycle
assessment (LCA). Any missing data required for the LCA is estimated using the ANN.
Artiﬁcial intelligence is also applied in waste sorting is the deep learning based method,
implemented by Reﬁned Technologies of Sweden [9]. It recognizes products or product
models with a high degree of similarity.
Many researchers have described the application of neural networks methodolo-
gies across different scientiﬁc and practical domains. Numerous research papers discuss
Kohonen networks applied for multidimensional data visualization to evaluate classiﬁ-
cation possibilities of various coal types [10], collision free path planning and control
of wheeled mobile robot [11], or parametric fault clustering in analog electronic circuits
with the use of a self-organizing artiﬁcial neural network [12].
Radial basis function (RBF) networks are also widely discussed in the literature as a
tool supporting, among others, rotor fault detection of the converter fed induction motor
[13], local dynamic integration of ensemble in prediction of time series [14], predicting
the corrections of the Polish time scale UTC(PL) (Universal Coordinated Time) [15], or
accurate load forecasting in a power system [16]. However, solutions implementing the
RBFN, Kohonen networks or MLP in ecodesign are scarce. Hence the authors’ interest
in the application of neural networks.
The method aiding the selection of materials in the ecodesign, which used neural
networks was shown in the article. While developing the expert system, the authors used
their experience from solutions supporting ecodesign [17–19] and creative of neural
networks [4, 20–22].
3
Methods
Materials selection for product components is aided with the use of MLP, RBF and
SOFM networks. Neural networks are very good suited to the obtain of knowledge and

16
I. Rojek et al.
experience, in this case in the range of selection of compatible materials in the process
of ecodesign.
The MLP network structure consists of many artiﬁcial neurons in a few connected
layers. The artiﬁcial neural network is a very simpliﬁed model of the brain of a living
organism, because the brain doesn’t have a perfectly layered structure in which neurons
are connected between the layers. The neural network model is very simpliﬁed. For
simpler implementation, the neural network is built symmetrically. It consists in the fact
that all neurons from one layer are connected to neurons of the next layer. The network
learning process eliminates connection redundancy [23]. MLP networks have three basis
features. The network is made up of layers in which neurons are located. These neurons
in each layer may have a different number. The layers in the network connect to each
other on the principle of: each neuron from one layer with each neuron of the previous
layer. Data in the network ﬂows from entry to exit in one direction. The network can be
divided into input, hidden (or n hidden) and output layers.
MLP network is the most universal network commonly applied for resolving various
problems, including technical ones [23]. But, RBF networks also have many advantages.
Firstly, they are able to map any nonlinear function by a single hidden layer, unlike the
MLP network where sometimes we need more than one hidden layer. Moreover, the
RBF network typically has one hidden layer with radial neurons, each of which models
the Gaussian process based response surface [23]. Radial networks are composed of
neurons whose activation functions map (1). Their values change radially around center
c.
x →ϕ(∥x −c∥), x ∈Rn
(1)
where(∥·∥)isusuallytypicallyanEuclideannorm.Functionsϕ(∥x −c∥)arereferred
to as radial basis functions.
Secondly, in the output layer we can performed to optimize simple linear transforma-
tion by means of traditional linear modelling techniques. The techniques are quick and
free from such problems as local minima, which occur in the training of MLP networks.
Therefore, we can train RBF networks in a very short time period (the difference in the
training speed can reach orders of magnitude).
Kohonen networks are one of the basic types of self-organizing networks. They train
in a way similar to the way human beings do, without deﬁning any patterns – the patterns
are created through the training process combined with normal functioning. Owing to
their self-organizing capability, they open up new possibilities, such as adaptation to
input data they have little knowledge of. SOFM networks represent an entire group
of networks which learn by the self-organizing competitive method. On the network’s
inputs signals are set up to choose the winning neuron – the one which best corresponds
to the input vector. SOFM’s topology correct feature maps ﬁrst choose the winning
neuron (by means of the Euclidean distance), and subsequently determine the training
coefﬁcient of the winner’s neighboring neurons [23].

Comparison of Neural Networks Aiding Material Compatibility Assessment
17
Once the network is triggered by the input vector x, neurons compete among them-
selves. The winning neuron is the one whose weights are most similar to the respective
components of that vector. A topological neighborhood G(i, x) is assumed around the
ith neuron. In the standard Kohonen algorithm, the G(i, x) function is deﬁned as follows
(2):
G(i, x) =
1 for d(i, w) ≤R
0 for others
(2)
where d(i, w) represents the Euclidean distance between the winning vector wi and
the ith neuron, and R – the neighborhood radius.
We identify three stages in Kohonen networks: construction, learning, and recogni-
tion.
4
Creation of Models Based on the Neural Networks
The selection of materials in the ecodesign is possible thanks to neural network models
that were created in the following stages:
• analysis of input data for the selection of the materials (input data were developed on
the basis of real data taken into account by the designers when selecting materials),
• creating training, testing and validation kits containing examples of the selection of
materials to be used in creating neural networks and evaluation their effectiveness,
• creating models using neural networks (MLP, RBF, SOFM),
• model evaluation,
• selection of the most effective material selection models and their implementation in
the expert system.
4.1
Data Preparation
Recycling oriented ecodesign relies primarily on the material selection and methods
of connecting them. The main goal is to design a product made of the largest possible
number of standardized and recyclable materials. This has a positive impact on the envi-
ronment in the last stages of the product’s lifecycle, such as maintenance or withdrawal
from use. When selecting materials for a product, we are guided by their compliance in
terms of recycling. Mainly the chemical composition of materials determines recycling.
Special tables have been developed that show material compatibility due to recycling.
For a detailed analysis, selected properties of materials have been added upon consul-
tation with designers. Parameters of material selection were chosen for AGD products.
The ﬁles have been prepared based on an analysis of properties of materials, such as:
MM - main material name (e.g. PVC), D - density in grams per cubic centimeter (e.g.,
7.88), TS - tensile strength expressed in mega Pascal (e.g., 35.5), YPE - elongation at
yield point (Re) expressed as a percentage value (e.g., 5.5), PT - processing temperature
expressed in degrees centigrade (e.g., 20.8), DC - the dielectric constant (e.g., 2.0), ME -
Young’s modulus (elasticity) expressed in gigapascal (e.g., 4.61), WA - water absorbency

18
I. Rojek et al.
expressed as a percentage value (e.g., 22.55), RC - the recycling cost expressed in PLN
per kilogram (e.g., 4.25), where a positive value represents a proﬁt from the sale of mate-
rial, and a negative one – the disposal cost, and AM - the added material name (e.g. ABS).
Properties of materials give inputs of MLP network and output is C - compatibility. The
data set includes 980 examples.
4.2
Material Selection by Neural Networks
In experiments authors built many models of MLP neural networks. The input and output
of the network was the same for all built models (10 inputs and 1 output) (see Fig. 1).
In order to develop the best model of the neural network, various parameters were
changed in the experiments. Changed: the number of neurons in the hidden layer (5–
25), in the BFGS algorithm the number of training periods (10–120), the error function
(SOS, Entropy), the activation function in the hidden and output layer (linear, logistic,
exponential, Tanh, Softmax). Seven neural networks of varying efﬁcacy (activity quality)
were presented in Table 1.
Fig. 1. MLP network structure.
MLP 10-23-1, MLP 10-16-1, and MLP 10-21-1 neural networks were the most effec-
tive neural networks (100%). MLP 10-25-1 (96.87%), MLP 10-9-1 (97.12%), MLP 10-
16-1 (99.22%), and MLP 10-25-1 (96.34%) neural networks were a little less effective.
MLP 10-12-1 turned out to be the least effective (76.48%). Table 2 shows the analysis
of neural network errors. In the case of networks with lower efﬁciency, these networks
classiﬁed some examples incorrectly.
The MLP 10-23-1 network had 0% errors (100%, best network). MLP 10-25-1 was
slightly worse (35 errors) and MLP 10-12-1 showed the worst classiﬁcation (220 errors).

Comparison of Neural Networks Aiding Material Compatibility Assessment
19
Table 1. The neural networks (MLP) models for material selection.
ID
S
TQ
TEQ
VQ
TA
FE
FHA
FOA
1
10-25-1
96.06
97.96
96.60
38
Entropy
Logistic
Softmax
2
10-23-1
100.00
100.00
100.00
80
SOS
Tanh
Linear
3
10-16-1
100.00
100.00
100.00
30
Entropy
Tanh
Softmax
4
10-9-1
96.79
97.96
96.59
57
Entropy
Logistic
Softmax
5
10-16-1
95.19
96.59
95.24
35
Entropy
Logistic
Softmax
6
10-25-1
96.50
97.95
94.56
39
Entropy
Logistic
Softmax
7
10-21-1
100.00
100.00
100.00
60
SOS
Logistic
Tanh
where: ID – network of id, S – MLP network structure, TQ - quality of training, TEQ – quality of
testing, VQ – quality of validation, TA - BFGS algorithm, FE - function of error, FHA – function
of hidden activation, FOA – function of output activation
Table 2. Analysis of neural network errors.
Answer of network
Compatibility
Good
Incompatible Limited
10-25-1-good
265
5
0
10-25-1-incompatible
10
170
15
10-25-1-limited
5
0
510
10-23-1-good
280
0
0
10-23-1-incompatible
0
175
0
10-23-1-limited
0
0
525
10-12-1-good
225
30
75
10-12-1-incompatible
10
115
30
10-12-1-limited
45
30
420
For RBF networks, the input parameters (10 inputs) for the construction of a neural
network include material properties, including eco-friendliness, the added material for
the assessment of compatibility with the main material, and one output – the decision
class, which in this case is the compatibility of materials. Table 3 shows the most impor-
tant data of the material selection models developed as RBF networks. The models have
different numbers of neurons in the hidden layer (20–60). The activation function in the
hidden layer is the Gaussian function, the activation function in the output layer is the
Softmax function, and the training algorithm (RBFT).
The best RBF network (10-58-1) reached an efﬁciency of 94.91%. It featured 10
inputs, 58 neurons in the hidden layer, and one output. Measured with cross entropy
(CE), the training error was 0.3956, the testing error – 0.2954, and the validation error
– 0.3512.

20
I. Rojek et al.
Table 3. The neural networks (RBF) models for material selection.
ID
S
TQ
TEQ
VQ
TA
FE
FHA
FOA
1
10-20-1
76.03
75.09
74.08
RBFT
SOS
Gaussian
Softmax
2
10-28-1
80.66
78.93
76.65
RBFT
Entropy
Gaussian
Softmax
3
10-35-1
84.98
84.99
81.34
RBFT
Entropy
Gaussian
Softmax
4
10-50-1
93.05
92.11
90.01
RBFT
Entropy
Gaussian
Softmax
5
10-58-1
96.60
95.21
92.92
RBFT
Entropy
Gaussian
Softmax
where: ID – network id, S – RBF network structure, TQ – quality of training, TEQ – quality of
testing, VQ - quality of validation, TA - RBFT algorithm, FE - function of error, FHA – function
of hidden activation, FOA – function of output activation
For Kohonen networks, many neural network models were built in the course of the
conducted experiments. They all featured the same input layer, whose size resulted from
the amount of input data (11 inputs). The neural network models were parameterized
by various values: the network topology, number of learning cycles and neighborhood
were changed. The learning process consisted in the assignment of cluster centers to the
radial neuron layer. The functioning of a self-organizing network during the learning
process largely depends on the selection of the measure of distance between the winning
neuron and the input vector. The learning coefﬁcient represents the neighborhood radius,
whose value decreases over time. The models of Kohonen networks differ between these
the following parameters: error (learning), Kohonen’s learning algorithm (Number of
learning cycles – 100, 500, 1000), neighborhood (3, 5), and topology (6 × 10, 10 × 20,
15 × 25). Kohonen networks effectiveness was seen on Fig. 2.
99
99
98,91
98,98
99,39
99,66
99,63
98,00
99,00
100,00
SOFM 11-60
SOFM 11-60
SOFM 11-60
SOFM 11-60
SOFM 11-200
SOFM 11-375
SOFM 11-375
Eﬀecveness [%]
Fig. 2. Effectiveness of Kohonen models [%].
The most effective neural networks (100% effectiveness) were MLP 10-23-1, MLP
10-16-1, and MLP 10-21-1. Such good efﬁciency of neural networks was inﬂuenced

Comparison of Neural Networks Aiding Material Compatibility Assessment
21
by properly selected network parameters (number of neurons in the hidden layer, error
function, activation functions, applied learning algorithm, and network learning time).
Kohonen networks: 11-200 (99.39%) and 11-375 (99.66%) were a slightly less effec-
tive. RBF networks were the worst networks: RBF 10-50-1 (91,72%) and RBF 10-58-1
(94,91%) (see Table 4 and Fig. 3).
Table 4. Comparison of the best neural networks.
Structure
Effectiveness
MLP network
10-23-1
100.00
10-16-1
100.00
10-21-1
100.00
RBF network
10-50-1
91.72
10-58-1
94.91
Kohonen network
11-200
99.39
11-375
99.66
86,00
88,00
90,00
92,00
94,00
96,00
98,00
100,00
MLP 10-23-1
MLP 10-16-1
MLP 10-21-1
RBF 10-50-1
RBF10-58-1
Kohonen 11-200
Kohonen 11-375
Fig. 3. Effectiveness of MLP, RBF, and Kohonen neural network models [%].
4.3
Example Implementation of a Neural Network into an Expert System
An expert system implementing a neural network model supporting the selection of
materials and showing their compatibility (see Fig. 4) advises designers in the product

22
I. Rojek et al.
development process. On the basis of the input data representing properties of the main
and added materials, the system provides information on their compatibility. In the case
under analysis, the response generated for PC and PA is: incompatible.
Fig. 4. Choosing material compatibility.
5
Summary
Considering large amounts of numerical input data used in ecodesign, application of
neural networks as classiﬁcation methods seems to be appropriate to support the process.
Classiﬁcation has been conducted using MLP, RBF, and Kohonen neural networks. All
three methods are characterized by excellent classiﬁcation abilities. It follows from the
study that MLP networks are the best classiﬁers.
The selected classiﬁcation methods have taken ecodesign to the next level. Owing
to them, the knowledge which has so far been hidden in human minds or stored in
databases, can be automatically acquired and used in the design process. The study has
proven neural networks to be highly useful and effective in the aided of material selection
in ecodesign.
The models developed and implemented into the decision support system aid in the
design of new products. The system tells which materials are compatible and which are
not, while the designer can take a decision on the materials to be used. What is important,
the added material should meet both the environmental criteria and the technological
requirements speciﬁed in the expert system, so as to maintain technological coherence
of the product.
The more compatible the materials in the product are, the less time it takes to separate
them. Therefore, materials with the highest degree of compatibility should be used to
manufacture the product.

Comparison of Neural Networks Aiding Material Compatibility Assessment
23
Acknowledgments. The
work
presented
in
the
paper
has
been
co-ﬁnanced
under
0613/SBAD/8727 and grants to maintain research potential Kazimierz Wielki University.
References
1. Rojek, I., Dostatni, E.: Artiﬁcial neural network-supported selection of materials in ecodesign.
In: Trojanowska, J., Ciszak, O., Machado, J.M., Pavlenko, I. (eds.) MANUFACTURING
2019. LNME, vol. 1, pp. 422–431. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-18715-6_35
2. Rojek, I., Dostatni, E., Hamrol, A.: Automation and digitization of the material selection
process for ecodesign. In: Burduk, A., Chlebus, E., Nowakowski, T., Tubis, A. (eds.) ISPEM
2018. AISC, vol. 835, pp. 523–532. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-97490-3_50
3. Rojek, I., Dostatni, E., Hamrol, A.: Ecodesign of technological processes with the use of deci-
sion trees method. In: Pérez García, H., Alfonso-Cendón, J., Sánchez González, L., Quintián,
H., Corchado, E. (eds.) SOCO/CISIS/ICEUTE 2017. AISC, vol. 649, pp. 318–327. Springer,
Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67180-2_31
4. Dostatni, E., Rojek, I., Hamrol, A.: The use of machine learning method in concurrent ecode-
sign of products and technological processes. In: Hamrol, A., Ciszak, O., Legutko, S., Jurczyk,
M. (eds.) Advances in Manufacturing. LNME, vol. 649, pp. 321–330. Springer, Cham (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68619-6_31
5. Karlsson, R., Luttropp, C.: EcoDesign: what’s happening? J. Clean. Prod. 14, 1291–1298
(2006)
6. Wikipedia. https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recykling. Accessed 21 Nov 2018
7. Chiang, T.A., Che, Z.H., Wang, T.T.: A design for environment methodology for evaluation
and improvement of derivative consumer electronic product development. J. Syst. Sci. Syst.
Eng. 20(3), 260–274 (2011)
8. Li, J., Wu, Z., Zhang, H.-C.: Application of neural network on environmental impact
assessment tools. Int. J. Sustain. Manuf. 1(1/2), 100–121 (2008)
9. Artiﬁcial Intelligence put to use in Recycling. http://www.mistbreaker.com/sustainability/art
iﬁcial-intelligence-put-use-recycling. Accessed 19 Apr 2019
10. Jamróz, D., Niedoba, T.: Application of multidimensional data visualization by means of
self-organizing Kohonen maps to evaluate classiﬁcation possibilities of various coal types.
Arch. Min. Sci. 60(1), 39–50 (2015)
11. Hendzel, Z.: Collision free path planning and control of wheeled mobile robot using Kohonen
self-organising map. Bull. Pol. Acad. Sci. Tech. Sci. 53(1), 39–47 (2005)
12. Grzecha, D.: Soft fault clustering in analog electronic circuits with the use of self-organizing
neural network. Metrol. Meas. Syst. XVIII(4), 555–568 (2011)
13. Kami´nski, M., Kowalski, C.T.: Rotor fault detector of the converter fed induction motor based
on RBF neural network. Bull. Pol. Acad. Sci. Tech. Sci. 62(1), 69–76 (2014)
14. Osowski, S., Siwek, K.: Local dynamic integration of ensemble in prediction of time series.
Bull. Pol. Acad. Sci. Tech. Sci. 67(3), 517–525 (2019)
15. Luzar, M., Sobolewski, Ł., Miczulski, W., Korbicz, J.: Prediction of corrections for the Polish
time scale UTC(PL) using artiﬁcial neural networks. Bull. Pol. Acad. Sci. Tech. Sci. 61(3),
589–594 (2013)
16. Osowski, S., Siwek, K., Szupiluk, R.: Ensemble neural network approach for accurate load
forecasting in the power system. Int. J. Appl. Math. Comput. Sci. 19(2), 303–315 (2009)

24
I. Rojek et al.
17. Dostatni, E., Diakun, J., Grajewski, D., Wichniarek, R., Karwasz, A.: Multi-agent system to
support decision-making process in design for recycling. Soft. Comput. 20(11), 4347–4361
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-016-2302-z
18. Dostatni,E.,Diakun,J.,Grajewski,D.,Wichniarek,R.,Karwasz,A.:Functionalityassessment
of ecodesign support system. Manag. Prod. Eng. Rev. 6(1), 10–15 (2015)
19. Dostatni, E.: Recycling-oriented eco-design methodology based on decentralised artiﬁcial
intelligence. Manag. Prod. Eng. Rev. 9(3), 79–89 (2018)
20. Rojek, I.: Neural networks as prediction models for water intake in water supply system.
In: Rutkowski, L., Tadeusiewicz, R., Zadeh, L.A., Zurada, J.M. (eds.) ICAISC 2008. LNCS
(LNAI), vol. 5097, pp. 1109–1119. Springer, Heidelberg (2008). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-540-69731-2_104
21. Rojek, I.: Hybrid neural networks as prediction models. In: Rutkowski, L., Scherer, R.,
Tadeusiewicz, R., Zadeh, L.A., Zurada, J.M. (eds.) ICAISC 2010. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 6114,
pp. 88–95. Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-13232-2_12
22. Rojek, I.: Classiﬁer models in intelligent CAPP systems. In: Cyran, K.A., Kozielski, S., Peters,
J.F., Sta´nczyk, U., Wakulicz-Deja, A. (eds.) Man-Machine Interactions. AINSC, vol. 59,
pp. 311–319. Springer, Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-00563-3_32
23. Tadeusiewicz, R., Chaki, R., Chaki, N.: Exploring Neural Networks with C#. CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton (2014)

Parameterized State Feedback Control Applied
to the 1st Degree of Freedom of a Cylindric
Pneumatic Robot
Marcos G. Q. Rijo1(B), Eduardo A. Perondi2
, Mário R. Sobczyk S.2,
and Carlos A. C. Sarmanho Jr.3
1 IFSUL Federal Institute, Sapiranga, RS, Brazil
mqrijo@gmail.com
2 Mechanical Engineering Department, UFRGS University, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil
3 IFSUL Federal Institute, Charqueadas, RS, Brazil
Abstract. This paper addresses a gain-schedule trajectory controller applied to
the ﬁrst degree of freedom of a pneumatic ﬁve-degree cylindrical robot. The pro-
posed control law is based on pole placement and state feedback techniques asso-
ciated with a continuous gain-schedule scheme. Its gains are parameterized with
respect to the trajectory-dependent mass moment of inertia of the manipulator
with relation to its rotation axis. Therefore, the value of the equivalent transla-
tional inertia to be moved by the ﬁrst degree of freedom actuator is calculated
on line and used to update the gain set of the controller. As consequence, the
poles of the closed-loop system remain unaltered, which results in small per-
formance losses due to payload variations. Performance enhancement is veriﬁed
by means of experimental results of position trajectory errors for the controlled
system considering invariant and variable equivalent mass applied to the 1st DOF.
Keywords: Gain-schedule control · State feedback control · Pneumatic robotic
manipulator
1
Introduction
Robotic manipulators are driven by electric motors or, less frequently, ﬂuidic ones,
according to several performance requirements such as precision, power/weight and
power/volume ratios, maintainability, compliance, robustness, durability, reliability,
response time, ease to control, energy source availability, energetic efﬁciency and cost.
In this context, pneumatic actuators are attractive because they are fast, low-cost, easy
to install (compressed air is common in industrial facilities), and durable, while present-
ing high power/volume and power/weight ratios. Moreover, air compressibility is useful
in collaborative applications since it facilitates handling fragile objects and interacting
with humans, thereby enhancing overall compliance. Nevertheless, these actuators are
difﬁcult to control accurately for a number of reasons associated with highly nonlinear
phenomena such as air compressibility, pressure dynamics in the chambers, dead zones
in the control valves, and dry friction [1, 2]. Thus, signiﬁcant effort has been spent
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 25–36, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_3

26
M. G. Q. Rijo et al.
on improving control algorithms applied to pneumatic actuators, so their considerable
operational advantages can be exploited with acceptable accuracy [3].
Due to their highly nonlinear nature, it is widely known that pneumatic actuators are
not expected to achieve very good performance in precision applications when controlled
by means of common linear feedback strategies, such as PID control [4–7]. On the other
hand, nonlinear controllers tend to yield signiﬁcant performance improvements, but at
the cost of greatly increased complexity not only in theoretical terms, but also in the
corresponding implementation hardware [8]. Thus, intermediate complexity algorithms
such as State Feedback Control with position, velocity and acceleration feedback (the
PVA controller) can often be regarded as an interesting “midway” approach, yielding
acceptable performance at relatively reduced implementation costs when compared to
more advanced algorithms such as Computed Torque Control [8].
When a linear model is provided, PVA control allows imposing the desired closed-
loop dynamics to the system (at least for a limited range) with relatively little effort
in design and implementation. If applied to pneumatic actuators, such controllers yield
good responses when the mass is held constant, but its dynamic performance deteriorates
with varying payloads [6], as demonstrated experimentally in [5]. When translated to
the case of a pneumatically driven robot, this results in poor accuracy even if the payload
remains constant, because pose variations will also affect the controller performance due
to changes in the overall equivalent inertia perceived in each joint.
Here, we improve the PVA-controller robustness with respect to payload variations
by parameterizing its gains in terms of the moment of inertia associated with the instan-
taneous robot pose, an approach that can be interpreted as a continuously updated
gain-schedule control algorithm. It is applied to compensate for the variations in the
moment of inertia perceived in the 1st degree of freedom (DOF) of a 5-DOF cylindrical
robotic manipulator driven by a pneumatic power source. The performance of the pro-
posed controller is evaluated experimentally, using the results obtained with a standard
PVA-controller as reference for comparison.
Section 2 of this paper addresses the overall conﬁguration of the pneumatic robot.
Section 3 is dedicated to deﬁning the equivalent mass perceived by the actuation system
of the 1st DOF as a function of the manipulator pose. The synthesis of the control strategy
is presented in Sect. 4, whereas experimental results are discussed in Sect. 5. Finally,
the main conclusions are presented in Sect. 6.
2
The 5-DOF Pneumatic Robot
As shown in Fig. 1, the robot comprises one rotation joint related to the 1st DOF, followed
by two prismatic orthogonal joints associated to the 2nd and 3rd DOFs, and two rotation
joints associated to the 4th and 5th DOFs. The end effector is composed by a pneumatic
gripper with two ﬁngers. The ﬁrst joint is driven by a rodless double action cylinder,
connected with a 5/3 proportional valve to control the air mass ﬂow rates that ﬁll or
exhaust the actuator chambers. Chamber are measured through pressure transducers.
These components are mounted in a base constructed with aluminum proﬁles. Some of
these hollow proﬁles are also used as accumulators for the compressed air coming from
the pneumatic supply line, reducing its pressure oscillations. The robot base also houses

Parameterized State Feedback Control Applied to the 1st Degree of Freedom
27
a transmission system of three pulleys and a synchronizer belt, which convert the piston
translation of the piston into the rotational movement of the 1st DOF of the robot.
Fig. 1. Kinematic chain of the pneumatic cylindrical robot (left) and schematic view of the
mechanical components of the 1st degree of freedom (right).
The main part of the transmission system of the 1st DOF is a timing belt pulley
(primary pulley), assembled to a vertical rotational aluminum shaft that supports all
other links of the robot. This pulley is connected to the other two by a timing belt, which
ensures that all three rotations are synchronized. A metallic clamp is used to connect the
extremities of the timing belt, which transmits the force from the pneumatic actuator to
the pulley linked to the 1st joint. The timing belt is of HTD type, which, according to
[9], is adequate for low speeds and high torque transfer operations.
A proprietary Microcontrolled Actuation and Control Unit (UCAM) was developed
to communicate the control board with the measurement devices. Typical functions of
UCAM include analogic signals sampling from pressure sensors, A/D and D/A con-
versions, and performing the serial communication (RS-485) with the magnetostrictive
piston position sensor mounted inside of the pneumatic cylinder. A centralized robot
control algorithm is programmed in Matlab-Simulink® and is processed in a PC hosted
dSPACE® DS-1104 board with a hard real-time control cycle of 1.8 ms.
3
Parameterization of the Equivalent Mass
As the robot moves, the moment of inertia with respect to the rotation axis of the 1st DOF
changes with the current robot joint coordinate values. The parametric control strategy
is based on, by means the Steiner’s law, calculate a so-called equivalent lumped mass
that is instantaneously added to that of the moving parts of its linear pneumatic cylinder,
resulting in the value of the total equivalent mass that have to be moved by the linear
piston in result of the control driving. Taking into account this value, the gains of the state
feedback controller are suitably updated by means a parametric algorithm. Therefore,
when the arm changes its pose, the control gains are modiﬁed, seeking to keep constant
the closed-loop poles associated with the 1st DOF. This strategy takes into account the
positions of the 3rd and 4th DOFs of the robot, which alter the mass moment of inertia
with respect the 1st DOF. Figure 2 presents the deﬁnition of the coordinate systems.

28
M. G. Q. Rijo et al.
Fig. 2. Manipulator and coordinate systems for the moment of inertia parameterization
The moment of inertia I of a given robot link with respect to the 1st DOF Z-axis is:
I = IG + md2,
(1)
where m is the link’s mass, IG is the link mass moment of inertia related to its mass
center, and d is the distance from this mass center to the 1st DOF Z-axis.
To parameterize its equivalent lumped mass, the manipulator was divided into three
subsets. The ﬁrst one comprises the transmission shaft and the pulleys of the 1st DOF,
the coupling part between the 1st and 2nd DOFs, the pneumatic actuator of the 2nd DOF,
the coupling part between the 2nd and 3rd DOFs, and the piston of the 3rd DOF actuator.
Since no one of these moving parts affects the mass moment of inertia with respect to
the 1st DOF Z-axis, its equivalent lumped mass mE1 is constant.
The second subset is formed by the actuators of the 3rd and 4th DOFs. When these
parts move, the mass moment of inertia relative to 1st DOF Z-axis varies. Thus, mE2
represents the inertia variations due to the displacements in the 3rd DOF, whereas the
effects of the 4th DOF are represented by another variable equivalent mass mE3. The
equivalent lumped mass for this subsystem is given by mE2 + mE3.
The third subset is formed by the wrist, whose mass moment of inertia IG varies with
the translation of the 3rd DOF and the rotation θ of the 4th DOF, for that, Steiner’s law
is used:
IG =
IXG + IYG
2

−IXG −IYG
2
cos(2θ) + IXYGsin(2θ),
(2)
where IXG, IYG and IXYG are the wrist moment of inertia relative to the associated axes x,
y and the rotation angle θ (Fig. 2). Thus, once obtaining the value of IG, the equivalent
mass mE4 is calculated through (1).
After calculating the equivalent masses of the three subsystems, the total equivalent
mass is determining by summing all involved masses:
mE = mCE + mC + 2mEP + mE1 + mE2 + mE3 + mE4,
(3)

Parameterized State Feedback Control Applied to the 1st Degree of Freedom
29
where mCE, mC and mC are, respectively, the piston, clamp and belt masses, whereas
mEP = IP/R2
P is the equivalent mass of each the auxiliary pulley in the transmission
mechanism of the 1st DOF (Fig. 2), with IP and RP standing for their mass moment of
inertia and effective radius.
4
State Feedback Controller
The modeling of a standard pneumatic servopositioning system is extensively discussed
in several works [4–7, 10], where it is shown to be satisfactorily represented by means
of the following transfer function:
G(s) = Y(s)
I(s) =
b0
s

s2 + a1s + a2
,
(4)
where I is the control signal voltage applied to the pneumatic servovalve, y is the piston
position, s is the Laplace varialble, and b0, a1, a2 are parameters that depend upon the
characteristics of the system. These coefﬁcients can be expressed as:
b0 = 4ArRTkq
mEV
; a1 = 4rA2P0
mEV ; a2 = Cf
mE
,
(5)
where A is the cross-sectional area of the pneumatic piston, r is speciﬁc heat ratio of the
air, R is the gas constant of compressed air, T is the average absolute temperature, V is
the volume of the piston, kq is the average mass ﬂow rate gain of the valve oriﬁces, and
Cf is the is the viscous friction coefﬁcient (linear Newton’s friction coefﬁcient). Table
1 presents the numerical values used in the present work for the controller design.
Table 1. Numerical values of the model parameters [8].
As the 3rd order model does not present zero-pole cancelation, the system is control-
lable. Therefore, within the actuating range of its control valve, it is possible to arbitrarily
choose its closed-loop poles by using the following feedback law:
u(t) = kp˜y + kv˙˜y + ka¨˜y,
(6)
where ˜y, ˙˜y and ¨˜y are the errors between the desired values of position (yd), velocity (˙yd),
and acceleration (¨yd), and their measured counterparts y, ˙y, and ¨y, with respective gains

30
M. G. Q. Rijo et al.
kp, kv and ka. This law is schematically shown in Fig. 3. It is usually referred to as PVA
because it uses position (P), velocity (V) and acceleration (A) as feedback states. Several
authors applied PVA controllers to pneumatic positioners based on the 3rd order linear
model given in (4) [7]. Velocity and acceleration signals were obtained by numerical
differentiation of the position data.
Fig. 3. Linear 3rd order system with state feedback controller.
The characteristic equation for this closed-loop system is
s3 + (b0ka + a2)s2 + (b0kv + a1)s + b0kp = 0.
(7)
Since each gain affects one independent power of s in Eq. (7), the allocation of all
three poles is a straightforward process. Deﬁning P1d, P2d and P3d as the desired poles,
the correspondent characteristic coefﬁcients are:
a0d = −P1dP2dP3d,
(8)
a1d = P1dP2d + P2dP3d + P1dP3d,
(9)
a3d = −(P1d + P2d + P3d).
(10)
Thus, the desired dynamics’ characteristic equation is
s3 + a2ds2 + a1ds + a0d = 0.
(11)
Finally, matching Eqs. (7) and (11), the controller gains are determined as:
kp = a0d
b0
; kv = a1d−a1
b0
; ka = a2d−a2
b0
.
(12)
The desired dynamics is deﬁned as a dominant pair of poles for the 1st DOF
(approaching its dynamics of that of a 2nd order system), with the third pole located
in a position ten times farthest than the real part of the dominant ones. The maximum
overshoot is chosen as 20% and the settling time is 1.4 s (with 2% tolerance), implying a
damping ζ = 0,5 and a natural frequency ωn = 5,71 rad/s. The corresponding complex
conjugate poles are P12d = −2, 86 ± 4, 95i, whereas the third pole is P3d = −28, 6.
Oncethedesireddynamicsisestablished,thecompleteproposedcontrolstrategyconsists
of performing the following three steps on each control cycle:

Parameterized State Feedback Control Applied to the 1st Degree of Freedom
31
1. Compute the equivalent total lumped mass value as described in (3);
2. Update the open loop coefﬁcients (b0, a1 and a2) using (5);
3. Calculate the control gains kp, kv and ka (12) and obtain the corresponding control
signal to be applied to the servovalve (6).
5
Experimental Results
Two cases were analyzed through experimental tests. In the ﬁrst, only the 1st DOF was
moved, whereas the 3rd and 4th arm joints were ﬁxed so as to generate three conditions
for the equivalent moment of inertia: maximum, medium, and lowest. In the second one,
all these three joints were made to track their respective desired trajectories, as described
in Table 2, so that the equivalent inertia with respect to the 1st DOF was continuously
varying.
Table 2. Desired trajectories

32
M. G. Q. Rijo et al.
In both cases, two PVA controllers were used: a standard (SPVA) one, based on the
nominal values of the linear model for the 1st DOF, and the proposed parameterized
(PPVA) one, with continuously updated gains.
Due to the geometric conﬁguration, the 2nd (vertical displacement) and the 5th DOF
do not signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the mass moment of inertia of the entire manipulator with
respect to the 1st DOF. Therefore, only the 3rd and the 4th DOF displacement were taken
into account in the variable mass case tests, in which, the desired trajectory consists of a
combination of a 7th order polynomial curve with constant values in the initial and ﬁnal
positions, as presented on Table 2. These kinds of trajectory have already been used as
a test pattern in other studies of tracking control [11] and was prescribed in a way that
the manufacturer pneumatic cylinder’s limits of velocity and acceleration are always
observed. Figure 4 presents the desired trajectory for the 1st DOF.
5.1
Case 1 – Invariant Equivalent Mass Applied to the 1st DOF
In this case, the tests were performed with three different geometric conﬁgurations of
the robot, where the 3rd and 4th DOF were ﬁxed so the equivalent mass perceived in
the 1st DOF presented minimum (86.5 kg), intermediate (134 kg) and maximum values
(180.5 kg). For simplicity, the results shown in this section refer only to the minimum
inertia case. The trajectory-tracking errors in all cases are discussed in Sect. 5.3.
A typical trajectory tracking position for both controllers when the system operates
with the minimum inertia is presented in Fig. 4.
(a) PPVA
(b) SPVA
Fig. 4. Position trajectory tracking response (smaller inertia case: 86,5 kg).

Parameterized State Feedback Control Applied to the 1st Degree of Freedom
33
Figure 5 presents the control signals for the minimum inertia case. It is clear that the
control action required for the SPVA control law is much more severe than the one given
in the PPVA case. Although no saturation occurred (the valve operates in the range of
−5 V to +5 V), the chattering in control action for the PPVA is undesirable because
it leads to premature wear of the control valve and to the risk of exciting unmodeled
dynamics in the robot arm. In fact, when this law was used, it was possible to observe
vibrations along the arm structure.
(a) PPVA
(b) SPVA
Fig. 5. Control signals for minimum inertia case.
5.2
Case 2 – Variable Equivalent Mass Applied to the 1st DOF
Aiming at reproducing actual operation conditions, each DOF tracks its respective
desired trajectory as deﬁned in Table 2, so the equivalent mass with respect to the
1st DOF is time-varying, as depicted in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Time evolution of the equivalent mass calculated through (4).
Figure 7 present the position tracking and position tracking error for the two control
algorithms operating with all the joints moving concomitantly.

34
M. G. Q. Rijo et al.
(a) PPVA
(b) SPVA
Fig. 7. Position trajectory tracking response (variable inertia).
Figure 8 shows the control actions applied to the valve for both controllers.
(a) PPVA
(b) SPVA
Fig. 8. Control signals for the time varying inertia case.
Once again, it is clear that the use of the proposed PPVA scheme leads to reductions
in the chattering of the valve opening, which is desirable.
5.3
Position Trajectory-Tracking Errors
The results plotted in Fig. 9 presents the position trajectory-tracking errors in the closed-
loop system for all performed tests. These results are also summarized numerically in
Table 3.
Overall, error amplitudes are similar for both controllers, suggesting no clear advan-
tage for the proposed scheme. However, closer inspection shows that PPVA control
leads to signiﬁcant reductions in steady-state errors, especially when the inertia in the
actual system is larger than the estimate used in designing the SPVA. Coupled with the
chattering reduction observed in the previous sections, this indicates that the proposed
controller tends to improve the precision of the robot arm as a whole, since it reduces
steady-state errors and structure vibrations as the overall trajectory is performed.
Still with respect to steady-state errors, this result is in apparent contradiction with
the corresponding open-loop linear system model given in (4): since there is a pole on the

Parameterized State Feedback Control Applied to the 1st Degree of Freedom
35
Fig.9. Trajectory-tracking errors for the controlled system: (a) minimum mass, (b) nominal mass,
(c) maximum mass, (d) time-varying mass.
Table 3. Experimental results summary
Mass [kg] 
Steady State Error [mm] 
Tracking error [mm] 
Max. 
Average 
Max. 
Average 
Gains 
Variable 
0,73 
0,21 
7,95 
5,25 
Parameterized 
0,63 
0,38 
5,72 
4,52 
Fixed 
86,5 
0,47 
0,26 
8,58 
7,20 
Parameterized 
0,53 
0,32 
6,72 
5,23 
Fixed 
134 
0,57 
0,24 
5,42 
4,61 
Parameterized 
0,69 
0,26 
5,52 
4,63 
Fixed 
180,5 
0,24 
0,15 
3,98 
3,37 
Parameterized 
0,57 
0,40 
5,72 
4,73 
Fixed 
origin, the corresponding integral action should force these errors to zero. However, we
must stress that the real system is highly nonlinear, with at least two major hindrances to
such “ideal” integral action: (i) dry-friction forces, which cause the actuating piston to
stick unless pneumatic forces are high enough to cause movement [12]; (ii) a dead zone
in the control valve, which, for the employed model, is typically about 5% of its opening
stroke. Thus, small but nonzero steady-state errors are to be expected when PVA-control
is applied to this type of system.

36
M. G. Q. Rijo et al.
6
Conclusions
Even though there is no signiﬁcant reduction in error amplitudes when compared to a
standard, ﬁxed-gain PVA controller, the proposed parameterized control scheme leads to
important reductions inthesteadystateerror values, especiallywhenthereal inertiainthe
system is greater than expected during the design of the standard controller. Moreover,
the proposed algorithm leads to signiﬁcantly reduced chattering in the corresponding
control signals applied to the servovalve. This particular result is highly desirable, since
it leads to extended lifespan of the control valves and reduced vibrations in the overall
structure of the robotic arm. For these reasons, the proposed control scheme can be
considered an attractive one.
Further work would include stability and robustness analysis of the proposed param-
eterized PVA control scheme, as well as the extension of this technique to compensate
for other undesirable effects in the system.
References
1. Saravanakumar, D., Mohan, B., Muthuramalingam, T.: A review on recent research trends
in servo pneumatic positioning systems. Precis. Eng. 49, 481–492 (2017). https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.precisioneng.2017.01.014
2. Najaﬁ, F., Fathi, M., Saadat, M.: Dynamic modelling of servo pneumatic actuators with
cushioning. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 42(7–8), 757–765 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00170-008-1635-x
3. Rouzbeh, B., Bone, G.M., Ashby, G.: High-accuracy position control of a rotary pneumatic
actuator. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 23(6), 2774–2781 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/
TMECH.2018.2870177
4. Bobrow, J.E., McDonell, B.W.: Modeling, identiﬁcation, and control of a pneumatically
actuated, force controllable robot. IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom. 14(5), 732–742 (1998)
5. Ning, S., Bone, G.M.: High steady-state accuracy pneumatic servo positioning system
with PVA/PV control and friction compensation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, Washington, DC, pp. 2824–2829 (2002)
6. Ren, H.P., Fan, J.T.: Adaptive backstepping slide mode control of pneumatic position servo
system. Chin. J. Mech. Eng. 29(5), 1003–1009 (2016). https://doi.org/10.3901/CJME.2016.
0412.050
7. Sobczyk, M.R., Perondi, E.A., Suzuki, R.: Feedback linearization control with friction com-
pensation applied to a pneumatic positioning. In: ABCM Symposium Series in Mechatronics,
Section II – Control Systems, vol. 5, pp 252–261 (2012)
8. Sarmanho Jr., C.A.C.: Desenvolvimento de um robô pneumático de 5 graus de Liberdade com
controlador não linear com compensação de atrito. Thesis (Ph.D. in Mechanical Engineering),
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (2014)
9. Urethane Timing Belts and Pulleys GATES CATALOG. www.http://misbelt.com/wp-content/
uploads/2018/01/Mectrol-Belt-Pulley-Catalog_5_11.pdf. Accessed 01 Jan 2018
10. Virvalo, T.: Designing a pneumatic position servo system. Power Int. 35, 141–147 (1989)
11. Borges, F.A.P., Perondi, E.A., Sobczyk, M.R., Cunha, M.A.B.: A hydraulic actuator model
using feedforward neural networks. In: 25th ABCM International Congress of Mechanical
Engineering, Uberlândia, MG, Brazil (2019)
12. Sobczyk, M.R., Gervini, V.I., Perondi, E.A., Cunha, M.A.B.: A continuous version of the
LuGre friction model applied to the adaptive control of a pneumatic servo system. J. Franklin
Inst. 353(13), 3021–3039 (2016)

Building a Mobile Application by Combining
Third Party Platforms in Order to Reduce Time,
Costs and Improve Functionality
Marian Tanasie(B) and Ionel Simion
University Politehnica of Bucharest, 060042 Bucharest, Romania
Abstract. The article explains the collaboration between two different programs
like structure (web design and android programming) in order to shorten the time
process in design, reduce costs and improve the graphical results. Exemplify-
ing will be explained using Wordpress and Android studio demonstrating the
effectiveness of the programs in their achievement.
Keywords: Graphics · Design · Programming
1
Introduction
1.1
Goal
In this article we will demonstrate how we can develop a mobile app using Wordpress
and Android Studio. Normally building a native mobile application would take weeks,
months. But we will prove that less than a day it’s enough to know how to build a website
and then transform it into a mobile application. So in order to develop a mobile app we
would need to learn java and Android Studio. In our case we only need to know few
knowledge about how to make a website because we will use wordpress to create it.
Of course this method works on any custom or other platforms made websites, but the
point is to improve time, quality and design so we chose Wordpress for it’s ﬂexibility
and large community.
1.2
Related Work
There are some plugins for Wordpress [1], whom authors sustain that can transform your
Wordpress Website into a mobile application, but the reviews and reality shows us that
they are spam, most of them don’t work and can crash your website or some of them that
work charges you for hundreds of dollars per month. Furthermore these kind of plugins
can affect your website’s integrity making it vulnerable for attackers and they provide
some tools that forces you to use certain templates that may not bring the results you
want.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 37–43, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_4

38
M. Tanasie and I. Simion
2
How it Works
2.1
Creating an Online Store with Wordpress
We are going to demonstrate our work on an existing online store (www.feminista.ro)
made on Wordpress with Woocommerce. But ﬁrst we are going to explain how simple
is to create a website with wordpress.
First we are going to install the wordpress on localhost machine or, in our case,
on a server using FTP connection or cPanel. For that we need to create a database in
phpmyadmin and a user for the database.
The next step is uploading wordpress ﬁles into the root directory through FTP or File
Manager in cPanel. After uploading Wordpress we will access the ﬁle install.php in a
browser and the installation will begin. We will need to complete the setup steps where
we will ﬁll in the name of the database created, the user and password (see Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Setting up Wordpress
If we set up the database correctly the installation should be a success and we can
start designing our website. In our case we want to make a online market where people
can buy things. So the ﬁrst thing we will do is install a theme in wordpress by going to
Appearance – Themes.
After installing a theme we need to install woocommerce from Plugins menu so we
can sell stuff on our website. Then we will have to setup the woocommerce settings
(currency, country, shipping methods, payment gateways) (see Fig. 2).
After setting up woocommerce we will start creating our pages: Home, About, Shop,
Terms and other pages that we like to have. All this is done from the WP admin menu
and no programming is needed.
If we want to customize the theme we can access the ﬁles through FTP and start
coding or we can add custom CSS in the admin custom code section. The platform is
easy to learn and even a beginner can make a simple website. If we don’t have knowledge
at all about web programming we can search for plugins in the Plugin section in admin
panel where we can ﬁnd different plugins for what we need (e.g.: Image sliders, contact
forms, social share, etc.). After the design is ﬁnished we can start adding products into

Building a Mobile Application by Combining Third Party Platforms
39
Fig. 2. Setting up Woocommerce
the shop. We can add products from products section in wordpress where we will set the
name, price, category, attributes, images and description of the product (see Fig. 3).
Fig. 3. Adding products into the shop
2.2
Advantages of Using Wordpress for Creating the Website in Order to Easily
Develop the Mobile Application
For developing a native application in Android Studio from scratch it requires lots of
knowledges, libraries, modules, etc. [4], knowledges that should need years of learning.
Using Wordpress to create the online store gives us many advantages for the developing
of the application.
First of all we need to know few about html and css in order to adjust the wordpress
theme if we don’t like it. And that’s all the coding we need to know. The most important
thing that we need to achieve is a mobile responsive website because practically what
the android app will to is to load the website mobile version. So as long as the design
is responsive we won’t have any problem. All Wordpress themes comes with fully
responsive design but in order to be sure we just need to know a little html and css if we
need to arrange some elements if they don’t show properly.

40
M. Tanasie and I. Simion
So one of the important advantage is that we need few knowledge of program-
ming. But related to this fact, another important advantage is time. Because wordpress
themes gives us almost everything we need and we don’t need programming, the time
of implementation is very little.
Another advantage is money. For a company that has android developers as employ-
ees, there are a lot of costs in salary and resources. On the other hand a team of web
designers is less expensive and if the company already has that there is no need for full
stack programmers or Android/IOS programmers.
And of course time is very important for a project deadline. To make a native mobile
app that would be connected to the website would take weeks, months depends on the
project. So using our method will decrease time signiﬁcantly.
The design of the application and user experience is another very important advan-
tage. Making a mobile application from scratch would require front-end and back-end
programmers because the quality of the design is very important. Most mobile applica-
tion are not so eye-catching [2, 5] because it’s hard to achieve a good looking interface
in java programming.
Wordpress comes with a huge directory of themes and templates, always updated
and improved. Also they are responsive so they look very good and have an interactive
design, always keeping the user entertained (see Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. Adding products into the shop
One of the most important advantage is the functionalities of the app such as: ajax
live search suggestions, membership features, login custom ﬁelds, advanced discount
types and much more. This kind of features is needed for example in our store to give
clients different beneﬁts and user experience so they can become permanent clients.
ThesekindoffeaturesarepredeﬁnedinWordpressorcanbeﬁndindifferentmodules.
In Android such features would require weeks or months of programming and testing.

Building a Mobile Application by Combining Third Party Platforms
41
2.3
Converting the Website into an Android Application
After we set up the website now we can head up in Android Studio and start baking the
app. We will use WebView library [3] in Android studio and we will create an app that
will practically load the website.
The ﬁrst thing we are going to do next is adding the main code in MainActivity.
So we are going to make the app to access the website’s link. But that it’s not enough
because if we do only that the app will close and will open a browser to access the link,
practically we’ve just give the OS a command. So we will set the app to open the website
inside it using WebViewClient (see Fig. 5).
Fig. 5. Main code for accessing the website
The next code we are going to add is in the AndroidManifest.xml where we are going
to add permission to Android to let the app access the internet.
After we added the permissions we will go to activity_main.xml where we will set
the width and height of the application. We will set them to ﬁll the whole screen of the
Phone so it will look good on every resolution. We can test the app to see if it works and
check if it needs some modiﬁcations. In order to do that we will use AVD Manager. We
can set up our own emulator with the resolution we want or we can connect our phone
to the computer and it will appear on the list and test on it. After we select the emulator
a virtual device will show up on our screen where we can see and test the app. We will
go to Run in the menu and select Run App. The emulator will load the app and we can
test it (see Fig. 6).
We notice that our app is working but we need to set up one more thing before we
can export the app. When we access the pages on the app we notice that when we try
press the back button the result is closing the app not going to the previous page. So in
order to ﬁx that we need to add some code to the MainActivity where we tell Android
that back button will work in app too not globally.
After we ﬁnished the app we can head up and prepare the settings for export. To
export the app we go to “Build” in the menu and select “Build APK”. But before we do

42
M. Tanasie and I. Simion
Fig. 6. Testing the app
that we have to set the app an icon. In order to do that we right click on the project and
select “New” and then “Image Asset” (see Fig. 7).
Fig. 7. Setting the icon for the app
3
Conclusions
In conclusion, mobile app’s are needed more and more because most of people use their
mobile phones to surf the internet or to buy their food, clothes or to rent a cab [2] but
they are expensive and take a lot of time and resources to develop and can have poor
quality design. Combining multiple free open source applications such as Wordpress
and Android Studio, we signiﬁcantly shorten time and reduced resources to create an
app which can have great impact in the future.

Building a Mobile Application by Combining Third Party Platforms
43
We have shown that using multiple programs to achieve some projects (in our case
an online store) it’s far more better: advanced graphics quality, faster rendering, reduced
time, low costs, low human resources, easier to administrate and modify and more.
Acknowledgement. This work has been funded by the European Social Fund from the Sectoral
OperationalProgrammeHumanCapital2014–2020,throughtheFinancialAgreementwiththetitle
“Scholarships for entrepreneurial education among doctoral students and postdoctoral researchers
(Be Antreprenor!)”, Contract no. 51680/09.07.2019 - SMIS code: 124539.
References
1. Wordpress Plugins. https://www.wpbeginner.com/showcase/best-plugins-to-convert-wordpr
ess-into-mobile-app/. Accessed 21 Feb 2020
2. Verma, N., Kansal, S., Malvi, H.: Development of native mobile application using android
studio for cabs and some glimpse of cross platform apps. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 13, 12527–
12530 (2018)
3. Documentation Page. https://developer.android.com/docs/. Accessed 16 Jan 2020
4. Jose, D.V., Lakshmi Priya, C., Priyadarshini, G., Singh, M.: Challenges and issues in android
app development - an overview. Int. J. Adv. Res. Comput. Sci. Softw. Eng. IJARCSSE 811–814
(2015)
5. Kathuria, A., Gupta, A.: Challenges in Android application development: a case study. Int. J.
Comput. Sci. Mob. Comput. IJCSMC 4(5), 294–299 (2015)

Conveyor Belts Joints Remaining Life Time
Forecasting with the Use of Monitoring Data
and Mathematical Modelling
Edward Kozłowski1
, Anna Borucka2(B)
, Yiliu Liu3
,
and Dariusz Mazurkiewicz4
1 Faculty of Management, Lublin University of Technology, ul. Nadbystrzycka 38,
20-618 Lublin, Poland
e.kozlovski@pollub.pl
2 Faculty of Security, Logistics and Management, Military University of Technology, ul. gen.
Sylwestra Kaliskiego 2, 00-908 Warsaw, Poland
anna.borucka@wat.edu.pl
3 Faculty of Engineering, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
7491 Trondheim, Norway
yiliu.liu@ntnu.no
4 Mechanical Engineering Faculty, Lublin University of Technology, ul. Nadbystrzycka 36,
20-618 Lublin, Poland
d.mazurkiewicz@pollub.pl
Abstract. Monitoring the condition of conveyor belt joints by measuring and
continuously analysing changes in their length raises a number of research chal-
lenges. One of them is the need for a more advanced method of assessment of the
condition of each individual joint. Suitable mathematical modelling that would
allow to identify the change in the length of such joints over its life time could be
considered as a potential solution. Therefore, the aim of this study was to indicate
that on the basis of the operation history of such elements, it is possible to esti-
mate the parameters of the time series model, allowing to identify the joints which
should be observed more carefully due to the unfavourable changes occurring
in them. As a results of this research aim - the article presents the methodology
allowing to identify the proper model and the function estimated for the selected
joint.
Keywords: Real-time monitoring · Conveyor belts joints · Remaining useful
time · Mathematical modelling
1
Introduction
Belt conveyor systems are usually used to transport large quantities of rock materials
over long distances. High cost of manufacturing highly damage-resistant belts, e.g. fabric
and rubber ones, the sections of which are usually joined by vulcanized or cold bond
splicing, makes them particularly important for maintenance services as well. From the
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 44–54, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_5

Conveyor Belts Joints Remaining Life Time Forecasting
45
point of view of maintenance of the elements of, usually complex, transport system, cold
bond joints pose the greatest challenge in terms of ensuring the expected reliability, as
their breaking strength is noticeably lower than that of the belt itself. A typical single
belt conveyor, which constitutes the basic component of a belt conveyor system, usually
consists of several belts spliced together. These joints are the most vulnerable element of
the entire structure, as breaking one of them results in downtime of the entire conveyor
belt along with the other associated elements of the conveyor system, which operates
in series. Therefore, monitoring of the condition of individual joints of the belt is vital
[1]. Monitoring the condition of conveyor belt joints by measuring and continuously
analysing changes in their length raises a number of research challenges [1–3]. One of
them is the need for a more advanced method of assessment of the condition of individual
joints. Suitable mathematical modelling that would allow to identify the change in the
length of such joints over time could be considered as a potential solution. Momentary
change in the length of the cold bond joint is a process that is inﬂuenced by several factors,
such as the momentary load on the belt, time of operation, signiﬁcant load at start-up
or when stopping the conveyor, the amount of material transported and the method of
its distribution on the belt, quality of joints, etc., many of which are difﬁcult or even
impossible to assess or measure precisely. Therefore, the aim of the presented study was
to indicate that on the basis of the operation history of such elements, it is possible to
estimate the parameters of the time series model, allowing to identify the joints which
should be observed more carefully due to the unfavourable changes occurring in them.
The article presents the research methodology allowing to identify the proper model and
the function estimated for the selected joint.
2
Methodology
The article examines the problem of identiﬁcation of the time series, describing the
change in joint length over time, which is an important element inﬂuencing the reliable
operation of a conveyor belt. Exceeding the limit values may result in rupture and sig-
niﬁcant losses in the mining process. The undesirable phenomenon identiﬁed in such
a time series is a trend that is described with a linear function. If the gradient deter-
mining the occurrence of the trend in the model is not signiﬁcantly different from zero,
particular attention should be paid to the residuals. If they do not meet the condition
of homoscedasticity, this means that the variance is unstable, which results from e.g.
uneven load distribution on the conveyor belt. This is also an adverse phenomenon, het-
erogeneous changes in joint length (especially stretching) lead to faster wear rate and
increase the possibility of rupture.
Let (, F, P) be the probability space, R – a set of real numbers and N – a set of
natural numbers, and for any t ∈N random variable xt :  →R.
Deﬁnition 1. Time series {xt}t∈N is deﬁned as a stochastic process in discrete time [4,
5].

46
E. Kozłowski et al.
The development trend model (a model describing the development of the phe-
nomenon over time) is used to identify the joint length. At each moment (cycle) the
t ∈N joint length is presented in the following form:
xt = α0 + α1t + εt,
(1)
where {εt}t∈N it is a sequence of independent random variables with a normal
distribution N

0, σ 2
. The following assumptions are made for regression models (1):
– the variance of the random component is constant (does not depend on the moment
t = 1, 2, . . . , n);
– there is no external factor inﬂuence on the realization of the dependent variable;
– there is no autocorrelation of random components.
Failure to meet the above assumptions indicate the existing dependencies in the
residuals, which were not explained by the model (1). The solution to this problem
may be to additionally identify the series of residuals {εt}t∈N using models that take
into account the dynamics of external disturbances. In order to identify the structural
parameters in the model (1), the least squares method is used [6]. For the realization of
{xt}1≤t≤n, the values of structural parameters are determined using the formula:
⎧
⎨
⎩
α1
 = n n
t=1 txt−n
t=1 xt
n
t=1 t
n N
t=1 t2−
	N
t=1 t

2
,
α0
 = 1
n
n
t=1 xt −α1
n
t=1 t

.
(2)
Using the formulas n
t=1 t = n(n+1)
2
and n
t=1 t2 = n(n+1)(2n+1)
6
the system (2) can
be presented in the following form:

α1
 = 12 N
t=1 txt−N(N+1)
2
x
N(N 2−1)
,
α0
 = x −α1 N+1
2 ,
(3)
where x = 1
n
n
t=1 xt. In the linear model (1), the unbiased estimator of the variance
of the random σ 2 component is:
S2
ε =
n
t=1 ε2
t
n −2 ,
(4)
where {εt}1≤t≤n means the realization of residuals, εt = xt −α0
−α1
t for 1 ≤t ≤n.
Variance of parameters α0 and α1 is determined as:
⎧
⎪⎪⎨
⎪⎪⎩
S2
α0 = S2
ε
n
t=1 t2
n N
t=1 t2−
	N
t=1 t

2 =
S2
ε
n−3
2
n+1
2n+1 ,
S2
α1 = S2
ε
n
n N
t=1 t2−
	N
t=1 t

2 =
12S2
ε
n(n+1)2 .
The analysis of trend signiﬁcance in the linear model (1) allows to determine whether
the time factor (the number of cycles) affects the joint length signiﬁcantly. To this end,
the working hypothesis is veriﬁed at the signiﬁcance level 0 < α < 1:

Conveyor Belts Joints Remaining Life Time Forecasting
47
H0: α1 = 0 (slope in the linear model (1) is not signiﬁcantly different from zero) against
the alternative hypothesis:
H1: α1 ̸= 0 (slope in the linear model (1) is signiﬁcantly different from zero).
Test statistics T =
α1

Sα1 is characterized by Student’s t-distribution with n−2 degrees
of freedom. If T ≤t

1 −α
2 , n −2

, then at the signiﬁcance level α there are no grounds
to reject the working hypothesis, therefore the α1 coefﬁcient is not signiﬁcantly different
from zero and the time factor (cycles) does not have a signiﬁcant impact on the joint
length. If T > t

1 −α
2 , n −2

, then at the signiﬁcance level α the working hypothesis
is rejected, therefore the α1 coefﬁcient is signiﬁcantly different from zero and the time
factor (cycles) has a signiﬁcant impact on the joint length.
In addition to the determination of the trend in the series {xt}1≤t≤n, the identiﬁca-
tion of the residual series {εt}1≤t≤n should also be performed. Both its stationarity and
homogeneity (homoscedasticity) are veriﬁed.
Deﬁnition 2. Time series {εt}t∈N is strictly stationary, if for each m ∈N, any t1 < t2 <
. . . < tm and each τ ∈N the total probability distributions m of elementary random
sequences εt1, . . . , εtm and εt1+τ, . . . , εtm+τ are identical.
Deﬁnition 2 shows that for stationary time series, for any time shift, the static and
dynamic properties remain unchanged, therefore the mean value and the variance of the
elements of the time series {εt}t∈N are constant [4, 5].
Deﬁnition 3. Time series {εt}t∈N is homogeneously (homoscedasticly) non-stationary
if by separating a non-random component from the time series a stationary series is
obtained.
The most commonly used tests for determining time series stationarity are unit root
tests: the Augmented Dickey–Fuller test (ADF) test, the Kwiatkowski-Phillips-Schmidt-
Shin (KPSS) test [7, 8]. For the purpose of this study the ADF test was used. Time series
{εt}t∈N of the following form is considered:
Δεt = θεt−1 +
k
i=1γiΔεt−i + ϵt
(5)
where {ϵt}t∈N is a sequence of independent random variables with a normal distribu-
tion N

0, σ 2
. The k ∈N order of autoregression is selected with the aim of eliminating
correlations between the elements of the series {ϵt}t∈N. A working hypothesis is created
at the signiﬁcance level 0 < α < 1:
H0: time series {εt}t∈N is non-stationary; and the following alternative hypothesis is
assumed:
H1: time series {εt}t∈N is stationary.
Test statistic:
DF =
θ

S(θ)
(6)

48
E. Kozłowski et al.
is characterized by the Dickey-Fuller distribution, where θ

is an estimator of the
parameter θ and S(θ) is the standard deviation of this parameter. The value of the esti-
mator of the parameter θ and the standard deviation are determined using the least
squares method. For the Dickey-Fuller distribution the critical value DF∗is determined.
If DF∗≤DF, then at the signiﬁcance level α there are no grounds for rejecting the
working hypothesis, therefore it is assumed that the series {εt}t∈N is non-stationary.
If DF < DF∗, then at the signiﬁcance level α the working hypothesis is rejected in
favor of the alternative hypothesis and it is assumed that the series {εt}t∈N is station-
ary. In the case where the elements of the series {εt}t∈N are correlated and meet the
condition of stationarity, the series is identiﬁed using the ARMA(p, q), p, q ∈N class
models (AutoRegressive Moving Average). In this case, the residuals are presented in the
following form:
εt = α0 + α1εt−1 + · · · + αpεt−p + ϵt −θ1ϵt−1 −· · · −θqϵt−q
(7)
where {ϵt}t∈N is a sequence of independent random variables with distribution
N(0, σ 2).
To verify the homoscedasticity of the series of residuals {εt}t∈N the Breusch-Pagan
test is used [9, 10]. A working hypothesis is created at the signiﬁcance level 0 < α < 1:
H0: Var(εt) = σ 2 for t = 1 . . . n (the variance of residuals is constant) and an alternative
hypothesis:
H1: Var(εt) = σ 2
t ̸= const (the random component of the model (1) is heteroscedastic,
the variance of residuals is a function dependent on time t).
To verify the working hypothesis using the Breusch-Pagan test, the linear regression
equation of the following form is considered:
ε2
t = γ0 + γ1t + ϑt
(8)
and the coefﬁcient of determination R2 for the model (8) is determined. The test
statistic
LM = nR2
(9)
has the χ2 distribution with 1 degree of freedom. If the value of the statistics LM <
χ2(1 −α, 1) (the value of χ2(1 −α, 1) is a quantile of order 1 −α for distribution χ2
with 1 degree of freedom), then at the signiﬁcance level α there are no grounds to reject
the working hypothesis H0 and it is assumed that the series {εt}t∈N is homoscedastic.
If LM ≥χ2(1 −α, 1), then at the signiﬁcance level α the working hypothesis H0 is
rejected in favour of the alternative hypothesis H1 (series {εt}t∈N is heteroscedastic).

Conveyor Belts Joints Remaining Life Time Forecasting
49
Residual series for which the variance changes over time are identiﬁed using
ARCH (Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity) class models or their extension
GARCH (Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity) models [11, 12].
The ARCH model [3, 14, 15] was proposed by Robert Engle in 1982. For the ARCH(p)
model, the p ∈N elements of the time series {εt}t∈N are determined using the following
equation:
εt = σtϵt,
(10)
where the conditional variance σ 2
t is described by the following formula:
σ 2
t = α0 + α1ε2
t−1 + · · · + αpε2
t−p
(11)
and {ϵt}t∈N is a sequence of independent random variables with distribution N(0, 1)
and α0 > 0, α1, . . . , αp ≥0. From formula (10), the conditional variance of the elements
of a series of residuals {εt}t∈N is a linear function of the squares of past values of these
residuals. In the case of strong disturbances in the time series having a long-term effect
on the variability of the series, it is necessary to adopt a high value of autoregression
order p. It is a disadvantage of the ARCH(p) model.
A generalization of the ARCH(p) model is GARCH(p, q), p, q ∈N [11, 12], which
was proposed by T. Bollerslev in 1986. The model takes into account the dependence
of the conditional variance not only on the previous values of the series of residuals, but
also on the values of previous conditional variances. For the GARCH(p, q) model, the
p, q ∈N elements of the time series {εt}t∈N are determined using Eq. (10), while the
conditional variance σ 2
t is described by the following formula:
σ 2
t = α0 + α1ε2
t−1 + · · · + αpε2
t−p + β1σ 2
t−1 + · · · + βqσ 2
t−q
(12)
and α0 > 0, α1, . . . , αp, β1, . . . , βq ≥0. In formula (11), the conditional variance
of the elements of a series of residuals {εt}t∈N is a linear combination of past squares of
residuals and past conditional variances.
The problem of reliability of technical systems is the subject of a number of analyses
[16, 17]. The best models for predicting and preventing process disturbances under con-
ditions of uncertainty are sought [18, 19]. Often a good solution is to use several methods
of mathematical modelling, which allows to achieve higher quality of identiﬁcation and
prediction [19, 20].
3
Case Study
Thecollecteddataconcernsseveraljointsconnectingindividualelementsoftheconveyor
belt. Three were selected for the analysis: joint A, joint B, joint C. The graph of change
in their length for the ﬁrst 200 test cycles is presented in Fig. 1.
The values of the length of individual joints differ, as shown in the frame graph
presented in Fig. 2.
Due to clear differences between the momentary values of the length of individual
joints, these values cannot be considered as one variable in the model [21]. It is therefore

50
E. Kozłowski et al.
Fig. 1. Line graph of selected observations (joint: A, B, C).
Fig. 2. Frame graph of studied joints (joints: A, B, C).
necessarytoanalyseeachofthemindependently.Atestaimedatidentifyingtheexistence
ofatrendﬁrst,andthenatassessingthevarianceoftherandomcomponentwasconducted
for all joints. The existence of a positive trend in the linear model means that, as the
number of cycles of operation increases, a gradual stretching of the joint occurs, which is
the result of the stresses occurring in the belt. This situation requires constant monitoring
and assessment of potential exceeding of the limit values.
Special attention should also be paid to those joints in which no trend was identi-
ﬁed, however statistical tests conﬁrmed the heteroscedasticity of the variance of external

Conveyor Belts Joints Remaining Life Time Forecasting
51
disturbances. The variability of the variance could mean a signiﬁcant impact of the con-
veyor belt momentary loads on the joint tension and, consequently, affect its reliability.
The results for selected joints are presented in Table 1.
Table 1. Diagnostics of time series for joints A, B and C.
Joint
Trend assessment
Trend factor
Variance of the
residual component
Residual component
model
Joint A
A signiﬁcant trend
was found
0.000066
Homoscedasticity of
variance
ARMA(1,1)
Joint B
No signiﬁcant trend
was found
–
Homoscedasticity of
variance
–
Joint C
No signiﬁcant trend
was found
–
Heteroscedasticity of
variance
GARCH(1,1)
For joint A, the analysis of the trend signiﬁcance in the linear model allowed to
conclude that the number of cycles has a signiﬁcant impact on the change of the joint
length. The linear model has the following form:
yt = 0,000066 · t + 1,6 + εt
(13)
The joint stretches gradually over time, which means that it is necessary to constantly
monitor and check for exceeding of the limit value. The graph of the function of the
trend and empirical values is presented in Fig. 3.
Thentheresidualsofthelinearmodelwerediagnosedbytestingthehomoscedasticity
of their variance. Test statistics BP = 0.8313 and p-value = 0.3619, therefore, there
are no grounds to reject the working hypothesis of homoscedasticity of the random
component. Therefore, the external disturbances of the linear model are described using
the ARMA model. Results of estimation of its parameters are presented in Table 2.
For joint B, no trend was identiﬁed, the condition of homoscedasticity of variance is
met (test statistic BP = 1.445 and p −value = 0.2293), therefore there are no adverse
changes in its tension.
No trend was identiﬁed for joint C either, however the heteroscedasticity of variance
was found (test statistics BP = 0.1155 and p−value = 0.00068). External disturbances
occurring in the linear model were identiﬁed using the GARCH model, the structural
parameters are presented in Table 3.
The model has the following form:
εt =

0,000025 + 0,063ε2
t−1 + 0,91 σ 2
t−1 ϵt
(14)
The analysis of changes in the length of joint A indicated the existence of a signiﬁcant
trend. This means that consecutive work cycles cause it to elongate. Such a joint should
be subject to thorough inspections, as an element conducive to belt rupture, which can be
identiﬁed by the linear model proposed by the authors. Additionally, heteroscedasticity

52
E. Kozłowski et al.
Fig. 3. Empirical observations and linear model of joint A.
Table 2. Parameters of the ARMA(1,1) model for joint A.
ARMA(1,1) AR (p) MA(q)
Coefﬁcients
0.7867 0.7079
SE
0.1507 0.1674
Table 3. Estimated parameters of the GARCH model.
GARCH (1,1) α0
α1
β1
Coefﬁcients
0.000025
0.063
0.91
SE
2.764376 10−5 2.567176 10−2 4.002943 10−2
of the external disturbances was not found, which means no uncontrolled inﬂuence on
the elongation of the tested element. The ARMA(1,1) model was proposed to describe
the residuals of the model. In the case of joint C, heteroscedasticity of the component
of the residuals was found. The GARCH(1,1) model was used to identify them. The
heterogeneity of the variance of residuals indicates adverse changes in the joint length.

Conveyor Belts Joints Remaining Life Time Forecasting
53
4
Final Thoughts
The aim of this article is to evaluate and present a method of mathematical modelling of
the change in the length of joints of a conveyor belt, the reliability of which is determined
by the quality of joints of all its individual components.
The study presented the possibility of using a linear model to identify the trend,
the occurrence of which means unfavourable changes in the joint during operation of a
conveyor belt. Moreover, the importance of the characteristics of the variance of external
disturbances for making the assessment was demonstrated. Therefore, in order to assess
the possibility of joint rupture more effectively, an analysis of the residual component
was carried out and, depending on the result, an appropriate model was proposed.
The proposed method can assist in the management of the conveyor belt operation
process. The existence of the trend and the diagnosed heteroscedasticity of the variance
indicate the necessity of monitoring such joints, because the increase in the number
of work cycles or excessive loads resulting from the increase in weight carried on the
conveyor belt may cause the joints to rupture.
Further research should consider the prediction of the change in the length of such
joints over time, understood as forecasting the moment of occurrence of a potential
damage in the joint, which will allow to estimate the time of correct operation or the
best moment to perform the necessary maintenance service activities.
References
1. Mazurkiewicz, D.: Computer-aided maintenance and reliability management systems for
conveyor belts. Eksploatacja i Niezawodnosc – Maintenance Reliab. 16, 377–382 (2014)
2. Vališ, D., Mazurkiewicz, D.: Application of selected Levy processes for degradation mod-
elling of long range mine belt using real-time data. Arch. Civil Mech. Eng. 18(4), 1430–1440
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acme.2018.05.006
3. Valis, D., Mazurkiewicz, D., Forbelska, M.: Modelling of a transport belt degradation using
state space model. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and
Engineering Management (IEEM), Singapore, pp. 949–953. IEEE (2017). https://doi.org/10.
1109/IEEM.2017.8290032.
4. Box, G.E.P., Jenkins, G.M.: Time Series Analysis: Forecasting and Control. Holden-Day, San
Francisco (1970)
5. Kozłowski, E.: Analiza i identyﬁkacja szeregów czasowych. Politechnika Lubelska, Lublin
(2015)
6. Chow, G.C.: Ekonometria. PWN, Warszawa (1995)
7. Kokoszka, P., Young, G.: KPSS test for functional time series. J. Theor. Appl. Stat. 50(5),
957–973 (2016)
8. Kozłowski, E., Mazurkiewicz, D, ˙Zabi´nski, T., Prucnal, S., S˛ep, J.: Assessment model
of cutting tool condition for real-time supervision system. Eksploatacja i Niezawodnosc
– Maintenance Reliab. 21(4), 679–685 (2019). https://doi.org/10.17531/ein.2019.4.18
9. Breusch, T.S., Pagan, A.R.: A simple test for heteroscedasticity and random coefﬁcient
variation. Econometrica 47, 1287–1294 (1979)
10. Maddala, G.S., Lahiri, K.: Introduction to Econometrics, 4th edn. Wiley, Chichester (2009)
11. Bollerslev, T., Chou, R., Kroner, K.: ARCH modeling in ﬁnance. J. Econometrics 52(1–2),
5–59 (1992). https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-4076(92)90064-X

54
E. Kozłowski et al.
12. Bollerslev, T.: Generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity. J. Econometrics 31,
307–327 (1986)
13. Bera, A.K., Higgins, M.: ARCH Models: properties, estimation and testing. J. Econ. Surv.
7(4), 305–336 (1993)
14. Engle, R.F.: Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of
United Kingdom inﬂation. Econometrica 50, 987–1007 (1982)
15. Shimizu, K.: Parametric AR(p)-ARCH(q) models. In: Bootstrapping Stationary ARMA-
GARCH Models, pp. 19–64, Vieweg+Teubner (2010)
16. Iscioglu, F., Kocak, A.: Dynamic reliability analysis of a multi-state manufacturing system.
Eksploatacja i Niezawodnosc – Maintenance Reliab. 21(3), 451–459 (2019). https://doi.org/
10.17531/ein.2019.3.11
17. Selech, J., Andrzejczak, K.: An aggregate criterion for selecting a distribution for times to
failure of components of rail vehicles. Eksploatacja i Niezawodnosc – Maintenance Reliab.
22(1), 102–111 (2020). https://doi.org/10.17531/ein.2020.1.12
18. Li, J., Wang, Z., Ren, Y., Yang, D., Lv, X.: A novel reliability estimation method of multi-state
system based on structure learning algorithm. Eksploatacja i Niezawodnosc – Maintenance
Reliab. 22(1), 170–178 (2020). https://doi.org/10.17531/ein.2020.1.20
19. Li, J., Wang, Z., Liu, C., Qiu, M.: Accelerated degradation analysis based on a random-
effect Wiener process with one-order autoregressive errors. Eksploatacja i Niezawodnosc
– Maintenance Reliab. 21(2), 246–255 (2019). https://doi.org/10.17531/ein.2019.2.8
20. Alkali, M.A., Sipan, I.M., Razali, N.: Assessing the forecasting performance of ARIMA and
ARIMAX models of residential prices in Abuja Nigeria. Asia Proc. Soc. Sci. 4(1), 4–6 (2019)
21. Kissi, E., Adjei-Kumi, T., Amoah, P., Gyimah, J.: Forecasting construction tender price index
in Ghana using autoregressive integrated moving average with exogenous variables model.
Constr. Econ. Build. 18(1), 70–82 (2018)
22. Borucka, A., Wi´sniowski, P., Mazurkiewicz, D., ´Swiderski, A.: Laboratory measurements of
vehicle exhaust emissions in conditions reproducing real trafﬁc. Measurement 174, 108998
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2021.108998

Experience in Implementing
Computer-Oriented Methodological Systems
of Natural Science and Mathematics Research
Learning in Ukrainian Educational Institutions
Olena Hrybiuk(B)
Institute of Information Technologies and Learning Tools NAES of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine
Abstract. Taking into account the speciﬁcs of the existing dissonance regarding
the technical characteristics of computer equipment used in schools in the pro-
cess of designing computer-oriented methodological systems of natural science
and mathematics research learning (COMSRL), the solutions which meet all the
necessary requirements, contribute to the effective organization of research activ-
ities during research studies at school and are a budget alternative to expensive
software are offered. The experience is analyzed. With the aim to increase the
motivation and effectiveness of students’ learning the ways of solving the prob-
lems of designing variable models of research learning using the components of
the COMSRL are considered. The results of the experimental study conﬁrm that
due to the use of COMSRL the optimal concentration of educational resources
is ensured integrating training courses of robotics tested in the educational pro-
cess and extracurricular activities; orientation of the content and technologies of
students’ preparation for research, manufacturing integration in terms of educa-
tional process. To organize the students’ cognitive activity in the ﬁeld of robotics,
a number of constructors have been developed that help the students’ to assemble
the structure, create the programme and run the robot model. The results of a wide
experiment allowed us to determine the most effective psychopedagogical factors
that inﬂuence the efﬁciency of mastering knowledge. It has been shown that in
determining the feasibility of applying and selecting the COMSRL it is neces-
sary to give preference to those ones that will help students to develop conceptual
structures of knowledge.
Keywords: Modelling · Engineering · Computer oriented methodological
systems of research learning · Variational models · Manufacturing · Educational
robotics
1
Introduction
Programming and robotics training in the technological 21st century promotes the
development of communicative skills of young people, develops interaction, autonomy
in decision-making, reveals students’ creativity. To achieve this goal, within the all-
Ukrainian experimental work “Variable models of computer-oriented methodological
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 55–68, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_6

56
O. Hrybiuk
systems of natural science and mathematics research learning in a comprehensive edu-
cational institution” [1] in the context of continuity of education and strategic initiative
“Variable models of systems of general and extra education for kids and youth” [2] the
ﬁrst 27 experimental sites were created in 2016.
In the conditions of low motivation of kids and youth as for the cognitive activity
sand scientiﬁc creativity the task to improve extra educational programmes, the cre-
ation of computer oriented methodological systems of research learning with the use
of appropriate forms for kids’ intellectual development, their preparation for clarifying
educational engineering programs are of signiﬁcant importance.
Introduction of the elements of robotics in school subjects has helped to increase the
motivation and interest of students, has diversiﬁed educational and research activities [3].
To avoid the scholasticism of knowledge, demo experiments and laboratory works are
used in the process of research learning of the subjects of the natural-mathematical cycle
[4]. But often the appliances that make up the foundation of the laboratory equipment
have a high error, which allows to evaluate the results of the experiment qualitatively,
not quantitatively. To solve this problem, robotic platforms, constructors, handmade
devices, etc. are used. With the help of these tools, with the participation of children,
various models are created and programmed, such as household appliances powered
by electricity, the solar system, mobile robots with temperature sensors, magnetic ﬁeld
sensors, and others.
The theoretical and methodological basis of scientiﬁc research is the system of devel-
opmental learning [5], the theory of educational activity [6], the theory of the gradual
formation of mental actions [7]), the psychological research [8], the theory of teaching
methods [9], the theory of pedagogical systems [10], problems of variability in edu-
cation and vocational training [11–13], Principles of Convergent Natural Sciences and
Engineering Education [14–16]. However, there are a number of problems that prevent
penetration of progressive methods in the engineering and science teaching process as
well as the spreading of an interdisciplinary approach to teaching, including the interna-
tional experience [17, 18]. The problem of pedagogical design with the use of variable
models is fragmented in science, that is why the research was conducted to create a com-
prehensive scientiﬁc understanding of the features of computer-oriented design of the
educational environment and the construction of variable models for the implementation
of research learning in natural and mathematical disciplines. However, the problem of
exploring characteristics necessary and sufﬁcient for the organization of research learn-
ing at school, using COMSRL and taking into account the psychopedagogical features
of the students in the process of designing COMSRL remains a priority. Determining the
relationship between the theoretical foundations of research learning and the possibility
of developing the teaching practice using the COMSRL in accordance with the goals of
students’ development, became one of the objectives of the research.
2
Methodology
In the experimental study in the process of information resources selection during the
research learning we took into account the psychophysiological and psychopedagogical
factors, among which the stages of intellectual progress (SIP) of the students were of
great importance [3, 19].

Experience in Implementing Computer-Oriented Methodological Systems
57
In the process of determining the factors that most inﬂuence the learning outcome,
research data from 7.7 thousand respondents (students, teachers) from 27 educational
institutions located in different regions of Ukraine were analyzed. Signiﬁcant differences
between the learning and teaching styles of students and teachers have been experimen-
tally proved. It is shown that the differences depend primarily on the SIP and the prepa-
ration. It has been identiﬁed that students who have different combinations of learning
styles experience different cognitive pressure during research learning with the use of
COMSRL [20].
Descriptive statistics, Pearson’s correlation analysis with correlation coefﬁcients,
nonparametric tests for calculation the W Kendall coefﬁcient of correlation were used
for statistics analysis of the results in the study. A signiﬁcance level of 0.05 was used to
test the hypotheses, and appropriate bilateral signiﬁcance values were provided as appro-
priate. All components of theCOMSRLusedinlearningnatural scienceandmathematics
were organised into 17 groups according to their functions.
Indicators of students’ preference for the use of information resources are consid-
ered as characteristics of the popularity of a separate COMSRL. Two parameters were
identiﬁed regarding the need for certain restrictions on the practical use of information
resources and the popularity of their use: the value of the average score obtained during
the survey of respondents and the number of signiﬁcant correlations.
The calculated correlations between the students’ preference indicators towards the
use of separate COMSRL and SIP information resources for individual groups of infor-
mation resources are used to adjust the research teaching methodology to optimize the
selection of learning resources to minimize contradictions considering students’ SIP
(Table 1), speciﬁc to the group.
The study developed and tested an algorithm for selecting the optimal set of resources
of the COMSRL, which involves the use of quantitative criteria to determine the suit-
ability of resources to the requirements of students and teachers. The ﬁrst criterion is the
average score of the preference for e-resource selection by students with different SIPs
and learning styles, which is calculated for a typical group (class) proﬁle. The second
criterion is the difference between the expert rating of resources for each topic and the
score given by the students.
An analysis of the experimental data obtained and the scientiﬁc literature made it
possible to formulate such recommendations that would help teachers to prevent students
from working ineffectively [3].
1. The formulation of the cognitive style of the individual in the process of professional
training actually leads to the leveling of the difference in individual styles, taking
into account SIP. In the process of research learning, it is necessary to develop a
mechanism for integrating different types of student style behaviour.
2. Preliminary diagnosis of student behaviours in the group is desirable in order to
organize effective research learning. Understanding the composition of the group
helps the teacher create the conditions for the prevention of phenomena which help
avoid the “conﬂict of learning styles” regarding the SIP of teachers and students (for
example, ineffective design of teaching material, poor performance, high levels of
discomfort, etc.); actualization and enrichment of the whole system of mechanisms

58
O. Hrybiuk
Table 1. Coefﬁcients of correlation between students’ preferences towards the use of separate
information resources of COMSRL and students’ SIP for the groups of resources “static
visualizations” and “dynamic visualizations”.
Resource group
Resource name
Stages of students’ intellectual progress (SIP)
I
II
III
IV
Static visualisation
Drawings
−0,406
−0,489
0,014
−0,116
Charts
−0,627
−0,427
−0,300
−0,359
Diagrams
−0,461
−0,471
−0,221
−0,461
Tables
−0,113
−0,556
−0,060
−0,441
Schemes
−0,428
−0,380
−0,080
−0,493
Dynamic visualisation
3D Model
−0,316
−0,239
0,067
−0,365
Animation
−0,415
−0,101
0,467
−0,198
Video playback of the
experiment
−0.221
−0,09
0,042
−0,032
Video playback of
natural processes
−0,110
−0,198
0,124
−0,423
Video playback of life
examples
−0,070
−0,135
0,417
−0,327
Video Excursions in
manufacturing plants
−0,026
−0,202
0,571
−0,087
of students’ stylistic behaviour, which determines the productivity of intellectual
actions.
3. The task of organizing effective research learning involves the creation of didactic
materials with the possibility of selecting a speciﬁc line of research learning and
prerequisites for the gradual formation of individual cognitive styles.
4. In order to organize effective research learning in natural science and mathemat-
ics disciplines, COMSRL are required, which have adaptive tools and provide the
opportunity to present educational material in various forms.
3
Collaborative Manufacturing and Education in the Context
of Industry 4.0 (COMSRL)
The results of the study conﬁrm that in the process of research learning, each student
develops the vital qualities in modern realities (communicativeness, critical thinking,
creativity, cooperation, individual responsibility) under conditions of effective and posi-
tive interaction [3, 13]. Theoretical analysis of scientiﬁc works, the study of experience in
the use of information and communication technologies in the educational process indi-
cates the existence of contradictions between: the development of modern information
and communication technologies and the degree of their introduction in the educational
process; variety of computer equipment and mobility of participants in the educational
process; the presence of a new type of teacher in schools capable of organizing effec-
tive interaction with the use of COMSRL in natural science and mathematics, and the
absence of scientiﬁcally based technologies of its organization; the growing demands
on the management and organization of the educational process by society.

Experience in Implementing Computer-Oriented Methodological Systems
59
The urgency of the research was determined by the need to develop a new ﬁeld
of applied research: the use of variable models of COMSRL of natural science and
mathematics in the educational process, management and dissemination of the author’s
methodology of research learning.
The hypothesis of the study was that the use of COMSRL natural sciences and
mathematics would have a positive impact on the organization of learning, would create
conditions for the development of new methods and technologies of students’ research
learning, would increase their motivation for learning, would ensure the development
of information, research, foreign languages and professional teachers’ competences,
that would lead to positive qualitative changes in organization of the participants of
educational process.
The computer-based system of teaching students and developing their technological
competence is represented as a set of innovative research practices, which are imple-
mented using the technosphere of educational organizations on the principles of variabil-
ity and their usage contributes to the activation of cognitive activity [1].The students’
motivation to learn and choose the engineering professions is achieved through their
interest in research and innovation practices, including the realization of design and
graphic tasks. Research learning with COMSRL is ensured through the use of appro-
priate programmes, expositions, laboratory and demonstration equipment, appropriate
software and content, active forms of organization of the educational process, research
activities of students.
The uniqueness of the author’s method of the research learning is, for example, the
possibility of programming on examples made for a particular performer, designed by
the students themselves [3]. The achievement of this goal is ensured by the fulﬁllment
of the following tasks: promoting the formation of elementary knowledge in IT, physics,
mathematics; ability to design models of robots and their construction, creation and
software algorithms realisation; operating system and graphical programming language
skills; developing the ability of students to use information and communication tech-
nologies to effectively solve the atypical tasks of obtaining and submitting information
through physical devices, processing this data by the processing unit, saving for further
processing; formation of the students’ scientiﬁc worldview as an integral part of the
general human culture, as the necessary condition for a fulﬁlling life in modern society;
sustainable motivation to study; intellectual development of personality, development
of students’ logical thinking, algorithmic, informational and graphic culture, memory,
attention, intuition; physical, ecological, aesthetic, civic education and formation of
positive personality traits.
Among the main educational areas it is necessary to distinguish the following: inter-
esting and/or in-depth study of mathematics, chemistry, biology, physics, ecology and
other subjects of the natural science cycle, engineering graphics, information and com-
munication technologies, design and construction, robotics, fundamentals of electrical
mechatronic engineering, 3D-visualization, prototyping, nano-technologies and others
(depending on the speciﬁc tasks of the educational institutions).
A computer-based learning system is presented as logistically and scientiﬁcally
methodological support, which contains logically and logistically related objects and

60
O. Hrybiuk
services. The core of a computer-based learning system is an innovative science com-
plex which components give students the opportunity to learn the basics of mathematics,
biology, physics, chemistry, electronics, geography, ecology, history, and other sciences
in an exciting (non-standard) form. The innovative scientiﬁc complex consists of “per-
manent (static)” and “variable (dynamic)” components (blocks, exposures). “Static”
components are intended for the basic sciences and may not change for a long time;
“variable (dynamic)” components change periodically, the achievements of applied sci-
ences and technological sphere are presented with their help, too. In different premises
of the educational institution, due to the use of modern technologies, it is possible to hold
both scientiﬁc conferences and creative events for preschoolers, workshops, seminars,
mini-conferences, lectures and other events.
Here is a fragment of the contents of the elementary school physics program using
educational robotics. For example, when studying the section “Physics and Physical
Methods for the Study of Nature” such topics are considered “Physics – the science of
nature”, “Observation and description of physical phenomena”, “Physical appliances”,
“Physical quantities and their measurements”, “Physical experiment”, “The role of math-
ematics in the development of physics”, “Physics and Technology”. Such research
papers as “Calibration of measuring devices”, “Timer” and others are recommended
to implement.
In the process of studying the section “Thermal phenomena”, when the environmen-
tal problems of the use of heat engine are investigated, the work “Electric car with a
solar battery” is offered to perform. Studying the section “Electromagnetic oscillations
and waves” it is advisable to pay attention to the implementation of research projects
“Electrical measurements”, “Lego-capacitor - energy storage”, “Electricity storage”,
“Calculation of energy costs for lighting”, “Connection of the generator to the engine”,
“Optimization of energy conversion process”, “Solar battery power”, “Electric power
generation using a water wheel”, “Electricity generation using a wind engine”, etc.
4
The Use of Digital Laboratories in the Process of Teaching
Natural Science and Mathematics
Author’s Digital Labs are sets of equipment and software for conducting demonstration
and laboratory experiments, a wide range of studies, laboratory workshops including
the accumulation and analysis of data from natural experiments using the project and
research work of students. With the use of digital equipment it is possible to carry out
both laboratory work within the school programme and new researches, synchronizing
the data with the PC with the possibility of their further processing, conversion.
Digital laboratories for physics are used to perform various laboratory work, includ-
ing studying the movement on an inclined plane; simple oscillatory movements; current-
voltage characteristics of resistance, heating lamps and diodes; magnetic ﬁelds; speed
of sound; diffraction and interference of light.
Digital laboratories for biology and chemistry are used in the study of the effect
of exercises on human body temperature and heart rate; study of water evaporation by
terrestrial plants; the inﬂuence of vegetation on the microclimate of the area; acid-base
titration.

Experience in Implementing Computer-Oriented Methodological Systems
61
The use of digital laboratories and individual sensors (humidity sensors, oxygen
concentration, heart rate, temperature, acidity, etc.) signiﬁcantly improves visualization
both during the direct performing of the work and in the process of processing the results
of the study.
The equipment the physics laboratory includes sensors: Current; Distances; Forces;
Humidity; Lighting; Induction of magnetic ﬁeld; Pressure; Sound sensor (microphone);
Thermocouple; Voltages.
The Digital Laboratory of Chemistry and Biology includes sensors: Breathing; Heart
rate; Humidity; Lighting; Oxygen; pH meter; Temperature.
The equipment of the digital laboratory is universal, thus, students can use it in
different experimental installations, to make measurements in the “ﬁeld conditions”,
to save the time for students and teacher, to encourage students to creativity, allowing
changing the parameters of measurements. Using video and analytics software, you
can retrieve video snippets. All this contributes to the exploration of real life situations
recorded on video by students and to the exploration of fragments of educational and
popular science videos.
Using digital labs, students participate in scientiﬁc experimentation with the support
of teachers and scientists being not limited to the topic of the lesson, gaining experience
in analyzing and reﬁning the results of the study.
For example, in the process of studying the acidity of various substances, students
can independently make the conclusion that popular drinks are harmful to the digestive
system. Accordingly, gloves should be used when using some detergents (containing
chemical reagents).
Using digital laboratories, new approaches to learning are used that helps students
to develop the ability to autonomous search, processing, and analyzing messages, they
also help to reveal students’ creativity.
Inbiologylessons,studentsperformlaboratoryworksusingtheCOMSTRanddigital
labs. Below there are some examples.
I.
Middle school programme: Cardiovascular system response to loading (Grade 8);
Effect of enzymes on substrate (example of catalysis) (8, 9, 10 grades); Study of blood
circulation (8 grade); Functional tests. Tests for the evaluation of the breathing
system (8, 9, 10 grades); Relationship between loading and energy exchange (8–10
grades).
II. High School Program: Catalytic activity of enzymes in living tissues (9–10 grades);
Adaptation of organisms to the habitat (9–10 grades).
Undoubtedly, the motivation of students to study extracurricular researches using
experimental tasks increases signiﬁcantly.
For example, when studying topics in the section “Plant biology”: Water absorption
by the roots. Root pressure (6 grade); CO2 absorption and release of O2 under the
action of light (6 grade); Breathing of leaf; Breath of leaf; Evaporation of water by
plants. Transpiration; Seed breathing; Cold-resistant and thermophilic plants; Seed
germination conditions.
Zoology Section: Aquatic Animals (7 grade); Cold-blooded and warm-blooded
animals (7 grade).

62
O. Hrybiuk
Section “Human Biology” – “Man and his health” (8 grade): Responses of the car-
diovascular system of a man to exercise; Circulatory problems when you press your
ﬁnger; Gas exchange in the lungs; Donder’s model. Breath. Inhalation and exhalation
mechanism; Vital capacity of the lungs. Breathing system response to exercise; Skin
structure and functions. Skin selection. Respiratory and thermoregulatory functions of
the skin.
General Biology Section (9–11 grades): Effect of enzymes on substrate (catalysis).
Decomposition of hydrogen peroxide H2O2; Inﬂuence of pH on enzyme activity; The
inﬂuence of external factors on photosynthesis. The rate of photosynthesis.
In chemistry teaching, students can perform laboratory works using sensors and
digital laboratories in the classroom and during extra-curricular activity.
For example, Studying the Laws of Electrolysis and Application of Electrolysis in
Practice (Current and Voltage Sensors); Water analysis. Chemical analysis of drink-
ing water. Studying acidity of different water samples: from tap and drinking bottled
water, drinking and mineral water (acidity sensor); Experimental veriﬁcation of gas
laws; Investigation of exothermic (interaction of copper chloride with aluminum) and
endothermic (interaction of baking soda with citric acid, keﬁr, sauerkraut) reactions;
Investigation of the thermal effect of fuel burning; Study of the chemical catalysis of the
decomposition of hydrogen peroxide H2O2 in the presence of a catalyst (MnO2).
Demonstrative experiments can be performed during biology learning, including:
Gas exchange in the lungs. Breathing retention samples; Changes in blood circulation
during clamping; Pressure change in the aquatic environment; Vein valves. The structure
and functions of the venous system; Skin selection thermo control function; Response of
the cardiovascular system to metered loading.
When using digital labs in a demonstration experiment, the results are so obvious that
students can not only quickly understand and memorize a learning topic, but also using
concrete examples from their own life answer speciﬁc questions which are given by the
teacher. For example, during a ﬁnger-pressing experiment, students will understand why
their feet get frozen in tight shoes; why in order to stop bleeding in winter a braid cannot
be applied for the same time interval as in summer. Finally, students will understand
why warm-blooded animals can live in cold climates and cold-blooded animals do not;
why cold-blooded animals can live without food for a long time, etc.
Demo experiments can be conducted in chemistry lessons. In all curricular, sufﬁcient
attention is paid to environmental issues. Laboratory workshops (including the use of
oxygen sensors, pH and light, pressure, temperature, humidity, etc.) and excursions are
required for a thorough study of this area of knowledge.
It is recommended to carry out ecological researches on the following topics during
extra-curricular activities:
Research on the effectiveness of lighting in the school (Measurement of lighting in
the school premises); Determination of acidity of different drinks; Inﬂuence of phys-
ical parameters of air on the health of the pupil in the school premises; Inﬂuence of
ventilation on the microclimate of educational premises; Abiotic environmental factors;
Ecology of urban areas; The oxygen content in the air of various accommodations of the
city; Inﬂuence of change of soil acidity on the plants species; Determination of oxygen
concentration in “ﬂowering” reservoirs.

Experience in Implementing Computer-Oriented Methodological Systems
63
A new area of experimental work at school has been the study of physical phenomena
with computer-processed results and the use of robots. The existence of the LabVIEW
graphical programming environment, which is demanded and used in modern industry
to control the production of a set of precision and convenient sensors attached to the NXT
robot, transforms the process of experimentation into a cognitive, dynamic and exciting
study.
Laboratory workshops with Vernier sensors were held at Summer School, where
gifted young people were invited. The simplest and most understandable of all the
temperature sensor was used to conduct experiments to determine the temperature of
water in several glasses, ﬁnding their location. For this purpose, a voice thermometer
was designed. The robot moved along a straight line, looking for a glass of water with
different temperatures using a light sensor. When the object of study was found, the
robot stopped and lowered the Vernier temperature sensor into the glass. Then the water
temperature was being measured for 10 s. LegoMindstorms light sensor was used for
searching of the glasses.
Software written in LabVIEW has a user-friendly interface. It was also interesting for
the students to conduct a chemical experiment using robots. The idea was to manage a
chemical reaction using LabVIEW. In the process of polymer formation, the temperature
of the solution increased. After the polymer was formed, the temperature decreased and
the polymer cooled and solidiﬁed. The experimenters observed changes in the optical
density of the object and changes in temperature. The characteristics were measured
using Vernier surface light and temperature sensors and were displayed on the screen
(online) in graphical form.
All operations were performed automatically by the robot: The process of releasing
the reagent from one test-tube; Adding it to a test- tube for research; Immersion of a
probe into a test tube for forming a polymer on it; Releasing polymer from the probe.
Undoubtedly, using a Lego NXT microcomputer for a robot equipped with accurate
Verniersensors,workinginaLabVIEW graphicalprogrammingenvironmenttoautomat-
ically process data will help students test their hypotheses, do their own cross-curricular
experiments, and learn how to make scientiﬁc researches.
5
Perspectives of Introduction of Variational Models of Computer-
Oriented Environment of Studying Subjects of Natural Sciences
and Mathematical Cycle
The prospect of introducing variable models of computer-oriented systems of natural
science and mathematics (COMSRL) research learning in schools is justiﬁed by the
following alternative solutions.
1. Taking into account the speciﬁcs of the existing dissonance regarding the techni-
cal characteristics of computer technology used in schools, it is recommended that
xUbuntu and Ubuntu distributions should be used in designing individual compo-
nents of computer-based systems for the study of subjects in science and math-
ematics. The proposed solutions are a budget alternative to expensive software,
meet all necessary requirements and contribute to the effective organization of the

64
O. Hrybiuk
educational process at school. So far, it is relevant to formulate and ﬁnd ways to
solve problems in the design of learning environment and the construction of vari-
able models of the COMSRL in science and mathematics. As a result of the anal-
ysis, visual environments for C++, C # programming languages were selected;
control of students’ computers by the teacher; a system of management and train-
ing on-line, including group training, research and testing; creation of schedules
of classes and distribution of teachers’ training load; a set of administrative pro-
grammes for an educational institution; programmes for teaching algebra, geometry,
physics, chemistry, geography, astronomy, etc. Detailed analysis was carried out
and programmes for hearing, memory, students’ eyesight, etc. were identiﬁed; work
with electronic maps (GIS); systems of computer mathematics, including systems
of dynamic mathematics (GeoGebra), Cantor. To construct graphs of mathematical
functions we use KAlgebra, OpenSource analogue MatLab, wxMaxima - graphical
interface for system of computer mathematics Maxima, system of computer algebra
Mathematic, programme Cabri, The Geometer’s Sketchpad, GEONExT, Cinderella,
TracenPoche, etc.; a package of applied mathematical programmes for engineering
and scientiﬁc calculations; creation and calculation of chemical structures, viewing
macromolecules and preparation for publication of their images; editors of chemical
schemes and reactions; schematic creation of electronic circuits, graphic stimuli of
computer networks and electrical circuits; digital oscilloscopes, design of electronic
devices and necessary boards.
2. The construction of the curriculum as an individual educational project is possible
due to thoroughly comprehended paths of students’ individual learning, taking into
account the possibilities of deductive design of the educational process of natural
and mathematical disciplines. The main emphasis is placed on the project research
activities, and the corresponding goals of the subject research projects are creating
the conditions for self-realization of the students’ authorial position through their
active participation in the subject research project; reﬁnement and differentiation
of the concept apparatus, systematization of students’ knowledge, establishment of
cross-curricular connections and preparation of Olympiad tasks, preparation for
entry into higher educational institutions; correction of the level of formation of
different learning actions using project-research activities.
3. In the study the variable models of COMSRL based on the competence approach
in modern education, taking into account the basic stages of design (target, method-
ological, factor, structural, functional, resource, deﬁcient, procedural, prognostic
and effective are represented) [8]. In the process of designing a computer-oriented
learning environment, the participants perform the following functions: formation of
relevant competences, including research ones, assessment of impact factors, deter-
mining the strategy of the institution, risk and educational resources assessment,
selection of educational route, selection of educational content process; develop-
ment of technologies and techniques for assimilation of necessary competences,
examination of teaching programmes and assessment of competency result.
4. To increase the motivation of students and the level of training, FlashQard utilities,
GNU it Flashcard Trainer, tkgate Circuit Simulator stimulators, KTurtle program-
ming environment, KmPlot mathematical functions, K3DSurf mathematical tools,
Euclidean geometry albums KSeg Geometry Sketchpad, the Euler interactive math

Experience in Implementing Computer-Oriented Methodological Systems
65
programming environment are used in educational process. Geography learners use
KGeography, the Quantum GIS geographic information system, and the Emerillon
Map Viewer map editor.
5. It’s appropriate to use the graphical simulators of computer networks gns3, Kumir
Language Implementation, Quite universal circuit simulator, Oregano electrical
engineering tool in the research work. To analyze the data visualisation QtiPi-
lot, MathGL-based data rendering, Qosmic’s recursive fractal editor, Veusz science
graphics package, and View Your Mind link visualization tool are used. The develop-
ment of mathematical thinking and relevant skills is accomplished through GCom-
pris, MathWar Tux, of Math Command!; memory is developed with the help of
the Mnemosyne, PySyCache, Gamine, LMemory, Linux Letters, Childsplay, Blinken
software, and the hearing is trained via the GNU Solfege and others. Tux ! and
KLettres programmes are used in the educational process to develop imaginative
thinking and perspective. Students like to explore the Universe using the Celestia
Space Simulator. Step is also used for simulation of physical experiments. Using
the Kstars Desktop Planetarium, the Marble Globe, and the Pauker Cards, the Stel-
larium Planet, the Merkaator electronic mapping programs are used to enhance
students’ cognitive activity and enhance the performance of the learning process.
The periodic table gElemental, GPeriodic, Kalzium, molecular design and Avogado
simulation systems Chemtool, BKchem and xdrawchem Chemistry Editor are used
in chemistry lessons to represent and calculate chemical formulas and reactions. The
Unipro UGENE package is recommended for conducting research in biology teach-
ing, using RasMol and the Xoscope digital oscilloscope to view macro molecules
and prepare their images for publication.
6. In the process of a research learning project work will be of a developmental character
if only there weren’t the reproductive forms of activity, which will encourage students
to search creatively for answers to problematic questions from mentors or literary
sources. When planning teaching process, it is advisable to take into account the
control reﬂection in order to adjust the timing of work at each stage and improve the
outcome of the project activity. The classiﬁcation of software for research teaching
of natural science and mathematics is developed [3].
7. It is important to take into account the system-conceptual approach to the design and
operation of the COMSRL. The basic requirements for the creating of the COMSRL
include: the use of licensed and freely distributed software; the existence of effective
methods of protecting and determining the performance of the COMSRL; periodic
analysis of safety and performance of the COMSRL, effective use of server equip-
ment and workstations of training classes, multimedia equipment; availability of a
ﬁle storage intended for creation of backup-ﬁles of the COMSRL server. Examples
of architectures of the COMSRL using freely distributed software products have
been developed [3].
One of the options of complex development of robotics is studying the functioning
of numerically controlled machines. Undoubtedly, in addition to the basic lessons in
robotics, there are various extracurricular activities, including those for the promotion
of engineering, technical, technological specialties. For this purpose, competitions on
educational robotics, round tables for students, quizzes, master classes “Designing and

66
O. Hrybiuk
programming of robots” and the Olympiads are held. The possibilities and forms of
studying robotics are not run out of those mentioned above. Students understand the
learning material better when they create or invent something on their own. This fact
is widely used in robotics classes, taking into account numerous prospects for further
development. Using robots and robotic platforms, students create models of automated
devices. Until now, the technology of research learning is used to solve applied problems,
which inspires students for inventions in the sphere of science, technology, mathematics
encouraging them to think creatively, to analyze a situation, to speculate, to apply their
skills for solving environmental problems [3].
6
Conclusion
Within the experimental work we make sure that the study of educational robotics con-
tributes to the formation of cross-curricular and meta-subject competences including
the ability to do researches in a team, the decision-making autonomy in speciﬁc life
situations, paying attention to the peculiarities of the environment and availability of
additional materials [3]. Due to the implementation of robotics into educational process
students anxiously look for relationships between different branches of knowledge on
the basis of self-modeled prototypes of mechanical devices, while clarifying the speciﬁcs
of the work of mechanical structures, clarifying for themselves the physical concepts
while working in their own rhythm and taking into account the individual paths of the
student’s development.
Students’ interest in research using educational robotics, a synergistic combination
of engineering knowledge with interdisciplinarity, the development of new scientiﬁc and
technical ideas will contribute to creating necessary conditions for increasing motivation
including the use of COMSRL in the educational process and pedagogical approaches
of research learning [2]. In the process of studying the course of educational robotics the
basics of modern robotics and cognitive technologies as a whole are provided. Accord-
ingly, students are shown the techniques of step-by-step robots’ creation from constructor
elements with the ability to connect programmable processors and sensor elements to
build automated installations and anthropomorphic components on the open architecture
platforms (both code and hardware).
The study offers the expediency of using a system-conceptual approach to the design
and operation of COMSRL. In the context of the basic directions and principles of the
use of systems of research learning of science and mathematics with the use of COMSRL
blended learning approaches are recommended to use [1, 3, 4]. The analysis of the results
of the conducted studies conﬁrms the prospect and necessity of using variable models of
COMSRL at school. Further work is underway to improve the scientiﬁc, methodological
and didactic support of the components.
The research guidelines that teachers need to use to integrate the choice of com-
ponents of COMSRL to the research learning methods including the style of teaching
and SIP in real life conditions are formulated. For working out experimental techniques,
taxonomy of choice of independent COMSRL and teaching techniques for each type
of students has been drawn up. Taxonomy is based on the analysis of students’ surveys
and opinions of Ukrainian teachers as well as on the analysis of the results of scientiﬁc

Experience in Implementing Computer-Oriented Methodological Systems
67
research of scientists from different countries and on our own experience. To choose the
methods of teaching there were used classiﬁcations which reﬂect the peculiarities of the
research learning at school and the speciﬁcs of the proﬁle preparation. The identiﬁed
methods and tools that are most suitable for the organization of research learning with
the use of COMSRL gave the opportunity to substantiate pedagogical approaches and
formulate methodological recommendations. It has been shown that the greatest effec-
tiveness from the use of COMSRL may be expected with use of the research learning
approach. The following problems also need to be addressed urgently: It is necessary
to implement innovative activities of created educational and scientiﬁc clusters in order
to carry out research cooperation with higher educational institutions and established
regionalSTREAMcentersforthepossiblecollectiveuseofuniqueandvaluablescientiﬁc
equipment.
References
1. Hrybiuk, O.: Improvement of the educational process by the creation of centers for intel-
lectual development and scientiﬁc and technical creativity. In: Hamrol, A., Kujawi´nska, A.,
Barraza, M.F.S. (eds.) MANUFACTURING 2019. LNME, pp. 370–382. Springer, Cham
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18789-7_31
2. Hrybiuk, O.O.: Perspectives of Introduction of Variational Models of Computer-oriented
Environment of Studying Subjects of Natural Sciences and Mathematical Cycle in General
Educational Institutions of Ukraine. Collection of scientiﬁc works of the KPNU. Pedagogical
series, vol. 22, pp. 184–190. KPNU (2016)
3. Hrybiuk, O.O.: Research learning of the natural science and mathematics cycle using
computer-oriented methodological systems. In: Monograph, Kyiv, Drahomanov NPU,
pp. 307–349 (2019)
4. Hrybiuk, O.O., Lukavyi, P.M., Kulish, N.Yu.: Implementation of STEM-STEAM-STREAM-
education within the framework of the research-experimental work of the all-Ukrainian level
“Variable models of computer-oriented environment for teaching subjects of the natural and
mathematical cycle in a secondary school”, Kyiv, pp. 127–134 (2019)
5. Vygotsky, L.: Thought and Language (A. Kozulin, Trans.). (Orig. 1934). MIT Press,
Cambridge (1989)
6. Leontyev, A.N.: Activity, Consciousness, and Personality (M. J. Hall, Trans.). Prentice Hall,
Englewood Cliffs (1978)
7. Halperin, P.Ya., Zaporozhets, A.V., Karpova, S.N.: Actual problems of developmental
psychology, Moscow (1978)
8. Rubinstein, S.L.: The Principles of General Psychology, Moscow (1940)
9. Davydov, V.: Theory of developmental education, Moscow (1996)
10. Elkonin, D.: Problems of activity in theory of individuality, Moscow (1989)
11. Tomlinson, C.A., et al.: The Parallel Curriculum: A Design to Develop Learner Potential and
Challenge Advanced Learners, 2nd edn. Corwin Press, Thousand Oaks (2009)
12. Hrybiuk, O,O.: Psychological and pedagogical requirements for computer-oriented systems
of teaching mathematics in the context of improving the quality of education. Human. Bulletin
of the SHEI, Kyiv, Issue 31, vol. IV, no. 46, pp. 110–123 (2013)
13. Hrybiuk, O.O.: Pedagogical design of a computer-oriented environment for the teaching of
disciplines of the natural-mathematical cycle. Sci. Notes 7(3), 38–50 (2015)
14. Renzulli, J.S., Koehler, J.L., Fogarty, E.A.: Operation Houndstooth intervention: social capital
in today’s schools. Gift. Child Today 29(1), 14–24 (2006)

68
O. Hrybiuk
15. Zinchenko,V.P.:Psychologicalfoundationsofpedagogy:psychologicalandpedagogicalbasis
of constructive development, Moscow, Gardariky, pp. 79–87 (2002)
16. Tejaswini, D., Wendell, K.: Community-based engineering. Sci. Child. 53(1), 67–73 (2015)
17. Mann, E.L., Mann, R.L., Strutz, M., Duncan, D., Yoon, S.Y.: Integrating engineering into K–6
curriculum: developing talent in the STEM disciplines. J. Adv. Acad. 22, 639–658 (2011)
18. Banchi, H., Bell, R.: The many levels of inquiry. Sci. Child. 46(2), 26–29 (2008)
19. Hrybiuk,O.O.:Theinﬂuenceofinformationandcommunicationtechnologiesonpsychophys-
iological development of the young generation. “Science”. Publishing Center of the EAPP
“Science”, Prague, vol. 1, pp. 190–207 (2014)
20. Hrybiuk, O.O.: Cognitive theory of a computer-oriented system for learning natural sciences
and mathematics and the interrelation of verbal and visual component. Humanitarian Bulletin
“Higher education of Ukraine in the Context of Integration into the European Educational
Space”, Kiev, 36, vol. IV, no. 64, pp. 158–175 (2015)

Optimal Preventive Maintenance
Frequency in Redundant Systems
Guilherme Kunz(B)
Western Parana State University, Foz do Iguazu, Brazil
guilherme.kunz@unioeste.br
Abstract. The right frequency of preventive maintenance is essential
for production availability with adequate safety and economic levels. The
optimal preventive maintenance intervals are diﬃcult to identify as pro-
duction systems are becoming complex by combining electro-electronic
and mechanical systems with large quantities. High rates of preventive
maintenance boost quality costs, low availability, and high possibility of
maintenance failures. Otherwise, it could happen an increase in unsched-
uled downtime and high costs by losing the production. The development
of algorithms to evaluate the maintenance program performance becomes
a challenge to validate when it includes continuous, discrete, and stochas-
tic models. This paper proposes an approach to stochastic model check-
ing for identifying the optimum frequency of preventive maintenance
by mechanical equipment, simulated and veriﬁed through a network of
timed automata. A case study was adopted to illustrate the eﬀectiveness
of the solution. It is useful to evaluate the optimal preventive mainte-
nance frequency in similar circumstances.
Keywords: Reliability · Preventive maintenance · Stochastic model
checker
1
Introduction
A good maintenance program is essential to keep industrial activities opera-
tional. There are three distinct strategies: corrective, preventive, and predictive.
Corrective maintenance is useful when a failure happened. Preventive mainte-
nance is a time-based replacement or ﬁxed based on machine history failure.
Predictive maintenance uses sensors and prediction models to recognize when
they will happen.
Corrective maintenance is often used in redundant systems and usually is
expansive. Predictive maintenance is the right choice because the machine will
only be repaired when they indicate conditions to failure or abnormal perfor-
mance. In the time of Industry 4.0, a lot of work has been doing to explore
predictive maintenance [1–3]. However, in some cases, it is not very easy to cre-
ate prediction models, and the machines do not show anomalous signals earlier
enough to the anomalous detection algorithm reacts. In these situations, a proper
maintenance strategy is preventive maintenance or time-based maintenance.
c
⃝The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 69–80, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_7

70
G. Kunz
High frequency of time-based maintenance can increase the machine fails by
the addition of human error during maintenance time and increase the equip-
ment downtime. On the other hand, the lack of time-based maintenance results
in unscheduled downtime and expensive maintenance. Unscheduled downtime
increases the probability of manufacturing suspend by multiple failures, and it
reﬂects in a loss of production and more expensive maintenance to the system
restart in some cases. Scheduled shutdowns are signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient than
unscheduled shutdowns because the time required for maintenance management
(components purchase and transportation) is signiﬁcantly smaller.
To identify the optimal time-based maintenance frequency is necessary to
make models that reproduce the equipment statistical fail behavior and verify
the frequency that coincides with the least amount of preventive maintenance
that results in the least amount of corrective maintenance.
Analytical solutions are relatively easy to solve in simple systems. However,
with the improvement of electronics in the production process, were received new
monitoring capabilities [4–6] but also increased the complexity of the systems to
obtain the maintenance frequencies of productive systems hard without the use of
computational resources. The increase in complexity is showed when comparing
equipment from diﬀerent ages. One car, for example, in 1910, included about
2,000 pieces, and today it has about 20,000 pieces. Commercial aircraft of the
1930s had about 100,000 pieces, and today, it has about 1,000,000 pieces [7].
Diﬀerent techniques could be used to analyze time-based maintenance [8–
10], but in this paper, the main diﬀerence is the process of modeling, simulation,
and veriﬁcation techniques, applied to reliability. These techniques increase the
knowledge about multiple fails probabilities to create strategies to avoid crit-
ical fail situations at connected mechanical, electrical, and electronic systems.
This paper, when joined to papers [11,12], allows a detailed investigation of the
mechanical, their controllers, communication protocols, and fail behavior of the
operation.
This paper proposes a method to identify the optimal frequency of preventive
maintenance of systems through the modeling, validation, and veriﬁcation tech-
niques modeled as networks of timed automata. By the nature of the problem
is recommended to use stochastic timed automata to analyze the probability of
failures. This paper will be limited to the scope of redundant mechanical systems.
2
Statistical Model Checking
Classical model checkers, based on their mathematical approach, can guarantee
the absence of defects in system development since the models are considered
acceptable according to the project speciﬁcations [13].
Initially, formal methods veriﬁcation used to evaluate discrete hardware and
software behavior. To address critical real-time systems was developed timed
automata to analyze the behavior of clock-dependent systems. Uppaal is a tool-
box that works directly on the real-time system checking by timed automata
and applied to case studies such as communication protocols [11,14,15].

Optimal Preventive Maintenance Frequency in Redundant Systems
71
The Uppaal SMC (Statistical Model Checking) [16,17], was adopted as an
alternative to avoid state explosion in highly complex systems, it allows an analy-
sis of systems where their behavior depends on stochastic and nonlinear dynam-
ics. Consequently, it allows the modeling of continuous (ordinary diﬀerential
equations), discrete and stochastic systems behavior [18].
To identify the optimal preventive maintenance frequency in redundant sys-
tems through the stochastic model was chosen the UPPAAL Stratego version
4.1.20 [19]. UPPAAL Stratego incorporate techniques developed in Uppaal [14],
Uppaal Tiga [20], Uppaal SMC [13] and Statistical learning methods [21].
3
Models
The goal is to determine the preventive maintenance interval that get higher
availability and minimum maintenance. The system requirement needs models
that are possible to represent clocks and state changes based on randomly gen-
erated values according to the distribution function that describes the behavior
by the equipment under analysis.
To make electronic system failures models were needed random values of
an exponential distribution function (constant failure rate). Mechanical systems
failures are adequately described by Weibull distribution enabling setup the fail-
ure rates during the infant-mortality period, useful life period, and wear-out
period [22].
The Log-Normal distribution describes the time required for maintenance
where the average time to perform preventive maintenance, as well as its disper-
sion, are shorter than the time intervals needed for corrective maintenance, the
eﬀect of planned maintenance [23].
The UPPAAL Stratego toolbox provides builtin exponential and uniform dis-
tribution function. Were implemented in UPPAAL the Log-Normal distribution
according to equation X = eμ+σZ, where Z = N(μ = 0, σ2 = 1) and Weibull
distribution according to equation X = η · −ln(Z)(1/β), where Z = U(0, 1). It
permits describe the equipment time to failure and support team behavior to
corrective and preventive maintenance.
3.1
Case Study
This case study was inspired by the examples introduced in [24]. In this paper,
the case study was changed to identify the optimal interval of preventive main-
tenance. It is supposedly impossible to observe the equipment degradation and
the maintenance procedures turn the pump to the original condition. This case
study demands to keep an operational process that demands four out of six
cooling pumps operational.
Concerning maintenance teams, both preventive and corrective maintenance,
restore the pump to its original condition, and there is only one team to perform
the preventive maintenance activity. The preventive maintenance team chooses
the pump with the longest maintenance-free time. There is always a team ready

72
G. Kunz
for corrective maintenance. Time preventive maintenance (planned maintenance)
is faster then unscheduled maintenance [23].
The time to failure (TTF) depends on the pump’s parts: bearing, rotor, seal,
and shaft. All failure times were deﬁned as Weibull distributions with param-
eters based on [25]. In real industrial conditions, the estimation of the Weibull
parameters are based on maintenance records.
Concerning maintenance teams, both preventive and corrective maintenance,
restore the pump to its original condition, and there is only one team to per-
form the preventive maintenance activity. The preventive maintenance team
chooses the pump with the longest maintenance-free time. There is always a
team ready for corrective maintenance. Time preventive maintenance (strongly
planned maintenance) is faster then unscheduled maintenance [23]. Maintenance
times was based on activity records and in [24]:
1. Time to Preventive Maintenance (TP M). The time required to execute pre-
ventive maintenance, based on the performance records of the maintenance
team. It is represented by a Log Normal distribution with μ = 80 and σ = 3
hours.
2. Time to Corrective Maintenance (TCM). The time required to perform cor-
rective maintenance, based on the performance records of the maintenance
team. It is represented by a Log Normal distribution with μ = 600 and σ = 25
hours.
To obtain the optimal preventive maintenance interval implies to look at the
highest availability and the lowest cost of maintenance. The costs values used
was:
1. Fail System Cost (Cfs). Net revenues from the product sales are $250000/day.
2. Preventive Maintenance Cost (Cpm). The average preventive maintenance
cost to pump is $480/day.
3. Corrective Maintenance Cost (Ccm). The average repair cost to pump is
$3600/day.
3.2
Automata Models
To this case, automata models represent the time-to-failure probabilities in line
with the block diagram to estimate the preventive maintenance intervals that
reduce costs. Figure 1 shows one of the six pumps under analysis where W1
symbolizes the equipment working under reasonable condition, corrective main-
tenance, or preventive maintenance according to the following logic:
1. If the equipment is operational (sd[id]!=F), the automata receive the next
time for failure according to the elements (of the pump) that produce, in the
simulation, the shortest time to failure (Weibull distribution).
2. If the equipment is under failure (sd[id]==F), the automata receive the time
needed for corrective maintenance (log-normal distribution).

Optimal Preventive Maintenance Frequency in Redundant Systems
73
3. If the equipment is operational, the automata can receive a preventive main-
tenance request (MP[id]?) and receive the time required for preventive main-
tenance (log-normal distribution).
The model in Fig. 1 represents one of the N system equipment and replicates
to represent six system pumps under analysis.
Fig. 1. Pumps model.
Two distinct models represent preventive maintenance. The ﬁrst one (Fig. 2)
controls the intervals and the conditions of starting preventive maintenance.
Considering that there is only one (1) maintenance team, preventive maintenance
only happens when all machinery is operational. It assures that the maintenance
team is available and exist a reduced probability of a manufacturing failure by
keeping more pumps working together during preventive maintenance.
Both maintenances move together if one maintenance is happening and
another pump goes into fault condition. If complete the time required for pre-
ventive maintenance, and one or more pumps are in corrective maintenance,
one more extra day is required to start the preventive maintenance until the
conditions are fully satisﬁed.
Fig. 2. Frequency of preventive maintenance.
When all requirements for preventive maintenance (the model in Fig. 2) are
satisﬁed, it sends a message to the model in Fig. 3. This model will select the
next pump for preventive maintenance. The model will choose the model with
the longest time without maintenance. It is not necessary to check the status
of the equipment before the request (MP[cL!]) since it only happens when the
equipments are operational.

74
G. Kunz
Fig. 3. Equipment select to preventive maintenance.
Models in Fig. 4 describe maintenance and product sales loss. The model in
Fig. 4a is updated by any change from the pump status and estimates the amount
of time that these pumps are stopped for corrective or preventive maintenance
and computes the product sales loss when there is three or more pumps stopped.
The automata in Fig. 4b measures the ﬁnal costs after 7,300 days (20 years). It
counts the costs from preventive maintenance, corrective maintenance, product
sales loss, and total costs (sum of all sources).
Fig. 4. Estimation of maintenance costs.
Where wC represents the quantity of equipment in operation, pC the amount
of equipment under preventive maintenance, cC the amount of equipment under
corrective maintenance, and fC is a binary variable that represents the state of
product sales.
4
Results Analysis
The preventive maintenance interval (dS in Fig. 2) was modiﬁed to identify the
best time among preventive maintenance actions (lower costs and higher avail-
ability). To this, the variable (dS) changed from 1 to 50 days. The model (XML
ﬁle) was changed by R [26] to create diﬀerent ﬁles veriﬁed by separate instances

Optimal Preventive Maintenance Frequency in Redundant Systems
75
of UPPAAL. By the end of the analysis, were identiﬁed the minimum cost and
maximum availability.
To extract information was made an DLL called from UPPAAL [27,28] to
print the values as illustrated in Figs. 2, 3 and 4a. It gets the time when starting
the preventive maintenance, the pump selected, and the costs. For data analysis
the following expressions were veriﬁed in UPPAAL to obtain maintenance costs
and production loss over 215 simulations of 20 years:
1. E[<=days;runs]
(max: End.cntP): Preventive maintenance costs.
2. E[<=days;runs]
(max: End.cntC): Corrective maintenance costs.
3. E[<=days;runs]
(max: End.cntF): Production loss costs.
4. E[<=days;runs]
(max: End.cntCusto): Total costs.
Results are exposed in Fig. 5a and 5b. Figure 5a indicates the costs related
to preventive maintenance. The higher the frequency of preventive maintenance,
the higher the cost of failure prevention. Figure 5b shows the inﬂuence of the
preventive maintenance interval on corrective maintenance costs. The longer
the interval between preventive maintenance, the higher the cost involved in
corrective maintenance.
Fig. 5. Maintenance costs.
Production sales loss and total costs are displayed in Fig. 6a and 6b. Figure 6a
revealed that costs related to the production shutdown increase when the fre-
quency of preventive maintenance is lower. Manufacturing downtime costs have
a higher dispersion compared to others. Figure 6b shown the total costs and
the uncertain limits to diﬀerent preventive maintenance intervals. Longer the
preventive maintenance intervals, bigger the uncertain costs. The lowest costs
happen when the preventive maintenance interval is approximately ten days.

76
G. Kunz
Fig. 6. Costs of maintenance totals and production shutdown.
Maximum availability is performed to a higher frequency of preventive main-
tenance, as seen in Fig. 7 but giving higher total costs when compared to preven-
tive maintenance intervals near to 10 days. Table 1 shows a comparison between
project criteria: availability or costs.
Fig. 7. Availability.
If availability is the priority, the costs will increase 12% over the 20-years.
The minimum cost happened when performed 33 maintenance events per year
(see Fig. 8a), or, one preventive maintenance performed every 11 days (66 days
to each pump), including one day to start maintenance by the unavailability of
the security criteria (see Fig. 8b).

Optimal Preventive Maintenance Frequency in Redundant Systems
77
Table 1. Comparison between strategies.
Maximal availability Minimal costs
Frequency of PM (days)
2
10
Costs (millions)
5.12
4.57
Availability
99.99
99.98
Production shutdown (20 years) 0.74
1.47
Fig. 8. Average and delay of preventive maintenance.
All pumps are equals and, as predicted, had the same percentage of preventive
maintenance (16.7%). The inﬂuence of each equipment on pump failure indicated
that 45% of the failures were due to seal, 25% of bearing, 21% of shaft, 9% of
motor and impeller registered some failures below 1%.
4.1
Inﬂuence of Corrective Maintenance Parameters
To estimate the inﬂuence of the TCM on the optimal interval of preventive main-
tenance, diﬀerent average values of TCM (range from 80 to 600 h) were tested.
No changes were made in the dispersion of the frequency distribution. All of the
steps described before were repeated.
Figure 9 shows no longer optimal preventive maintenance frequency when
performing TCM below 380 h (in this case study). So, reducing the TCM repair
should grow up the preventive maintenance intervals.

78
G. Kunz
Fig. 9. Relationship between costs and TCM.
5
Conclusion
The complexity of industrial equipment has been increasing with new technolo-
gies, and, for this reason, new methods could help to analyze the reliability of
factories. For this purpose, it proposed the use of a stochastic model checker to
analyze maintenance strategies to minimize the errors resulting from the analysis
of these complex systems.
The goal of the paper is to identify the optimal frequency of preventive main-
tenance of systems through the modeling, simulation, and veriﬁcation techniques
applied to stochastic timed automata. This kind of solution permits a formal app-
roach to the decision-making process, growing up the reliability. Behind that,
suggest a sequence to a solid system modeling to reliability analysis.
The recommended solution examined through a study with serial and parallel
devices produced consistent results. The case study selected represents a real
industry situation. In the way, this contribution could increase the learning about
the reliability industry, mainly when combined with the investigation of the
mechanical, controllers, and communication protocols behaviors. It assumed that
using continuous, discrete, and stochastic approaches can assist the preventive
maintenance analysis strategies to complex systems.
The results are aligned with the reliability theory and get detailed behavior of
the fails. It compared diﬀerent industry goals: maximal availability and minimal
costs. Both goals are important to the decision making maintenance program.
The next step to this research is built models to predictive approach study
and, because of the growth of complexity, apply algorithms to accelerate the
optimal point detection.

Optimal Preventive Maintenance Frequency in Redundant Systems
79
References
1. Albrice, D., Branch, M.: A deterioration model for establishing an optimal mix of
time-based maintenance (TbM) and condition-based maintenance (CbM) for the
enclosure system, Kansas (2015)
2. Ahmad, R., Kamaruddin, S.: An overview of time-based and condition-based main-
tenance in industrial application. Comput. Ind. Eng. 63(1), 135–149 (2012)
3. Jasiulewicz-Kaczmarek, M., Gola, A.: Maintenance 4.0 technologies for sustainable
manufacturing-an overview. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52(10), 91–96 (2019)
4. Kunz, G., Perondi, E., Machado, J.: Modeling and simulating the controller behav-
ior of an automated people mover using IEC 61850 communication requirements.
In: IEEE International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), Art. no.
6034947, pp. 603-608 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/INDIN.2011.6034947
5. Le˜ao, C.P., Soares, F.O., Machado, J.M., Seabra, E., Rodrigues, H.: Design and
development of an industrial network laboratory. Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Learn.
6(SPECIAL ISSUE.2), 21–26 (2011). https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v6iS1.1615
6. Silva, M., Pereira, F., Soares, F., Le˜ao, C.P., Machado, J., Carvalho, V.: An
overview of industrial communication networks. Mech. Mach. Sci. 24, 933–940
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09411-3-97
7. Groover, M.P.: Automation, Production Systems, and Computer-Integrated Man-
ufacturing, 3rd edn. Prentice Hall Press, New York (2007)
8. Antosz, K.: Maintenance-identiﬁcation and analysis of the competency gap.
Eksploatacja i Niezawodno´c´s 20, 484–494 (2018)
9. Sobaszek, L., Gola, A., Swic, A.: Time-based machine failure prediction in multi-
machine manufacturing systems. Eksploatacja i Niezawodno´c´s - Maint. Reliabil.
22(1), 52–62 (2020)
10. Loska, A., Paszkowski, W.: SmartMaintenance - the concept of supporting the
exploitation decision-making process in the selected technical network system. In:
International Conference on Intelligent Systems in Production Engineering and
Maintenance, pp. 64–73. Springer (2017)
11. Kunz, G., Machado, J., Perondi, E., Vyatkin, V.: A formal methodology for accom-
plishing IEC 61850 real-time communication requirements. IEEE Trans. Ind. Elec-
tron. 64, 6582–6590 (2017)
12. Kunz, G., Perondi, E., Machado, J.: A design strategy for obtaining reliable con-
trollers for critical mechanical systems. Mechatronics 54, 186–202 (2018)
13. David, A., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Mikucionis, M., Poulsen, D.B.: Uppaal SMC
tutorial. Int. J. Softw. Tools Technol. Transf. 17, 397–415 (2015)
14. Behrmann, G., David, A., Larsen, K.: A tutorial on Uppaal. In: Formal Methods
for the Design of Real-Time Systems (2004)
15. Behrmann, G., David, A., Larsen, K.G., Pettersson, P., Yi, W.: Developing
UPPAAL over 15 years. Softw.: Pract. Exper. 41, 133–142 (2011)
16. Sen, K., Viswanathan, M., Agha, G.: Statistical model checking of black-box prob-
abilistic systems. In: CAV. LNCS, vol. 3114, pp. 202–215. Springer (2004)
17. Younes, H.L.S.: Veriﬁcation and planning for stochastic processes with asyn-
chronous events. Ph.D. thesis, Carnegie Mellon (2005)
18. Basile, D., Beek, M.H., Ferrari, A., Legay, A.: Modelling and analysing ERTMS
L3 moving block railway signalling with simulink and Uppaal SMC. In: Larsen, K.,
Willemse, T. (eds) Formal Methods for Industrial Critical Systems. FMICS 2019.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 11687 (2019)

80
G. Kunz
19. David, A., Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Mikuˇcionis, M., Taankvist, J.H.: Uppaal
Stratego. In: 21st International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Con-
struction and Analysis of Systems TACAS (2015)
20. Cassez, F., David, A., Fleury, E., Larsen, K.G., Lime, D.: Eﬃcient on-the-ﬂy algo-
rithms for the analysis of timed games. In: 16th International Conference CONCUR
(2005)
21. David, A., et al.: On time with minimal expected cost! In: 12th International
Symposium on Automated Technology for Veriﬁcation and Analysis ATVA (2014)
22. Abernethy, R.: The New Weibull Handbook: Reliability and Statistical Analysis
for Predicting Life, Safety, Supportability, Risk, Cost and Warranty Claims, 5th
edn. R.B. Abernethy, North Palm Beach (2006)
23. Kline, M.B.: Suitability of the lognormal distribution for corrective maintenance
repair times. Reliab. Eng. 9(2), 65–80 (1984). ISSN 0143-8174
24. Alexander, D.C.: Application Of Monte Carlo simulations to system reliability
analysis. Texas A&M University. Turbomachinery Laboratories (2003). http://hdl.
handle.net/1969.1/164018
25. Morris, S.F.: Failure rate estimates for mechanical components (2020). https://
reliabilityanalyticstoolkit.appspot.com
26. R Core Team: R: a language and environment for statistical computing. R Foun-
dation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria (2019). https://www.R-project.
org/
27. Jensen, P.G., Larsen, K.G., Legay, A., Nyman, U.: Integrating tools: co-simulation
in UPPAAL Using FMI-FMU. In: 22nd International Conference on Engineering
of Complex Computer Systems ICECCS, Fukuoka, pp. 11–19 (2017)
28. Cassez, F., Aledo, P.G., Jensen, P.G.: WUPPAAL: Computation of Worst-Case
Execution-Time for Binary Programs with UPPAAL. In: Aceto, L., Bacci, G.,
Bacci, G., Ing´olfsd´ottir, A., Legay, A., Mardare, R. (eds.) Models. Algorithms,
Logics and Tools (2017)

Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Mass
Load on Flight Performance of an Octorotor
and Dodecarotor UAV
¸Sahin Yildirim1(B)
, Nihat Çabuk2
, and Veli Bakircio˘glu2
1 Department of Mechatronics Engineering, Engineering Faculty, Erciyes University,
38039 Melikgazi, Kayseri, Turkey
sahiny@erciyes.edu.tr
2 Vocational School of Technical Sciences, Aksaray University, Bahçesaray Mh.,
68100 Aksaray, Turkey
Abstract. In this study, the ﬂight performance of a universal Vertical take-off
and landing (VTOL) unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) with 12 and 8 rotors was
examined under load and no-load conditions. Thanks to its universal structure,
experimental studies with 8 and 12 rotor UAVs were performed on the same
platformandunderthesameconditions.Inaddition,thecontrollerparameterswere
kept the same for both vehicle types in order to observe the effect of the mass load
only. Hierarchical PID controllers are used as the controller architecture to control
the orientation and position of the both vehicles. The ﬂight performance of both
vehicles was examined in three stages as take-off, trajectory and landing. Settling
time, rise time parameters and position errors were used to benchmark the ﬂight
performance of the both vehicles. The results show that the performance of the
12-rotor vehicle is superior, especially in terms of trajectory tracking performance
although the take-off and landing performance is very close to each other for both
vehicles. This was observed more clearly under load conditions.
Keywords: Dodecarotor · Flight Performance · Octorotor
1
Introduction
Vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) air vehicles are unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)
that perform their ﬂights by changing the angular speeds of their rotors. Since they can
land and take off vertically these vehicles are becoming increasingly common in areas
such as military, recreational, agricultural and transport. In all areas of use, these vehicles
must be loaded in different amounts depending on the purpose.
Inliterature,severalstudieshavebeenconductedonVTOLairvehicles.Thesestudies
are mostly related to the control [1–4], while partly on the design of these vehicles [4–8].
W. Zhu et al. [2] proposed a ﬁnite-time controller for the quadrotor aircraft to achieve
hovering control in a ﬁnite time. They stated that compared to the classical PD control,
it has been shown that the ﬁnite-time control can improve the closed-loop system’s
dynamical performances. In addition, studies on design, control and ﬂight performance
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 81–89, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_8

82
¸S. Yildirim et al.
analysis were also conducted [9–11]. China E. Lin et al. [12], developed a hybrid vehicle
model by installing four short-arm internal combustion engines and four long-arm dc
motors. Longer ﬂight times and greater load capacity are made to enable the goals of this
study stated that they have achieved. Most of these studies were based on simulation.
There are also studies on the examination of the behavior of these vehicles under load.
Angelis et al. [13] proposed a novel control strategy for stabilizing the dynamics of a
multirotor carrying a suspended load. They stated that according to results of numerical
simulations show the effectiveness of the proposed methodology and its suitability for
practical application in an operative scenario by considering model uncertainties, and
control system implementation features. A. R. Godbole and K. Subbarao [14] studied
about the mathematical modeling and control of an unmanned aerial system with a
payload suspended using a cable.
In this study, autonomous ﬂight tests of two types of VTOL air vehicle both under
load and under no load were performed. The ﬁrst of these vehicles is a conventional
eight-rotor vehicle and the second is a non-conventional design with twelve rotors. The
second vehicle has twelve rotors which can be controlled independently, with eight rotors
in the upper plane and four rotors in the lower plane. With and without load for both
vehicles, four autonomous ﬂight experiments conducted with a rectangular trajectory
and the ﬂight data of the vehicle were compared. The results of this comparison are
thought to contribute to the design of a VTOL UAV for any purpose.
The presentation of the study is as follows; after the introduction section, the exper-
imental system under investigation in this study is introduced in Sect. 2. Subsequently,
in Sect. 3, experimental studies and the graphical results are given. Finally, in Sect. 4,
the obtained results are discussed and evaluated.
2
System Description and Flight Condition
The universal VTOL drone system is given in Fig. 1. As can be seen from the ﬁgure,
four of the motors are placed in the lower plane and eight of the motors in the upper
plane. Each of these motors is independently controlled by the controller. Thus, different
conﬁgurations can be obtained.
On the same drone system, the different drone models are obtained by disabling
some motors seen in Fig. 1 as software. The motors numbers disabled according to the
models are given in Table 1.
A detailed mathematical model was obtained for the system in our previous study
[15]. UAVs can be controlled in two different ways as manual and autonomous. In
autonomouscontrol,thevehiclemayfollowadesiredtrajectory.Thecontrollercalculates
the required forces and torques for the motion of the vehicle according to the desired
trajectory and the roll-pitch angle limits.
Control of the UAV is primarily about the control of four basic variables: the Euler
angles which are roll-pitch-yaw angles, and the altitude of the vehicle. These four vari-
ablesusedtocontrolthepositionandspeedofthedrone.Intheexperiments,thecontroller
with the same parameters and the same trajectory was used for autonomous ﬂights. The
results of the experimental study are signiﬁcantly affected by weather conditions. The
experiments were conducted in an environment where the air temperature was 15 ◦C and

Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Mass Load
83
Fig. 1. Universal VTOL drone.
Table 1. The universal VTOL drone models according to motor numbers.
Vehicle type
Dodecarotor Octorotor
Disabled motors –
9, 10, 11, 12
the wind was 11 km/h in the southwest direction. The number of satellites connected to
the GPS was 11 and horizontal dilution of precision value was 0.91 which are the impor-
tant parameters that affect the position accuracy of the vehicle in autonomous ﬂight [16,
17].
The mass of the load used in ﬂight experiments is approximately 6.5 kg, and Fig. 2
shows the vehicle with load. With this load, the total mass of the universal drone system
is become approximately 20 kg. Here, the mass used for the load was kept constant
and ﬁxed for both vehicles so that the effect of the rotor numbers could be observed
standalone. In addition, the control parameters were kept the same for both loaded and
unloaded vehicles in ﬂight experiments. Figure 3 shows the controller structure. The
gains used for the controllers were tuned empirically for the system without load.
Flight planning consists of three parts and the analyzes were performed accordingly.
In the ﬁrst stage of ﬂight planning, the vehicle was ﬁrst asked to rise to a height of
5 m relative to the ground. In the second part, it was requested to follow a rectangular
trajectory while maintaining its height and to change the orientation during the ﬁrst two
turns and to return to the starting point without changing the orientation of the vehicle in
the last turn. Finally, in the third stage, it was asked to land to the starting ground point.
The results obtained from the ﬂight experiments are presented in the next section.

84
¸S. Yildirim et al.
Fig. 2. System with load.
Fig. 3. Controller architecture

Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Mass Load
85
Fig. 4. Schematic representation of the info ﬂow through the system.
3
Experimental Results of the Flight Performance
Several experimental studies were performed in this study, however only the most typical
results are presented in this paper. Experiments are performed for an autonomous ﬂight.
In autonomous ﬂight, by receiving the autonomous ﬂight mode command from the
radio transmitter, the vehicle follows the trajectory in the ﬂight control card according
to the controller algorithm. Depending on the determined speed and acceleration limits,
pulse width modulation values for electronic speed controllers are generated by the
controller during trajectory tracking of the vehicle. The response of the system is based
on instantaneous data such as positions, Euler angles, rates and accelerations both from
the internal inertial measurement unit on the control card and the externally available
global positioning system module. This instantaneous data is entered as feedback to the
controller and trajectory tracking is performed. Figure 4 shows the info ﬂow through the
system.
The results of autonomous ﬂight performed for both vehicles both under load and
without load are presented graphically as seen in Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. In the
graphics, take off stage that is the ﬁrst stage of the ﬂight was marked with light red ﬁeld,
trajectory tracking stage that is the second stage of the ﬂight was marked with light blue
ﬁeld and landing stage that is the ﬁnal stage of the ﬂight was marked with light green
ﬁeld.
The turnings in the rectangular trajectory are marked with red ﬁeld. The purple ﬁeld
in the graphs indicate the instant of the motion beginning after the last turning to the
starting point without changing orientation of the vehicle. Finally, settling margin for
the take off stage was marked with light black ﬁeld. This representation is also used in
the following graphics in the paper.
In Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, results obtained from the ﬂight experiments of the Octorotor, In
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 obtained from the ﬂight experiments of the Dodecarotor with no load
and with load conditions were graphically illustrated, respectively.
When the graphs are examined, for the no load condition, the rise and settling time
in the Dodecarotor are observed as 4.25 and 7.88 s for the ﬁrst ﬂight stage, respectively,
whereas they are observed as 5.42 and 9.91 s for Octorotor. When the second part of the
ﬂight is examined in terms of errors of roll and pitch angles, it is seen that the maximum
absolute error of Octorotor is about 2 and 4° and it is about 4.7 and 5° for Dodecarotor,

86
¸S. Yildirim et al.
Fig. 5. Flight performance graphics of the Octorotor with no load.
Fig. 6. Flight performance graphics of the Octorotor with load.

Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Mass Load
87
Fig. 7. Flight performance graphics of the Dodecarotor with no load.
Fig. 8. Flight performance graphics of the Dodecarotor with load.
respectively. In the load conditions, the rise and settling time in the Dodecarotor is
observed as 4.48 and 9.09 s for the ﬁrst ﬂight stage, respectively, whereas it is observed
as 6.57 and 11.37 s for Octorotor. For second part of the ﬂight time, in terms of errors

88
¸S. Yildirim et al.
of roll and pitch angles, the maximum absolute error of Octorotor is about 3.8 and 5.1°
and it is about 4.8 and 4.6° for Dodecarotor, respectively. Furthermore, the maximum
trajectory error for altitude which is approximately 1.5 m is seen to be close to each
other for both systems. The summary of the results mentioned above is given in Table 2.
Table 2. Summary of the ﬂight performance results from experiments performed for both
vehicles.
Flight
Stages
Parameters [Units]
Vehicle type
Dodecarotor
Octorotor
Loaded
No Load
Loaded
No Load
Take off
Settling time [s]
9.09
7.88
11.37
9.91
Rise time [s]
4.48
4.25
6.57
5.42
Trajectory
tracking
Max. abs.
error
Altitude [m]
Approx. 1.5
Approx. 1.5
Roll [deg]
4.8
4.7
3.8
2
Pitch [deg]
4.6
5
5.1
4
4
Conclusion
In this paper, the ﬂight performance analysis of two different UAVs with 12 and 8
rotors was examined under load and no-load conditions. In terms of rising time and
settling time, dodecarotor air vehicle showed better ﬂight performance than octorotor.
In the context of roll and pitch angle errors, although, octorotor better performance than
dodecarotor in no load condition, the performances occurred close to each other in with
load condition.
On the other hand, in terms of maximum altitude and yaw angle errors and also mean
errors, which are the actual controlled references, it is seen that Dodecarotor performs
better than Octorotor. When the landing performance, which is the most critical stage for
UAVs, is examined in the terms of the roll-pitch angle, the dodecarotor is acting more
aggressively to maintain its altitude than octorotor, but still compromised the yaw angle.
Whentheno-loadﬂightconditionandtheloadedﬂightconditionareevaluatedamong
themselves in both vehicle types, in the context of the increase of maximum absolute
roll and pitch errors when the vehicles are loaded, the error increase in the octorotor was
greater than that of the dodecarotor. Thus, it can be said that the vehicle with dodecarotor
has a better performance in the increase of load.
References
1. Ma, T., Wong, S.: Trajectory tracking control for quadrotor UAV. In: 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO), pp. 1751–1756. IEEE (2017). https://
doi.org/10.1109/ROBIO.2017.8324671

Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Mass Load
89
2. Zhu, W., Du, H., Cheng, Y., Chu, Z.: Hovering control for quadrotor aircraft based on ﬁnite-
time control algorithm. Nonlinear Dyn. 88(4), 2359–2369 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11071-017-3382-8
3. Martinez Alvarez, A., Lozano Espinosa, C.A.: Nonlinear control for collision-free navigation
of UAV ﬂeet. SN Appl. Sci. 1(12), 1 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-019-1606-x
4. Burggräf, P., Pérez Martínez, A.R., Roth, H., Wagner, J.: Quadrotors in factory applications:
design and implementation of the quadrotor’s P-PID cascade control system. SN Appl. Sci.
1(7), 1–17 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-019-0698-7
5. Anweiler, S., Piwowarski, D.: Multicopter platform prototype for environmental monitoring.
J. Clean. Prod. 155, 204–211 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.10.132
6. Brischetto, S., Ciano, A., Ferro, C.G.: A multipurpose modular drone with adjustable arms
produced via the FDM additive manufacturing process. Curved Layer. Struct. 3, 202–213
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1515/cls-2016-0016
7. Lin, C.E., Supsukbaworn, T.: Development of dual power multirotor system. Int. J. Aerosp.
Eng. 2017, 1–19 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/9821401
8. Vu, N.A., Dang, D.K., Le. Dinh, T.: Electric propulsion system sizing methodology for an
agriculture multicopter. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 90, 314–326 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ast.2019.04.044
9. Kotarski, D., Piljek, P., Brezak, H., Kasa´c, J.: Design of a fully actuated passively tilted mul-
tirotor UAV with decoupling control system. In: 2017 8th International Conference Mechan-
ical and Aerospace Engineering ICMAE 2017, pp. 385–390 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICMAE.2017.8038677
10. Bucki, N., Mueller, M.W.: A novel multicopter with improved torque disturbance rejection
through added angular momentum. Int. J. Intell. Robot. Appl. 3(2), 131–143 (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1007/s41315-019-00093-4
11. Ömürlü, V.E., Kirli, A., Büyük¸sahin, U., Engin, ¸S.N., Kurtoˇglu, S.: A stationary, variable
DOF ﬂight control system for an unmanned quadrocopter. Turkish J. Electr. Eng. Comput.
Sci. 19, 891–899 (2011). https://doi.org/10.3906/elk-1007-579
12. Lin,C.E.,etal.:Enginecontrollerforhybridpowereddualquad-rotorsystem.In:IECON2015
- 41st Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pp. 001513–001517.
IEEE (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/IECON.2015.7392315
13. de Angelis, E.L., Giulietti, F., Pipeleers, G.: Two-time-scale control of a multirotor aircraft
for suspended load transportation. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 84, 193–203 (2019). https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ast.2018.10.012
14. Godbole, A.R., Subbarao, K.: Nonlinear control of unmanned aerial vehicles with cable
suspended payloads. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 93, 105299 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ast.
2019.07.032
15. Yıldırım, ¸S, Çabuk, N., Bakırcıo˘glu, V.: Design and trajectory control of universal drone
system. Measurement 147, 106834 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2019.
07.062
16. Langley, R.B.: Dilution of precision. GPS World 10, 52–59 (1999)
17. Freimuth, H., König, M.: Planning and executing construction inspections with unmanned
aerial vehicles. Autom. Constr. 96, 540–553 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2018.
10.016

Indoor GPS System for Autonomous Mobile
Robots Used in Surveillance Applications
Philip Coand˘a, Mihai Avram, Victor Constantin(B), and Bogdan Gr˘amescu
Mechatronics and Precision Mechanics Department, University Politehnica of Bucharest,
Bucharest, Romania
victor.constantin@upb.ro
Abstract. Development of urban areas has created a need for stable, reliable and
cost-efﬁcient indoor GPS systems based on regularly available technologies. Such
systems already exist and are in use. This paper proposes such a system with an
emphasis on ease of use, long-term reliability or maintenance free through net-
work redundancy techniques as well as an open-source architecture. The proposed
architecture uses a Bluetooth/Wi-Fi’s RSSI (Received Signal Strength Indicator)
parameter as relative to multiple mobile and ﬁxed nodes to determine the distance
to an object. The nodes, both mobile and ﬁxed, are purpose-built for the object of
this study and feature multiple other peripherals, as described in the paper. The
basic implemented model of these nodes is also described in the paper.
Keywords: Indoor positioning system · Received signal strength · Mobile robots
1
Introduction
The need for such a system comes with the continuous development of buildings and
their spreading on even larger surfaces, which makes using the GPS system impossible.
Whether it is ofﬁce buildings, storage buildings or industrial workshops, such a location
system can provide valuable data that can be further used for better resource manage-
ment (e.g.: locating machines in real time, location of people and implicitly warning in
emergencies).
Another important feature of such a system is security, the system being local, with-
out its connection with equipment whose data ﬂow cannot be controlled by the user.
Structurally, the system is intended to be made of ﬁxed and movable nodes. Fixed nodes
are those with known position and the movable nodes are represented by entities or
objects that must be tracked or located that have the movable node on them [1–4]. The
mobile node, whose position is not known, will be located according to its position rel-
ative to the ﬁxed nodes. Thus, a position relative to the position of the ﬁxed nodes with
an initially known position is desired. Figure 1 shows the basic proposed schematic of
the system.
Today, localization has become much easier to achieve, given the latest techno-
logical advances. No long ago, GPS was the only standard which could provide such
functionalities (Global Positioning System), things have evolved and today we can use
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 90–98, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_9

Indoor GPS System for Autonomous Mobile Robots
91
Fig. 1. Representation of beacons, mobile node and the user in the proposed system
alternative methods for location. The location is no longer dependent on large, bulky,
power-consuming equipment and is accessible to anyone.
Although GPS is still today the most widely used standard for outdoor location,
for indoor applications it does not work properly. Buildings and shopping centers have
become larger and larger and are made of materials that attenuate radio waves, making
it almost impossible to connect to an outdoor satellite.
In this situation, the indoor localization techniques became necessary with the
increasing dimensions of the buildings of today and at the same time new solutions
had to be developed, considering that the use of the GPS standard is either expensive for
the application in question or it is impossible for constructive reasons.
2
State of the Art
RSSI is a term that comes from the ﬁeld of telecommunications and represents a way
of measuring the intensity of the received signal. Normally, this is a parameter that is
not widely known to users, but which is very important in measuring and analyzing
the received signal. RSSI is a relative index that is used to measure signal quality. The
IEEE 802.11 standard speciﬁes that RSSI can take values from 0 to 255, each equipment
manufacturer being responsible for deﬁning its maximum RSSI value. For example,
Cisco uses values between 0 and 100, and Atheros between 0–60. This aspect is highly
important in the interpretation and use of measured data [5]. A localization system
using RSSI can be made with different wireless standards. This paper will present three
standards, these being Bluetooth, Wi-Fi and LoRa/LoRaWAN.
Bluetooth is a wireless standard for transmitting data over short distances. It uses
shortwave radio waves in the range 2.4–2.485 GHz. Bluetooth operates at frequencies
between 2402–2480 MHz, or 2400–2483.5 MHz. It divides the information into packets
which are then transmitted on one of the 79 channels. Each channel has a bandwidth of
1 MHz.
The Bluetooth standard was created to replace the data transmission through cables,
while also wishing to have low power consumption. The maximum distance for the

92
P. Coand˘a et al.
transmission of information is classiﬁed in classes (ex BLE4.0), and each class corre-
sponds to a certain energy consumption. It should also be considered that radio waves
are subjected to alteration depending on the environment in which they are propagated.
For example, inside, there are large attenuations due to objects in the environment [6].
Wi-Fi is a radio technology that is based on the IEEE 802.11 standard. Devices that
can use Wi-Fi technology can connect to each other or to the internet through a wireless
access point. Such an access point has a signal area of about 20 m inside and larger
outside, in the open ﬁeld. There are different versions of Wi-Fi technology, each with
different maximum distances, different speeds and different operating frequencies. The
most used of these are the 2.4 GHz radio band and the 5.8 GHz radio band. Each of
these bands is divided into several channels and each channel can be used by multiple
networks at the same time [5].
LoRa/LoRaWAN is a long-range radio communication technology that uses unli-
censed radio bands in Europe (169 MHz, 433 MHz, 868 MHz) and the US (915 MHz) and
allows long-distance communication (more than 10 km in rural areas) with low power
consumption. This makes it a technology to consider in long-distance IoT systems, mar-
itime platforms, mining and logistics. LoRaWAN is the network in which LoRa operates.
To make it easier to understand, a simple analogy can be made between LoRaWAN and
Wi-Fi, the former being the basic standard for IoT applications. LoRaWAN is respon-
sible for the management of the data, the channels, the transmission frequency and the
required power [1].
Using one or more of the above technologies and different ﬁltering techniques for the
acquisitioned data, in paper [4], the following results are obtained for indoor positioning
systems that can be seen in Table 1 where Ac. l. err/m is actual localization error per
meter and Av. l. err/m is the average localization per meter:
Table 1. Positioning results of paper [4]
Method
5 × 5 m
10 × 10 m
100 × 100 m
Ac. l. err/m
Av. l err/m
Ac. l. err/m
Av. l err/m
Ac. l. err/m
Av. l err/m
Classic
RSSI
1.4422
1.8543
2.1587
1.9229
27.7492
26.8520
Correction
RSSI
0.3162
0.3375
0.8495
0.6325
7.3246
6.7493
3
System Overview
The proposal is a lightweight indoor positioning system with low power Bluetooth
modules which uses RSSI parameter to determine the position.
In the present application, for a simpler determination of the parameters required for
such a system, a limited number of ﬁxed nodes (four) and a single mobile node were

Indoor GPS System for Autonomous Mobile Robots
93
used. The latter is represented by a mobile robot that will be controlled by the user. The
change of position and its updating is intended to be displayed on a real-time graph.
For the realization of software programs, it is desired to use the following
programming languages:
• Python - implementation of programs that will run on a ﬁxed workstation (server).
The program creates a socket server that will exchange information with the ESP-12E
module. This could be ordered in this way and send the serial readings to a Bluetooth
module integrated in the mobile nodes. The whole assembly represents the mobile
node.
• C++ - the program running on the ESP-12E module was made and aims to com-
municate between the user and the ﬁxed node and at the same time reads the data
transmitted through the serial communication port by the HM-10 Bluetooth module.
The ESP-12E module can be programmed in several programming languages, some
of which are: C, MicroPython, CircuitPython, C++. For versatility and considering
the number of libraries available, the C++ language was chosen.
The proposed solution consists in the realization of a system containing a network of
nodes, some of them having a known position, and others, mobile, having an unknown
position to be determined (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Trilateration principle
The mobile nodes move in the emission zone of the ﬁxed nodes and by measuring the
received signal intensity between the two nodes (the ﬁxed node and the mobile node),
the distance between the ﬁxed and the mobile node is determined at a certain time.

94
P. Coand˘a et al.
For a better understanding of the positioning systems and the technologies used,
three solutions have been studied that will be presented later in the paper.
Fig. 3. Block scheme of a four-beacon system
According to [2–4] the estimation of the distance using the received signal power is
based on the estimation of the distance of one node relative to another node that transmits
a signal by processing the intensity of the received signal power. The node that transmits
the signal is ﬁxed and its position is known. These nodes are called anchor nodes or
beacon nodes. If the intensity of the power received by a node that is at a certain distance
from a beacon node is known, then the power at distance d is given by the formula (1):
Pr(d) = A −10 ∗np ∗log(d)[dBm]
(1)
where Pr is the power received at the distance d relative to the beacon node, A is
the power received at a unit distance from the beacon node, and np is the transmission
factor, the latter being different depending on the environment. Parameters A and np are
constant in the external environment, but they can vary considerably over short distances
in the internal environment. Therefore, inside, the area is divided into several smaller
areas, with each area having the parameters A and np with a constant value. Parameter
values can be determined experimentally for each area and, once known, the distance
between a node and a beacon node can be expressed by the formula (2):
d = 10 −Pr + A ∗10 ∗np[m]
(2)
In order to be able to predict the location of a node in a two-dimensional area, the
distance must be measured from at least three beacon nodes that are not on the same
line. With the locations of the three known beacon nodes, the location of the node is

Indoor GPS System for Autonomous Mobile Robots
95
determined by constructing three circles having the center of the beacon node and the
radius equal to the distance from each beacon node to the node whose position it wants to
be located. Thus, using the following set of Eqs. (3) whose representation can be found
in Fig. 3, you can ﬁnd the position of the node.
(xa −x)2 + (ya −y)2 = d2
a
(xb −x)2 + (yb −y)2 = d2
b
(xc −x)2 + (yc −y)2 = d2
c
(3)
where (xa, ya), (xb, yb), (xc, yc) are the coordinates of the known nodes, da, db, dc, the
distances from each beacon node to the node whose position is needed to be determined,
and (x, y) represents the coordinates of the node whose position is desired to be located.
In order to determine the position in 3D space, it is necessary to use four beacon
nodes that are not located in the same plane. In this case, the position of the node can
be found by the intersection of the four spheres that are formed from the measurement
of the four distances of the beacon nodes to the node whose position is desired to be
located.
To have a better understanding of the localization principle, a simulation was done
using MATLAB. There is represented the point Pa which can be found at the intersection
of the four circles, their radius being the distance to the corresponding point, as per Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Representation of circle intersection with corresponding distance-radius from mobile node
to ﬁxed beacons.
4
Mobile and Fixed Nodes
In order to be able to operate, the system needs at least three ﬁxed nodes with known
position and at the same time exploitable. These are necessary to be able to apply the
algorithm for determining the distance (3) between the ﬁxed and the mobile nodes, by
which we can calculate the distances d1, d2, d3, respectively d4 speciﬁc to each mobile
node.

96
P. Coand˘a et al.
Once the three required minimum distances have been determined, the above-
mentioned trilateration algorithm (3) can be applied. This allows us to determine the
position of the mobile node (Fig. 5) relative to the other ﬁxed points whose position is
known, using the distance between the mobile node and each point separately. As the
number of ﬁxed nodes grows, the position determination is more accurate. Because we
are in the plane, the z axis representing the height is not considered, being equal to zero.
Fig. 5. Block scheme of communication pattern between ﬁxed nodes, mobile nodes and user
The mobile nodes are speciﬁcally designed for this application, as presented in
Fig. 6. The main components are the ESP12 module which I needed in order to be able
to communicate with the node and a BLE 4.0 module which is used to create the ﬁxed
and mobile beacons network.
The programming of the ESP module it is desired to be done using an FTDI-style
(USB to TTL converter) and the communication between the BLE4.0 module and the
ESP module is done by serial communication. To be able to have a mobile node, a propul-
sion system is needed. In this case, two motors and a motor driver must be implemented
on the board to be able perform the movement.
The ﬁxed beacons are represented by the BLE4.0 modules. These modules can be
programmed via AT (ATtention) commands in order to have different behavior, taking
into consideration the application. A good characteristic of this modules is the low power
consumption.
As it can be seen in Fig. 7, a demo version for the mobile node was developed in
order to be able to start testing with good initial results regarding connectivity and ease
of use.

Indoor GPS System for Autonomous Mobile Robots
97
Fig. 6. Schematic design of mobile node
Fig. 7. Test version of mobile node
5
Conclusions and Future Development
In this paper, it was proposed the schematic of an indoor positioning system using
bluetooth low energy modules and RSSI parameter to calculate the position. Further
development involves the development of a dedicated software program to be able to
collect, analyze and ﬁlter the data and to provide the necessary means to be able to
present the data in an understandable form.
Considering the advantages of an indoor positioning system, it is desired to imple-
ment and test it to determine and improve the current limitations of the system. The
modules from which the system is made are easy to reproduce on a large scale using
both tried and tested and novel 3D printing technologies [7], so it makes it suitable for
applications where it is necessary to implement it quickly and efﬁciently, without high
material costs. The system can also be easily implemented for education purposes [8].
References
1. de Carvalho, S., Joel, J.P.C., Alberti, A.: LoRaWAN—A low power WAN protocol for internet
of things: a review and opportunities. In: 2017 SpliTech. IEEE (2017)

98
P. Coand˘a et al.
2. Goutham,A.,Thanikaiselvan,V.:ImprovingtheperformanceofRSSIbasedindoorlocalization
techniques using neural networks. In: 2018 Second International Conference on Electronics,
Communication and Aerospace Technology (ICECA). IEEE (2018)
3. Xiaolong, S., Shenbqi, Y., Jian, H.: Improved localization algorithm based on RSSI în low
power Bluetooth network. In: 2016 2nd International Conference on Cloud Computing and
Internet of Things (CCIOT). IEEE (2016)
4. Jianqiao, X., Qin, Q., Zeng K.: A distance measurement wireless localization correction algo-
rithmbasedonRSSI.In:2014SeventhInternationalSymposiumonComputationalIntelligence
and Design, vol. 2. IEEE (2014)
5. IEEE Computer Society LAN/MAN Standards Committee: IEEE standard for informa-
tion technology-telecommunications and information exchange between systems-Local and
metropolitan area networks-speciﬁc requirements part 11: Wireless LAN medium access
control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) speciﬁcations. IEEE Std 802.11 (2007)
6. Miller, A., Brent, A., Chatschik, B.: Bluetooth Revealed: The Insider’s Guide to An Open
Speciﬁcation for Global Wireless Communication. Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River
(2001)
7. Besnea, D., Dinu, E., Moraru, E., Spanu, A., Rizescu, C., Constantin, V.: Experimental
researches regarding the manufacturing of new thermoplastic materials used in additive
technologies. Materiale Plastice 56(1), 167–170 (2019)
8. Mogo¸s, R., Bodea, C., Dasc˘alu, M.: Technology enhanced learning for Industry 4.0 engineering
education. Revue roumaine des sciences techniques 63(4), 429–435 (2018)

Incorporating Inteco’s 3D Crane into Control
Engineering Curriculum
Frantisek Gazdos(B)
and Lenka Sarmanova
Faculty of Applied Informatics, Tomas Bata University in Zlin, Nam. T.G. Masaryka 5555,
760 01 Zlin, Czech Republic
gazdos@utb.cz
Abstract. The paper describes the Inteco 3D Crane as a suitable scale-model to
support practical training of students in control engineering and related ﬁelds.
It also contains an illustrative case study controlling the payload position in 3D
space in a robust way using the systematic polynomial approach, including also
experimental identiﬁcation of the crane dynamics in all three axes. As such, it can
serve as an inspiration for both academic staff and students dealing with related
ﬁelds of study.
Keywords: Control engineering · Inteco 3D crane · Modelling · Robust control ·
Polynomial approach
1
Introduction
Control engineering represents a multidisciplinary ﬁeld of study placing high demands
on the students – prospective engineers in this ﬁeld. They have to understand, in a broader
context, mathematics, physics, informatics, electrical engineering, instrumentation and
measurements, signal processing and others. Knowledge of these subjects together with
appropriate practical training then enables designing safe, reliable and efﬁcient control
systems – “brain” of most engineering applications. Practical training in this ﬁeld real-
ized in a special laboratories equipped with real-time scale process models has proven to
be beneﬁcial for this purpose [1–3]. The labs usually contain some typical processes to
prepare prospective control engineers for various types of systems and conditions. Here,
students are forced to work with real hardware, identify it, implement suggested control
algorithms and face real challenges, such as stochastic disturbances, signal saturations,
nonlinearities, etc. Consequently, they are more conﬁdent under real conditions in prac-
tice. One such laboratory has been presented in the author’s previous publication [3].
This contribution aims at introducing possibilities of one speciﬁc scale model acquired
for this lab recently, namely 3D Crane by Inteco [4]. Crane control, including modelling,
identiﬁcation and various control strategies is a popular scientiﬁc subject, e.g. [5] can
serve as a starting survey paper, various control strategies related particularly to the dis-
cussed Inteco 3D Crane can be found e.g. in the references [6–11]. Here, in this paper,
the crane possibilities are discussed, followed by an illustrative case study controlling
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 99–111, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_10

100
F. Gazdos and L. Sarmanova
the payload position in 3D space in a robust way using the systematic polynomial app-
roach [12–14], including also experimental identiﬁcation of the crane dynamics in all 3
axes. As such, this paper can serve as an inspiration for both academic staff and students
struggling with control engineering and related ﬁelds of studies.
The paper starts with general description of the crane and its possibilities, followed
by a detailed state-space mathematical model of this system. Next section illustrates
control system design for the problem of payload position control, including also exper-
imental identiﬁcation and derivation of controllers based on the algebraic approach using
polynomials and some results from the robust control theory. The paper concludes giving
results of real-time control of this system and some ﬁnal remarks.
2
Inteco 3D Crane
2.1
General Description
The 3D Crane of the Polish company INTECO [4] represents a non-linear electrome-
chanical system with a complex dynamics which can be used to create challenging
control problems [15]. It is a laboratory-scaled model which can be controlled from
a PC using a common A/D-D/A board and MATLAB software libraries. Basic set-up
presented in Fig. 1 consists of a payload hanging on a pendulum-like lift-line wound by
a motor mounted on a cart, thus the payload can be lifted and lowered in the z-direction.
The cart is placed on a rail and it is capable of horizontal motion along the rail in the
y-direction using next motor. Finally the rail with the cart can also move horizontally
in the x-direction using another motor. As a result, the payload attached to the end of
the lift-line can move freely in 3 dimensions and it is driven by 3 DC motors, which
represent 3 possible control inputs (manipulated variables) of this system, controlled
by PWM. The model enables to measure 5 state variables that represent possible con-
trolled outputs – the cart coordinates on the horizontal plane together with the lift-line
length and, in addition, also two deviation angles of the payload. All the variables are
sensed with identical measuring encoders with resolution 4096 pulses/rotation, enabling
to measure the payload deviation with accuracy 0.0015 rad [15].
A typical control task represents payload position control in the 3D space, more
advanced control problems can take into account also oscillation of the payload during
the motion with the aim to suppress it as much as possible. These tasks typically include
identiﬁcation of the system(s), validation of the model(s), controller(s) design, testing
and optimization, either in the SISO or MIMO set-ups.

Incorporating Inteco’s 3D Crane into Control Engineering Curriculum
101
Fig. 1. Inteco 3D Crane – detail
2.2
Mathematical Model
Let us assume the scheme of the crane according to Fig. 2 below [15, 16].
Fig. 2. Inteco 3D Crane – coordinates and forces [15]
Further, let us denote 5 measured variables as:
• xw, yw – distance of the rail with the cart from the center of the construction frame,
and distance of the cart from the center of the rail, respectively,
• R – length of the lift-line,
• α, β – angle between the y-axis and the lift-line, and between the negative direction
on the z-axis and the projection of the lift-line onto the x-z plane,
and other used physical quantities as:

102
F. Gazdos and L. Sarmanova
• mc, mw, ms – payload, cart and moving rail mass,
• xc, yc, zc – coordinates of the payload,
• S – reaction force in the lift-line acting on the cart,
• Fx, Fy, FR – forces driving the rail with cart, the cart along the rail and controlling
the length of the lift-line, respectively,
• Tx, Ty, TR – corresponding friction forces.
Then the payload position can be described by the equations:
xc = xw + R sin(α) sin(β),
yc = yw + R cos(α),
zc = −R sin(α) cos(β).
(1)
Next, the following symbols are used in the sequel:
μ1 = mc
mw
, μ2 =
mc
mw + ms
,
u1 = Fy
mw
, u2 =
Fx
mw + mc
, u3 = FR
mc
,
T1 = Ty
mw
, T2 =
Tx
mw + mc
, T3 = TR
mc
,
N1 = u1 −T1, N2 = u2 −T2, N3 = u3 −T3.
(2)
If we denote the state variables of the 3D crane model as:
x1 = yw,
x2 = x′
1 = y′
w,
x3 = xw,
x4 = x′
3 = x′
w,
x5 = α,
x6 = x′
5 = α′,
x7 = β,
x8 = x′
7 = β′,
x9 = R,
x10 = x′
9 = R′,
(3)
and introduce other auxiliary variables (where g denotes the gravity constant):
sn = sin(xn), cn = cos(xn),
V5 =c5s5x2
8x9 −2x10x6 + gc5c7,
V6 =2x8(c5x6x9 + s5x10) + gs7,
V7 =s2
5x2
8x9 + gs5c7 + x2
6x9,
(4)
then, it is possible to ﬁnally derive the following non-linear state-space model of the
crane dynamics, consisting of 10 interdependent differential equations [15]:
x′
1 =x2,
x′
2 = N1 + μ1c5N3,
x′
3 =x4,
x′
4 = N2 + μ2s5s7N3,
x′
5 =x6,
x′
6 =

s5N1 −c5s7N2 +

μ1 −μ2s2
7

c5s5N3 + V5

x9,
x′
7 =x8,
x′
8 = −(c7N2 + μ2s5c7s7N3 + V6)

(s5x9),
x′
9 =x10,
x′
10 = −c5N1 −s5s7N2 −

1 + μ1c2
5 + μ2s2
5s2
7

N3 + V7,
(5)
which shows complexity and non-linearity of this model.

Incorporating Inteco’s 3D Crane into Control Engineering Curriculum
103
3
Control System Design
In this paper, due to the limited space, only the problem of payload position control is
illustrated. It is based on the decentralized control approach, starting with experimental
identiﬁcation of the motion dynamics in all 3 axes ﬁrst and then followed by controller
design which uses the systematic algebraic approach with polynomials leading to the
pole-placement problem solution. This is addressed in a robust way ensuring satisfying
control performance not only on simpliﬁed identiﬁed models but on the real system as
well, which is proved experimentally.
3.1
Experimental Identiﬁcation
For identiﬁcation of the crane dynamics in all 3 axes x, y, z, e.g. a simple technique of
step-responses evaluation can be used. For this purpose, a step change of input signal in
different operating points was injected into the system and the responses were recorded,
processed and evaluated. This was done for each of the 3 DC motors separately, obtaining
corresponding responses in all 3 axes. The z-axis was identiﬁed in both directions as
recommended in the literature [15], i.e. up, denoted z + and down, labeled as z-. Obtained
responses (shifted to zero, normed to unit step input signal and averaged) for the axes x
and y are presented in the graphs of Fig. 3 below (in blue), together with the resultant
identiﬁed models (in red). Results for the z-axis provided similar match but are omitted
due to the limited space of this conference paper.
Fig. 3. Identiﬁcation of the crane dynamics in the x and y axes
With respect to the obtained responses from the identiﬁcation, the following
simpliﬁed model was suggested to describe the crane dynamics in all the axes:
G(s) =
b0
s(s + a0) =
k
s(Ts + 1),
(6)

104
F. Gazdos and L. Sarmanova
which is represented by an integrative system with a given gain k and time-constant T.
As shown in the presented graphs above, this model describes the system dynamics suf-
ﬁciently. In order to ﬁnd the unknown parameters of the model, the MATLAB function
fminsearch was used, minimizing the sum of squared differences between the mod-
elled and measured responses. Results of this optimization procedure, i.e. the identiﬁed
parameters k and T for all 4 cases are given below:
Gx(s) =
0.273
s(0.108s + 1),
Gy(s) =
0.308
s(0.055s + 1),
Gz+(s) =
0.137
s(0.032s + 1),
Gz−(s) =
0.115
s(0.036s + 1).
(7)
These models described by transfer functions are further used for control system
design, i.e. to design suitable compensators in each axis to control the payload position
in the 3D space of the crane.
3.2
Design of Controllers
Control system design here is based on the systematic algebraic approach using polyno-
mials leading to the solution of polynomial equations [12–14]. It allows to ﬁnd both suit-
able controller structure and its parameters and it naturally leads to the pole-placement
problem which can be solved by many different approaches [17]. Control set-up sug-
gested in this work is sketched in Fig. 4 below consisting of a system G to be controlled
by means of a compensator with two parts – feedback controller Q and feedforward
controller (ﬁlter) R. The variables y, w, u and v denote controlled variable, its reference
(set-point) signal, control input (manipulated variable) and disturbance, respectively.
This conﬁguration will generally enable lower overshoots of the controlled variable and
provide more realizable values of the control input.
Fig. 4. Control set-up
Further suppose that both the plant and the controller(s) can be approximated by
transfer functions G(s), Q(s) and R(s) with coprime polynomials {b(s), a(s)}, {q(s),
p(s)} and {r(s), p(s)} according to (8)–(9) while satisfying (10)-(11).
G(s) = b(s)
a(s)
(8)

Incorporating Inteco’s 3D Crane into Control Engineering Curriculum
105
Q(s) = q(s)
p(s), R(s) = r(s)
p(s),
(9)
deg a(s) ≻deg b(s)
(10)
deg p(s) ≥deg q(s), deg p(s) ≥deg r(s),
(11)
Basic requirements for the control systems above are formulated as:
• stability,
• asymptotic tracking of the reference signal,
• disturbance attenuation,
• inner properness.
From the scheme of Fig. 4 and assuming (8)–(9), it is easy to derive following
relationships between the controlled variable y(t) (Y(s) in the complex domain) and the
input signals w(t) and v(t) (W(s) and V(s) similarly):
Y =
GR
1 + GQW +
1
1 + GQV =
br
ap + bqW +
ap
ap + bqV
= br
d W + ap
d V = TW + SV
(12)
Here, d denotes a characteristic polynomial of the closed loop deﬁned as:
ap + bq = d
(13)
and symbols S and T represent important transfer functions of the loop known as the
sensitivity function and the complementary sensitivity function respectively.
Similarly, it is straightforward to derive the formula (14) for the control error e(t)
(E(s) in the complex domain):
E(s) = 1
d

(d −br)W(s) −apV(s)
	
.
(14)
From (12) it is clear that the control system of Fig. 4 will be stable if the characteristic
polynomial d(s) given by (13) is stable. This polynomial equation, after a proper choice
of the stable polynomial d(s), is used to compute the unknown feedback controller
polynomials q(s) and p(s). Roots of the characteristic polynomial d(s) are known as
poles of the closed loop. Their proper placement inﬂuences not only stability of the loop
but also the achieved control quality, i.e. settling-time, overshoots, control input course
etc. Therefore the so-called pole-placement problem is a natural part of the polynomial
approach to control system design.
Further assume the identiﬁed model of the plant is in the form of (6), i.e. an integrative
system with general transfer function (8), speciﬁed more as:
G(s) = b(s)
a(s) =
b(s)
s · ˜a(s)
(15)

106
F. Gazdos and L. Sarmanova
and let us also suppose, as it is a common case, that both the reference signal w(t) and
disturbance v(t) can be approximated well by step functions, in the complex domain:
W(s) = w0
s , V(s) = v0
s
(16)
for some reals w0, v0. Then, substituting (16) into the control error (14) yields
E = 1
d

(d −br)w0
s −apv0
s

= 1
d

(d −br)w0
s −˜aspv0
s

= 1
d

(d −br)w0
s −˜apv0

(17)
which shows that step disturbances will be compensated automatically, thanks to the
integrative nature of the plant (15). Moreover, in order to ensure also asymptotic tracking
of the reference signal, the formula (17) shows that the term (d–b.r) must be divisible by
the “s” term, i.e. (d–b.r) = t.s must hold for some unknown polynomial t(s). This relation
can be rewritten into the form of (18) which enables to ﬁnd the unknown numerator
polynomial r(s) of the feedforward controller R(s) when the characteristic polynomial
d(s) is properly prescribed.
ts + br = d
(18)
Then, the unknown polynomials of both controllers Q, R (9), namely q(s), p(s) and
r(s) can be calculated from the couple of polynomial Eqs. (13), (18), i.e.:
˜asp + bq = d
ts + br = d
(19)
for a given characteristic polynomial d(s).
The inner properness of the control system is satisﬁed if all its parts (transfer func-
tions) are proper. With regard to the strictly proper plant transfer function (8), (10), proper
controllers (9), (11) and taking into account the solvability of polynomial Eqs. (19), it is
possible to derive the following formulas for the degrees of the unknown polynomials:
deg q(s) = deg ˜a(s),
deg p(s) = deg ˜a(s),
deg r(s) = 0,
deg d(s) = 2 deg ˜a(s) + 1,
deg t(s) = 2 deg ˜a(s),
(20)
when seeking the simplest controllers structures. For the identiﬁed model of the crane
dynamics in all the axes (6) then holds: deg q = 1, deg p = 1, deg d = 3 and deg t = 2;
consequently the controllers take the form:
Q(s) = q(s)
p(s) = q1s + q0
p1s + p0
, R(s) = r(s)
p(s) =
r0
p1s + p0
(21)
whichshowsthatthefeedbackcompensatorQ(s)isrepresentedbyaﬁlteredPDcontroller
while the feedforward regulator is just a ﬁltered P-controller.

Incorporating Inteco’s 3D Crane into Control Engineering Curriculum
107
3.3
Pole-Placement Problem
For practical computation of the controller’s polynomials q, p and r it is necessary to
choose a suitable stable polynomial d appearing on the right side of the polynomial
Eqs. (19). This is the so called pole-placement problem mentioned earlier, e.g. [17].
Therefore we are seeking suitable poles pi of the designed loop to fulﬁll given require-
ments. Then d can be expressed as (22) for some poles, i.e. its roots pi. As a result,
the control design procedure transforms to the optimization problem of ﬁnding the right
poles providing the required control quality.
d(s) =
deg d

i=1
(s −pi)
(22)
Here, it is suggested to have this polynomial in the following simple form:
d(s) = (s + α)3
(23)
for some positive parameter α > 0; although this choice is the simplest it will not only
guarantee stable aperiodic control process (all closed-loop poles will be equal to −α) but
it also enables to tune the loop simply by one single parameter α. Solving the polynomial
Eqs. (19) for such choice of the characteristic polynomial (23) provides the following
formulas for the unknown coefﬁcients of the controllers (21):
p1 = 1,
p0 = 3α −a0,
q1 = 3α2 −a0p0
b0
,
q0 = r0 = α3
b0
,
(24)
depending on the identiﬁed parameters b0, a0 of the controlled system (6) and, on the
“tuning” parameter α introduced above.
As the Inteco 3D crane is non-linear and multivariable in nature, having quite com-
plex dynamics, while the suggested identiﬁed models of dynamics in all the axes are
quite simple, it is further suggested to optimize the tuning parameter α with respect to
robustness of the designed loop, in order to cope with the nonlinearities and possible dis-
turbances. Peak gain of the sensitivity function frequency response given by the inﬁnity
norm H∞is a classical measure of the loop robustness [18]. Therefore it is suggested
here to use it as tool to optimize the one tuning parameter α. The sensitivity function is,
according to (12), given as:
S =
1
1 + GQ =
ap
ap + bq = ap
d
(25)
then, the criterion describing the robustness reads:
J = ∥S∥∞= sup|S(jω)|
ω
(26)
where ω indicates the frequency. Values of this criterion depending on the tuning param-
eter α for the identiﬁed model Gx (7), describing x-axis dynamics, are presented in Fig. 5
below – general overview ﬁrst, followed by more detailed inspection.

108
F. Gazdos and L. Sarmanova
Fig. 5. Norm H∞of the sensitivity function S with α
As can be seen from the graph, sensitivity of the loop decreases rapidly with α ﬁrst
and then it does not change signiﬁcantly. Moreover, closer inspection reveals minimum
of the graph indicating least sensitive, i.e. most robust setting of the tuning parameter.
This speciﬁc setting is further used to calculate the controllers’ coefﬁcients (24) and for
both simulation testing and real-time control of the Inteco 3D Crane. Similar graphs can
be obtained also for the other identiﬁed models from (7) providing these optimal values
of the tuning parameter α for controllers in all the axes:
αx = 4.65,
αy = 9.06,
αz+ = 15.39,
αz−= 13.86,
(27)
which ﬁnally yields the following resultant controllers:
Qx = 8.49s + 39.77
s + 4.68
, Rx =
39.77
s + 4.68;
Qy = 14.89s + 131.96
s + 8.87
, Ry = 131.96
s + 8.87;
Qz+ = 57.06s + 851.4
s + 14.92
, Rz+ =
851.4
s + 14.92;
Qz−= 60.86s + 825.8
s + 13.57
, Rz−=
825.8
s + 13.57.
(28)
3.4
Real-Time Control Results
The resultant controllers (28) were tested by simulation means ﬁrst, providing good
results, and ﬁnally by real-time experiments on the Inteco 3D Crane. Some of the exper-
iments, namely the position control in the x and y axes are presented in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7
below. More experiments including control in all 3 axes will be, due to the limited space
of this paper, showed in the presentation and prospective extended version of this paper.
As can be seen from the graphs, the control response is stable with only minor
overshoots and the set-point positions are tracked relatively quickly. Moreover, control

Incorporating Inteco’s 3D Crane into Control Engineering Curriculum
109
Fig. 6. Control response in the x-axis
Fig. 7. Control response in the y-axis

110
F. Gazdos and L. Sarmanova
input values are in a reasonable range and disturbances are attenuated also successfully
(disturbance in time 17 s for x-axis and 45 s for y-axis were simulated by gently slamming
into the payload by hand), which conﬁrms robustness of the designed loop.
4
Conclusion
This paper describes the Inteco 3D Crane as a suitable scale-model to support practical
training of students in control engineering and related ﬁelds of study. This eletrome-
chanical model, nonlinear and multivariable in nature, can be used to create both simple
and complex control challenges for prospective control engineers. This work presents
a case study, illustrating a position control of the payload in the 3D space of the crane.
As such, it can help and inspire both teachers (to incorporate similar hardware into their
control courses) and students (to understand the problems involved) in their “struggle”
for better practical skills related to designing safe, reliable and efﬁcient control systems.
In this paper, due to its limited space, only the position control problem is illustrated,
however, authors are in the stage of preparing an extended version of this contribution,
where also the more challenging problem of suppressing payload oscillations will be
addressed, as another example.
References
1. Horacek, P.: Laboratory experiments for control theory courses: a survey. Annu. Rev. Control
24, 151–162 (2000)
2. Leva, A.: A simple and ﬂexible experimental laboratory for automatic control courses. Control
Eng. Pract. 14, 167–176 (2006)
3. Gazdos, F.: Using real-time laboratory models in the process of control education. In:
Machado, J., Soares, F., Veiga, G. (eds.) HELIX 2018. LNEE, vol. 505, pp. 1097–1103.
Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91334-6_151
4. INTECO. http://www.inteco.com.pl. Accessed 30 Jan 2020
5. Abdel-Rahman, E.M., Nayfeh, A.H., Masoud, Z.N.: Dynamics and control of cranes: a review.
J. Vib. Control 9(7), 863–908 (2003)
6. Nguyen, Q.T., Vesely, V.: Robust decentralized controller design for 3D crane. In: Fikar, M.,
Kvasnica, M. (eds.) Process Control 2011, pp. 485–489 (2011)
7. Trajkovic, D.M., Antic, D.S., Nikolic, S.S., Peric, S.L., Milovanovic, M.B.: Fuzzy logic-based
control of three-dimensional crane system. Autom. Control Robot. 12(1), 31–42 (2013)
8. Petrehus, P., Lendek, Z., Raica P.: Fuzzy modeling and design for a 3D Crane. In: IFAC
ICONS 2013, pp. 479–484. IFAC (2013)
9. Vazquez, C., Fridman, L., Collado, J., Castillo, I.: Second-order sliding mode control of a
perturbed-crane. J. Dyn. Syst. Measur. Control 137(8) (2015)
10. Aksjonov, A., Vodovozov, V., Petlenkov, E.: Three-dimensional crane modelling and con-
trol using euler-lagrange state-space approach and anti-swing fuzzy logic. Electr. Control.
Commun. Eng. 9(1), 5–13 (2016)
11. Pauluk, M.: Optimal and robust control of 3D crane. Przeglad Elektrotechniczny 92(2), 206–
212 (2016)
12. Hunt, K.J.: Polynomial Methods in Optimal Control and Filtering. Peter Peregrinus Ltd.,
London (1993)
13. Kucera, V.: Diophantine equations in control – a survey. Automatica 29(6), 1361–1375 (1993)

Incorporating Inteco’s 3D Crane into Control Engineering Curriculum
111
14. Anderson, B.D.O.: From Youla-Kucera to identiﬁcation, adaptive and nonlinear control.
Automatica 34(12), 1485–1506 (1998)
15. 3D Crane User’s Manual. Inteco Ltd., Krakow (2017)
16. Sarmanova, L.: Modelling, identiﬁcation and control of an Inteco 3D Crane. Master’s thesis,
Tomas Bata University in Zlin, Faculty of Applied Informatics, Zlin (2019)
17. Kucera, V.: The pole placement equation – a survey. Kybernetika 30(6), 578–584 (1994)
18. Skogestad, S., Postlethwaite, I.: Multivariable Feedback Control: Analysis and Design. Wiley,
Chichester (2005)

Design of Laser Scanners Data Processing
and Their Use in Visual Inspection System
Ivan Kuric
, Matej Kandera
, Jaromír Klarák(B)
, Miroslav Císar
,
and Ivan Zajaˇcko
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Department of Automation and Production Systems,
University of Žilina, Univerzitná 8215/1, 010 26 Žilina, Slovakia
{matej.kandera,jaromir.klarak}@fstroj.uniza.sk
Abstract. Visual product inspection is an important element, whether in-process
or output product inspection in today’s industry. The present paper describes an
approach to visual inspection, based on the usage of line laser scanners. Their task
is to obtain coordinates of individual geometric proﬁle elements of the scanned
object in the form of raw data in.csv output. Paper also describes the design of
processing and sorting of these raw data and creating output from them in a format
suitable for subsequent processing. In order to enable the subsequent evaluation of
the processed data and the visual representations generated therefrom, a procedure
for combining the individually obtained images of the surface of the rotating object
into a single linear image is also proposed. The described procedure can accelerate
and simplify the whole process of visual inspection of determined objects.
Keyword: Visual inspection · Laser scanners · Image processing
1
Introduction
Visual inspection, whether direct or indirect, is one of the valuable tools of non-
destructive product inspection methods. Visual inspection with appropriate lighting is
often one of the ﬁrst methods for detecting and locating suspect areas on inspected
objects. In the past, it was a highly subjective approach to quality control and there was
no documentation to describe its progress. The success of the result depended mainly on
the trained operators, the cleanliness of the environment, the properties of the test object,
the quality of the optical devices and the correct illumination (when using an industrial
camera as a recording device) of the investigation area. These parameters are of course
very important even today, but the equipment used is much more sophisticated.
Another approach to obtaining data from real objects except for cameras is to use line
laser scanners. The advantage of using scanners is a fact, that they work on the principle
of triangulation of a red light beam, which they emit to the object to be examined, thereby
partially eliminating the above-mentioned need for additional illumination. They are also
less affected by variations in ambient light intensity. For this reason, in some cases, the
use of the so-called “Black box” is not necessary as when using cameras.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 112–118, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_11

Design of Laser Scanners Data Processing and Their Use
113
Visual inspection is one of the basic methods of non-destructive testing. In the visual
inspection process, the worker follows the prescribed procedures, which can range from
simple inspection of objects with the naked eye to detect external defects to the perfor-
manceofvariousmeasurementstoensurecompliancewiththerequiredstandards.Nowa-
days, optical systems include real-time imaging and various analysis using computers
[1–3].
The ﬁrst step to enable visual inspection with analysis using a computer is to obtain
the input data correctly. Different types of ﬁles can be used as input data, in visual
inspection, as the name implies, this data will be in the form of a visual representation
of the scanned object or its selected parts [4].
2
Capture Method and Data Export
In the research described in this paper, a line laser scanner was chosen to capture the
surface of the selected object. The object to be scanned is an automobile tire (Fig. 1), in
the described case speciﬁcally its sidewall. A micro epsilon scan-CONTROL 2600-50
device, with resolution up to 640 dots per line was used to scan the product. Scan-
CONTROL Conﬁguration Tools and 3D View software were used along with this line
scanner, which is an interactive 3D visualization software designed for displaying and
exporting 3D captured data during the scanning, supplied directly by the manufacturer
[5].
Table 1. Achieved scan resolution.
Resolution Value [mm]
Axis x
≈0,100
Axis y
≈0,060
Axis z
≈0,004
Mentioned sensors operate on the principle of triangulation, in which they can pro-
vide a resolution capability in the z-axis up to 0.004 mm. This value represents the
resolution of the sensitivity of the sensing point from the device sensor (Fig. 1).
The captured data was exported from Microepsilon 3D View in two data ﬁle types.
As pictures in.png format (Fig. 2) and also in the form of coordinates of individual points
saved in.csv format. The.csv ﬁle contains the position of the individual scanned points
of the scanned object proﬁle in the Cartesian coordinate system in the x, y and z axes
(Fig. 1). The exported.png format serves a basic illustration of the surface that has been
scanned and stored in a speciﬁc.csv ﬁle.

114
I. Kuric et al.
Fig. 1. The scanned object and detail of the selected area during the scanning process.
3
Processing of Data from Scanning
The obtained.png ﬁles were used to illustrate scans of the tire surface while the data
source for further processing was the.csv ﬁle.
For generating the visual content, the z-coordinate of the points obtained from the
scanning was used. One scan contained approximately 15.5 mil. points classiﬁed in
25000 lines aligned in the y-axis with the number of scanned points per line ranging
from 580 to 630. During scanning process, 11 images of individual tire sidewall sections
were taken, as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Illustrations of the tire surface generated by the software from the scanner manufacturer.

Design of Laser Scanners Data Processing and Their Use
115
These scans are generated by micro-epsilon software that offers a basic visual pre-
view of the scanned surface. In this case, the output data does not contain geometric
information, it is only a 2D representation of a surface scan with recognizable geometric
shapes.
When processing data in.csv format, the image was ﬁrst generated from an unclas-
siﬁed point cloud. Described algorithm is based on the generation of images based on
raw z-axis data to produce an image with a high degree of interference as it is displayed
in Fig. 3 [6, 7, 10].
Fig. 3. An image generated from raw z-axis data with a high degree of interference.
In order to achieve the desired image quality and to allow further work with data, it is
necessary to sort the image into a 640 × 25000 matrix. The value of 640 is characterized
by a maximum number of points scanned in a line (x-axis) and the value of 25000
indicates the number of such lines which are consecutively scanned (y-axis). The points
were classiﬁed using x coordinates of each point and its position deﬁnition in the x
coordinate were continuous values from −25 to 27 mm. The classiﬁcation was performed
using algorithm based on the following Eq. (1):
Xp =

Xi −fmin(X )
fmax(X ) −fmin(X )


∗639 ϵ N
(1)
which determined the position of individual points Xp based on the overall scan, which
is based on ﬁnding of maximal fmax(X ) and minimal fmin(X ) values from data by the
position value in the x axis. Subsequently, this image was generated and is shown in
Fig. 4, in which the detectable geometry of the tire scan is suitable for further processing
[13, 14].
By further processing is meant the possibility of utilization associated with the appli-
cation of the comparative method to compare etalon data and a scan of the controlled
product. The checked product can be searched for anomalies or differences to the etalon
sample. In this case, this method of detecting anomalies was chosen because of its uni-
versality and veriﬁcation of the theory, where the emphasis was also placed on ﬁnding
errors or objects that are not commonly encountered in practice or that the system has
not yet encountered.
The sorted image shown in Fig. 4 is further processed. The main feature of this state
of processing is the recognizable tire sidewall surface geometry. Another assumption is
to scan the entire product. The problem was the hardware that did not allow to capture

116
I. Kuric et al.
Fig. 4. The processed image generated from the sorted scanned data.
more than 25,000 lines. In this case, attention was directed to the number of scans per
second, with approximately 250 scans per second, when this number actually ﬂuctuated
around the speciﬁed value. As a result, mentioned parameter was set based on a compro-
mise between the scan time (approximately 170 s) and the result image resolution and
sharpness. In this way, the amount of line scans obtained was not sufﬁcient to scan the
entire tire due to the mentioned hardware limitations. The creation of a complete scan
had to consist of combining several scans into one. The resultant image was created by
combining scans 1, 2 and 4 as shown in Fig. 2. Scan number 1 was set as a base to which
scan number 2 and then this continuous image was supplemented with a portion of scan
4. The connection was made on the principle of pairing of border areas of 2000 lines.
Deﬁning a match was realized by searching for a global minimum (2).
Emin =

(ai −bi)2
(2)
Individual scans were connected to each other on the basis of such a match. The scan
boundaries are shown in Fig. 5, where scan 2 and scan 4 were combined and as a result
a continuous scan of the entire perimeter of the tire sidewall was created with a smooth
transition.pixel ﬁlter applied
Fig. 5. Preview of continuous scan created from partial scans 2 and 4.
Scan 1 was added to the continuous scan, where only the missing area was added to
the parts from scans 2 and 4. Because of the completion, it was necessary to determine
the boundaries from both sides of the scan and add this part to the continuous scan 2 +
4. produced a continuous 1 + 2 + 4 scan. The ﬁnal continuous scan is then suitable for
detecting anomalies in the geometry of the inspected object, which may be deemed inap-
propriate under predeﬁned conditions and thus affect the overall quality of the inspected

Design of Laser Scanners Data Processing and Their Use
117
product. Anomaly highlighting is generated by comparing etalon data that is guaranteed
to be error-free and inspected data that has a certain probability of error.
Before comparing an etalon and an inspected sample, it is necessary to locate and
pair the selected area on both scans. When a match is found, it overlaps and produces
an image with highlighted differences. Due to the non-constant scanning of the points,
microscopic displacements occur, especially at the border regions. Another non-constant
value is the scanned edges in the run-in area in the product rotation direction. At these
parts of the geometry, the beams reﬂected at the wrong angle, which meant that the
geometry points forming some of edges were not sensed. These are depicted as black
areas in the images. The areas highlighted in this way do not match when compared and
thus create line differences in the compared image, which are ﬁltered for better entity
contrast. As a result, only the difference area with a larger pixel cluster is highlighted
than the 4 × 4 pixel ﬁlter applied [8, 9, 12].
Fig. 6. Demonstration of anomalies occurring on the scanned object.
In Fig. 6. Two speciﬁc areas with geometric differences that indicate a possibility of
the anomaly are highlighted in white. In this case, the scanned object would be evaluated
as a failure, if it were an application directly in the industry. Subsequent to categorizing
the product according to the type and severity of the defect, an evaluation would be made
as to whether the product is suitable for repair and if there is a possibility to eliminate
the defects or to be eliminated from the manufacturing process.
4
Conclusion
Visual inspection as a non-destructive method of product control is one of the basic
methods of detecting external inaccuracies. The article presents a way of raw line laser
scanner data processing, suitable for further ﬁnding and highlighting anomalies on a
speciﬁc object with speciﬁc properties. In the case of this paper, it is an automobile
tire and its sidewall in particular. The described method of obtaining data for further
processing is based on the surface scanning with a line laser scanner. For further pro-
cessing of acquired data, it is possible to create the system in two different ways. First is

118
I. Kuric et al.
intelligent fault-ﬁnding using trained artiﬁcial neural networks, and the other is a com-
parison method between an etalon and an inspected object. In the comparative method,
the system is resistant to the occurrence of unknown anomalies. These anomalies are
highlighted without the system being adapted to look for speciﬁc types of geometric
anomalies. Following the mentioned reasons, this comparative method was chosen for
the described task. Differences in images can mean two possible states, either an anomaly
or entities occurring on the object, but which do not have a constant position for each
product. With the sensing parameters set, satisfactory resolution (Table 1) in the z and
y axes was achieved, but these parameters were limiting the resolution in the x-axis.
Increasing the resolution in the x-axis would be possible by scanning a smaller product
width or by using different scanning devices with a higher number of scanned points.
The limitation of this system is the compromise between scan quality, scan time and
computational performance, which also depend on evaluation hardware used.
Acknowledgement. This article was made under the support of APVV project – APVV-16-0283
Research and development of multi-criteria diagnosis of production machinery and equipment
based on the implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence methods.
References
1. Mix, P.E.: Introduction to Nondestructive Testing, 2nd edn. John Wiley, Hoboken (2005)
2. Tlach, V., Ságová, Z., Kuric, I.: Collaborative assembly task realization using selected type
of a human-robot interaction. Proc. Eng. 40, 541–547 (2019)
3. Kuric, I., Bulej, V., Saga, M., Pokorny, P.: Development of simulation software for mobile
robot path planning within multilayer map system based on metric and topological maps. Int.
J. Adv. Robot. Syst. 14(6) (2017)
4. Dodok, T., ˇCuboˇnová, N., Kuric, I.: Workshop programming as a part of technological
preparation of production. Adv. Sci. Technol. Res. J. 111–116 (2017)
5. Kuric, I.: New methods and trends in product development and planning. In: 1st International
ConferenceonQualityandInnovationinEngineeringandManagement(QIEM),pp.453–456,
Cluj Napoca (2011)
6. Košinár, M.; Kuric, I.: Monitoring possibilities of CNC machine tools accuracy. In: 1st Inter-
national Conference on Quality and Innovation in Engineering and Management (QIEM),
pp. 115–118, Cluj Napoca (2011)
7. Sage, A., Melsa, J.: System Identiﬁcation, p. 221. Academic press, New York (1971)
8. Filinov, M.V., Fursov, A.S., Klyuev, V.V.: Approaches to the assessment of the residual
resource of technical objects. Control. Diagn. (8), 6–16 (2006)
9. Eykhoff, P.: System Identiﬁcation: Parameter and State Estimation, p. 555. Wiley-
Interscience, New York (1974)
10. Eykhoff, P., (ed.): Trends and Progress in System Identiﬁcation, 402 p. Oxford, England,
Pergamon (1981)
11. Graupe, D.: Identiﬁcation of System, p. 302. R.E.Krieger Publ. Company, New York (1976)
12. Isermann, R.: Fault-Diagnosis Systems: An Introduction from Fault Detection to Fault
Tolerance, p. 475. Springer, New York (2006)
13. Costa, B.S.J.: Fuzzy fault detection and diagnosis. In: Handbook on Computational Intelli-
gence, 2 Volumes. Volume 1: Fuzzy Logic, Systems, Artiﬁcal Neural Networks, and Learning
Systems, pp. 251–288. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. (2016)
14. Sapietová, A., Sága, M., Kuric, I., et al.: Application of optimization algorithms for robot
systems designing. Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst. 15(1) (2018)

Monitoring System of Taekwondo Athletes’
Movements: First Insights
Tudor Claudiu Tîrnovan1, Pedro Cunha2(B), Vítor Carvalho3, Filomena Soares2,
Camelia Avram1, and Adina As,tilean1
1 Department of Automation, Faculty of Automation and Computer Science, Technical
University of Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Claudiu.Tirnovan@student.utcluj.ro, {Camelia.Avram,
Adina.Astilean}@aut.utcluj.ro
2 Department Industrial Electronics, Algoritmi Research Centre, Minho University,
Braga, Portugal
id5514@alunos.uminho.pt, fsoares@dei.uminho.pt
3 School of Technology & Algoritmi Research Centre, IPCA & University of Minho,
Braga, Portugal
vcarvalho@ipca.pt
Abstract. Taekwondo practice has been increasing worldwide, however, the
methods of analyzing the performance of the athletes have not evolved in the
same proportion. The evaluation methods used are performed manually, making
the process slow and ineffective. Regarding that, is presented in this paper a sys-
tem able to get the 3-axis acceleration and gyroscope measurements of the Taek-
wondo athlete’s movements from a MPU-6050 sensor via Wi-Fi communication.
The developed WPF Application (Windows application) provides the interface to
add the athlete and training session’s data, and al-lows to view in real time the
session’s values through plots. The data obtained is saved into a SQL database.
The application will be used by Taekwondo trainers to evaluate the performance
of the athlete’s movements in real time in training environment.
Keywords: Taekwondo · Martial arts · Sensor · Accelerometer · Gyroscope ·
Arduino
1
Introduction
In sports the performance of the athlete is a key to obtain better results, whether as a
team or individually.
Taekwondo is an ancestral martial art with more than 1500 years. The movements that
characterize this martial art are head-height kicks, spinning and jumping kicks performed
using the hands and the legs [1]. In Portugal the practice of Taekwondo began with the
Grand Master David Chung Sun Yong [2]. Since then the number of athletes federated in
Taekwondo practice has been increasing, having more than 4500 athletes nowadays [3].
The popularity of Taekwondo practice has also been increasing worldwide, becoming
an Olympic sport in the year 2000 [4].
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 119–128, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_12

120
T. C. Tîrnovan et al.
To evaluate the performance of the athletes is a difﬁcult task for coaches in any
sport. Considering this, over time, with the development of technology, systems have
been developed to assist coaches in evaluating athletes’ performance. With emphasis
on sports with high social impact and ﬁnancial capacity. In Taekwondo despite the
technological development there has been no development of technological tools to aid
the evaluation of the performance of the athletes in training environment. The athlete’s
performance evaluation during the training is currently made manually by the coach.
He/she usually uses on time visual evaluation or videos of the athletes’ training sessions,
time consuming tasks that hinders the quick feedback from the coach to change and adapt
the training process.
The system presented in this paper is part of a project that aims to develop a real-time
prototype to assist the performance of Taekwondo athletes during training sessions. A
windows application allows to visualize and store the athletes training session’s data by
using a mini Wi-Fi board based on ESP-8266 [5] and a triple axis accelerometer and
gyroscope (MPU-6050) [6] to collect and send data to the windows application and a
SQL database to store the data.
This paper is organized in six sections. In the second section, the state of the art is
presented. In the third section, hardware architecture, describes the components used. In
the fourth section, software architecture, details the Windows application, database and
Arduino code. The ﬁfth section presents the scenarios developed. In the sixth section
are enunciated the conclusions and future perspective of work.
2
State of the Art
The evaluation of the performance of athletes in sport has been raising the interest of
the scientiﬁc community, through the development and adaptation of new technologies
that facilitate this process. According to other works, there are already systems that
analyze the performance of athletes in sports as swimming, tennis, cycling or martial arts.
However, there are few available technological tools for assisting Taekwondo trainings.
Wearable devices are valuable instruments for the improvement of sports perfor-
mance. However the existing systems are still limited [7].
In [8] the authors agreed that magneto inertial technology is a reliable tool to improve
athlete’s performance, the training speciﬁcity and to prevent injuries. These sensors
measurements can be used to estimate temporal, dynamic and kinematic parameters.
Smart sensors and sensor fusion allows to study the impact suffered by the athlete. In
[9], the authors demonstrated the use of smart sensors and sensor fusion in biomedical
applications and sports areas, promoting a reﬂection about techniques and applications
to process physical variables associated with the human body. The application can be
used in areas related to rehabilitation, the athlete’s performance development, among
others.
In [10], the authors agreed that the impact signals combined with IMU may be
a reliable way of scoring, whilst heart rate measurement enables monitoring of the
athlete’s physical state. The technique used consists in integrating a “non-invasive”
sensor system into Taekwondo clothes. The impact is measured using pressure sensors,
thin ﬁlm piezo resistive force and accelerometers. The communication between the

Monitoring System of Taekwondo Athletes’ Movements
121
sensor and the computer is based on Bluetooth and it was discovered a limitation of
bandwidth using this transmission protocol.
A system to evaluate the performance of the Taekwondo athletes in real-time, as an
auxiliary of the training sessions, is presented in [11], aiming to provide a faster feedback
process, and contributing to a most effective evolution of the athlete performance. The
system is composed by a 3D camera Orbbec Astra, a computer and a software developed
forthepurpose.The3DcamerathroughthedepthsensorallowstoobtainingtheCartesian
coordinates of several joints of the human body in the real world. The software allows
recording and visualizing the athlete’s personal data as well as the training performance
in real time, through numerical values display and/or graphical proﬁles of movements’
velocity and the coordinates of the athlete’s hands and feet.
3
Hardware Architecture
Taekwondo is a sport of contact and agility in which athletes perform fast and wide
movements. The required hardware should then have low weigh and small dimensions.
Fig. 1. Developed prototype: a); b).
Figure 1 presents the developed prototype it uses a Wi-Fi board with a battery shield
along with an accelerometer and gyroscope, powered by a Lithium-ion Polymer Battery
3.7 V 320 mAh. The total weight of the prototype is 25 g, measuring 60 mm in length
and 40 mm in width.

122
T. C. Tîrnovan et al.
For the processing and transmission of data was chosen the Wemos D1 mini a Wi-Fi
board based on ESP-8266 (Fig. 1a), with 11 digital input/output pins and 1 analog input
[5]. This board is compatible with Arduino, one of the most used boards for research
and development of prototypes. So the development environment (IDE) and code used
to program it was the same used with Arduino.
The sensor chosen to obtain the acceleration and gyroscope data was the GY 521
MPU 6050 (Fig. 1b), which is a three axis gyroscope and acceleration module, with
standard communication IIC. The acceleration range is between ±2 and ±16 g and the
gyroscope range is between +250 to +2000 ˚/s [6].
The system includes a battery shield [12] which allows to choose between powering
the system through a battery or through a USB charger, as well as allowing to charge the
battery when the system is being powered by the USB charger (Fig. 1b). A rechargeable
Lithium-ion Polymer battery was selected (3.7 V, 320 mAh, hose size is 3 × 30 ×
40 mm).
In Fig. 2 presents the Wemos D1 mini Wi-Fi board and the GY 521 MPU 6050
sensor connection diagram. The digitals D1 and D2 pins of Wemos D1 can receive SDA
(the line to send and receive data) and SDL (the line that carries the clock signal) signals
of the sensor. The SDA and SCL are two simple bidirectional wire bus, part of I2C
protocol. In fact, that protocol combines features of UARTs and SPI protocols. Some of
the advantages of transmitting data via I2C are the noise resistance, a long track record
in the ﬁeld, the compatibility with a number of processors with integrated I2C ports and
the ease to emulate in software by any microcontroller.
Fig. 2. Wemos D1 mini Wi-Fi board and the GY 521 MPU 6050 connection diagram.
The data transfer consists in establishing a communication between one master and
one slave, to exchange 8-bit bytes. The others components can use the bus only after the
master release the SDA line and SCL value is high. When SCL value is low, no device
can change its value, except at start and stop bits [13]. The operating voltage supply of

Monitoring System of Taekwondo Athletes’ Movements
123
the sensor is 3.3 V, for that, the VCC pin of the sensor was connected to 3.3 V pin of the
board.
4
Software Architecture
The components of the software architecture are the Arduino code, the developed
Windows application and the SQL database (Fig. 3).
The Windows application creates a user friendly interface which helps the user to
insert new data, to get the sensor readings and to work with the measurements. All data
are saved into a SQL database.
Fig. 3. Software architecture
4.1
Arduino Sketch
The developed code aimed at transmitting the data obtained by the GY 521 MPU 6050
sensor, using the “MPU6050.h” library by ElectronicCats [14] (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. Setting offsets
In order to assure correct reading values from the GY 521 MPU 6050 the calibration
offsets were deﬁned. For that, it was used the Arduino code that returns calibration

124
T. C. Tîrnovan et al.
offsets of the GY 521 MPU 6050, developed by Luis Rodenas [15]. For the calibration
to occur, it is needed to call in the code the initialize() function and setting the
offsets resulted from calibration sketch (Fig. 4). Then the sensor is ready to read the
acceleration and gyroscope values. The acceleration values were converted in g using
Eq. 1.
xAccel = xSensorRead
16384
∗10
(1)
The next step was the establishment of the connection to the Internet via Wi-Fi
and to create the client side using the “ESP8266WiFi.h” library [16]. Once the Wi-
Fi connection is accomplished, the board is trying to connect to server side (windows
application) in order to send the measurements. In the loop function, the application is
trying to verify if there is a connection between the client and the server side. If the result
is false, the application calls client.connect(host,port) in order to connect to
server, where host is the IP address where the windows application is running. Once the
client.connected() returns true, the client will start to send byte by byte strings
as JSON objects with the acceleration and gyroscope data (Fig. 5).
Fig. 5. Data in JSON format
As the server reads the information line by line and the data sent can be received on
more than one line, the JSON string will be between to marks: “!” and “ =”. The marks
are used to notify the server where is the start and the end of the JSON object.
4.2
Windows Application
The Windows application was developed using Visual Studio 2019 IDE. It is a WPF
application (Windows Presentation Foundation). The interface of the Windows applica-
tion has three different scenarios: General, Track Data and Graphic (Fig. 6). The user
can interact with the system mainly in three ways.
One of them is to add the athlete and training session movement data and save both
information, scenario General. Another way is tracking data by selecting the athlete,
identify the movement and begin de training session, reading the MPU 6050 sensor data
and save it into the database, scenario Track Data. The third way is to plot the data from
a chosen athlete training session previously saved in the database, scenario Graphic.
In scenario General, ﬁrst tab in Fig. 7, the user can create a new athlete and/or
movement completing the speciﬁc boxes and pressing the Save button. In this tab, the
user has the possibility to add athletes and movements into database.
The scenario Track Data, the “Track Data” tab in Fig. 7, allows the user to choose
an athlete and a movement, then press the “Start Session” button to the application start

Monitoring System of Taekwondo Athletes’ Movements
125
Fig. 6. WPF application usage scenarios
Fig. 7. WPF application interface (General Tab)
to process the data from the MPU 6050 sensor. The application will accept the request
connection from the ESP-8266 and will start listen the port to receive data via socket.
Once recreated the JSON object, the information followed by the movement id will be
inserted into a SQL database using SQL commands. The session will stop when the user
press Stop Session button. In that moment the server close the connection to ESP-8266.

126
T. C. Tîrnovan et al.
It is important that the sensor should be in working mode and placed on the athlete in
that moment. After the movement is ﬁnished, the user can stop the data processing.
In scenario Graphic, the 3rd tab of Fig. 7, the user can chose an athlete and movement
and to plot the data processed (Fig. 8). It contains two dropdown lists where the user
can choose an athlete and a movement and then plot the data stored in the database. To
plot the data it was used LiveCharts library [17], an open source library, which provides
functions for creating charts. This library allows to plot charts lively using incoming
data updating at every new value.
Fig. 8. Graphical movement data output of the training session
4.3
SQL Database
For a correct storage of the data, a relational database was created in Structured Query
Language (SQL). The SQL database consists in three tables: Athlete, Movement, and
Coordination. The structure can be viewed in Fig. 9.
Athlete table contains ﬁve ﬁelds which cannot be null: “ID”, “Name”, “Age”,
“Weight” and “Team”. Coordinates table contains a datetime ﬁeld, “TimeStamp”, 6
ﬁelds for coordination values, as doubles and one ﬁeld for “IdMovement”, used to ref-
eree to a speciﬁc movement. The Movement table contains “IDmov”, “MovementName
and “IDath”. An athlete can have more movements, a movement can have more athletes
and more coordination data.

Monitoring System of Taekwondo Athletes’ Movements
127
Fig. 9. Database architecture
5
Final Remarks
Taekwondo has been gaining more practitioners in recent years, however the monitoring
of the training techniques have been maintained over time. They are mainly performed
manually because there are few technological tools developed to assist during training.
So, it is of at most importance to develop an economically affordable and non-invasive
tool to assist the practice of Taekwondo in real-time [18].
Following this trend, the system presented was developed to assist the coach in the
evaluation of the athlete performance, through the reading of the 3-axis accelerometer
and gyroscope values of the athlete movement joints. Presenting the collected values in
charts at the end of the training session and by consulting previously recorded sessions.
The system gives a fast feedback of the performance of the athlete, allowing a rapid
correction or adaptation of the training techniques in the sense of more efﬁcient evolution
of the athlete’s performance.
The prototype module includes the Wemos D1 mini Wi-Fi board, the 3-axis
accelerometer and gyroscope MPU 6050, the battery shield and battery, along with
software and a computer with Wi-Fi. The presented system intends to be an affordable
and easy-to-use technological solution.
The prototype was tested in laboratory environment. Next step is to test the system
in training sessions with Taekwondo athletes. This will validate the system in terms of
robustness and efﬁciency for the hardware and data transmission.
In the near future, a larger number of athletes’ movement data will be acquired
in order to create a dataset of standard movements used in Taekwondo to be used in
training deep learning models so that the system can automatically identify and quantify
the movements performed by the athlete during the training session.
Acknowledgment. This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia
within the R&D Units Project Scope: UIDB/00319/2020.
References
1. Kazemi, M., et al.: A proﬁle of olympic taekwondo competitors. J. Sports Sci. Med. 5(CSSI),
114–121 (2006)

128
T. C. Tîrnovan et al.
2. Taekwondo History. http://www.dojangabilio-costa.com/home. Accessed 30 May 2019
3. Federated Practitioners - Statistics – Tables. http://www.idesporto.pt/conteudo.aspx?id=103.
Accessed 30 May 2019
4. About the Federation. http://www.worldtaekwondo.org/about-wt/about-wt/. Accessed 30
May 2019
5. Wemos D1 mini. https://wiki.wemos.cc/products:d1:d1_mini. Accessed 10 Mar 2019
6. Triple Axis Accelerometer & Gyro - MPU-6050. https://components101.com/sensors/mpu
6050-module. Accessed 10 Mar 2019
7. Li, R.T., Kling, S.R., Salata, M.J., Cupp, S.A., Sheehan, J., Voos, J.E.: Wearable performance
devices in sports medicine. Sports Health 8(1), 74–78 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1177/194173
8115616917
8. Camomilla, V., Bergamini, E., Fantozzi, S., Vannozzi, G.: Trends supporting the in-ﬁeld use
of wearable inertial sensors for sport performance evaluation: a systematic review. Sensors
18(3), 873 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3390/s18030873
9. Mendes Jr., J.J.A., Vieira, M.E.M., Pires, M.B., Stevan Jr., S.L.: Sensor fusion and smart
sensor in sports and biomedical applications. Sensors 16(10), 1569 (2016). https://doi.org/
10.3390/s16101569
10. Amaro, B., Antunes, J., Cunha, P., Soares, F., Carvalho, V., Carvalho, H.: Monitoring of
bioelectrical and biomechanical signals in taekwondo training: ﬁrst insights. In: Tavares J.,
Natal Jorge, R. (eds.) VipIMAGE 2017. ECCOMAS 2017. Lecture Notes in Computational
Vision and Biomechanics, vol 27. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
68195-5_46
11. Cunha, P., Carvalho, V., Soares, F.: Development of a real-time evaluation system for top
taekwondo athletes SPERTA. In: SENSORDEVICES 2018, The Ninth International Confer-
ence on Sensor Device Technologies and Applications, pp. 140–145. IARIA, Venice, Italy
(2018)
12. Battery Shield. https://wiki.wemos.cc/products:d1_mini_shields:battery_shield. Accessed 13
Jun 2019
13. I2C Manual. https://www.nxp.com/docs/en/application-note/AN10216.pdf. Accessed 13 Jun
2019
14. MPU6050 Arduino Library. https://github.com/ElectronicCats/mpu6050. Accessed 18 Apr
2019
15. Arduino script for MPU-6050 auto-calibration. https://42bots.com/tutorials/arduino-script-
for-mpu-6050-auto-calibration/. Accessed 18 Apr 2019
16. ESP8266WiFi library. https://arduino-esp8266.readthedocs.io/en/latest/esp8266wiﬁ/readme.
html. Accessed 18 Apr 2019
17. LiveCharts. Link. https://lvcharts.net/App/examples/wpf/start. Accessed 30 Mar 2019
18. Cunha, P., Carvalho, V., Soares, F.: Real-time data movements acquisition of taek-
wondo athletes: First Insights. In: International Conference on Innovation, Engineering and
Entrepreneurship, pp. 251–258. Springer, Cham, June 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-91334-6_35

Performance Evaluation of the BioBall Device
for Wrist Rehabilitation in Adults and Young
Adults
Bárbara Silva1
, Ana Rita Amorim1
, Valdemar Leiras1
, Eurico Seabra1(B)
,
Luís F. Silva1
, Ana Cristina Braga2
, and Rui Viana3
1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, School of Engineering, University of Minho, Campus
of Azurém, Guimarães, Portugal
eseabra@dem.uminho.pt
2 Algoritmi Research Center, School of Engineering, University of Minho, Campus of Azurém,
Guimarães, Portugal
3 Faculty of Health Sciences, Fernando Pessoa University, Porto, Portugal
Abstract. The BioBall device, developed for wrist function rehabilitation, allows
the execution of movements with a greater level of control. A component was
added to make it possible to read the range of motion of the patient’s wrist. Thus,
this project came up intending to evaluate the performance and suitability of the
BioBall device for wrist function rehabilitation. To this end, a technical evalua-
tion was performed in order to verify the consistency and accuracy of BioBall.
Technical tests consisted of amplitude readings taken by the device, either in auto-
matic or manual mode, “Passive Exercise” and “Physical Exercise” respectively.
From the results obtained in this analysis it was concluded that the BioBall device,
besides functioning correctly, can collect the angular data with consistency and it
is suitable to follow the evolution of a patient’s rehabilitation. In order to evaluate
whether the BioBall device performs reproducible and repeatable range of motion
measurements, a test-retest was performed on healthy subjects (with the space of
one week). The maximum amplitude of each wrist movement of the participants
was measured. The results of the statistical analysis showed that, although there
is some variation in the amplitudes obtained between the test and the retest, the
device has good reliability in measuring the range of motion of the wrist.
Keywords: BioBall device · Movement · Rehabilitation · Wrist
1
Introduction
The wrist is a highly complex joint mechanism, associated with a wide range of move-
ments. In addition to providing support and ﬂexibility to manipulate objects, the wrist
allows the execution of tasks whose delicacy and strength vary widely.
In a healthy wrist, three groups of movements can be considered: ﬂexion and
extension (FLEX-EXT), cubital deviation and radial deviation (CD-RD), pronation and
supination (PRO-SUP). The limit range for each type of movement can vary depend-
ing on people’s anthropometric characteristics. The amplitudes that can be expected in
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 129–140, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_13

130
B. Silva et al.
a healthy human vary between 60º–85º for ﬂexion, 50º–80º for extension, 30º–45º for
cubital deviation, 15º–30º for radial deviation, 80º–90º for pronation and 80º–90º for
supination [1, 2]. These amplitude values are usually determined using a goniometer.
Several injuries or pathologies can affect the wrist. These have a high incidence
in adulthood and occur mostly in females, as osteoporosis increases the fragility of
bones, with greater susceptibility to bone fractures. Regarding the younger class, these
disorders are mainly due to sports injuries. The causes of wrist injuries can be diverse,
possibly due to isolated traumatic events, such as fractures and ligament injuries, or to
repetitive activities (overuse injuries). The treatment depends on the state of the disorder
and the anatomical-physiological characteristics of the patients. In most cases, patients
are referred to physiotherapy after treatment [3, 4].
The recovery of the wrist function is essentially based on traditional procedures
with mechanical and rudimentary devices. Although there are some devices that allow
the patient to perform rehabilitation exercises with controlled movements, these do not
always cover all types of wrist movements or are more directed to muscle strengthening.
The BioBall device is an adapted and improved version of the device already on
the market designated PowerBall®. In its development, the format and vibratory char-
acteristics of the PowerBall® for relaxation and proprioception were used, and tools
were added to allow the rehabilitation of the wrist movements. Some changes were also
introduced on the device in order to improve its performance and comfort when using
it.
Thus, this project came up with the objective of testing the BioBall performance. For
this, two types of test were outlined: a technical analysis of the device, in order to verify
the device’s repeatability and accuracy; a ‘test-retest’ using a heterogeneous population,
in order to assess the reliability of the device in measuring the wrist range of motion
(ROM). The results of the two test groups are discussed throughout this article, in view
of some functional aspects of the device that may be improved.
2
The BioBall Rehabilitation Device
The BioBall project had as motivation the fact that PowerBall®, despite being a useful
device for relaxation and proprioception, is not suitable for the rehabilitation of the wrist,
but for a more advanced phase where muscle strengthening exercises are performed. In
this way, the new device maintains the relaxation and proprioception system, having
been adapted to a controlled vibration system. Additionally, includes a mechanism that
allows to reproduce the basic movements of the wrist, both in passive and active mode,
coupled with a support that provides stability and portability to the system.
In this way, the developed device can be divided into two systems, the system for
relaxation and proprioception and the system for wrist rehabilitation. The ﬁnal prototype
of this device, made with elements off the shelf, is shown in Fig. 1.
2.1
Rehabilitation System for Wrist Movements
The objectives of rehabilitation are to restore complete joint movement and functional
capacity in order to provide the patient’s return to their daily activities. The interven-
tions used by physiotherapists to achieve these goals can be classiﬁed as active, when

Performance Evaluation of the BioBall Device
131
the patient is obliged to play an active role in his rehabilitation, or passive, when the
movements are induced in the patient without having to make any effort [5–7].
The rehabilitation system of the device consists of a system that reproduces the
main movements of the wrist, assists its execution (passive rehabilitation) and creates
resistance to them (active rehabilitation). For this, it was necessary to create a support
capable of accommodating all the components and providing stability and portability to
the device. The support, shown in Fig. 1 a) and b), basically consists of three bars, with
rotating joints and without restrictions, where a position adjustment system was placed,
which restricts the rotation of the bars, and a clamp ﬁxation system for the support. At
the top of the support is a box (controller) that contains all the electronic components and
their connections, the necessary entrees, buttons and an LCD. This system also includes
a stepper motor that will impulse the movement of the ball which, due to the eccentric
metal bar with “S” shape attached to the motor shaft, allows to recreate the trajectories
of the basic movements of the wrist. This metal bar has a system that allows the coupling
and decoupling of the ball when necessary.
(a)
(b) 
(c)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(3)
(6)
Fig. 1. Final prototype of the BioBall device: (a) front view of the device; (b) side view of the
device; (c) ball attached to the handle for relaxation and proprioception exercises; (1) - Controller;
(2) - Eccentric bar in “S” shape; (3) - Ball; (4) - Position adjustment bars system; (5) - Support
system of the “clamping clamp” type; (6) - Handle.
Additionally, in order to allow the reading of the ROM of the patients’ wrist and,
consequently, monitor their evolution throughout the rehabilitation programs, a rotatory
encoder was added to the device. The encoder is an electromechanical component that
converts position to digital electrical signal, allowing the measurement of the rotational
movement of a motor. It is usually composed of a disc with markings, a light-emitting
component (LED) and a receiver on the opposite side of the disc, as shown in Fig. 2a).
A 1024 pulse per rotation rotary encoder (Yumo E6B2-CWZ3E) was attached to the
stepper motor shaft, as shown in Fig. 2b). This encoder outputs gray code which can be
interpreted using a microcontroller and ﬁnd out which direction the shaft is turning and
by how much.

132
B. Silva et al.
(a)
(b) 
Fig. 2. Inclusion of an encoder in the system: (a) schematic representation of the optical rotary
encoder operation (Adapted from [8]); (b) connection of the encoder to the stepper motor.
2.2
Relaxation and Proprioception System
Proprioception, associated with sensorimotor control of the joints, is the term that
describes the body’s ability to feel and perceive itself. Trauma can lead to signiﬁcant
injury of the skin, ligament and muscle and can consequently interrupt the generation
and transmission of appropriate proprioceptive stimuli [5]. A proprioceptive element is
important in any rehabilitation program because it restores proprioceptive sensitivity and
improves the functioning of the joint, reducing the risk of new injuries. Rehabilitation
methods that use vibration and tactile stimulation of the skin and muscle-tendon recep-
tors in the wrist are an important basis and have shown positive results in the sensory
re-education process [9, 10].
In this way, a relaxation and proprioception system was integrated into the device.
This system consists of a ball in which a vibration system is incorporated. It helps muscle
relaxation and, at the same time, works as an instrument of controllable proprioception
from which it is possible to extract data on the evolution of the patient’s recovery. For
this purpose, an outrunner brushless motor (Brushless outrunner motor A28L 920 kV) is
integrated inside the ball, which allows to obtain controllable speeds. An eccentric was
added to the axis of this motor, which creates an imbalance during its operation, causing
the vibration of the ball. Due to the high characteristic speeds of the selected DC motor
and the coupling of the eccentric weight on its axis, it is possible to reach vibrations in
the order of 150 Hz. The ball also allows the assembly of a handle in order to be handled
by the therapist (Fig. 1c).
2.3
Operation Modes
The support structure developed allows the execution of different positions by adjusting
the bar system. In this way, besides allowing the simulation of all wrist movements, it is
also adjustable to different patients, allowing a comfortable use of the device. As shown
in Fig. 3a), it is possible to vary, for example, the height of the device up to about 70 mm.
The upper bar of the support also has some degrees of freedom, with the possibility of
placing the device vertically, horizontally or with some inclination, allowing a proper
use by the patient, Fig. 3b).
With the ball coupled to the eccentric bar, which in turn is coupled to the motor
shaft, it is possible to reproduce the movements of FLEX-EXT and CD-RD by grabbing

Performance Evaluation of the BioBall Device
133
(a)
(b) 
170 mm
100 mm
90º
0º
Fig. 3. Device adjustment mechanism that allows comfortable use by different patients: (a)
variation in the height of the device; (b) variation in the inclination of the device.
the ball as shown in Fig. 4a) and b), respectively. Due to the nature of the PRO-SUP
movements, the ball must be coupled directly to the motor shaft, without the need to use
the eccentric bar. In this case, the device must be placed horizontally, and the ball must
be grabbed as shown in Fig. 4c), where the angle between the arm and the forearm is
90º.
Fig. 4. Positioning of the device, forearm and hand of the patient in the different rehabilitation
movements: a) FLEX-EXT movement; b) CD-RD movement; c) PRO-SUP movement.
2.4
Developed Programs
Four rehabilitation programs were developed in order to reproduce wrist movements
as much as possible and to observe the evolution of patients. These programs were
designated by: “Passive Exercise”, “Active Exercise”, “Physical Exercise” and “Mixed
Exercise”.
In the “Passive Exercise” two limit angles are deﬁned for the amplitude of the desired
movement (A1 in the anticlockwise rotation and A2 in the clockwise rotation) and a
relative rotation speed for this movement, on a scale from 1 to 100. In this exercise, the
device moves the ball, while the patient grabs it, helping him to perform the exercises
without having to make any effort. In the “Active Exercise” a relative rotation speed
is selected on a scale of 1 to 10 and the patient, grabbing the ball, has to create some
resistance to the movement generated by the motor, thus exercising the muscles of the
hand, wrist and forearm. The “Physical Exercise” program consists only of grabbing the
ball and performing the movements freely to observe the maximum amplitude reached by

134
B. Silva et al.
each patient. To reconcile the advantages of rehabilitation exercises with proprioception
exercises in the same program, a program designed “Mixed Exercise” was developed.
In this program, it is possible to select the limit angles A1 and A2, the relative rotation
speed and the vibration frequency of the ball. The operating mode is equal to the “Passive
Exercise”, but with the addition of vibration.
Aprogramforrelaxationandproprioceptionwasalsodeveloped,involvingvibration.
This program allows the selection of the vibration frequency between 0 and 150 Hz.
While the patient grabs the ball and moves it as far as possible or to the required point,
the physiotherapist can increase or decrease the frequency of the ball vibration. This
program can also be used to perform exercises freely, instructed by the physiotherapist,
since it is possible to decouple the ball, obtaining greater freedom of handling. It also
serves to relieve pain areas and, with the assembly of a handle, the effect for massage is
also achieved.
3
Technical Analysis of the Device: Methodology and Tests
In order to calibrate and technically evaluate the suitability of the device, a series of
tests were carried out to understand whether it works correctly, assessing its consistency
and accuracy. Only two BioBall programs were used: “Physical Exercise” and “Passive
Exercise” and geometric angle markings were made with a protractor.
3.1
“Passive Exercise” Test
Using the “Passive Exercise” program, an angular value was attributed to the device (A1
+ A2) and a rotation speed, and the ball was expected to reach that angle. The angular
values introduced were A1 = 0º and A2 = 90º, which corresponds to an angular range
A1 + A2 = 90º. Since for high speeds the device presents more instability, the tests
were performed only for a low rotation speed (relative speed of 3/100). For the angular
interval inserted, the test was performed 5 times, for 5 min, in order to obtain an average
value.
The values obtained (by the reading of the encoder) over this time were recorded in
a program speciﬁcally developed for this purpose. Through a geometric analysis of the
trajectory, it was intended to understand if the device was measuring the angular value
correctly, that is, if the angular value of the trajectory obtained geometrically coincided
with the angular interval initially introduced in the device. This geometric analysis
consisted of using a pencil attached to the eccentric bar, which, due to the movement of
the bar, marked the angular value on a millimeter paper.
To evaluate the performance of the encoder with the motor running, it was calculated
the average values read by the encoder and it was recorded the maximum and minimum
values obtained for the inserted angular interval. The standard deviation (SD) of the read
values was determined to verify the dispersion of the measurements around the mean.
3.2
“Physical Exercise” Test
This test consisted of deﬁning angular values that were marked geometrically on a
millimeter paper, rotating the eccentric bar from a reference point to the desired angle.

Performance Evaluation of the BioBall Device
135
The same angular values were marked in different zones (zones 1, 2, 3 and 4, represented
in Fig. 5) of the area where it is possible to move the bar without the ball colliding with
the support structure of the device.
Ball
Support structure
Fig. 5. Schematic representation of the range of motion of the bar. Zones 1, 2, 3 and 4 deﬁned for
the tests are represented in yellow, green, orange and blue, respectively. The angles were recorded
in the direction shown by the colored arrows.
In this way, it was intended to determine whether the device measures angles with
the same precision over its entire angular amplitude. For each angle, the procedure was
repeated 5 times. In order to evaluate the encoder reading accuracy and its sensitivity
when the motor is not running, the average values and the SD of the readings obtained
in the different zones were also calculated.
3.3
Results
Regarding the “Passive Exercise” test, the statistical results are shown in Table 1. It
was observed that the geometric measure of the trajectory coincided with the angular
interval (A1 + A2) that was introduced in the device. The mean of the angular amplitude
readings (86.89º) after 5 repetitions was a bit different from the inserted angular interval,
with a maximum of 93.03º and a minimum of 79.81º. The SD was calculated from the
read values for the 5 repetitions and it was obtained an average value of 2.99º.
Table 1. Experimental results of the angular trajectory in the “Passive Exercise” program for the
relative speed of 3/100
A1 (º)
A2 (º)
Geometric (º)
Mean (º)
Maximum (º)
Minimum (º)
SD (º)
0
90
90
86.89
93.03
79.81
2.99
The results of encoder readings obtained in the test using the “Physical Exercise”
program are shown in Table 2. It is possible to observe the average values obtained for
each angle in different zones of range of motion of the bar, the global mean of the four
zones, as well as the SD of those values.

136
B. Silva et al.
Table 2. Experimental results obtained in the “Physical Exercise” program for the different zones
of movement of the bar (the cells ﬁlled with ‘-’ correspond to areas where this amplitude was not
performed due to the support structure of the device)
Angle (º)
Zone 1 (º)
Zone 2 (º)
Zone 3 (º)
Zone 4 (º)
Global mean (º)
SD (º)
0
0.39
0.07
0.07
0.28
0.20
0.16
5
5.41
5.27
5.27
5.13
5.27
0.11
10
10.48
10.44
10.12
9.49
10.13
0.46
15
15.05
15.96
16.10
14.34
15.36
0.83
30
30.06
30.20
30.34
29.14
29.94
0.54
45
45.07
45.74
44.86
-
45.22
0.46
60
-
60.22
59.48
-
59.85
0.52
75
-
76.39
75.02
-
75.71
0.97
90
-
91.44
89.51
-
90.47
1.37
3.4
Discussion
The “Passive Exercise” test had as main objective to verify if the angular value of
the trajectory obtained geometrically was coinciding with the angular interval initially
inserted in the device. The results obtained showed that the geometric value of the
amplitude obtained was practically equal to the value of the amplitude inserted in the
device, which means that it is possible to perform rehabilitation exercises without any
angular deviations that can be harmful to the patient.
On the other hand, the average of the readings obtained by the encoder during this
test deviates a little from the value inserted in the device. These differences may be due
to an insufﬁcient acquisition rate in the reading of the encoder signal, or, possibly, to
mechanical vibrations induced by the movement of the bar. However, these differences
are not relevant for the performance of exercises with the “Passive Exercise” program,
as reading ROM is not a fundamental aspect in these exercises.
Through the “Physical Exercise” test, the consistency of the reading was veriﬁed
and maintained throughout the angular range of the device. The average values obtained
for each angle showed a certain variation in the different zones of movement of the bar,
however, this variation is not signiﬁcant for the type of exercises to be performed. The
results showed that repeatable measurements of an angle can be obtained for the total
angular range of the device.
The variation of the readings recorded during the tests can be related to several
factors, from the types of components used, as well as to its operational form. In general,
this variation in readings is within previously reported ranges based on goniometer
measurements. Goniometry results in quite high variations between observers, with SD
varying between 3º and 10º, and intra-observer variations between 1º and 3º [11].
The BioBall device has proven to be a useful in controlling a deﬁned angular value
and it can obtain reliable measurements based on angular conﬁgurations introduced.

Performance Evaluation of the BioBall Device
137
4
Reliability Analysis: Test-Retest
A measuring device must be reproducible and there must be repeatability in its mea-
surements. In the case of the BioBall device, these two properties must be tested to see
if the measurement component, achieved by incorporating an encoder, presents reliable
measurements of the ROM of the patients.
A test-retest in healthy subjects was deﬁned, in order to assess the reliability of the
device. This chapter discusses the methodology adopted during the test-retest, all data
treatment and statistical analysis carried out, the results obtained and their discussion.
4.1
Test-Retest Methodology
To perform this test, a sample was selected through a questionnaire and a test procedure
was outlined for that sample. The results were statistically analyzed using the Microsoft
Excel and the Statistical Package For Social Sciences (SPSS) programs.
Sample
The participants were selected through a questionnaire where information such as age,
weight, height, dominant hand, occupation, among other aspects were collected. The
sample consists of 61 healthy volunteers (27 males and 34 females), adults and young
adults, aged between 18 and 35 years. Subjects who recently had injuries in the wrist,
hands and ﬁngers, who underwent surgery or suffered neuromuscular dysfunction were
excluded from the study. Also, individuals who experienced pain while using the device
or who were undergoing physical therapy during the time of the study were left out.
Procedure
The volunteers were initially informed about the procedures, postures and movements
that would be required during the data acquisition process. Each selected participant was
present in two sessions. The retest time was carried out 1 week later. In each session the
individuals performed the FLEX-EXT, CD-RD and PRO-SUP movements of the wrist
for the “Physical Exercise” program and the maximum amplitudes of each movement
were recorded. All movements were repeated 3 times.
Statistical Analysis
A descriptive analysis was performed on the data with arithmetic mean and standard
error of the mean (SEM) of the test and retest. In order to assess the stability of the
means between the two sessions, a Student’s T-test was performed for paired samples
for each of the movements. To complement the results, reliability was determined by
analyzingthetwo-wayvariance(two-wayANOVA)fromwhichtheintraclasscorrelation
coefﬁcient (ICC) was obtained and respective 95% conﬁdence intervals (CI). Values of
ICC below 0.5 indicate low reliability, values between 0.5 and 0.75 indicate moderate
reliability, values between 0.75 and 0.9 indicate good reliability and values greater than
0.90 indicate excellent reliability [12].

138
B. Silva et al.
Table 3. Results obtained in the test-retest analysis: mean of the maximum amplitudes obtained
in the test and in the retest and SEM; ICC and IC obtained by the analysis between test and retest
Movement
Mean (º)
SEM (º)
ICC (95% CI)
Flexion
Test
104.46
1.89
0.799
(0.663–0.880)
Retest
102.41
2.30
Extension
Test
46.76
1.21
0.803
(0.671–0.883)
Retest
48.68
1.35
Cubital Deviation
Test
40.68
1.64
0.836
(0.726–0.902)
Retest
44.06
1.64
Radial Deviation
Test
31.37
1.15
0.854
(0.755–0.913)
Retest
35.18
1.32
Pronation
Test
97.46
2.29
0.756
(0.592–0.854)
Retest
95.85
2.17
Supination
Test
99.78
2.06
0.806
(0.675–0.884)
Retest
103.13
2.48
4.2
Results
The mean of the maximum amplitude obtained for each type of wrist movement in the
test and retest and respective SEM are shown in Table 3.
The T-test showed that there are signiﬁcant differences between the means of the
test and the retest for cubital and radial deviation. There were no statistically signiﬁcant
differences between the means of the test and the retest of other wrist movements.
Still in relation to Table 3, it is also possible to observe the ICC and respective CI for
each movement. The analysis of ICC values showed that the correlation between the test
and the retest and, consequently, the repeatability of the device, is in average good. The
analysis of the CI demonstrated that the correlation can vary from moderate to good,
such as the ﬂexion movement 0.799 (0.663–0.880), and from good to excellent, as in
the case of the radial deviation 0.854 (0.755–0.913).
4.3
Discussion
Analyzing the average amplitude values obtained for each movement, it was found that
there is a signiﬁcant difference in the average amplitude of the FLEX-EXT movements
when compared to the expected values presented in Sect. 1, normally determined by the
goniometer. This difference was expected because the amplitude reading of the FLEX-
EXT with the BioBall device presents a reference position different from the position
using the goniometer. Trying to quantify this difference, calculations were made using
AutoCAD software in which the average dimensions of an adult’s hand, the dimensions
of the ball and the eccentric bar were used. With this approximation, it was found
that the difference between the two measurement methods is about 24º, which means

Performance Evaluation of the BioBall Device
139
that, if approximately 24º are subtracted to the average ﬂexion value, it is obtained an
average ﬂexion within the expected values in a healthy individual (between 60º and
85º). On the other hand, if the average extension value is added approximately 24º,
an average extension is obtained within the expected values (between 50º and 80º).
Thus, it was veriﬁed that the device is suitable for measuring the amplitude of FLEX-
EXT movements. Differences were also found in the mean values obtained for the
movements of radial deviation, pronation and supination in relation to the expected
values (15º to 30º and 80º to 90º, respectively). These differences can be justiﬁed by the
difﬁculty in isolating the movements and, in the case of PRO-SUP, there may have been
a compensation for rotation of the ﬁngers when grabbing the ball.
Regarding the SEM obtained by the device for the different movements, it was found
that the highest SEM value obtained was around 2.48º. This error, compared to maximum
values of SEM obtained with a universal goniometer in other studies (about 4.65º) [13],
is lower, which shows that the device has greater precision in measuring amplitudes than
a universal goniometer.
The results of the t-test showed that there were no signiﬁcant differences between
the teste and retest means, except for the cubital and radial deviations. These differences
can be justiﬁed by the fact that it is difﬁcult to guarantee that the subjects perform
movement compensation. Thus, in the case of cubital deviation the subjects could also
have performed ﬂexion of the wrist and extension, in the radial deviation.
The ICC values obtained for the reliability of the active ROM measurement were
high,indicatingagoodreliabilityforallmovements.Thelowerreliabilityvaluesobtained
inthepresentstudycanbeattributedtothedifﬁcultyofhandlingthedevice,whichmadeit
difﬁcult to identify the anatomical reference points, making it susceptible to the existence
of differences in the subject’s forearm position in each test. Also, the strength applied
and the characteristics of the participants, such as skin ﬂexibility and bone structure, fat
and muscles, may have contributed to the variations in measurements.
Despite the difﬁculties and limitations, the obtained reliability values showed that
there is a good reliability of the device when performing the movements. The errors
obtained were not signiﬁcant. Thus, it was possible to verify the repeatability of the
device in the measurement of the patients’ ROM, which is a great tool to assess the
evolution of patients during the rehabilitation sessions.
5
Conclusions
This device can join two major aspects of rehabilitation: restoring joint movement
and proprioception, with the aim of restoring the injured limb’s functional capacity.
It combines several functionalities observed in different equipment and rehabilitation
techniques in just one device and has a support that provides portability, stability and
suitability for use.
Tests carried out to check the accuracy, repeatability and consistency of the BioBall
deviceshowedpositiveresults,allowingtoconcludethatthisdeviceisworkingaccording
to planned and that it can be a useful device for controlling deﬁned angular amplitude,
as well as to measure random amplitudes.
The ICC values obtained showed that BioBall is a reliable device for measuring wrist
movements, making it a good tool for assessing the evolution of patients’ rehabilitation.

140
B. Silva et al.
It was possible to validate and improve the idea of a low-cost wrist rehabilitation
device that adds several functionalities, standing out from all the existing equipment
on the market. However, in order to validate the device for the intended purpose and
to conclude about its effectiveness in rehabilitation, a pilot test should be performed
using patients with some type of wrist injury to observe if the BioBall contributes to the
improvement of the patient’s condition.
Acknowledgements. This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e
Tecnologia within the R&D Units Project Scope: UIDP/04077/2020.
References
1. Pina, J.A.E.: Anatomia Humana da Locomoção. 5th edn. Lidel- Edições Técnicas, Lda.,
Lisboa (2014)
2. Akdo˘gan, E., Aktana, M.E., Korua, A.T., Arslana, M.S., Atlıhana, M., Kuran, B.: Hybrid
impedance control of a robot manipulator for wrist and forearm rehabilitation: performance
analysis and clinical results. Mechatronics 49, 77–91 (2018)
3. Llopis, E., Restrepo, R., Kassarjian, A., Cerezal, L.: Overuse injuries of the wrist. Radiol.
Clin. North Am. 57(5), 957–976 (2019)
4. Cooney, W.P.: The Wrist: Diagnosis and Operative Treatment, 2nd edn. Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins (2010)
5. Hagert, E.: Proprioception of the wrist joint: a review of current concepts and possible
implications on the rehabilitation of the wrist. J. hand 23(1), 2–17 (2010)
6. Bruder, A.M., Taylor, N.F., Dodd, K.J., Shields, N.: Physiotherapy intervention practice
patterns used in rehabilitation after distal radial fracture. Physiotherapy 99(3), 233–240 (2013)
7. Karagiannopoulos,C.,Michlovitz,S.:Rehabilitationstrategiesforwristsensori-motorcontrol
impairment: from theory to practice. J. Hand Ther. 22(2), 154–165 (2016)
8. Logicbus: Encoders. https://www.logicbus.com.mx/info_encoders.php. Accessed 23 Aug
2019
9. Cuppone, A.V., Squeri, V., Semprini, M., Masia, L., Konczak, J.: Robot-assisted propri-
oceptive training with added vibro-tactile feedback enhances somatosensory and motor
performance. PLoS ONE 11(10), e0164511 (2016)
10. Frank Rauch, M.D.: Vibration therapy. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 51(4), 116–168 (2009)
11. Hogeweg, J., Langereis, M., Bernards, A., Faber, J., Helders, P.: Goniometry-variability in the
clinical practice of a conventional goniometer in healthy subjects. Eur. J. Phys. Med. Rehabil.
4(1), 2–7 (1994)
12. Koo, T.K., Li, M.Y.: A guideline of selecting and reporting intraclass correlation coefﬁcients
for reliability research. J. Chiropr. Med. 15(2), 155–163 (2016)
13. Santos, C.M., Ferreira, G., Malacco, P.L., Sabino, G.S., Moraes, G.F.S., Felício, D.C.: Intra
and inter examiner reliability and measurement error of goniometer and digital inclinometer
use. Locomotor Apparatus Exerc. Sports 18(1), 38–41 (2012)

Smart Packages Tracking System
Camelia Avram(B), Mihai Modoranu, Dan Radu, and Adina A¸stilean
Technical University of Cluj Napoca, Cluj Napoca, Romania
camelia.avram@aut.utcluj.ro
Abstract. The paper presents the design and implementation of a system for
tracking and identifying the packages sent by couriers, using various technologies
such as GPS, GSM or RFID. The system structure is composed of a hardware
and a software part. The two main objectives of this application are the tracking
of the packages sent by courier, along with the generation of cost-efﬁcient routes
from the source to the destination. The application server, which handles the
provision and management of information, has a layered architecture to increase
the scalability of the application. Another feature of the system is the possibility of
the customers to choose the most convenient transport variant from those exhibited
by the Martins algorithm, based on the information about the storage centers
present in the application and the connections between them. This feature makes
the services personalized according to the client’s needs, giving them value, which
will return back through more orders and thanks.
Keywords: Cyber-physical Systems · Internet of Things · Mechatronic devices ·
Smart tracking
1
Introduction
The ﬁeld of logistical services records continuous growth every year, having turnover of
aroundbillionsofeuros.Amongthecausesofthisincreasearetheeconomicdevelopment
and progress of electronic commerce. The courier services have become part of the life
of each of us, and their importance is given by the necessity of the transport of goods.
Whether we are talking about business or personal, there will always be a time when an
object will have to be transported between two locations. Despite the importance and
growth of the domain, the number of dissatisﬁed customers also increased.
In case a package is delayed or lost, the only information the companies know is
the details of the parcel and the history of the storage centers through which it passed.
Considering the number of machines that carry parcels, this granulation of the locations
through which a parcel has passed is a real problem when a parcel must be located. The
system presented in this paper is intended to be an efﬁcient solution that reduces the
number of lost packages and complaints, while increasing the conﬁdence of customers
in the companies that offer courier services.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 141–153, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_14

142
C. Avram et al.
2
State of the Art
The current concept of IoT refers to the use of Internet to interconnect in a system smart
devices, automated systems, user applications and services, integrating different tech-
nologies [1]. The development of the telecommunications domain has allowed end users
to utilize the last new technologies to interconnect IoT devices. Common IoT wireless
communication technologies include Bluetooth, WiFi, ZigBee, NFC, LoRaWAN and
RFID [2, 3]. By interconnecting smart objects of different kinds, intelligent solutions
can be created for a large part of the annoyances encountered in today’s society [4].
Some of the applications for which IoT has come up with robust solutions are in
a strong connection with the wireless communications, with localization and object
identiﬁcation. Therefore, the Global Positioning System (GPS), the GSM system and
services or the radio-frequency identiﬁcation (RFID) technology, are more and more
used in a variety of initiatives aiming to offer solutions to today’s limitations [5]. With
the advent of 5G technology, more devices will be able to connect to a single network
[6], and the security of the applications will become a major challenge in this area. The
authors of the research presented in [7], propose a series of technologies that should be
used to secure the IoT systems and classiﬁes them according to the ﬁeld of use.
In articles [8–11] the authors propose several systems in which the mobile phone
is seen as a tool for managing logistics information. As basic module, a GPS device,
connected by Bluetooth technology to a mobile terminal, is used.
Other important category of applications refers to the items identiﬁcation. For this
purpose, one of the ﬁrst product identiﬁcation methods was that based on the bar codes.
The main disadvantage of their utilization is the necessity to position the reader next to
the code for scanning purposes. This is uncomfortable for large objects. A solution to
eliminate the disadvantage could be the usage of radio-frequency identiﬁcation method.
The work presented in [12] describes such a system that would replace the bar codes used
for packages sent by courier, a similar solution being proposed in [13]. Also, the authors
describe a method of self-registering packages both when they pass through a storage
center and when they arrive at their destination. In the case of giant cargo containers,
[14], the use of RFID tags is by far superior to the use of bar codes. In [15], a machine
tracking system based on RFID tags is proposed, another interesting way of locating
vehicles being the using of RFID technology instead of GPS for vehicle tracking, [16].
The purpose of the system designed in [15] is to reduce the times when a trafﬁc accident
is detected by using RFID technology, video cameras and a network with an SDN-like
architecture.
GPS, GSM and RFID, used separately, can solve many real and interesting problems,
but if used together, they will be able to solve more complex problems by offering robust
and comprehensive solutions. Complete tracking and identiﬁcation solutions for supply
chains are described in [17], for the determination of the best route to follow in [18, 19]
or for monitoring [20–24] and transport security, in [25–33].
All the above proposed and implemented solutions demonstrate the utility of the
new integrated concepts and technologies in a variety of applications. Moreover, with the
increasing awareness of the Internet of Things concept, the number of ideas implemented
in the logistics systems has signiﬁcantly increased.

Smart Packages Tracking System
143
3
Package tracking system
The two main objectives of this application are the tracking of the packages sent by
courier, along with the generation of cost-efﬁcient routes from the source to the destina-
tion. Some of the most important functionalities of the application together with a brief
description of the implementation are given below.
The system allows three types of users: the courier (who runs the car), the adminis-
trator, and the client. Couriers and customers can create their own accounts by accessing
the registration page. One or more cars can be assigned to the courier account (operation
done from the administrator account). Once accessing the site, the customer can select
one of his packages and view either all the locations or only the last recorded location.
The user has a page with all the storage centers of the courier company and another
page where he can see a list of all his packages together with the related details, such as
description, recipient, RFID code, destination address, and so on. The package record
is controlled by the courier, who has three available buttons, with which he can change
the system states. The three possible actions are: adding parcel, extracting parcel and
conﬁrming action. Each button has a LED attached indicating the intermediate point in
which the system is located. If the add button is pressed, the LED corresponding to this
button will be lit, and each packet passed through the RFID reader will be marked as
added to the machine. After scanning all the packages that are added to the machine, the
conﬁrm button have to be pressed again. This action will launch the process of updating
the information in the data-base. The same steps are similar in the case of extracting the
packages from the car. Concurrently with the actions presented above, at a preset time,
one of the scripts running on the development board transmits the location provided by
the GPS module to the server.
To meet these requirements the system structure, composed of a hardware and soft-
ware part, was designed as follows. The software part consists of a server, a database
and a web application. The hardware component afﬁxed to the courier machine has the
roles of monitoring the location of the machine and keeping track of packages entering
or leaving the car. This part of the system consists of several components: Raspberry Pi
development board, GPS mode, GSM mode, RFID reader, three but-tons, three LEDs
and a buzzer. The scripts running on the Raspberry Pi board are written in Python
programming language.
The software part of the system deals with the storage of data provided by the hard-
ware module and the interaction with the users. The components of the software module
are the server, the database and the web application.
The server is built using Java programming language along with the Spring frame-
work and deals with the ﬂow and correctness of the data in the application. It exposes
a number of REST endpoints, which the other modules can call to receive, send, delete
and update information. The server is secured, meeting the speciﬁc needs.
Data storage is done in a non-relational database. Unlike a relational database,
in which data is represented as tables with rows and columns, in the non-relational
database, data is symbolized as JavaScript Object Notation (JSON). Choosing this solu-
tion the number of tables required for the application was reduced and some queries
were streamlined.

144
C. Avram et al.
The web application is built using the Angular framework and provides a series of
graphical interfaces to interact with the system. Each user’s action is reﬂected as a series
of calls made by the web application on the server. In order to access some of the pages
of the web application, the user must be authenticated with an account that has one of
the administrator or client roles. The pages that can be accessed with-out creating an
account in advance are those that allow to verify the location of a package using the RFID
identiﬁcation code, the page for viewing the storage centers and their locations, the page
for registration and the one for authentication. If the user try to access another page,
other than those listed above, without being authenticated with an account containing
the necessary rights, the user will be redirected to the authentication page.
The courier account is stored on the Raspberry Pi card, in the source code. Therefore,
every call to the server initiated by the hardware module located on the car must contain
the driver authentication data in order to be accepted. All communications are encrypted.
Of all those who can beneﬁt from the web application, the user with administrator
rights has the most privileges. The only account with administrator role is created at
the ﬁrst running of the server. Administrator account assignments include viewing the
locations of any package, regardless of the sender, adding new packages in the system
and choosing a route from those offered by the routing algorithm, viewing company
cars along with the packages contained, viewing, adding and shipping centers or the
establishment and modiﬁcation of costs between storage centers.
A graph based representation was used to generate possible routes between source
and destination. The algorithm chosen to generate the most efﬁcient routes between
the source storage center and the destination is Martins algorithm, implemented on a
non-oriented graph. In this graph, the nodes represent the storage centers of the courier
company and the arcs correspond to the physical roads between centers. Three costs
were considered for each arc, to be minimized: the distance, the travel time and the cost
price.
4
System Architecture
The main objective of the package tracking system is to provide a robust solution for
tracking packages sent by courier. The system provides a hardware module, which can
be mounted on the courier machine, which will continuously transmit the location to the
server. Some of the advantages offered by this type of application is the information and
the conﬁdence offered to the customers, along with the possibility of quickly identifying
and correcting the errors that may appear during the transport. Identifying the packages
handled by the driver of the courier vehicle, offers yet another dimension of the data
used by the application, which makes the system more robust.

Smart Packages Tracking System
145
In Fig. 1 the system architecture is presented.
Fig. 1. The high level architecture of the tracking system
4.1
Hardware Architecture
The hardware component of the system, which is located in the courier machine, has the
role of monitoring the location of the machine and keeping track of packages entering or
leaving the car. The architecture of this component is shown in Fig. 2 and is composed of
the Raspberry Pi development board, GPS module, GSM module, RFID reader, buzzer,
buttons, LEDs and their connections. As can be seen in the architectural diagram, the
development board is the command center that communicates with each component in
order to respect the rules after which this system works.
Some of the pins provided by the Raspberry Pi board are general purpose input/output
pins (GPIO pins). Some of the remaining pins are reserved for more complex commu-
nication interfaces, such as SPI, UART, I2C, and the rest of the pins are either power
supply and output 3.3 V or 5 V, or are ground pins.
The pins to which the buttons are connected are set as input pins, and those for
led and buzzers are set as output pins. This indicates the low complexity of the control
mode, which is achieved either by changing the value of a digital output, or by setting
an interrupt on an input pin. The other utilized modules communicate by synchro-nous
serial interface (SPI) and asynchronous serial interface (UART). The GPS and the GSM
modules are integrated on the same board, the communication being realized through
UART. This component also contains two individual antennas for the two modules.
Compared to the GPS/GSM module, the RFID card reader co-communicates via SPI,
being connected to the Raspberry Pi development board.

146
C. Avram et al.
Fig. 2. The hardware architecture
4.2
Software Architecture
The application server, which handles the provision and management of information,
has a layered architecture. This type of architecture offers high decoupling between
modules, which increases the scalability of the application. In Fig. 3 is represented the
corresponding structure of the server, having a presentation level, a logic level and a data
level. Each level has access only to its lower level, to which it can request or provide
data. The data exchange is made by the references of the lower level elements, contained
by the upper level elements.
The presentation level situated at the top of this hierarchy exposes a number of
terminal nodes where requests can be sent to provide or write data. The two clients
accessing this level are the web client, represented by the web application and the client
represented by the hardware module.
Each of the four controllers that make up the ﬁrst level of the server has separate
tasks depending on its ﬁeld of activity. The UserController handles authentication and
account creation requests. It also provides information about the users of the application.
The logic level is it divided into: manager level and services level. For a strong
decoupling, the services and controllers should not access more than one element from
the next level. As some desired actions of controllers may require information that would
involve more services, it is necessary to add the sub-level managers. This sub-level does
not affect the proposed architecture at all, but on the contrary, it offers scalability and
better visualization of the data ﬂows in the application.
A special service is the one called MartinsPlanner, which deals with generating the
most efﬁcient routes between two storage centers. When called, it collects all the data
about the storage centers in the database, creating a non-oriented graph from them.
Routes are found by applying the Martins algorithm to the graph created previously.
The data level consists of the database, where the information and the Reposito-
ries layer are stored. This layer contains four interfaces that are useful for creating
Java objects, mapping information from the database to the previously provided data
model. Through this mapping method, provided by Spring and MongoDB, queries for
the database no longer need to be created, but only to deﬁne the methods corresponding
to the queries from the four interfaces.
Requests to the server are made using the HTTP protocol, and the responses will be
sent as JSON and will be mapped to the classes of models speciﬁed in the application.

Smart Packages Tracking System
147
The data model used to build the system is an important part of the implementation
becauseitdescribeshowinformationﬂowsthroughtheapplication.Atthesametime,this
model offers an abstraction of the elements used in the system reality, making possible the
use of speciﬁc algorithms with the role of solving problems digitally. Without a well-
established model, the data ﬂow would either be simplistic, which would be limited
to primitive types, or would be an uncontrolled amalgam of data types, which would
damage the application if it were to be scaled.
Fig. 3. The software architecture of the server
Each of the four controllers that make up the ﬁrst level of the server has separate
tasks depending on its ﬁeld of activity. The UserController handles authentication and
account creation requests. It also provides information about the users of the application.
The logic level is it divided into: manager level and services level. For a strong
decoupling, the services and controllers should not access more than one element from
the next level. As some desired actions of controllers may require information that would
involve more services, it is necessary to add the sub-level managers. This sub-level does
not affect the proposed architecture at all, but on the contrary, it offers scalability and
better visualization of the data ﬂows in the application.

148
C. Avram et al.
A special service is the one called MartinsPlanner, which deals with generating the
most efﬁcient routes between two storage centers. When called, it collects all the data
about the storage centers in the database, creating a non-oriented graph from them.
Routes are found by applying the Martins algorithm to the graph created previously.
The data level consists of the database, where the information and the Reposito-
ries layer are stored. This layer contains four interfaces that are useful for creating
Java objects, mapping information from the database to the previously provided data
model. Through this mapping method, provided by Spring and MongoDB, queries for
the database no longer need to be created, but only to deﬁne the methods corresponding
to the queries from the four interfaces.
Requests to the server are made using the HTTP protocol, and the responses will be
sent as JSON and will be mapped to the classes of models speciﬁed in the application.
The data model used to build the system is an important part of the implementation
becauseitdescribeshowinformationﬂowsthroughtheapplication.Atthesametime,this
model offers an abstraction of the elements used in the system reality, making possible the
use of speciﬁc algorithms with the role of solving problems digitally. Without a well-
established model, the data ﬂow would either be simplistic, which would be limited
to primitive types, or would be an uncontrolled amalgam of data types, which would
damage the application if it were to be scaled.
5
Implementation
Two scripts written in Python programming language run on the Raspberry Pi develop-
ment board. The ﬁrst script interacts with the SIM808 GPS/GSM module, from which it
obtains the location that is transmitted to the server, and the other deals with the operat-
ing logic of the RFID card reader and the buttons made available to the courier. For the
two scripts to work properly it is necessary that the hardware elements to be properly
connected to the development board. The forty pins on the board were used to connect
the hardware to the Raspberry Pi. Also, both simple input pins and pins that support
more complex communication protocols have been used.
GPS/GSM Module
The GPS/GSM module uses the UART protocol and connects to the UART0 interface of
the development board. In Table 1 are presented the pins used to interface the SIM808
module.
Table 1. Connecting the GPS/GSM module to Raspberry Pi
Pin GPS/GSM module Pin Raspberry Pi
GND (ground)
Pin 6 – GND (ground)
RxD
Pin 8 – GPIO14 (UART0_RxD)
TxD
Pin 10 – GPIO15 (UART0_TxD)
VCC (5 V)
Pin 4 – 5 V (Power)

Smart Packages Tracking System
149
The supported communication protocol is asynnchronous and the two data lines, Tx
and Rx, are cross connected to the serial port of the development board. The SIM808
module also supports a number of commands that helps ﬁnding and conﬁguring the
module states.
The algorithm used to control the SIM808 module:
Open serial port no.#0; portul serial numarul 0;
Repeat: each time interval
While GPS not connected:
/*Module intialization*/
//module verification
Send on serial port the „AT” comand;
Wait 1 second;
// GPS start
Send on serial port the „AT+CGNSPWR=1” comand;
Wait 1 second;
//Setting the receiving data mode
Send on serial port the „AT+CGNSSEQ=RMC”comand;
Wait 1 second;
//Get position 
Send on serial port the „AT+CGNSINF”comand;
Read position; 
If the position has the right form:
Send location to the server;
Until the script is off; 
RFID Reader
The RFID card reader, the buttons, the LEDs and the buzzer are controlled with a
Python script. The SPI synchronous serial protocol is used to communicate with the
RC522 integrator. The connection to the development board is made at the SPI0 port by
Table 2. PINs used to connect the RFID reader to the Raspberry Pi
Pin RFID reader Pin Raspberry Pi
SDA
Pin 24 – GPIO8 (SPI0_CE0_N)
SCK
Pin 23 – GPIO11 (SPI0_SCLK)
MOSI
Pin 19 – GPIO10 (SPI0_MOSI)
MISO
Pin 21 – GPIO9 (SPI0_MISO)
IRQ
–
GND
Pin 9 – GND (ground)
RST
Pin 22 – GPIO25
VCC
Pin 1 – 3.3 V (Power)

150
C. Avram et al.
seven wires out of the 8 provided by RC522. In Table 2 are presented the pins used to
interface with the reader.
Also, three buttons were used with which the courier can change the system states.
In Table 3 are presented the pins used to control the buttons.
Table 3. PINs used to connect the buttons to the Raspberry Pi
Button
Pins buttons Pins Raspberry Pi
Button “Add”
Pin 1
Pin 12 – GPIO17
Pin 2
Pin 30 – GND (ground)
Button “Delete” Pin 1
Pin 40 – GPIO27
Pin 2
Pin 30 – GND (ground)
Button “OK”
Pin 1
Pin 36 – GPIO22
Pin 2
Pin 30 – GND (ground)
6
Simulation and Testing
The software part of the system resulting from the implementation consists of a Spring
Boot server, a relational database and a web application made in Angular.
The display of all storage centers (from the list on the left) together with all their
con-nections are available by clicking on the Storage Centers button, Fig. 4. These are
located by latitude and longitude.
In Fig. 5 is presented the client page where he can visualize all his packages. These
packages apear in a list and contains more details like: description, RFID code attached
to the package, name of the receiver, adress for delivery and the time when the package
were added. On this page the user can track all his deliverys.
Fig. 4. Visualizing the storage center

Smart Packages Tracking System
151
Fig. 5. The user page for packages tracking
7
Conclusions
The main objective of this work was the design and implementation of a system for
tracking and identifying the packages sent by couriers, using various technologies such as
GPS, GSM or RFID. These interdependent technologies have been integrated in a single
system that allows the continuous location of the courier machines and the identiﬁcation
of the packages that are introduced or removed from them, a method different from the
classic one, used by the courier companies, where the packages are located only when
I reach a checkpoint. The system is divided into the hardware area, where the packets
are located and identiﬁed through GPS, GSM and RFID modules, and the software area
consisting of a Spring Boot server, a non-relational database and a web application. The
software part of the system deals with the storage, visualization and editing of the data
in the system.
Also, another feature of the system is the possibility of the customers to choose
the most convenient transport variant from those exhibited by the Mar-tins algorithm,
based on the information about the storage centers present in the application and the
connections between them. This feature makes the services offered to be personalized
according to the client’s needs, giving them value, which will return back through more
orders and thanks. An experimental version of the system is available and all the imposed
functionalities were successfully tested.
References
1. Gkhale, P., Bhat, O., Bhat, S.: Introduction to IOT. Int. Adv. Res. J. Sci. Eng. Technol. 5(1),
41–44 (2018)
2. Greer, C., Burns, M., Wollman, D., Griffor, E.: Cyber-physical systems and internet of things.
NIST Spec. Publ. 1900(202), 10–13 (2019)
3. Salman, T., Jain, R.: A survey of protocols and standards for internet of things. Adv. Comput.
Commun. 1(1) (2017)
4. El Khaddar, M.A., Boulmalf, M.: Smartphone: the ultimate IoT and IoE device. In:
Smartphones from an Applied Research Perspective, pp. 137–162. InTech Open (2017)
5. Rghioui, A., Oumnad, A.: Internet of things: visions, technologies, and areas of application.
Autom. Control Intell. Syst. 5(6), 83–91 (2017)

152
C. Avram et al.
6. French, A.M., Shim, J.P.: The digital revolution: internet of things, 5G, and beyond. Commun.
Assoc. Inf. Syst. 38, 840–850 (2016)
7. Harbi, Y., Aliouat, Z., Harous, S., Bentaleb, A., Refouﬁ, A.: A review of security in internet of
things. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 108(1), 325–344 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-019-
06405-y
8. Khraisat, Y.S.H., Al-Khateeb, M.A.Z., Abu-Alreesh, Y.K., Ayyash, A.A., Lahlouh, O.S.: GPS
navigation and tracking device. Int. J. Interact. Mob. Technol. 5(4), 39–41 (2011)
9. Zhou, Z., Ma, H., Lin, P.: Research on the key technologies of truck-tracking and navigation
system based on GPS/3G. Trans Tech Publications (2011)
10. Verma, P., Bhatia, J.: Design and development of GPS-GSM based tracking system with
Google Map based monitoring. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng. Appl. (IJCSEA) 3(3), 33–40 (2013)
11. Vanmore, S.V., Jadhav, N., Nichal, S., Patil, M., Patil, A.: Smart vehicle tracking using GPS.
Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol. 4(3), 66–69 (2017)
12. Kis, P., Alexandru, M.: Real time monitoring and tracking system for an item using the RFID
technology. Rev. Air Force Acad. 3, 71–76 (2015)
13. Awadalla, M.H.A.: Real time shipment tracking system using RFID. Int. J. Comput. Technol.
17(1), 7163–7180 (2018)
14. Al-Ani, M.S.: Packages tracking using RFID technology. Int. J. Bus. ICT 1(3–4), 12–20
(2015)
15. Deng, J.: Architecture design of the vehicle tracking system based on RFID. Telkomnika
11(6), 2997–3004 (2013)
16. Gopi, A., Rajan, D.P.R.L., Rajan, S., Renjith, S.: Accident tracking and visual sharing using
RFID and SDN. Int. J. Comput. Eng. Res. Trends 3(10), 544–549 (2016)
17. He, W., Tan, E.L., Lee, E.W.: A solution for integrated track and trace in supply chain based
on RFID & GPS. In: IEEE Conference on Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation
(2009)
18. Janssens, G.K., Pangilinan, J.M.: An empirical evaluation of martins’ algorithm for the multi-
objective shortest path problem (2011)
19. Zinari, S., Canalda, P., Spies, F.: WiFi GPS based combined positioning algorithm. In:
IEEE International Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and Information
Security, pp. 684–688 (2010)
20. Prinsloo, J., Malekian, R.: Accurate Vehicle Location System Using RFID, an Internet of
Things Approach. MDPI Sens. 16(825) (2016)
21. Zaenurrohman, A., Marwanto, A., Alifah, S.: Temperature and humidity monitoring on IoT
based shipment tracking. J. Telemat. Inf. 6(1), 27–36 (2018)
22. Bhoyar, A., Varma, R.: GPS based real time vehicle tracking system for kid’s safety using
RFID and GSM. Int. J. Adv. Res. Ideas Innov. Technol. 4(1), 290–292 (2018)
23. Kalid,K.S.,Rosli,N.:Thedesignofaschoolchildrenidentiﬁcationandtransportationtracking
system. In: International Conference on Research and Innovation in Information Systems
(ICRIIS) (2017)
24. Kumar, N.M., Dash, A.: The internet of things: an opportunity for transportation and logis-
tics. In: IEEE International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI),
Coimbatore, India (2017)
25. Barros, C., Leão, C.P., Soares, F., Minas, G., Machado, J.: RePhyS: a multidisciplinary expe-
rience in remote physiological systems laboratory. Int. J. Online Eng. 9(SPL.ISSUE5), 21–24
(2013)
26. Leão, C.P., et al.: Web-assisted laboratory for control education: Remote and virtual environ-
ments. In: Uckelmann, D., Scholz-Reiter, B., Rügge, I., Hong, B., Rizzi, A. (eds.) ImViReLL
2012. CCIS, vol. 282, pp. 62–72. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-28816-6_7

Smart Packages Tracking System
153
27. Gandibleux, X., Beugnies, F., Randriamasy, S.: Martins’ algorithm revisited for multi-
objective shortest path problems with a MaxMin cost function. French Italian Oper. Res.
Soc. 4, 47–59 (2006)
28. Kunz,G.,Machado,J.,Perondi,E.,Vyatkin,V.:AformalmethodologyforaccomplishingIEC
61850 real-time communication requirements. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 64(8), 6582–6590
(2017). Art. no. 7878522. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2017.2682042
29. Silva, M., Pereira, F., Soares, F., Leão, C.P., Machado, J., Carvalho, V.: An overview of indus-
trial communication networks. In: Flores, P., Viadero, F. (eds.) New Trends in Mechanism
and Machine Science. MMS, vol. 24, pp. 933–940. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-09411-3_97
30. Kunz, G., Perondi, E., Machado, J.: Modeling and simulating the controller behavior of an
automated people mover using IEC 61850 communication requirements. In: IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), art. no. 6034947, pp. 603–608 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1109/INDIN.2011.6034947
31. Leão, C.P., Soares, F.O., Machado, J.M., Seabra, E., Rodrigues, H.: Design and development
of an industrial network laboratory. Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Learn. 6(SPECIAL ISSUE.2),
21–26 (2011). https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v6iS1.1615
32. Campos, J.C., Machado, J., Seabra, E.: Property patterns for the formal veriﬁcation of auto-
mated production systems. IFAC Proc. Vol. (IFAC-PapersOnline) 17(1 PART 1) (2008).
https://doi.org/10.3182/20080706-5-KR-1001.4192
33. Campos, J.C., Machado, J.: Pattern-based analysis of automated production systems. IFAC
Proc. Vol. (IFAC-PapersOnline) 13(PART 1), 972–977 (2009). https://doi.org/10.3182/200
90603-3-RU-2001.0425

Automatic Warehouse for Workshop Tools
Marco Ferreira1, Miguel Rodrigues1, and Caetano Monteiro2(B)
1 Universidade do Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
2 Algoritmi, Universidade do Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
cmonteiro@dem.uminho.pt
Abstract. Industry is becoming more and more automated and the deployment
of robots for work improvement and production time reduction has been crucial
in the evolution of the industry itself. At the storage level, the implementation
of robots is practically mandatory. These robots have improved the speed, safety
and organization of industrial warehouses. However, at the workshops, frequently,
tools are still stored and organized manually on conventional shelves. In this work
project it was studied the development of an automated warehouse based on a
storage machine for automatic rental of VHS and/or DVD cassettes. It is intended
to study the implementation of an automatic storage cabinet adapted for storing
small tools and consumables, such as cutting inserts, screws, nuts, washers, etc.,
in a much faster and more organized way. The main functions of the storage
machine were studied in order to solve the challenges placed by the new usage:
the dimension limitations imposed by the cabinet shelfs and the differences in
weight of the new material to be stored and transported. In its original application,
the handling robot is expected to carry about 550 g while a box full with screws
can easily exceed 2 kg. This paper presents the solution proposed to solve this
problem, and presents the envisaged future works.
Keywords: Automatic tool storage · Cartesian robot and automation ·
Mechatronics
1
Automatic Warehouses
Automatic warehouses are systems developed with the purpose of carrying out the auto-
matic storing process of products, arranging them in proper conditions respecting the
product speciﬁcities. These systems are based on robotic capability for transporting,
placing and picking products, under the control of adequate software for operational
control and data management. The main objectives to be achieved by warehouses are to
deliver products to the customer quickly and efﬁciently, to organize the storage under
computerizedmanagement,toobtaintheresponsivenessofaserviceprovider,thequality,
the efﬁciency and increase control of industry storage needs [1].
The warehouse studied and presented in this paper has, as main purpose, to serve
as an experimental workbench for being used in a Laboratory facility for students and
workers from domain of industrial mechatronics, in a similar purpose of [2, 3].
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 154–163, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_15

Automatic Warehouse for Workshop Tools
155
Warehouses present the following advantages and disadvantages:
Advantages:
• Minimum operator intervention;
• Fast operation execution;
• Possible reduction of storage area;
• Good organization and fast ability for products delivering;
• Easy stock control.
Disadvantages:
• High initial investment;
• Need for storage and infrastructures access adaptation.
Figure 1 presents a typical industrial warehouse arrangement.
Fig. 1. Industrial automated warehouse
Taking into account the technological evolution, the growing difﬁculties in handling
and keeping track of an increasing number and of varied products, automated warehouses
are becoming unavoidable in most industries for storing raw materials, ﬁnished products,
consumables and tools. Figure 2 depicts the VIDEOMATIC 1432 rental cassette machine
used to study its adaptation to an illustration physical model of an industrial warehouse
for storing small tools and consumables, such as cutting inserts, screws, nuts, washers,
and others.

156
M. Ferreira et al.
Fig. 2. VIDEOMATIC 1432 rental cassette machine.
2
Project Framework
There are workshops whose tool storage consists in large rooms with many shelves
and countless different tools [4–6]. The manual organization of a large number of tools
and/or consumables easily becomes tedious and ineffective. Misplacement of tools in the
shelfs is unfortunately frequent in workshops, resulting in extra time spent in searching
activities or in their loss for practical purposes with the consequent need of buying
replacement units. It is also difﬁcult to keep under control the level of consumable
stocks, leading to overstock or stock exhaustion. Having a ﬁlm rental machine available
in the University laboratory, these considerations motivated the realization of this project
to transform the machine into an automatic tool magazine, developing a small warehouse
for small tools and consumables like the ones used in a workshop.
2.1
VIDEOMATIC 1432 Film Rental Machine
This model of ﬁlm rental machine has a warehouse cabinet with three service stations and
two central service columns. The articles selected on the screens are delivered directly
to the service column next to the user (see Fig. 2). Three users may be simultaneously
selecting or renting articles. The two columns can also be used to quickly return the
leased items. Figure 3 presents the overall dimensions of the machine.
There are also two service receptacles in the rear of the cabinet for the owner to
withdraw or to incorporate new articles.

Automatic Warehouse for Workshop Tools
157
The storing cabinet shelves were originally designed to store DVD and VHS cassettes
that have different dimensions. Table 1 indicates the dimensions of common VHS and
DVD boxes. To provide room for these three types of boxes there are two different types
of shelfs: type 1 (Fig. 4, left) accepting VHS 2 boxes, type 2 (Fig. 4, right) accepting
either 1 VHS 1 box or two DVD boxes. The dimensions of these spaces are indicated in
Table 2.
Table 1. Typical VHS and DVD box dimensions.
Type
Width [mm]
Length
[mm]
Height [mm]
DVD
135
190
10
VHS 1
122
200
30
VHS 2
115
190
27
Fig. 3. VIDEOMATIC 1432 warehouse dimensions.
It must be noted that the length of the shelf spaces is shorter than the cassettes’
length, and so the difference length will be in cantilever, allowing the pick-up action,
explained below.

158
M. Ferreira et al.
Table 2. Dimensions of the three types of shelf spaces.
Type
Width [mm]
Length
[mm]
Height [mm]
1
145
150
37
2
110
150
37
3
145
150
15
Fig. 4. Shelf types in the VIDEOMATIC cabinet.
The cabinet shelf storage arrangement is shown in Fig. 5, were the transporting robot
can be seen. It is a two axis Cartesian robot, driven by stepper motors (not seen in the
ﬁgure). The handling device consists of a platform attached to the vertical axis, provided
with 4 pneumatic actuated claws, working in two pairs that can be closed independently.
The handling device can be moved in the Y direction to fetch (or to store) the individual
boxes from the shelfs. This action is provided also by pneumatic actuator, which can
assume three positions: left, central and right. When the platform is moving loaded, the
claws must be in central position, the two pairs closed to tighten the box.
The box is pulled from the shelf by moving the open claw system left, to pick a box
from the left wall (or right in the case of a box from the right wall); the left pair of claws
closes over the box, the claw system moves to central position, opens again, repeats
the movement left, then both claw pairs close and pull the box to the central position.
The robot can now deliver the box to the chosen service receptacle, where an inverse
sequence of actions permits delivering the box. The process of picking a box from the
right wall or from the service receptacle is similar, and then the box will be stored in an
empty shelf, also in the same manner.

Automatic Warehouse for Workshop Tools
159
Fig. 5. Shelf types in the VIDEOMATIC cabinet.
3
Adapting Problems
A VHS or a DVD cassette does not exceed 200 g while a box with the same volume ﬁlled
with screws for example may exceed 2 kg. Some tests were done to verify the maximum
pulling capacity of the handling device. In the original conditions for manipulating the
cassettes, the maximum weight the handling device had to pull was about 550 g, much
below the 2 kg envisaged. It was then decided to study the introduction of modiﬁcations
to the handling device in order to be able to perform the new task.
3.1
Mechanical Analysis of the Problem
The handling device consists of 4 pneumatic actuated claws, two actuating at each side
of the box. In the ﬁrst picking action only two opposite claws can reach the box. Figure 6
shows a simple diagram of the forces actuating on the box during the pulling action. The
box weight is equilibrated by a normal reaction force (−→
N in Fig. 6), and, if a pulling or
a pushing action is made, a friction force (−→
F µ) develops. The pulling system must be
able to produce a puling force (−→
F Robot in Fig. 6) to equilibrate the friction between the
box and the shelf base.
The equation system (1) permits the calculation of the force needed to pull the box
out of the shelf.
xx :
yy :
−→
F Robot + −→
F µ = 0
−→
N + −→
P = 0
⇐⇒
FRobot = N · µ
N = m · g
⇒FRobot = m · g · µ
(1)
The present claw system also uses friction force to pull the boxes. At the beginning of
the movement two claws actuating at opposite faces of the box must develop a clamping

160
M. Ferreira et al.
Fig. 6. Free body diagram.
force big enough to produce a friction force equal to −→
F Robot and hence to −→
F µ. The
claws were designed to pull just a small mass of 200 g, and, considering a friction
coefﬁcient between the clamps and the box equal to the friction coefﬁcient between the
box and the shelf base, the clamping force must be about 10 N if the friction coefﬁcient
is 0.2, an acceptable value for the materials involved. For a 2 kg mass, under the same
friction conditions, the clamping force required would be 100 N, an excessive force for
the present system.
3.2
Alternative Mechanical Solutions
When analyzing the problem, some mechanical solutions arise. The ﬁrst approach is
to increase the friction coefﬁcient between the clamps and the box, while keeping the
friction coefﬁcient between the box and the shelf at the same level, or lowering it.
To increase the friction between the clamps and the box, rubber inserts or stripes can
be placed on the sides of the box and on the claps, and then a friction coefﬁcient of about
1 will be attained; to lower the coefﬁcient between the box and shelf base, a low friction
material like Teﬂon can be considered: friction coefﬁcients can be as low as 0.05. In this
case the pulling force needed would be around 1 N for the same 2 kg box, and, with
rubber inserts in the sides of the boxes, that would be the pulling force needed.
Another approach to solve the problem would be to modify the clamping claws in a
manner that the pulling force would no longer depend on the friction coefﬁcient between
the claws and the box. That may be obtained by redesigning the claws and the box in
order that during pulling (or pushing) the dragging force be transmitted by mechanical
interference, with the claws closed. The needed force for pulling the box would then
depend on the weight of the box and the friction coefﬁcient between the box and the
shelf base.
A steel bar with the largest cross section acceptable for the available shelfs (Fig. 4,
left, box type 1), with the maximum cassette (VHS 1, Table 1) length of 200 mm, was
considered to establish a target maximum pulling force needed for the handling device
to exert. A 7.86 density steel bar and a 0.2 friction coefﬁcient between the bar and the
shelf base were considered. Table 3 summarizes the prevailing conditions in the system.
A 16.5 N pulling force will be needed for picking up the bar.

Automatic Warehouse for Workshop Tools
161
Table 3. Maximum weight box: dimensions and pulling force.
Width [mm]
Length [mm]
Height [mm]
Volume [cm3]
Weight [N]
Pulling Force [N]
145
200
37
1 073
82.7
16.5
4
Adapting Problems
The DVD and VHS boxes can be used, but only for low weight materials. Also the
products inside the boxes should not be free to move or the equilibrium during handling
will be affected.
Alternative boxes should use light weight, resistant non-expensive materials, like
acrylic, PLA or ABS, for the outer case, and foam to accommodate components inside
when needed. Figure 7 presents an example of a possible materialization of such a box,
designed to store a ratchet wrench set. The volume of this particular box was found to
be 912 mm3. This particular box was designed with grooves on the sides for rubber
insertion, enabling larger friction coefﬁcient.
Fig. 7. CAD drawing of a tool box storage.
The box cover slides in a groove to open and close, and is maintained closed by
neodymium magnets to prevent possible accidental opening inside the cabinet. Figure 8
shows an exploded view of the box arrangement. The cover also provides a space for
the placement of the label with the box code bar, identifying it and its content.

162
M. Ferreira et al.
Fig. 8. Exploded view of box arrangement.
5
Conclusions and Future Directions
Theworkcarriedoutsofarallowstheconclusionthatthemachinehasenoughpowertobe
adapted into an automatic tool and components magazine. It is also possible to conclude
that with minor modiﬁcations the machine will be able to support bigger weight boxes,
allowing the storage of most small components and tools existing in the shop ﬂoor. The
machine is a whole complex mechatronic system, thus proving support for design study
students and industry workers from industrial mechatronics domain. In regard to future
work, it must be said that the machine was running using the original devices, electronics
and software. The database will be modiﬁed, in order to replace managing ﬁlm rental
information for tool storage and supply. A customized man machine interface is also
into consideration, to allow new pick and place algorithms, to introduce new features or
operations.
References
1. Gangala, C., Modi, M., Manupati, V.K., Varela, M.L.R., Machado, J., Trojanowska, J.: Cycle
time reduction in deck roller assembly production unit with value stream mapping analysis. In:
Rocha, Á., Correia, A.M., Adeli, H., Reis, L.P., Costanzo, S. (eds.) WorldCIST 2017. AISC,
vol. 571, pp. 509–518. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-56541-5_52
2. Leão, C.P., et al.: Web-assisted laboratory for control education: remote and virtual environ-
ments. In: Uckelmann, D., Scholz-Reiter, B., Rügge, I., Hong, B., Rizzi, A. (eds.) ImViReLL
2012. CCIS, vol. 282, pp. 62–72. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-28816-6_7
3. Barros, C., Leão, C.P., Soares, F., Minas, G., Machado, J.: RePhyS: a multidisciplinary expe-
rience in remote physiological systems laboratory. Int. J. Online Eng. 9(SPL.ISSUE5), 21–24
(2013). https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v9iS5.2756

Automatic Warehouse for Workshop Tools
163
4. MECALUX.
https://www.logismarket.pt/armazens-automaticos/armazem-automatico-para-
caixas-miniload/11226452-11707260-p.html. Accessed 19 June 2019
5. GelsonLuz.
https://www.materiais.gelsonluz.com/2018/09/massa-especiﬁca-do-aco.html.
Accessed 19 June 2019
6. FESTO. https://www.festo.com/cat/pt-br_br/products_ESG. Accessed 19 June 2019

New Reﬁnement of an Intelligent System
Design for Naval Operations
M. Filomena Teodoro1,2(B), M´ario J. Sim˜oes Marques1, Isabel Nunes3,4,
Gabriel Calhamonas4, and Marina A. P. Andrade5
1 CINAV, Center of Naval Research, Naval Academy, Portuguese Navy,
2810-001 Almada, Portugal
mteodoro64@gmail.pt
2 CEMAT, Center for Computational and Stochastic Mathematics,
Instituto Superior T´ecnico, Lisbon University, 1048-001 Lisbon, Portugal
3 UNIDEMI, Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Faculty of
Sciences and Technology, New Lisbon University, 2829-516 Caparica, Portugal
4 FCT, Faculty of Sciences and Technology, New Lisbon University,
2829-516 Caparica, Portugal
5 ISTAR - ISCTE, Instituto Universit´ario de Lisboa, Lisboa Portugal,
1649-026 Lisbon, Portugal
maria.alves.teodoro@marinha.pt
Abstract. To better optimize the decision chain in a maritime disaster
context, allowing a reduction both in time of support and costs, recently,
the authors considered the facilities and high qualiﬁed staﬀof Portuguese
Navy proposing a variant of the Delphi method, a method where the opin-
ion of each element of a team is considered an important information
source to contribute to a decision, implementing a system that prioritize
certain teams for perform speciﬁc in incidents, taking into account the
importance of each team that acts in case of a disaster occurrence.
Continuing the work developed recently and extending the technique
used before, in the present manuscript, we propose an adjustment of each
expert opinion weight when the Delphi method is applied. The weight of
each expert does not not depend on years of expert experience exclusively
but also from the type of such experience. Firstly, we have used the hier-
archical classiﬁcation, allowing to identify diﬀerent patterns for experts
with the “‘same experience”’. Also discriminant analysis and multidimen-
sional scaling revealed to be adequate techniques for this issue. The expe-
rience of each expert was evaluated using the proximity/distance between
the individuals in the group of proposed experts and compared with the
number of consensus presented.
We hope to have given an improvement to the optimization o the deci-
sion support system used in a maritime disaster context of the Portuguese
Navy.
Keywords: Decision support system · Expert · Delphi method ·
Questionnaire · Catastrophe · Multidimensional scaling
c
⃝The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 164–177, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_16

New Reﬁnement of an Intelligent System Design
165
1
Introduction
The Decision Support System (DSS) appears to be the result of new technologies,
and optimal decisions are urgent in the short term. The DSS with the decision
chain can be observed, so it can be optimized to improve the performance of tasks
such as medicine, education, engineering, transportation [1–3]. They can also be
found in marine environments. In the event of a disaster, DSS for naval operations
can improve all stages of intervention: receiving information about the incident,
what to do, direction of navigation for the incident, and advice on how to perform
the action.
The THEMIS project, promoted by the Portuguese Navy, aims to design
and implement a DSS capable of handling disaster relief operations in maritime
situations. Some contributions using some new technology like augmented reality
or user experience design to were proposed by the authors in [4–7].
We are particularly interested to build and implement a DSS with the ability
to prioritize certain teams for speciﬁc incidents taking into account the impor-
tance of each team that acts in case of emergency, the sequence of tasks that
should perform all possible orders to be given. As the author [1] claims, the
Delphi method is an exceptionally useful method in which people’s opinions are
needed to reduce the lack agreement or incomplete knowledge. This method is
especially important due the ability to build and organize group communication.
Being the Delphi method a structured group communication process where
experts are anonymous and express their opinions on problems with uncertain
and incomplete knowledge, accordingly with [8,9], it was used on the facilities
and staﬀof the Portuguese Navy. The goal was to reach expert consensus on
speciﬁc issues through an iterative process of response and feedback and analysis
using simple statistics.
When the Delphi method is applied, the obtained results depend on the
weighting of experts experience. In the [8,9], the chosen weights depend on the
time of the expert service. In the present work, we evidence that these weights
shall take into account not only the time of experience but the similarity of the
experts opinion.
In Sects. 2 and 3 we describe details about the proposed methodology and
some background. The evidence of the improvement issue need is provided in
Sect. 4. Also are done some conclusions and suggestions.
2
Multidimensional Scaling
The Multidimensional Scaling(MDS) had its origin in the models of Psychology
used at the end of the 19th century. In the scope of these ﬁrst psychometric works,
the authors of [10–12] stood out when they tried to understand the magnitude
of stimuli in individuals, without the knowledge of its physical intensity. One of
the pioneering works of MDS, according to [13] was due to [14] but it remained
little used until it was revived and modernized in ﬁfties by the author of [15,16],
stimulated, in large part, by the development of modern digital computers -

166
M. F. Teodoro et al.
which made the complex methodology computationally viable, especially in the
multidimensional case, as well as in non-metric cases.
It is common to observe, among researchers from diﬀerent areas of knowl-
edge, some diﬃculties in measuring the structure of their objects of study. This
occurs mainly when the structure of an object is latent or “hidden”, when more
than one underlying factor are appropriate for the interpretation of the data,
or even when the answer given by the participants may not be determined by
a single trace [17]. These characteristics are usually present in an object with a
multidimensional structure, that is, when more than one underlying dimension
is appropriate to collect the data. In this way, there is a risk that the interpre-
tation will not be reliable because it does not reach all the attributes embedded
in the data, since the experimenter’s preconceptions may be reﬂected in the des-
ignation of verbal descriptors in the various dimensions, that is, the dimensions
may being in the conceptual universe of the experimenter not in the perceptual
universe of the observer [18]. In order to achieve an accuracy in the interpreta-
tion of the data of objects that present multidimensionality of parameters, the
multidimensional scale technique (MDS) comes from a family of data proximity
analysis techniques and has proved to be an important mathematical instrument
for measurement. Usually, this technique has a quantitative and computational
character and can be developed by diﬀerent algorithms. According with [17],
the technique for raising data from multidimensional scales consists of asking
the participant to compare several objects (stimuli) in various features (parame-
ters), concomitantly, and not just evaluate an object in a single stroke at a time.
The proximity found between the objects will reﬂect the degree of similarity
between them and will be obtained from the distance between the objects of
study (stimuli), which will be represented graphically by means of points in a
Euclidean space. Through the distances between the points (pairs of stimuli),
the stimuli that are judged by the participants as similar will be represented by
means of close points, as in a map, while the stimuli judged as not similar will be
located with a greater spatial distance. In this way, from the formation of groups
of stimuli judged as similar, it will be possible to identify the dimensions, that
is, the coordinate axes used to locate a point in Euclidean space. One dimension
allows you to view common characteristics shared by a signiﬁcant amount of
data. According to [19], the data produced by MDS are generally represented by
two-dimensional diagrams, allowing for a better visualization, where any point
can be deﬁned in terms of a set of coordinates and the most distant distance. The
next between two points is a straight line. However, many data require three,
four or even ﬁve dimensions, so they are adjusted in two dimensions. For this
type of visualization, there is a risk that the distance between the points (pairs
of stimuli) is slightly incorrect and, so that the chosen solution has a good cor-
respondence with the similarities between the objects originally evaluated, [20]
proposed a measure of the degree of deviation between the distances and the
dissimilarities observed called the stress function.

New Reﬁnement of an Intelligent System Design
167
3
Delphi Method
This section begins with the characterization of the method and follows an app-
roach to the process sound Delphi method was built with reference to the most
basic principles, relevance and choice in Delphi research. Finally, some examples
from distinct areas of knowledge where the Delphi method was applied.
3.1
Background
The ancient Greeks used the Delphos oracle to make the most important deci-
sions in the country, such as planning a war or ﬁnding a new colony. Today,
the oracle is not consulted to take a decision, but a panel of previously selected
experts. The Delphi method, inspired by the Delphos oracle is generally recom-
mended when mathematical models are not easy to use and personal judgment is
appropriate. It was developed and was launched in the early 1960s by researchers
Olaf Helmer and Norman Dalkey, under the aim of operational research. [21]
point to four important characteristics of the Delphi method.
Anonymity: The anonymity of the answers and the fact that there are
no physical meetings, gives the members of the expert group the freedom
to express their opinions, while avoiding the inﬂuence of psychological fac-
tors such as the inﬂuence of their abilities. Persuasion, reluctance to leave
the assumed position, the majority’s dominance over minority views. Think,
for example, of a group that includes well-known experts. It is possible for
unknown experts to change opinions in accordance with statements from
prominent experts to remove the statistical representation of the answers
in the study. The authors of [22] say that anonymity ensures more objective
answers and better results.
Repeatability: If you hold several rounds, experts can review responses in
light of information received from the rest of the expert group.
Controlled feedback: At each iteration, experts receive information about
the location of the other experts. This feedback is Irrelevant information is
removed, and each member of the expert panel has access to their own answer
and the group’s answer. Feedback is presented and summarized through sim-
ple statistics (average, median, etc.) that summarize the answers of a group
or person. The authors of [22,23] claim that anonymously controlled inter-
actions between elements in a group is the determinant fact that distinguish
the Delphi method from other personal interaction methods (eg meetings,
committees or seminars).
Statistical treatment: The results can be presented in the form of a
report or conclusion through the statistical representation of the answers from
experts in each round. Simple measurements are usually used as the mean
or median. At the end of each round, the statistical representation is elabo-
rated so that the participants can better visualize their position before the
group for the next round. In addition, the statistical representation provides
the opportunity for the coordination team to follow the process of creating
consensus among experts, which is the most important goal of the method.

168
M. F. Teodoro et al.
In [24–26] we can ﬁnd many examples of Delphi method applications. Some
examples that show the importance of the Delphi method: natural sciences [1],
pulp production [27], education [25], transportation [3], Social Policy [28], index
construction of the car supply chain [29,30]. The author of [31] presents a litera-
ture review and several examples of the application of the Delphi method in the
social sciences. In [32] is presented a compilation of published studies using the
Delphi method. The authors of [21] present a compilation of dissertations and
thesis where the Delphi method was used and synthesize and clearly present the
diversity and ﬂexibility of the Delphi method.
3.2
Delphi Method - Round I
This section brieﬂy presents the ﬁrst round of the Delphi method done in [8,9].
In order to continue using the Delphi method, in the previous stage of question-
naire application, a group of prospective experts was asked about age, gender, job
grade, training class, type of experience in response to disasters (real versus train-
ing) and cumulative boarding time (less than 1 year, 1–3 years, 3–5 years, more
than 5 years). Such data collection summarized the 52 tasks presented in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. List of tasks. Source [8].
To understand the relative order (priorities) that each team should perform
each particular task, the same group of experts ﬁlled a questionnaire ordering
the importance rated from 1 (not important) to 6 (very important) about relief
work for each existing team that can serve in a humanitary disaster operation
(see all 52 tasks in Fig. 1 and all possible teams in Fig. 2).

New Reﬁnement of an Intelligent System Design
169
Fig. 2. Available teams. Source [8].
A total of 572 questions were grouped on a 6-point Likert scale (from 1 to 6).
In the ﬁrst round of the questionnaire, twelve experts with positions of lieutenant,
naval commander and frigate commander (most common) were considered, all
men aged 35 to 54 who had been on board for at least ﬁve years. Only 25% of
all professionals have real/disaster preparedness experience. The remaining 75%
of professionals have training experience.
To identify tasks that have reached consensus, you need to determine the
Inter-Quartile Range (IQR), the diﬀerence between Q1 and Q3 records. IQR
represents 50% of the observations closest to the median. An IQR of less than
1 means that at least 50% of the answers obtained fall within 1 point on the
Likert scale [25].
To process the questionnaires data and classify each one as consensual/no
consensual, was necessary to compute a weighted mean (WM), were the weights
are based on the experience of each expert responded to with each team. These
weights evaluate the individual time of service. Notice that the opinion of a more
experienced expert has a more signiﬁcant weight in the weighted mean of the
importance of a certain team and vice-verse. See Table 1.
Table 1. Weights coeﬃcient per each participant’s level of experience.
Level of experience Weight
1
0.1
2
0.5
3
0.9
4
1.1
5
1.5
6
1.9
For tasks with an IQR greater than 1, it was assumed that experts disagreed
on the importance of a given team in performing a speciﬁc task. This will be
how it will be assessed in the next questionnaire.
If the task IQR is less than or equal to 1, it was analyzed the frequency dis-
tribution. You can see that the distribution of the answers to the task is not con-
sistent, but the time is approaching. In this case, a new criterion was proposed.

170
M. F. Teodoro et al.
Not all questions are consistent when there is a non-consecutive signiﬁcance level
of 2 or more, which is 20% or more of the sum of weighted experience levels.
As per the proposed rule, the initial poll between the 572 question disagreed
with the 290(50.7%) question, and the IQR of 282 was greater than 1. Only 8
between tasks with an IQR less than or equal to 1 did not meet the requirements
of the proposed method. These questions totaling 290 will be considered in the
next round.
4
Proposal
In the present section is provide the motivation to improve the weight chart in
Table 1 applied in the ﬁrst round of Delphi method to achieve WM. The starting
weight depends on the individual service time (see Table 1). The statements of
experienced experts place greater emphasis on the weighted average of the team’s
signiﬁcance and vice-versa. However, experts specify in detail certain areas where
the weight should be greater and those that were taken into account in the
initial phase with a smaller coeﬃcient. As preliminary approach, we have made
a hierarchical classiﬁcation of experts by task/team. The obtained dendograms
have shown diﬀerent proﬁles depending on the task. Discriminatory analysis
conﬁrmed this. Expert proﬁles are separated for each task/team. We propose to
analyze the proximity of experts in a particular team. Some teams were tested
and studied proximity measurements between experts using the PROXSCAL
algorithm, of the MDS technique that minimizes normalized raw stress.
Fig. 3. Global position, dimension 1. The diﬀerent experts appears in a diﬀerent order
for dimension 1. SAR-REC team.
We can give as example, the proximity of the twelve experts has a distinct
pattern when we consider the SAR-URB, SAR-REC or SAR-EST. In a ﬁrst and
naive approach, we consider one dimension for simplicity. We can ﬁnd in Figs. 3,
4 and 5 that diﬀerent experts appears in a distinct order for diﬀerent teams.

New Reﬁnement of an Intelligent System Design
171
When we consider a 2D space (see in Figs. 6, 7 and 8), the results are in
accordance with distinct similarities the experts, depending on the selected team.
Clearly, the distribution and groups in the plan for the 3 teams is distinct.
For dimension 2, we can ﬁnd in Table 2 the validation measures of Stress (a
badness-of-ﬁt measure for the entire MDS representation.) and others ﬁt mea-
sures are displayed . The raw stress is small enough, the Tucker’s coeﬃcient of
congruence is excellent in all 3 teams.
Fig. 4. Global position, dimension 1. The diﬀerent experts appears in a diﬀerent order
for dimension 1. SAR-URB team.
Fig. 5. Global position, dimension 1. The diﬀerent experts appears in a diﬀerent order
for dimension 1. SAR-ST team.

172
M. F. Teodoro et al.
Also, the measure of distance between experts per distinct teams has distinct
patterns. The graphs of distance versus estimated proximity residuals can be
found in Figs. 9, 10 and 11. These facts promote the idea that the Table 1 can
be reformulated taking into account the similarity of the experts per each team.
Fig. 6. Global position, dimension 2. The diﬀerent experts appears in a diﬀerent order
for dimension 2. SAR-REC.team.
Fig. 7. Global position, dimension 2. The diﬀerent experts appears in a diﬀerent order
for dimension 2. SAR-URB team.

New Reﬁnement of an Intelligent System Design
173
Fig. 8. Global position, dimension 2. The diﬀerent experts appears in a diﬀerent order
for dimension 2. SAR-ST team.
Table 2. MDS applied to data from SAR-REC team, SAR-URB team and SAR-ST
team. Stress and ﬁt measures.
SAR-REC SAR-URB SAR-ST
Normalized raw stress
0.07830
0.01832
0.00783
Stress I
0.08848
0.13535
0.08848
Stress II
0.17822
0.33304
0.17822
Stress III
0.01472
0.3747
0.01472
Dispersion Accounted For (DAR) 0.99217
0.98166
0.99217
Tucker’s coeﬀ. of congruence
099608
0.99080
0.99608

174
M. F. Teodoro et al.
Fig. 9. Residuals of estimates proximities between experts (2D). The diﬀerent experts
appears distinct distances with each other when we consider diﬀerent teams. SAR-REC
team.
Fig. 10. Residuals of estimates proximities between experts (2D). The diﬀerent experts
appears distinct distances with each other when we consider diﬀerent teams. SAR-URB
team.

New Reﬁnement of an Intelligent System Design
175
Fig. 11. Residuals of estimates proximities between experts (2D). The diﬀerent experts
appears distinct distances with each other when we consider diﬀerent teams. SAR-ST
team.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by Portuguese funds through the
Center of Naval Research (CINAV), Portuguese Naval Academy, Portugal and The
Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT), through the Center for
Computational and Stochastic Mathematics (CEMAT), University of Lisbon, Portugal,
project UID/Multi/04621/2019.
References
1. Powell, C.: The delphi technique: myths and realities. Methodol. Issues Nurs. Res.
41(4), 376–382 (2003)
2. Reuven, L., Dongchui, H.: Choosing a technological forecasting method. Ind. Man-
age. 37(1), 14–22 (1995)
3. Duuvarci, Y., Selvi, O., Gunaydin, O., G¨ur, G.: Impacts of transportation projects
on urban trends in zmir. Teknik Dergi 19(1), 4293–4318 (2008)
4. Sim˜oes-Marques, M., Correia, A., Teodoro, M., Nunes, I.: Building a decision sup-
port system to handle teams in disaster situations - a preliminary approach. In:
Nunes, I. (ed.) Proceedings of Advances in Human Factors and System Interactions,
AHFE 2017 Conference on Human Factors and System Interactions, Advances in
Intelligent Systems and Computing, pp. 97–108. Springer, Cham (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60366-7 10
5. Nunes, I.L., Lucas, R., Sim˜oes-Marques, M., Correia, N.: Augmented reality in
support of disaster response. In: Nunes, I. (ed.) Proceedings of Advances in Human
Factors and System Interactions, AHFE 2017 Conference on Human Factors and
System Interactions, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, pp. 155–167.
Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-60366-7 15

176
M. F. Teodoro et al.
6. Marques, M., Elvas, F., Nunes, I., Lobo, V., Correia, A.: Augmented reality in the
context of naval operations. In: Ahram, T., Karwowski, W., Taiar, R. (eds.) IHSED
2018, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, pp. 307–313. Springer,
Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02053-8 47
7. Nunes, I., Lucas, R., Sim˜oes-Marques, M., Correia, N.: An augmented reality
application to support deployed emergency teams. In: Bagnara, S., Tartaglia, R.,
Albolino, S., Alexander, T., Fujita, Y. (eds.) Proceedings of the 20th Congress
of the International Ergonomics Association. IEA 2018. Advances in Intelligent
Systems and Computing, pp. 195–204. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-319-96077-7 21
8. Nunes, I., Calhamonas, G., Sim˜oes-Marques, M., Teodoro, M.: Building a decision
support system to handle teams in disaster situations - a preliminary approach.
In: Madureira, A., Abraham, A., Gandhi, N., Varela, M. (eds.) Hybrid Intelligent
Systems. HIS 2018. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, pp. 551–559.
Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-14347-3 54
9. Sim˜oes Marques, J., Teodoro, M.F., Calhamonas, G., Nunes, I.: Applying a vari-
ation of delphi method for knowledge elicitation in the context of an intelligent
system design. In: Nunes, I. (ed.) Proceedings of Advances in Human Factors and
System Interactions, AHFE 2019 Conference on Human Factors and System Inter-
actions, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing, pp. 386–398. Springer,
Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20040-4 35
10. Thurstone, L.: Multiple fator analysis. Psychol. Rev. 38, 406–427 (1931)
11. Thurstone, L.: Primary Mental Abilities. University of Chicago Press, Chicago
(1938)
12. Thurstone, L., Thurstone, T.: Fator Studies of Intelligence. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago (1941)
13. Carroll, J., Green, P.: Psychometric methods in marketing research: part ii, mul-
tidimensional scaling. J. Mark. Res. 34(2), 193–204 (1997)
14. Young, G., Householder, A.: Discussion of a set of point in terms of their mutual
distances. Psychometrika 3, 19–22 (1938). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02287916
15. Torgerson, W.: Multidimensional scaling: i. theory and method. Psychometrika 17,
401–419 (1952). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02288916
16. Torgerson, W.: Theory and Methods of Scaling. Wiley, Chicago (1958)
17. Pasquali, L.: Instrumentos Psicol´ogicos: Manual Pr´atico De Elabora¸c˜ao. LabPAM,
Bras´ılia (1999)
18. Silva, J., Ribeiro-Filho, N.: Avalia¸c˜ao e Mensura¸c˜ao da Dor: Pesquisa. Teoria e
Pr´atica. FUNPEC, Ribeir˜ao Preto (2006)
19. Sturrock, K., Rocha, J.: A multidimensional scaling stress evaluation table. Field
Methods 12, 49–60 (2000)
20. Kruskal, J., Wish, M.: Multidimensional Scaling. SAGE, Thousand Oaks (1978).
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781412985130
21. Skulmoski, G., Hartman, F., Krahn, J.: The delphi method for graduate research.
J. Inf. Technol. Educ. 6, 1–24 (2007)
22. Lilja, K., Laakso, K., Palomki, J.: Using the delphi method. In: Kocaoglu, D. (ed.)
Technology Management in the Energy Smart World, PICMET 2011, pp. 1–10.
Piscataway (2011). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5138006
23. Linstone, H., Turoﬀ, M.: The Delphi Method-Techniques and Applications. New
Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ (2002)
24. Gunaydin, H.: Impact of Information Technologies on Project Management Func-
tions. Ph.D. dissertation, Chicago University (1999)

New Reﬁnement of an Intelligent System Design
177
25. De Vet, E., Brug, J., De Nooijer, J., Dijkstra, A., De Vries, N.: Determinants of
forward stage transitions: a delphi study. Health Educ. Res. 20(2), 195–205 (2005)
26. Wissema, J.: Trends in technology forecasting. Res. Dev. Manage. 12(1), 27–36
(1982)
27. Fraga, M.: A economia circular na ind´ustria portuguesa de pasta, papel e cart˜ao.
Master thesis, FCT, Universidade Nova de Lisboa (2017)
28. Adler, M., Ziglio, E.: Gazing into the Oracle: The Delphi Method and its Applica-
tion to Social Policy and Public Health. Kingsley Publishers, London (1996)
29. Azevedo, S., Carvalho, H., Machado, V.: Agile index: automotive supply chain.
Eng. Technol. 79, 784–790 (2011)
30. Azevedo, S., Govindan, K., Carvalho, H., Machado, V.: Ecosilient index to assess
the grenness and resilience of the up stream automotive supply chain. J. Cleaner
Prod. 56, 131–146 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.04.011
31. Landeta, J.: Current validity of the delphi method in social sciences. Technol.
Forecast. Soc. Chang. 73(5), 467–482 (2006)
32. Rowe, G., Wright, G.: The delphi technique as a forecasting tool: issues and anal-
ysis. Int. J. Forecast. 14(4), 353–375 (1999)

ICT4Silver: Design Guidelines
for the Development of Digital Interfaces
for Elderly Users
Nuno Martins1(B)
, Sónia Ralha2, and Ricardo Simoes2
1 Polytechnic Institute of Cávado and Ave/ID+, Barcelos, Portugal
nmartins@ipca.pt
2 Polytechnic Institute of Cávado and Ave, Barcelos, Portugal
Abstract. The Southwest European region (targeted by the SUDOE regional
policy), will have by the year 2050 a total of 40% population over 60 years old,
which is expected to be the oldest population in Europe. Therefore, the need exists
to develop products and services which are well adapted to the needs of the elderly
population. This investment, and the associated business, focused on the elderly,
is usually termed the Silver Economy.
The ICT4SILVER project, supported by the Intereg SUDOE programme, is
a consortium of 9 enterprises within the Southwest Europe territory (namely Por-
tugal, Spain and France) which interfaced with circa 25 SMEs to support the ﬁnal
stage development of technological products aimed at the senior population.
Within the context of this project, a speciﬁc work has been conducted on
studyinguserinteractionandredesigningthegraphicalinterfacesofthreeproducts.
This paper describes that analysis and redesign effort as well as a broader proposal
ofdesignguidingprinciples(DGP)fordigitalinterfaces aimedattheelderly.These
DGP are divided in three types of guidelines: senior user characteristics, learning
processes, and UX (user experience)/UI (user interface) design.
The main goal of this work was the application of the proposed DGP on the
digital interfaces of three products in the scope the ICT4Silver project, namely:
‘ArkeaOnLife’, ‘PhysioSensing’, and ‘Kwido’.
Keywords: ICT4Silver · Senior user · Digital interface design · User
experience · User interface
1
Introduction
The work presented in this article is part of project ICT4Silver1 and its main objective
is to contribute to the development of digital interfaces, with a Design vision directed at
the senior population.
1 More information about the project at https://www.ict4silver.eu.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 178–188, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_17

ICT4Silver: Design Guidelines for the Development of Digital Interfaces
179
In 2050, SUDOE2 will have the oldest population in Europe, with 40% of the popula-
tion aged over 60 [1]. Faced with such evidence, there is a growing need to develop prod-
ucts and services adapted to the needs of the elderly, and consequently, the opportunity
to invest in Silver Economy3.
Based on this problem, the ICT4Silver project was created, which proposes responses
to market opportunities and social challenges, and enhancing ICT products (Information
and Communication Technologies) in the SUDOE space.
This project presents a research focused on products with digital interfaces aimed at
the senior population, proposing solutions that include factors such as the understanding
and acceptance of technology by this type of users. The importance of the designer, in
this case, lies in the elimination of barriers between senior users and ICT products.
The study also focuses on the development of a relevant knowledge base, for
designers and researchers, on the guiding principles of design for senior users.
The practical phase of the project was divided into two stages of development: the
ﬁrst involving the development of design guiding principles (DGP); and the second, on
the application of DGP in three different products.
In the ﬁrst phase, the DGP are developed following three guidelines: the character-
istics of senior users; learning; and the design of digital interfaces.
In the second phase, the redesign of the ICT4Silver project products was imple-
mented, based on the developed DGP. The problems of the three products under study
are structured, based on surveys and usability tests, as well as on the use of the DGP
carried out. Based on the problems, possible redesign solutions were developed, also
based on the established DGP, and on the analysis of competing products in the market.
The methodology adopted in product redesign is based on Agile Design and Design
Thinking processes, with the objective of combining agile processes, empathy and
creativity.
2
Technology, Senior User and Design
The state of the art, presented here, focuses on the themes of design, technology, and
senior users, namely, ICT products with digital interfaces; senior users, in relation to their
characteristics and limitations; and, ﬁnally, the importance of design in the relationship
between the senior user and technology.
2.1
Technology’s Relationship with the Senior User
Today, ICT is part of everyday life in developed societies and can also be of signiﬁcant
beneﬁt to older people who are typically not comfortable adhering to this type of product,
mainly because they experience great difﬁculties in using it.
These problems should make designers aware of the importance of knowing the char-
acteristicsofusers,especiallytheelderly,inordertodesigninclusivesolutions.Designers
2 South-west European Territorial Cooperation Programme.
3 Economy corresponding to the speciﬁc needs of the population above 60 years of age.

180
N. Martins et al.
should understand that the process of designing products for the elderly requires knowl-
edge of the user’s attitudes and motivations, as well as their barriers and advantages of
use [2].
There are several factors that inﬂuence the individual to adopt an ICT product.
The socio-economic level and the geographical location are vital factors that should be
considered.
Seniors from higher socioeconomic levels have more experience with technology
and seniors in urban geographical areas have easier contact with technology products.
According to Hawthorn [2], the adoption of technology by older people depends on
two important factors: the utility of the technology, and the ease with which they use
it. The advantage of using the product is equally important for prompting adoption. If
elderly users understand the advantages of using a given product, they will realize its
usefulness. If the product is easy to use, the motivation to adopt it will also be positive
[3].
Learning is another important factor, as is practice for acquiring experience.
Technology is constantly evolving, and learning should always be considered and
adapted.
Zajicek (2001, cited by [4]) adds that the cause of the poor relationship between the
elderly and technology lies in human factors and the necessary faculties for the individual
to be able to interact. For example, in a digital interface, the lack of visual acuity hinders
interactivity and the understanding of information. The degradation of memory reduces
the ability to build conceptual models, and the decrease in motor dexterity hinders the
ability to perform tasks. These disabilities and difﬁculties reduce the elderly’s conﬁdence
in dealing with technology and facing new challenges.
2.2
The Contribution of Design to the Relationship Between Senior User
and Technology
In recent years, themes such as user, interface design, User Interface (UI) and User
Experience (UX) have been the subject of in-depth research. Usability has become a very
important parameter, leading its creators to the development of user-centered design.
In the development of the design process it is necessary to know the needs, prefer-
ences, skills, motivations and limitations related to user-pain. Czaja et al. [5] add to these
factors the relevance of including and involving the senior user in the design process
early and frequently. In the same line of thought, Newell et al. (cited by [2]) state that
obtaining knowledge about the aging process is not sufﬁcient for the work of a designer.
It is not enough to know the common limitations and characteristics of a user group; it
is necessary to interact with the user.
The aim of UI Design is to make interaction efﬁcient and enjoyable. The user experi-
ence (UX Design) is inﬂuenced by the interface design choices. Interactions and design
are not static, being inﬂuenced by the variation of technology systems, but also by the
variations of their users. The variability of skills in the age group of the elderly hinders
the designer’s goal, becoming a challenging job [5]. For this reason, the designer plays
a vital role.

ICT4Silver: Design Guidelines for the Development of Digital Interfaces
181
2.3
The Senior User
The deﬁnition of the concept of a senior user is complex due to the variety of character-
istics of this user group [3]. In order to understand the senior user, it is important to know
the characteristics common to the ageing process, but also the individual characteristics.
According to Cancela: “The decline of different physiological structures takes place
at different rates, with the ageing process and life expectancy differing between indi-
viduals” (cited in [6] p. 109). The aging process includes physiological, as well as psy-
chological, social and economic characteristics. In aging, the body gradually changes,
becoming more fragile in its ability to adapt to external conditions [6].
3
Design Guiding Principles and Their Application
Possible barriers in the adaptation of technological products by the senior user are created
when there is no design research on this type of users - resulting in exclusive and unusable
products.
The products under study, ArkeaOnlife, PhysioSensing and Kwido, are examples of
products that present barriers to the senior user and that, through this study, new design
solutions are presented in order to make them inclusive.
3.1
Guiding Principles for Digital Interface Design
The design guiding principles (DGP) presented in this study, are directed to the senior
user and applied to products with digital interfaces. They are based on three fundamental
points: characteristics and needs of the senior user; guiding principles of design learning;
and guiding principles of design (UX and UI).
The guidelines presented refer to authors such as Czaja et al. [5] and Hawthorn [2],
and also to design references for digital interface applications, such as ––“Accessibility”
Material Design [7]; “Make apps more accessible” [8]; “Introduction - Accessibility -
HumanInterfaceGuidelines”[9];and,fortheWeb,theW3CWebAccessibilityInitiative
[10].
Characteristics of the Senior User. The senior user is a complex user who has, within
the group of elderly, common but also individual attributes. The common characteristics
of the aging process are preceptive, cognitive and psychomotor. The characteristics
responsible for the individuality of the elderly are demographic and psychographic.
Demographiccharacteristicsarerelatedtorace,ethnicity,education,healthstatusand
family structures. Different levels of education, increased age-schooling in the elderly,
better health conditions, fewer young people providing care, different types of families
and increased cultural and ethnic diversity are some of the factors related to demography
that inﬂuence the individual characteristics of the elderly.
The psychographic characteristics are personality, motivation, attitude and interests.
Individual characteristics are important in the exercise of technology adoption by the
senior population. On the other hand, the low motivation of the elderly in adhering to
technology, the openness to experience, fear and inhibition, as well as the stability of

182
N. Martins et al.
interests and prejudice associated with the elderly, hinder the adoption of technological
products.
The common characteristics of the aging process provide comparative data, which
help in the creation of parameters. These characteristics are preceptive, cognitive, and
psychomotor, and are related to the usability of the product. The ease of use is affected
by the way the individual understands and interacts with the interface.
Perceptive characteristics are related to vision and hearing and inﬂuence the ability
to perceive and understand elements such as text, images, icons and buttons. Interaction
is also affected by changes in visual abilities. Elderly people are slower to identify,
understand and read. In hearing, their loss makes it difﬁcult to identify and understand
sounds.
In psychomotor characteristics, speed, direction and strength are affected by age,
making it difﬁcult to interact with a digital interface. The alteration of the sensitivity to
touch and the understanding of the position of the body itself also hinder its usability.
Cognitive characteristics are altered in memory, attention and cognitive performance:
– The damage caused to the memory makes it difﬁcult, in the short term and in the long
term, to understand the mental maps of an interface.
– Changes in attention create barriers in the performance of tasks, even of a simple
nature.
– Cognitive ability also changes, hindering responsiveness and the creation of new
methodologies.
These are some of the characteristics common to the aging process and that should be
taken into account by designers when building a product with inclusive digital interfaces.
Guiding Principles of Learning. We understand learning as any and all actions that
involve training related to the use of a product, with digital interface. In this study, the
following learnings are considered:
– trainings and classes, with teachers specialized in digital interfaces and ICT;
– tutorials (documents, videos, websites, etc.);
– instructions for use of the product;
– instructions and aids inserted in the digital product, as an integral part of the interface,
such as: pop-ups, help menus and artiﬁcial intelligence.
In the guiding principles of learning, the user barriers in its adoption, the training
process, and the characteristics of the support are highlighted.
In the training processes it is important to consider the environment, the trainer and
the information support. The trainer should be knowledgeable about the programmatic
contents but should also be aware of the characteristics and barriers of the elderly individ-
ual. In the tutorials, the contents should include design concerns, such as knowledge and
visual heritage, content organization and sizes. Product instructions should also contain
usability concerns and user barriers.

ICT4Silver: Design Guidelines for the Development of Digital Interfaces
183
Guiding learning principles are important in the adoption of a product. If the senior
usercanunderstandtheadvantages,itcancorrespondtothemotivationtousetheproduct,
but if the introduction is not adapted, its adoption will not be met.
Design Guiding Principles (UX and UI) of Digital Interfaces. Issues related to the
adjustment of the interface to the elderly user and the design resources that can minimize
the obstacles created by the aging process are addressed. Design guidelines are provided
with input and output interface element approaches.
The guidelines presented focus on the following design and usability points:
– guiding principles regarding the graphic component (iconography, color, typography,
text and messages, composition, graphics and images);
– guiding principles regarding interaction (usability, path and behavior, mental model,
selection and activation of items, structure and architecture, interactive elements,
transitions of interface pages, interaction aids and customization features);
– other guiding principles (audio, language, feature design and text input).
3.2
Redesign of Products Belonging to the ICT4Silver Project: ArkeaOnLife,
PhysioSensing and Kwido
Given the aging of the population and the scarcity of products and services that meet the
needs of the elderly, the ICT4Silver project has two main objectives: the ﬁrst is to ﬁnd
answers to help in matters of health and to maintain the independence of the elderly,
with special focus on rural areas under SUDOE; the second is to assist products and
companies, in the SUDOE space, for entry into the Silver Economy market [1].
The ICT4Silver products proposed for analysis and development were: ArkeaOn-
Life, PhysioSensing and Kwido (see Fig. 1). These products were selected by combining
their degree of maturity and availability of information for analysis.
ArkeaOnLife is a brand of Crédit Mutuel Arkéa, dedicated to connected living and
home, for the independent user, or the user residing in specialized homes. This product
is a smartwatch that allows emergency alerts, emergency calls and location of the elderly
user.
PhysioSensing is a portable platform for balance and pressure, with visual bio
feedback technology, through software.
Kwido is a mobile application that allows the sharing of information between the
elderly user, the companies providing care, and associated health teams.
Throughout the ICT4Siver project, products were studied and tested with their users.
The tests were carried out by institutions within the ICT4Silver consortium, in order to
accelerate the entry of the products into Silver Economy.
In the development phase of this project, different methods and strategies were
considered,inalignmentwiththeworkprocessesofAgileDesignandDesignThinking,in
order to allow a product to be developed with greater empathy and agility. The subscribed
methodology was intended to allow optimum degrees of contact with the senior user.
Three phases of Leam4 development were adopted: “thinking”, “make” and “test”.
In the ﬁrst phase of the methodology, “thinking”, the possible chances of development
4 Work processes based on Agile Design methodologies.

184
N. Martins et al.
Fig. 1. ICT4Silver products (ArkeaOnLife, PhysioSensing e Kwido).
are structured. In the second stage, “make”, a prototype is drawn up on the basis of the
hypotheses and, ﬁnally, in the ﬁnal stage, the proposal is made to the users.
In the ﬁrst phase, the methodologies of Design Thinking are introduced: empathy,
deﬁnition and idealization, in order to introduce a user-centered methodology.
In the “thinking” phase, the users and their characteristics are deﬁned, through studies
carried out during the course of the project. Usability tests and surveys are also analysed
in order to understand user satisfaction [11, 12]; design; learning; and the technical
limitationsofthethreeproductsunderstudy.Theproblemspresentedbyusersinusability
tests are identiﬁed, as well as the difﬁculties examined, based on the guidelines presented
during the development of the project [13, 14]. Studies were conducted on competing
products (OscarSenior, Senior Phone, Ownfone, Beezie and Omate) in order to collect
their attributes and solutions of UX and UI Design.
At the deﬁnition stage, brainstorming techniques and diagrams are used in order to
gather all the ideas and indicate points of relevance for the project.
Finally, in the conception stage, Workﬂow is performed, with the architecture of the
three different supports: clock, platform, software and mobile application.
The “make” phase is composed of the elaboration of a hypothesis and the creation
of a minimally viable product (MVP). This product has the potential to be tested with
its user, gathering the necessary feedback. The Wireframes of the three products were
accordingly created, enabling the product’s interactivity and usability to be understood;
the ﬁrst prototypes were then created, with a focus on determining aspects such as the
positioning of the elements, navigation ﬂow, priority of functionalities and contrast; and,
ﬁnally, the identity of each brand was analyzed and the visual design of each product
was prepared [15–17].
At this stage only a few screens are designed, as the aim is to test the MVP with the
user and then, in a circular way, deepen and ﬁnalize the digital product. At this point of
development, prototypes and mockups are produced.
In the “test” stage, the MVP is introduced, validating (or not) the product. If the
product is not validated, it returns to the “make” stage. Usability tests and A/B tests can
be performed.
Some of the elaborated considerations are presented in detail for each of the products
under development. Such considerations are a selection of problems concerning the
usability and design of the products, and subsequently, possible solutions.

ICT4Silver: Design Guidelines for the Development of Digital Interfaces
185
ArkeaOnLife. In the ArkeaOnLife product there were problems such as the difﬁculty
in reading the numbers, as well as the lack of information on the calendar and battery
status. For the elderly, the information should be present in a very visible way to help
them in reading and memory. In the elaboration of the new screens for the product,
solutions were presented such as the addition of all the clock numbers and the creation
of a second screen, with digital numbering and with calendar information and battery
status; see Fig. 2. A third battery alert screen was also created.
Fig. 2. New solutions for the ArkeaOnLife product.
PhysioSensing. In this product the main problems were the long menus without hierar-
chy and difﬁcult to use interaction targets. The elderly has greater difﬁculty in concen-
tration and visual selection, as well as motor difﬁculties in control, speed and direction.
At the interface, the creation of menus with hierarchies and no levels of interaction was
suggested. Touch targets and pointer targets were also changed and adapted to the visual
and motor characteristics of the user. To help the working memory a site map and related
elements were proposed to navigate back easily. The absence of contrast and the use of
short-wave colors such as green and blue, also present levels of difﬁculty, 0thus a color
palette based on the accentuated contrast was developed.
The creation of a ﬂuid reading, using a constant and repetitive architecture (see Fig. 3)
is proposed in order to avoid the constant use of cognitive abilities, such as concentration
and memory.
Kwido. One of the problems in the Kwido interface was the extensive menu, with undi-
rected and confusing contents. As a result, the different users (seniors, caregivers and
health teams) found it difﬁcult to locate the content aimed at them. In this product, an
initial menu was thus created in order to organise the contents by type of user. Kwido
also presents problems such as the excess of content, making it difﬁcult to concentrate

186
N. Martins et al.
Fig. 3. New solutions for the product PhysioSensing.
and navigate ﬂuidly; and targets of interaction with elements are too small and lacking
in contrast and white space, which is reﬂected in a disorderly and hierarchical appli-
cation. As a solution, the simpliﬁcation of information was proposed, incorporating
targeted content, buttons with appropriate dimensions and white space with hierarchies
and contrast (see Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. Study of the Kwido product (on the right, the proposed new solution).

ICT4Silver: Design Guidelines for the Development of Digital Interfaces
187
4
Conclusions
The goal of this project was to deﬁne and establish a design basis for supporting design-
ers of digital products that meets the requirements as well as the needs of the elderly
population.
There are currently in the market many interesting and promising technological prod-
ucts for the senior population which are actually not suitable for their intended market.
This is due to physical and psychological characteristics, as well as some limitations,
of the elderly. Considering this population segment is only expected to grow substan-
tially in coming years, clearly there is both a societal need and a business opportunity in
the creation and adaptation of technology-based products for the elderly. Through this
project, we hope to not only help establish guidelines for the designers of such products,
but simultaneously to raise the designers’ awareness of inclusivity concerns.
Finally, it should be noted that through this work, we expect to raise awareness and
promote a more inclusive technological society, which will beneﬁt not only the users but
the developers, since increasing both offer and demand of ICT products will help foster
the growth of the Silver Economy.
References
1. ICT4Silver: Project - ICT4silver. http://www.ict4silver.eu. Accessed 06 Aug 2019
2. Hawthorn, D.: Designing Effective Interfaces for Older Users (2006)
3. Nielson, J.: Usability for Senior Citizens. https://www.nngroup.com/articles/usability-for-sen
ior-citizens. Accessed 06 Mar 2020
4. Pereira, L.: Princípios orientadores de design de interfaces para aplicações ITV orientadas
para seniores portugueses. FBAUP (2014)
5. Czaja, S.J., Boot, W.R., Charness, N., Rogers, W.A.: Designing for Older Adults. (Boca, R.,
Ed.) (3rd ed.) CRC Press (2019). https://bookshelf.vitalsource.com/#/books/9781351682244.
Accessed 27 Sep 2019
6. Fonseca, I., Amado, P., Costa, L.: Desenho de interfaces para seniores: desaﬁos e oportu-
nidades no projeto SEDUCE. Prisma.com (2014)
7. MaterialDesign.https://material.io/design/usability/accessibility.html.Accessed06Oct2019
8. Developer, A.: Make apps more accessible - Android developer. https://developer.android.
com/guide/topics/ui/accessibility/apps, Accessed 03 Aug 2019
9. Developer Apple. https://developer.apple.com/design/human-interface-guidelines/accessibi
lity/overview/introduction. Accessed 23 Aug 2019
10. W3C Web Accessibility Initiative: Older Users and Web Accessibility. https://www.w3.org/
WAI/older-users/. Accessed 18 Apr 2020
11. Sousa, F., Martins, N.: Learning experience design:: instructional design applied to the
onboarding of digital products. In: Martins, N., Brandão, D. (eds.) Advances in Design and
Digital Communication: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Design and
Digital Communication, Digicom 2020, November 5–7, 2020, Barcelos, Portugal, pp. 45–
57. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-616
71-7_5
12. Martins, N., Dominique-Ferreira, S., Lopes, C.: Design and development of a digital platform
for seasonal jobs: improving the hiring process. J. Glob. Scholars Market. Sci. (2021). https://
doi.org/10.1080/21639159.2020.1808851

188
N. Martins et al.
13. Martins, N., Campos, J., Simoes, R.: Activerest: design of a graphical interface for the remote
use of continuous and holistic care providers. Adv. Sci. Technol. Eng. Syst. J. 5(2), 635–645
(2020). https://doi.org/10.25046/aj050279
14. Campos, J., Martins, N., Portela, D., Pereira, S., Simões, R.: Development of a graphical
interface for continuous and holistic care providers. In: Proceedings of 14th Iberian Confer-
ence on Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI), Coimbra, 19–22 June 2019. IEEE,
pp. 139–150 (2019). https://doi.org/10.23919/CISTI.2019.8760994
15. Oliveira, D., Neves, J., Raposo, D., Silva, J.: Research project management in communication
design:designmethodologyappliedtocommunicationdesignresearch.In:Raposo,D.,Neves,
J., Silva, J., Castilho, L.C., Dias, R. (eds.) Advances in Design, Music and Arts: 7th Meeting
of Research in Music, Arts and Design, EIMAD 2020, May 14–15, 2020, pp. 79–93. Springer
International Publishing, Cham (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-55700-3_6
16. Raposo, D.: Communicating Visually. In: Raposo, D. (Ed.), Communicating Visually: The
Graphic Design of the Brand, pp. 20–41 (2018). Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing
17. Raposo, D., da Silva, F.M., Neves, J., Silva, J.: Clarifying the concept of corporate identity:
from a collective vision to cultural interface. In: Rebelo, F., Soares, M. (eds.) AHFE 2017.
AISC, vol. 588, pp. 600–609. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
60582-1_60

Dynamic Analysis of a Robot Locomotion
for an External Pipe Inspection and Monitoring
Bogdan Gr˘amescu(B)
, Adrian Cartal
, Ahmed Sachit Hashim, and Constantin Nit,u
Department of Mechatronics and Precision Mechanics, University “POLITEHNICA” of
Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania
{bogdan.gramescu,adrian.cartal,constantin.nitu}@upb.ro
Abstract. The paper presents the dynamic analysis of a robot locomotion along
the external oil and gas pipelines, for the purpose of their inspection and monitor-
ing. The work is focused on both regular crawling motion and obstacles avoiding.
During regular motion, the robot resembles to a crank-slider mechanism with equal
lengths of the crank and rod, while for stepping over obstacles it becomes an open
chain with double actuated leverage. For each of both motions, there were built
models in 20-sim environment, for which the simulation results are presented.
Keywords: Mobile robot · External pipe inspection · Dynamic analysis
1
Introduction
The importance of the oil and gas industry for the world economy is obvious. The weather
conditions of the areas where these resources are mainly exploited, and the personnel
costs are reasons for use of mobile robotics within this industry [1]. Robotics is expected
to help for monitoring, inspection and detection of pipelines defects as cracks, corrosion,
and leakage, or for maintenance operations (e.g. deposition cleaning). For this purpose,
the inspection mechatronic systems require movement along the pipe.
Most of the actual robots developed for this industry do the job inside the pipe
[2–4]. There are different types of locomotion like wheels driven, inchworm or screw
techniques. The main advantage of these inspection robots is the adjustment to variable
pipe diameters and detection/cleaning of the internal depositions. The main disadvantage
is the need for pipe dismantling for performing this operation.
An alternative solution is to use the outer surface of the pipe for locomotion and
inspection tasks [5]. In this case, the inchworm technique or actuated wheels are regular
solutions. The locomotion principle and mechanism should be also adequate to avoid
obstacles like ﬂanges, elbows turning left/right or up/down, etc. There is necessary to
have at least two grasping mechanism, for locomotion over external surface of the pipes.
2
Developed Robotic Structure as Demonstrator
The robotic structure was developed [6] to travel along the pipelines, carrying sensorial
equipment and communication devices, in order to perform the inspection of the pipes
and data transmission.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 189–200, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_18

190
B. Gr˘amescu et al.
a. 
  b.
   c.
Fig. 1. Locomotion of the inspection robot along a pipe (a. - schematics, b. - small scale
demonstrator, c. - clamping mechanism)
The complete system consists of a speciﬁc mechanism – electro-mechanical unit,
which is the plant of the automatic system, integrated with sensors and actuators, two
power supply units of different nominal voltages, with step down circuits, a control unit
and a communication unit. This is a small-scale demonstrator (Fig. 1), able to travel
along a pipeline of 50 mm diameter, and to avoid obstacles like elbows, ﬂanges, etc. The
analysis is also valid for a real scale robot, but the adequate components (mechanical
structure, power supply and actuators) must be chosen when it is built.
An important function of the robot structure is its inchworm locomotion (see Fig. 1
a). This speciﬁc motion consists of alternating clamping of the worm’s body ends,
followed by body extensions and contractions alternatively. For clamping the ends of
the robot body, if taken into consideration that its pathway is mostly a cylindrical surface
(external surface of the pipe), a grasping mechanism seems to be the most appropriate
solution. These devices are useful, during operation, mainly for two tasks: to ascertain
their adequate position, in order to be aligned to the pipeline axis and to fasten the robot’s
ends on the pipe.
Using a rotational motor would diminish the size of the clamping mechanism, while
letting ﬁxed one of its jaws and the other mobile will lead to a cheaper design (Fig. 1
c). It is obvious that only a theoretical and experimental evaluation of the ﬁxation grade
could be the criterion for ﬁnal decision making [7].
For the inspection of the surface, some scanning devices, camera and sensors must
be moved around the pipe for inspecting its circumference. This requires a manipulator,
attached to the robot body, which can position the camera and sensors (C&S) at equally
distanced points on a circle, which is centered on the pipe axis, while the C&S incidence
line is on radial direction of the pipe. The developed manipulator [8] consists of three
bars open chain mechanism with active joints, as in Fig. 2.

Dynamic Analysis of a Robot Locomotion for an External Pipe Inspection
191
Fig. 2. Scanning manipulator
3
Modeling of the Robot Crawling Along the Pipe Using Actuator
XYZ Robot A1–16
According to the inchworm locomotion presented in Fig. 1a, there are four motion stages
for obtaining one step: two clamping, one extension and one retraction. The movement
is accomplished by positioning of the active joints A, B, C, which are powered by servos
XYZ A1–16.
3.1
Modeling of the Actuator XYZ Robot A1–16
The main advantages of this actuator are its low price, high torque and good resolution,
in a small volume. The accompanying disadvantages are the lack of the data for building
its model and the difﬁcult access to the internal PID controller of the positioning closed
loop, without its dedicated controller.
As concerns the poor datasheet of the servo, it was compensated by experimental
research [9], which enabled measuring or identiﬁcation of the servo’s physical param-
eters, necessary for modeling. Generally, a DC motor is characterized by an electrical
equation and a mechanical one:
u = Ldi
dt + Ri + kω · ω
(1)
T = kt · i = Jeq
dω
dt + Tfr + TL
(2)
where: u – control voltage; i – current, L – winding inductance; R – winding resis-
tance; ω - angular velocity of the output shaft; kt - motor torque coefﬁcient, multiplied
by the gear ratio; kω - back EMF constant; T- motor torque, multiplied by the gear ratio;
Jeq – equivalent inertia of the motor rotor and gears, at the output shaft; Tfr – internal
friction torque of the servo; TL – load torque.
The values determined by experimental research and processing of the device
datasheet are: the control voltage is upper limited to u = 12 V; R = 5.06 Ω; kt=
1.034 N.m/A; kω= 1.034 V.s/rad, Jeq= 5.7×10−5kg.m2.
The model of the servo actuator XYZ A1–16 is a simpliﬁed approach, where the
actual PWM control of the DC motor is considered a current control, and the dig-
ital PID controller is replaced by a continuous one. The winding inductance was

192
B. Gr˘amescu et al.
not measured/determined, because it has no signiﬁcance, when the motor is current
controlled.
Fig. 3. Simpliﬁed model of the servo A1–16 in 20-sim
The model exploits the 20-sim facility of combining the Signal library with the
Bond Graph one, which is based on power variables (Fig. 3). The internal friction of the
actuator was experimentally determined and a modiﬁed Karnopp model was used to ﬁt
the measured data, because it is well known for solving the numerical drawback, when
the velocity values are very small, almost zero.
Fig. 4. Karnopp’s modiﬁed model of friction
According to the Fig. 4, Karnopp introduced a small interval [−δ, + δ] of the angular
velocity, for which the friction torque is the minimum between |TS| and |Ta|, where TS
is the value of the stiction torque, experimentally determined [9] (TS = 0.109 N.m)
and Ta is the actuator torque. This period is called stiction, when the moving part is
almost still. The model differs from the original one, by the linear variation with the
angular velocity, instead of parallel lines to abscissa, at +TC and −TC ordinate values
(Coulomb friction). Mathematical model of the modiﬁed Karnopp model is expressed
by the following equations:
Tslip =

0.0891 + 0.0082 · ω
if ω ≥δ
−0.0891 −0.0082 · ω
if ω ≤−δ
(3)
Tstick =
 min (Ta, TS)
if −δ < ω < δ and Ta ≥0
min (Ta, −TS)
if −δ < ω < δ and Ta ≤0
(4)

Dynamic Analysis of a Robot Locomotion for an External Pipe Inspection
193
The new model is called modiﬁed because the original Karnopp model keeps the slip
torque constant at Coulomb value, while the modiﬁed one introduces the viscous friction
(linear dependence with angular velocity), as it was experimentally found. The equations
are implemented into the new developed block Karnopp, as an equation submodel, shown
in the model from Fig. 3.
This model does not contain a speed loop, because the Arduino board, used for con-
trol, cannot control both speed and position simultaneously, as the proprietary associated
microcontroller unit and XYZ_Motor_Editor_Driver_v3 can do. The model from Fig. 3
uses a PID_p controller from the Signal library of 20-sim, which means a parallel form
of the PID controller with the following transfer function:
C(s) = u
ε = K

1 + 1
Tis +
Tds
1 + Td
N s

(5)
where: u – output of the controller (command signal); ε = SP-MV – error signal; K
– proportional controller gain; Ti - integral time constant (Ti > 0); Td - derivative time
constant (Td > 0); N – derivative gain limitation.
Fig. 5. A1–16 response for a 60° step reference (initial position 30°)
For a target (reference) position of π/3 (1.047) rad, when the following PID param-
eters are used: K = 5; N = 100; Ti = 1.6; Td = 0.5, the result is the curve in Fig. 5. It is
to be noticed that the target position is reached in about 5 s, after an overshoot of about
12%. The movement starts from an initial position, θ = π/6, for a further comparison
with the actuation of the robotic chain, during locomotion.
3.2
Modeling of the Inchworm Locomotion, Actuated by the Servos XYZ Robot
A1–16
In this stage of the robot development, based on the mechanical design realized in a CAD
environment, the values of the inertia and masses of the robot components, involved in
the dynamic model, were determined, as well as the distances between the mass centers
and the robot joints.
Due to the symmetrical built of the kinematic chain, the bodies attached to the
joints A and C can be ﬁrstly ﬁxed (A actuated and clamping mechanism E opened –
the II stage of the complete inchworm cycle) and, then prismatic one (C actuated and
clamping mechanism D opened – the IV stage of the complete inchworm cycle). From
the geometric/kinematic point of view, there is only a sign difference between the two

194
B. Gr˘amescu et al.
stages, but from the dynamic point of view, the difference is essential, because while
in the ﬁrst one the gravity forces help the motion, in the second one they oppose to it.
That’s why, both the kinematics and the dynamics of the stage IV are analyzed.
During the locomotion process, when one clamp, denoted by A or C, is activated,
the arm attached to it performs a rotation around the joint with the same notation. In this
case, for ﬁnding the moment of inertia of this arm, Steiner’s theorem is applied. The arm
BC rotates around the joint C (Fig. 6), and the moment of inertia is:
JBC(C) = JBC(G1) + mBC · l2
G1
(6)
Fig. 6. Crank-slider mechanism in stage IV of locomotion
The distances between the mass centers of the arms BC, AB and the joints C and A,
were measured in CAD environment: lG1= 112 mm and lG2= 131 mm.
The equivalent moment of inertia, which replaces the masses and moments of inertia
of the entire kinematic chain, is obtained from the equivalence between the kinetic
energy of the virtual substitute element and the sum of kinetic energies of each other
components of the kinematic chain:
Jeq · ω2
2
= JBC(C)ω2
2
+ JAB(G2)ω2
2
+ mABv2
G2
2
+ mAv2
Ax
2
(7)
By taking into consideration the equations of the geometrical model [6], in respect
with notations of Fig. 6, it results:
Jeq = JBC(G1) + JAB(G2) + mAB · l2
G2 + 4[mAB · l(l −lG2) + mSl2] · sin2θ
(8)
The equivalent load torque can be evaluated from the mechanical work of the resistant
forces, which are the gravity forces of the two arms and friction force of the slider:
TLeq · ω = mBCg · vG1y + mABg · vG2y + μmSg · vAx
(9)
The Eq. (9) can be simpliﬁed:
TLeq = (mABlG1 + mBClG2)gcosθ + 2μmS · glsinθ
(10)
The determined masses and moments of inertia involved in the Eqs. (8) and (10) are
presented in the Table 1.

Dynamic Analysis of a Robot Locomotion for an External Pipe Inspection
195
Table 1. Inertial parameters of the robotic chain components.
Parameter
ms
mAB
mBC
JAB(G2)
JBC(G1)
Unit
kg
kg
kg
kg.m2
kg.m2
Value
0.503
0.331
0.376
6.93×
10–4
7.53×
10–4
Using the values from Table 1, the Eqs. (9) and (10) became:
Jeq = 0.0118 + 0.165 · sin2θ
(11)
TLeq = 0.838 · cosθ + 0.493 · sinθ
(12)
where it was considered μ = 0.2. The functions are deﬁned for the values θ ∈[30°,
60°]. As in this range sinθ is an increasing function, the maximum value of Jeq is reached
for θ = 60°, Jeq= 0.135 kg.m2. For the entire range of θ, the equivalent moment of inertia
varies between the limits [0.053, 0.135] kg.m2. On the other side, the equivalent load
torque is practically decreasing on the same interval. As concerns the maximum value
of TLeq, the ﬁrst derivative applied to (12) leads to: tanθ = 0.493/0.838 = 0.588. That
means θ = 30.47◦. Practically, TLeq is maximum at the interval left end and minimum
at the right end of the range. TLeq varies from 0.972 N.m for θ = 30°, to 0.846 N.m
for θ = 60°. This fact can compensate the torque spent for the acceleration of the robot
components, if the angular acceleration is kept under a certain limit. If an almost linear
variation of Jeq and TLeq is assumed, at the ends of the angular interval can be written:
Jeqmin · ε + TLeqmax = Ta
(13)
Jeqmax · ε + TLeqmin = Ta
(14)
where Ta is the actuator torque; ε - angular acceleration. By subtracting (13) from
(14), it results a maximum angular acceleration:
ε = TLeqmax −TLeqmin
Jeqmax −Jeqmin
= 1.54 s−2
(15)
The paper presents the ﬁrst attempt to check the servo capability for the worst
conditions, meaning that both Jeq and TLeq will have maximum values.
As it can be seen in Fig. 7, a modulated effort source was added in order to introduce
the load torque (0.972 N.m), while the equivalent moment of inertia for the crank-slider
mechanism is added to the initial value of the inertance, I (equivalent inertia of the motor
and gears).
The response is substantially improved just modifying the initial PID gain from K
= 5 to K = 10 (see Fig. 8) but keeping the other parameters (N = 100; Ti= 1.6; Td=
0.5). The deviation from the reference position is 4×10–3 rad, which very satisfying.

196
B. Gr˘amescu et al.
Fig. 7. Model of the loaded servo A1–16 with the maximum torque and inertia
Fig. 8. Position response of the crank-slider mechanism for a 60° step reference (initial position
30°) with the increased gain to K = 10
These simulation results demonstrate the capability of the robotic chain to perform
the proposed crawling along the pipeline, when it is actuated by only one servo. An
alternative, and surely a reliable solution for performing the inchworm locomotion is the
coordinated actuation of two servos, which can provide more input power, but tracking
a certain trajectory.
3.3
Modeling of the Obstacles Overtaking
During locomotion, the robot can cross over ﬂanges or ﬁxing brackets, for which it needs
to go over larger diameters than that of the pipe or should turn left-right or up-down,
when an elbow is encountered. For the dynamic behavior veriﬁcation, it was selected the
movement stage, which is considered the most disadvantageous concerning the inertial
load and the torque generated by the gravity forces.
From the strategy for ﬂange/bracket, elbow up and elbow down overpassing, it was
selected the transition state shown in Fig. 9, in which one actuator of the robotic structure
is extremely loaded, both inertially and by torques of the gravity forces, because it has
to raise vertically the arm BC, while the triangle ABC is kept equilateral.
The robot uses the actuator C to raise the equilateral triangle ABC, from initial
position θ = π/3 to the ﬁnal position θ = π/2 (see Fig. 9 b). For this transition, the
equivalent moment of inertia and resistant torque must be evaluated, in order to perform
the dynamics simulation. The model used is presented in Fig. 10.
For the state shown in the Fig. 9, b, using Fig. 10, the equivalent moment of inertia
is derived from:
Jeq · ω2
C
2
= JBC(C) · ω2
C
2
+ JAB(G2) · ω2
C
2
+ mAB · v2
G2
2
+ mA,CA · v2
A
2
(16)

Dynamic Analysis of a Robot Locomotion for an External Pipe Inspection
197
a)
b)
Fig. 9. Transition states veriﬁed for ﬂange/bracket overpassing
Fig. 10. For inertia and gravity torque calculation
where: ωC – angular velocity around the joint C; JBC(C) – moment of inertia of the
arm BC, around the axis C; JAB(G2) – moment of inertia of the arm AB, around its mass
center; mAB – mass of the arm AB; vG2 – linear velocity of the arm AB; mA,CA – mass
of the clamping mechanism CA. The linear velocity of CA is the time derivative of the
segment AA’:
vA = d
dt (l · sinθ) = l · cosθ · ωC
(17)
For calculating the linear velocity of G2, the segment CG2 must be ﬁrstly calculated.
According to Fig. 10, this is:
CG2
2 = l2 + l2
2 −2l · l2cos60◦= l2 + l2
2 −l · l2
(18)
and
v2
G2 = CG2
2 · ω2
C =

l2 + l2
2 −l · l2

· ω2
C
(19)
By substituting (17), (18), (19) in (16), it results:
Jeq = JBC(c) + JAB(G2) + mAB

l2 + l2
2 −l · l2

+ mA,CA · l2cos2θ
(20)
As concerns the equivalent resistant torque, generated by the robot gravity forces, it
is calculated from the equivalent power conserving:
Treq · ωC = mA,CA · g · vA + mAB · g · vG2y + mBC · g · vG1y
(21)

198
B. Gr˘amescu et al.
Where :
vG2y = vG2 · cos(θ + α) =

l2 + l2
2 −l · l2 · ωC · cos(θ + α)
(22)
And
vG1y = vG1 · cos

θ + 60◦	
= l1 · ωC · cos

θ + 60◦	
(23)
The unknown angle, α, can be derived from triangle ACG2 (Fig. 10), by applying
both sine and cosine theorems:
sinα
l2
=
sin60◦

l2 + l2
2 −l · l2
(24)
l2
2 = l2 + l2 + l2
2 −l · l2 −2l

l2 + l2
2 −l · l2cosα
(25)
From (24) and (25), it results:
sinα =
l2
√
3
2

l2 + l2
2 −l · l2
(26)
And
cosα =
2l −l2
2

l2 + l2
2 −l · l2
.
(27)
Firstly, there are introduced (17), (22) and (23) in (21) and it is obtained:
Treq = mA,CA.gl.cosθ + mAB.g

l2 + l2
2 −l.l2 . cos(θ + α) + mBC · gl1cos

θ + 60◦	
(28)
If (26) and (27) are introduced in (28), the equivalent resistant torque is expressed
as:
Treq
g
=

mA,CA · l + mAB

l −l2
2

+ mBC · l1
2

cosθ −
√
3
2 (mABl2 + mBCl1)sinθ
(29)
Knowing that l1 = lG1 = 112 mm, l2 = lG2 = 131 mm and by use of the values
from Table 1, the Eq. (6) gives JBC(C) = 5.47 · 10−3 kg · m2. The numerical result of
(20), to be used for simulation is:
Jeq = 2.169 · 10−2 + 1.562 · 10−3cos2θ
kg · m2
(30)
where θ ϵ [0, 30°]. Within this range, the maximum equivalent moment of inertia is
for θ = 0°
Jeqmax = 2.325 · 10−2kg · m2
(31)
The equivalent resistant torque can be calculated from (29), with the same values of
masses and lengths and assuming g = 9.81 m/s2. It results:
Treq = 2.1 · cosθ −0.7325 · sinθ
N · m
(32)

Dynamic Analysis of a Robot Locomotion for an External Pipe Inspection
199
The maximum value of the equivalent resistant torque is also for θ = 0°, Treqmax =
2.1 N.m.
It is to be noticed that both equivalent moment of inertia and the equivalent resistant
torque have maximum values for the initial position, θ = 0°. If in the model, the actuator
can raise the structure with these maximum values, then, for the real actuation will be
easier when the angle θ increases. The ﬁrst attempt to simulate the model with the new
values of Jeq and Treq was to check if the last PID parameters are adequate to perform
the imposed task and the result was unsatisfying. The solution was to increase the PID
gain from 10 to 25, for which the simulation result is presented in Fig. 11.
Fig. 11. Position response of the robotic chain for a 30° step reference (initial position 0°) with
the torque coefﬁcient diminished with 12% and K = 25 (PID)
Because it is not possible to change the PID parameters during operation, as having
K = 10 for locomotion and K = 25 for obstacles avoiding, it has to be veriﬁed if the
new PID parameters do not trouble the inchworm locomotion. Then, a simulation of the
locomotion step, with the last gain, K = 25, was run, with the system response shown
in Fig. 12.
Fig. 12. Position response of the crank-slider mechanism for a 60° step reference (initial position
30°) with the increased gain to K = 25
It was also checked, with positive results, if a controller gain increase can com-
pensate the negative deviation of the most important parameter of the DC motor – the
torque coefﬁcient. The lack of overshooting and oscillations at theoretical response is
a satisfying result, but the variation of the equivalent inertia and resistant torque with
the servo actuator position can introduce a velocity variation, which slightly modify the
actual response, Anyway, for each case the reference is reached, because the simulations

200
B. Gr˘amescu et al.
were run for the most disadvantageous circumstance, as it is the procedure in mechanical
engineering.
4
Conclusions
When developing a mobile robot, as for any mechatronic system, the simulations per-
formed on a model can save a lot of time of experimenting, because they approach to
the actual parameters values, without a physical prototype, which is more expensive.
The key information for the robot developing is the actuators complete characteriza-
tion, which can be done by help of simple experiments on them. This is a much stronger
request, for the cheap components, due to the poor information provided by the producer.
If possible, even the information from datasheet has to be checked.
The use of the servos in the development of mobile robots can solve effectively
the problem of actuation. Their small size, high output torque, fairly good accuracy and
affordable cost are convincing arguments for use at mini-robots and in this case for small
scale demonstrator of external pipe inspection robot.
References
1. Shukla, A., Karki, H.: Application of robotics in onshore oil and gas industry-a review part I.
Robot. Auton. Syst. 75, 490–507 (2016)
2. Sharma, S.L., Qavi, A., Kumari, K.: Oil pipelines/water pipeline crawling robot for leakage
detection/cleaning of pipes. Glob. J. Res. Eng. H Robot. Nano-Tech 14(1), 31–37 (2014)
3. Schempf, H., Mutschler, E., Gavaert, A., Skoptsov, G., Crowley, W.: Visual and nondestructive
evaluation inspection of live gas mains using the ExplorerTM family of pipe robots. J. Field
Rob. 27(3), 217–249 (2010)
4. Kotawad, A., Lad, K., Jadhav, S., Mandlik, R.: Identify the Deterioration in pipe by using
wheel operated robot. Int. J. Res. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol. 4(II), 278–281 (2016)
5. Singh, P., Ananthasuresh, G.K.: A Compact and compliant external pipe-crawling robot. IEEE
Trans. Rob. 29(1), 251–260 (2013)
6. Nit,u, C., Gr˘amescu, B., Hashim, A.S., Avram, M.: Inchworm locomotion of an external pipe
inspection and monitoring robot. In: Machado, J., Soares, F., Veiga, G. (eds.) HELIX 2018.
LNEE, vol. 505, pp. 464–470. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
91334-6_63
7. Gr˘amescu, B., Cartal, L.A., Hashim, A.S., Nit,u, C.: Clamping mechanisms of an inspection
robot working on external pipe surface. In: Gheorghe, G.I. (ed.) ICOMECYME 2019. LNNS,
vol. 85, pp. 218–230. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26991-3_20
8. Ni¸tu, C., Gr˘amescu, B., Cartal, L.A., Hashim, A.S.: Manipulator for Scanning of the Pipes
External Surface, MATEC Web of Conferences, 290 08015 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1051/
matecconf/201929008015
9. Hashim, A.S., Gr˘amescu, B., Cartal, L.A., Nit,u, C.: Modeling and Identiﬁcation of a High Reso-
lution Servo for Mobile Robotics, U.P.B. Scientiﬁc Bulletin, Series D Mechanical Engineering,
ISSN 1454–2358, vol. 82 (2020)

The Choice of the Electric Energy Storage
Device Type for the Hybrid Power Drive
of Military Wheeled Vehicles
Dmitriy Volontsevich(B)
, Sergii Strimovskyi
, Ievgenii Veretennikov
,
Dmytro Sivykh
, and Vadym Karpov
National Technical University “Kharkiv Polytechnic Institute”, 2 Kyrpychova Street, Kharkiv
61002, Ukraine
vdo_khpi@ukr.net
Abstract. The purpose of the work is the formation of the scientiﬁcally based
methodology for calculating the parameters and choosing the electric energy stor-
age device criteria for the designed hybrid drive with the electromechanical trans-
mission for promising military wheeled vehicles. It will be performed the analysis
of the main characteristics of batteries and supercapacitors, which are used in vehi-
cles, their advantages and disadvantages, as well as limitations and features of the
application; the calculations of the required values of the electric power for the
movement of the machine in various road conditions; calculations of the electric
energy storage device capacity to ensure the power reserve during the autonomous
driving with electric traction in various movement conditions; calculations of the
maximum electric energy of the batteries and supercapacitors charge for the recu-
peration of the machine kinetic energy during emergency braking of the armored
personnel carrier. Criteria are determined for choosing parameters of the electric
energy storage device for the hybrid drive with the electromechanical transmis-
sion for military wheeled vehicles. All calculations are made on the example of
the Ukrainian wheeled armored personnel carrier BTR-4.
Keywords: Electric energy storage device · Hybrid drive · Electromechanical
transmission · Battery · Supercapacitor · Recuperated energy · Charge-discharge
energy
1
Introduction
The analysis of modern military wheeled vehicles with the hybrid power drive and
the electromechanical transmission showed that this type of the power drive and the
transmission has already been used successfully on military technical support vehicles
HEMTT-A3, Chevrolet Silverado (Colorado) ZH2; on reconnaissance vehicles Shadow
RST-V, HE HMMWV, Panhard 4x4; on armored personnel carriers SEP, Panhard 6x6;
on infantry ﬁghting vehicles Marder, GCV, WARRIOR FV510 GENAIRCON [7] and
on autonomous transport platforms of ground-based robotic complexes Tardec, Crusher,
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 201–212, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_19

202
D. Volontsevich et al.
MDARS [1–3]. The introduction of the hybrid power drive and electromechanical trans-
missions for various types of military wheeled vehicles is justiﬁed by the advantages,
which are obtained in comparison with used diesel engines and mechanical or automated
hydromechanical transmissions.
The main advantages of using the hybrid power drive and electromechanical
transmissions for military wheeled vehicles are [8, 9]:
– the summary reduction of the fuel consumption and the increasing of the power
reserve, due to the recovery of the braking energy [11, 12] and the body oscillation
on the suspension [10];
– improved maneuverability and cross-country (terrain) capabilities;
– the ability to perform the covert movement (with lower noise and the heat dissipation
in comparison with a running diesel engine);
– the ability to start driving with the electric energy storage instantly regardless of the
weather conditions without starting the diesel engine;
– a simpliﬁed automation of the motion control, including the remote motion control;
– the ability to move back and forth at the same speed;
– the possibility of using the hybrid power drive as a diesel-electric station;
– the simpliﬁcation of the main units layout on chassis of the machine without
mechanical connections.
The obtaining of these advantages and the performance of the hybrid drive directly
depends on the correct choice of parameters for the electric energy storage device, inter-
acting with a diesel generator and traction motors. Therefore, it is important to consider,
the scientiﬁc and technical task of choosing a type and a capacity of the electric energy
storage device during designing the hybrid drive and electromechanical transmissions,
taking into account the speciﬁcs of the military wheeled vehicles operation.
2
Literature Review
The wide variety of batteries are currently being manufactured for transport vehi-
cles. They are divided into lead-acid, alkaline, iron-nickel (FeNi), nickel-cadmium
(NiCd), nickel-metal hydride (NiMH), sodium-sulfur (NaS), lithium-sulfur (LiS) [15]
and lithium-ion (Li-ion), depending on the chemical system of elements [4]. All of
these types of batteries in terms of the resistance to operating conditions can be used to
build the energy storage in hybrid drives on military wheeled vehicles. However, it is
necessary to choose batteries with the highest capacity, the energy density, the shortest
charge time and long life cycle to obtain the maximum efﬁciency of the military wheeled
vehicles hybrid drive, even at the expense of their cost. The lithium-ion battery system
is the best suited to these requirements [16]. It provides the speciﬁc energy density in
the range of 100…240 W·h/kg and includes six main types of Li-ion batteries. These
are lithium-cobalt (LiCoO2), lithium-manganese (LiMn2O4 or LMO), lithium-nickel-
manganese-cobalt (LiNiMn2O4 or NMC), lithium-iron-phosphate (LiFePO4), lithium-
nickel-cobalt-aluminum (LiNiCoAlO2 or NCA), lithium-titanium (Li4Ti5O2) batteries.
The ﬁrst type of LiCoO2 has the highest speciﬁc energy intensity, but it can only work at

The Choice of the Electric Energy Storage Device Type for the Hybrid Power
203
low discharge-charge currents. Therefore, it is used for portable electronic devices with
the low power consumption of the electric energy. The remaining 5 types can operate
at higher currents, which are sufﬁcient for using in power units, power tools, electric
vehicles, hybrid cars, but at the same time they have lower speciﬁc energy consump-
tion in comparison with LiCoO2. The greatest energy intensity among chemical battery
systems, which are used for powerful consumers of electric energy, is the NCA system.
This technology is used by Tesla to make traction batteries for electric vehicles. The
Li4Ti5O2 system is also promising. It provides the fast battery charging, the wide range
of operating temperature, long life cycle, but at the same time, the Li4Ti5O2 system has
low speciﬁc energy intensity, compared to the NCA system and the higher cost.
Thecharacteristicsofthebatterieswereconsidered,whichareusedinmass-produced
electric vehicles and cars with the hybrid drive and the electromechanical transmission.
The characteristics of the batteries are shown in the Table 1, which are installed in
the most common electric cars, trucks and cars, trucks with the hybrid drive and the
electromechanical transmission.
Table 1. Characteristics of batteries, which are installed in electric vehicles and cars with the
hybrid drive and the electromechanical transmission.
Car
model
Car
mass,
kg
Battery
capacity,
kW·h
Battery
type
Battery
mass, kg
Energy
density,
W·h/kg
Type of
cooling
Mileage on
storage
energy, km
Tesla
model S
2208
85/90/100
NCA
540/571/627
157,4…159,5
Liquid
320…424
Nissan
leaf
1680
24/30
LMO
218/272
110
Aerial
130…160
BMW
i3
1440
22
LMO
204
107,8
Aerial
135
Toyota
prius
1530
2,15
NiMH
39
55,1
Aerial
20
Hino
dutro
hybrid
6500
2,15
NiMH
39
55,1
Aerial
–
Volvo
FE
hybrid
26000
5
LMO
46
108,7
Aerial
–
Renault
hybrid
25000
5
LMO
46
108,7
Aerial
–
Volvo
FL
electric
16000
50×2(6)
LMO
455×2(6)
110
Aerial
160…350
Tesla
semi
36000
100×
6(10)
NCA
627×6(10)
159,5
Liquid
480…800

204
D. Volontsevich et al.
The Table 1 shows that the highest energy density is had by batteries, which are used
in Tesla cars and trucks. The rated voltage of the battery is 400 V. The battery has the
liquid cooling, the NCA chemical system and produces a current of up to 850 A for a
battery with a capacity of 85 kW·h and up to 1000 A for a battery with a capacity of
100 kW·h. It is obtained, as a result of calculating the electric power, the supplied or
the received maximum power of the battery is 340 kW and 400 kW, respectively, for
batteries 85 kW·h and 100 kW·h.
It should be also noted there is a possibility of using supercapacitors to build electric
energy storage devices [13, 14]. Maxwell, Yunasko, Nesscap, ELTON (ESMA) com-
panies suggest to use supercapacitors not only in electric systems for starting internal
combustion engines, but also in hybrid drives and electric transmissions for the accumu-
lation of the recuperated electric energy during the vehicle braking [5]. Supercapacitors
have the high speciﬁc power (W/kg), a faster charge-discharge process and a longer ser-
vice life compared to Li-ion batteries, but they also have the much lower speciﬁc energy
density (W·h/kg) and larger overall dimensions compared to Li-ion batteries. Therefore,
the power reserve of the vehicle with energy storage devices in supercapacitors will not
be large.
Currently, supercapacitors are used in hybrid power drives of some models of
buses, trucks and locomotives. For example, Oshkosh Corporation applied four Maxwell
BMOD0063-P125 modules in series in the hybrid drive of the HEMTT-A3 technical
support truck. The modules provide the total accumulation of the electrical energy of
up to 1,9 MJ. Also, on the experimental “Krymsk” armored personnel carrier, ELTON
modules 30EK405 were tested with the total stored electric energy of up to 3 MJ [6].
3
Research Methodology
The characteristics of the selected battery or super-capacitor to build the energy storage
device must provide:
– The efﬁcient acceleration on electric traction subject to the maintaining of the diesel
engine in the economy mode;
– the accumulation with minimal losses of the recuperable electric energy during
braking;
– the required stand-alone power reserve of the military wheeled vehicle with the electric
traction;
– the fulﬁllment of the conditions for limiting the overall and mass parameters of the
electric energy storage device by the internal space and the maximum permissible
mass of the designed machine.
It is necessary to calculate the following required parameters to make a choice of
the electric energy storage device:
– the maximum instantaneous values of the discharge and charge power of the electric
energy storage in vehicle acceleration and braking modes;

The Choice of the Electric Energy Storage Device Type for the Hybrid Power
205
– the minimum value of the electric energy storage device capacity for the ensuring of
the effective operation of the hybrid power drive in vehicle acceleration and braking
modes;
– the power reserve of the vehicle during driving with the electric energy storage device.
The calculations are performed for the armored personnel carrier with the 8x8 wheel
formula with the hybrid power drive and the electromechanical transmission, are made
according to the sequential construction scheme, with power transfer from the traction
motor to the drive wheel. The simpliﬁed power transmission scheme is shown in Fig. 1.
In the diagram of Fig. 1 the 7, 8, 9, 10 positions contain eight elements each. This
provides the construction of eight branches for transmitting of power ﬂows to each
wheel separately. In these branches, in the acceleration mode, the power is converted
and transmitted from the traction electric generator 3 and the electric energy storage 6
to the drive wheels 10 of the machine. In the braking mode, the power is converted and
transmitted from the drive wheels 10 to the electrical energy storage 6.
9
6
3
2
1
4
8
7
5
10
Fig.1. The scheme of power transferring in the hybrid power drive and the electromechanical
transmission in the sequential construction scheme, where: 1 – the diesel engine; 2 – the matching
gear; 3 – the traction electric generator; 4 – the power control unit for the traction electric generator;
5 – the top level controller; 6 – the electric energy storage device; 7 – the inverter; 8 – the traction
electric motor; 9 – the gearbox; 10 – the driving wheel.
The acceleration mode of the wheeled armored personnel carrier was examined on
the straight road. The required parameters for the electric energy storage device can be
determined. For this, the current value of the required electric power is calculated by the
formula from the source [18]:
NEP =
FDvv
1000ηGBηTM ηinv
,
(1)
NiEP is the current value of the electric power for the movement of the vehicle (kW);
FiT is the current value of the vehicle traction force (N); viv is the current value of the
vehicle speed (m/s); ηGB = 0, 9235 is the gearbox efﬁciency; ηTM = 0, 94 is the traction
motor efﬁciency; ηinv = 0, 98 is the inverter efﬁciency.

206
D. Volontsevich et al.
The current value of the traction force, which is necessary for the movement of the
vehicle, can be calculated by the formula [18]:
FiT = fmg + KV Fv2
iv + mδai,
(2)
f is the coefﬁcient of the resistance to the movement, f = 0,015 is for the asphalt
concrete, f = 0,045 is for the dirt road; m is the vehicle mass (kg); g = 9,81 (m/s2) is
for the gravity acceleration; KV = 0,65 (N·s2/m4) is the aerodynamic ﬂow coefﬁcient
of the machine body; F (m2) is the area of the vehicle frontal projection; δ = 1,246 is
the coefﬁcient of accounting for rotating masses; ai– is the current value of the vehicle
acceleration (m/s2).
The current value of the discharge and charge power of the electric energy storage
device is determined by the formula:
NiEES = NGnom −NiEP,
(3)
NiEES is the current value of the electric energy storage power (kW); NGnom is the
generator power of the diesel engine in the economy mode (kW).
The power of the generator is calculated by the formula [18]:
NGnom = NDnomηredηGenηinv,
(4)
NDnom is the diesel engine power in a case of the minimum speciﬁc fuel consumption
(kW); ηred = 0, 985 is the efﬁciency matching gear; ηGen = 0, 94 is the efﬁciency of
the traction generator; ηinv = 0, 98 is the inverter efﬁciency.
If the value NiEES is positive, it is the charge power of the electric energy storage
device, if the value is negative, it is the discharge power of the electric energy storage
device.
The required capacity of the electric energy storage in the acceleration mode of the
wheeled armored personnel carrier is determined by the formula:
Ea =
t
i=1
NiEES
3600
,
(5)
Ea is the required capacity of the electric energy storage in the acceleration mode
(kW·h); i is a calculation step is 1 s; t is the vehicle acceleration time, s.
Next, the regenerative braking mode of the wheeled vehicle was studied. During the
performing uniform braking, the maximum value of the recuperated electric power is
determined by the formula [19]:
NER = mv2
M
2t ηGBηTM ηinvηCB,
(6)
NER is the recuperated electrical power (kW); t is the braking time (s); ηGB = 0, 95
is the charge battery efﬁciency; vM is the vehicle speed (m/s);
The braking time of the vehicle was calculated from the condition of equally slow
motion to a complete stop t = vM/a, where a is the deceleration of the vehicle. In a case
of the emergency braking, the deceleration is approximately 4 m/s2.

The Choice of the Electric Energy Storage Device Type for the Hybrid Power
207
The amount of the recuperated electric energy was calculated at the performing
emergency braking of the armored personnel carrier from the initial speed of 16,7 m/s
(60 km/h) to the complete stop. As a result, the braking time is t = 16,7/4 = 4,2 s. The
maximum value of the recuperated electric power is:
NER = 25000 · 16, 72
2 · 4, 2
0, 9235 · 0, 94 · 0, 98 · 0, 95 = 670, 8 (kW).
During 4,2 s, eight traction electric motors of the armored personnel carrier will
generated 2817,3 kJ (670,8 kW·4,2 s) of the electrical energy.
The uniform movement of the armored personnel carrier on the straight road was
studied and the power reserve of the armored personnel carrier in the electric vehicle
mode at the average speed of 12,5 m/s (45 km/h) on asphalt-concrete and dirt roads was
determined.
The required electric power for the movement of the military wheeled vehicle can
be calculated by the formula [18]:
NEP =
FTvM
1000ηGBηTM ηinv
,
(7)
NEP is the electric power for the movement of the vehicle (kW); FT is the vehicle
traction force (N); vM is the vehicle speed (m/s).
The traction force, which is necessary for the movement of the vehicle, can be
calculated by the formula [18]:
FT = fmg + KV Fv2
M ,
(8)
f is the coefﬁcient of the resistance to the movement, f = 0,015 is for the asphalt
concrete, f = 0,045 is for the dirt road; m is the vehicle mass; KV = 0,65 (kg/m3) is
the aerodynamic ﬂow coefﬁcient of the machine body; F (m2) is the area of the vehicle
frontal projection; g = 9,81 (m/s2) is the gravity acceleration.
The required battery capacity to ensure the movement of the vehicle for the given
distance is calculated by the formula [19]:
E = NEP
S
3, 6vM
,
(9)
E is the battery capacity (kW·h); S is a distance (km).
From the formula (9) the power reserve equation can be derived:
S = E 3, 6vM
NEP
.
(10)
After performing calculations according to formulas (1) – (10), the highest values of
the discharge and charge power of the electric energy storage device in the acceleration
and braking modes of the vehicle are selected. And also the largest value of the required
capacity of the electric energy storage device is selected for choosing its type during the
designing of the hybrid power drive for the military wheeled vehicle.

208
D. Volontsevich et al.
4
Results
The Simulation of the acceleration mode, calculations of the recovered electric power
during performing uniform braking and determining the power reserve of the machine
were performed for the Ukrainian wheeled armored personnel carrier BTR-4. The cal-
culated acceleration characteristics of the promising BTR-4 armored personnel carrier
with the designed hybrid power drive and the electromechanical transmission (Fig. 1)
were obtained by calculating formulas (1) – (5) in the source [9] and they are presented
in Fig. 2.
NiEES, kW
NiEP, NiDG, kW; vi, km/h; a·100, m/s2; gei, g/kW·h
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
t, s
Fig. 2. The calculated acceleration characteristics of the promising BTR-4 with the designed
hybrid power drive and the electromechanical transmission, where: 1 – the current value of the
required electric power NiEP (kW) for the movement of the wheeled armored personnel carrier; 2
– the current value of the generated electric power NiDG (kW) by the diesel generator of the 3TD-3
engine for the movement of the wheeled armored personnel carrier with the deactivated electric
energy storage devices; 3 – the minimum value of the speciﬁc fuel consumption ge (g/kW·h) for
the 3TD-3 engine; 4 – the current value of the speciﬁc fuel consumption gei (g/kW·h) of the 3TD-
3 engine during accelerating of the armored personnel carrier with deactivated electric energy
storage devices; 5 – the experimental characteristic of the change in the speed of the movement
vi (km/h) of the BTR-4 during acceleration; 6 – the calculated characteristic of the change in the
speed of the movement Vi (km/h) of the armored personnel carrier with the hybrid power drive;
7 – the change in acceleration on a·100 scale, m/s2 is for the characteristic 5; 8 – the change in
acceleration on a·100 scale, m/s2 is for the characteristic 6; 9 is the change in the electrical power
of NiEES (kW) in the electric energy storage device during accelerating of the armored personnel
carrier with the hybrid power drive to a speed of 100 km/h.
According to the results from Fig. 2, the short-term consumption of the electric
energy due to traction electric motors with the power of up to 352 kW for 10 s is
required for ensuring the dynamic acceleration of the armored personnel carrier BTR-4
with the weight 25 tons to a speed of 27,8 m/s (100 km/h). The long-term consumption
of electric energy with a capacity of 306 kW is necessary for maintaining the movement

The Choice of the Electric Energy Storage Device Type for the Hybrid Power
209
at the maximum speed of 27,8 m/s (100 km/h). At least 5 kW of electric energy should
be added to these values to ensure the operation of all electrical devices (consumers)
on the armored personnel carrier. If the acceleration of the armored personnel carrier is
performed in the electric vehicle mode (the battery is the energy source), the required
acceleration dynamics is provided by a battery with a capacity of 100 kW·h or two
parallel-connected batteries with a capacity of 85 kW·h. When the hybrid drive with the
diesel engine is in the minimum fuel consumption mode, the generator makes 192 kW
of electricity. In this case, to ensure the required acceleration dynamics of the armored
personnel carrier from the battery, the short-term output of 160 kW of the electric energy
and the long-term output of 114 kW of electric energy are required for maintaining the
maximum speed.
Also, the initial charge of the electric energy storage device must be at least 6030 kW.
From the graph 9 it is seen that during the acceleration of the machine, ﬁrstly the charge
of the drive increases to 6735 kW for 12 s and after that, it decreases to zero by 104 s.
As a result, during the acceleration of the armored personnel carrier with the hybrid
drive with the worked diesel engine (the sources of energy are a diesel generator and a
battery), the using of a battery with a capacity of 85 kW·h will be excessive. Therefore,
the battery capacity can be reduced to 50 kW·h with the maximum short-term energy
output of up to 200 kW.
The recuperated electric power, which is equal to 670,8 kW, was calculated by the
formula (6) in regenerative braking mode. If one battery with a capacity of 100 kW·h,
which can accumulate not more than 400 kW per second, is used for the energy storage, it
can accumulate not more than 1680 kJ per 4,2 s. As a result, about 1137,3 kJ will be lost.
It is enough to connect two 85 kW·h batteries in parallel to save the recuperated electrical
energy without losses completely. They will be able to accumulate up to 680 kW per
second instantly. As a result, the total capacity of the two batteries will be 170 kW·h,
and the mass is 1080 kg.
The capabilities of the supercapacitor were studied as an energy storage device for the
hybrid drive of the armored personnel carrier. The characteristics of one module of the
BMDC0063-P125 supercapacitor from Maxwell were set for analyzing the operating
modes of the hybrid drive [5]. The charge-discharge operating voltage is 125 V, the
maximum charge voltage is 135 V, the capacity is 63 F, the speciﬁc energy intensity is
2,4 W·h/kg, the speciﬁc maximum power is 3,7 kW/kg, and the mass is 58 kg. As a result
it is determined the number of required modules for building the energy storage device,
which is based on the required amount of the electrical energy reserve. The maximum
value occurs during the performing emergency braking with the deceleration of 4 m/s2.
Eight traction electric motors of the armored personnel carrier will generated 2817,3 kJ
(670,8 kW·4,2 s) of the electrical energy per 4,2 s. The accumulation of the electrical
energy in the drive, which consists of supercapacitors, is calculated by the formula [19]:
WC = CU 2
2000,
(11)
where WC is the total charge energy of the energy storage device, which consists of
supercapacitors (kJ); C is the total capacity of the energy storage device, (F); U is the
charge voltage in the U–U/2 (V) window.

210
D. Volontsevich et al.
The maximum value of the charge voltage ≥400 V was set, it is close to the operating
voltage of the considered characteristics of a Li-ion battery with a capacity of 100 W·h.
Three modules of BMD0063-P125 supercapacitors must be connected in series to fulﬁll
this condition. As a result the maximum value of the charge voltage can be got, it is equal
to 3·135 V = 405 V. The working charge voltage will be 375 V, and the total capacity
of 3 series-connected modules will be 21 F. The charge energy, which is calculated by
formula (11), will be equal to WC = 21·3752/2000 = 1476 kJ, which is approximately
half less than the required value.
It is necessary to connect two groups of series-connected batteries in parallel (3
modules in each group) to double the capacity of the energy storage device. The total
number of modules will be 6 pieces. In this case, the total capacity of the energy storage
device will be 42 F, and the total charge energy is 2953 kJ at an operating voltage of 375 V.
This totally ﬁts into the condition for the full secondary using of the recuperated electrical
energy, which is received during the emergency braking of the armored personnel carrier.
If all 6 modules are connected in series, the value of the operating voltage of the energy
storage device can be increased to 750 V. In this case, the total capacity of the energy
storage device will be 10,5 F, and the total charge energy will be unchanged.
As a result, the total mass of 6 modules will be equal to 348 kg. This is the mass
of the supercapacitors energy storage device that provides the complete recuperation
of the electric energy from the emergency braking of the wheeled armored personnel
carrier with the mass of 25 tons. If the same energy storage device will be built on Li-ion
batteries, its mass will be 1080 kg.
During the performing power reserve calculations, according to formulas (7) – (10),
it was obtained that when the armored personnel carrier with the mass of 25 tons moves
along the straight asphalt-concrete road at a speed of 12,5 m/s (45 km/h), the traction
force should be equal to 4,2 kN, and the required electric power for the movement should
be 65,4 kW. Accordingly, 11,6 kN and 178,8 kW are for the dirt road.
If a battery with a capacity of 100 kW·h is used for the electric energy storage device,
the armored personnel carrier will be able to move autonomously along the straight
asphalt road with 68,8 km or along the straight dirt road with 25 km. It is necessary to
increase the number of batteries due to connecting them in parallel to increase the power
reserve, as well as to use the automatic systems for optimally electricity consume during
the vehicle movement [17].
For comparison, it was noted that the mass of a Li-ion battery with a capacity of
100 kW·h is 627 kg. This is 1,8 times more than the mass of the energy storage device of
supercapacitors 6 modules. The number of modules will be increased 2 times more to 12
pieces to approximate the mass of the electric energy storage device on supercapacitors
to the mass of Li-ion batteries with a capacity of 100 kW·h. Then the mass of the energy
storage on supercapacitors will be 696 kg. The cruising range of the armored personnel
carrier weighing 25 tons on energy storage devices from 12 BMD0063-P125 modules
will be calculated. It is supposed that there are 4 groups of modules connected in parallel
in the energy storage device. Each group has 3 series-connected modules. Then, having
the performed calculations according to the formula (6), it is obtained the total charge
energy of the energy storage device is 5906 kJ.

The Choice of the Electric Energy Storage Device Type for the Hybrid Power
211
Previously, it was found that the required electric power for the driving at a speed of
12,5 m/s (45 km/h) on the straight asphalt-concrete road is 65,4 kW, and on the dirt road
is 178,8 kW. If these power values are taken every second from the energy storage device,
the armored personnel carrier will be able to move 90,3 s on the asphalt-concrete road and
33 s on a dirt road. As a result, the armored personnel carrier will move 90,3 s·12,5 m/s =
1128,7 m along the smooth asphalt-concrete road, and 33 s·12,5 m/s = 412,5 m along the
dirt road. These values are signiﬁcantly less than the power reserve, which is performed
by the armored personnel carrier with a Li-ion battery with a capacity of 100 kW·h.
5
Conclusions
The choice of the electric energy storage device methodology, which was presented,
allows to analyze the efﬁciency of the designed hybrid power drive with the electrome-
chanical transmission of the wheeled armored personnel carrier in acceleration, braking
and uniform motion modes.
The chosen electric energy storage device for the hybrid drive with the electrome-
chanical transmission must meet the required instantaneous maximum values of dis-
charge and charge powers in the acceleration and braking modes of the wheeled armored
personnel carrier.
The capacity of the electric energy storage device must ensure the continuous opera-
tion of the diesel engine in the economical mode at accelerating of the wheeled armored
personnel carrier and accumulating of the recuperated power without losses in perform-
ing emergency braking of the wheeled armored personnel carrier at the current speed of
16,7 m/s (60 km/h).
Li-ion batteries should be chosen, which have the NSA chemical system, to ensure
the maximum power reserve during the motion from the electric energy storage device.
The energy storage devices in Li-ion batteries will have lower mass in comparison with
the using of supercapacitors, considering the energy density (W·h/kg) of Li-ion batteries
is signiﬁcantly higher than that of supercapacitors.
References
1. Sivakumar, P., Reginald, R., Venkatesan, G., Viswanath, H., Selvathai, T.: Conﬁguration study
of hybrid electric power pack for tracked combat vehicles. Def. Sci. J. 67(4), 354–359 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.14429/dsj.67.11454
2. Walentynowicz, J.: Hybrid and electric power drive combat vehicles. J. KONES Powertrain
Transp. 18(1), 471–478 (2011)
3. Military Use of Hybrid Electric Drives. Army Guide Monthly, vol. 12(15), 16–18 (2005)
4. Robert Bosch. Bosch Automotive Handbook. 9th edn, Robert Bosch GmbH (2014)
5. Schepmann, S.: Ultracapacitor Heavy Hybrid Vehicle: Model Predictive Control Using Future
Information to Improve Fuel Consumption. All Theses TigerPrints Clemson University 168
(2010)
6. Kozachenko, V.F., Ostrirov, V.N., Lashkevich, M.M.: Transmission on the basis of a valve-
inductor motor with independent excitation. Electr. Eng. 2, 54–60 (2014)
7. Galvagno, E., Rondinelli, E., Velardocchia, M.: Electro-mechanical transmission modeling
for series-hybrid tracked tanks. Int. J. Heavy Veh. Syst. 19(3), 256–280 (2012). https://doi.
org/10.1504/ijhvs.2012.047916

212
D. Volontsevich et al.
8. Volontsevich, D.O., Veretennikov, E.A., Kostianik, I.V., Iaremchenko, A.S., Efremova, A.I.,
Karpov, V.O.: Determination of the electric drive power for lightly armored caterpillar and
wheeled vehicles using single- or two-stage mechanical gearboxes. Electr. Eng. Electr. Mech.
1, 29–35 (2019). https://doi.org/10.20998/2074-272X.2019.1.05
9. Volontsevich, D.O., Klyuchka, R.V., Sobko, A.P., Strimovskiy, S.V.: Analysis of oper-
ating modes of a hybrid drive with an electromechanical transmission on a promising
wheeled armored personnel carrier. Integr. Technol. Energy Saving [Integrovani texnologiyi
ta energozberezhennya] 4, 34–47 (2018)
10. Liu, J., Li, X., Wang, Z., Zhang, Y.: Modelling and experimental study on active energy-
regenerative suspension structure with variable universe fuzzy PD control. Shock. Vib. 2016,
1–11 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/6170275
11. Kotsur, M.I., Kotsur, I.M., Blizniakov, A.V.: Increase effectiveness of reversible braking mode
realization of the wound-rotor induction motor. Eastern-Eur. J. Enterp. Technol. 8(73), 27–30
(2015). https://doi.org/10.15587/1729-4061.2015.36670
12. Sinchuk, O., Kozakevich, I., Kalmus, D., Siyanko, R.: Examining energy-efﬁcient recupera-
tivebrakingmodesoftractionasynchronousfrequency-controlledelectricdrives.Eastern-Eur.
J. Enterp. Technol. 1(1), 50–56 (2017). https://doi.org/10.15587/1729-4061.2017.91912
13. Sevilla, M., Mokaya, R.: Energy storage applications of activated carbons: supercapacitors
and hydrogen storage. Energy Environ. Sci. 7(4), 1250–1280 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1039/
c3ee43525c
14. Fomin, O., Sulym, A., Kulbovskyi, I., Khozia, P., Ishchenko, V.: Determining rational param-
eters of the capacitive energy storage system for the underground railway rolling stock.
Eastern-Eur. J. Enterp. Technol. 2(1), 63–71 (2018). https://doi.org/10.15587/1729-4061.
2018.126080
15. Maurer, C., Commerell, W., Hintennach, A., Jossen, A.: Capacity recovery effect in lithium
sulfur batteries for electric vehicles. World Electr. Veh. J. 9(2), 34 (2018). https://doi.org/10.
3390/wevj9020034
16. Martinez-Laserna, E., Herrera, V.I., Gandiaga, I., Sarasketa-Zabala, E., Gaztañaga, H.: Li-
ion battery lifetime model’s inﬂuence on the economic assessment of a hybrid electric bus’s
operation. World Electr. Veh. J. 9(2), 28 (2018). https://doi.org/10.3390/wevj9020028
17. Chen, Z., Liu, W., Yang, Y., Chen, W.: Online energy management of plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles for prolongation of all-electric range based on dynamic programming. Math. Probl.
Eng. 2015, 1–11 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/368769
18. Aleksandrov, E.E., Epifanov, V.V., Medvedev, N.G., Ustinenko, A.V.: Tjagovo-skorostnye
harakteristiki bystrohodnyh gusenichnyh i polnoprivodnyh kolesnyh mashin [Trailer-speed
characteristics of high-speed track and full-wheel drive wheeled vehicles]. Kharkiv, NTU
“KhPI” publ. (2007)
19. Gnatov, A.V., Argun, Shh.V., Trunova, I.S.: Teoriya elektropryvodu transportnyh zaso-
biv: pidruchnyk [The theory of electric vehicles: a textbook]/Kharkiv, Kharkiv National
Automobile and Highway University publ. (2015)

Machinery Retroﬁting for Industry 4.0
Pedro Torres1,4(B), Rogério Dionísio1,3,5, Sérgio Malhão1, Luís Neto2,4,
and Gil Gonçalves2,4
1 Instituto Politécnico de Castelo Branco, Castelo Branco, Portugal
{pedrotorres,rdionisio}@ipcb.pt, smalhao@ipcbcampus.pt
2 FEUP, Faculdade de Engenharia, Universidade Do Porto, Porto, Portugal
{lcneto,gil}@fe.up.pt
3 DiSAC – R&D Unit, Avenida Do Empresário, 6000-767 Castelo Branco, Portugal
4 SYSTEC, Research Center for Systems and Technologies, Porto, Portugal
5 INESC TEC, Porto, Portugal
Abstract. The paper presents an approach for the retroﬁtting of industrial looms
on the shop ﬂoor of a textile industry. This is a real case study, where there was a
need to update the equipment, providing the machines with communication fea-
tures aligned with the concept of Industry 4.0. The work was developed within
the scope of the research project PRODUTECH-SIF: Solutions for the Industry
of the Future. Temperature, Inductive, Acoustic and 3-axis Accelerometers sen-
sors were installed in different parts of the machines for monitorization. Data
acquisition and processing is done by a SmarBox developed on a cRIO 9040 from
NationalInstruments.ASmartBox processesdatafromonetofourlooms,allowing
these old machines to have communication capacity and to be monitored remotely
through the factory plant’s MES/ERP. Communication can be done through the
OPC UA or MQTT architecture, both protocols aligned with the new trends for
industrial communications. The sensor data will be used to feed production and
manufacturing KPIs and for predictive maintenance. The approach presented in
this paper allows industries with legacy equipment to renew and adapt to new
market trends, improving productivity rates and reduced maintenance costs.
Keywords: Retroﬁtting · Cyber physical system · Industrial IoT · Predictive
maintenance · Industry 4.0
1
Introduction
The exponential growth of technology and the growing requirements for personalized
products mean that manufacturers need to invest in automation to be aligned with this
industrial revolution that is Industry 4.0. However, old infrastructure and outdated pro-
cesses can make it difﬁcult to reach a better productivity and competitiveness. Com-
munications are one of the main keys of Industry 4.0, allowing sensors, machines and
people to communicate and cooperate with each other. This is the fundamental basis for
Internet of Things (IoT) and Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). Manufacturers invest in
smarter equipment, with a greater ability to acquire and process data in real time, without
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 213–220, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_20

214
P. Torres et al.
compromising communication requirements, preferably choosing IP-based protocols to
ensure global connectivity.
Any industrial equipment is designed to be robust and have the longest possible life.
Industrial machinery typically has high acquisition costs, reason enough to consider if a
replacement machine is the better choice, unless there is no other alternative in order to
obtain the maximum return on investment. Upgrading is an economical way to improve
machine interoperability and productivity by renewing legacy equipment for the Industry
4.0 era. The implementation of a monitoring and control system, such as Supervision
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) or Distributed Control System (DCS), can help
in the upgrading, as it allows the system to operate as a whole and not as an isolated
component. Integration of Human Machine Interfaces (HMI) to act, visualize and report
processes is also important in the retroﬁtting process.
An accurate insight of the production process is obtained by installing new sensors
and improving connectivity, connecting old machines to the intranet or the internet. The
new sensors can be connected to the machine’s legacy controllers, a generally difﬁcult
process, or new controllers can be installed. The controller collects data and converts it
into a usable format [1], such as Open Platform Communications - Uniﬁed Architecture
(OPC UA) or Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT), so that the information
can be made available to the rest of the factory network.
In the context of the Portuguese textile industry, legacy industrial loom machines
have been used for decades. Currently, they are sharing the shop ﬂoor along with modern
machines ready for the Industry 4.0 challenges, that causes disparities between different
sections of the manufacturing process and shop ﬂoor management. The objective of this
paper is to present an approach for the retroﬁtting of legacy industrial looms. This is a real
case study, where there was the need to update the equipment, providing the machines
with communication features aligned with the concept of Industry 4.0. The remaining
of this paper is organized as follows. The ﬁrst chapter presents the introduction to the
concept and need of industrial loom machines retroﬁtting, followed by a section dealing
with the choice of and industrial communication protocol. A case study is then described
in detail in Sect. 3. The lessons learned from the retroﬁtting process are presented in
Sect. 4, followed by the conclusions.
2
Industrial Communication Architectures
One of the problems of industrial automation is the lack of uniformity in communi-
cations, especially when there is a multitude of equipment from different manufactur-
ers. Although today there are several communication standards, many of the factories,
especially older ones, have machines without the ability to communicate. The use of
standards-based data connectivity is essential to ensure that the machines may “talk” the
same language. Of the various market protocols, OPC UA is the one that truly serves as a
data connectivity standard to make Industry 4.0 a reality. Instead of replacing standards,
OPC UA complements them, creating a common layer for exchanging information.
This chapter describes OPC UA and MQTT, the two standards implemented for
communication between the SmartBox installed on the shop ﬂoor and the different
automation systems in the factory.

Machinery Retroﬁting for Industry 4.0
215
2.1
OPC UA
OPC UA is the standard for communications in Industry 4.0. The German initiative
RAMI 4.0 (Reference Architectural Model for Industry 4.0) [5], under the Plattform
Industrie 4.0, released several speciﬁcation reports for communication between Industry
4.0 components, using OPC UA [6–8]. A fundamental condition for RAMI 4.0 is that all
actors involved must be able to understand each other, regardless of domain, vendor and
technology. The OPC UA architecture provides a data model and several information
models, these deﬁne modulation rules and several types that can be used to model
information and data. With this, all actors involved can understand each other by sharing a
commonsyntaxandsemantics. Duringthedevelopment of this usecasetheSOSD(Smart
Object Self-Description) information model [4] was developed on top of the OPC UA
Data Access information model. All aspects of the newly developed model were based
in the Plattform Industrie 4.0 recommendations for Industry 4.0 components. Figure 1
shows the OPC UA architecture supported on the communication model between client
and server.
Fig. 1. OPC UA based network architecture.
2.2
MQTT
MQTT is a publish/subscribe communication protocol developed by IBM with a special
emphasis in achieving a lightweight footprint. This protocol is widely used in IoT and
IIoT applications due to its simplicity and robustness [10]. MQTT communication relies
in a central broker that allows information publishers and subscribers to ﬁll/consume
message queues identiﬁed by topics. Despite lacking a standard information model as
OPC UA, this protocol can be used in less capable controllers and is very simple to
setup, which allows for time and cost savings. The popularity of MQTT caught the
attention of OPC Foundation, resulting in the Part 14 of the OPC UA standard [9].
This bridging between both architectures enables the use of OPC UA over MQTT,
allowing for: transmission of OPC UA standardized information over the internet, using
MQTT as a transport mean; easy integration of IoT gateways and devices based on
MQTT with OPC UA clients and servers. In this use case, IoT devices and low-cost
sensors were integrated through MQTT. This was a successful cost saving method to
add environmental and other non-critical sensor data to the use case. Figure 2 shows the
MQTT communication model implemented in this work.

216
P. Torres et al.
Fig. 2. MQTT communication model.
3
Case Study – Preparation of Legacy Looms
The case study is implemented on a textile factory that produces clothing tags. In the
manufacturing plant, it has looms from different generations. This work focuses on the
oldest equipment, as these are the ones that need intervention to maintain their usefulness
and desired production levels. The preparation of these legacy looms was carried out in 5
stages: gathering of requirements, installation of sensors, data acquisition and processing
by a SmartBox [2, 3], integration with the factory network and, ﬁnally, data analysis.
During the requirements assessment, the company identiﬁed the main problems the
old looms were suffering. All electrical and mechanical properties of the machines were
summarized, so the set of sensors to be installed could be correctly selected. Another
importantstepwastoassessthecompanycommunicationinfrastructureandtechnologies
used to communicate with the local MES/ERP.
Installed Sensors:
• 1 Temperature sensor in the machine electrical box for monitoring the temperature
inside the box due to overheating and prevent fault situations;
• 1 Temperature sensor on the Jacquard loom for monitoring the temperature inside the
equipment;
• 1 Temperature sensor on the loom calender for local temperature monitoring;
• 1 Inductive sensor to measure the motor rotations and consequently calculate the
length of produced tissue;
• 1 Acoustic sensor to gather mechanical noise of the machine during production, in
the context of fault detection;
• 1 3-axis accelerometer to measure mechanical vibrations during production. Useful
in a context of predictive maintenance by identifying altered spectrum frequencies.
All sensors are wired to a multiple input/output board on the NI cRIO 9040, as well
as signals from the tower light to identify different levels of machine operability as
summarized on Fig. 3.
The calibration of the sensors and the real-time processing of the data is done in the
SmartBox that works as an OPC UA server. OPC UA clients running on smartphones,
tablets or computers can easily access to the information remotely at different parts of

Machinery Retroﬁting for Industry 4.0
217
the shop ﬂoor. All data are stored in a database accessed by the company’s MES/ERP.
The developed SOSD model, allows for other components developed in the context of
the PRODUTECH-SIF project to communicate and understand context and production
data of the old machines [4]. The case study components, according with the SOSD
model, illustrated in Fig. 4., are divided in four data types: SmartObjectType describes
the SmartBox properties and relations; DeviceType describes machines, sensors and
actuators and its relations; ServiceInstanceType describes services available in the OPC
UA Server, these can be provided by software modules, machines, SmartBoxes and their
relations; PointDescriptionType describes endpoints in the network with which the OPC
UA server can communicate.
Fig. 3. Physical architecture of the installation.
The intervention on the shop ﬂoor will be done in different phases. Until the moment
was prepared a testbed with 4 machines. After testing and adjustments all legacy looms
on the shop ﬂoor will be retroﬁtted. Figure 5 illustrates the intervention in one machine
and the location of 2 installed sensors.

218
P. Torres et al.
Fig. 4. Case study elements mapped according with SOSD data model.
Fig. 5. Machine sensorization operations detail. a) Legacy loom, b) Inductive sensor, c)
Temperature sensor protected by box.

Machinery Retroﬁting for Industry 4.0
219
4
Conclusions
The Industry 4.0 is coming with Internet of Things, Cyber-Physical Systems, Cloud
Computing and intelligent networking based on wireless, mobile and sensor devices
autonomously exchanging information, triggering actions and controlling each other
independently. Smart gateways for I-IoT are implemented in the 4th industrial revolution
due to their capabilities for data analytics, diagnostics, prognostics and self-awareness,
and simplify greatly the process to export data and functionality of the physical devices
to end users on the web.
Two important lessons learned during the ﬁrst phase are related with the requirements
assessment: 1) The SmartBox was sampling at 1 Hz for some time, this revealed as a
problem because the vibration and acoustic signals could not be accurately reconstructed,
and therefore, be correctly analyzed. 2) The logic levels of the machine signals, low cost
sensors, industrial sensors and the I/O board on the NI cRIO 9040 were not compatible.
This required to use an optocoupler to match the machine and industrial sensor signals
with the I/O board.
The work presented in this paper is important in the process of retroﬁting old
machines. Sensorization and implementation of standardized communications is essen-
tial in for the concept of connected factories. As future work will be implemented
techniques of data analytics and machine learning in scenarios of predictive maintenance.
Acknowledgments. This research was supported by the project PRODUTECH SIF - Solutions
for the Industry of the Future, ﬁnanced by the Portuguese National program COMPETE 2020.
References
1. Torres, P., et al.: Cyber-Physical production systems supported by intelligent devices (smart-
boxes) for industrial processes digitalization. In: 5th International forum on Research and
Technology for Society and Industry (RTSI), pp. 73–78, IEEE, Florence, Italy (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1109/RTSI.2019.8895553
2. Malhão, S., Dionísio, R., Torres, P.: Industrial IoT smartbox for the shop ﬂoor. In: 5th Exper-
iment International Conference (exp.at 2019), pp. 258–259, IEEE, Funchal (Madeira Island),
Portugal (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/EXPAT.2019.8876562
3. Rubio, E.M., Torres, P.M., Dionísio, R.P.: Smart gateways for IOT-factory integration: trends
and use case. In: Ferreira, L., Lopes, N., Silva, J., Putnik, G., Cruz-Cunha, M., Ávila, P. (Eds.)
Technological Developments in Industry 4.0 for Business Applications, pp. 149–170. IGI
Global (2019). https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-5225-4936-9.ch007
4. Neto, L., et al.: An industry 4.0 self-description information model for software components
contained in the administration shell. In: International Conference on Intelligent Systems and
Applications, 8, pp. 1–6. IARIA, Rome, Italy. ISBN: 978–1–61208–723–8
5. Hankel, M., Rexroth, B.: The reference architectural model industrie 4.0 (rami 4.0). ZVEI,
April 410 (2015)
6. Rauchhaupt, L., Kadel, G.: Network-based Communication for Industrie 4.0–Proposal for an
Administration Shell. Plattform Industrie 4.0 (2016)
7. P. I. 4.0: Interaction Model for Industrie 4.0 Components, 3 (2016). https://www.plattf
orm-i40.de/I40/Redaktion/EN/Downloads/Publikation/interaction-model-I40-components.
pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=9. Accessed 02 Feb 2020

220
P. Torres et al.
8. VDMA. Industrie 4.0 Communication Guideline Based on OPC UA. 10 12 2017. https://ind
ustrie40.vdma.org/en/viewer/-/v2article/render/20625194. Accessed 02 Feb 2020
9. OPC Foundation. OPC UA Part 14 - PubSub Speciﬁcation. OPC Foundation, 6 2
2018. https://opcfoundation.org/developer-tools/specifications-uniﬁed-architecture/part-14-
pubsub. Accessed 02 Feb 2020
10. Peralta, G., Iglesias-Urkia, M., Barcelo, M., Gomez, R., Moran, A., Bilbao, J.: Fog computing
basedefﬁcientIoTschemefortheIndustry4.0.In:Electronics,Control,Measurement,Signals
and their Application to Mechatronics (ECMSM). 2017 IEEE International Workshop of
(2017)

Conceptual Design of a Positioning System
for Systematic Production of Needle Beds
Luis Freitas1(B)
, Rui Oliveira1
, Teresa Malheiro2
, A. Manuela Gonçalves2
,
José Vicente3
, Paula Monteiro4
, and Pedro Ribeiro5
1 School of Engineering, MEtRICs Research Centre, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
b7245@dep.uminho.pt
2 School of Sciences, CMAT Research Centre, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
3 InsideLimits, Canidelo, Vila Nova de Gaia, Portugal
4 Center of Computation Graphics (CCG), Guimarães, Portugal
5 School of Engineering, Algoritmi Research Centre, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
Abstract. In-Circuit-Test Machines are nowadays one of the most important sys-
tems on the productions lines in the electronic industry. Printed Circuit Board
quality standards have become increasingly higher and all processes involved in
its production must be checked and controlled with a high degree of reliability.
One particular aspect that clearly did not follow the technological breakthroughs
is the manufacturing process of the In-Circuit-Test machines, and more particu-
larly its needle beds. This process is still a manual process that results in critical
quality problems that are going to be reﬂected on the ﬁnal production lines. This
paper proposes a new manufacturing process for needle bed production that aims at
reducing the production process constraints and therefore improving all respective
quality parameters. The problem was analyzed and several project parameters were
deﬁned, such as project goals, engineering requirements and functions analysis.
A conceptual solution is developed and proposed to solve the identiﬁed problem.
Keywords: In-Circuit-Test machines · Mechatronic design
1
Introduction
In the new era of industrial automation, characterized by concepts on the domain of
Industry 4.0, a new paradigm is driving the development of industrial equipment for
industrial companies. The so-called Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) equipment must be
developed and adapted for the new industrial challenges [1], and prepared to connect and
communicate [2–8] with other systems by collecting data and making available useful
information.
Technological production is nowadays increasing at breakneck pace, forcing produc-
ers of electronic equipment into a supply race of electronic components at an increasingly
higher pace and quality level. Printed Circuit Boards (PCB) are one of these electronics
components and they are especially important because they are widely used [9].
With the increasing complexity and the need for lot size reduction, one of the main
problems still affecting the PCB production chain is its electrical quality testing phase
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 221–235, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_21

222
L. Freitas et al.
(In-Circuit Test systems - ICT systems), often leading to PCB stagnation (production
line stops to PCB rework) and/or rejection. A part of these problems is not related to the
PCB itself, but to manufacturing failures of ICT systems arising from the fact that the
manufacturing process is still mostly handmade [10]. Since the number of test points is
always increasing and the ICT system is getting more and more complex, the present
manufacturing process of the ICT system struggles to keep up the high quality standard
of the ever-demanding automotive industry. The key to avoid a part of the problems
during the testing phase is to prevent manufacturing failures of the ICT systems.
This paper will focus on the development of an automatized system for the most
critical production phase of the ICT system production – needle receptacle insertion.
To achieve the proposed goals, the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 presents
a brief ICT description and its current manufacturing process by highlighting the goals
proposed for the system to be developed and the proposed methodology to do it; Sect. 3
describes all steps of the design tasks development to achieve the proposed conceptual
solution to solve this challenge; Sect. 4 presents the main results by focusing on the more
important aspects. Finally, the last section presents the conclusions by summarizing the
goals achieved with this conceptual solution and the steps to be taken next.
2
State of the Art
As an article aiming at presenting a conceptual solution to solve a well-known prob-
lem, this chapter presents on 2.1 subchapter, a description of the current systems and
manufacturing process used. More speciﬁcally, it covers ICT and ﬁxtures concepts and
its constitution, as well as the current manufacturing process of the ﬁxtures and the
problems it entails.
The proposed goals are also presented, on 2.2 subchapter, based on the problems
previously explained, as well as the proposed design process methodology to achieve
these goals.
2.1
ICT Systems Manufacturing
ICTsystemsincludebothsoftwareandhardwareparts.Focusingonthehardware,Fixture
it is an electromechanical device roughly consisting of a mobile plate where the Device
Under Test (DUT) – this paper only addresses PCBs as DUT – and a Needle Bed (“Bed-
of-nails”) are placed. A PCB ICT provides a quick contact with hundreds of access
points (test points) between the PCB and the needles by pressing the mobile plate down
against the Needle Bed. The Needle Beds are the most critical parts in terms of quality
problems due to their importance in the entire system and its handmade manufacturing
process [9].
The needle bed consists of a test plate custom manufactured with several through-
holes where the receptacles and the needles will be inserted. On the other side of the
test plate, the receptacles-needle set is connected to a wiring system. This wiring system
allows measuring electrical parameters in the PCB, connecting the PCB and software
part [11]. Figure 1 shows both sides of the test plate, bottom and top: the Needle Bed
and the Wiring system, respectively.

Conceptual Design of a Positioning System for Systematic Production
223
Fig. 1. Needle beds [10]
The manufacturing process consists in two main parts: the wiring process, which
creates an entire network of electrical connections, and the insertion process of the
receptacles and needles. This paper will focus be on the receptacles insertion process.
The receptacles are manually inserted in the test plate and then the needles are also
manually inserted into these receptacles, that serves as guidance for the needles. The
two following ﬁgures present a technical drawing of a receptacle (Fig. 2) and photos of
the receptacles, needles and receptacles-needle set sizes compared to an ordinary pen
(Fig. 3).
Fig. 2. Receptacle technical drawing (KS-075 47 E03 Ingun) [13]
Note that receptacle diameter and size are, in themselves, a problem since precision
levels are around hundredths of a millimeter.
Receptacle insertion is done using a press-in tool (Fig. 4), which helps the technician
to press the receptacles to their ﬁnal position.
Therefore, the angle and the force applied by the technician on the receptacles may
deform them and cause the needles to be uneven at the end of the process. Since it
is a handmade process, it may also be difﬁcult to ensure perpendicularity between the
receptacle’s axis and the test plate. This manufacturing process can take up to more than
a week of work depending on the PCB to be tested, and it is a truly repetitive process,
requiring high concentration and sensitivity levels from the technicians throughout the
whole process. This manufacturing process is highly dependent on the operator’s skill
and requires years of training and experience, which is a competitive disadvantage.
It is also important to note that if the receptacle is misplaced, consequently the
respective needle, and the needle beds aren’t fully validated internally, since it is almost

224
L. Freitas et al.
Fig. 3. Receptacles/needle size
Fig. 4. Press-in Tool (SW-KS-VF4, Ingun) [14]
undetectable by the human eye, the error detection is postponed to the production line
phase.
All the conditions inherent to the abovementioned process resemble more a hand-
crafted process than an industrial one. Therefore, automation is a viable path both to
ensure tolerances, perpendicularity and accuracy in the receptacle placement – and so the
needle position - and to carry out a quality control of these parameters, and consequently
to reduce both time and cost of production.
This upgrade is expected to create a competitive advantage in this manufacturing
process and consequently achieve some signiﬁcant goals, such as those presented in
Table 1.

Conceptual Design of a Positioning System for Systematic Production
225
Table 1. Project goals
Features
Current Market Situation
Project Goals
Accuracy increase for access
point
0,8 mm minimum
diameter recommended
for the access points
Automated system capable of
0,6 mm minimum diameter of
access point
Accuracy increase in centering
the needles’ contact points in
regard to the access points
70% average of accurate
contacts
Automated system capable of
95% average of accurate
contacts
Fixtures production process
optimization
Handmade receptacles
insertion (high operator
dependency; error-prone
process)
Automated system of
receptacles insertion and quality
checking
Fixtures production time
reduction
100% = 104 h
50% = 40 h
Receptacle insertion
repeatability process
Handmade process makes
repeatability impossible
Automated system that allows
receptacle insertion
repeatability process
2.2
Methodology
Throughout the years, several authors tried to explain and systematize the design process.
FromDescriptiveModels,thatsimplydescribethestepsandphasesofthedesignprocess,
such as the ones proposed by French [15], for example, to models like the ones proposed
by Jones, Archer, or even the VDI 2221 [16] guideline, named Prescriptive Models, that
tries to deﬁne and encourage designers to adopt a more analytical and systematized way
of working [17].
Given the innovative nature of this project, it was chosen a methodology that does
not set a deﬁnitive line between analysis of the problem and development of solu-
tion concepts, to allow designers a more ﬂexible approach to the problem. This is the
methodology proposed by Cross [17].
3
Project Development
This chapter presents all the necessary phases that will lead to the development of system.
In the ﬁrst Subsect. 3.1, the project is dismembered into its objectives, functions and
speciﬁcations, that are absolutely crucial to develop all the conceptual system alternatives
presented in Subsect. 3.2. It is also presented the evaluation of each alternatives, and
how it compares with each other regarding the system requirements.
3.1
Exploration Step
The goal of this step is to understand and deﬁne, with some level of detail, all the aspects
to enable designing a system to match all the project needs.

226
L. Freitas et al.
Fig. 5. Objectives tree
After a careful and thoroughly analysis, an objectives tree [15] was built (see Fig. 5).
The main objective for this project is the design of a system to automate the receptacle
placement process.
To enable the use of this system in an industrial context, and taking into account
all the demands of a highly competitive industry like the automotive industry, other
sub-objectives were added.
The ﬁrst one is that, whatever system is chosen, it will have to be a robust and reliable
system in terms of precision, quality control of the needle beds and operator dependency.
Moreover, the system needs to be of simple production to allow good reproducibility,
cost-efﬁciency and easy maintenance. The majority of the parts should be standard and
bought-out and easy to assemble. Finally, and since this system will be used with an
operator, the user aspect is highly important and must include a user-friendly interaction,
with easy optimization and modiﬁcation of the process parameters.
After all the objectives are stated, it is necessary to break them down into functions.
The overall function diagram is simple (see Fig. 6). [17].
Fig. 6. Main function diagram
But to do a more systematic analysis, it is necessary to break the main function down
into its respective sub-functions.
Figure 7 presents all the tier 2 functions that allow the system to fulﬁll all the
objectives previously presented.

Conceptual Design of a Positioning System for Systematic Production
227
Fig. 7. Function Diagram
These main sub-functions are described below:
• Test Plate Positioning– The system must ensure that the plate receiving the
receptacles stands in a known position and within the speciﬁed tolerances.
• Automatic Receptacle Feeder – Since one objective is to reduce operator interaction
as far as possible, it is necessary to ensure that the receptacles are fed into the system
in a way that guarantees their correct positioning.
• ReceptacleHandling – This sub-function describes the sub-system that will position
the receptacles received via the automatic receptacle feeder into their correct positions
on the test plate.
• ReceptacleInsertion – This sub-function relates to the task of placing the receptacles
into their ﬁnal position on the test plate.
• Insertion Validation– The ﬁnal sub-function deﬁnes the sub-system that will guar-
antee that all receptacles (one by one or all at the same time) are placed correctly on
the test plate.
Finally, an auxiliary function was added that is not directly related to the objectives
but adds value to the system:
• Receptacle removal– This sub-function will allow the system, within its own process,
to correct possible bad receptacle insertions, thus reducing the time and therefore
adding value to the entire system.
The ﬁnal step of this ﬁrst phase is the listing of the requirements and/or engineer-
ing characteristics extracted from the problem analysis. Table 2 presents a list of all
engineering characteristics and requirements for all the sub-functions:
Starting with all these assumptions, all the necessary information is thus gathered to
start developing and comparing system alternatives.

228
L. Freitas et al.
Table 2. Engineering requirements
Sub-functions and engineering requirements
Tolerances/Dimensions
Test Plate Positioning
Positioning Tolerance of the test plate relative to the system structure
0.05
Poke-Yoke system for the test plate
Maximum test plate dimension
500 mm × 500 mm
Automatic Receptacle Feeder
Minimum number of receptacles per cycle
200
Two types of receptacles
Receptacle positioning
Positioning Tolerance of the receptacles relative to the test plate
0.05 mm
Repeatability for receptacle positioning
0.01 mm
Receptacle Insertion
Positioning Tolerance of the receptacles relative to the test plate
0.05 mm
Insertion Validation
Verify receptacle presence
Verify receptacle position
0.01 mm
Verify receptacle perpendicularity
0.05 mm
Verify receptacle height in relation to the test plane
0.05 mm
3.2
System Alternatives
Matchingthesystemobjectiveswiththerequirements/characteristics,asetofalternatives
solutions weredevelopedfor eachspeciﬁcsub-functiondescribedintheprevious section.
Table 3 presents a morphological chart with the all the sub-solutions for all the sub-
functions.
As previously mentioned, for the purpose of this paper only the designing process
for the Receptacle Positioning and Receptacle Handling/Insertion sub-functions will
be addressed. These two functions are directly connected since the system for recepta-
cle positioning, handling and inserting could be the same. The next tables present the
selection matrix for these two sub-functions and their respective sub-solutions.
In Table 2, some parameters were deﬁned to will serve as evaluation parameters for
the sub-function Receptacle Positioning. These parameters are directly connected to the
system’s requirements and objectives. The ﬁrst two parameters are quantitative, since a
real value can be deﬁned, and self-explanatory.
“Flexibility” refers to the sub-solution’s ability to embrace new sub-functions or
auxiliary functions that are not mentioned here, and the more ﬂexible this solution is,
the easier it is to integrate this sub-function with the Receptacle Handling/Insertion.
Regarding the space that this system needs to ensure the plate’s maximum dimension’s
requirement, the name chosen for the parameter was “overall dimensions”.

Conceptual Design of a Positioning System for Systematic Production
229
Table 3. Sub-solutions alternative per sub-function
Sub-solution
1
Sub-solution 2
Sub-solution
3
Sub-solution
4
Sub-solution
5
Plate
Load/Positioning
Guiding
pins
Optical alignment
Receptacle Feeder
Vibration
System
Circular Cube
Manual
Load in
predeﬁned
positions
Receptacle
Positioning
3 axis
System
6 axis Robot
Scara Robot
Delta Robot
Cylindrical
Robot
Receptacle
Handling/Insertion
Gripper
Fingers
System
Pneumatic-actuated
System
Vacuum
System
Insertion
validation
Industrial
Vision
Mechanical
Veriﬁcation System
Operator
Validation
It is important to note that the values and the score presented on Table 4 do not refer
to the state-of-art of the current technology but compare systems within the same price-
range. Circles are used to represent the sub-solution scores, regarding the “ﬂexibility”
and the “overall dimensions”, considering a scoring range from 1 to 3, where 1 circle is
the minimum score and 3 is the maximum score.
Table 4. Receptacle positioning sub-solution score
As demonstrated in the previous table, the 6 axis robot is the option that fulﬁls
the requirements and achieves a higher scoring. Like the others, this robot fulﬁls the

230
L. Freitas et al.
positioning and repeatability tolerances, but it also provides a better ﬂexibility due to its
6th axis, thus providing an easier integration with the handling system and the ability to
absorb possible tolerance and positioning problems in the feeding system. In terms of
overall dimensions, it also scores positively.
The same process was applied to the handling sub-function. Table 5 presents the
scoring of three conceptual sub-solutions regarding three evaluation parameters. The
ﬁrst parameter refers to the possibility of each concept ensuring the positioning tolerance
required for the system and has a preponderance of 0.5. The second parameter addresses
the system’s easiness of producing and assembly, with a preponderance of 0.25. In this
case, ﬂexibility relates to the concept’s ability to absorb and interact with the different
sub-functions alternatives and has the same preponderance as the machinability.
Note that the notiﬁcation and the scoring range to each sub-solution is the same as
in Table 4, where 1 circle is the minimum score and 3 is the maximum score.
Table 5. Receptacle handling sub-solution score
Considering the relative weight of the parameters, the solution that best suits this
project is the pneumatic system because it provides a better positioning tolerance while
maintaining a relatively easy machinability. This derives from the way the solution is
designed, thus making it easier to ensure much-needed close tolerances; but to do so,

Conceptual Design of a Positioning System for Systematic Production
231
the machinability and the assembly process are more complex. Finally, it scored worse
in the ﬂexibility since it needs that the receptacles are fed in a very strict position.
4
Results
The main proposal of this paper is to develop a conceptual solution to solve the problem
identiﬁed. The study shown in the previous chapter allowed, among several theoretical
solutions, to achieve a conceptual solution.
This conceptual solution is detailed presented in this chapter and manages to carry
out the sub functions that best fulﬁlls the requirements previously identiﬁed as necessary
to solve the problem.
This conceptual solution in presented and explained in this chapter.
4.1
Conceptual Solution
As the development of the concept was taking place, it was observed that there were two
main aspects that the gripper needed to ensure in the ﬁrst place: a gripping function and
a positioning system that guarantee that the receptacle is in a known position.
The concept presented here (see Fig. 8), can be divided in two parts. The central
part, the “guiding pin”, will enter the receptacle and will guide the part into its correct
position, and the gripping part will grab the receptacle with the help of a pneumatically
actuated mechanism.
Fig. 8. Conceptual Solution
After this conceptual description, the team started to 3D-modeling the system, as
presented in Fig. 9.

232
L. Freitas et al.
Fig. 9. Front View of the 3D-modeled solution
For a better understanding, the system and all of its sub-components are presented
in an exploded view in Fig. 10.
Fig. 10. Exploded View of the 3D-modeled solution and its respective parts list
To ensure the needed precision, the part that will guide the receptacle needs to
have very good concentricity with the part that will connect to the robot. The best way
to achieve this is to aggregate these two functions in the same part and the result is a
structural part that is responsible to position the receptacle and will be directly assembled
into the robot ﬂange. This structural part is shown in Fig. 11.
The robot will position the handling system in such a way that the guiding pin will
enter in the receptacle, ensuring that the receptacle is fully guided in all directions. This
part that needs to have tighter tolerances and it will be dimensionally controlled for
guiding pin concentricity, relative to the robot ﬂange part, and its diameter.

Conceptual Design of a Positioning System for Systematic Production
233
Fig. 11. Views of the structural part
After receptacle positioning is guaranteed, the system grabs it and holds it in the
same positioning throughout the insertion process. For this, a system was developed,
based on a pneumatic ﬁnger gripping system that is presented in Fig. 12.
Fig. 12. Detailed views of the gripping system
The gripper parts, that are solidary with the parallel ﬁngers gripper through the
connection shafts, will press the receptacle against the guiding pin with little but enough
force to hold it in place.
This system will be integrated into a 6-axis Robot. This robot allows a precise
positioning of the receptacles and also provides ﬂexibility that can help when interacting
with the automatic feed system that will be developed in the future.
Figure 13 presents the handling system assembled into the robot.

234
L. Freitas et al.
Fig. 13. Overview of the system attached to the robot
5
Conclusions and Future Developments
This paper addressed the speciﬁc problem of ﬁnding an accurate solution for the
automation of a manual manufacturing process.
The conceptual solution here presented highlights the need for automation of this
process and the consequent reduction of all parameters that cause the ﬁnal product’s
current quality failures. The achieved precision, ensured by the system, is 0.05 mm – thus
accomplishing the main goal – and, more importantly and so hard to achieve manually,
the repeatability was also set to 0.05 mm. The solution also allows a considerable time
reduction in the receptacle insertion and wiring process of at least 50%, from the previous
mentioned week (40 h) to an estimative of 20 h.
This paper stresses the importance of a well-established methodology to ensure
solution development according to design objectives and engineering requirements.
The next steps will include the detailed design of all sub-solutions and their integra-
tion with each other. Finally, a proof-of-concept prototype will be developed to test and
validate all the sub-solutions .
References
1. Canadas, N., Machado, J., Soares, F., Barros, C., Varela, L.: Simulation of Cyber Physical
Systems Behavior Using Timed Plant Models. Mechatronics 54, 175–185 (2018). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mechatronics.2017.10.009
2. Kunz, G., Machado, J., Perondi, E., Vyatkin, V.: A formal methodology for accomplishing
iec 61850 real-time communication requirements. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 64(8), art. no.
7878522, 6582–6590 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2017.2682042
3. Kunz, G., Perondi, E., Machado, J.: Modeling and simulating the controller behavior of an
automated people mover using IEC 61850 communication requirements. In: IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), art. no. 6034947, pp. 603–608 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1109/INDIN.2011.6034947
4. Silva, M., Pereira, F., Soares, F., Leão, C.P., Machado, J., Carvalho, V.: An Overview of Indus-
trial Communication Networks. In: Flores, P., Viadero, F. (eds.) New Trends in Mechanism
and Machine Science. MMS, vol. 24, pp. 933–940. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-09411-3_97

Conceptual Design of a Positioning System for Systematic Production
235
5. Leão, C.P., Soares, F.O., Machado, J.M., Seabra, E., Rodrigues, H.: Design and development
of an industrial network laboratory. Int. J. Emerg. Technol. Learn. 6(SPECIAL ISSUE.2),
21–26 (2011). https://doi.org/10.3991/ijet.v6iS1.1615
6. Campos, J.C., Machado, J.: Pattern-based analysis of automated production systems. In: IFAC
Proceedings Volumes (IFAC-PapersOnline), 13 (PART 1), pp. 972–977 (2009). https://doi.
org/10.3182/20090603-3-RU-2001.0425
7. Campos, J.C., Machado, J., Seabra, E.: Property patterns for the formal veriﬁcation of auto-
mated production systems. In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes (IFAC-PapersOnline), 17 (1 PART
1) (2008). https://doi.org/10.3182/20080706-5-KR-1001.4192
8. Leão, C.P., et al.: Web-Assisted Laboratory for Control Education: Remote and Virtual
Environments. In: Uckelmann, D., Scholz-Reiter, B., Rügge, I., Hong, B., Rizzi, A. (eds.)
ImViReLL 2012. CCIS, vol. 282, pp. 62–72. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-642-28816-6_7
9. Anc˘au, M.: The optimization of printed circuit board manufacturing by improving the drilling
process productivity. Comput. Ind. Eng. 55(2), 279–294 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.
2007.12.008
10. Bateson, J.T.: In-Circuit Testing. 1st edition Springer, Dordrecht (1994)
11. Professional Plastic. https://www.professionalplastics.com/professionalplastics/BedofNail
sTestFixturePCBOverview.pdf. Accessed 02 Feb 2021
12. I.-T. Solutions. http://www.insidelimits.pt/. Accessed 25 Jan 2021
13. Ingun.
https://ingun.com/en/Products/Productﬁnder/GKS_KS/KS-075/KS-07547E03.
Accessed 15 Jan 2021
14. Ingun. https://ingun.com/ingun-media/Global/Downloads/Print/PI_GKS_SW-KS-xxx.pdf?
la=de-DE&hash=1EC2BBC6AAD3E4FDDA0D2D14F04295120EB3DEA7. Accessed 15
Jan 2021
15. French, M.J., Gravdahl, J.T.: Conceptual Design for Engineers. 3rd edition. Springer,
Heidelberg (1985)
16. Konzipieren technischer Produkte. VDI-Richtlinie 2221. VDI-Verlag, Düsseldorf (1973)
17. N. Cross., T.: Engineering Design Methods: Strategies for Product Design. 3rd edition. John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Hoboken (2000)

Selection and Development of Technologies
for the Education of Engineers in the Context
of Industry 4.0
Pedro José Gabriel Ferreira(B)
, Silvia Helena Bonilla
,
and José Benedito Sacomano
Universidade Paulista, Doutor Bacelar, São Paulo - SP 1212, Brazil
pedro.ferreira@docente.unip.br
Abstract. The fourth industrial revolution has been changing the way new prod-
ucts are produced, global competition and labor relations. More than that, it alters
social relationships and educational methodologies. Educational administrators
are responsible for adjusting the curricula of engineering courses in order to pre-
pare new professionals for the needs of the industry. In this work an exploratory
research is carried out in the literature for the selection and development of edu-
cational technologies, which can assist in the new teaching methodologies for
the education of Engineers, in the context of Industry 4.0. A market research is
carried out to evaluate the technologies available in Brazil with good cost-beneﬁt
and partnerships are established for the development of an industrial automation
kit. The selected and developed equipment is presented, as well as the design of
a laboratory for innovation and entrepreneurship called Fablab and implemented
by the Universidade Paulista - UNIP.
Keywords: Industry 4.0 · Fablab · Virtual reality · Engineering education
1
Introduction
The fourth industrial revolution has spread across the world and makes industrial pro-
cesses increasingly competitive. The concept of I4.0 is based on the integration of infor-
mation and communication technologies and industrial technology, and is mainly depen-
dent on building a cyberphysical system to realize a digital and intelligent factory, to
promote manufacturing to become more digital, information led, tailored, and green [1].
Nine technologies are reshaping production processes [2], they are: Robotics, big
data, virtual reality (VR), integration of vertical and horizontal systems, internet of things
(IOT), cyber security, cloud computing, additive manufacturing and augmented reality.
As a reﬂection, the need for universities to adapt their curricula arises, in order to provide
the market with professionals trained to work with these new concepts. Education must
be aligned with industry to increase competitiveness and generate the talents required
(interdisciplinary) for Industry 4.0 [3]. In order for these new professionals to be properly
trained, we will need to invest in the development of engineering courses and innovation.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 236–244, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_22

Selection and Development of Technologies for the Education of Engineers
237
It is understood, therefore, that the concept of Industry 4.0 or Advanced Manufactur-
ing requires strong investment in education and innovation so that it can contribute to
the dissemination of knowledge that make it possible to understand its real impact on
production processes and changes in the Brazilian economy [4].
For some time, we have been discussing what skills would be needed for the training
of Engineers. Professional competence means the personal ability to mobilize, articulate
and put into action knowledge, skills, attitudes and values necessary for the efﬁcient and
effective performance of activities required by the nature of the work and the technologi-
cal development [5]. The latest revisions made in the Brazilian curriculum guidelines for
engineering courses have already addressed the issue of competencies, a deﬁciency in
the development of non-technical competencies during graduation is demonstrated [6].
It is up to the educational administrators to remodel engineering courses not only with
these competencies provided for in the resolution cited, but also to understand which
skills are necessary for the training of the Engineer capable of acting in Industry 4.0.
In order to stimulate new skills, educational tools can be used. UNIP uses in its
Engineering courses what is known as, Supervised Practical Activity - SPA, also known
as challenge activity. SPA activity enriches physics teaching at a higher level, preparing
and training students and reinforcing their cognitive processes through experimentation
and social and interpersonal relationships [7].
Other tools can help SPA and encourage student innovation and entrepreneurship.
The need for people able to develop solutions to problems of the technologically oriented
modern world has steadily increased [8]. One example is the Maker Space or FabLabs,
which enable students to develop and create their products without necessarily having
complex means of manufacturing them. Maker Spaces are environments where appren-
tices, designers, engineers and anyone with an idea can exercise their creativity safely
and easily, with the help of technical facilitators and/or technology in the development
of creative work [9]. 3D printing helps engineering students learn via rapid prototyping
and enhances CAD drawing skills, troubleshooting, and optimization [10].
Tools such as Virtual Reality and Augmented Reality, in addition to being pointed
out as technologies that are reshaping production, also become increasingly easy and
cheaper to use. The use of Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality devices is on the rise
and these devices are increasingly realistic and less costly ﬁnancially [11].
Another very important item for the teaching of industrial automation and conse-
quently the concepts of Industry 4.0 is the Programmable Logical Controller or PLC. It
is a vital component in any automation process and considered as one of the technologies
that will be present in this type of concept for a long time, even with the new technologic
advances. Even in the age of Industry 4.0 and industrial internet, it can be assumed that
these controllers will continue to be required to a large extent for tomorrow’s production
[12].
Based on the industry 4.0 development scenario and exploratory and market research,
this work aims to identify, select and develop tools that support educational methodolo-
gies that can provide new professionals with the competencies required by the Brazilian
national curriculum guidelines and those necessary to work in Industry 4.0.

238
P. J. G. Ferreira et al.
2
Methodology
The ﬁrst stage of the work was to conduct an exploratory research in the literature,
evaluating which technologies could be used to assist in teaching methodologies aimed
at training Engineers, with the skills needed by the industry. Educational specialists of
our university were consulted to validate the technologies selected.
Subsequently, a market research was conducted with suppliers of potential industrial
and educational equipment to identify which technologies could be provided immedi-
atelyandwhichonescouldbedevelopedtogether.Twooftheselectedsupplierspresented
technologies already developed and that could be tested immediately, such as 3D print-
ers and 3D virtual commissioning software for factory automation and equipment. The
third supplier suggested a partnership to develop kits that integrated industrial processes
through a suitcase of experiments with a programmable logic controller (PLC) and a
Human Machine Interface (HMI), along with an exercise book.
After establishing the technologies that would be employed, the equipment was pro-
vided for testing and the PLC /HMI kit was developed together. Training was conducted
to train teachers and technicians in their use.
Finally, a space called FabLab UNIP was developed to accommodate 3D printers,
through operational tests with teachers, technicians and students to assess needs and
subsequent use throughout the community.
3
Discussion and Results
As a result of the exploratory research and market research conducted, some equipment
was acquired by the university aimed at assisting in learning by challenge. For students
to start their Reverse Engineering work, a scanner has been selected for creating 3D
images and later printing, presented in Fig. 1. It is possible to position an object on the
turntable, performing a full scanning automatically.
Fig. 1. Scanner used for reverse engineering.
For students to perform various operations in the manufacture of a prototype, such
as laser cutting and engraving, milling and 3D printing, a hybrid equipment has been

Selection and Development of Technologies for the Education of Engineers
239
Fig. 2. Hybrid equipment with its milling and printing heads.
selected, which is presented in Fig. 2. It is possible to change the heads and perform
different operations on the same equipment.
For prints that require greater deﬁnition or require special materials, such as bio-
compatible scans, the University acquired the equipment with stereolithography printing
technology, presented in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. 3D Printer - digital light processing (DLP).
For the installation of printers and creation of an environment where students can be
creative and innovative, designing, manufacturing and testing their prototypes, the Uni-
versity has designed a laboratory. This laboratory was certiﬁed by the FabLab network,
which means it belongs to the worldwide network of laboratories with common char-
acteristics. This type of space will allow an exchange of knowledge between students,
communities and businesses from around the world. The laboratory plant is presented
in Fig. 4 and the laboratory in Fig. 5.
The 3D virtual commissioning software for factory automation chosen was Ciros,
presented in Fig. 6. Students and teachers can simulate and program industrial pro-
cesses, see the manufacture of products, interfere in the process, cause errors and see
the corrections made by the system.

240
P. J. G. Ferreira et al.
Fig. 4. Fablab UNIP plant, located on the Bacelar campus.
Fig. 5. FabLab UNIP pictures
Fig. 6. Ciros software screen - Industrial production line

Selection and Development of Technologies for the Education of Engineers
241
The kit presented in Fig. 7 was developed by one of the authors in conjunction with
an automation company.
Fig. 7. PLC and HMI kit developed in partnership with automation company.
It is important to notice that although HMI and PLC cannot be considered as inno-
vative technologies, the integration of them will bring to students, the possibility of
monitoring the results of their programming inputs simulated on screen as shown in
Fig. 8. The adoption of the suitcases offers a cheaper opportunity (unique in Brazil) to
the university since real processes need space and are expensive to be mounted. In a
suitcase, HMI and PLC are packaged together and a book with 12 exercises has been
developed, where the student will learn how to program a PLC, with data recording and
movement, the use of the timer on delay and timer off delay, how to use their digital and
analog inputs and outputs and program the HMI. Real industrial processes were chosen
to elaborate the exercises, which are visualized on the HMI screen. Answers to the exer-
cises are provided to assist teachers during simulations. Two examples of exercises are
cited as follows:
The ﬁrst one involves the control of a tank level (low and high level) by triggering a
pump. In this way, the student can program the PLC to trigger the pump as a function
of the tank level provided by the level sensors (Fig. 8).

242
P. J. G. Ferreira et al.
Fig. 8. First example: control of a tank level (screen).
The second example involves a thermic treatment process control where the number
of samples as well as the treatment time can be established by the student. A conveyor
belt is triggered to direct the samples to the oven and a control of opening/closing gates
can be programmed, as shown in Fig. 9.
Fig. 9. Second example: thermic treatment process control (screen)
Table 1 shows the selected technologies, the learning outcomes and the justiﬁcation
related to curriculum improvement for each one of them.

Selection and Development of Technologies for the Education of Engineers
243
Table 1. Technologies, learning outcomes and justiﬁcation.
Technology
Outcomes
Curriculum improvement
3D Printers
Innovation
Entrepreneurship
Enable the students to design, produce,
test and modify the prototype in a fast
and cheap way
Students can do the whole process at the
university (not depending on other
factories, without spending more time
and money)
Enable the exchange of prototypes
between our university and the
worldwide network (FabLab concept)
Virtual reality
Problem solving ability
Technical knowledge
Global vision
Allows the testing of the industrial
processes that currently could be
expensive to the university
Vision of system capacity of correction
Kit PLC + HMI (suitcase) Technical knowledge
Process vision
Enable the students to visualize the
industrial process operating and the
results of programming change (Screen
of HMA)
4
Conclusions
Exploratory research has contributed to the selection of educational tools that can be used
in teaching methodologies aimed at developing speciﬁc capabilities for new engineers
to act in the context of industry 4.0. The market research helped to select equipment that
has good acquisition cost and capability. Fablab is being implemented and will serve
to support challenge activities and ﬁnal course work. Its efﬁciency will be measured
with questionnaires that will be applied to teachers and students, after the use of new
technologies. Sincethis is theﬁrst year that students aresubjectedtothenewtechnologies
the learning outputs are difﬁcult to evaluate and thus the research shows this limitation.
Even so, learning outputs will be evaluated after the ﬁrst year of implementation through
performance tests and surveys. Simultaneously, the research team of Industry 4.0 is
gathering insight through an industrial experts’ survey in order to gain feedback of the
selected techniques and broaden the outlook on other possibilities adopted by industrial
network. To evaluate the technologies and proposed methodology a survey is now been
conducted involving professors of different countries (Poland, Japan, United States,
Brazil and Portugal).
References
1. Mendoza, R.A.R., Menendez, R.M., Saldivar, R.P.: Engineering education 4.0: proposal for
a new curriculum. In: IEEE Global Engineering Education Conference 2018 (EDUCON),
pp. 1273–1282. Curran Associates, Red Hook (2018)

244
P. J. G. Ferreira et al.
2. BCG Homepage. https://www.bcg.com/capabilities/operations/embracing-industry-4.0-red
iscovering-growth.aspx. Accessed 28 Feb 2020
3. Chou, C.M., Shen, C.H., Hsiao, H.C., Shen, T.C.: Industry 4.0 manpower and its teaching con-
notation in technical and vocational education: adjust 107 curriculum reform. Int. J. Psychol.
Educ. Stud. 5(1), 9–14 (2018)
4. Alarcon, D., Da Rosa, L.Q., da Silva, R.S., Muller, F.M. De Souza, M.V.: Os desaﬁos da
educação em rede no contexto da indústria 4.0. In: Congresso Internacional de Conhecimento
e Inovação 2018, vol. 1, pp. 53–61 (2018)
5. CNE
Homepage.
http://portal.mec.gov.br/index.php?option=com_docman&view=dow
nload&alias=15766-rces011-02&category_slug=junho-2014-pdf&Itemid=30192. Accessed
25 Feb 2020
6. Carvalho, L.D.A., Tonini, A.M.: Uma análise comparativa entre as competências requeri-
das na atuação proﬁssional do engenheiro contemporâneo e aquelas previstas nas diretrizes
curriculares nacionais dos cursos de Engenharia. Gestão Produção 24(4), 829–841 (2017)
7. Ferreira, P.J.G., et al.: Ensino de Física em Cursos de Engenharia e Atividades Práticas
Supervisionadas: Uma proposta de ensino baseada na aprendizagem por desaﬁo. In: Brito,
C. da R., Ciampi, M.M. (eds.) International Conference on Engineering and Technology
Education 2014, vol.13, pp. 261–265 (2014)
8. Verner, I., Merksamer, A.: Digital design and 3D printing in technology teacher educa-
tion. In: Shpitalni, M., Fischer, A., Molcho, G. (eds.) CIRP 25th DESIGN CONFERENCE
INNOVATIVE PRODUCT CREATION 2015, vol. 36, pp. 182–186. Elsevier, Amsterdam
(2015)
9. Brockveld, V.V.M., Teixeira, C.S., Da Silva, M.R.: A Cultura Maker em prol da inovação:
boas práticas voltadas a sistemas educacionais. In: ANPROTEC 2017. Anprotec, Brasília
(2017)
10. Chong, S., Pan, G., Chin, J., Show, P.L., Yang, C.K., Huang, C.: Integration of 3d printing
and industry 4.0 into engineering teaching. Sustainability 10(11), 3960 (2018)
11. Morenilla,A.J.,Romero,J.L.S.,Mora,H.M.,Miralles,R.C.:Usingvirtualrealityforindustrial
design learning: a methodological proposal. Behav. Inf. Technol. 35(11), 897–906 (2016)
12. Langmann, R., Pena, L.R.: PLCs as industry 4.0 components in laboratory applications. Int.
J. Online Eng. 12(7), 37–44 (2016)

An Exploratory Approach with EEG
– Electroencephalography in Design
as a Research and Development Tool
Bernardo Providência1 and Rute Silva2(B)
1 Teacher at School of Architecture, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
providencia@arquitetura.uminho.pt
2 Master in Product and Service Design, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
Abstract. This article discusses methodologies based on EEG - electroen-
cephalography, applied to ED - emotional design and consequently, to the rela-
tionship between the user and the product. The objective is to understand whether,
based on the brain response, it is possible to identify the individual’s emotional
factors when interacting with the products. The process by which users enjoy
experiences when interacting with products is the result of a context of use, fun-
damental for companies as well as for designers in the design and development
of more positive new products. In this way, it is crucial to approach different
areas of design and engineering on multidisciplinary teams. EEG technology and
ED are approached, based on practical cases as well as the evaluations of exper-
iments carried out in the Psychological Neuroscience laboratory that validate the
application of these concepts. Through this, it is expected that the contribution of
the EEG and the self-report tools, will validate Wellington’s (2007) ethnographic
assessment assumptions about motivation and engagement. As a methodology,
they are expected to contribute to the creation tools that meet the new trends more
focused on semantic values - ideological and playful, than on pragmatic values
- practical and critical. Thus, it becomes relevant to answer questions about how
the incorporation of this technology - EEG - can contribute to the strengthening
and complementarity of the interaction between engineering and design, in the
construction of products and services that, in addition to satisfying basic needs,
contribute to your wellbeing [1].
Keywords: Electroencephalography (EEG) · Product design · Engineering ·
Design and emotion · Neuro design
1
Introduction
Based on the literature review, it is intended to present a theoretical model for a practical
intervention in the evaluation and development of experiences with the product through
the EEG. In particular, the intersection of neurosciences and emotional design as a
contribution to engineering. This investigation emerges as a response to the existent
gap in the semantic evaluation of emotional design [2], since the responses given in the
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 245–256, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_23

246
B. Providência and R. Silva
interaction with the product refer more commonly to functional and usability assessment.
In speciﬁc, understand if the communication process at semantic level can be validate
using technologies, through the EEG, which allows us to perceive the brain’s response
to stimuli. This study is part of a partnership with the Psychological Neuroscience
Laboratory of the Faculty of Psychology of the University of Minho, with extensive
experience and publications in this area, which allowed the development of the necessary
protocols and investigations with the EEG evaluation technology.
A good understanding of neural and emotional response between users and products
is essential for success in developing new products. In the design process – product
evaluation/validation – self-report scales are applied to assess user’s feelings and prefer-
ences. Recently, to improve these assessments, EEG has been applied to measure brain
activity in order to understand sensory perceptions of consumers’ emotional responses.
The reason why this technology has been useful to support self-report scales is the fact
that it directly measures users’ physiological and emotional responses [3].
The intervention of the EEG in the emotional issue of the human being comes from
the need to identify emotions [4]. However, studies report that human beings can control
their facial expressions or vocal intonation, manipulating the expressions they intend to
transmit to others. Thus, the focus is on the recognition of internal emotions through
the EEG, witch can be visible in real-time through the intensity, magnitude, and speed
of the brain response, as well as the correlation between the left and right hemisphere
in response to food stimulus [3]. This approach leads us to question the possibility of
correlating EEG data with António Damásio’s somatic markets.
“Damásio (1996), with the formulation of the somatic marker hypothesis, proposes
a mechanism through which the emotional processes can guide the behavior (or
inﬂuence a tendency for a determined behavior), particularly the decision making.
This hypothesis declares that emotion acts automatically as a positive and negative
marker in cognitive decisions, to maintain the system necessary for survival in a
healthy society. Thus, the markers work as guides in the problem-solving processes
and we resort to them when it is necessary to decide.” [5].
Emotional design is one of the main considerations when it comes to sensory percep-
tions. This concept emerges in the late twentieth century and works the user’s interaction
withobjectsfromsensoryandcognitiveexperiences,underliningperception,andstimuli:
“Cagan and Vogel (2002), identiﬁed a group of values to be considered by design-
ers, named Value Opportunities (VO). The OV set includes emotion, aesthetics,
product identity, impact, ergonomics, core technology, and quality. (…) This show,
that it is remarkable that emotion is the ﬁrst VO that adds value to a product and
improves the experience of users.” [2].
Through these authors, it is possible to identify that emotion adds value to a product,
improving the experience and can affect the purchase decision. From the scientiﬁc point
of view, the triangulation resource is important because it allows for understanding a
research question from multiple perspectives. Patton (2002) points out that the goal of
triangulation isn’t to get consistency across data sources or approaches [6]. In Patton’s

An Exploratory Approach with EEG – Electroencephalography in Design
247
view, these divergences should be an opportunity for deeper meaning in the data and not
be something that weakens the research purpose.
Brieﬂy, the investigation included:
The bibliographic review on theoretical concepts as well as the relationship between
them, thus allowing to support the purpose of this investigation.
Understand the operation of EEG technology and its potential, starting the ﬁeldwork
that involved: observation, experimentation and graphic recording in the laboratory. This
step also helped to understand how these methodologies are applied in this investigation.
Then, methods that can be complementary were used, such as self-report scales - which
are already used in this type of investigation.
The experimental phase involved the development of a practical case - a case study.
The design of the experience was deﬁned based on the protocols used in the EEG tech-
nique and with the concepts of emotional experience, namely the approach by (Norman,
2014) which refers to three levels of assessment: visceral, behavioral, and reﬂective
[7].The participant is evaluated using the EEG technique and the Likert scales that allow
the evaluation of semantic differentials [8].
Following the previous steps, it is concluded that this technique can be an asset in the
evaluation phase in the development of new products, allowing to make the emotional
characterization of the response to objects.
2
Methodologies
In this study, two different methods are approached that allow understanding of how
the human being feels about a certain product - brain processing evaluation scale, EEG
and self-report scales. In the design of the investigation, it is important to consider the
methodological triangulation, for a validation of the questions to be answered. Thus,
from the methodology, it is interesting to compare the different studies and methods -
quantitative and/or qualitative, thus allowing to create a sustained model to increase the
veracity of the study.
One of the considerations of the two methods is that, if, on the one hand, the data
collected through the EEG with the electrodes allows to directly record the participant’s
brain activity, on the other, the information collected through the questionnaire with
self-report method allows to obtain the opinion of each participant. Songsamoe (2019),
argues that:
“However, these measurements are subject to cognitive bias from consumers
because all of the measurement data are obtained from consumers’ reported
thoughts or questionnaires.” [3]
Still, on the perspective of self-report assessment based on semantic analysis,
Krippendorff says:
“The study of the symbolic qualities of man-made forms in the cognitive and
social contexts of their use and the application of the knowledge gained to objects
of industrial design. By this deﬁnition, product semantics is not a style, program,
or movement. Rather, it is a concern for the sense artefacts make to users, for how
technical objects are symbolically embedded in the fabric of society.” [2]

248
B. Providência and R. Silva
Krippendorff also mentions, contrary to other authors, that “the form does not follow
the function, but the meanings” [2]. The principle of product semantics is not primarily
concerned with issues of functionality, the semantics of the product is based on what
people tend to understand when interacting with the product. The human being sees
beyond the characteristics of a product, these serve as a means of message, through
which the user unleashes meanings. This question leads us to consider that if an object
is purely utilitarian, it means that it lacks presence and is only visible in the act of use.
The emotional component - emotional design, is another dimension that goes beyond
what is functional, thus correlating the concept of functionality and symbolism in the
same product. For a product to be understood from symbology, the user needs to be
interconnected with the product, that is, there is interaction with it. Only in this way, it is
possible to know what the user says because the meanings emerge from the interaction
process. From the research point of view, the symbolism inherent in a given product is
expressed by the user’s attitude and what he says, that is, the user is exposed to a certain
stimulus - product, in a given context, where the interaction results.
Regarding the methodology in its practical component, the investigation follows ﬁve
stages:
First, the design of the experiment - based on EEG technology and self-report scales.
Human resources - participants, material and space - are also considered at this stage.
When? How? which makes it possible to gather the necessary conditions to start this
phase of the investigation.
Second, data collection - This phase considers a universe between 12 to 20
participants, with adulthood.
The experiments are carried out in the facilities in the EEG collection room - Psycho-
logical Neuroscience laboratory. Also, all equipment and material are made available by
the same. About the experience, the focus of the evaluation is based on two variables:
visual evaluation through photographs and the real object; tactile evaluation through the
object. The technique of recording brain activity is prepared, in the period in which the
EEG is registered, the participant is exposed to a certain stimulus - in this case, a product
(kitchen utensil).
The realization of the experiment, after preparing the laboratory and the participant,
involves three tasks for data collection. In the presentation, each photograph is shown
to the participant for 1 s with a repetition of 50 times. The repetitions of the images
are interspersed with the Likert scale for the participant to classify according to the
categories being evaluated. In the physical product, in the visual variable, the participant
observes each different type of object for 5 s with a repetition of 35 times. In this case,
the Likert scale is only answered by the participant at the end of the task. In the tactile
variable, the considerations are the same. At the end of the three tasks, the participant
responds to a questionnaire with open answers that complete the categorization through
the categories exposed on the Likert scale.
The third phase involves the treatment and analysis of data from the methods applied
in the evaluation. The data are obtained through the following methods: registration of the
EEG technique; self-report scales - are answered by the participant during the recording
of brain activity; questionnaire - answered at the end of the activity registration. In
the treatment of data from information collected through self-report scales, categories

An Exploratory Approach with EEG – Electroencephalography in Design
249
are deﬁned based on the evaluated concepts, for example, interesting and uninteresting
concept. Subsequently, the EEG data are separated based on these same categories,
thus allowing a comparison between both dimensions. This comparison is made at the
statistical level, parameters of amplitude and latency of the components of the potential
evoked by the product.
Finally, relate the theoretical foundation and practical results.
The methods and tools applied in the study were deﬁned through a literature review.
The next section describes the emotion assessment tools considered to apply in the
practical case - self-report scales and brain function measures.
2.1
Brain Processing Evaluation Measures
The use of technology to measure brain processing using magnetic resonance images has
allowedtodeepentheknowledgeaboutbrainprocessing,namelyusingfMRI(Functional
magnetic resonance images) as in the case of studies on the emotional stimuli associated
with the music of Oliver Sacks, where from the magnetic resonance records it allows to
perceive the mapping of certain areas of the brain during the listening of music scores [9].
At the same time, the use of EEG has become more prominent in this type of mapping
from the point of view of the clinical forum and recently, with the application of this
technique in the design area, making it possible to identify several advantages of using
EEG in the emotional evaluation of the user with a particular product.
“The EEG technique is currently the most commonly used method for measuring
brain waves with high temporal resolution. It can measure the brain waves in
real time and provide much useful data. EEG data obtained from brain wave
measurements can be analysed in terms of mood, acceptance tendency and brain
functioning (Andersen et al., 2018). Therefore, it is not surprising that the brain
activity of consumers is very important, and the EEG technique is emphasised for
application in sensory research and consumer behaviour evaluations.” (Shaw &
Bagozzi, 2018) [3].
The EEG is the study of how the cognitive functions (including perception, memory,
language, emotion, behavior monitoring/control, and social cognition) are supported
or implemented by brain the electrical activity [10]. This technique of hightemporal-
resolution is an exceptional tool for study of cognitive processes and one of the reasons
is the ability to capture cognitive dynamics in the period in which cognition occurs
[10]. The collection of data from the EEG, in addition to be a non-invasive technique,
allows us to obtain data-rich information – depending on the number of electrodes that
are used. The author also says that cognition is fast, brain rhythms are fast, and brain
imaging technologies, such as EEG, can capture this fast dynamic by directly measuring
brain activity.
2.2
Self-report Measures
In the ﬁeld of design, the use of data collection methods for self-report evaluation is
frequent, which consists of applying a set of tools that go through observation, ques-
tionnaire or semi-structured interviews and that allow the evaluation of quantitative and

250
B. Providência and R. Silva
qualitative parameters/responses [11]. In conclusion, these self-report evaluation mea-
sures, in addition to being simple to access, allow information to be obtained quickly
and objectively. Thus, in this investigation aimed at applying semantic analysis, the
observation tool and questionnaires were applied - completed with self-report scales.
Questionnaire
The questionnaire is a means of communication between the researcher and the partici-
pant, that is, it is an investigation method with a set of questions (open, closed or mixed)
that aims to achieve a certain knowledge [11].
SAM
The Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM), developed by Peter Lang – 1980, is a technique
of image evaluation of the affective response associated with an object or context. This
combines three types of image: Fig. 1 - to measure pleasure - happy or unhappy; moti-
vation - active or relaxed; dominance - greater or less control in each situation, when
faced with a wide variety of stimuli. This method is easy to apply and non-verbal, which
allows you to assess the reports of affective experiences quickly [12].
Fig. 1. Adaptad from the three SAM scale representation (Lang, 1980)
PANAS
The Positive and Negative Affect Schedule or (PANAS), developed by psychologists
DavidWatson,LeeAnnaClarckandAukeTellegen–1988,isascalewithdifferentwords
that describe feelings and emotions. PANAS measures the positive and negative affect of
the user, realizing how he feels at a given moment and how those same emotions inﬂuence
him to act and make decisions. On the one hand, positive affect – positive emotions and
expressions, such as joy or satisfaction; on the other hand, negative affect – negative
emotions and expressions, such as anger fear, or sadness. This scale is applied through
a 5-point Likert scale questionnaire for scoring. PANAS is a reliable and consistent

An Exploratory Approach with EEG – Electroencephalography in Design
251
scale, with scores ranging from 0.86 to 0.90 for PA and from 0.84 to 0.87 for NA
(Magyar-Moe,2009) [13].
POMS
The Proﬁle of Mood States or (POMS), developed by McNair, Lorr, and Droppleman-
1971, is a scale that measures the six factors of the mood state with a 5-point Likert
scale - the basis for answering a questionnaire with 65 questions. Several studies prove
its suitability for sensitively, accurately and validly measuring the moods of individuals,
whether in a psychiatric context or with a non-psychiatric population (Boyle, 1987;
McNair et al., 1971; Norcross, Guadagnoli & Prochaska, 1984; Weckowizc, 1978) [14].
3
Study Cases
This section aims to demonstrate and validate the application of EEG concepts as an
evaluation method in the product development process. First, the equipment and the data
collection process with EEG used in the laboratory and this investigation - pilot case,
are mentioned. Then, the methodology applied in the experiment is approached, which
is based on the investigations that have been carried out in the Neuroscience laboratory,
taking into account the methods and results analyzed in the case studies. These case
studies are referred to in the article, to demonstrate how the EEG technique has been
applied in the product area about the participant’s evaluation.
3.1
Equipment and Conditions for Data Collection with EEG
Regarding the collections in the area of Psychology, the method used in the Psycho-
logical Neuroscience Laboratory of the University of Minho is considered, where the
ﬁeldwork is carried out to understand the technology, observe and developing experi-
ences of the collecting EEG data. The data collection includes a laboratory coordinator,
the researcher, the participant, equipment for recording brain waves, hardware, and soft-
ware for collecting and analyzing data. Brieﬂy, the procedure follows the following
order: 1. Preparation of the laboratory - computers and all the necessary material to
carry out the collection in an isolated space of any type of radiation; 2. Preparation of
the participant – introduce and explain the session; cap placement (perimeter measure-
ment to choose the appropriate cap for the participant); skin preparation; placing the
electrodes on the skin of the face; placement of electrodes in the cap – Fig. 2 – layout
applied in the experiments. To start the collection, the participant moves to another room
compartment, where he is accommodated to make the smallest possible movements, and
the electrodes are connected to the registered electrical signal ampliﬁer. Through a com-
puter, after explaining what is wanted on the part of the participant, a sequence of images
is presented that contains the exercise through which the registration is made in real-
time. After the collection, all the electrodes of the participant are removed, and later the
analysis of the records is made.
The EEG signal are recorded using an ActiveTwo Biosemi system (Biosemi, Ams-
terdam, the Netherlands) with 64 pin-type active electrodes inserted in an elastic cap
according to the international 10-10 system. Electrooculogram is also recorded by two

252
B. Providência and R. Silva
electrodes placed next to the outer canthi of the eyes (HEOG), and by one electrode
placed below the participants’ left eye (VEOG), using a Common Mode Sense (CMS)
and Driven Right Leg (DRL) montage of two electrodes located over the vertex as ref-
erence. The electrode offset is always kept below 30 mV. EEG data is ﬁltered online
between 0.01 and 100 Hz, and digitized at a sampling rate of 512 Hz. EEG signals are
stored for posterior off-line analyses using the Matlab toolboxes EEGLab (Delorme &
Makeig, 2004) and ERPLab (Lopez-Calderon & Luck 2014).
Fig. 2. Representation Layout (BioSemi, n.d).
In addition to this, the ﬁeldwork, allowed to participate in the collections regarding
the preparation of the participant; identify the methods of experiments that are applied
to obtain a certain type of result and identify possibilities and limitations. Two investi-
gations were observed, in which the participant’s experience was performed through the
representation of a computer image. In one of the studies, the participant had to observe
the images on the screen and say what the same image corresponded to - using only
the voice. In the other study, the participant had to interact with the computer and make
decisions on how he wanted to organize the objects. These questions allow us to consider
some problems in the data collection phase and to design the design of the experiments.
3.2
Application of Methodologies in Design – Case Study
Article - Understanding consumer physiological and emotional responses to food
products using electroencephalography
In this article, the author focuses on the principles and applications of EEG in food
research, with food being the factor under evaluation. According to Tammela, a con-
sumer’s brain activity, in terms of physiological response, is important for the emotional
response related to food and food preference [3]. Linforth reinforces these issues by
referring that the consumer’s brain waves can sensitively change when facing stimuli,
names, food appearance, odors, and food ﬂavors [3].

An Exploratory Approach with EEG – Electroencephalography in Design
253
As an evaluation method, consumers are stimulated by different factors: food prop-
erties, environmental factors, and internal consumer factors. The assessment is done in
two ways: ﬁrst, “biofeedback” response; second, changes in brain activity and emotional
response, for example, like, dislike. In these types of products, brain waves are usually
measured before, during, and after exposure to stimuli. The use of the EEG technique
included: the participant, the stimuli (food, image, sound, environment, among others),
the recording equipment - the electrodes, and the analysis software. In the general pro-
cedure, the electrodes are placed on the scalp and then connected to the brain wave
ampliﬁer. After preparation, the participant is exposed to stimuli, and brain waves are
recorded in real-time and subsequently analyzed.
The author’s ﬁnal considerations for the study, are that although self-report scales
are used to study consumers’ emotional responses to food products, these measures are
obtained from thoughts reported by consumers or through questionnaires. With this, the
application of EEG is seen as an opportunity because it allows measuring the consumer’s
physiological response directly. They say that changes in alpha and beta waves clearly
illustrate changes in consumers’ emotions and brain states with food stimulation [3].
Article - Assessing Product Design Using Photos and Real Products
The article investigates the validity of using photos of the product instead of real products
in the user’s responses to the design with the evaluation of the design of a car. The
authors of this article used explicit and implicit methods such as EEG, eyetracking, and
questionnaires [15]. In the evaluation - comparing the users’ perceptive responses when
using photos and real cars - they used three distinct perceptual aspects: explicit responses
- using a questionnaire; visual responses - patterns of looking; neural responses - use of
the EEG technique.
In the experiment procedure, two-car models were considered, named A and B of
different brands. Two experiments were carried out, one with photos and the other with
real cars. Car A was used in both experiments, while B was a different color in each
experiment. In the ﬁrst experiment, the participants evaluated the photos of the product,
and in the second, the physical product (the participants in each experiment were different
so as not to induce the memory recovery process). In the questionnaire, with a scoring
system from 1 to 7, three aspects were considered: preference - indicates whether to like
or dislike the car design, which is crucial for the decisionmaking process; luxury - often
considered in this type of product design; harmony - consistency between the design of
the different components of the car. Subsequently, the considerations were made from
an average and standard deviation [15]. The EEG technique was used only in car A
since the question of color variation in car B could be an unwanted inﬂuence on neural
responses. Regarding the data recording, a gray screen was displayed for ﬁve seconds
to record the basic signals, for twenty seconds a photograph of the car and between
the images, ﬁve seconds of a gray screen. This evaluation showed that the use of real
products is desirable to understand users’ responses more precisely, as the photo and
real car responses show to be considerably different [15].

254
B. Providência and R. Silva
3.3
Deduction for Study Cases
Intending to legitimize this investigation, the work that is carried out in the neuroscience
laboratory, the experiments carried out so far and the bibliographic references analyzed
- having been presented in the article two practical cases allow to understand the follow-
ing aspects: in both investigations the EEG method following the common collection
process, that is, similar to what is done in the laboratory of the University of Minho; the
collection of EEG data in both is done before, during and after the experiment - even if
different times can be considered; in the ﬁrst article, it considers self-report scales as a tra-
ditional method and to improve data the EEG, while the second considers questionnaires
as a traditional method and as a complement to the EEG and eye-tracking technique.
All the information collected so far, and the methodologies have been validated and are
common in different sources, allow to emphasize the need for methodological triangula-
tion between the EEG technique and the self-report scales. In addition to a larger number
of data, it allows to compare them and understand what is possible to obtain from each
one. If, on the one hand, through EEG it is possible to perceive the participant’s reaction
to the stimulus, the self-report scale allows us to deﬁne this response. This pertinent
investigation illustrates whether we can characterize the product through this technol-
ogy and whether it is possible to deﬁne the participant’s motivation with the product.
but as mentioned above, the emotion factor is one of the main factors for humans, and
it is increasingly important to consider its importance as functionality.
4
Conclusion
This article intends to demonstrate the purpose of an ongoing investigation, through
the contents covered: bibliographical research, laboratory experiments, methodology
design and analysis of practical cases that demonstrate its results. During this article, the
purpose of ongoing research is addressed through the analysis of key concepts and case
studies. Based on the work accomplished so far, it is intended, through brain mapping,
to understand the user’s motivation and involvement in each product. So, adapting to
the product development process in the evaluation component - answering questions
such as: Does this form motivate me? Is it functional? Do I feel comfortable? Therefore,
understanding the emotional responses by consumers’ biofeedback is essential for suc-
cess in product development because self-report scales are subject to cognitive changes.
After all, all measurement data is obtained from the user’s reported thoughts or through
questionnaires.
The article focuses on its purpose through the analysis of key concepts and practical
cases, but although engineering is not addressed explicitly, it is also related to these
issues, such as design, when it comes to product development. This intervention by
multidisciplinary teams - designers and engineers - in the evaluation of users’ responses
is important in both areas.
The intervention of this investigation with the EEG technique can be seen as a tool for
working with emotional design, which can, in turn, inﬂuence the design of the product.
Although these issues arose from a design gap, they are implicit in the new engineering
processes. The application of the EEG technique has been an asset in the application
in engineering projects that have become successful from functionality and usability.

An Exploratory Approach with EEG – Electroencephalography in Design
255
However, from meaning, motivation, and engagement, there is still a considerable gap
as demonstrated in this text. In the case of practical cases, the value of this approach to
engineering is noticeable, for example, in the article Assessing Product Design Using
Photos and Real Products, the investigation was supported by the Hyundai Motor Com-
pany brand. In engineering, the environment is merely functional, but for example, the
factor of shapes and textures can inﬂuence the motivation of users who consequently
inﬂuence the purchase decision. Once again, the importance of the bridge between
engineering, and the design of the intervention of this investigation is reinforced. In a
completely different area, the food area, the article Understanding consumer physio-
logical and emotional responses to food products using electroencephalography (EEG),
demonstrates that through emotions, it is possible to identify what consumers like or
dislike and create a model, which inﬂuences work of engineers.
Acknowledgments. This work was ﬁnanced by the Project Lab2PT - Landscapes, Heritage and
Territory laboratory - UIDB/04509/2020 through FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia
References
1. Desmet, P., Jimenez, S., Pohlmeyer, A.: Positive Design, Reference Guide. Delft, The
Nerthelands (2015)
2. Medeiros, W.: Meaningful Interaction A Proposition for the Identiﬁcation of Semantic.
Staffordshire University, England, Pragmatic and Emotional Dimensions of Interaction with
Products (2007)
3. Songsamoe, S., Saengwong-ngam, R., Koomhin, P., Matan, N.: Understanding consumer
physiological and emotional responses to food products using electroencephalography (EEG).
Trends Food Sci.Technol. 93, 167–173 (2019)
4. Providência, B., Ciurana, J., Cunha, J.: Connecting emotion to product customization an inte-
gration model system. In: Proceedings of 8th International Design and Emotion Conference
London (2012)
5. Carvalho,M.:Odesignemocionalnaconstruçãodeinterfaces.UniversidadedeAveiro,Aveiro
(2013)
6. Patton, M.Q.: Two decades of developments in qualitative inquiry: a personal, experiential
perspective. Qual. Soc. Work Res. Pract. 1(3), 261–283 (2002)
7. Norman, D.: Why we love (or hate) everyday things. Perseus Books Group, New York (2004)
8. Ribeiro, I.M.: Mapeamento da hedonomia e das experiências emocionais. UFPE, Recife
(2020)
9. Langleben, D.D., Moriarty, J.C.: Using brain imaging for lie detection: Where science, law,
and policy collide. Psychol. Public Policy Law. 19(2), 222–234 (2013)
10. Cohen, M.X.: Analying Neutral Time Series Data: Theory and Practice. MIT Press, The
Nertherlands (2014)
11. Brace, I.: Questionnaire Design: How to plan, Structure and Write Survey Material for
Effective Market Research, 2nd edn. Kongan Page, London (2008)
12. Bradley, M.M., Lang, P.J.: Measuring emotion: the self-assessment manikin and the semantic
differential. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 25(1), 4959 (1994)
13. Positive Psychology, PANAS. https://positivepsychology.com/positive-and-negativeaffect-
schedule-panas/. Accessed 24 Jan 2020

256
B. Providência and R. Silva
14. Faro Viana, M., Almeida, P., Santos, R.C.: Adaptação portuguesa da versão reduzida do Perﬁl
de Estados de Humor – POMS. Análise Psicológica. 19(1), 77–92 (2012)
15. Moon, S.-E., Kim, J.-H., Kim, S.-W., Lee, J.-S.: Assessing product design using photos and
real products. In: Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, 17, pp. 1100–1107 (2017)

Modelling IT Specialists Competency in the Era
of Industry 4.0
Maciej Szafra´nski
, Selma Gütmen, Magdalena Graczyk-Kucharska(B)
,
and Gerhard Wilhelm Weber
Faculty of Engineering Management, Poznan University of Technology, ul. Rychlewskiego 2,
60-965 Poznan, Poland
magdalena.graczyk-kucharska@put.poznan.pl
Abstract. The topic of the future and development of human capital in the con-
text of issues related to the digitization of the economy, including Industry 4.0,
matching IT competencies to the needs of enterprises and the labor market is a
growing challenge for public and training institutions in making decisions as to
its development in the region. The availability of competency resources of future
employees depends on many factors, including the region, matching the candidate
to the job proﬁle, date of publication of the offer or completion of the candidate’s
education. The literature review was done in this paper in the context of the issue
of professional competencies of potential candidates in the IT profession in the
era of automation and digitization of enterprises. The authors focus in particular
on emphasizing the matching of professional competencies to the needs of enter-
prises in the era of the fourth industrial revolution. An important and innovative
element of the study is the mathematical model which describes the impact of
signiﬁcant independent variables on the examined dependent variable which is
the group of professional competencies of the IT technician. The research sample
is based on 2,173 competency proﬁles of students studying in the profession of
an IT technician, described in total by 3,874 skills and 619 job offers describing
over 3,133 skills. The aim of the article is to create a mathematical model support-
ing decisions, taking into account signiﬁcant dependent variables for matching
professional competencies in the IT area to the needs of the labor market.
Keywords: Professional competence · Competence management · Industry 4.0 ·
Data mining · Multivariate adaptive regression splines · Labor market
1
Introduction
The accelerating world and the economy require innovation. In the second decade of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, the system of organizational and technological solutions referred
to as Industry 4.0. became one of them. Among other things, this name encompasses the
development of the Internet, including the Internet of things, communication between
humans and machines and cloud computing processes [1]. Job creation and virtual indus-
trialization [2] are also characteristic of Industry 4.0. The speciﬁcs of that issue were
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 257–269, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_24

258
M. Szafra´nski et al.
described in more detail in an article devoted to a bit different subject, i.e. compe-
tence management in a network of production companies [3]. The article quoted works
of authors engaged in the issues addressed by Industry 4.0 [4–6]. The expectations
regarding the direction of the development of companies encompassed under the phrase
Industry 4.0 led to a growth in the demand for work provided by IT specialists, including
programmers. At the moment, the expected acceleration in the improvement of efﬁciency
and effectiveness in companies is hampered by shortages of staff in that professional
group. Therefore, the following issues can be seen:
• shortage of IT specialists, including programmers,
• insufﬁcient level of competencies among IT specialists relative to expectations on the
labor market.
Competencies are deﬁned in different ways. Those issues were addressed in the
article [7]. With respect to an individual, e.g. a single employee, they are very often
simply presented as a set of knowledge, skills and attitudes [8]. From the point of view of
decision-makers in companies, they are perceived as an input resource to labor processes
[9]. Companies undertake various activities in order to either acquire competencies from
the market or train employees so that they acquire or develop them [10]. Looking for
competencies on the market requires communicating with it. With that respect, it is quite
difﬁcult to name competencies properly so that the communicating parties (businesses,
job candidates, educating institutions) [11] understood the same thing under different
names of competencies [12]. Other challenges include improvement of competency
selection methods so that to ensure their expected bundles on job positions. In a turbulent
reality, those bundles often include competencies which in traditional, still dominating
education systems, are taught as part of different professions and thus it is additionally
difﬁcult to ﬁnd employees meeting the competency requirements. Job candidates often
have competency gaps or sets of excessive competencies at the same time. From the
point of view of the labor market and companies, every solution which will accelerate
the shaping of competency bundles expected on job positions is interesting. For instance,
it would be very useful if a method was developed thanks to which on the basis of
identiﬁcation of one competency in a candidate, it could be concluded with a high
degree of probability that they will also have a bundle of other needed competencies. It
is exactly such a method that the Pozna´n University of Technology team is working on
together with its international partners. This article is going to present the outcomes of
works carried out to date in reference to the profession of an IT specialist which is very
important in the global dimension.
2
Problem Deﬁnition
In solving social problems, and works on looking for relations between separate com-
petencies, it is very useful to have a big amount of data, however, it is often difﬁcult to
collect them. It is not enough just to have those data, they should also be up to date and
of high quality. Whereas the results of student examinations are collected on an ongoing
basis in education systems, the evaluation criteria are often ill-adjusted to the require-
ments pursued on the market. In reference to the needs of the labor market, employers’

Modelling IT Specialists Competency in the Era of Industry 4.0
259
needs are sometimes analyzed, for instance on the basis of data from jobcentre websites
but ﬁrstly, it is difﬁcult to compare them with data from education systems and sec-
ondly, companies do not publish them or do so against a signiﬁcant fee and thirdly, there
are no standardized competency glossaries, a fact which makes the ﬂow of knowledge
about the needs of the labor market more difﬁcult [12]. However, when it is eventually
possible to collect the data, as it was the case in the project “Time of professionals -
Wielkopolska professional education” (2012–2015) where system.zawodowcy.org was
used [3, 13], a shortage of methods with which the data could be analyzed is noticeable.
Most often, the analyses boil down to the publication of simple reports with circle or
bar charts. There are some advantages to that since such charts are understandable to
most recipients of the information. The lack of in-depth studies of dependencies between
variables such as competencies, features of the job or training or internships candidates,
or variables describing the environment in which the companies or the job candidates
function, makes it impossible to draw conclusions on the dependencies among them. The
absence of methods supporting inference about relations among the needs of companies,
the condition of competencies and factors which affect the shaping of all those variables
makes it more difﬁcult to make decisions in enterprises, education systems, regional, and
domestic and international decision-making centres. The limited knowledge about the
nature and changeability of competencies treated as a resource makes it more difﬁcult
to manage them both on the microeconomic level (e.g. in companies) as well as the
macroeconomic level (e.g. in the region or the state).
It was mentioned that data on the competencies of future employees, including IT
employees, were and are still being collected via system.zawodowcy.org. It would be
advantageous if before the data are collected, research assumptions were made about
dependencies among different variables. Unfortunately, it is not possible. Firstly, there
are so many categories of variables listed in the system that the number of assumptions
would be close to inﬁnity. Secondly, it is the purpose of the system to collect and present
information about job candidates and employers and thus research purposes must give
way to the information needs of users of the system.
The methodology gap in that research area might be ﬁlled by the use of advanced
statistical methods such as MARS, Linear Regression or ANN [14].
This article is going to focus on MARS. The method is known in mathematics and
already used in some areas of ﬁnance [15], the environment [16], natural resources
[17]. Its insufﬁcient use, given the beneﬁts it can generate, is noticeable in problems
concerning the functioning of social systems or human development. The use of MARS
in the works whose outcomes will be presented in the following points stemmed from the
identiﬁcation of very interesting research problems which can be described as follows:
• are there any dependencies between the professional competencies of IT job candi-
dates and social competencies and other features of the candidates or the environment
they function in?
• how to notice dependencies between a big number of categories of variables which
are collected without primary assumptions of dependencies among them?
• are there tools, methods or statistical techniques which can be used to look for depen-
dencies among the features, including competencies of potential IT employees, in big
sets of unordered data?

260
M. Szafra´nski et al.
• how can sets of IT specialists’ competencies be modelled on the basis of identi-
ﬁed dependencies among the features of potential IT employees, including their
competencies, and on the basis of data concerning the needs of employers?
3
Methodology
3.1
Conditions of the Research and Assumptions Made
The formulated research problems became the basis for the development of a research
method and carrying out studies.
The following conditions for the studies have been assumed.
The research used data from system.zawodowcy.org. In connection with the fact
that the system collects data on competency proﬁles of students of technical schools
who learn different professions in Wielkopolskie province (Poland), the scope of the
data was limited only to competency proﬁles of students learning the profession of IT
specialists. The data were collected for the period of October 2012 to November 2015.
They continue to be collected in the system, however after a change was introduced to
their collection method, including the competency glossary, it is no longer possible to
combine data from the studied period with data from later periods. The historical period
also stems from the fact that the data from said period had been anonymized and thus
the system administrator was able to disclose them for the purposes of the studies. The
historical period is sufﬁcient for the development of a method for studying dependencies
between the features of potential IT employees which also include competencies. It can
be argued that the application of example data would be possible for the purposes of
testing research methods but actual data make it possible to verify the method by coming
up with conclusions which refer to the reality. The system also presents job offers posted
by employers in the same period. They were also created based on the dictionary on the
basis of which the students of technical schools developed their competency proﬁles.
Thanks to the use of the same dictionary, it is possible to compare how the student’s
competencies from their proﬁle match the expectations of the employer presented in
the offer. A 1:1 comparison is simple and automated. The comparison of aggregate
data is also simple. Unfortunately, it is impossible in the system to study dependencies
among competencies at the same time taking into account the inﬂuence exerted over
those dependencies by the needs reported by employers, i.e. representatives of the labor
market. Neither does the system have any mechanism for studying how the occurrence
of competencies depends on other features of the student than their competencies and
the features of the environment they live in. Among other things for those reasons, it is
impossible to model competency sets in the profession or answer questions such as: will
the occurrence of one competency be accompanied by the occurrence of other or others?
Is the occurrence of a given competency or competency bundle affected by the variable
characterizing the environment or a variable other than competency which characterizes
the student or a variable which characterizes the company which formulated the job
offer? In the competency dictionary, they were divided into three groups, according to
the Polish “Vocational education core curriculum” [18] which will be in effect until 2021.
Therefore, professional (P), common (C) and general (G) skills were distinguished in

Modelling IT Specialists Competency in the Era of Industry 4.0
261
the dictionary. In the dictionary, the competencies were described with more detailed
skills.
The following research assumptions were made:
1. there are dependencies between professional and common and general competencies
of future IT specialists (i.e. students learning the IT profession),
2. there are dependencies between professional competencies and other features of the
students who are potential IT employees,
3. there are dependencies between the features of the environment in which the students
learning to be IT specialists live and their professional competencies.
3.2
Preparation of Data for the Research
Taking the aforementioned research conditions into account, 3346 students were identi-
ﬁed in system.zawodowcy.org in the profession of the IT technician. Moreover, students
learning other professions who have at least 3 skills attributed to the IT technician pro-
fession, i.e. an extra 566 people, were taken into account. Those students were included
because quite often it is not the profession which they learnt that is the search criterion
on the labor market but their actual skills or, in wider terms, competencies.
In the studied period, 423 (small, midsize and big) companies described their
competency needs in 619 job offers.
3807 skills were indicated in the student’s competency proﬁle or the job offer at
least once in the period in question. 3324 of them were (P), 335 were (C), and 148 were
(G). All the skills became input data for the studies. Moreover, variables such as student
features other than skills, jobs offers from employers and the environment the students
live in were taken into account for the input.
Table 1 presents all the variables used in the studies.
System.zawodowcy.org contains many other variables which were not taken into
account in the presented studies. Therefore, the variables presented in Table 1 should be
treated as representatives of separate categories of variables. Some of the variables could
not be taken into account due to the fact that they were only descriptions, not quantiﬁed
variables. It made their use impossible, given the statistical technique applied.
The number of skills and students identiﬁed in the system was so high that the data
had to be reduced. The available statistical tools would not have coped with such a
big number of columns and records. Therefore, the data were synthesized with special
mathematical procedures which are not going to be presented here in detail and 3807
skills were reduced to 3 variables, i.e. YZ, X14 or XG, X15 or XC. It must be pointed out
that those three variables encompass the complete information about all the skills of the
students (in the 3 separate groups) and at the same time about all the competency needs
included by the employers in the job offers published in the system. For instance, in
order to create the variable Y, analyzed were all competency proﬁles developed by the
students in the system and all the job offers posted there by employers. Both parties used
the same dictionary of competencies. Therefore, every student used the entire dictionary
of competencies, choosing some of them as those they possess. Employers did a similar
thing when describing their competency needs in the job offers. All the records in the
offers’ data set and all the records in the student proﬁle data set were compared with

262
M. Szafra´nski et al.
Table 1. Variables used in the studies.
Variable
Symbol
Dependent variable concerning professional competencies
The student’s total evaluation value of professional skills for a particular offer
YP
Independent variables (predictors)
Concerning the student’s features
Student’s gender
X1
Student’s birthday
X2
Student’s proﬁle creation date
X3
Concerning the job offer
Job offer visible from
X4
Job offer visible to
X5
Job offer’s date of work start
X6
Job offer’s date of creation
X7
Job offer’s type of employment
X8
Job offer’s working time
X9
Job offer’s no. of job positions
X10
Job offer’s shift work
X11
Job offer’s non-stationary work
X12
Concerning the environment’s features
The job offer and the student are located in the same county
X13
Concerning competencies other than professional
The combined evaluation value of the student’s common skills for a particular offer X14 or XG
The combined evaluation value of the student’s general skills for a particular offer
X15 or XC
one another, subsequently taking into account only those pairs of students and job offers
which had at least one skill from the skill dictionary in common (in the case of the
variable Y, the comparison was made only for professional skills). Subsequently, the
generated data were aggregated to one number for every offer-student pair described
in the proﬁle. A detailed depiction of the data aggregation procedure for the variable Y
and analogously developed variables XC and XG would require a separate article in the
scope of mathematics or operational research.
3.3
The Research Technique
MARS or Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines method was used in the study. It is
a statistical technique which addresses one of the key deﬁned problems, i.e. the fact that
researchers have a set of unordered data and cannot specify research hypotheses at the
input for the studies. Therefore, it is necessary to apply a non-parametric technique [19].

Modelling IT Specialists Competency in the Era of Industry 4.0
263
MARS is such a technique. The basics of the application of MARS were described by
authors such as [20–23].
In MARS, the starting point is the following general mathematical formula which
shows the connection between the response variable (output variable) and the input
variables (predictors):
Y = f (X ) + ε
(1)
where:
Y – the response variable,
X = (X1, X2, …, Xm)T – the vector representing each input variable,
ε – noise with zero mean and limited variance.
The model can be developed to the following form:
Y = γ0 +
N

n=1
γnFn(X ) + ε
(2)
(Y) can be calculated as a function of the predictors X (and their interaction). The
elements of the equation include the input ordinate (γ0) and weight-weighted (γ n) sum
total of many base functions Fn(X) which can be expressed with the symbol (BFn). The
functions are often called splines.
The base function (BFn) can be graphically depicted as in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Graphic expression of a single base function used in MARS. Where: ϕ, x ∈R.
Figure 1 presents two component functions of the base function. They are: [ϕ −x]+
and [x −ϕ]+. The parameter ϕ is the knot of the base function and divides it into two
sections of linear regression (it must be remembered that MARS is an advanced linear
regression technique). The location of the knot stems from the data. With more accuracy,

264
M. Szafra´nski et al.
the functions can be presented as follows:
[x −ϕ]+ =
x −ϕ, if x > ϕ
0,
otherwise
(3)
[x −ϕ]−=
ϕ −x, if ϕ > x
0,
otherwise
(4)
As it can be seen in Fig. 1, only the sections following the ϕ knot are taken into
account in the analyses. The value of the function before the knot is zero.
As it was presented, the use of MARS involves searching the space of all input and
output values and connections between them. More base functions, chosen from the
set of all admissible functions, are added to the model of the reality described with the
variables so that to maximize the overall level of the model’s ﬁt to the described reality.
This practice leads to ﬁnding the most important independent variables and the most
important interactions among them.
MARS is a very accurate tool, therefore it makes it possible to identify a lot, even
very little, dependencies and develop an excessively ﬁtted model. Taking such a big
number of connections into account would make very difﬁcult to draw conclusions
which independent variables affect the dependent variable to the most extent, therefore,
the omission of those of the base functions which present the lowest ﬁt of the model to the
reality is one of the stages in the procedure of identifying dependencies. For that purpose,
MARS applies the lack of ﬁt criterion (LOF) which is described by the Generalized Cross
Validation (GCV). It makes it possible to arrive at the optimum number of base functions
(BFn) which ensure the best predictive ﬁt. The GCV formula was developed by Friedman
in 1991 [21] and looks as follows:
LOF

f

b

= GCV(b) :=
l
i=1 (yi −f

b(xi))
2
(1 −P(b)
l )
2
(5)
where:
b – optimal number of terms.
f

b – optimal number of effective terms b,
l – number of observations,
xi – corresponding data vector.
yi – the y value which is related to data vector xi.
In formula (5):
P(b) := v + dK
(6)
which is read as follows: P(b) is the efﬁcient number of parameters.

Modelling IT Specialists Competency in the Era of Industry 4.0
265
where:
v – the number of linearly independent functions,
d – the price of “penalty” for one unit of complexity (most often designated as 2 or 3);
2 is preferred in additive models [15],
K – number of knots.
In order to describe the connections between the variables listed in Table 1, the
following function was eventually adopted in the presented studies:
Y = γ0 +
N
n=1 γnBn + ε
(7)
4
Model Development
SPM 2018 software was used to develop the model of dependencies among the variables
deﬁned in Table 1. Following the aforementioned procedure of the application of MARS,
it was possible to arrive at the following 23 base functions (formula 8):
BF1 = max{0, X14 −2};
BF2 = max{0, 2 −X14};
BF3 = max{0, X8 −1} · BF1;
BF5 = max{0, 1 −X15} · BF2;
BF6 = max{0, X4 −5281} · BF5;
BF7 = max{0, 5281 −X4} · BF5;
BF8 = max{0, X4 −5269} · BF5;
BF10 = max{0, X4 −5297} · BF5;
BF12 = max{0, X4 −5163} · BF5;
BF14 = max{0, X2 + 1695} · BF3;
BF16 = max{0, X15 −31} · BF1;
BF17 = max{0, 31 −X15} · BF1;
BF19 = max{0, 4864 −X3} · BF16;
BF20 = max{0, X5 −5426} · BF5;
BF21 = max{0, 5426 −X5} · BF5;
BF22 = max{0, X4 −5115} · BF5;
BF24 = max{0, X4 −5178} · BF5;
BF26 = max{0, X4 −5233} · BF5;
BF28 = max{0, X5 −5426} · BF3;
BF29 = max{0, 5426 −X5} · BF3;
BF30 = max{0, X3 −5373} · BF5;

266
M. Szafra´nski et al.
BF33 = max{0, 32 −X15} · BF3;
BF34 = max{0, X5 −6575} · BF5;
(8)
On the basis of formula 7, the model presented in formula 9 with 21 base functions
was developed for the research problem in question.
Y = 12.41 + 4.21 · BF1 + 10.26 · BF3 −81.92 · BF5
−29.62 · BF6 + 0.369 · BF7 + 20.81 · BF8
+ 11.22 · BF10 −9.461 · BF12 −0.005 · BF14
−0.1405 · BF17 −0.00172 · BF19 −0.0531 · BF20
−0.317 · BF21 + 3.040 · BF22 + 8.216 · BF24
−4.307 · BF26 −0.0315 · BF28 + 0.098 · BF29
+ 0.263 · BF30 −0.374 · BF33 + 0.116 · BF34 + ε.
(9)
The symbol “−” means the related BF has a negative effect on the response variable
while “ +” means it has a positive effect.
1 Observation
Therefore, 21 BFn were included in the model described with formula 8. The analysis
of those functions indicates that they take into account 7 input variables (X) out of all 15
listed in Table 1. Those variables need to be considered the most important ones when it
comes to their inﬂuence over Y, i.e. the student’s total evaluation value of professional
skills for a particular offer. They are:
X2 – 1 instance, student’s birthday.
X3 – 2 instances, student’s proﬁle creation date.
X4 – 8 instances, Job offer visible from…
X5 – 5 instances, Job offer visible to…
X8 – 1 instance, Job offer’s type of employment.
X14 = XG – 1 instance, total value of the evaluation of the student’s common skills
for a particular offer,
X14 = XG – 3 instances, total value of the evaluation of the student’s general skills
for a particular offer.
Some of the remaining input variables might also be important but statistically
“covered”bythedependencythroughthe7variablesthatwerealreadytakenintoaccount.
2 Observation
6 out of the 15 variables included in the studies were time-related. 4 of them were
included among the 7 which were considered the most important for Y. That shows that
the variable Y is signiﬁcantly dependent on time. For instance, in the period in question,
the match of the professional skills of students declaring that they have the skills required
from IT specialists to the expectations included in job offers for such specialists largely
depended on the time at which those offers were posted in system.zawodowcy.org (X4).
3 Observation
Table 2 shows all the estimated values of coefﬁcients γ n, corresponding to selected BF

Modelling IT Specialists Competency in the Era of Industry 4.0
267
developed through MARS in the model: of the inﬂuence of different factors (variables
X) on the match between: the competency proﬁles of students who have the professional
skills of IT specialists and the professional skills expected in the job offer.
Table 2. Coefﬁcient values in the model prepared with the MARS technique.
γ0
γ1
γ2
γ3
γ4
γ5
γ6
γ7
12.41
4.21
10.26
−81.92
−29.62
0.369
20.81
11.22
γ8
γ9
γ10
γ12
γ13
γ14
γ15
γ16
−9.461
−0.005
−0.1405
−0.00172
−0.0531
−0.317
3.040
8.216
γ17
γ18
γ19
γ20
γ21
γ22
−4.307
−0.0315
0.098
0.263
−0.374
0.116
MARS assigns these coefﬁcients for each BFs in the model. The ones with minus
have a negative effect on response variable Y, the others with plus have positive effects
on it, as it has been explained in Fig. 1 and in Formula 3 and 4.
5
Conclusions and Outlook
The use of MARS in the research turned out to be very promising. Data collected in
system.zawodowcy.org are just one of many examples where, due to their complexity
and amount, it is difﬁcult to see speciﬁc dependencies while making hypotheses and
verifying them could take almost an eternity. The technique used makes it possible to
identify dependencies among the variables very fast. It would be difﬁcult to apply MARS
without an IT tool. Having it makes it possible to quickly change the variable sets and
repeat the study many times over a short period of time.
During the studies, several challenges which will have to be faced in the future have
also been identiﬁed. Firstly, deciding which data to use in the research and further works
connected with their preparation for the analysis is a very time-consuming process. Sec-
ondly, whereas MARS does provide immediate information about dependencies among
the variables, it does not provide detailed information about the nature of those depen-
dencies. That nature has to be studied with the use of other statistical methods. Thirdly,
if a decision is made to aggregate the data, there appears the problem of how extensive
the aggregation should be. Excessive aggregation does make it possible to take a big
amount of data into account, however, the output information is very general.
It was the main goal of the studies to create a mathematical model supporting deci-
sions, taking into account signiﬁcant dependent variables for matching professional
competencies in the IT area to the needs of the labor market. It was an ambitious and
realistic goal which was fully achieved.
The studies should be deepened in order to get a more accurate grasp of the nature
of the identiﬁed dependencies among the 7 variables X and the variable Y with the
use of additional research methods, including statistical ones and those conducted in

268
M. Szafra´nski et al.
interdisciplinary teams. Changing the position of the dependent variable might prove
interesting. For instance, current variable Y = XP can be treated as an input variable
while other variables, e.g. XC or XG can assume the role of Y in order to test whether and
how XP and other X variables affect them. The X data set can be enlarged by adding e.g.
macroeconomic data or additional features of the students to test whether other factors
affect the match between the competency proﬁles of students who have the professional
skills of IT specialists and the professional skills expected in the job offer. It might also
be interesting to use the MARS tool in relation to other professions and job positions
as system.zawodowcy.org contains much bigger data resources than those used in the
presented research. Finally, it might also be interesting to compare the effectiveness
of MARS with other parametric or non-parametric methods such as the basic Linear
Regression [21, 24] or Artiﬁcial Neutral Networks [25, 26].
The results of the studies are promising enough to justify the need for their con-
tinuation as well as intensiﬁcation. On the basis of the generated results, it is not yet
possible to recommend what kind of decisions should be made by business owners,
schools or representatives of local governments so that the competencies of graduates
learning IT professions adapted faster to the working conditions in the companies. Such
fast adaptation and then requaliﬁcation and fast learning are necessary in the conditions
of Industry 4.0. In the opinion of the authors, the studies should continue for instance as
part of projects dedicated to basic research.
References
1. Lee, J., Behrad, B., Kao, H.A.: A cyber-physical systems architecture for industry 4.0-based
manufacturing systems. Manufact. Lett. 3, 18–23 (2015)
2. Magruk, A.: Uncertainty in the sphere of the industry 4.0-potential areas to research. Bus.
Manage. Educ. 14(2), 275–291 (2016)
3. Graczyk-Kucharska, M., Szafra´nski, M., Goli´nski, M., Spychała, M., Borsekova, K.: Model of
competency management in the network of production enterprises in Industry 4.0 – assump-
tions. In: Hamrol, A., Ciszak, O., Legutko, P., Jurczyk, M. (eds.) Advances in Manufacturing,
pp. 195–204. Springer, Heidelberg (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68619-6_19
4. Lu, Y.: Industry 4.0: a survey on technologies, applications and open research issues. J. Ind.
Inf. Integr. 6, 1–10 (2017)
5. Brettel, M., Friederichsen, N., Keller, M., Rosenberg, M.: How virtualization, decentralization
and network building change the manufacturing landscape: an industry 4.0 perspective. Int.
J. Mech. Ind. Sci. Eng. 8(1), 37–44 (2014)
6. Thames, L., Schaefer, D.: Software-deﬁned cloud manufacturing for industry 4.0. Proc. CIRP
52, 12–17 (2016)
7. Szafra´nski, M.: Threefold nature of competences in enterprise management: a qualitative
model. In: Proceedings of the 20th European Conference on Knowledge Management,
Universidade Europela de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, vol. 2, pp. 1006–1015 (2019)
8. Boyatzis, R.E.: The Competent Manager: A Model for Effective Performance. Wiley, New
York (1982)
9. Russ-Eft, D.F.: Human resource development, evaluation, and sustainability: what are the
relationships? Hum. Resour. Dev. Int. 17(5), 545–559 (2014)

Modelling IT Specialists Competency in the Era of Industry 4.0
269
10. Spychała, M., Goli´nski, M., Szafra´nski, M., Graczyk-Kucharska, M.: Competency models as
modern tools in the recruitment process of employees. In: Proceedings of the 10th European
Conference on Intangibles and Intellectual Capital ECIIC 2019, Published by Academic
Conferences and Publishing International Limited, Chieti-Pescara, Italy, pp. 282–291 (2019)
11. Szafra´nski, M., Goli´nski, M., Graczyk-Kucharska, M., Spychała, M.: Cooperation of educa-
tionandenterprisesinimprovingprofessionalcompetences-analysisofneeds.In:Hamrol,A.,
Grabowska, M., Maletic, D., Woll, R. (eds.) MANUFACTURING 2019. LNME, pp. 155–168.
Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-17269-5_11
12. Szafra´nski, M., Bogurska-Matys, K., Goli´nski, M.: Problems in communication between
businesses and technical education system. Manage. Prod. Eng. Rev. 8(2), 9–18 (2017)
13. Spychała, M., Szafra´nski, M., Graczyk-Kucharska, M., Goli´nski, M.: The method of design-
ing reference models of workstations. In: Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on
Knowledge Management ECKM 2017, Academic Conferences and Publishing International
Limited, Barcelona, pp. 930–939 (2017)
14. Graczyk-Kucharska, M., Özmen, A., Szafra´nski, M., Weber, G.W., Goli´n´ski, M., Spychała,
M.: Knowledge accelerator by transversal competences and multivariate adaptive regression
splines. Cent. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 28(2), 645–669 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10100-019-
00636-x
15. Köksal, E.: Modeling of exchange rates by multivariate adaptive regression splines and com-
parison with classical statistical methods. Master’s thesis. Institute of Applied Mathematics,
Middle East Technical University (2017)
16. Taylan,P.,ÖzkurtYerlikaya,F.,Weber,G.W.:PrecipitationmodelingbypolyhedralRCMARS
and comparison with MARS and CMARS. Environ. Model. Assess. 19, 425–435 (2014)
17. Özmen, A., Yılmaz, Y., Weber, G.W.: Natural gas consumption forecast with MARS and
CMARS models for residential users. Energy Econ. 70, 357–381 (2018)
18. Regulation of the Minister of National Education of 31 March 2017 on the core curriculum
for vocational learning, item 860 as amended. Accessed 22 Dec 2019
19. Ghasemzadeh, A., Ahmed, M.M.: Utilizing naturalistic driving data for in-depth analysis of
driverlane-keepingbehaviorinrain:non-parametricMARSandparametriclogisticregression
modeling approaches. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerging Technol. 90, 379–392 (2018)
20. Friedman, J.H.: Multivariate adaptive regression splines. Ann. Stat. 19(1), 1–65 (1991)
21. Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J.: The Elements of Statistical Learning. Springer,
Heidelberg (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-84858-7
22. Salford predictive modeler. https://www.salford-systems.com/products/spm. Accessed 15
Feb 2019
23. Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARSplines). https://www.statsoft.pl/textbook/
stathome_stat.html?https%3A%2F%2Fwww.statsoft.pl%2Ftextbook%2Fstmars.html. Stat-
Soft Electronic Statostic TextBook. Accessed 22 Dec 2019
24. Aster, R., Borchers, B., Thurber, C.: Parameter Estimation and Inverse Problems. Academic
Press (2003)
25. Lippmann, R.: An introduction to computing with neural nets. IEEE ASSP Mag. 4, 4–22
(1987)
26. Mass, J., Flores, J.: The application of artiﬁcial neural networks to the analysis of remotely
sensed data. Int. J. Remote Sens. 29, 617–663 (2008)

Original Constructive Solutions
for the Development of Industry 4.0 in Romania
Gheorghe Gheorghe1(B), Badea Sorin-Ionut1, Iulian Ilie1, and Despa Veronica2
1 INCDMTM Bucharest, Pantelimon Road, 6-8, 2nd District, 021631 Bucharest, Romania
2 Valahia University of Targoviste, 130105 Targoviste, Romania
Abstract. The scientiﬁc paper includes the original constructive solutions pro-
vided for the development of Industry 4.0 in Romania.
The scientiﬁc paper will focus next on examples of contributions and elabo-
rations of original concepts and constructions of intelligent systems, technolog-
ical platforms and COBOT networks that support the digital enterprise and the
Intelligent Industry (4.0) in Romania.
Keywords: COBOT networks · COBOT technology platforms · Medical
applications · Intelligent control · Production lines control · Checking tightness
automotive parts · Car body assembly · Electronics pads control · Ecological
agriculture
1
Introduction
Examples of COBOT Networks of COBOT platforms with immediate applications in
Digital Enterprise and Intelligent Industry (4.0).
Some works [1–3] have been developed in the context of Industry 4.0 and this issue
has an upmost importance in several countries, including Romania. Since several pillars
that are part of Industry 4.0 context, Industry 4.0 is based, mainly, in new approaches for
designing and developing cyber-physical systems. Those systems are based on a perfect
combination of physical and virtual worlds [4–6]. The communication and exchanging
of information is an issue that has a lot of work for being developed [7–11].
2
COBOT Network of Technology Platforms for Integrated
Control, Sorting and Storage, Servicing and Operational
Assistance
At European level, a complex and ambitious program called Industry 4.0 has been elab-
orated, with the aim focused on a new industrial revolution understood more towards
a much improved or modernized industry, by using and integrating cyber-physical and
cyber-mixmechatronics systems in intelligent manufacturing. According to Fig. 1, the
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 270–284, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_25

Original Constructive Solutions for the Development of Industry 4.0 in Romania
271
cobot platform network - for intelligent control, sorting & storage, servicing and opera-
tional assistance, has an organizational and functional structure, like any Web network,
consist of:
COBOT technology platform - for intelligent control processes in the ﬁeld of Elec-
tronics, structured on three important sectors: the whole sector of Intelligent Mechatronic
Control Equipment for the electronic domain (for different electronic components and
subsystems in the digital electronic manufacturing process); the data of the intelligent
measurement and control are taken over and protocol and then transmitted, through the
cyber environment/system, to the user, these being provided through the cyber protection
systems; after the presumptive appearance of the ﬁrst errors, through the telemonitor-
ing/telecontrol/teleconﬁguration and telementenance center, contact the applicant ben-
eﬁciary, to whom it is transmitted by e-mail, telephone, etc., all the operations to be
undertaken, in order to remove the identiﬁed errors in order to reintroduce the intel-
ligent mechatronic control equipment, only if the applicant beneﬁciary agrees to be
interrogated through the INTERNET and the INTRANET of the beneﬁciary entity. By
applying remote monitoring, the interventions for Good Functioning are cheaper! Also,
the Center for telemonitoring, telecontrol, teleconﬁguration and telementenance [12], is
the one that ensures the smooth operation of the mechatronic equipment of intelligent
control, based on the complex structure of advanced software programs.
COBOT technology platform [13] - for sorting and storage processes in the industrial
environment, also structured on three important sectors - the whole sector of Intelligent
Mechatronic Equipment for sorting and storage processes in the industrial environment,
– the cyber environment sector and - the telemonitoring center sector.
The COBOT type technological process comprises all the robot-operator techno-
logical operations, from the robot and operator input sizes, to their transformation into
processed data and protocol, to their transmission on the supplier-beneﬁciary communi-
cation bus, from the cyber space, to the beneﬁciary who performs the speciﬁc activities
of the robotic equipment, ﬁnally pursuing the fulﬁllment of the output sizes, through the
remote monitoring and remote control center of the COBOT technology platform for
technological processes, it is structured on three levels: the level of intelligent robotic
equipment, the level of the cyber space and the level of the telemonitoring center.
The technological processes served by this COBOT technology platform are very
many, very diverse and very complex.
Depending on these technological processes, the intelligent robotic equipment spe-
ciﬁc to the type of process is integrated and adapted, with its adaptability, to the cyber
space and the telemonitoring center and to the specially used and applied software.
COBOT technology platform for machine tool assistance (CNC), is structured on
three sectors/levels such as: intelligent robot equipment, cyber space and telemonitoring
center.
The technological assistance process of the MU with the CNC, includes all the
technological operations carried out, from the detection of the elements in the working
space of the robot - such as materials, devices, operator, etc., to the assistance through
active or passive operational service, to the communication assistance with the operator,
to the feedback of each activity, to the OK of each activity.

272
G. Gheorghe et al.
Fig. 1. COBOT network of technology platforms for integrated control, sorting & storage,
servicing and operational assistance
3
COBOT Network of COBOT Platforms for Intelligent Handling
and Control, Processes, Positioning, Measuring and Intelligent
Control Processes in Metrology and Industry
According to Fig. 2, the cobotic network of COBOT-type platforms - for intelligent
handling and control processes, positioning processes, integrated veriﬁcation and control
processes and intelligent measurement and control processes in industry and metrology,
comprises COBOT platforms, so:
• COBOT platform for integrated veriﬁcation and control processes in the MixMecha-
tronic domain;
• COBOT platform for intelligent measurement and control processes for technological
equipment;
• COBOT platform for intelligent manipulation and control processes in the ﬁeld of
Mechatronics and Cyber-MixMechatronics;
• COBOT platform for positioning processes in metrology laboratories.
The COBOT platforms mentioned above with each typed and corresponding struc-
ture, technological platforms speciﬁc to the services performed and speciﬁc to the related
industrial ﬁelds [14, 15].
Each COBOT type technological platform has, in its turn, a typical structure, namely:
intelligent mechatronic equipment/system, built to perform the functions of measure-
ment/veriﬁcation/control/positioning and manipulation, which transmits the data ﬂow

Original Constructive Solutions for the Development of Industry 4.0 in Romania
273
processed in the processes that they carries out, to the communication bus to the bene-
ﬁciary and/or the supplier of the equipment, in order to remotely monitor its quality but
also the operations performed at the beneﬁciary, through the Telemonitoring Center, the
communication between the supplier and the beneﬁciary being done through the Cyber
Space (INTERNET and INTRANET).
The protocols to be transmitted between the beneﬁciary - respectively the cyber-
mixmechatronic system and the provider - respectively the Telemonitoring Center, are
cybernetically secured and moreover they are qualitatively assured, for the best cobot
collaboration.
The collaborative processes of the technological platforms that make up the plat-
form network, are ensured, at a distance, by the Integrative Center for telemonitoring,
teleconﬁguration, telecontrol and teleservices of COBOT type technology platforms.
Collaborative assistance [16] is provided by the active operator of the integrative
Telemonitoring Center, by applying specialized collaborative software, for each COBOT
type platform, in order to carry out speciﬁc activities for each one, for validation of
activities, for service on request from the beneﬁciary, for collaboration beneﬁciary-
supplier and to ensure the quality of all the activities carried out by each platform.
The productive and quality contribution of the entire Cobot Network is integrated
with each SME-member of each Network, for the maturation of the digital transformation
process of the SME and the Intelligent Industry (4.0).
Fig. 2. COBOT network of COBOT platforms for intelligent handling and control, processes,
positioning, measuring and intelligent control processes in metrology and Industry

274
G. Gheorghe et al.
4
COBOT Network of COBOT Technology Platforms for Control,
Processes on Automotive Manufacturing Lines, Industrial
Parts Assembly Processes, Manufacturing Processes (Welding
and Handling) and Machine Tool Assistance Processes Web
CNC, for the Machine Tools Industry
According to Fig. 3, where the Cobot Network of COBOT technology platforms is
presented, its structure is based on four COBOT technology platforms speciﬁc to the
operation of services for the ﬁelds of the machine building industry, as follows:
• COBOT technology platform for control processes and on automotive manufacturing
lines;
• COBOT technological platform for assembly processes of industrial parts in the ﬁeld
• of machine construction;
• COBOT technology platform for CNC machine tool assistance processes;
• COBOT technology platform for manufacturing processes (welding and handling);
EachCOBOTtechnologyplatform,speciﬁctothetypeofservicesservedandthetype
of domain to which it is intended, has a typical organizational and functional structure,
as follows:
• the intelligent mechatronic system/equipment serving the specialized service/services
- measuring/controlling/assembling/assisting/manufacturing;
• cyber space with INTERNET and INTRANET based logistics;
• the center for remote monitoring, remote control and remote conﬁguration.
Each intelligent mechatronic system/equipment is built and equipped with several
domain-speciﬁc expression features and quality features, in accordance with European
and international standards.
The output data ﬂow from the system/equipment is transmitted/transferred, through
the cyber space at the remote monitoring center to the beneﬁciary and supplier.
The remote monitoring center of each COBOT technology platform, collaborates
with each of them, in order to be able to remote conﬁgure and to collaborate - sys-
tem/equipment in the manufacturing process related to the operator of the center and the
operator of the system/equipment.
Each COBOT technology platform, is placed in a speciﬁc and collaborative com-
munication and enters into an active collaboration - platform - operator, based on the
dedicated software used.
The collaboration between the four COBOT technology platforms is provided by
the Integrative Center for t remote monitoring, remote conﬁguration, remote control and
remote service of COBOT technology platforms, through specialized software.
By integrating and implementing these cobot networks of COBOT technology plat-
forms for intelligent control processes, intelligent manufacturing processes and all other
ancillary processes, each SME will be transformed, and each SME will become a digi-
tized SME, respectively all activities in SMEs, will be subjected to digital transformation,

Original Constructive Solutions for the Development of Industry 4.0 in Romania
275
from the supply, their transformation, the realization of products and product assemblies,
to the speciﬁc activities of marketing, ﬁnancial accounting, management, etc., which will
become these, digital activities served by industrial robots, economic robots, and so on.
Fig. 3. COBOT network of technology platforms for control, processes on automotive manufac-
turing lines, industrial parts assembly processes, manufacturing processes (welding and handling)
and machine tool assistance processes CNC, For the machine tools Industry
5
COBOT Network of COBOT Technology Platforms for Checking
Leaks of Molded Parts of the Automotive Industry, Dimensional
Control with Probes and 4D Intelligent Control
According to Fig. 4, where the Cobot Network of cobot technology platforms is pre-
sented, it consists of four cobot technology platforms/mechatronic robots (systems), as
follows:
• technology platform/robot (system) mechatronic leak-prooﬁng of molded parts of the
automotive industry;
• technological platform/robot (system) mechatronic dimensional control with touch
probes;
• technology platform/robot (system) mechatronic for dimensional control;
• technology platform/robot (system) 4D smart mechatronics.
Each cobot technological system (system) intelligent mechatronic robot has a typ-
ical structure based on intelligent mechatronic platform/robot (system), cyber space
(INTERNET/INTRANET) and remote monitoring center.
The data ﬂow, collected and transformed, is sent through the communication bus, to
the respective beneﬁciary, the supplier for monitoring the processes carried out at the

276
G. Gheorghe et al.
quality levels in accordance with European and/or international norms and standards,
through the t remote monitoring and remote conﬁguration center.
Cobot network of cobot technology platforms/mechatronic robots (systems), ensures
collaboration with the network operator, respectively with the computer/server through
specialized software and the Internet and/or Intranet.
Depending on the structure of the network, the collaboration is ensured for the
performance of all the services related to the specialized ﬁelds.
The Cobot network of cobot platforms/systems (robots) is intended for the devel-
opment of the digitized enterprise and the intelligent industry (4.0), while ensuring the
modernization and development of intelligent specialized ﬁelds: the intelligent car indus-
try; the mechatronics and cyber-mechatronics industry; advanced aeronautics industry;
intelligent shipping industry; advanced railway industry; the smart medical industry; to.
The Cobot Network of cobot/robot platforms (systems) develops around it innovative
groups of SMEs with intelligent specialized ﬁelds.
Each SME in Romania or in the European and international world, based on the inte-
gration and implementation of cobot technological platforms for intelligent electronic
control and industrial technological platforms for the specialized intelligent ﬁelds, will
pass in steps and development stages when digitizing all technical-technological activi-
ties - economic-logistics, etc., respectively as a digital enterprise and so on, as a smart
industry (4.0) [17], respectively as a computerized and post-computerized society.
Each SME, thus transformed, will have a digitized structure, will have a staff trained
in the digitization processes for all types of activities carried out on all the related levels
and will have an adaptive management to the development level of the company.
Fig. 4. COBOT network of technology platforms for checking leaks of molded parts of the
automotive industry, dimensional control with probes and 4D intelligent control

Original Constructive Solutions for the Development of Industry 4.0 in Romania
277
6
COBOT Network of COBOT Technology Plat
forms for the Analysis and Recovery of Walking
in the Smart Medical Field and for Surgical Operations
and Laboratory Analyzes in the Smart Medical Field
According to Fig. 5, where the Cobot Network is presented, it is structured on: COBOT
technology platform for surgery and laboratory analysis in the smart medical ﬁeld;
COBOT technological platform for the analysis and recovery of walking in the smart
medical ﬁeld.
Each COBOT technology platform, has a typical structure and functionality
, based on:
• specialized equipment/system, with adaptive characteristics to the environment and
domain, specialized;
• cyber space with logistics (INTERNET/INTRANET);
• remote control/remote conﬁguration center.
The information ﬂow collected and transformed, from the technological equipment
is communicated to the communication bus through INTERNET and INTRANET, by
using the Internet and the Intranet, to the beneﬁciary, respectively to the supplier.
The monitoring of the information is done in real time, by carrying out speciﬁc
activities for the beneﬁciary and the supplier, respectively, according to the specialized
intelligent ﬁelds served.
The Cobot network of technological platforms/robots (systems) develops groups of
innovative SMEs, respectively value chains materialized by high quality levels.
The monitoring and collaboration of the Cobot Network is done through the Inte-
grative Center for remote monitoring, remote conﬁguration, remote control and remote
services of the COBOT technology platforms and through the operator of all the activ-
ities carried out in real time, through the computer and the Network Server, with the
operation of the Internet and Intranet as efﬁcient logistics.
By integrating and implementing all the cobot networks of technological platforms
cobotcontrolandtechnologicalprocess,digitalcompaniesandintelligentindustries(4.0)
are obtained respectively, which together will build a digital and post-digital society.
The construction of the cobot networks of COBOT technological control platforms
and of technological processes and/or of the mix networks, will contribute to the devel-
opment of the digital SMEs and the intelligent industries respectively and together of
the information and post-information society.
Then each SME and each smart industry (4.0) will jointly ensure the construction
of intelligent products, advanced and advanced technologies, and intelligent services,
and in the following periods, they will ensure the construction of the information and
post-information society.

278
G. Gheorghe et al.
Fig. 5. COBOT network of technology platforms for the analysis and recovery of walking in the
smart medical ﬁeld and for surgical operations and laboratory analyzes in the smart medical ﬁeld
7
COBOT Network of Technological Platforms/Intelligent
Robots for Welding Services, Body Assembly, Engine Assembly
and for Handling Parts in the Automotive Industry
The cobot network of COBOT type technology platforms/intelligent robots for weld-
ing services, body assembly, motor assembly and for handling parts in the automotive
industry (Fig. 6), includes in its modular and typiﬁed structure, the following intelligent
technological cobot platforms:
• platform/intelligent robots for welding operations in the automotive industry;
• intelligent platform/robots for bodywork assemblies in the automotive industry;
• platform/intelligent robots for motor assembly in the automotive industry;
• intelligent platform/robots for handling parts in the automotive industry;
Each of the intelligent platforms/robots for the automotive operations has a
typical/modular structure, based on:
• the mechatronic/cyber-mixmechatronic equipment/system for performing the opera-
tions and services of the car, whose ﬁnal data is transmitted through the communica-
tions bus to the other systems related to the platform, data that are dosed and which
represent the Integration Database of the platform;
• cyber system/cyber space, which has subsystems consisting of antennas, modems,
Internet, etc.
• the center for remote monitoring, remote control, remote conﬁguration and remote
maintenance of the related equipment/system of the platform.

Original Constructive Solutions for the Development of Industry 4.0 in Romania
279
The process of performing the operations/services in the ﬁeld of techni-
cal/technological platforms, of services related to all the special and speciﬁc activities
of the cobot network, comprises:
• the integration of the mechatronic/cyber-mixmechatronic system/equipment into the
related technological platform;
• execution of the operation/service required in the technology platform;
• conducting the operation/service based on the speciﬁc software, in accordance with
the technological guide;
• transmission/transfer of data to the Database of the integrative process and to the
beneﬁciary of the equipment/system and/or to the supplier of the equipment/system;
• active monitoring of the activities carried out by the equipment/system for their vali-
dation, in accordance with the technical/technological guide of the platform or when
errors/accidental occurrences occur, etc., for their resolution through the operator from
the Telemonitoring Center, from the platform provider’s space.
Within the Cobot Networks, monitoring/services are carried out, of all COBOT
technical/technological platforms, through the Integrative Center for remote monitoring,
remote conﬁguration, remote control and remote service of the mechatronic and cyber-
mixmechatronic systems of the Cobot Network.
Through this Integrative Center, each COBOT-type platform is remote monitored,
remote conﬁgured and remotely controlled, in order to carry out speciﬁc activities in the
best conditions, for each SME and for the Intelligent Industry.
Thus, each COBOTIC Network, is monitored, for all its functions and for its con-
tribution, to the digital construction and transformation of the enterprise (SME) and the
Intelligent Industry.
Fig. 6. COBOT network of technology platforms/intelligent robots for welding service, body
assembly, engine assembly and for handling parts in the automotive industry

280
G. Gheorghe et al.
8
COBOT Network of COBOT Technology Platforms/Systems
(Robots) for Positioning, Electronic Platelet Control,
Ultra-Precise Positioning and Intelligent Handling
Figure 7 shows the Cobot Network of COBOT technological platforms/Mechatronic
systems (Robots) for intelligent manipulation/ultra-precise positioning and electronic
platelet control.
The structure of the Cobot Network comprises the following COBOT type Intelligent
Technology Platforms (Robots):
• COBOT/Dodecapod intelligent ultra-precise positioning technology platform;
• COBOT technology platform/Intelligent Positioning System - Hexapod;
• COBOT technology platform/Intelligent mechatronic system for electronic platelet
control control;
• COBOT/Robot intelligent technology platform for intelligent manipulation;
Each component of the COBOTICE Network, has a typical/modular structure
consisting of three related buses, as follows:
Intelligent Dodecapod system of ultra-precise positioning, which performs ultra-
precise measurements and positions, in metrology laboratories and industrial workshops;
The cybernetic space/cybernetic environment, having in its composition, elements
and components that serve the data transfer from the intelligent pickling system to
the communication bus to the other components of the COBOT platform, for example
antennas, 4G and 5G modems, etc.;
The remote monitoring center of the platform, for its continuous dialogue with the
supplier and the beneﬁciary of the related intelligent system.
The interrelation of COBOT platform systems, is carried out collaboratively between
these platform components and the operator of the remote monitoring center on the one
hand, and on the other hand, between the entire COBOT type platform and the Integrative
Center of the Cobot Network, respectively through the operator of the platform center.
Depending on the applications of the Cobot Network and respectively the applica-
tions of the COBOT Platform, the special activities of the Cobot Network and of the
COBOT Platform, respectively, will be carried out, all the activities of the Network,
for their integration in each SME-component member of the network, respectively of
the platform, in order to become in time, the digitalized SME and contributing to the
development of Intelligent Industry 4.0 related to the SME domain.
TheintegrationofCobotNetworksandCOBOTPlatforms,fromtheSMElevel,tothe
groups/clusters of intelligent specialized domains, this will contribute to the development
of the digital enterprises and the Intelligent Industry (4.0), respectively of the Intelligent
Industry (4.0).

Original Constructive Solutions for the Development of Industry 4.0 in Romania
281
Fig. 7. COBOT network of technology platforms/systems (robots) for positioning, electronic
platelet control, ultra-precise positioning and intelligent handling
9
COBOT Network of COBOT Technology Platforms/Mechatronics
Systems (Intelligent Robots) for Organic Farming and Smart
Agriculture
Figure
8
shows
the
COBOT
Network
of
COBOT-type
technological
plat-
forms/Mechatronic systems (Intelligent Robots) for modular/typical ecological agri-
culture consisting of:
• COBOT/intelligent robot platform for ecological agriculture (with agricultural robot);
• COBOT/intelligent robot platform for intelligent agriculture (with advanced robot);
COBOT/intelligent robot platform for ecological agriculture (with intelligent robot);
• COBOT/intelligent robot platform for intelligent agriculture (with multi-application
agricultural robot).
For intelligent and ecological agriculture, where cobot networks and COBOT tech-
nology platforms are applied, each cobot network and each COBOT technology platform
makes a major contribution to the digitization or digital transformation of each enterprise
or SME becoming a Digitized Enterprise or SME-the digitized and together participating
in the development of the Intelligent Industry and respectively in the development of the
Company in the computerized society or in the post-computerized Society.
Each COBOT type technology platform has a typical/modular structure and consists
of:
• the intelligent equipment/mechatronic system/robot related to the cobot platform or
network,whichperformsalltheactivitiesandservicesrelatedtothem,transmitswithin
the technological process served, all the data related to it, through the communication
bus between the component parts of the cobot network or network;

282
G. Gheorghe et al.
• the cybernetic space/system, which ensures the real/virtual connection of the cyber-
netic space with the equipment provided to the beneﬁciary so that the equip-
ment/system can be monitored, through the remote monitoring center;
• theremotemonitoringcenter,theCOBOTplatform,orthecobotnetwork,permanently
carries out remote monitoring, remote conﬁguration, remote control, remote service
activities, for the intelligent equipment/system/intelligent robot related to the platform
or network.
The active and virtual dialogue of the component parts of the cobot platform or the
cobot network is done through the remote monitoring center of the platform or through
the remote monitoring center of the cobot network.
These telemonitoring centers of the cobot platform or network, carry out all opera-
tional activities on agricultural lands, in intelligent processes, to demonstrate the ﬁeld
of intelligent and ecological agriculture.
The support of intelligent and ecological agriculture through the conception, design
and realization of intelligent agricultural technologies, will lead to the real construction
of intelligent agriculture in Romania, and subsequently to the construction of smart
agriculture in Europe and the World.
Fig. 8. COBOT network of technology platforms/mechatronics systems (intelligent robots) for
organic farming and smart agriculture
10
Conclusions
In the next stage of Romania, the basic elements of the Industry 4.0 are initiated, through
decisions at national level to elaborate the Strategy of Industry 4.0 for Romania and its

Original Constructive Solutions for the Development of Industry 4.0 in Romania
283
integration/implementation in the National Development Strategies of Romania in the
medium and base period, for a strategic start of Industry 4.0, of the National Action Plan
of those foreseen in these strategies.
The Roadmap for Industry Strategy 4.0 will include all the elements necessary for
the implementation of the Industry 4.0 strategy, the relative architecture for digitization
and all other professional and technological components, human and social resources,
for a sustainable support of Industry 4.0 in Romania.
Therefore, the solutions that are designed, realized and implemented in the industrial
environments for the consolidation of the Intelligent Industry, become the basic pillars
for the Smart Industry and for the Digital Enterprise.
References
1. Lepenioti, K., Bousdekis, A., Apostolou, D., Mentzas, G.: Prescriptive analytics: literature
review and research challenges. Int. J. Inf. Manage. 50, 57–70 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijinfomgt.2019.04.003
2. Jantunen, E., Junnola, J., Gorostegui, U.: Maintenance supported by cyber-physical systems
and cloud technology. In: 2017 4th International Conference on Control, Decision and Infor-
mation Technologies, CoDIT, pp. 708–713 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/CoDIT.2017.810
2678
3. Cheng, B., Zhang, J., Hancke, G.P., Karnouskos, S., Colombo, A.W.: Industrial cyberphysical
systems: realizing cloud-based big data infrastructures. IEEE Ind. Electron. 25–35 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MIE.2017.2788850
4. Canadas, N., Machado, J., Soares, F., Barros, C., Varela, L.: Simulation of cyber physical
systems behavior using timed plant models. Mechatronics 54, 175–185 (2018). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mechatronics.2017.10.009
5. Sanislav, T., Miclea, L.: Cyber-physical systems - concept, challenges and research areas. J.
Control Eng. Appl. Inform. 14(2), 28–33 (2012)
6. Zhu, W., Wang, Z., Zhang, Z.: Renovation of automation system based on industrial internet
of things: a case study of a sewage treatment plant. Sensors 20, 2175 (2020). https://doi.org/
10.3390/s20082175
7. Iarovyi, S., Mohammed, W.M., Lobov, A., Ferrer, B.R., Lastra, J.L.M.: Cyber-physical
systems for open-knowledge-driven manufacturing execution systems. Proc. IEEE 104(5),
1142–1154 (2016)
8. Asghari, M., Youseﬁ, S., Niyato, D.: Pricing strategies of IoT wide area network service
providers with complementary services included. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 147, art. no. 102426.
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2019.102426
9. Leão, C.P., et al.: Web-assisted laboratory for control education: remote and virtual environ-
ments. In: Uckelmann, D., Scholz-Reiter, B., Rügge, I., Hong, B., Rizzi, A. (eds.) ImViReLL
2012. CCIS, vol. 282, pp. 62–72. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-28816-6_7
10. Kunz,G.,Machado,J.,Perondi,E.,Vyatkin,V.:AformalmethodologyforaccomplishingIEC
61850 real-time communication requirements. IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. 64(8), 6582–6590
(2017). Art. no. 7878522. https://doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2017.2682042
11. Kunz, G., Perondi, E., Machado, J.: Modeling and simulating the controller behavior of an
automated people mover using IEC 61850 communication requirements. In: IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), art. no. 6034947, pp. 603–608 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1109/INDIN.2011.6034947

284
G. Gheorghe et al.
12. Gheorghe, G., Bajeanru V., Ilie, I.: Ingineria Mecatronic˘a s,i Cyber-MixMecatronic˘a pentru
Construct,ia Intreprinderii Digitale s,i Industriei Inteligente (4.0). CEFIN Pubishing House,
Bucharest (2019)
13. Gheorghe, G.: Concepts and mechatronics and cyber-mixmechatronics constructions, inte-
grated in COBOT type technology platform for intelligent industry (4.0). In: Gheorghe, G.I.
(ed.) ICOMECYME 2019. LNNS, vol. 85, pp. 281–300. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-26991-3_26
14. Costa, D., et al.: Performance evaluation of different mechanisms of production activity
control in the context of industry 4.0. In: Gheorghe, Gheorghe Ion (ed.) ICOMECYME 2019.
LNNS, vol. 85, pp. 82–103. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-269
91-3_9
15. Silva, M., Pereira, F., Soares, F., Leão, C.P., Machado, J., Carvalho, V.: An overview of indus-
trial communication networks. In: Flores, P., Viadero, F. (eds.) New Trends in Mechanism
and Machine Science. MMS, vol. 24, pp. 933–940. Springer, Cham (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-09411-3_97
16. Constantin, A.: Telementenance and teleservice oriented design of dependable mechatronic
system in automotive industry. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Numerical
Analysis and Applied Mathematics 2014 (ICNAAM-2014), AIP Conference Proceedings,
vol. 1648, p. 620004 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4912854
17. Gheorghe, G.: Challenges and research in the innovation of digital enterprise and smart indus-
try (4.0). In: Proceedings of 2019 International Conference on Hydraulics and Pneumatics
– HERVEX, 13–15 November 2019, Baile Govora, Romania, ISSN 1454–8003 (2019)

Metrology Information in Cyber-Physical
Systems
João Sousa(B), João Silva, and José Machado
MEtRICs Research Center, School of Engineering, University of Minho,
4800-058 Guimarães, Portugal
jsousa@dem.uminho.pt
Abstract. The implementation of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) applied across
the manufacturing value chain helps to make processes more efﬁcient since CPS
enable the creation of more personalized, diversiﬁed and mass-produced prod-
ucts. This paper addresses the challenges of integrating Dimensional Measurement
Equipments in a CPS manufacturing system, often addressed as Cyber-Physical
Production Systems (CPPS). CPS and Industry 4.0 represent an opportunity for
metrology. The challenge is to design a CPPS, considering the metrology informa-
tion required to provide value-added services to the manufacturing system. The
use of open information models and established standards will be addressed to
enable data to ﬂow seamlessly from the physical layer (measuring devices) to the
cyber layer of a CPPS, mainly focusing on the Quality Information Framework
(QIF) information model.
Keywords: Cyber-Physical Production Systems · Open information models ·
Metrology · Integration · Smart manufacturing
1
Introduction
The embracing of Cyber-Physical Systems, one of the fundamental approaches in the
forth-industrial revolution, is stated with the term Cyber-Physical Production Systems
(CPPS). The vision of manufacture as a CPPS is considered for standard production and
also for the ﬂexibility to adapt the production system to the customer requirements. This
is an ongoing transformation of the ﬁeld level in a factory, towards more intelligent,
active (i.e. smart) devices, which provides beneﬁts regarding process optimization. The
digitization, interconnection, and the augmented ﬂexibility of production assets, which
lead to CPPS, represent an opportunity for the ﬁeld of metrology. With an interconnected
production, metrology is the foundation for a thorough valuation of production scenarios
and is fundamental to the implementation of model-based manufacturing. Furthermore,
the development emphasis of metrology will change from device engineering to the
provision and linking of data. However, the vertical integration of information in a
smart manufacturing environment, the linking, and the consequent harmonization of
heterogeneous data persists as major challenges.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 285–292, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_26

286
J. Sousa et al.
Industry 4.0 and speciﬁcally CPPS provide a new paradigm based on distributed
manufacturing services [1, 2] where the integration aspects are considered some of the
main features, namely [3]:
• the horizontal integration across business networks for inter-factory cooperation,
• the vertical integration of different hierarchical subsystems to provide ﬂexibility and
reconﬁgurability of manufacturing systems within a factory, and;
• the end-to-end integration of different engineering domains through the value chain
for product customization.
The vertical integration inside a factory and the horizontal integration of factories
enable the end-to-end integration of different engineering domains due to the prod-
uct lifecycle embracing various phases that may be accomplished by diverse factories.
In the ﬁelds of production and automation engineering and Information Technologies
(IT), vertical integration deals with the integration of the diverse IT systems at different
hierarchical levels, namely the machine, the actuator, the sensor, Programmable Logic
Controllers (PLC), Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems (SCADA), Manu-
facturing Execution Systems (MES) and Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) to deliver a
top-down solution. Through vertical integration, manufacturing systems become ﬂexible
and reconﬁgurable within a factory, from the machine component to MES and ERP sys-
tems, thus allowing the network of manufacturing machines to become a self-organized
system that can be dynamically adapt to different products, achieving an efﬁcient custom
production.
To cope with these requirements, new approaches for automation and production
systems that exploit the developments in the ﬁelds of Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)
and CPPS need ﬂexibility, agility, adaptability and interoperability. These solutions lean
towards the integration and harmonization of data coming from a variety of heteroge-
neous components at distinct hierarchal levels. Some industrial standards have appeared
over the last years, provide semantic deﬁnitions to some extent, for data modelling and
data exchange for diverse areas of the manufacturing industry. The most notorious exam-
ple being the IEC 62264 (ISA-95) standard, which provides a framework to assist the
integration and interoperability of enterprise-control systems. The IEC 62264 is also one
of the foundations of the RAMI 4.0 architecture [4].
Metrology or measurement information (e.g. the dimensions, measurements uncer-
tainty data, process capability, measurement system capability, failed parts, etc.) need to
be collected and fed back to the upper layers which isn’t traditionally being performed.
Research covering the use of open information models for metrology/inspection/quality
domain is mainly concerned in closing the gap between design and the inspection pro-
cess. A literature review shows a promising open information model addressing infor-
mation requirements for the end-to-end chain of metrology activities in a manufacturing
company – the Quality Information Framework (QIF). In [5, 6], authors propose a
model-based inspection framework to integrate design, manufacturing, inspection and
inspection process procedures. The framework uses the QIF information model to some
extent and shows some results in terms of speeding up inspection related tasks. In [7] a

Metrology Information in Cyber-Physical Systems
287
semantic information model for manufacturing resources is built with QIF for metrology
information, OPC UA1 and MTConnect2 for exchange data.
2
Metrology Information Modelling
The metrological domain in a manufacturing system involves different activities, each
one with different information outputs and requirements from distinct sources, such
as design, process planning, process execution, measurement and results reporting and
analysis. In each of the activities, a multitude of commercial software systems exist
usually referred to as Computer Aided Inspection systems (CAI) and Computer Aided
Inspection Planning systems (CAIP). Still, the information exchange among these soft-
ware systems is usually proprietary resulting in expensive data transformations for the
software users, the suppliers, the vendors, and in the end to the customers. The existing
metrology standards and initiatives that offer the deﬁnition and execution of the inspec-
tion activities and results analysis and improve the interchange of inspection-related
information and measurement results are:
• DMIS - Dimensional Measuring Interface Standard;
• DML - Dimensional Markup Language;
• STEP-NC part 16, which is still only available as a working standard for GD&T and
inspection procedures deﬁnition [8];
• STEP AP 219 Dimensional Inspection Information Exchange;
• QMD - Quality Measurement Data;
• I++ DME - Inspection Plus-Plus Dimensional Measurement Equipment;
• QIF - Quality Information Framework;
QIF is the most promising initiative to focus primarily on the activities associated
with metrology and quality control and address metrology interoperability. The QIF
information model is a neutral data exchange format that deﬁnes a set of XML schemas
to address interoperability issues in the data ﬂow through quality systems.
The QIF Information model enhances the exchange of metrology information
along the product lifecycle from design, manufacturing, inspection, maintenance, and
recycling/disposal phases. QIF is a feature and characteristic-based data format, that
expresses four aspects of a characteristic: Deﬁnition, Nominal, Item, and the Actual
allowing QIF to describe Product and Manufacturing Information (PMI) and report
measurement results while STEP only states the PMI [9].
The QIF schemas (XSDs) are structured in six generic topics for the metrology
domain: model-based deﬁnition (MBD), Rules, Resources, Plans, Results, and Statistics.
And is generically classiﬁed into the following sub-systems: product deﬁnition, mea-
surement process planning, measurement process execution and measurement results
reporting [10]. A simpliﬁed QIF workﬂow is presented in Fig. 1.
Such as STEP, QIF supports the principles of GD&T as deﬁned in ISO GPS standards
and ASME GD&T standards (ASME Y14.5).
1 https://opcfoundation.org/about/opc-technologies/opc-ua/.
2 https://www.mtconnect.org/.

288
J. Sousa et al.
An example of a sheet metal thickness measurement using QIF is provided below
(adapted from [10]). The thickness has a nominal representation and an associated tol-
erance that is required to be evaluated. The thickness speciﬁcation is 5 ± 0,02 mm. The
tolerance value is speciﬁed with the characteristic deﬁnition:
<ThicknessCharacteristicDefinition id="1"> 
<Tolerance> 
<MaxValue>0.02</MaxValue> 
<MinValue>-0.02</MinValue> 
<DefinedAsLimit>false</DefinedAsLimit> 
</Tolerance> 
</ ThicknessCharacteristicDefinition> 
The nominal value is speciﬁed in the characteristic nominal:
<ThicknessCharacteristicNominal id="10"> 
<CharacteristicDefinitionId>1</CharacteristicDefinitionId> 
<TargetValue>5</TargetValue> 
</ThicknessCharacteristicNominal> 
If the thickness is measured using a caliper, the tolerance condition can be assessed,
along with the actual thickness value:
<ThicknessCharacteristicMeasurement id="20"> 
<Status> 
<CharacteristicStatusEnum>PASS</CharacteristicStatusEnum> 
</Status> <CharacteristicItemId>1</CharacteristicItemId> 
<Value>5.01</Value> 
</DiameterCharacteristicMeasurement> 
Fig. 1. Simpliﬁed QIF based workﬂow.
Several tests were conducted to assess how correct and complete is the speciﬁcation
that revealed that the QIF Results schema ﬁle is capable of representing diverse types
of measurement features and characteristics [11]. As the format is independent of the

Metrology Information in Cyber-Physical Systems
289
data collection method, the QIF Results schema is capable of transferring measurement
results from devices such as coordinate-measuring machines or vision scanning or opti-
cal devices demonstrating that QIF Results schema offers a solution for seamlessly data
exchange and the collection of measurement results without costly subsequent data trans-
lation. Additionally, other information models deﬁne traceability data such as DMIS,
DML, and ISO 10303 AP 238 though, the association between traceability and measure-
ment data is unsatisfactory according to [11]. QIF has one important feature: the fact that
all data generated throughout the process is linked to the authority model. This satisﬁes
traceability requirements and gives room to further application with advanced analyti-
cal tools like data mining. This non-proprietary format can be used with an enterprise
control system, specialized in quality and manufacturing management but also support
the linking (at least) with the following domains [10]:
• FAIR - First Article Inspection Plan and Report;
• SPC - Statistical Process Control;
• MRP - Materials Resource Planning;
• MSA - Measurement Systems Analysis;
• MES - Manufacturing Execution Systems;
• CAM – Computer-Aided Manufacturing.
3
Towards the Central Role of Metrology Information in a CPPS
This paper addresses the pursuit of a CPPS architecture with measuring systems and the
adjacent services playing the central role. The objective is the integration of Dimensional
Measurement Equipments (DMEs) in a smart factory providing metrology/quality (web)
services, by providing seamless metrology information exchange through the different
enterprise control systems avoiding the current proprietary data block. These services
can leverage the metrology information within a factory to optimize the manufacturing
process since there is no standard method to act upon a manufacturing system using
metrology/quality data analysis as support. Figure 2 shows the central role of metrology
in a CPPS, linking the manufacturing and the inspection systems, and the metrology
services. This approach will beneﬁt from a common information model that links the
aforementioned contexts.
Taking into account the number of information models and standards, addressing
product and metrology data, one information model - or a combination of different
information models - should be used, to enable information to ﬂow seamlessly from the
physical layer to the cyber layer of a CPPS. This paper addresses the pursuit of a CPPS
architecture extensible to a high number of manufacturing SMEs.
Considering the different frameworks for Industry 4.0 implementation and CPS
architectures, a methodology should be adopted, enabling the integration of DMEs in
CPPS, providing added-value services to the company’s stakeholders. An integrated
solution considering the multiple dimensions of the manufacturing CPPS will provide a
sustainable implementation methodology for the seamless integration of DMEs, further

290
J. Sousa et al.
enhancing the industrial digitalization. The DMEs (either standalone systems or inte-
grated in manufacturing machines) are connected to a network of distributed enterprise-
control system modules and metrology related data is used through the different systems
to provide optimization to the manufacturing devices.
Fig. 2. The central role of metrology in a CPPS.
3.1
The Steel Tube Manufacturing Use-Case
The envisioned approach aims to measure the proﬁle of the steel tube to evaluate if the
shape of the steel tube conforms to the industrial steel tube standards (ISO 10305). This
is performed by the input of the production order, either directly from the ERP or the
MES system, or manually introduced by the operator. Then the evaluation of the prod-
uct’s conformance can start, the system can show in real-time the steel tube production
conditions and can compare the product’s speciﬁcation to the measured steel tube pro-
ﬁle dimensions. The dimensional measurement is performed employing an industrial
camera as shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Measurement of a steel tube proﬁle using optical methods
The required dimensional speciﬁcations can be provided by a STEP AP 242 MBD
ﬁle translated to QIF MBD (XML ﬁle) that states that “the width the square tube is 20 ±

Metrology Information in Cyber-Physical Systems
291
0,5 mm”. The measured shape of the steel tube is then compared to the measured shape
to identify if the dimensions are correct.
The measurement result can be provided by the industrial camera through a QIF
Results ﬁle. A QIF Statistics ﬁle can then be generated. The ﬁle has the dimensional
requirements for that speciﬁc product and the conformance result (Pass/Fail) based on
the speciﬁed tolerance – that speciﬁc tube can be deﬁned as “out of tolerance”. The
operator can be alerted and the information is stored.
A further level of development of the envisioned system requires the application
of the collected information in the manufacturing system: the system must provide the
information that “the velocity of the roller from the bending machine is responsible
for the failed tolerance result”. And ultimately, the application of speciﬁc knowledge
towards the optimization of the manufacturing system, where the system can advise to
“adjust the said velocity to 20 mm/s to correct the failed tolerance”.
Another application is the use of the generated QIF Statistics ﬁle to feed the SPC
system to monitor and control the steel tube production line.
For the envisioned system to work, the optical dimensional measurement system
has to be able to measure the different dimensional speciﬁcations (e.g. width, height,
diameter and corner radius) from different products (e.g. square, rectangular, round and
special tubes). Traceability is also a big requirement since each result has to be traceable
to the production order.
4
Conclusions and Outlook
CPPS and IIoT are considered major cornerstones of the new industrial revolution, with a
signiﬁcant impact in manufacturing systems, namely Smart Factories. To design a CPPS,
several categories of real-time manufacturing and measuring data has to be acquired
from the shop ﬂoor level, and passed to the cyber level. The main challenge is to deﬁne
the information models that are independent of the manufacturer. Metrology related
information models are being improved for interoperability mainly by the developments
of QIF that show promising features for interoperability within the metrology domain.
This paper addresses the problem of integrating DMEs in a CPPS, with special
attention to manufacturing SMEs, due to the lack of resources to use expensive (and
extensive) commercial enterprise systems. The approach intends to contribute to the
ﬁeld, by exploiting current standards and open information models for the integration
of metrological devices to exchange metrological information in a smart manufacturing
environment.
A use case for the implementation metrology information is a CPPS is presented.
Acknowledgements. This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e
Tecnologia within the R&D Units Project Scope: UIDP/04077/2020 and UIDB/04077/2020.

292
J. Sousa et al.
References
1. Leão, C.P., et al.: Web-assisted laboratory for control education: remote and virtual environ-
ments. In: Uckelmann, D., Scholz-Reiter, B., Rügge, I., Hong, B., Rizzi, A. (eds.) ImViReLL
2012. CCIS, vol. 282, pp. 62–72. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-28816-6_7
2. Barros, C., Leão, C.P., Soares, F., Minas, G., Machado, J.: RePhyS: a multidisciplinary expe-
rience in remote physiological systems laboratory. Int. J. Online Eng. 9(SPL.ISSUE5), 21–24
(2013). https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v9iS5.2756
3. Kagermann, H., Wahlster, W., Helbig, J.: Recommendations for implementing the strategic
initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0 (2013)
4. Hankel, M., Rexroth, B.: Industrie 4.0: the reference architectural model industrie 4.0 (RAMI
4.0). 2 (2015)
5. Liu, R., Duan, G.-J., Liu, J.: A framework for model-based integrated inspection. Int. J. Adv.
Manuf.Technol.103(9–12),3643–3665(2019).https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-019-03775-2
6. Rui, L., Guijiang, D.: An application of MBD based inspection in cloud manufacturing. In:
IECON 2018 - 44th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pp. 4171–
4175 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/IECON.2018.8591520
7. Hu, Y., Zheng, L., Wang, Y., Fan, W.: Semantic information model and mobile smart device
enabled data acquisition system for manufacturing workshop. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 1074,
012148 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1074/1/012148
8. Kumar, S., Newman, S.T., Nassehi, A., Vichare, P., Tiwari, M.K.: An information model
for process control on machine tools. In: Huang, G.Q., Mak, K.L., Maropoulos, P.G. (eds.)
Digital Enterprise Technology, vol. 66, pp. 1565–1582. Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-10430-5_118
9. Heysiattalab, S., Morse, E.P.: From STEP to QIF: product and manufacturing information. In:
2016 Annual Meeting on American Society for Precision Engineering, vol. 65, pp. 312–317
(2016). https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.34292.55682/1
10. DMSC: Quality Information Framework (QIF) 3.0 – A Data Model for Manufacturing Quality
Information (2018)
11. Zhao, Y.F., Horst, J.A., Kramer, T.R., Rippey, W., Brown, R.J.: Quality information framework
– integrating metrology processes. In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes, vol. 45, pp. 1301–1308
(2012). https://doi.org/10.3182/20120523-3-RO-2023.00113

Overview of Collaborative Robot YuMi
in Education
Jiri Vojtesek
and Lubos Spacek(B)
Department of Process Control, Faculty of Applied Informatics, Tomas Bata University in Zlin,
Nad Stranemi 4511, 760 05 Zlin, Czech Republic
{vojtesek,lspacek}@utb.cz
Abstract. The collaborative robotics is together with digitalization a trending
topic in the automation industry. It allows operators to safely work among robots
and collaborate with them on various tasks. This solution combines the advantages
of robots and humans and reduces space requirements, which results in boosted
effectivity. Students of robotic ﬁelds should be aware of the usage conditions of
collaborative robots to be fully prepared for their future work. They need to under-
stand how different they are from classic industrial robots and what limitations
they have. Collaborative robot YuMi from ABB is a perfect candidate for educa-
tion as it is quite easy to program, with its low payload is harmless even when
used inappropriately and has two arms that can be used for coordinated motion
applications.
Keywords: Collaborative robot · YuMi · Rubik’s Cube · Education
1
Introduction
This paper aims to incorporate the collaborative robot YuMi to education in a way that
will draw students’ attention, is easy enough to be covered in less time and can be
extended on the software and hardware side by ﬁnal projects or theses. There are many
applications for robots, but most of them lack this extensibility because robots are meant
to perform repetitive tasks. Once these tasks are programmed, there is not much room
for improvement except path and process optimization.
A very good application in education for a two-arm collaborative robot could be
Rubik’s Cube solving. It is interesting enough to keep students busy, it is simple to
understand and more importantly, it can be extended by optimization of algorithms and
spin moves, implementation of new ones and usage of cameras or other sensors. Human-
machine interaction can be also improved or developed. Everything mentioned can be at
ﬁrst simulated in a virtual environment (RobotStudio in ABB’s YuMi case) as a digital
twin and this paper covers the creation of the tool needed – a virtual 3D representation
of Rubik’s Cube in the RobotStudio. You can ﬁnd a few solutions for YuMi solving
the cube [1–3], but they are mostly for marketing purposes and lack a student-based
approach and complete 1-to-1 virtualization.
The paper introduces industrial robot YuMi in Sect. 2, Rubik’s Cube in Sect. 3 and
describes the created component for RobotStudio in Sect. 4.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 293–300, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_27

294
J. Vojtesek and L. Spacek
2
Collaborative Robot YuMi
2.1
Robot
YuMi is a collaborative industrial robot designed and produced by ABB (Fig. 1). YuMi
has two 7-DoF manipulators (arms) with each having a payload of 0.5 kg which allows
him to reach maximum TCP (tool center point) speed up to 1.5 m/s while maintaining the
safety of human operators. It is programmed in the language called RAPID and offers
full virtualization in the RobotStudio environment. Its two arms allow for generating
coordinated movements of all 14 motors built in these two arms. Synchronization of
both arms is built in the system, thus providing an excellent tool for the cooperation of
both arms.
Fig. 1. Collaborative robot YuMi [4]
2.2
RobotStudio Environment
RobotStudio is a development environment for modeling, programming, and simulation
of robotic applications (Fig. 2). It offers complete virtualization of ABB’s robots and
controllers and allows an online connection to real controllers [5]. It is more than suit-
able to be used for creating a digital twin with all its tools and features. Digital twin
provides smart integration to the production by reducing design and optimization costs
and increasing time effectiveness of the whole process [6, 7]. In education, this digital
twin can play a big role during home assignments or larger ﬁnal projects because stu-
dents don’t have usually access to industrial robots at their homes physically. They need
virtual solutions and RobotStudio can be used anywhere. Most of the schools have prob-
ably a server license of RobotStudio installed for their robotics courses, thus students
only need VPN access to the school’s network. With the help of a digital twin that can
be prepared in RobotStudio using its tools called Smart Components can students test
their solutions and algorithms at home and when ready, just copy-paste the code to the
real robot. Smart Components are RobotStudio objects (most of the time without a 3D
graphical representation) that can simulate logic or behavior of physical objects or logic
circuits used in the production. Several Smart Components can be aggregated together
using a node-like structure with connections and bindings (Fig. 3).

Overview of Collaborative Robot YuMi in Education
295
Fig. 2. RobotStudio environment
Fig. 3. Node structure of smart components in RobotStudio
3
Rubik’s Cube
3.1
Skill Toy
Probably everybody knows or at least heard of a famous puzzle called Rubik’s Cube
(Fig. 4), originally invented in 1974 by a Hungarian professor of Architecture, Ern˝o
Rubik [8]. It is famous even after 45 years, mostly as part of the skill toys group and has
a large community of solvers with competitions in speed solving all around the world.
It was also redesigned in numerous ways, adding different shapes and sizes (up to 33 ×
33 × 33 cube) in the last decades.

296
J. Vojtesek and L. Spacek
Fig. 4. Rubik’s Cube [9]
There are many solving techniques and algorithms, most of them used in a discipline
called speedcubing [10]. These algorithms are devised for humans but can be easily
rewritten to a computer algorithm, although they are not optimal in the number of moves
(face twists). It was proven in 2013 that the minimal number of moves to solve every
position of the cube is 20 [11]. The most optimal algorithm to solve the cube in the least
number of moves is, of course, a logical way to design a Rubik’s Cube solving robot, but
for education purposes, general speedcubing algorithms are more interesting. It is not
possible for a human to calculate the solution of the Rubik’s Cube in the most optimal
way possible and thus students will be forced to use algorithms developed for humans.
In this way, they will learn more about the programming and be able to come up with
own optimizations and implementations. To support their endeavor, a digital twin of the
cube should be created in RobotStudio with the same behavior as the real cube.
3.2
Rubik’s Cube Solving Algorithms
There are several algorithms used by professional Rubik’s Cube solvers for speedcubing.
All of them require the memorization of certain moves based on the speciﬁc layout of the
cube which is advantageous when using a robot to solve it (note they are not optimized
for time or number of moves). The most used and well-known methods for speedcubing
are [12]:
• Fridrich method (also called CFOP),
• Roux method,
• ZZ method.
The comparison of these methods is needed to determine the best method for the
robot. This comparison was done on multiple occasions by the community of cube
solvers and this paper presents the comparison shown in Fig. 5. Although all these
methods are suitable for the solution, it is advised to start with the CFOP method that is
more comprehensive than the other two methods.

Overview of Collaborative Robot YuMi in Education
297
Fig. 5. Comparison of speedcubing methods [13]
4
Digital Twin Implementation
Following functions are needed to create a fully operational digital twin of Rubik’s Cube
in RobotStudio:
• Communication interface,
• input signals mapping,
• logical interface,
• graphical representation,
• output signals mapping,
• human-to-machine interface,
• simulation of physical properties (solved by RobotStudio),
• substitution of external signals (e.g. from a camera).
It may seem obvious that the graphical representation is the easiest part, but because
RobotStudio has graphic controls similar to CAD programs, the implementation of
rotations of faces is not so straight forward. Each sub-cube of the large cube should
belong to a group representing one face, however, the rotation of one face distributes
sub-cubes over other face groups, thus every time a face rotates, its group has to be
ﬁlled with sub-cubes currently present in that face. The implementation of sub-cubes
distribution to active faces is a challenging task in a CAD-oriented environment and
would be otherwise not possible in RobotStudio without Smart Components.
The graphical representation of the Rubik’s Cube in RobotStudio can be seen in
Fig. 6, Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 and the controls for positive and negative face rotations are
shown in Fig. 9, which also shows a reset button for the cube and duration property for
the rotation of the face.

298
J. Vojtesek and L. Spacek
Fig. 6. Solved Rubik’s Cube in RobotStudio
Fig. 7. Unsolved Rubik’s cube in RobotStudio

Overview of Collaborative Robot YuMi in Education
299
Fig. 8. Rubik’s Cube in RobotStudio in mid-rotation
Fig. 9. Rubik’s Cube face rotation controls in RobotStudio

300
J. Vojtesek and L. Spacek
5
Conclusion
This paper dealt with the preparation of graphical Smart Component in RobotStudio
for students in robotics courses. This component simulates the behavior of 3 × 3 ×
3 Rubik’s Cube and provides an interface for a robot that helps with the manipulation
of the object. This short overview of the whole concept covers a basic idea about the
motives behind the creation of this type of application and its usage in classes. It is
already prepared to be used in ﬁnal projects and although it has not a practical purpose
in the industry, it can teach students a lot more than few never changing applications
for a demonstration that do not require extra research and studying from students’ side.
Students thus acquire deeper knowledge about processes behind and can develop their
algorithms or optimizations.
The advantages of a collaborative robot in education and production were also brieﬂy
described. Dual-arm collaborative robot YuMi from ABB was also introduced, and it
was shown that its potential for this kind of application in education is huge. Students and
teachers could all beneﬁt from exploiting its abilities during classes while maintaining
safety standards.
References
1. YuMi vs Rubik’s Cube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GN7RKRFtZiQ. Accessed 15
Mar 2021
2. ABB’s YuMi® solves Rubik’s Cube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_jIVCiEu2Wk.
Accessed 15 Mar 2021
3. ABB YuMi vs Rubik’s Cube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ghYbFUC9h0. Accessed
15 Mar 2021
4. ABB
YuMi®.
https://new.abb.com/products/robotics/industrial-robots/irb-14000-yumi.
Accessed 15 Mar 2021
5. RobotStudio Manual, 3HAC032104-001. https://library.abb.com/en. Accessed 15 Mar 2021
6. Qi, Q., Tao, F., Zuo, Y., Zhao, D.: Digital twin service towards smart manufacturing. In:
Procedia CIRP, pp. 237–242 (2018)
7. Kritzinger, W., Karner, M., Traar, G., Henjes, J., Sihn, W.: Digital twin in manufacturing:
a categorical literature review and classiﬁcation. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine, pp. 1016–1022
(2018)
8. Ewing, J., Kosniowski, C.: Puzzle It Out: Cubes, Groups and Puzzles. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge (1982)
9. Rubiks Cube Clipart. http://getdrawings.com/rubiks-cube-clipart. Accessed 15 Mar 2021
10. Harris, D.: Speedsolving the Cube: Easy-to-Follow, Step-by-Step Instructions for Many
Popular 3-D Puzzles. Sterling Pub., New York (2008)
11. Rokicki, T., Kociemba, H., Davidson, M., Dethridge, J.: The Diameter of the Rubik’s cube
group is twenty. SIAM J. Discrete Math. 1082–1105 (2013)
12. Different Rubik’s Cube Solving Methods. https://ruwix.com/the-rubiks-cube/different-rub
iks-cube-solving-methods/. Accessed 15 Mar 2021
13. The BEST Speedcubing Method. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QKK8J3JKWi4.
Accessed 15 Mar 2021

Reliability of Replicated Distributed Control
Systems Applications Based on IEC 61499
Adriano A. Santos1,2(B)
, António Ferreira da Silva1,2
, António Magalhães3
,
and Mário de Sousa3
1 CIDEM, School of Engineering of Porto, Polytechnic of Porto, 4249-015 Porto, Portugal
{ads,afs}@isep.ipp.pt
2 INEGI - Instituto de Ciência e Inovação em Engenharia Mecânica e Engenharia Industrial,
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 400, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal
3 Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal
{apmag,msousa}@fe.up.pt
Abstract. Theuseofindustrialanddomesticequipmentisincreasinglydependent
on computerized control systems. This evolution awakens in the users the feeling
of reliability of the equipment, which is not always achieved. However, system
designers implement fault-tolerance methodologies and attributes to eliminate
faults or any error in the system.
Industrially, the increase in system reliability is achieved by the redundancy
of control systems based on the replication of conventional and centralized pro-
grammable logic controllers. In distributed systems, reliability is achieved by
replicating and distributing the most critical elements, leaving a single copy of
the remaining components. On the other hand, given the nature of the distributed
systems, it will also be necessary to ensure that the data set received by each of the
replicas has the same order. Thus, any change in the order and data set received will
result in different results, in each of the replicas, which may manifest in erroneous
behavior.
In this paper, the interactions and the erroneous behavior of the replicas are
explained, depending on the data set received, in a fault tolerant distributed sys-
tem. Its tendency, behavior and possible inﬂuences on reliability are presented,
considering the failure rate and availability based on the mean time to failure.
Keywords: Dependability · Distributed systems · Event-base control ·
Fault-tolerance · IEC 61499 · Industrial control · Real-time · Reliability ·
Replication
1
Introduction
Technological developments that have occurred in recent years have led to the prolif-
eration of computerized systems both at the industrial level and for consumption and
domestic use. At the industrial level, the technology used is based on a control sys-
tem centralized in Programmable Logical Controllers (PLCs), sometimes redundant to
ensure the reliability of the systems, running in a single machine. On the other hand,
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 301–312, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_28

302
A. A. Santos et al.
the use of computerized systems at the domestic and consumer level is more discreet.
Embedded systems are present in our daily lives in the most diverse devices and with
more visibility in traditional computers for daily use.
This proliferation makes us more and more dependent on computerized systems,
becoming us more vulnerable to the occurrence of failures both in terms of the control
of domestic systems and in terms of industrial systems. Failures in the control system of
a reactor at a nuclear power plant will have more serious consequences than in domestic
systems. The reactor, when subject to a failure, can put thousands of people in danger
and seriously affect the ecosystem. On the other hand, a failure an embedded system in a
washing machine or toaster, keeping the equipment energized, can also, at a lower level,
put people and property at risk. Obviously, if a ﬁre occurs due to system failure, the
housing in question and the contiguous ones can be in great danger. From the point of
viewofthereliabilityofacomputersystem,theunderlyingideaisthatthesystembehaves
according to its speciﬁcation, in view of the numerous problems that can occur (natural
accidents, software and hardware errors, among others). In fact, what we expect from
computer systems is that they will work correctly to guarantee integrity and availability.
Industrially, the process control is based on centralized PLCs, generally programmed
according to the languages standardized in IEC 61131 [1]. On the other hand, with the
proliferation of communication networks in the industrial domain, PLCs were intercon-
nected with each other resulting in distributed control applications. However, according
to the semantics of IEC 61131, programming languages and their execution are not pre-
sented as a good practice for the requirements used in ﬂexible automation and distributed
control applications. It was mainly for this reason that the International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC) developed the standard IEC 61499 [2] to facilitate the development
of Distributed Industrial Process Measurement and Control Systems (DIPMCS). This
standard proposes the use of Function Blocks (FBs) as a basis for the development of
reusable software modules for the control system. Each function block is a functional
software unit that encapsulates local data and algorithmic behavior within an event/data
interface where operations, within a function block, are controlled by an event-driven
state machine.
Given the nature of distributed control applications, many new problems must be
considered. Therefore, when developing a distributed application, the designer must be
aware of the possibility of partial failures, that is, the possibility of some device stopping
its execution and the others continue with their normal processing. So, when developing
IEC 61499 applications with high dependability requirements, the implementation of
solutions to tolerate these partial failures should be considered. The increase in the
reliability can be obtained by masking the failed devices, introducing fault-tolerance in
the application architecture.
The purpose of this text focuses on the presentation and deﬁnition of some concepts
related to the dependability attributes of computer systems. In this way, it is also intended
to expose some of the classic mechanisms that allow to solve the dependability problems,
namely the faut-tolerance techniques. The analysis presented in the next sections are an
adaptation of traditional approaches to partial fault-tolerance. Some of the problems
associated with the reliability of replicated systems will be explained considering the
various possibilities of communication between the devices.

Reliability of Replicated Distributed Control Systems Applications
303
2
Dependability
Replication is widely used in distributed systems as a Fault-Tolerance (FT) mechanism to
maintain the desired availability and reliability. Among other reasons for its use, the fact
that replication ﬁts naturally in the topology of distributed systems stands out. So, it is
for these reasons that fault-tolerance techniques are generally used to satisfy dependabil-
ity requirements. Dependability of systems engineering – computational, mechanical,
physical, and human systems – must be expressed by a relatively small number of fail-
ures. On the other hand, it is necessary to consider that the acceptable levels of failure
of the systems vary according to their measured speciﬁcations, in percentage, according
to the Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF) and the Availability (A).
Dependability systems has been deﬁned by [3] as “…the trustworthiness of a com-
puting system which allows reliance to be justiﬁably placed on the service it delivers …”.
Another similar deﬁnition is given by Avizienis et al. [4] “… the ability to deliver ser-
vice that can justiﬁably be trusted …”. However, the main idea of dependable systems
is that they must be able to ensure that the service provided meets the speciﬁcations
and, as such, does not fail. This means that the use of dependable systems is always
desirable, as they are “trustworthy” [5]. The perception of dependability can be very
generic and understood in different ways by different people, however this must inte-
grate the following attributes: Availability, Reliability, Safety, Integrity, Maintainability,
and Conﬁdentiality.
Availability is used to measure the probability that a system or component will
become operational and perform its functionality after a failure. Mathematically, the
“availability is a measure of the fraction of time that the item is in operating condition
in relation to total or calendar time.” [6]. More formally, availability can be deﬁned as
the “… proportion of time a system is in a functioning condition” [7]. The availability
of the system at time t is deﬁned by A(t) which represents the fraction of time that the
system is available. It is also called inherent availability or steady-state availability and
can be expressed at time t by:
A(t) =
u
u + d
(1)
where u is the mean uptime and d is the mean downtime of the system.
The next attribute, reliability, is deﬁne as “… the ability of an item (a product or a
system) to operate under designated operating conditions for a designated period of time
or number of cycles.” [6]. More formally, reliability can be deﬁned as “… the ability of a
system to function under stated time and conditions” [7]. So, reliability is the probability
that the system is operating normally in the range [t0, t], therefore, reliability at time t
is denoted as R(t). On the other hand, the abnormal operating condition of the system at
[t0, t] is deﬁned as unreliability degree at time t and it denoted as F(t). The relationship
between reliability and unreliability can be expressed at time t by:
R(t) = 1 −F(t)
(2)
Safety is deﬁned as “the nature of a system not to endanger personnel and equipment.”
[7], however Avizienis et al. [4] deﬁne safety considering the environment as the “…

304
A. A. Santos et al.
absence of catastrophic consequences on the user(s) and the environment”. Note that
availability and reliability are related, however they are not synonymous with security.
The availability or unavailability and the reliability or unreliability of a system does
not translate into security. Therefore, high reliability results in high security, but high
security does not necessarily result in high reliability [7]. Safety is denoted as S(t).
Maintainability is deﬁned as “the ability of a system to recover its required function”
[7]. It is the ability of the system to be successfully repaired under certain conditions.
The degree maintainability is denoted as M(t). Integrity is the non-occurrence of undue
changes to the information in the systems, they cannot be modiﬁed without authorization,
while conﬁdentiality is deﬁned as the absence of unauthorized disclosure of information,
that is, the information is not disclosed without authorization.
From the above, we can say that these attributes are interconnected, so, a product
or system will be considered dependable if it has all the attributes. On the other hand,
we must also consider that the degree of dependability for a system is not a binary
phenomenon but is based on the degradation of these attributes and the limits that are
consideredacceptable[5].Itisacombinationofavailability,conﬁdentiality,andintegrity.
2.1
Relationship Between Fault, Error, and Failure
According to the above, a service will only be performed correctly when it meets the
conditions mentioned in the speciﬁcations. The existence of an error (see Fig. 1), is due
to the occurrence of a component failure caused by physical phenomena of mechanical
or electrical origin, internal or external. This can spread, manifesting itself in the degra-
dation of the service, such as, for example, limiting services, decreasing speed of service
provision, etc., causing a failure. In software, faults resulting from wrong programming
will translate into the existence of a latent fault that, when activated, called the wrong
instructions or the use of the wrong data. This event will give rise to an error that in turn
will propagate to produce a failure [8].
activation
fault
error
failure 
propagation
causation
fault
Fig. 1. Error propagation chain [4].
A fault is a static feature of a system and is the cause of an error. The error is an
incorrect internal state of the system that can lead to failure. A failure is considered as
the occurrence of an unexpected behavior of the system, that is, when the system does
not fulﬁll its mission. This is caused by an error. So, if we look at a car tire, we can say
that the failure in this system can be caused by an external event (a nail, a wire, or a
glass) that causes a puncture or an internal cause like the tube’s trail (causation). This
fault will give rise to an error (activation), deﬂating the tire, compromising its use for
the speciﬁed purposes (propagation) (see Fig. 1). The tire deﬂating causes the failure,
preventing the vehicle moving forward. Therefore, we can say that the faults, however
small, they can cause major errors, however the presence of an error will not necessarily
be considered the cause of a failure [9].

Reliability of Replicated Distributed Control Systems Applications
305
Note, however, that the classiﬁcation of the several internal states of a system for
fault, error or failure situations will depend on the system and its speciﬁc character-
istics. Therefore, based on the characteristics of the systems, for example, centralized,
distributed and/or replicated, will be in the presence of organic software and/or hardware
failures. In this perspective, we must consider them different since the software does not
wear out. Thus, it can be said that there will be a software error or failure if consider the
deﬁnition presented in [10] “… work according to the original contract or according
to the requirements documentation…” whenever its MTBF, for example, exceeds the
default value. In this assessment, will be in the presence of a fault, but the system will
remain operational.
2.2
Means to Attain Dependability
Over the years, various means have been used to achieve the attributes of dependability.
These attributes can be grouped into four groups [4]: Fault Prevention (use of design
methodologies, techniques, and technologies to avoid faults), Fault-Tolerance (use of
means to provide service even in the presence of faults), Fault Removal (use of review,
analysis, and testing techniques to reduce the number and severity of faults) and Fault
Forecasting (estimate of the number, incidence, and future consequences of faults).
The development of ﬂawless computer systems is rarely achieved, so some of the
attributes of dependability, such as fault-tolerance, are often used. Fault-tolerance is used
to increase the probability that the ﬁnal design of the application will show acceptable
behaviors and thus produce correct outputs. On the other hand, correctness of the system
is closely linked to the structure of the application, so, the greater or lower level of fault-
tolerance will directly depend on the characteristics of itself and its design. Dependability
based on fault-tolerance is generally achieved by redundancy. Redundancy is the dupli-
cation (triplication, quadruplication, etc.) of a speciﬁc component, considered critical,
for which the failure of the component or subcomponent will not result in the failure of
the entire system.
 
 
 
a)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
b)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
c) 
Fig. 2. Fault-tolerance architecture: a) Normal implementation; b) Standby implementation
(Replica in standby, rum in parallel); c) Parallel implementation, voting validation.
From the perspective of the operational requirements of fault-tolerance systems,
they can have classiﬁed into two classes of operability (Continuous and Non-continuous
operations) and three main approaches. In the ﬁrst case, the systems remain operational
even in the presence of faults (provides a continuous service) while in the second case the
systems interrupt their operation. On the other hand, the fault-tolerance implementation
architectures will be based on the use of error detection (ED), with modules operating

306
A. A. Santos et al.
in standby or in parallel, and the use of voters that validate and consolidate the output
values of the redundant elements (see Fig. 2).
The criteria for choosing one of these implementations will depend on the sys-
tem itself. It will be obvious, and therefore logical, that the application designer only
replicates devices with a high inﬂuence on the application, while maintaining a sin-
gle copy of the remaining devices. However, regardless fault-tolerance approach used,
the availability, reliability, and safety properties (see item 2) for the system, must be
maintained.
The measurement of these properties involves knowledge of MTBF based on the
Mean Times To Failure (MTTF) and Mean Time To Repair (MTTR). So, MTBF can be
expressed as:
MTBF = MTTF + MTTR
(3)
then availability, according to (1), will translate into the following expression:
A =
MTTF
MTTF + MTTR(%)
(4)
On the other hand, from a reliable point of view, it can be said that the system’s reliability
represents the probability that there will be no fault during a given period, in which more
than one failure is possible [11]. In this sense, it can be considered that the ratio of the
number of faults (fault rate) will also be an indicator of reliability showing the portion
of components or equipment that must survive in an instant t. The fault rate (λ) will be
given by the following expressions:
λ = Number of faults
Time of use
or λ =
1
MTBF
(5)
Safety must be a propriety for the entire system, including hardware and software, and
for its entire life cycle. Thus, when addressing security issues, a set of attributes must be
considered that must be veriﬁed at the same time: 1) availability for authorized actions,
2) conﬁdentiality and 3) integrity [4].
3
Overview of IEC 61499 Replications
In the industrial context, control processes are dominated by PLCs. With the increase
in demand for new, more ﬂexible productive markets, ﬂexibility requirements become
preponderant and lack real-time responses. On the other hand, it must be considered
that these new needs for ﬂexibility demand greater availability of productive systems
and, consequently, greater reliability of them. Reliability or redundancy in centralized
applications using PLCs, is usually achieved using a second or more identical PLCs.
However, if the same criterion were used in a distributed system, the replication of all
devices would become very complex and with exaggerated dimensions.
To address the problems associated with distribution and reliability based on device
replication, the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) has developed the IEC

Reliability of Replicated Distributed Control Systems Applications
307
61499 standard. The distributed nature of this standard allows each device to perform a
simple replica or a sub-application of other devices that are running on the same system.
Based on a several FB – Basic FB (BFB – which runs an Execute Control Chart
(EEC) on the head and several algorithms on the body), Composit FB (CFB – several
FBsrunninginsideoftheFB)andSpecialInterfaceFB(SIFB–communicationFB)–,the
application designer decides which component, as a software unit (FB), to be replicated.
The designer replicates the FBs or sub-applications that have greatest inﬂuence on the
dependability of the system (deﬁning new input and output events and data port, (see
Fig. 3a), keeping a single copy of the remaining (see Fig. 3b).
a) 
b) 
Fig. 3. a) Basic Function Block (BFB) with input and output ports; b) Distribution of replicated
and non-replicated applications among divices.
A distributed IEC 61499 application can be distributed or replicated between divices.
Thus, the replica of an application can be performed on a single device (application A
– replica 3), while other replicas of the same application are distributed between two or
more devices (application A – replicas 1 and 2), see Fig. 3b. Based on these distribution
possibilities, several interaction scenarios can be identiﬁed.
Fig. 4. Distributed system with the several interaction scenarios of the replicated FBs [12].
The interaction scenarios depend on the system distribution and the replication per-
formed by the application designer, that is, on the components that send events and/or

308
A. A. Santos et al.
data ➁(one-to-many), the receivers ➄(many-to-one) or both ➃(many-to-many) are
replicated components or not, as you can see in Fig. 4 and explained in [12] and [13].
4
Example for Redundancy Implementation
To implement redundancy, all replicas must be identical. Therefore, for this requirement
to be met, all replications must be performed assuming a deterministic behavior, that is,
the algorithm of each of the replicated FBs must be deterministic. In this sense, when
executing the FBs, in IEC 61499 execution environment, if it is guaranteed that they will
be executed in the same way, the determinism of the replicas will be guaranteed. This
means that the order in which each event is run will be the same in all replicas and will
produce the same results.
To illustrate the implementation of redundancy, based on IEC 61499, we will present
asimpleexample.Thefaulttoleranceapproachwillbebasedonsimpleactiveredundancy
of software and hardware. This application is a small part of a more complex application
for conveyor-based pieces distribution systems. In this sense, the case study will be
limited to the analysis of the interconnection of two types of conveyors (linear, C1
and C2, and rotating, C3) that working, perpendicularly. C3 receives parts from both
conveyors considering that all conveyors are relatively small and will only be able to
transport one part at a time and its work according to the layout shown in Fig. 5.
C1
C4
C2
C3
C5
Fig. 5. Example conveyor layout.
Workpieces arrive from the left (C1) and the top (C2) and must be transferred to the
rotating conveyor belt (C3) at the center. Each conveyor belt is controlled by a single
FB based on the conveyor type (linear or rotating) that runs on an independent low-cost
device (Raspberry Pi) that controls the entire mechatronic device of the conveyor.
The pieces to be transferred are simulated by a simple algorithm in each of the FBs.
The linear conveyors feed (C1 and C2) provides two integers value corresponding to
each of the conveyors, data 1 and 2, respectively. The rotating conveyor (C3) receives
data from the feed conveyors. This conveyor processes the data according to the event’s
availability time (the oldest ﬁrst) and transfers the part and data information to the
following conveyor. Each of these timed messages will be ordered according to the time
they were available. A conveyor will be free to receive a new piece as soon as the piece
in transport is transferred to the next conveyor.
The design of the application and the replication of elements considered critical of the
system are shown in Fig. 6. Note that the conveyors need to receive events and data from

Reliability of Replicated Distributed Control Systems Applications
309
the previous ones and send events and data to the following ones. So, conveyors belts on
the left, which are feed conveyors, are triggered by a start event sent simultaneously to
C1 and C2 and the data produced are sent to the subsequent replicas. Device 3 and 4 are
replicas of conveyor C3 that will receive information from the clients C1 and C2. The
information received in each of the replicas is an indicator of availability for delivery a
work piece. The data received in each of the replicas must belong to the same data set
and in the same order.
Fig. 6. Design application and replicated elements, interconnection with Publish/Subscribe pair.
4.1
Execution Semantics
In this item, a brief description of the design process and how the replication/distribution
was performed in IEC 61499 application will be made. The application design is very
simple, and it is focuses on the fault-tolerance approach. To develop the replicated
distributed system, we used the open-source Eclipse 4diac™and the FORTE IEC 61499
execution environment [14]. Application was replicated according to scenario ➁(one-
to-many), shown in Fig. 4 and the ﬁnal design of it is shown in Fig. 6.
As already explained, to maintain replicas determinism, it will be necessary to ensure
that the execution of each replicated FBs occurs in a synchronized manner, that is, that
each event received generates the same sequence of actions in all replicated FBs. So, to
ensure communications between all replicated FBs and maintain design application, you
must use Publish/Subscribe communication SIFBs pairs to implement timed-messages
protocol (one-to-many and many-to-one) as well internal synchronization. On the other
hand, all instances of the FORTE runtime environment and devices must be in the same
multicast group and be synchronized [15], as well as internal clocks by Network Time
Protocol (NTP) synchronization, for example. However, when we consider that “FORTE

310
A. A. Santos et al.
is relatively well suited for supporting the replication design …” [13] the expected
results will not be guaranteed, since “… its execution semantics almost guarantee a
deterministic execution of event sequences.” [13] as demonstrated in [16].
4.2
System Reliability
A system is usually composed of several components that will have different reliability
and that, in principle, will be known. In this sense, knowing the reliability and trend of
each component, determining the reliability of the system will be relatively simple, if
the system can be represented by a reliability block diagram (RBD). However, when it is
only possible to know the failure rate, without knowing the system’s tendency (decreas-
ing, constant or increasing), the adoption of any distribution to quantify the reliability
will become an almost impossible task. The RBD representation of the implemented
redundant system is shown in Fig. 7. This is a complex system composed of components
in series and in parallel. Determining the value of system reliability is a succession of
mathematical operations that combine redundancy in series and in parallel to obtain an
overall value for it.
Fig. 7. Reliability for scenario 2, communication one-to-many.
However, the study carried out aims, essentially, to analyze the deterministic behav-
ior of the Publish/Subscribe communication pairs, that is, quantify their guarantee of
determinism. Therefore, all communication errors between clients 1 and 2 and the repli-
cas C3 and C3′ were recorded and based on this analysis, it was possible to build the
graph shown in Fig. 8. The trend of the system can be determined through a process of
statistical inference based on hypothesis tests, that is, to verify if it is possible to conﬁrm
or deny the formulated hypothesis. To verify H0 (constant rate) we will have to conﬁrm
it or not using the statistical process called Laplace Test (ET). Following equation:
ET =
√
12N
N
i=1 ti
N.t0
−0, 5

=
√
12 × 567

2711967
567 × 10000 −0,5

= −1,789 (6)
where N is the number of faults, ti the time of fault i, and t0 the total time. So, in this
case the test is conclusive, as there is evidence of acceptance of H0, since the ET value is
outside the rejection region [−ET(α/2) < ET < + ET(α/2)], that is, −1,960 < ET < +
1,960 with α = 5%. When accepting H0, rejecting H1 (non-constant), we consider that
the fault rate is constant, and the occurrences are Independent and Identically Distributed
(IID).
The fault rate of the system is λ = 0, 0567 fault/s (5) so, reliability components,
considering only replicas, is given by R(t) = e−λt. According to Fig. 7, the reliability

Reliability of Replicated Distributed Control Systems Applications
311
system (RS) will be obtained, based on the received components, considering the rest
with high reliability, by the expression: Rs = 1−

1 −e−λtn. Data received in the active
replicas, have an R10000
S
= 0, 951, a MTTF = 17,637 s, and F(t) = 0, 049 (2).
Fault
Linear (Fault)
Fig. 8. Relation between fault number and time (F-T).
5
Conclusion
In a distributed system, there are usually partial failures that must be considered. Critical
component redundancy is one of the measures that must be used for fault-tolerance.
However, the adoption of redundancy measures will lead to replication with or without
votersinwhichtheresultsoutgoingreplicasmustpresentthesamevalues.Thisrestriction
will require that all replicas remain synchronized.
The use of timed messages protocol and NTP are an important contribution to ensure
the synchronization of the replicas. However, it will be necessary to consider the different
communication scenarios between replicated and non-replicated components and how
to guarantee the determinism of IEC 61499 applications, considering their restrictions.
Thus, to ensure the ordering of data in a FORTE execution environment, it will be
necessary to ensure that the Publish/Subscribe communication pairs send and receive
the same data set in the same order in which they are made available.
The analyses carried out shows that the design of replicated systems, using the FBs
deﬁned in the IEC 61499 standard is not able to guarantee its determinism. Thus, based on
the lead time and the ordering of data received, it was possible to quantify the reliability
of the system, considering only the data received in the replicated pairs, so the measured
reliability was around 95%. These results deﬁne a 5% rate of unreliability (base in 10 K
data received in each replica), which will indicate that the replication based on the IEC
61499 FBs and FORTE runtime do not guarantee reliability by itself. Reliability will be
guaranteed by the development of additional FBs that implements it.
Acknowledgments. We acknowledge the ﬁnancial support of CIDEM, R&D unit funded by
the FCT – Portuguese Foundation for the Development of Science and Technology, Ministry of

312
A. A. Santos et al.
Science, Technology and Higher Education, under the Project UID/EMS/0615/2019 and this work
was supported by FCT, through INEGI and LAETA, project UIDB/50022/2020.
References
1. IEC 61131: Programmable Logic Controllers Part 3 (IEC 61131-3). International Electrotech-
nical Commission, 3rd edn. IEC (2013)
2. IEC 61499: International Standard IEC 61499-1, Function Block Architecture Part 1, 2nd
edn. International Electrotechnical Commission. IEC (2012)
3. IFIP Working Group 10.4 on Dependable Computing and Fault Tolerance. http://wg10.4.dep
endability.org/. Accessed 07 Dec 2020
4. Avizienis, A., Laprie, J.-C., Randell, B., Landwehr, C.: Basic concepts and taxonomy of
dependable and secure computing. IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput. 1(1), 11–33
(2004)
5. Farrukh Khan, M., Paul, R.A.: Chapter 4 - pragmatic directions in engineering secure depend-
able systems. In: Advances in Computers - Dependable and Secure Systems Engineering, vol.
84. Elsevier, USA (2012)
6. Modarres, M., Kaminskiy, M.P., Krivtsov, V.: Reliability Engineering and Risk Analysis, a
Practical Guide. 3rd edn. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group (2017)
7. Yang, M., Hua, G., Feng, Y., Gong, J.: Chapter 1 - introduction. In: Fault-Tolerance Techniques
for Spacecraft Control Computers. Wiley (2017)
8. Bloomﬁeld, R., Lala, J.: Safety-critical systems: the next generation. IEEE Secur. Priv. 11(4),
11–13 (2013)
9. Abdulhameed, O.A., Jumaa, N.K.: Designing of a real time software fault tolerance schema
based on NVP and RB techniques. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 180(26), 35–4 (2018)
10. ISO 9000-3:1997: Quality management and quality assurance standards - Part 3: Guidelines
for the application of ISO 9001:1994 to the development, supply, installation and maintenance
of computer software. ISO (1997)
11. O’Connor, P.D.T., Kleyner, A.: Practical Reliability Engineering, 5th edn. Wiley, UK (2012)
12. Santos, A.A., de Sousa, M.: Replication strategies for distributed IEC 61499 applications. In:
IECON 2018 - 44th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, pp. 2225–
2230. IEEE. Washington, DC (2018)
13. de Sousa, M.: Chapter 9 – fault-tolerance IEC 61499 applications. In: Distributed Control
Applications: Guidelines, Design Patterns, and Applications Examples with the IEC 61499,
2nd edn. CRC Press, Boca Raton (2016)
14. Eclipse 4diac. https://www.eclipse.org/4diac/. Accessed 29 Dec 2020
15. Pinho, L.M., Vasques, F., Wellings, A.: Replication management in reliable real-time systems.
Real-Time Syst. 26(3), 261–296 (2004)
16. Santos, A.A., da Silva, A.F., Magalhães, A.P., de Sousa, M.: Determinism of replicated dis-
tributed systems-a timing analysis of the data passing process. Adv. Sci. Technol. Eng. Syst.
J. 5(6), 531–537 (2020)

Inspection Robotic System: Design
and Simulation for Indoor and Outdoor Surveys
Pierluigi Rea3, Erika Ottaviano1(B), Fernando J. Castillo-García2,
and Antonio Gonzalez-Rodríguez2
1 University of Cassino and Southern Lazio, via Di Biasio 43, 03043 Cassino, FR, Italy
ottaviano@unicas.it
2 University of Castilla-La Mancha, Avda. Carlos III. Real Fábrica de Armas,
45071 Toledo, Spain
Fernando.Castillo@uclm.es
3 University of Cagliari, Via Marengo, 2, 09123 Cagliari, CA, Italy
pierluigi.rea@dimcm.unica.it
Abstract. In this paper, the design and simulation are presented for a wheeled
robot designed for indoor and outdoor inspections. In particular, for a large number
of cases, an automatic or tele-operated survey can be performed by wheeled mobile
robots, which represent the most efﬁcient solution in terms of power consump-
tion, control, robustness and overall costs. Referring to the analysis of structures
and infrastructure, such as bridges and pipelines, wheeled robots must be able
to move on horizontal or sloped surfaces and overpass obstacles that in most of
cases are steps, i.e. longitudinal internal stiffeners. In this paper, we present a
mechatronic design and simulations of a wheeled robot being used in indoor and
outdoor inspections, taking as illustrative example an infrastructure inspection. In
particular, the wheeled robot is equipped with suitable sensors in order to take
information on the main structural elements, avoiding the need of experienced
personnel to get directly inside the site to be inspected.
Keywords: Mobile robots · Simulation · Robotic infrastructure inspection
1
Introduction
Mobile robots represent an interesting ﬁeld of research due to their great potential fea-
tures. They can be used for a wide range of applications including inspection [1], service
[2], defense, manufacturing, cleaning, remote exploration [3], rescue [4] and entertain-
ment. Wheeled and tracked systems can perform fast and robust motion on ﬂat terrain,
but they are less effective in overpass obstacles that are greater, or having a similar
size, than the radius of the wheel. In a large number of applications, such as bridges or
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 313–321, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_29

314
P. Rea et al.
pipelines, when it is possible to move on horizontal surfaces, wheeled robotic solution
can perform the inspection of structures and infrastructure. As reported in the literature,
several solutions can be adopted for the inspection when moving on a horizontal surface,
see for example [5–9]. Indeed, if a surface is relatively smooth, with suitable dimensions
of the obstacles, wheeled solution is the most efﬁcient, in terms of power consump-
tion, costs, complexity of operation and control, robustness, travelling speed. A possible
application of wheeled locomotion system for inspection is for box girder bridges and
water distribution systems, where there is a relatively large area to inspect that is difﬁ-
cult to access. Box girders are used for bridges with large spans, having excellent high
torsional stiffness and when the self-weight of the bridge needs to be minimized. The
clean lines of box girders bridges, usually with no visible external stiffening, is generally
considered to give an excellent appearance and durability, since there are no traps for
dirt and moisture. Box girders can be used for highway bridges, railway bridges and
footbridges. The selection of a box girder shape usually results in relatively thin plate
panels (in terms of thickness to width ratio) for the webs and bottom ﬂanges (and for
top ﬂanges, in all-steel boxes). Avoidance of local buckling in compression zones and
in shear requires appropriate stiffening and longitudinal stiffeners are often required.
Although box sections offer high torsional stiffness, internal cross frames are usually
needed to prevent distortion when one web is subject to greater shear than the other,
one diagonal dimension across the cell increases and the other decreases. The inspec-
tion of box girders can be taken into account for the simulation purposes, as a possible
practical application of robotics inspection, which is an area of growing interest, as
reported in [10–13]. In this paper, we propose the mechatronic design and simulation
of a wheeled robot for infrastructure inspection; nevertheless, the robot can perform
outdoor inspection carrying suitable instrumentation as well.
2
Mechatronic Design
2.1
Mechanical Design
Figure 1 shows the mechanical design of the robot with a sensorization described in
Fig. 2. The mechanical design has been kept simple in order to have a robust and less
expensive mechanical solution. Four independent direct-drive wheels operate the robot.
The battery is located on-board. Tables 1 and 2 show robot and sensors speciﬁcations.
2.2
Sensorization
The mechatronic control scheme is built according to design principles reported in [14,
15]. The wheeled robot is commanded by remote-control and HMI interface is used for
monitoring the sensors on board. Front and rear cameras are mounted; one is intended to
be used for robot localization and motion into the environment, the second one is used
for inspection purposes. They have both pan, tilt and zoom, which can be controlled
by a virtual joystick shown in Fig. 2, as the red point on the screen of the HMI; the
used cameras allow infrared vision. The RC controller is a Spektrum DXe 6-Channel
2.4 GHz coupled with a Spektrum Receiver Mk610 2.4 GHz 6 Channel. Tables 1 and 2
summarize the main characteristics of the robot and its sensorization.

Inspection Robotic System: Design and Simulation
315
a)
b)                                                                                  c) 
Fig. 1. Mechanical design: a) 3D view; b) front view; c) side view.
Fig. 2. Overall mechatronic system: 1) robot; 2) HMI interface; 3) rear and front cameras; 4) RC
controller; 5) internal view of the robot-control boards; 6) electronic board for motor control; 7)
Spektrum Receiver Mk610.

316
P. Rea et al.
Table 1. Robot speciﬁcations.
Robot system
4- wheeled robot
Size (LxHxW)
900x600x500mm
Mass
45 kg
Max speed
Up to 3mph
Actuation
24VDC IG52
DOFs
4 (wheels)
Max step size
100 mm
Item description
Specification
Table 2. Sensor speciﬁcations.
Item description
Specification
Internal sensors
MTK Ver.1 Accelerometer
MTK Ver.1  Gyroscope sensor
MTK Ver.1 Gravity sensor
MTK Ver.1 Magn. field sensor
MTK Ver.1 Lin. Accel. sensor
Range 
Resolution 
Power
0...80
0.001 
0.001mA
0...34
0.001 
0.001mA
0...39
0.001 
0.001mA
0...4000
0.150 
0.001mA
0...39
0.001 
0.001mA
External sensors
Thermal camera (FLIR)
Front - Rear camera (Sony)
Model
Thermal
FLIR
48/5 MP
type
Communication
USB WiFi router
Spektrum Receiver Mk610
TP-LINK Model TL-WN821N
AR6210 DSMX
Control station
Remote-controller
HMI Interface
1 
1 
3
Simulation
Simulations were carried out to test the engineering feasibility and application of the
robot for infrastructure inspection. In particular, we consider an indoor evaluation inside
a bridge deck. Steel box girders and steel and concrete composite box girders are used for

Inspection Robotic System: Design and Simulation
317
long spans, where their excellent torsional stiffness is of particular beneﬁt and the self-
weight of the bridge needs to be minimized. A commonly adopted conﬁguration uses the
“open” trapezoidal girders. These girders have a steel bottom ﬂange, inclined steel webs
and a thin steel ﬂange on the upper part of each web. Each of these elements need to
be inspected, usually visually or with a thermal camera. The deck slab of the reinforced
concrete bridge forms the closed cell. For any closed cell that requires internal access to
construct it or to carry out inspection and maintenance, health and safety considerations
require sufﬁciently large and well-placed openings for the access by trained personnel,
alternatively, these sites can be inspected with mobile robots. The scenario that a robot
encounters is a ﬂat surface with steps to climb. Therefore, suitable simulations involve
the use of ﬂat surfaces with obstacles and steps to be surpassed.
A good standard evaluation method for certifying the locomotion characteristics of
mobile robots is the step ﬁeld pallets, as it is reported in [16]. They represent a suitable
and repeatable topology of surfaces for testing the motion capabilities of a robot. In this
context, we have considered a modiﬁed version than encounters steps simulating the
internal stiffeners of the box girders, as in Fig. 3, simulations are shown in Figs. 4, 5, 6
and 7.
Fig. 3. Field designed for a test on the mobile robot representing a box girder bridge.
More speciﬁcally, Fig. 3 shows a boxed girder bridge deck, whose main dimensions
are given. According to those dimensions, a realistic scenario is reproduced for testing
the robot, as it is shown in the motion sequence in Fig. 4. A speciﬁc 3D contact between
wheels and surface have been modeled and implemented.
In particular, Figs. 4, 5, 6 and 7 show the results of a dynamic simulation for the
wheeled robot during a motion on the surface represented in Fig. 3. This present a worst
case of obstacle with high = 150 mm and width = 150 mm.
The numerical results report a simulated motion inside a box girder bridge, where
a robot should move for the survey. The simulations show the robot overpassing the

318
P. Rea et al.
a)
b)
c)
d)
)f
)e
Fig. 4. Dynamic simulation snapshots for the robot to overpass the internal stiffeners in Fig. 3.
obstacles, which are the internal stiffeners, usually used in this context to reinforce the
system. In particular, Fig. 5a) shows the required actuation power for the left and right
front wheels, the rear ones are similar and then not repeated here for the sake of brevity.
Figure 5b) shows the motion coordinates of the center of gravity of the wheeled robot.
Figure 6 reports the velocity of the center of gravity during the simulation, while Fig. 7
shows the acceleration components ax, ay and az experienced during the simulation.
Simulation tools are very effective when dealing with large-scale system being
designed and tested to operate in urban environment, as it is reported in [17–20]. Simula-
tions are therefore of crucial importance to verify the robot capabilities, also in terms of
motion and carriage of suitable sensors. In addition, they are useful tools for overthrow-
ing veriﬁcation. Future development of the work is the implementation of additional
sensors onboard of the prototype and a trial on a real case of study.

Inspection Robotic System: Design and Simulation
319
a)
b)
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
Time [sec]
-52
-29
-6
17
41
M1 [watt]
-33
-6
22
49
76
M2 [watt]
0.00 1.00 2.00 3.00 4.00 5.00
Time [sec]
-3293
-2929
-2564
-2200
-1835
X (mm)
-759
-678
-598
-518
-437
Y [mm]
7736
7866
7997
8127
8258
Z [mm]
Fig. 5. Results for the simulation in Fig. 4: a) power for the left and right actuators; b) coordinates
X, Y and Z of the center of gravity.
a)
b)
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
Time [sec]
  0
 88
177
265
353
Vx [mm/sec]
-204
-119
-35
 49
133
Vy [mm/sec]
0.000.501.001.502.002.503.003.504.004.505.00
Time [sec]
-203
-145
-87
-29
29
Vz [mm/sec]
Fig. 6. Results of Fig. 4: velocity of the center of gravity a) Vx and Vy; and b) Vz.

320
P. Rea et al.
a)
b) 
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
Time [sec]
-3000
-2000
-1000
   0
1000
2000
3000
ax [mm/sec**2]
-3000
-2000
-1000
   0
1000
2000
3000
ay [mm/sec**2]
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
Time [sec]
-3017
-1547
 -78
1392
2862
az [mm/sec**2]
Fig. 7. Results of Fig. 4: acceleration of the center of gravity a) ax and ay; and b) az.
4
Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed the simulation tests of a four-wheeled robot designed
for inspection and survey of sites. In particular, a suitable 3D multibody model permits
the development of the simulation of a realistic scenario and operation planning for a
mechatronic survey. First simulations show a good behavior of the robot allowing the
planning of operations that are more complex. The ongoing work with the proposed
robot involves the integration of the sensor suit with thermal cameras and experimental
tests on real site of interest.
Acknowledgments. This paper is a part of a project that has received funding from the Research
Fund for Coal and Steel RFCS under grant agreement No. 800687.
References
1. Bekhit, A., Dehghani, A., Richardson, R.: Kinematic analysis and locomotion strategy of a
pipe inspection robot concept for operation in active pipelines. Int. J. Mech. Eng. Mechatron.
1(1), 15–27 (2012)
2. Morales, R., Feliu, V., Gonzalez, A., Pintado, P.: Coordinated motion of a new staircase
climbing wheelchair with increased passenger comfort. In: IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, Art. no. 1642315, pp. 3995–4001 (2006)
3. Wettergreen, D., Moreland, S., Skonieczny, K.: Design and ﬁeld experimentation of a
prototype lunar prospector. Int. Jnl. Robot. Res. 29(12), 1550–1564 (2010)

Inspection Robotic System: Design and Simulation
321
4. Kececi, E.F.: Design and prototype of mobile robots for rescue operations. Robotica 27(5),
729–737 (2009)
5. Ottaviano, E., Rea, P., Castelli, G.: THROO: a tracked hybrid rover to overpass obstacles.
Adv. Robot. 28(10) (2014). https://doi.org/10.1080/01691864.2014.891949
6. Figliolini, G., Rea, P., Conte, M.: Mechanical design of a novel biped climbing and walking
robot. In: Parenti Castelli, V., Schiehlen, W. (eds.) ROMANSY 18 Robot Design, Dynamics
and Control. CICMS, vol. 524, pp. 199–206. Springer, Vienna (2010). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-7091-0277-0_23
7. Rea, P., Ottaviano, E.: Design and development of an inspection robotic system for indoor
applications. Robot. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 49, 143–215 (2018)
8. Rea, P., Pelliccio, A., Ottaviano, E., Saccucci, M.: The heritage management and preservation
using the mechatronic survey. Int. J. Archit. Heritage 11(8), 1121–1132 (2017). https://doi.
org/10.1080/15583058.2017.1338790
9. Ottaviano, E., Rea, P.: Design and operation of a 2-DOF leg-wheel hybrid robot. Robotica
31(8), 1319–1325 (2013)
10. Granosik, G., Borenstein, J., Hansen, M.G.: Serpentine robots for industrial inspection
and surveillance. In: Huat, L.K. (ed.) Industrial Robotics – Programming, Simulation and
Applications, pp. 633–662. Pro-Literatur Verlag (2007)
11. Maurtua, I., et al.: MAINBOT - mobile robots for inspection and maintenance in extensive
industrial plants. Energy Proc. 49, 1810–1819 (2014)
12. PETROBOT (2021). http://petrobotproject.eu/
13. Biber, P., Andreasson, H., Duckett, T., Schilling, A.: 3D modeling of indoor environments
by a mobile robot with a laser scanner and panoramic camera. In: Proceedings of IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Sendai, pp. 3430–3435. IEEE
Computer society (2004)
14. Sorli, M., Figliolini, G., Pastorelli, S., Rea, P.: Experimental identiﬁcation and validation of a
pneumatic positioning servo-system. Power Transm. Motion Control PTMC 365–378 (2005)
15. Thomas, F., Ottaviano, E., Ros, L., Ceccarelli, M.: Performance analysis of a 3-2-1 pose
estimation device. IEEE Trans. Rob. 21(3), 288–297 (2005)
16. Jacoff, A., Downs, A., Virts, A., Messina E.: Stepﬁeld pallets: repeatable terrain for evalu-
ating robot mobility. In: Performance Metrics for Intelligent Systems (PerMIS) Workshop,
Gaithersburg, pp. 29–34 (2008)
17. Castelli, G., Ottaviano, E., Rea, P.: A cartesian cable-suspended robot for improving end-
users’ mobility in an urban environment. Robot. Comput.-Integr. Manuf. 30(3), 335–343
(2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rcim.2013.11.001
18. Ottaviano E., Ceccarelli M., De Ciantis M.: A 4–4 cable-based parallel manipulator for
an application in hospital environment. In: 15th Mediterranean Conference on Control and
Automation – MED07, Athens (2007)
19. Gonzalez-Rodriguez, A., Castillo-Garcia, F.J., Ottaviano, E., Rea, P., Gonzalez-Rodriguez,
A.G.: On the effects of the design of cable-driven robots on kinematics and dynamics mod-
els accuracy. Mechatronics 43, 18–27 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mechatronics.2017.
02.002
20. Ceccarelli, M., Ottaviano, E., Galvagno, M.: A 3-DOF parallel manipulator as earthquake
motionsimulator.In:Proceedingsofthe7thInternationalConferenceonControl,Automation,
Robotics and Vision, ICARCV 2002, pp. 944–949 (2002)

Dutch Auction Based Approach for
Task/Resource Allocation
Eliseu Pereira1,2(B), Jo˜ao Reis1,2, Gil Gon¸calves1,2, Lu´ıs Paulo Reis1,
and Ana Paula Rocha1
1 FEUP, Faculdade de Engenharia, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal
{eliseu,jpcreis,gil,lpreis,arocha}@fe.up.pt
2 SYSTEC, Research Center for Systems and Technologies, Porto, Portugal
Abstract. The introduction of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) in the
industry through the digitalization of equipment, also known as Digital
Twins, allows for a more customized production. Due to high market
ﬂuctuation, the implementation of a CPS should guarantee a high ﬂexi-
bility in both hardware and software levels to achieve a high responsive-
ness of the system. The software reconﬁguration, speciﬁcally, introduces
a question: “With heterogeneous equipment with diﬀerent capabilities -
namely processing and memory capabilities - where a certain software
module should execute?”; that question ﬁts on the task/resource allo-
cation area applied to CPS software reconﬁguration. Although in task
allocation issue several approaches address such a problem, only a few
of them focus on CPS resources optimization. Given that, an approach
based on the Dutch Auction algorithm is proposed, implemented at the
CPS level enables the software reconﬁguration of the CPS according to
the existing equipment resources. This approach, besides the optimiza-
tion of the CPS resources and the energy consumption, transforms the
CPS in more reliable and fault-tolerant systems. As shown by the results,
despite the demonstration of its suitability in task/resource allocation
problems in decentralized architectures, the proposed approach also as a
major advantage of quickly ﬁnding a near-optimal solution.
Keywords: Multi-agent systems · Resource allocation · Task
allocation · Dutch auction · FIPA-ACL
1
Introduction
The fourth industrial revolution boosts the introduction of new mentalities in
the manufacturing ﬁeld. One of the key insights is the transformation of the mass
production paradigm in a more ﬂexible manufacture, allowing the customization
of the products according to customer preferences. That level of customization
requires a ﬂexible shop ﬂoor layout, with constant monitoring of the processes.
The usage of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) enables both the digitalization of
the shop ﬂoor equipment and the reconﬁguration of their functionalities. A self-
organizing approach [1] allows the reconﬁguration of the CPS according to the
c
⃝The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 322–333, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_30

Dutch Auction Based Approach for Task/Resource Allocation
323
product characteristics. Regarding that, the self-organizing CPSs have to recon-
ﬁgure at both hardware and software levels. The software reconﬁguration, in
particular situations, generates the overload of the equipment resources, due to
the exceeding amount of processing modules to execute. That constraint requires
an equilibrium of consumption resources across the machines [2]. Typically, that
issue represents a task/resource allocation problem variant, where a set of tasks
(functions) are placed in a collection of machines (agents), to optimize each
machine resources and the system as a whole.
Regarding the CPS resources, the main beneﬁciary of the correct deploy-
ment of software functions according to the machine resources is the hard-
ware itself, which can result in the perfect load for the available computational
resources. This impacts in a reduction of the energy consumption, resulting from
the avoidance of the machines over-processing allowing high energy demanding
software application in a CPS to be more eﬃcient. Additionally, regarding CPS
maintenance, such an approach enables the automatic replacement of compo-
nents/machines with minimal conﬁguration of the new equipment, following the
plug and play philosophy in the true sense.
The task/resource allocation issue ﬁts in a multi-agent architecture, where
each agent makes its decisions to accept or refuse the execution of a task. Tra-
ditionally, there are a multitude of diﬀerent approaches to handle that problem,
e.g., agent negotiation, voting or multi-agent reinforcement learning. The pro-
posed approach uses a Dutch Auction-based algorithm, taking the advantages
of the auction algorithms such as quick achievement of solutions. The present
implementation diﬀers from the original algorithm with the adoption of a decen-
tralized architecture, where each agent can become the auctioneer.
The main contribution of that multi-agent system approach is the optimiza-
tion of the processing consumption by the agents, allocating functions across
the available agents uniformly and were the agent resources suite best. Also,
the utilization of Python, as a general programming language, enables the usage
of frameworks related to diﬀerent ﬁelds, e.g., Machine Learning, Statistics, or
Networking, that are increasingly used the Industry 4.0, for sensorization, main-
tenance or resources optimization. Regarding the Dutch Auction algorithm, typ-
ically the majority of action implementations adopt a centralized architecture,
where the central agent (auctioneer) manages all the process, the actual app-
roach uses a decentralized architecture which increases the fault tolerance in the
system.
The paper is organized in six diﬀerent sections, starting with the Introduc-
tion. The following section is the Related Work, which contains two subsections,
1) the Background concept, that describes the diﬀerent types of auctions and
introduces the Agent Communication Language (ACL) standard, proposed by
the Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents (FIPA), and 2) the Related Work,
where other approaches used to address the task/resource allocation problem
are compared. The next two sections are the Problem Formalization and the
Implementation, where in the ﬁrst one deﬁnes the problem and respective app-
roach mathematically, the second one describes the implementation process of

324
E. Pereira et al.
the whole multi-agent system. The last two sections are the Results and the Con-
clusions & Future Work, which validate the methods implemented and present
their advantages and limitations, respectively.
2
Literature Review
The Literature Review focuses on two diﬀerent concepts, the background context,
and the related work. The background concept introduces the standard FIPA-
ACL, which enables the agents’ communications, and is crucial to understand
the implemented protocols. The related work focuses on the existent algorithms
that address the task/resource allocation issue, describing and comparing them
in terms of architecture, environment vision, and scalability.
2.1
Background
The FIPA-ACL [3] standard deﬁnes the structure of the messages to exchange
between agents, some protocols of interaction between agents (e.g., request,
query, contract-net [4] or English Auction), and some agent types (e.g., Agent
Management System). The normative FIPA-ACL speciﬁes a standard name pat-
tern to identify each agent (agent name@ip address:port), that agent ID contains
the IP address and port where it is executing the agent and also a name to
facilitate its recognition. To use of the Agent Communication Language (ACL)
is crucial to understand the structure of the messages exchanged between the
agents. The message structure contains: 1) the sender agent ID, 2) the receiver(s)
agent ID(s), 3) the performative, which indicates for a particular protocol (e.g.,
query) what action to perform (e.g., inform, query or failure), 4) the protocol,
and 5) the content of the message.
The protocols deﬁne the sequence of actions that the agent could perform.
FIPA-ACL represents a broad set of interaction protocols; in this particular case,
it’s crucial to understand two of them, the query and the Dutch Auction proto-
cols. The query protocol starts when one agent sends a message with the per-
formative query. The receiver agents handle that message and respond with an
inform, failure, refuse, or not-understood performative. Assuming that if every-
thing okay with the query message, the receiver agent answers with an inform
performative, with the requested data as content. The Dutch Auction protocol
has a more complex sequence of performatives. The process starts when the auc-
tioneer sends a call for proposals performative to the bidders, the interested ones
answer with a bid message. The auctioneer selects the best one and sends an
accept message to the winning bidder, and a reject message to the other ones, at
the end of the auction, sends an inform message to notify all the agents about
the results.
Regarding the FIPA-ACL advantages (e.g., standard communication, relia-
bility), there are few implementations. The popular one is the Java Agent Devel-
opment Framework (JADE) [5], which is an implementation using Java as a gen-
eral programming language, which is a tool primarily adopted in the multi-agent

Dutch Auction Based Approach for Task/Resource Allocation
325
system projects. However, due to the incremental employment of data analytics
and machine learning in projects of several applications, the usage of Python
as the main programming language is growing exponentially. The FIPA-ACL
standard isn’t an exception to the increasing usage of Python, and the Python
Agent DEvelopment framework (PADE) [6] ﬁlls that gap, with an embryonic
implementation of the protocols, mainly used for simulation purposes.
2.2
Related Work
Resource allocation and task allocation are relevant problems in multi-agent
systems [7], due to its complexity (NP-Hard), and the numerous practical appli-
cations. Both issues have similar goals, which are to optimize the placement of
the tasks through the available agents, somehow to maximize the utility function
of each agent and the entire system—considering that each agent makes its own
decisions and wants to increase its utility. The methods applied to address the
resource allocation issue have diﬀerent characteristics, namely their scalability,
architecture, and information requirements. The architecture of the multi-agent
system might be centralized or decentralized regarding the method properties,
e.g., the auction protocol [8] is a typical example of a centralized architecture,
where the auctioneer is the central entity. The method scalability evaluates how
the multi-agent system performance progresses with the addition of new agents,
and indicates its limitations concerning the number of agents. The agent infor-
mation requirements indicate the level of knowledge essential for the agent to
perform its decision, e.g., partial environment information, information about
the entire environment, or also data about the other agents’ decisions.
The conventional implementation [8] of resource allocation in auction-based
approaches [9,10] has a centralized architecture composed by bidders and one
auctioneer, where the bidders make oﬀers, and the auctioneers coordinate the
process and decide who receives the item. There are diﬀerent types of auction,
e.g., the English Auction, the Dutch Auction, where in the ﬁrst one, the agents
know the other oﬀers instead of the second one, which is a blinded auction where
the agents don’t have information of the other bids. Typically that approaches
are an incremental process (one item auctioned individually and in sequential
order) where the agent only has information about the current and previous
auctioned items, resulting in incomplete information about the environment.
Regarding decentralized architectures [11–14] applied to handle the task allo-
cation issue, one of them is the distributed stochastic approach [11] that obtains
quick results without the overload of messages in the network. However, the
algorithm sometimes got stuck in a local minimum. Another method is the ant
colony algorithm [12], which uses a global pheromone matrix to achieve the opti-
mal solution. The approach based on the fast sum-max algorithm [13] returns an
answer at any time, concerning that the more time the algorithm executes, more
proﬁtable the solutions will be. However, the algorithm consumes a substantial
amount of memory. The usage of swarm intelligence [14] is another option; these
implementation uses a cluster-based algorithm that reﬂects the behavior of for-
ager bees in the agents, deciding jump to the next cluster or stay in the current

326
E. Pereira et al.
one. That behavior indicates a well-balanced exploration/exploitation rat; nev-
ertheless, it has low computational speed. Both fast sum-max and swarm intel-
ligence based algorithms have good scalability, allowing the successive addition
of new agents, where each one has a local vision about the environment.
Concerning the resource allocation issue, diﬀerent approaches [15–18] handle
to solve that problem. One them uses reinforcement learning [15] as the main
method, where each agent has several predictors to estimate the consumption
of each server, and based on that estimations, the agent makes its allocations.
Then, based on the real consumption of each server, the agent updates its pre-
dictor parameters. As a result, that implementation has a reduced exchange of
messages; however, it uses a substantial value of computational resources. The
negotiation [16] is another approach where the agents deal with diﬀerent agree-
ments and concessions based on the agents’ vicinity environment. The agents
have the option to decommit agreements receiving a paying penalty, using that
the algorithm can obtain the optimal solution, regardless of the high exchange of
messages between agents. As an alternative, the voting approach [17] models a
distributive justice method, where the agents vote on the weight associated with
the scoring function. A similar technique is the fair division algorithm [18], which
expands the concepts from the fair division theory. Both the voting [17] and
the fair division [18] algorithms obtain an exact equilibrium between the agent
resources; however, they require a high number of messages exchanged. Regard-
ing the agent information requirements, three of the implementations [15–17] use
a local vision of the environment, besides the fair division algorithm [18], which
needs a global image of the environment. Those methods have good scalability,
allowing the addition of new agents.
In general, the described implementations address the task/resource alloca-
tion issue, using diﬀerent architectures, algorithms, and archiving diﬀerent levels
of scalability. Considering that, a new approach based on the auction algorithm,
with modiﬁcation to ﬁt in a decentralized architecture, would be an excellent
alternative to the previous algorithms.
3
Problem Formalization
Regarding the variants of the resource allocation and task allocation issues, the
addressed one is the function assignment problem, where the environment is a
set of diﬀerent machines, and the algorithm ﬁnds a more suitable machine to
execute each function. The functions and their dependencies ﬁt in a pipeline
structure (e.g., fa →fb →fc →fd). The notation used traduces the work
pipeline in a graph data structure (G), where each vertex corresponds to one
function and each edge to the dependency/precedence between functions. The
machines that execute the functions correspond to agents, where each agent has
diﬀerent capabilities. Summarizing, each function from the graph (G) matches
an agent from the agent set (A).
An approach to solve the function assignment problem is the Dutch Auction
algorithm, where the functions are the bid items, and the agents are the bidders

Dutch Auction Based Approach for Task/Resource Allocation
327
that make oﬀers for each item. In the Dutch Auction, the auctioneer establishes
a base price (threshold) for each item, and waits for proposals, if there are not
oﬀers the auctioneer decreases the amount. The adaptation of that algorithm
to the function assignment problem forces each bid to be the agent cost to
execute the corresponding function, so the agent that oﬀers a lower cost will win
the function bid (Eq. 1), which corresponds to a minimization algorithm. The
threshold allows the agent to decide if it bids or not, depending on if the oﬀer
is lower than his own. If there are no oﬀers for that threshold, the auctioneer
increases the threshold. In the end, the auctioneer stores the accepted proposals
and the corresponding bidders in the bid winners set (BW).
BW = {min(bid00...bidi0)...min(bid0j...bidij)}
i ∈A, j ∈G
bid ≤threshold
(1)
As already stated, the agent proﬁle depends on several attributes, more con-
cretely their RAM (a ram), CPU (a cpu), and processing time (a time) capabil-
ities. Also, the functions have their properties, more precisely the RAM (f ram),
CPU (f cpu), and processing time (f time) requirements. According to the agent
speciﬁcations and the function requirements, each agent calculates its bid for
a particular function; if the bid value is lower than the current threshold, the
agent sends the oﬀer to the auctioneer. The bid value (Eq. 2) depends on several
factors; the most determinant is the function cost, which is the quotient between
each function requirement (f ram, f cpu and f time) and the agent speciﬁcations
(a ram, a cpu and a time). Additionally, the bid function considers the previ-
ously accepted bids from the agent as a way to balance the functions over the
agents. The formula also attends to the neighbours’ functions associated with
the bidder agent, considering the network delay associated with executing the
two linked functions in diﬀerent machines. This way, if the agent has neigh-
bour functions mapped in itself, a neighbour cost (nb) is decreased in the bid
formula, reducing the communications between agents, when they execute the
work pipeline.
bid = f ram
a ram + f time
a time + f cpu
a cpu + a cost −nb
(2)
The theoretical analysis of the problem demonstrates that the usage of the
Dutch Auction algorithm solves the problem of function assignment in a multi-
agent system. However, a more practical description is useful to understand
the algorithm and implementation and also some validation tests to prove the
concept demonstrated.

328
E. Pereira et al.
4
Implementation
The problem of function assignment is a combinatorial optimization problem,
which has several approaches to solve it. In this case, the adopted method was
the Dutch Auction, which ﬁts in a multi-agent system, where each agent is a bid-
der, and one of them is also the auctioneer. tas The functions negotiated between
agents use Python as a general programming language, which enables the usage
of an extensive number of frameworks applied to diﬀerent ﬁelds, e.g., Machine
Learning, Computer Vision, or Networking. Given that, the implementation uses
as bases the Python Agent DEvelopment framework (PADE) [6], which imple-
ments the message structure and some FIPA-ACL interaction protocols. Due
to the peer-to-peer network scenario, which requires bidirectional communica-
tion between agents, each agent uses the Twisted network framework [19] for
communication purposes.
Fig. 1. Dutch auction protocol (agents interaction)

Dutch Auction Based Approach for Task/Resource Allocation
329
4.1
Agents Interaction
The agents’ interaction, Fig. 1, uses TCP/IP as the transport layer, executing
each agent in a diﬀerent process to guarantee the isolation between agents. In
the auction architecture, all the agents are bidders, and one of them is also the
auctioneer. The auction starts when a new agent (Agent 0) joins the network
and queries anyone about the environment information. The asked agent (Agent
1) answers with the environment data, and starts an auction; this agent becomes
the auctioneer and sends the call for proposals (CFP) message to all the agents
(including him), asking about bids for the ﬁrst function. Each CFP message
contains the bidding function ID and the current threshold, allowing to identify
the current bidding function and the limit cost threshold to perform a bid (the
agents only send proposals smaller than the threshold). The auctioneer waits,
a ﬁxed interval, for submissions; then, if there are bids, it chooses the lowest
one as the winner; if there are no bids, the auctioneer increments the threshold
allowing agents with higher costs to bid. The auction is a sequential process,
oﬀering each function individually; this way, the agents with accepted bids will
increase their cost (current bid plus previously accepted bids), limiting their
future bids. When the auctioneer sold all the functions, it communicates the
results, and all the auction winners can start executing the respective functions.
The entire implementation follows the FIPA-ACL standards, e.g., the proto-
cols used or the messages exchanged. The agents interact using two protocols,
the query protocol, and the dutch auction protocol. Where the query protocol
allows new agents to join the network and receive the actual pipeline used as envi-
ronment, using a message to query the actual state of the system/environment
and other performative to inform the result (ﬁrst part of Fig. 1). The dutch
auction protocol includes all the interaction between agents to ﬁnd the best bid-
der for each function: 1) the call for proposals (CFP) performative requests to
each agent its bid for a particular function; 2) the bid performative sends the
information about an agent bid (function ID and bid value); 3) the accept per-
formative notiﬁes the bidder winner to update its internal costs; 4) the inform
performative to share the ﬁnal results of the auction.
4.2
Agent Architecture
The agent architecture that allows this interaction contains several components,
described in Fig. 2. In detail, the agent architecture splits into ﬁve diﬀerent
parts, 1) the agent itself, 2) the behaviors, that determine the agent actions, 3)
the peer, which allows the communication between agents, 4) the environment,
more concretely the graph representation of the pipeline of work, and 5) the
auction, which is only used by the auctioneer to manage the auction process.
In detail, the communication component (peer) uses a TCP/IP server to
receive the requests/messages from the other agents. Due that each agent needs
to use a diﬀerent URL (IP address and port), e.g., in the same machine, every
agent must use a diﬀerent port. Also, to send requests/messages, each agent
uses a list of clients, one for each agent in the network. That approach allows

330
E. Pereira et al.
bidirectional communication between agents, using messages with a FIPA-ACL
structure.
The environment component allows the extraction of the cost value to per-
form the bids by the agent. Each agent has an updated copy of the graph data
structure that represents the environment. When a new agent enter in the net-
work, it receives the current version of the environment in the content of a FIPA-
ACL message encoded as a JSON structure. The graph contains vertices asso-
ciated with the pipeline functions and edges to the precedence/return between
functions. Also, the graph stores the agent that executes each function as node
attributes.
Fig. 2. Agent architecture
The estimation of the bid value for the current bid item provides from the
agent speciﬁcations and the function requirements. The agent speciﬁcation is
the hardware description, which the user can edit in a conﬁguration JSON ﬁle of
each agent. The function requirements provide from a simulation component that
selects one value from the normal distribution (mean and standard deviation)
of each function requirement. Those distributions result from the experiment of
executing several times a function in certain hardware; the variables collected are
the processing time, RAM usage, and CPU usage. The bid value also depends
on the previous accept bids, and the neighbour accepted functions. This way,
during the auction, each agent increases its costs if their proposals are accepted.

Dutch Auction Based Approach for Task/Resource Allocation
331
Hence, the bid formula contains the values of the bids accepted to balance the
auctioned functions through the agents equally. Also, the previous auctioned
functions allow the agent to understand if the ﬂow has many transitions between
agents. If the pipeline is fa →fb →fc →fd and there are two agents in the
network (a1 and a2) its proﬁtable to map the agent a1 to the functions fa
and fb and the agent a2 to the functions fc and fd, because it decreases the
communication costs between agents (only need to communicate to pass data
between the function fb and fc).
As mentioned before, one of the agents its both a bidder and an auctioneer.
So, the auctioneer needs to manage all the auction process, due that each agent
has a component named Auction, which is only used by the auctioneer to handle
the process. This component receives the bids from the other agents and selects
the proﬁtable (lower one); if there are no bids, increases the threshold allowing
the agents with the highest cost to bid. This approach has the goal to dispatch
all the function through the agents.
5
Results
The multi-agent system implemented has several properties that require a spe-
ciﬁc validation. Given that, the experiments to perform are a proof of concept,
where for a particular pipeline, the method collects the agent costs during the
auction process. In detail, the experiment validates two diﬀerent work pipelines,
where the ﬁrst has two independent ﬂows that join at the end of the graph (left
topologies in Fig. 3), with two available agents. The second has a more complex
topology, with three available agents, which allows a more reﬁned analysis of the
system decisions. In each topology, two diﬀerent situations were evaluated one
using the neighbours’ cost (described in Eq. 2) and the other without using that
policy. Regarding those topologies, the expected results for the ﬁrst pipeline,
considering the neighbour cost, are the placement of each independent ﬂow in a
unique agent, ensuring the minimal communications between machines, reﬂected
in a faster processing time of the whole pipeline. When the bid function does not
contain the neighbour cost, the expected result is that the algorithm balances
the costs in all the agents. In the second scenario, the results must prove the
same conclusions, balancing the costs between agents and minimizing network
communications.
Given the initial assumptions about the behaviors of the system, the results
demonstrate that they are aligned with the real system decisions. The analy-
sis of the ﬁrst topology in Fig. 3 denotes that when the bid function considers
the neighbour cost, it obtains the optimal solution (second column), instead of
the version without neighbour cost, which only concerns about balancing the
resources through all the agents. Regarding the second topology the results pro-
vide similar conclusions, where the functions are equally balanced across the
agents (agent aid 0 was 4 functions associated, the aid 1 was 4 and the aid 2
was 5). Concerning the network delays, that topology presents a higher number
of links between separated agents (14 edges) in the experiment without neigh-
bour costs (column 3), when compared to the experiment with costs (13 edges).

332
E. Pereira et al.
Fig. 3. Agents cost vs graph topology
6
Conclusions and Future Work
Overall the Dutch Auction allows the quick auctioning of items, which gives a
smaller response time by the multi-agent system. Also, this algorithm enables the
dispatching of all the functions, which is a crucial requirement of this problem
(every function needs to have one associated agent). That version of the Dutch
Auction algorithm enables the usage of a decentralized architecture, which trans-
forms the CPS in a more fault reliable system.
Nevertheless, this approach has limitations, mainly due to the incremental
essence of the algorithm; some solutions are ignored, which could result in sub-
optimal solutions. To address that issue, the usage of combinatorial auctions,
with a global vision of the environment, would minimize that problem.
References
1. Zhang, J., Yao, X., Zhou, J., Jiang, J., Chen, X.: Self-organizing manufacturing:
current status and prospect for industry 4.0. In: 2017 5th International Conference
on Enterprise Systems (ES). IEEE (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/es.2017.59
2. Zhang, Y., Guo, Z., Lv, J., Liu, Y.: A framework for smart production-logistics
systems based on CPS and industrial IoT. IEEE Trans. Industr. Inf. 14(9), 4019–
4032 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/tii.2018.2845683
3. O’Brien, P.D., Nicol, R.C.: FIPA - towards a standard for software agents. BT
Technol. J. 16(3), 51–59 (1998). https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009621729979
4. Smith, R.G.: the contract net protocol: high-level communication and control in
a distributed problem solver. IEEE Trans. Comput. C–29(12), 1104–1113 (1980).
https://doi.org/10.1109/tc.1980.1675516
5. Bellifemine, F., Poggi, A., Rimassa, G.: JADE – A FIPA-compliant agent frame-
work. In: Proceedings of PAAM, London, vol. 99, p. 33 (1999)

Dutch Auction Based Approach for Task/Resource Allocation
333
6. de Freitas, B.K., Venturini, L.F., Domingues, M.A., da Rosa, M.A., Issicaba, D.:
Exploiting PADE to the simulation of multiagent restoration actions. In: 2019 11th
International Symposium on Advanced Topics in Electrical Engineering (ATEE).
IEEE (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/atee.2019.8724852
7. Ye, D., Zhang, M., Vasilakos, A.V.: A survey of self-organization mechanisms in
multiagent systems. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.: Syst. 47(3), 441–461 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1109/tsmc.2015.2504350
8. Krishna, V.: Auction Theory. Academic Press, Cambridge (2009)
9. Fatima, S.S., Wooldridge, M.: Adaptive task resources allocation in multi-agent
systems. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Autonomous
Agents, AGENTS 2001, pp. 537–544. Association for Computing Machinery, New
York (2001). https://doi.org/10.1145/375735.376439
10. Wurman, P.R., Wellman, M.P., Walsh, W.E.: A parametrization of the auction
design space. Games Econ. Behav. 35(1–2), 304–338 (2001). https://doi.org/10.
1006/game.2000.0828
11. Chapman, A.C., Micillo, R.A., Kota, R., Jennings, N.R.: Decentralised dynamic
task allocation: a practical game: theoretic approach. In: Proceedings of The 8th
International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems - Volume
2, AAMAS 2009, pp. 915–922. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems, Richland (2009)
12. Wang, L., Wang, Z., Hu, S., Liu, L.: Ant colony optimization for task allocation in
multi-agent systems. China Commun. 10(3), 125–132 (2013). https://doi.org/10.
1109/cc.2013.6488841
13. Macarthur, K.S., Str, R., Ramchurn, S.D., Jennings, N.R.: A distributed anytime
algorithm for dynamic task allocation in multi-agent systems. In: In Proceedings
of AAAI, pp. 356–362 (2011)
14. dos Santos, D.S., Bazzan, A.L.C.: Distributed clustering for group formation and
task allocation in multiagent systems: a swarm intelligence approach. Appl. Soft
Comput. 12(8), 2123–2131 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2012.03.016
15. Schlegel, T., Kowalczyk, R.: Towards self-organising agent-based resource allo-
cation in a multi-server environment. In: Proceedings of the 6th International
Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS 2007.
Association for Computing Machinery, New York (2007). https://doi.org/10.1145/
1329125.1329147
16. An, B., Lesser, V., Sim, K.M.: Strategic agents for multi-resource negotiation.
Auton. Agent. Multi-Agent Syst. 23(1), 114–153 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10458-010-9137-2
17. Pitt, J., Schaumeier, J., Busquets, D., Macbeth, S.: Self-organising common-pool
resource allocation and canons of distributive justice. In: 2012 IEEE Sixth Inter-
national Conference on Self-adaptive and Self-organizing Systems. IEEE (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1109/saso.2012.31
18. Kash, I., Procaccia, A.D., Shah, N.: No agent left behind: dynamic fair division of
multiple resources. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 51, 579–603 (2014)
19. Fettig, A., Lefkowitz, G.: Twisted Network Programming Essentials. O’Reilly
Media, Inc., Newton (2005)

MOBEYBOU
Tangible Interfaces for Cognitive Development
Hugo Baptista Lopes1, Vítor Carvalho1,2(B)
, and Cristina Sylla3
1 2Ai - School of Technology, IPCA, Barcelos, Portugal
a15999@alunos.ipca.pt, vcarvalho@ipca.pt
2 Algoritmi Research Centre, School of Engineering, University of Minho, Campus of Azurém,
Guimarães, Portugal
3 Research Centre on Child Studies/ITI/LARSyS, University of Minho/ITI/LARSyS, Campus
de Gualtar, Braga, Portugal
cristina.sylla@ie.uminho.pt
Abstract. This paper presents the development of a low-cost tangible interface
to enhance children’s learning through collaborative storytelling, using a set of
movable blocks, with a high degree of autonomy and the ability to exchange
information which other. Taking into account the context of the existing game
model and on the basis of which this study was developed, the function of these
removable blocks is to allow children who use them to create and recreate their
own narratives in permanent interaction between the representations associated
with these blocks (“characters” = ﬁgures of animals, objects, locations, or others)
and those of the existing virtual platform, that is, children, in the way they best
understand/succeed in the construction of their spontaneous narratives, will be able
toprojecttheserepresentationsonascreenthroughtheactivationandmanipulation
of the blocks, where they add, remove, move and interact with each other and with
those in it already introduced at every moment.
To that end and using freely accessible hardware and Bluetooth® technology,
we have attempted to apply a method that would somehow revolutionise the educa-
tional games’ industry, through RSSI (Received Signal Strength Indicator) based
triangulation to determine the relative position of various removable device/blocks
with each other and with respect to the virtual platform which is supposed to inter-
act, but were unable to secure results that would have made it possible to obtain
a precise location. We thus instead developed a simpler format that achieves an
interaction within a graphic environment as a result of the proximity of the phys-
ical objects in question, but not of any other factors, thereby essentially fulﬁlling
the study’s objective.
Keywords: Tangible interfaces · Children · Cognitive development · Game ·
Narrative
1
Introduction
Make-believe play in early childhood, which involves the use of fantasy and symbolism,
is important for children’s overall cognitive development. According to Fein [1] play is a
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 334–350, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_31

MOBEYBOU
335
symbolic behaviour in which one thing is treated as if it were another. He also underlined
the importance of the sensations related to play and considered that affection linked to
the game itself is a natural form of creativity [1]. Russ postulated that play is important in
the development of creativity as many of the cognitive and affective processes involved
in creativity occur when playing [2, 3]. Based on literature review, Russ identiﬁes, in the
model of affection and creativity, the main cognitive and affective processes involved in
creativity and their relationship [3].
Playing should facilitate divergent thinking because, in play, children exercise the
capacities of divergent thinking using objects that represent different things and imag-
ining various scenarios throughout the process [4]. Some studies point to a relationship
between affective processes during play and creativity. Leiberman found a relationship
between play, containing affective components of joy and spontaneity, and divergent
thinking in preschool children [5]. Christie and Johnson also concluded that there is
a relationship between play and creativity [6]. J. L. Singer and Singer uncovered that
children with a high degree of imagination recognize, in the context of playing games,
more themes involving danger and power than children with less imagination [7].
Creative narratives may be the most appropriate context to stimulate language devel-
opment in young children, as well as narrative competences [8]. Storytelling is a social
activity, based on shared experiences that can introduce new vocabulary and may also
include elements that help to develop phonological awareness, as are often found in
repeated patterns, rhymes or funny stories [9]. The narratives that occur naturally in
children’s play is particularly important to stimulate their imagination, to acquire and
practice different linguistic styles and to explore their social roles [10]. All kinds of
narratives are the basis for understanding and creating our experiences and the world
around us. At the individual level, the narratives that we listen to throughout life allow
us to build our role in the world. At the family level, narratives are often involuntarily
used to socialize children, to teach them values and principles. When exposed to these
stories, children develop their own narrative skills. At the cultural level, the narrative
gives cohesion to the transmission of principles and values [11]. It has been argued
that children can use more elaborate language in their narratives than in their everyday
conversations [12].
Collaboration is an important competence for young children’s learning, and working
in pairs or small groups can have very beneﬁcial effects on children’s learning and
development, particularly in the early years and in primary education [13–15].
Technology offers opportunities to support and facilitate collaborative learning in
many ways [16, 17]. The computer can provide a common frame of reference and be
used to support the development of ideas among children. However, neither learning
nor collaboration will take place simply because two children share the same computer.
Learning and collaboration will only occur if the technology is designed according to
the contexts of use and the purpose for which it is intended. Otherwise, the interface can
become a barrier to learning [17].
The difference between a graphical user interface (GUI) and a tangible user interface
(TUI) comes from the fact that the latter combines the technology of a virtual interface
with the physical world. Traditional GUIs are characterized by virtual elements such as
windows,icons,menus,andtheuser’sinteractionwiththecomputerisdoneusingdevices

336
H. B. Lopes et al.
such as mouse and keyboard. By contrast, the manipulation of a physical (tangible)
interface is done through objects that combine the physical with the virtual world.
TUIs were initially explored by Fitzmaurice [18] with the “Bricks” prototype. Mar-
shall [19] later stated that TUIs have great potential to support learning due to their
“hands-on” nature. However, it would be necessary to prove its usefulness concretely.
According to Piaget, cognitive structuring through the absorption and assimilation of
schemes requires physical and mental actions [20].
TUI, combining the physical world with the virtual, can play a very important role in
literacy and other areas in education. The development of technology and the widespread
access to increasingly small electronic components makes it possible to lead to inno-
vative teaching methodologies, which could translate into an improvement in cognitive
development in children or even adults. The creation of tangible interfaces endowed
with autonomy, capable of recognizing each other and interacting with a graphic envi-
ronment can prove to be an important step in the context of games to support and facilitate
collaborative learning.
Knowing how to read and write remains the basis of education and a prerequisite
in other scientiﬁc ﬁelds, such as science, mathematics and technology. Through partic-
ipation in language games, narratives, children’s interaction with peers contributes to
the development of these skills. In this context, of strong interaction, in order to be sure
that their messages are clearly perceived [21] children surpass themselves and stimulate
each other, thereby developing their capacity to build and tell stories [22]. The same
process occurs through storytelling between tutors and children. Children who showed
greater interest and involvement in activities related to narratives demonstrated greater
activation in the association areas on the right side of the cerebellum during the task and
greater functional connectivity between this activation cluster and the areas of language
and executive functions. Recent studies suggest a potential cerebellar response mecha-
nism at the level of child involvement that can contribute to the development of emerging
literacy during childhood and synergy between guardian and child during story sharing
[23].
For children, the theory suggests that supporting physical actions on computational
objects, therefore virtual, makes it difﬁcult to perform difﬁcult mental tasks. However,
experiences have recently emerged in which traditional teaching methods are compared
to the manipulation of physical objects in which any aspect of their shape represents
abstract concepts. Tangible interfaces can play a very important role in literacy and
other ﬁelds in education. With the development of increasingly smaller technology and
electronic components, the application of these in everyday objects facilitates the inter-
action between the user and the virtual world. Examples such as mobile phones, Tablets,
Nintendo Wii, demonstrate the ability to apply technology to objects as a way of inter-
acting with the virtual world in a non-traditional way. This bring forth a reduction in the
cost of developing new devices and devices and their use is becoming more and more
common. Transposing these types of characteristics to teaching methodologies may
translate into an improvement in cognitive development in children or even adults. The
widespread access of these components allows and increasingly facilitates the creation
of new prototypes of TUI interfaces [18].

MOBEYBOU
337
The main goal of this study is to design a tangible, technologically advanced object,
framed in the Mobeybou project, which currently uses the TOK platform hardware [9].
In order to optimize the already developed hardware in the scope of this project, this
study describes the development of a hardware solution that meets the existing system,
acting as a complement that can be integrated into the existing graphic environment. To
this end, it was taken into account not only what has already been developed in terms of
hardware as well as consider the main features of the system.
TOK is a tangible interface, which includes a graphical component and two main
tangible objects, the pieces/blocks, and a board. Each block has a capacitive sensor at
its base that contains information about its identity (ID). Each block is associated with
a graphic element. When placing a block on the board, it is recognized by the sensors of
the electronic board and its identiﬁcation is communicated to the graphical environment
which in turn triggers a virtual graphical representation of the respective element that
is displayed on the computer/tablet screen. The application allows users to mix all the
narrative elements, and this depends on the choice of blocks placed on the platform, and
this potential way to engage children in exploring different narratives.
What we propose is to make the game scalable, mouldable, customizable, modellable
and ﬂexible, making use of the most of the elements of the work done up to that point.
The use of currently available technology, namely computers, graphics and interfaces
environments offer an opportunity to support and facilitate collaborative learning.
In order to reinforce the importance that tangible objects bring to children’s cognitive
development, it is proposed to elaborate an object that can be integrated in a graphic
environment already created, but with an advantage over the solutions tested so far.
2
Background
TOK has enormous potential in terms of the ease of creating different blocks. The total
number of different blocks that can be created is quite high, but limiting the number
of blocks that can be read by the board is a disadvantage in the case where the pieces
identify objects and not characters.
Taking into account that the aim of this work is to continue the Mobeybou project, it
proved essential to look for an innovative alternative in relation to the existing solutions,
through a TUI prototype with a signiﬁcant degree of autonomy - which the state of the
art does not reveal to have been achieved until now - verifying, on the other hand, that
the identiﬁcation of this object requires a study of the different types of approach using
technology currently on the market.
Autonomy, as both energetic as functional, is the key issue in any technological
object and this kind of object is no exception, insofar as an object that is restricted
to a physical connection (by cables, for example) and powered by the power grid has
“inﬁnite” autonomy, while an object that it is movable has a limited energetic autonomy,
although it can be recharged/powered by renewable energy resources, for example. On
the other hand, the way that an object identiﬁcation is generated requires a study of the
different types of possible approach using technology currently on the market. It is also
important to use cross-cutting and uniﬁed technology.

338
H. B. Lopes et al.
3
Development
3.1
Bluetooth® 5 Technology
Bluetooth® 5 technology has signiﬁcant advantages over other solutions, when, as is
the case, the aim is to locate and exchange information between TUI objects, namely in
indoor environments [24]. Bluetooth®, in addition to low power consumption, omnipres-
ence, low cost and easy use, is immune to electromagnetic noise and is easily scalable for
scenarios with multiple agents. Other solutions, such as Wi-Fi, GPS (Global Position-
ing System), RFID etc., are not suitable for locating devices for the following reasons:
GPS requires a line of sight with at least four satellites, so it is not suitable for indoor
environments; RFID is not capable of communication; although Wi-Fi has a higher data
rate, high power consumption is inadequate; other technologies, such as Zigbee, are not
widespread and are not available on laptops, smartphones, desktops, among others [25].
Bluetooth® 5 brings vast advances to this technology and as the potential to become an
alternative [26–33]. Using an approach based on the Received Signal Strength Indicator
(RSSI) [34], one of the simplest and most widely used for indoor location, we tried to use
Machine Learning and Deep Learning algorithms, most used in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
analysis of large collections of data and image processing, that can make RSSI-based
localization more accurate. In addition, Kalman ﬁlters were applied to the RSSI values,
aiming to improve the accuracy of the readings. All the technology was applied to the
TUIs, the blocks, to make them “smart” in some way.
Bluetooth® devices can play different proﬁles as part of a communication, differently
from a communication between a server and a TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
client. The most usual connection can be described by a master and a slave, in which
the slave periodically sends his identity and some characteristics about himself allowing
the master to discover him and proceed with the connection. This connection can be
originated by any device and ends when the master disconnects. This condition is called
pairing between Bluetooth® devices. However, this requires greater energy expenditure
as it relies on a constant exchange of information. Instead, a much simpler method can
be resolved by exchanging information through observer and advertiser, since a device
advertises a packet with information and other collects this packet, thus reducing greatly
energy consumption.
3.2
Received Signal Strength Indicator
RSSI (Received Signal Strength Indicator) is a unit signal power measurement. Unlike
dBm (decibel-milliwatts), which also represents a signal strength measurement unit but
in absolute value, the RSSI is used to measure the relative quality of the signal strength
between devices. The scale is set by the manufacturer and varies between 0 and −255,
but in all cases, it can be inferred that the closer to 0 the better the signal. Therefore,
not being a scale that allows to quantify exactly the distance between two devices, it has
been studied to obtain an approximation of an indoor location in substitution of other
technologies that do not allow it, as the case of GPS.

MOBEYBOU
339
TheapproachbasedonRSSIisoneofthesimplestandwidelyusedforindoorlocation
[35, 36]. Using the RSSI and a simple model of signal propagation loss over space [37],
the distance d between the transmitter (TX) and receiver (RX) can be estimated by
RSSI = −10n log10(d) + A
(1)
where n is the exponent of propagation loss (varies between 2 in open line and 4 with
many obstacles) and A is the reference transmission value. Finding a device using RSSI
can be done in different ways. In the case of trilateration or trilateration by N-points,
used for example in the GPS signal, RSSI is used to estimate the absolute distance
between the device to be located and at least three reference points, usually referred
to as anchors. This method applies basic geometry and trigonometry. Although this
approach is simple and easy to implement, it suffers from little precision due to the
characteristics of the RSSI signal, especially in conditions where there is no line of
sight, in which the signal attenuation results from obstacles and walls causing large
ﬂuctuations in the RSSI [35, 38]. However, different types of ﬁlters can be applied to
mitigate these effects. Nevertheless, it is unlikely to obtain location with high precision
without the use of complex algorithms.
One approach that has been studied is the use of Machine Learning and Deep Learn-
ing algorithms, most used in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, analysis of large data collections and
image processing, but which can make the location based on RSSI more accurate.
In the case of neural networks, ANN (Artiﬁcial Neural Networks), the location is
obtained through classiﬁers and forecasting scenarios. The neuronal network is trained
with the different RSSI values corresponding to a given location in an ofﬂine process
[39]. Once trained, it can be used to obtain the location of any other device that obviously
has the same characteristics as RSSI. The MLP (Multi-Layer Perceptron) network with
a hidden layer is one of the most used and common networks in this type of approach
[40]. As an input, a vector with RSSI values is multiplied by weights and added to an
input layer bias, as long as the bias is selected. The result obtained is then placed in the
transfer function of the hidden layer. The output product of the transfer function and the
trained weights of the hidden layer are added to the hidden layer bias. The network’s
output is the device’s intended estimated location.
On the other hand, the application of clustering algorithms can also help in obtaining
more accurate results for the location of devices. This is the case with the kNN (k-
Nearest Neighbours) algorithm. The algorithm depends on RSSI online to obtain the
closest matches, based on the measured RSSI values, previously stored in a database in
the ofﬂine process, from known locations using the Root Mean Square Error - RMSE
[40, 41].
3.3
Extended Kalman Filter
Kalman ﬁlters have been applied in navigation situations. This method, developed by
Rudolf Emil Kalman in 1960, was originally designed and developed to solve the
navigation problem in the Apollo project [42].
Although it can be described by a single equation, the Kalman ﬁlter is usually divided
into two distinct phases: Prediction and Update and its purpose is to use measurements of

340
H. B. Lopes et al.
quantities performed over time, with a high degree of noise and other associated uncer-
tainties to obtain results that are close to the actual values. It performs efﬁciently, accurate
inferences about a dynamic system. It is computationally lightweight and relatively easy
to implement on systems with few input variables.
Prediction uses the previous state estimate to obtain an estimate of the current state
in time, which is called an a priori estimate. The Update is called a posteriori, as it
combines the current observation to improve the estimate. Prediction is given by:
xk = xk−1
(2)
Pk = Pk−1 + Q
(3)
where xk and xk−1 are the estimate of the state and the a priori state, Pk and Pk−1 are the
estimate of the covariance error and the a priori state and Q covariance of the system
noise. And the update by:
Kk = Pk(Pk + R)−1
(4)
xk = xk + Kk(zk −xk)
(5)
Pk = (1 −Kk)Pk
(6)
where R is the covariance of a posteriori noise, therefore the observation, Kk is the
Kalman gain and zk the measured value. To use the Kalman ﬁlter model, it is only nec-
essary to provide the state matrices, the initial parameters and the covariance matrices
Q and R. In order to form a well-structured opinion on the characteristics of the RSSIs
in these devices, some samples were collected between two devices that showed a rapid
change of positions. In fact, RSSI values change quite sharply when they are in a ﬁxed
position and often overlap. Since the values are integers, it is difﬁcult to obtain a res-
olution that allows accurate distances to be inferred. After applying the Kalman ﬁlter
and adjusting the parameters: Q - Covariance of the system noise; R - Covariance of the
observation noise; P - Estimate of the covariance error; we can see an improvement of
the signal values.
3.4
Requirements
The objective of this work is to design and develop a tangible, low-cost interface, with
the ability to be integrated into a virtual platform. In order to make the game competitive
in terms of the market, it is important to choose the technology that allows to obtain
validation of the proposal and that has the minimum associated cost.
In order to make the game scalable and ﬂexible, we thought of a solution that keeps
up with the existing model. To this end, the idea would be to transform each block into a
device that is autonomous and that collects information from other blocks in the vicinity.
Due to the RSSI characteristics, different from manufacturer to manufacturer, we
chose to use only the RSSI values between devices and not considered the RSSI between
computer - devices.

MOBEYBOU
341
Every physical object, block, must meet the following parameters: transmitting infor-
mation of their identiﬁcation; recognize adjacent parts for interaction between them;
switching status (on/off); be autonomous and have reduced price; easy integration in a
graphic environment; meet the physical size appropriate to the game.
3.5
Approach
In order to design physical objects, a prototype was developed at an early stage using
nRF52840 Chip/SoC, not only due to its reduced price, but also due to the characteristics
in terms of development.
Different tests were carried out to measure the RSSI values in order to be able to draw
conclusions about the methodology to be followed. After registering the RSSI values
of these components, based on the Chip/SoC nRF52840, it was developed a functional
prototype of the blocks, Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Block case
The case consists of a printed circuit board, a 2700 mAh battery, a TP4056 based
Chip/SoC board, with charge protection diode, to charge the battery and a button.
Each BLE Chip/SoC was programmed so that it would perform the role of observer
and advertiser at the same time with appropriate intervals. For the sake of autonomy,
it is intended that both the observer and advertiser proﬁles consume as little energy as
possible without changing the game dynamics.
A block that ﬁnds another one in the vicinity is able to determine the RSSI value,
ﬁlter it and transmit the value in the advertisement package to the API.
Due to the size of the advertisement package, 31 bytes were attempted to ﬁnd a solu-
tion that would allow to collect and transmit as much information about the respective
object and others in the vicinity. The advertisement package was conﬁgured to transmit
the information of the game name, “MBBou”, the object identiﬁcation and the identiﬁ-
cation of the objects in the vicinity, together with their RSSI value. Each block manages
the IDs between the blocks and the RSSI values that pass through a Kalman ﬁlter before
they are included in the package. All information happens dynamically, that is, if a block
meets another block, it adds the identiﬁcation of the second block and the ﬁltered RSSI
to the package, when the second disappears, the package undergoes the corresponding
change.

342
H. B. Lopes et al.
Thus, the processing shifts, Fig. 2, are to be done in the graphical environment itself
and not in each block. In this case, the UWP application must be able to collect all the
information of the blocks and all that is around them and make conclusions about these
data and be able to transmit them to the game engine.
Fig. 2. Block ﬁrmware ﬂowchart
When the button is pressed, the block switches to both the Advertising and Scanning
proﬁles. At the end of the Scan time, the Chip/SoC reports the data to a variable that
contains the information of the other blocks found, if applicable. The instant the data
reported by the scan is received, the information is organized to allow it to be included
in the advertisement package. The block is turned off when the button is pressed again.
Thus, the operation of the blocks is almost independent of the rest of the application
so it can create different ways of reading the information transmitted by them.
3.6
RSSI Values at Different Distances
In order to automate the system to the maximum and achieve the best possible per-
formance, a test was carried out in which devices separated by distance intervals were
placed at different signal strengths. The BLE Chip/SoC allows you to change the TX
transmission power, which in turn can result in a reduction in energy consumption.
It is therefore important to establish a comparison between the power of the TX signal
and the different positions. Initially, the test was carried out with nRF52840 - dongle. 100
samples of the RSSI were extracted at different transmission powers for eight positions

MOBEYBOU
343
approximately 10 cm apart. The readings include the Kalman ﬁlter. Between 40 and
60 cm there is a signal distortion, and it can be seen that RSSI values overlap. On the
other hand, if the block undergoes a rotation, the RSSI’s behaviour also changes. We
can see that the values at different emission intensities have almost the same behaviour,
so choosing a lower intensity allows a lower energy consumption taking into account
the variation of the RSSI values at given distances. One of the characteristics that is
also important to mention is that along an axis and at different distances, if the block
undergoes rotation there is a discrepancy in the values read. This becomes relevant when
the block is positioned in different ways. Since it will display a sticker with the object’s
representation, it is important to know if a rotation in the block position inﬂuences the
RSSI values.
Tests were carried out on the RSSIs values from some blocks to others. The values
differ between blocks and, therefore, the readings present some differences. The values
between the blocks with identiﬁcation 1, 2 and 3 were measured. The Kalman ﬁlter was
adjusted to obtain a better ﬁltration. For each position, 100 samples of the measured
RSSI values were taken. The values measured between blocks 1 and 2 are different from
those measured between 2 and 1.
In general, the Kalman ﬁlter greatly attenuates the error associated with the RSSI
values, but depending on the blocks (in this case different Chip/SoCs), even after ﬁltering,
there are quite relevant differences between the values. It will be necessary to infer about
the value after ﬁltering and the theoretical value, being able to afﬁrm that at the beginning
a triangulation by geometric shape will have errors too large to be considered in any way
an accurate measurement.
Therefore, inference of the positions of blocks will have to be determined by an appli-
cation which will allow to obtain satisfactory results and thus will reduce to maximum
propagated errors of real positions.
The relationship between the different RSSI values shows that it is possible to infer at
least two things: whether a block is near or far from another. In this sense, the approach
contemplates a solution whereby, after reading the values by any device that is able
to read the information of the blocks and worked on these data, it reports the state of
the blocks to the game engine so that it subsequently reacts accordingly. For this, the
API was developed in UWP, not only to allow access to Bluetooth® in the Windows
operating system, but also to allow visualization of the data in a graphical environment
to be later integrated in the Unity platform.
Following a Graph Theory model, in which the relationships between objects of a
given set are described, each block represents a vertex (node) and an RSSI value between
nodes represents an edge with a weight that is the RSSI’s own value. The data can be
visualized in a simple way by representing an adjacency matrix.
When the application is started, Fig. 3, it checks whether the Bluetooth® module
on the device it is running, whether it is compatible with Bluetooth® Low Energy or if
any other error has occurred. After successful conﬁrmation from the BLE module, the
application goes into scanning mode and, in parallel, starts a timer to communicate the
status of the devices to the game platform. The scanner reads the information transmitted
by the devices, these readings being almost random in the sense that it does not have a
predetermined time (a block can be read 4 times in one second and 9 times in the other).

344
H. B. Lopes et al.
This allows the scanner of the devices to work in parallel with the gaming platform so
any changes to the way the data is organized and the information read does not inﬂuence
the way the scanner works. On the other hand, you can conﬁgure the time when the
platform accesses the device information and the time for a block to be considered off.
In the game platform it is only necessary to create a function to register the event.
Fig. 3. Application ﬂowchart
After performing tests of the hardware components, it was realized that it would be
extremely difﬁcult to build a neuronal network that contemplated all possible variations
to determine the distances between blocks with the smallest possible error because, due
to the characteristics of the devices, all classiﬁcations would depend on the number and
the position of the blocks. For example, for a set of 10 blocks with a 10-position matrix,
the neuronal network would have to be classiﬁed with several different values, since the
RSSI value between block 1 and block 2 differs from block 2 and block 1, Fig. 4.
Although some tests were carried out with a multilabel classiﬁer, the results proved
to be inconclusive for the reasons described. From all the previously studied articles on
indoorlocationwithneuralnetworksusingRSSIvalues,itwasconcludedthat,althoughit
is possible to obtain better results than other approaches, training with a Bluetooth® Low
Energy Chip/SoC gives different results that of from training with another Bluetooth®
Low Energy Chip/SoC. In all cases, there is no speciﬁc description of this type of detail,
so it is not shown to work on any device without having to undergo prior training.

MOBEYBOU
345
(a1) 
         (a2) 
(b1) 
 (b2) 
Fig. 4. RSSI = −10n log10(d) + A; A = −4 dBm; n = 4; (a1) (a2) from block 1 to 2; (b1) (b2)
from block 2 to1;
4
Field Test
The game consists of blocks with different representations in the form of stickers with
correspondence in the graphic environment. To play, simply turn the different blocks on
or off, which will then appear or disappear in the graphical environment, allowing the
player to observe this behaviour and interactions between characters and consequently
develop a story from these elements.
Tests were carried out with children from two different age groups, 10 years and
5 years, from two classes with different educators, Fig. 5. Although the graphic environ-
ment was not completed in order to achieve the expected, since the interactions between
the characters occurs in a random way when the blocks are connected and not when
there is an approximation between them, it was possible to demonstrate that there is a
good reaction on the part of the children. Each child took a block at will and, almost as
if taking possession of it, turned them on and off in order to understand what the game
provided. Supposedly (this was the intention behind the experimentation) they should
have had to turn on the block, place it on the table and move it closer or further away
from the others.

346
H. B. Lopes et al.
To the 10-year-old children was asked, after handling the game, to write a group story
with the theme “Christmas in India” in which the game characters would be included and
the 5-year-old children to draw individually, with the same theme, a representation of
what they had played. The 5-year-olds understood the intention better, perhaps because
the 10-year-olds were already familiar with TOK, and were able, despite not seeing the
characters in order to copy them, to draw all the elements included in the game, one of
them represented even in its design, the ﬂute notes. One of the problems they mentioned,
in both groups, was the time it took the character to disappear when they disconnected
the block. Among the 5-year-olds was a child with special needs, who had a hard time
ﬁguring out how to connect the block so he needed help at ﬁrst; however, although he
had this kind of difﬁculties, he realized that the representation of the character in the
block was the same that appeared in the graphic environment, which brought him visible
satisfaction.
Fig. 5. Field experiment
In general, the game was very well accepted by both children and educators. The
report in both groups on the way they played and how they observed/interpreted the
interactions between the characters was revealing that bonds were created between the
children, which, in the long run, may even improve their social behaviours. Note that
family and school environments determine children’s narrative discourse. One of the
children reported family experiences around the characters in the game. According to
this, the snake represented a member of the family and, the interaction of the snake with
the elephant, led her to say, in a group, that … she was going to prison for having made
the elephant pass out.
5
Conclusion
Creating interactive solutions using technologies for the development of tangible inter-
faces is an asset for cognitive development in children of different age groups. The
development of the narrative supported by these supports allows children to enhance
communication, discourse and the emotional and affective relationship between them.
For this project, an attempt was made to create a physical interaction that could be
represented graphically in order to engage social and cognitive development. The use
of features and details of some existing technologies allows, with some creativity, to

MOBEYBOU
347
develop applications for which they were not foreseen or which for that purpose have
not been developed until now.
In this project, an attempt was made to create an alternative to a method previously
developed, in order to make it ﬂexible and scalable, and simultaneously compatible with
the reduced cost for which it is intended. For this, a widely disseminated technology,
Bluetooth®, was used, so that it could be applied to a game engine without the need
to introduce “adapters” and other types of readers. An attempt was made to adopt a
method that would somehow revolutionize the educational games industry, to create
a triangulation to determine the position of Bluetooth® devices, but no results were
obtained that would allow to obtain a precise location. This gave way to a more simpliﬁed
form, in which interaction in a graphic environment is achieved only by the proximity
of physical objects, fulﬁlling the purpose of the study.
Due to the characteristics of the new Bluetooth® devices, some difﬁculties were
found in the integration between the operating systems, namely Windows 10, and the
Unity game engine. The use of a system such as the Universal Windows Platform is
very reductive in the sense that one does not understand why one has to use a single
platform and different from other systems to access the peripherals of a computer, such
as Bluetooth®. Since Unity allows us to create games for different operating systems, we
would expect that there would be no difﬁculties when you want to use a game engine for
Windows 10. On the other hand, the characteristics of RSSI of Bluetooth® Low Energy
do not allow the location of devices in a small space, although it is possible to infer
about the relative proximity between two devices. This raises some doubts in studies
on indoor location even when other types of distances are involved and other types of
sensors may be associated, such as accelerometers and gyroscopes, which for this case
were not considered due to the associated cost. Some other methods, beside Kalman
ﬁltering, should be tested, namely MARS, CMARS and/or RCMARS, to improve the
readings of Bluetooth® RSSI values.
The prototype met some limitations; therefore, some limitations were found in the
way the block casing was built, namely in the way the on and off button was developed.
The children experienced some difﬁculties in the connection phase of the blocks. This
was evident by the child with special needs. In developing the prototype on a 3D printer
is denoted a lack of rigor and many imperfections associated with the actual printing,
although in this way it was possible to quickly create a working prototype. Due to the
size of the battery, the prototype was slightly larger than what was expected, compared
to the blocks of the previous TOK project.
There are some improvements and modiﬁcations that can be made to the blocks,
namely in the way they connect and disconnect. One of the proposals would be the
integration of a capacitive sensor that would allow to connect the block through touch.
Regarding the size of the block, it could be improved by choosing a battery of different
capacity, which in turn changes to a different size.
From these ﬁrst tests it is possible to prove the functioning of this prototype, even
if the graphic environment is not prepared for these blocks. In this sense, it would be
necessary to adapt the game for the use of these blocks and to elaborate the exploratory
tests again to draw conclusions. The same is true with the number of characters, that

348
H. B. Lopes et al.
is, the number of blocks should be greater because one of the children’s remarks was
exactly the reduced number of characters in relation to the other game, TOK.
Although conclusive results on the use of neural networks for the location of the
blocks were not obtained, the prototype allows to compare a group of a certain age
to another group of players with another age. By recording the proximity between the
blocks and the relationships in which children use them, one can, in some way, create
relationships between groups of children with and without special needs, for example.
This method can help to understand the level of narrative development between classes
with identical or diversiﬁed characteristics and even among children of different ages.
Acknowledgments. This work was funded by projects “NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000042”,
“NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000045” and “POCI-01-02B7-FEDER-053284”, supported by North-
ern Portugal Regional Operational Programme (Norte2020), under the Portugal 2020 Partnership
Agreement, through the European Regional Development Fund (FEDER). It was also funded by
national funds, through the FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia and FCT/MCTES in
the scope of the project “UIDB/05549/2020”.
References
1. Fein, G.: Pretend play: creativity and consciousness. In: Gorlitz, P., Wohlwill, J. (eds.)
Curiosity, Imagination, and Play, pp. 281–304. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc., Hillsdale
(1987)
2. Russ, S.: Development of creative processes in children. In: Runco, M. (ed.) Creativity from
Childhood Through Adulthood: The Developmental Issues, vol. 72, pp. 31–42. Jossey-Bass,
San Francisco (1996)
3. Russ, S.: Affect and Creativity: The Role of Affect and Play in the Creative Process. Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Inc., Hillsdale (1993)
4. Singer, D.L., Singer, J.: The House of Make-Believe. Harvard University Press, Cambridge
(1990)
5. Liebennan, J.N.: Playfulness: Its Relationship to Imagination and Creativity. Academic, New
York (1977)
6. Christie, J., Johnson, E.: The role of play in social-intellectual development. Rev. Educ. Res.
53(93–1), 15 (1983)
7. Singer, J.L., Singer, D.L.: Television, Imagination, and Aggression. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Inc., Hillsdale (1981)
8. Morais, J.: L’Art de Lire. Odile Jacob, Paris (1994)
9. Sylla, C., Pereira, I.S.P., Coutinho, C.P., Branco, P.: Digital manipulatives as Scaffolds for
Preschoolers 2019; Language development. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. 4(3), 439–449
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/TETC.2015.2500099
10. Meltz, B.F.: Pretend play enriches development. Boston Globe, Boston; Section C: 1 (1999)
11. Cassell, J., Ryokai, K.: Making space for voice: technologies to support children’s fantasy
and storytelling. Pers. Ubiquit. Comput. 5(3), 169–190 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1007/PL0
0000018
12. Peterson, C., McCabe, A.: Developmental Psycholinguistics: Three Ways of Looking at a
Child’s Narrative. Plenum, New York (1983)
13. Rogoff, T.: Apprenticeship in Thinking: Cognitive Development in Social Context. Oxford
University Press, Oxford (1990)

MOBEYBOU
349
14. Topping, K.: Cooperative learning and peer tutoring: an overview. Psychologist 5(4), 151–157
(1992)
15. Wood, D., O’Malley, C.: Collaborative learning between peers: an overview. Educ. Psychol.
Pract. 11(4), 4–9 (1996)
16. Barfurth, M.A.: Understanding the collaborative learning process in a technology rich
environment: the case of children’s disagreements. In: Proceedings of CSCL 1995 (1995)
17. O’Malley, C.: Designing computer systems to support peer learning. Eur. J. Psychol. Educ.
VII(4), 339–352 (1992)
18. Cottam, M., Wray, K.: Sketching tangible interfaces: creating an electronic palette for the
design community. IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 29(3), 90–95 (2009)
19. Marshall, P.: Do tangible interfaces enhance learning? In: Proceedings of TEI 2007, pp. 163–
170 (2007)
20. Piaget, J.: The Origins of Intelligence in Children. University Press, New York (1952)
21. Goncu, A.: Development of intersubjectivity in the dyadic play of preschoolers. Early
Childhood Res. Q. 8, 99–116 (1993)
22. Cassell, J.: Towards a model of technology and literacy development: story listening systems.
J. Appl. Dev. Psychol. 25(1), 75–105 (2004)
23. Hutton, J.S., et al.: Story time turbocharger? Child engagement during shared reading and
cerebellar activation and connectivity in preschool-age children listening to stories. PLoS One
12(5), 1–20 (2017)
24. Bluetooth® SIG, Bluetooth® 5 Core Speciﬁcation See. https://www.bluetooth.com/specifica
tions/bluetooth-core-specification.
25. Raghavan, A.N., Ananthapadmanaban, H., Sivamurugan, M.S., Ravindran, B.: Accurate
mobile robot localization in indoor environments using Bluetooth®. In: Proceedings - IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 4391–4396 (2010). https://doi.
org/10.1109/ROBOT.2010.5509232
26. Simon, H., Robert, H.: Bluetooth tracking without discoverability. In: LoCA 2009: The 4th
International Symposium on Location and Context Awareness, May 2009
27. Anastasi, G., Bandelloni, R., Conti, M., Delmastro, F., Gregori, E., Mainetto, G.: Experiment-
ing an indoor Bluetooth-based positioning service. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, April 2003, pp. 480–483 (2003)
28. Bargh, M., Groote, R.: Indoor localization based on response rate of bluetooth inquiries. In:
Proceedings of the First ACM International Workshop on Mobile Entity Localization and
Tracking in GPS-Less Environments, September 2008
29. Jevring, M., Groote, R., Hesselman, C.: Dynamic optimization of Bluetooth networks for
indoor localization. In: First International Workshop on Automated and Autonomous Sensor
Networks (2008)
30. Huang, A.: The use of Bluetooth in Linux and location aware computing. Master of Science
dissertation (2005)
31. Bruno,R.,Delmastro,F.:DesignandanalysisofaBluetooth-basedindoorlocalizationsystem.
In: Conti, M., Giordano, S., Gregori, E., Olariu, S. (eds.) PWC 2003. LNCS, vol. 2775,
pp. 711–725. Springer, Heidelberg (2003). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-39867-7_66
32. Hallberg, J., Nilsson, M., Synnes, K.: Positioning with Bluetooth. In: Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Telecommunications, vol. 2, no. 23, pp. 954–958 (2003)
33. Pandya,D.,Jain,R.,Lupu,E.:Indoorlocationestimationusingmultiplewirelesstechnologies.
In: The 14th IEEE Proceedings on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, vol.
3, pp. 2208–2212, August 2003
34. Bahl, P., Padmanabhan, V.N.: RADAR: an in-building RF-based user location and tracking
system. In: Proceedings of IEEE Infocom 2000, pp. 775–784, March 2000
35. Yang, Z., Zhou, Z., Liu, Y.: From RSSI to CSI: indoor localization via channel response.
ACM Comput. Surv. (CSUR) 46(2), 25 (2013)

350
H. B. Lopes et al.
36. Ladd, A.M., Bekris, K.E., Rudys, A., Kavraki, L.E., Wallach, D.S.: Robotics-based location
sensing using wireless ethernet. Wirel. Netw. 11(1–2), 189–204 (2005)
37. Kumar, P., Reddy, L., Varma, S.: Distance measurement and error estimation scheme for RSSI
based localization in wireless sensor networks. In: 2009 Fifth IEEE Conference on Wireless
Communication and Sensor Networks (WCSN), pp. 1–4. IEEE (2009)
38. Xiao, J., Wu, K., Yi, Y., Wang, L., Ni, L.M.: Pilot: passive device-free indoor localization
using channel state information. In: 2013 IEEE 33rd international conference on Distributed
computing systems (ICDCS), pp. 236–245. IEEE (2013)
39. Altini, M., Brunelli, D., Farella, E., Benini, L.: Bluetooth indoor localization with multi-
ple neural networks. In: 2010 5th IEEE International Symposium on Wireless Pervasive
Computing (ISWPC), pp. 295–300. IEEE (2010)
40. Liu, H., Darabi, H., Banerjee, P., Liu, J.: Survey of wireless indoor positioning techniques
and systems. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part C (Appl. Rev.) 37(6), 1067–1080 (2007)
41. Zafari, F., Gkelias, A., Leung, K.K.: A survey of indoor localization systems and technologies.
IEEECommun.Surv.Tutor.21(3),2568–2599(2019).https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2019.
2911558
42. Grewal, M.S., Andrews, A.P.: Applications of Kalman ﬁltering in aerospace 1960 to the
present [historical perspectives]. IEEE Control Syst. Mag. 30(3), 69–78 (2010). https://doi.
org/10.1109/MCS.2010.936465

Model of Acquiring Transversal Competences
Among Students on the Example of the Analysis
of Communication Competences
Marek Goli´nski
, Małgorzata Spychała(B)
, and Marek Mi˛adowicz
Poznan University of Technology, Poznan, Poland
malgorzata.spychala@put.poznan.pl
Abstract. The article presents a model of a method of accelerating the acqui-
sition of transversal competences by students, based on the example of commu-
nication competences. The analysis uses the MARS method to create the best
model describing the impact of various variables on accelerating the acquisition
of communication competences. The following variables were taken into account:
the rank of the training method in the developed matrix, the number of students
and the weighted average acceleration rate of acquiring the remaining transversal
competences, i.e. teamwork, entrepreneurship and creativity of a given student.
The results conﬁrm that our new method accelerates the acquisition of transversal
competences by students. This method can be used by various higher education
institutions in different countries. The developed results can be used in the cur-
riculum of already planned vocational courses and to develop the skills required
by employers in various positions and in different professions.
Keywords: Transversal competences · Communication skills · Modelling data
mining MARS · Competence management optimization
1
Competences in Modern Economy
Dynamically developing economy imposes constant changes in the functioning of enter-
prises. Maintaining a competitive position on the market, which is dominated by automa-
tion, digitalization, Big Data and Industry 4.0, forces business owners to implement
changes in personnel management. Narrow specialization and technical competences,
the scope of which is very diverse, currently play a less signiﬁcant role. Much more
required and valued are skills related to the speed of adaptation to the requirements
of the enterprise and market environment. The growth of both headcount and wages
in the last few decades has been particularly intensive in case of jobs requiring high
mathematical and social skills (Deming 2017; Borghans et al. 2014). Teamwork ability,
which is indispensable nowadays, requires the involvement of social skills. This trans-
lates into reduced coordination costs, enabling employees to specialize and cooperate
more effectively (Karabarbounis and Neiman 2014; Sadłowska-Wrzesi´nska et al. 2017).
Among competences of future employees on the researched markets, certain compe-
tency groups dominate, including language and communication competences (Pater et al.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 351–365, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_32

352
M. Goli´nski et al.
2019). The need to use communication competences occurs in all working conditions
(Babbar-Sebens et al. 2019; Majchak et al. 2019), at all levels of management (Bjeki´c
et al. 2015) and using all available techniques and conditions (Westerman et al. 2018).
Communication competences and their development, e.g. by simulating real working
conditions, is both an effective pedagogical strategy for the development of communi-
cation competences in preparation for internships or support in adaptation for recently
recruited employees (Barker et al. 2018).
Improving and developing communication competences is also an important psycho-
logical aspect in motivating employees and increasing their commitment to work (Chen
2017). Research conﬁrms the relationship between character traits (self-sufﬁciency,
resilience, optimism) and factors required in the workplace, e.g. keeping safe (safety
compliance, participation in safety), while improving the role of communication
competences (He et al. 2019, Gabryelewicz et al. 2017, Lyon et al. 2018).
Both in the labor market and at the education stage, particular attention is paid to
ensuring that employees meet the enterprise requirements related to currently desired
and forecasted competences (Graczyk-Kucharska et al. 2018; McCoshan et al. 2008;
Valente et al. 2014). In order to guarantee effective human resource management, it is
important to correlate company goals, efﬁcient management of human teams and mutual
motivation, trust and development of communication competences (Luong et al. 2019).
Issues related to effective communication within the team enable the implementation
of the most important functions of the organization, such as knowledge sharing in teams
(Del Giudice et al. 2013) and efﬁcient management of innovative projects (Sousa and
Rocha 2018).
All the above examples indicate very high practical signiﬁcance of communication
competences and justify the principal objective and subject of the article, which is: to
characterize communication as a very important transversal competence and to examine,
using statistical analysis, the relationship between selected transversal competences such
as: communication skills, entrepreneurship, creativity and teamwork.
These analyzes preceded research focused on determination of educational methods
that positively affect the development of transversal competences and factors which char-
acterize the surveyed students and inﬂuence the development of competences (Szafra´nski
2017; Graczyk-Kucharska et al. 2019; Szafra´nski et al. 2019).
2
Characteristics of Selected Transversal Competences
Engineers no longer manage their daily tasks with plain substance expertise; instead
they must be adept at communication, collaboration, networking, feedback provision
and reception, teamwork, lifelong learning, and cultural understanding (Lappalainen
2009). Therefore, technical competences are no longer sufﬁcient to meet the require-
ments of the modern labor market (Platonoff 2011; Mumford et al. 2000; Christensen
et al. 2006; Whetten and Cameron 2011). Individuals must also develop transversal com-
petences, i.e. general or interdisciplinary competences, required for different positions
and occupations, hence their transversal character (European Parliament and Council
18 December 2006/962/EC). Key competences were expressed in the European refer-
ence framework, which was inherited from the development of OECD, UNESCO and

Model of Acquiring Transversal Competences Among Students on the Example
353
the Member States themselves (Pepper 2011). The European reference framework has
deﬁned key competences as knowledge, skills and attitudes relevant in the context of:
communication in the mother tongue, communication in foreign languages, mathemati-
cal skills and basic competences in science and technology, digital competences, learning
skills, social competences, the capacity for initiative and entrepreneurship, as well as
cultural awareness and expression. All of the above emphasize critical thinking, initia-
tive, problem solving, risk assessment, decision making and constructive management
of emotions (Pepper 2011).
As part of the project The acceleration method of development of transversal com-
petences in the students’ practical training process, four transversal competences were
selected from those proposed by the European Parliament: entrepreneurship, creativity,
communication skills and teamwork. These competences are required for various jobs,
also used to identify key competences for these jobs, called reference models (Spychała
et al. 2017; Graczyk-Kucharska et al. 2018). These are the most frequently mentioned
competences by employers in various countries as key requirements on the labor market
(Szafra´nski et al. 2017a, b).
3
Characteristics of Communication Competences
Canale and Swain (1981) and Canale (1983) understood communicative competence
as a synthesis of an underlying system of knowledge and skill needed for communi-
cation. Communication competence is the ability to convey thoughts, information, and
intentions. It is the ability to use verbal and non-verbal competences to achieve desired
goals in a manner adequate to the context. An indispensable element of communication
competence is the ability to establish and maintain relationships with people, empathy
and assertiveness (Morreale et al. 2007).
Communication competence involves the quality of communication, which is com-
monly composed of the elements of appropriateness and effectiveness (Spitzberg and
Cupach 1984; Wiemann and Kelly 1981). An interpersonally effective person is the one
who accomplishes his goals in contact with others, while doing so in an adequate and
appropriate manner in a given social context. It depends on many factors, such as: atti-
tude toward the interlocutor, personal and cultural preferences, his interests, attitudes
and goals, clearly expressed intention through the choice of verbal and non-verbal sig-
nals. Effective communication is often cited as one of the most important attributes of a
successful manager or supervisor (DiMeglio 2007), the most central qualiﬁcations in the
workforce (Curtis et al. 1999; Hawkins and Fillion 1999) and linked with occupational
success (Spitzberg and Cupach 1989; Grifﬁth 2002).
It is necessary to develop communication competences which help shape relation-
ships between company employees and the environment, build an assertive attitude,
better solve problems and take on new challenges in life and in cooperation with other
people in the team. The development of communication competences offers signiﬁcant
value added when hiring new employees and allows for maintaining social cohesion,
which justiﬁes the necessity of lifelong learning, also in relation to adapting to changes
and participating in social life. By expanding communication competences, the individ-
ual becomes a conscious and responsible entity, choosing the means and predicting the
effects of his own actions (Dickson and Hargie 2004).

354
M. Goli´nski et al.
4
Methodology
4.1
ACT Erasmus Method
Figure 1 shows the main stages of the ATC ERASMUS method, which essence is the
development of the key competences of students, supervised by the team, including the
authors of this article. This process consists of 7 steps. The ﬁrst stage was to analyze
the teaching methods of transversal competences and practical teaching methods. 88
methods of improving transversal competences were selected. Next, the requirements
of employers regarding key competences were identiﬁed. After developing a matrix of
dependencies between practical teaching methods and teaching transversal competences,
models of processes improving transversal competences were designed and tested. These
processes were tested at universities in Poland, Finland, Slovenia and Slovakia.
After testing, all comments from testers were collected, results of testing process
models were developed, and conclusions were drawn. The next stage was the selection
of the most effective teaching processes and their application. The ﬁnal result of the
project was the development of the ACT Erasmus guide, which can be used at every
university, improving the transversal competences of students as well as in enterprises,
shaping social competences of employees. The presented model is a proof that coopera-
tion between Business and Education began. Educational Institutions have increasingly
begun to address the needs of employers in developing the learning process (Goli´nski
et al. 2016).
In the case of the ATC project, the main focus was on the study of accelerating the
acquisition of selected transversal competences: entrepreneurship, group work, commu-
nication skills and creativity, which are important for enterprises and constantly sought
after on the labor market in various positions (Szafra´nski et al. 2017b). In this study, the
analysis of acceleration in acquiring transversal competences (communication skills)
using the MARS method was performed. Applying the MARS method involves scan-
ning the space of all input and output values and relationships between these values.
Further base functions are added to the model of reality described by variables, selected
from the set of all allowable functions, in such a way as to maximize the overall level
of adjusting the model to the described reality. Such behavior leads to ﬁnding the most
important independent variables and the most important interactions between variables
(Hastie et al. 2009).
4.2
Multivariate Adaptive Regression (MARS)
Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) is a special regression method used
to solve regression and classiﬁcation problems in order to ﬁnd the values of dependent
variables on the basis of independent variables. The basic advantages of the MARS
method compared to other methods is the fact that its use does not require any speciﬁc
and restrictive special assumptions about the functional connections between dependent
and independent variables. An important feature of MARS is the nature of the variables
it operates on - they can have a nonparametric form and a multidimensional range. When
developing a database for calculations at the input to the analysis, no list of assumptions
about the type of dependencies between independent and dependent variables is required.

Model of Acquiring Transversal Competences Among Students on the Example
355
Fig. 1. Method model of processes developing transversal competences within practical train-
ing process http://www.awt.org.pl/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Guide-for-implementation-O8-
FINAL-ENG.pdf.
Thanks to these MARS features, the method is very useful in applying to inferences using
large amounts of various data.
The MARS method is often interchangeably used with methods using an artiﬁcial
neural network imitating a biological neural network (Merolla et al. 2014). Both methods
are successfully used in social research and technical sciences because as accurate tools
they allow the identiﬁcation of many, even very small dependencies, and ultimately
the development of an over-ﬁt model. The MARS method meets the requirements of
multi-criterion analysis thanks to operating on a large number of relationships between
data and based on it drawing conclusions which independent variables have the greatest
impact on the dependent variable. The studies cited in the article compared which of the
analyzed factors have the greatest impact and connection with communication skills. On
this basis, a statistical model was obtained showing the best reﬂection of reality.
The research also referred to the conclusions of similar studies on transversal
competences regarding entrepreneurship and creativity (Graczyk-Kucharska et al. 2019).
4.3
Collection of Data
For the purpose of the analysis, data have been collected from testing ﬁve processes
at six universities (Poznan University of Technology, Centria Ostrobotnia University
of Applied Sciences, University of Maribor, University in Banska Bystrica, Wrocław
University of Economics, Czestochowa University of Technology) from four European
Union countries (Poland, Finland, Slovakia and Slovenia). Research conducted under

356
M. Goli´nski et al.
the ATC project assumes that there are at least three methods of practical education
within the process. The test on accelerating the acquisition of transversal competences
was conducted on a relatively small sample of 113 students using a total of 10 different
methods of practical education of students tested from February to October 2017. The
development and collection of data on the pace of acceleration of acquiring transver-
sal students’ competences, guidelines were deﬁned in the ATC project as basis for a
harmonized way of data collection in the different countries. This also applies to a sit-
uation where the same methods were used at the same time. The students, on the basis
of their self-assessment, determined the extent to which the level of their skills and,
consequently, of the researched competences had increased after the application of each
method. A sixstage scale from 0 to 5 was addressed in the study. It is assumed that in the
case of transversal competences, the level of possessed skills, shaping the competence,
cannot be reduced. The degree of change expresses the rate of change perceived by the
students. After testing the process, in addition to the above data, information was also
collected on the number of students per group, the year of study or the cultural factors
that may inﬂuence the acceleration of the acquisition of the transversal competences in
different EU countries. In this case, secondary data were used based on Hofstede factors
(Hofstede 1984). For modelling, in a ﬁrst step, the analyses selected basic data for the
development of a model for accelerating the acquisition of transversal competences. One
of the transversal competences, i.e., communicativeness, was selected as the researched
independent variable applied by MARS algorithm on 100 data considering 26 inputs.
The matrix of educational methods takes into account the research conducted in the 4
partner countries on the importance of transversal competences among employers (N
135). The expert method (Szafra´nski et al. 2017a, b) was used to evaluate each of the
85 educational methods by assessing the impact of a particular method on the growth of
each of the analyzed transversal competences (Graczyk-Kucharska et al. 2019).
4.4
A Subsection Sample
Communication is a very important transversal competence. In the ﬁrst part of the article,
based on numerous scientiﬁc papers, its signiﬁcance and impact on other competences
sought on the labor market were demonstrated. The MARS statistical method used in the
study allows estimating values from a certain range of data, enabling both additive and
interactive effects of predictors that determine the variable response (Weber et al. 2012;
Akyıldız et al. 2015). An important issue when determining the form of a nonparametric
regression model while using MARS is the submodel portfolio assessment to select the
best submodel with the appropriate number of nodes relative to a subset of predictors. In
typical regression modeling, when the model has a large number of independent (predic-
tive) variables, and there is no accurate information on the exact functional relationships
between variables, many criteria of choosing the optimal model are difﬁcult to deter-
mine. In the analyzed study, in order to ﬁnd the simplest model which most accurately
estimates the adjustment to reality, the number of parameters was sought based on the
data compiled in the table (see Table 1).
Two models were used for data analysis: the ﬁrst based on multiple (linear) regression
and the second based on MARS multivariate adaptive regression.

Model of Acquiring Transversal Competences Among Students on the Example
357
Table 1. Sample variables used in research.
Type of variable
Symbol
Variable
Dependent variable
Yk
Avarage acceleration of Communicativeness
Independent variable
X2
No. of student
Independent variable
X3
Rank of the method in matrix
Independent variable
X4
No. of the method in the process
Independent variable
X5
No. of the process
Independent variable
X6
Size of tested group
Independent variable
X7
Number of meetings
Independent variable
X8
Number of test groups
Independent variable
X9
Duration of testing (min.)
Independent variable
X10
Average acceleration of Creativity
Independent variable
X11
Average acceleration of Entrepreneurship
Independent variable
X12
Average acceleration of Teamwork
Independent variable
X13
Power Distance (Hoffstede)
Independent variable
X14
Individualism (Hoffstede)
Independent variable
X15
Masculinity (Hoffstede)
Independent variable
X16
Uncertainty Avoidance (Hoffstede)
Independent variable
X17
Long Term Orientation (Hoffstede)
Independent variable
X18
Indulgence (Hoffstede)
Table 2 describes the results of the linear dependence model. This model shows
that the increase in communication acceleration is most closely related to teamwork
(X12) with a factor of 0.69, followed by X10, X11, and X5. Very weak relationship was
demonstrated for variables X6 and X7.
Based on descriptive statistics for multiple regression, the relationship between the
predicted raw data and the dependent variable was also determined - the results are
shown in Fig. 2.
One of the values characterizing the ﬂow of linear regression is the R squared coefﬁ-
cient, which is a measure of the model ﬁt, i.e. the given model explains 88%. Variability
of the phenomenon. Summarizing the results of data analysis and assessing the useful-
ness of the model, it should be noted that multiple regression results conﬁrm the ﬁt of the
model. The r square factor is a measure of the quality of the ﬁt of the model. It deﬁnes
what percentage of one variable explains the variability of the other variable.
The second data analysis was based on Multivariate adaptive regression MARS.
Table 3 contains the values characterizing the numerical measures of the regression
model, while Table 4 shows independent variables based on which the model can be
built. The most important factor that measures the model ﬁt, the R squared factor, which

358
M. Goli´nski et al.
Table 2. Summary of dependent variable regression.
N=339
b*
Standard 
error b*
b 
Standard 
error b
t(332)
p 
Free indicator
-0,504898
0,354091
-1,42590
0,154837
X12
0,690822
0,036091
0,703683
0,036736
19,14114
0,00000
X11
0,129498
0,041804
0,132943
0,042916
3,09774
0,002116
X10
0,134745
0,041641
0,139706
0,043174
3,23587
0,001335
X5
0,122700
0,052806
0,095001
0,040885
2,32360
0,020750
X6
0,074444
0,052066
0,004452
0,003114
1,42980
0,153714
X7
-0,024969
0,019060
-0,053617
0,040930
-1,30998
0,191110
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Dependent variable
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Raw predictions
0,95 Confidence interval
Fig. 2. Relationship of the predicted raw data to the dependent variable Yk.
is the measure of the model ﬁt, equals 0.88, which explains in a highly satisfying way
the 88% variability of the phenomenon.
Based on the obtained data and taking into account descriptive (independent)
variables that had rational measures of partial correlation, the following model was
obtained:
Yk = 3,16027669629377e+000 + 6,34980317952070e-001*max(0; X12-
3,14285714285714e+000) - 7,99184901257433e-001*max(0; 
3,14285714285714e+000-X12) + 2,96467637047732e-001*max(0; X11-
3,13163349859628e+000) - 2,37216855731993e-001*max(0; 
3,25515368953512e+000-X10) 

Model of Acquiring Transversal Competences Among Students on the Example
359
Table 3. Numeric quality measures Multivariate adaptive regression MARS.
Variable type
Value
Average (dependent variable)
3,29
Standard deviation (dependent variable)
1,15
Average (independent variable)
3,29
Standard deviation (independent variable) 1,08
Average (the rest)
0,00
Standard deviation (the rest)
0,40
Coefﬁcient of determination R-squared
0,88
Coefﬁcient of determination R-squared
Adjusted
0,87
Table 4. Coefﬁcients underlying the model’s construction (cell highlighting indicates max base
function)
Coefficients, nodes 
and base functions 
Nodes 
Yk 
Nodes 
X10 
Nodes 
X11 
Nodes 
X11 
Free factor 
3,160277
Factor No. 1 
0,634980
Factor No. 2 
-0,799185
-3,142857
Factor No. 3 
0,296468
-3,131633
-3,142857
Factor No. 4 
-0,237217
-3,255154
 
 
The obtained model and the results indicate that only the variables X10, X11 and
X12 are statistically signiﬁcant, while the remaining variables should be removed from
the regression model.
The resulting model indicates the key role played by the strengthening effect in the
teaching process between the mutual impact of accelerating the acquisition of speciﬁc
key competences. Accelerating the acquisition of communicative competence simulta-
neously inﬂuences the acquisition of other competences – in the described study mainly
the competences in the area of entrepreneurship, creativity and teamwork.
Taking into account the results obtained in Figs. 3, 4 and 5, the correlation between
the communicativeness competency and the other competences studied is presented.
The obtained results (Tables 2, 3 and 4) indicate that both based on multiple (linear)
regression and multivariate MARS adaptive regression, models can be developed that
with statistical reliability (identical value of determination coefﬁcient R2 = 0.88) reﬂect
the ﬂow of the studied phenomenon, conﬁrming the assumptions of the article.

360
M. Goli´nski et al.
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
Avarage acceleration of Communicativeness
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
Avarage acceleratio of Creativity
Fig. 3. Scatter plot of the dependent variable Yk against the independent X10.
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
Avarage acceleration of Communicativeness
-1,0
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
Avarage acceleration of Entrepreneurship
Fig. 4. Scatter plot of the dependent variable Yk against the independent X11.

Model of Acquiring Transversal Competences Among Students on the Example
361
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
Avarage acceleration of Communicativeness
-0,5
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
5,5
Avarage acceleration of Teamwork
Fig. 5. Scatter plot of the dependent variable Yk against the independent X12.
5
Conclusions and Outlook
The article indicates only a few results of research on the issue of transversal com-
petences, relationship between communication skills and other competences and their
importance for the functioning of the enterprise.
The choice of the presented analyzes and sample results was to indicate the possibil-
ities of managing employee competences in resource management of an enterprise. The
research results presented in the article conﬁrmed the assumptions made in the article
that it is possible to develop a multiple regression linear model indicating statistically
signiﬁcant relationships between transversal competences:
Yk = 3,16027669629377e+000 + 6,34980317952070e-001*max(0; X11-
3,14285714285714e+000) - 7,99184901257433e-001*max(0; 
3,14285714285714e+000-X12) + 2,96467637047732e-001*max(0; X11-
3,13163349859628e+000) - 2,37216855731993e-001*max(0; 
3,25515368953512e+000-X10)
The obtained model has a high value of the determination coefﬁcient R2 (0.88),
which conﬁrms its correlation with the analyzed data. The model does not take into
account many variables, so it does not show a complex description. From the analyzed 17
independent variables, only three were included in the model, also related to transversal
competences (X10, X11, X12). In case of the obtained model, signiﬁcant measures of
partial correlations were also shown.
The stronger the correlation among the individual data analyzed, the more difﬁcult
it is to change one variable without changing the other. By introducing modeling, it is

362
M. Goli´nski et al.
difﬁcult to estimate the relationship between each independent variable and the depen-
dent variable independently, because when the independent variables are correlated they
change in accordance. High correlation of independent data can negatively impact the
correct inference for modeling.
The practical aspects of using the results obtained are associated with both statistical
conﬁrmation of the assumptions and representativeness of the study group. The obtained
results were entirely based on data from studies on students entering the labor market.
The ability to use the solutions described in the article related to accelerating the
acquisition of transversal competences has a very signiﬁcant impact on the systemic and
innovative approach in resource management of an enterprise. This applies in particular
to the transversal competence analyzed in the article, because a strong emphasis is
placed on indicating the importance of the problem of communication between labor
market entities and the vocational education system (Don-levy et al. 2016; Miranda
et al. 2017). The importance of improving transversal competences is recognized and
taken into account in the projects implemented since 2010 by the Poznan University of
Technology.
To sum up, certain attention should be paid to the need of simultaneous analysis of
data on education methods and tools, and the needs of the economy, which to the greatest
extent builds its development on human resources. When implementing activities in the
ﬁeld of analysis and teaching of transversal competences, and as a result prevention in
competency management, it is necessary to take into account a time horizon of sev-
eral years, and to rely on the veriﬁed needs of managers in particular enterprises. The
effectiveness of teaching transversal competences depends not only on the used meth-
ods but also on the content being taught, which must be created in cooperation with the
university’s economic environment (Spychała et al. 2019; Szafra´nski 2017).
The results described in the article have impact on both the scientiﬁc and the practical
area. The research method, using the MARS tool, conﬁrmed the theoretical assumptions
related to the interdependence of the analyzed transversal competences. Regardless of the
theoretical approach, the results obtained gave grounds for modiﬁcation of educational
programs implemented at the university, which included the method of accelerating
the acquisition of transversal competences. In further research, it would be important
to examine additional factors that could have impact on accelerating the acquisition of
transversal competences, and the practical use of the developed model would be to apply
it in relation with raising employees’ competences in enterprises as a part of professional
development.
References
Akyıldız, E., Gebizlio˘glu, Ö.L., Karasözen, B., U˘gur, Ö., Weber, G.W.: Recent advances in applied
and computational mathematics: ICACM-IAM-METU. J. Comput. Appl. Math. 259(15), 327–
328 (2015)
Babbar-Sebens, M., et al.: Training water resources systems engineers to communicate: acting on
observations from on-the-job practitioners. J. Prof. Issues Eng. Educ. Pract. 45(4) (2019)
Barker, M., Fejzic, J., Mak, A.S.: Simulated learning for generic communication competency
development: a case study of Australian postgraduate pharmacy students. High. Educ. Res.
Dev. 37(6), 1109–1123 (2018)

Model of Acquiring Transversal Competences Among Students on the Example
363
Bjeki´c, M., Bjeki´c, D., Zlati´c, L.: Communication competence of practicing engineers and
engineering students: education and evaluation. Int. J. Eng. Educ. Part B 31(1), 368–376 (2015)
Borghans, L., Ter Weel, B., Weinberg, B.A.: People skills and the labormarket outcomes of
underrepresented groups. Ind. Labor Relat. Rev. 67(2), 287–334 (2014)
Canale, M., Swain, M.A.: Theoretical framework for communicative competence. In: Palmer, A.,
Groot, P., Trosper, G. (eds.) The Construct Validation of Test of Communicative Competence,
pp. 31–36 (1981)
Canale, M.: From communicative competence to communicative language pedagogy. In: Richards,
J.C., Schmidt, R.W. (eds.) Language and Communication, pp. 2–27. Longman, London (1983)
Chen, S.-L.: Cross-level effects of high-commitment work systems on work engagement: the
mediating role of psychological capital. Asia Pac. J. Hum. Resour. 56(3), 384–401 (2017)
Christensen, J., Henriksen, L.B., Kolmos, A.: Engineering Science, Skills, and Bildung. Aalborg
University, Denmark (2006)
Croucher, S.M., et al.: A multi-national validity analysis of the self-perceived communication
competence scale. J. Int. Intercultural Commun. 1–12 (2019)
Curtis, D.B., Winsor, J.L., Stephens, R.D.: National preferences in business and communication
education. Commun. Educ. 38, 6–14 (1999)
Del Giudice, M., Della Peruta, M.R., Maggioni, V.: Collective knowledge and organizational rou-
tines within academic communities of practice: an empirical research on science–entrepreneurs.
J. Knowl. Econ. 4(3), 260–278 (2013)
Deming, D.J.: The growing importance of social skills in the labor market. Q. J. Econ. 132(4),
1593–1640 (2017)
DiMeglio, F.: New role for business school research. Business Week Online (2007). http://www.
businessweek.com/stories/2007-08-14/new-role-for-businessschool-researchbusinessweek-
business-news-stock-market-and-ﬁnancial-advice
Donlevy, V., Curtarelli, M., McCoshan, A., Meierkord, A.: Study on Obstacles to Recognition of
Skills and Qualiﬁcations, Final Report, Directorate-General for Employment, Social Affairs
and Inclusion, Luxembourg: Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union (2016)
Gabryelewicz, I., Krupa, P., Sadłowska-Wrzesi´nska, J.: Online measurement of work safety culture
- statement of research. In: MATEC Web of Conferences, vol. 94, p. 06008 (2017)
Goli´nski, M., Mi˛adowicz, M.: Management of employee competencies in resource management
of an enterprise. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Knowledge Management,
ECKM, vol. 1, pp. 405–414 (2019)
Graczyk-Kucharska, M., Szafra´nski, M., Goli´nski, M., Spychała, M., Borsekova, K.: Model of
competency management in the network of production enterprises in industry 4.0-assumptions.
In: Hamrol, A., Grabowska, M., Maletic, D., Woll, R. (eds.) Advances in Manufacturing,
pp. 195–204. Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-68619-6_19
Graczyk-Kucharska, M., Özmen, A., Szafra´nski, M., Weber, G.W., Goli´n´ski, M., Spychała, M.:
Knowledgeacceleratorbytransversalcompetencesandmultivariateadaptiveregressionsplines.
CEJOR 28(2), 645–669 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10100-019-00636-x
Grifﬁth, D.A.: The role of communication competencies in international business relationship
development. J. World Bus. 37(4), 256–265 (2002)
Guo, B.H.W., Yiu, T.W.: Developing leading indicators to monitor the safety conditions of
construction projects. J. Manag. Eng. 32(1) (2016)
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J.: The Elements of Statistical Learning. Springer, New York
(2009)
He, C., Jia, G., McCabe, B., Chen, Y., Sun, J.: Impact of psychological capital on construction
worker safety behavior: communication competence as a mediator. J. Saf. Res. 71(12), 231–241
(2019)

364
M. Goli´nski et al.
Hofstede, G.: Cultural dimensions in management and planning. Asia Pac. J. Manag. 1(2), 81–99
(1984)
http://www.awt.org.pl/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Guide-for-implementation-O8-FINAL-
ENG.pdf
Karabarbounis, L., Neiman, B.: The global decline of the labor share. Q. J. Econ. 129(1), 61–103
(2014)
Lappalainen, P.: Communication as part of the engineering skills set. Eur. J. Eng. Educ. 34(2),
123–129 (2009)
Luong, T.T., Sivarajah, U., Weerakkody, V.: Do agile managed information systems projects fail
due to a lack of emotional intelligence? Inf. Syst. Front. 23(2), 415–433 (2019). https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10796-019-09962-6
Lyon, S., Hon, C., Chan, A., Wong, F., Javed, A.: Relationships among safety climate, safety
behavior, and safety outcomes for ethnic minority construction workers. Int. J. Environ. Res.
Public Health 15(3), 484 (2018)
Majchrzak, J., Goli´nski, M., Mantura, W.: The concept of the qualitology and grey system theory
application in marketing information quality cognition and assessment. Central Eur. J. Oper.
Res. 1–24 (2019). https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007%2Fs10100-019-00635-y.pdf.
Accessed 12 Dec 2019
McCoshan, A., Drozd, A., Nelissen, E., Nevala, A.M.: Beyond the Maastricht Communique:
developments in the opening up of VET pathways and the role of VET in labour market
integration: consolidated ﬁnal report, ECOTEC Research and Consulting, Brussels, Belgium,
European Commission, Directorate General for Education and Culture (2008)
Mikkelson, A.C., York, J.A., Arritola, J.: Communication competence, leadership behaviors, and
employee outcomes in supervisor-employee, relationships business and professional. Commun.
Q. 78(3), 336–354 (2015)
Miranda, S., Orciuoli, F., Loia, V., Sampson, D.: An ontology-based model for competence
management. Data Knowl. Eng. 107, 51–66 (2017)
Morreale, S.P., Spitzberg, B.H., Barge, J.K.: Communication between people, PWN (2007)
Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARSplines). https://www.statsoft.pl/textbook/sta
thome_stat.html?https%3A%2F%2Fwww.statsoft.pl%2Ftextbook%2Fstmars.html.
StatSoft
Electronic Statostic TextBook. Accessed 22 Dec 2019
Mumford, M.D., Marks, M.A., Connelly, S., Zaccaro, S., Reiter-Palmon, R.: Development of
leadership skills: Experience and timing. Leadersh. Q. 11(1), 87–114 (2000)
Özmen, A., Yılmaz, Y., Weber, G.W.: Natural gas consumption forecast with MARS and CMARS
models for residential users. Energy Econ. 70, 357–381 (2018)
Parlament Europejski i Rada 18 grudnia 2006/962/WE
Pater, R., Szkola, J., Kozak, M.: A method for measuring detailed demand for workers’
competences. Econ. Open-Access Open-Assessment E-J. 13(27) 1–29 (2019)
Pepper, D.: Assessing key competences across the curriculum-and Europe. Eur. J. Educ. 46(3),
335–353 (2011)
Platonoff, A.L.: Czas na rozwój. Człowiek, społeczno´s´c, organizacja. Podstawy zrównowa˙zonego
rozwoju w odniesieniu do jednostki, społeczno´sci i organizacji, Master of Business Adminis-
tration, Akademia Leona Ko´zmi´nskiego 1/2011 (116), 2–9 (2011)
Sadłowska-Wrzesi´nska, J., Gabryelewicz, I., Krupa, P.: The use of IT tools for the analysis and
evaluation of psychomotor efﬁciency of employees. In: MATEC Web of Conferences, vol. 94,
p. 06017 (2017)
Sousa, M.J., Rocha, Á.: Skills for disruptive digital business. J. Bus. Res. 94, 257–263 (2018)
Spitzberg, B.H., Cupach, W.R.: Interpersonal Communication Competence. Sage, Beverly Hills
(1984)
Spitzberg, B.H., Cupach, W.R.: Handbook of Interpersonal Competence Research. Springer, New
York (1989)

Model of Acquiring Transversal Competences Among Students on the Example
365
Spychała, M., Szafra´nski, M., Graczyk-Kucharska, M., Goli´nski, M.: The method of designing ref-
erence models of workstations. In: Proceedings of the 18th European Conference on Knowledge
Management, ECKM 2017, pp. 930–939. Academic Conferences and Publishing International
Limited, Barcelona (2017)
Spychała, M., Goli´nski, M., Szafra´nski, M., Graczyk-Kucharska, M.: Competency models as
modern tools in the recruitment process of employees. In: Sargiacomo, M. (ed.) Proceedings
of the 10th European Conference on Intangibles and Intellectual Capital ECIIC 2019, Chieti-
Pescara,Italy,pp.282–291.AcademicConferencesandPublishingInternationalLimited(2019)
Szafra´nski, M., Goli´nski, M., Simi, H.: The acceleration of development of transversal compe-
tences. Centria University of Applied Sciences, Kokkola (2017a)
Szafra´nski, M.: Problem of language used to describe competences in the management of accel-
eration in the creation of knowledge resources in businesses. Procedia Eng. 182, 679–686
(2017)
Szafra´nski, M., Bogurska-Matys, K., Goli´nski, M.: Problems in communication between busi-
nesses and technical education system. Manag. Prod. Eng. Rev. 8(2), 9–18 (2017b)
Szafra´nski, M., Goli´nski, M., Graczyk-Kucharska, M., Spychała, M.: Cooperation of education
and enterprises in improving professional competences - analysis of needs. In: Hamrol, A.,
Grabowska, M., Maletic, D., Woll, R. (eds.) MANUFACTURING 2019. LNME, pp. 155–168.
Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-17269-5_11
Szafra´nski, M.: Threefold nature of competences in enterprise management: a qualitative model.
In: Proceedings of the 20th European Conference on Knowledge Management, Universidade
Europela de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, vol 2, pp. 1006–1015 (2019)
Valente, A.C., Salavisa, I., Lagoa, S.: Education quality and economic performance in Europe.
In: Proceedings of the European Conference on Knowledge Management, ECKM 2014, vol.
3, pp. 1028–1036 (2014)
Weber, G.-W., Batmaz, I., Köksal, G., Taylan, P., Yerlikaya-Özkurt, F.: CMARS: a new contri-
bution to nonparametric regression with multivariate adaptive regression splines supported by
continuous optimization. Inverse Prob. Sci. Eng. 20(3), 371–400 (2012)
Westerman, C.Y.K., Reno, K.M., Heuett, K.B.: Delivering feedback supervisors’ source credibility
and communication competence. Int. J. Bus. Commun. 55(4), 526–556 (2018)
Whetten, D.A., Cameron, K.S.: Developing Management Skills. Prentice Hall/Pearson, Upper
Saddle River (2011)
Wiemann, J.M., Kelly, C.W.: Pragmatics of interpersonal competence. In: Wilder-Mott, C.,
Weakland, J.H. (eds.) Rigor and Imagination: Essays from the Legacy of Gregory Bateson,
pp. 283–298. Praeger, New York (1981)

Mobile Applications in Engineering Based
on the Technology of Augmented Reality
Tetiana Zhylenko
, Vitalii Ivanov(B)
, Ivan Pavlenko
, Nataliia Martynova
,
Yurii Zuban
, and Dmytro Samokhvalov
Sumy State University, 2, Rymskogo-Korsakova Street, Sumy 40007, Ukraine
ivanov@tmvi.sumdu.edu.ua
Abstract. The modern engineering educational environment ensures an exten-
sive use of augmented reality for the successful and deep memorization of graphic
material. There are many platforms for implementing augmented reality technol-
ogy, the most popular of which were analyzed. As a result, the research work
is devoted to the visualization of second-order surfaces and engineering objects.
The article describes the scenario of augmented reality both with QR codes and
authors’ markers. Moreover, the components of the markers and their signiﬁcance
in reproducing the image were described in detail. The proposed methodology
includes a step-by-step approach for using the applications based on augmented
reality for downloading through the public domain. As a result, the examples of
tasks that can be performed using AR were realized. Finally, many markers are
proposed in the article, which can be used in the engineering ﬁeld’s educational
process, especially with the mathematical peculiarities.
Keywords: Web application · Engineering graphics · Second-order Surfaces
1
Introduction
During the second decade, augmented reality (AR) was used in an educational process
in many countries of the world. This technology came into use in business, medicine,
industry, banking, education, and everyday life. Now every person who has a smartphone
has at least one AR-application. Modern children have many applications that make it
possible to combine reality and cartoons, games, stories, and emotions. AR entered the
educational environment ﬁrst in the library business, which now seems natural and not
surprising. Then they began to use it for various games as hints when searching for a
key.
Today, many students and teachers are engaged in using existing projects, but they
also create their applications with and without QR-codes. Each teacher is looking for
more and more assignments for an exciting lesson. Today students cannot be surprised
simply by the encrypted text in the QR-code. Therefore, we decided to create 3D-models
of second-order surfaces and machine-building demands using AR [1]. It diversiﬁes the
lessonbyworkingwithcodeandmasteringanewapplicationandrepresentingsurfacesin
three-dimensional space where you can view an object from different angles, at different
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 366–376, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_33

Mobile Applications in Engineering Based on the Technology of AR
367
scales, from all sides. With all the problematic features depict on a piece of paper. The
term “Augmented Reality” (AR) was ﬁrst used in 1990 by Tom Codel, who worked for
Boeing Corporation. The essence of the concept of “augmented reality” is in the name,
which means a technology that complements reality with virtual elements.
Displaying virtual objects on the screen of devices such as a computer, tablet, or
smartphone, visualization of real objects, and viewing virtual objects with special glasses
and helmets becomes possible. AR is used to combine virtual objects with natural objects
to create a unique combination of them. It is the main difference between AR and virtual
reality.
You can specify the following features of AR: the ability to inﬂuence virtual objects,
create photos of a real object with a virtual object, the ability to navigate the sites of
companies, medical institutions, libraries, etc.
This paper aims to study recent approaches and AR formation methods to develop
new AR-applications for the educational/retraining process of engineers in analyti-
cal geometry, mathematical analysis, descriptive geometry, engineering, and computer
graphics.
2
Literature Review
The main problem is creating a mobile application that would be interesting for students
and engineers in the educational process and make learning more fun and exciting.
Firstly, a comparative analysis of the platforms for the creation of AR was carried out.
The most popular AR-libraries ARToolKit, EasyAR, Kudan, Maxst, Vuforia, Xzimg,
Wikitude, and ThingWorx Studio were analyzed. ARToolKit is open-source software.
There is no watermark (a translucent image superimposed on top of the camera image
is represented by the company logo and is present in free AR-library licenses). Only
2D-objects can be recognized. Access is free, but developer documentation is limited. It
is not possible to recognize volumetric objects and labels from the cloud. AR-technology
can be useful for manufacturing, assembling, quality control, maintenance [2, 3].
EasyAR can recognize only 2D-objects. There is no watermark. It supports up to
1,000 tags for recognition. Research is possible only following the documentation, which
is not convenient and not productive. It is free and easy to use the alternative to Vufo-
ria from Chinese developers [4]. The corresponding supporting platforms are Android,
iOS, UWP, Windows, OS X, and Unity [5, 6]. The latest version of EasyAR has the
following features: image recognition, 3D-object recognition, perception of the envi-
ronment with a simultaneous orientation to the terrain, cloud recognition, working on
smart glasses, cloud application deployment. The library is entirely free, and to get
started with EasyAR. It is needed to register an account and generate a plug-in key for
a particular application under development. EasyAR integrates easily since it does not
work with tags but recognizes objects based on the 3D-model inside the project and
generates target images as the program runs. Using EasyAR, it is needed to write more
code and create a project in the IDE in a slightly different way. The developer manages
the corresponding behavior, determining his behavior for the object recognition/loss
event. The library recognizes objects in proper lights, but the percentage of successful
tag detection is lower than Vuforia.

368
T. Zhylenko et al.
Kudan [7] has positive features, including the absence of restrictions on the number of
recognized images and the small amount of memory required to store ﬁles on the device.
It is possible to recognize 3D-objects and markerless tracking of objects. Developers
can use the necessary documentation when accessing the library. However, the user
manual is not precisely detailed and requires additional information. The mapping of
add-ons is implemented through a separate wrapper component over OpenGL using a
watermark. However, the free version is available for application testing only. To publish
the application, purchasing a license is needed.
The platform Maxst [8] allows optimizing the AR-technologies speciﬁcally for
mobile platforms for recognizing and tracking the image but at the same time no more
than three goals. However, it is possible to track a ﬂat surface and place the desired object
on it. Additionally, the free version allows developing the solution only for Android and
iOS. Moreover, there is support for the simultaneous creation and saving of 3D-space
maps. The platform mentioned above describes only works with the 32-bit version of
the Unity editor. However, it does not have a highly precise level of mark recognition
quality.
Xzimg [9] represents the following three products for working with applications
based on augmented reality: Augmented Face, Augmented Vision, and Magic Face.
Augmented Face recognizes and tracks the faces, Augmented Vision identiﬁes and tracks
ﬂat images, and Magic Face is designed to replace facial features and apply the corre-
sponding makeup. It should be noted that it is possible to develop a project for HTML5.
However, a watermark with a free trial is available for demonstration only (including
the inverting of color and changing an image).
Wikitude [10] includes image recognition and tracking, 3D-model rendering, video
overlay, and AR and SLAM technology [5], enabling object recognition, tracking, and
instant position tracking devices without a marker. Additionally, the cross-platform SDK
is available for Android and iOS operating systems. Moreover, it is also optimized
for several points. Unlike Vuforia 3D-objects, one of the main features is available to
downloadvideostothedatabase.Thetargetmarkerisgeneratedfromthevideo.However,
to successfully create markers, a solid background is needed to be considered.
Wikitude recently released a relatively new powerful SLAM solution for the AR-
application of the Wikitude SDK 7. The corresponding Wikitude SDK has the following
features: excellent image recognition and tracking, 3D SLAM-based tracking, GEO Data
(enhanced geo-referenced data), and cloud recognition. The main features include the
execution of native code and JavaScript, examples of image recognition, 3D-models,
many demonstrations, and the simplicity of launching augmented reality from a URL.
Moreover, there is a free version of the developer library with watermarks on the screen.
ThingWorx Studio [8] uses a clear graphic editor and Vuforia computer vision tech-
nology. Recognition tags and 3D-objects are stored and used through the cloud database.
However, this toolkit has a free trial only.
Vuforia software is widely used as the industry-leading AR-solution with the best-
in-class machine vision technologies, powerful tracking features, and a wide range of
platform support. It is one of the most popular AR-platforms [11], which includes an
SDK for creating AR-applications. It uses computer vision algorithms to detect and track
ﬂat images (tags) and simple 3D-objects in real-time. Vuforia has its API that allows one

Mobile Applications in Engineering Based on the Technology of AR
369
to generate a code in C++, Java, Objective-C, and *.Net. Vuforia SDK can be installed
as an extension for IDEs, i.e., Android Studio, XCode, Visual Studio, and develop
software for a speciﬁc mobile platform (e.g., Windows Phone, Android, and iOS). The
last ones can be used as a Vuforia extension for the Unity games with the corresponding
engine and cross-platform mobile applications. The Vuforia Engine interacts with the
real world. The AR interfaces mean the elements through which the interaction of the
real (physical) world with the Vuforia Engine and the user is carried out, which brings
the level of interactivity of the human-machine to a new level [6].
Additionally, it should be noted that the scientiﬁc novelty and practical signiﬁcance
of the proposed approach are highlighted by recent research works in the ﬁeld of AR-
and VR-applications. Remarkably, in the paper [12], the methodology of automated
training of convolutional networks by virtual 3D-models for parts recognition in the
assembly process is proposed. Importance and challenges of implementing the Industry
4.0 strategy using augmented reality, big data, and the internet of things, particularly in
building a smart city, as well as recent trends for realizing intercultural management in a
globalized world with the possibilities of intelligence implementation in manufacturing
the role of the simulation were substantiated in the research works [13–15]. A systematic
review and reﬂections in collaborative manufacturing based on a cloud platform with
the Industry 4.0 oriented principles and technologies were presented in the paper [16].
In the research papers [17, 18], the fundamental approach for ensuring the reliability
of technological equipment in the engineering ﬁeld using artiﬁcial intelligence systems
was developed.
The ways of industrial implementation of the AR-technology in computer-aided
ﬁxturedesignsystemswereproposedintheresearch[19].Thesoftwarefortheautomated
training of deep learning networks by virtual 3D-models for object recognition was
presented in the article [20]. The mixed reality implementation for managing the product
lifecycle was proposed in the research [21].
According to the assessment strategy’s quality-oriented rethinking, providing engi-
neering disciplines at universities was realized in the paper [22]. The methods of indus-
trial engineering used in network organizations were proposed in the research work
[23]. The development of computer graphics management systems and the approach for
increasing image recognition quality were presented in the articles [24, 25]. The recent
research [26], based on the deep learning method, focused on recognizing objects and
elements during the visual product inspection. Finally, general approaches for ensuring
technological equipment reliability using the numerical simulation environment were
developed in the research papers [27, 28].
3
Research Methodology
Vuforia has several methods of recognizing and inputting visual information based on
readingfromthecameraofadeviceandtheconsequentprocessingbytheVuforiaEngine.
Image Targets dials with the real ﬂat images printed on any suitable plain surface. It
should be noted that the markers do not need exceptional monochrome (black and white)
zones to be tracked in Vuforia Engine. The markers are convenient to use anywhere, but
they can be potentially used for tips, informative help, create interactive books and
manuals, and visualize concepts.

370
T. Zhylenko et al.
The VuMark Tag is a more advanced version of regular markers [29]. It has an
outline, border, free area, code elements and may include a logo. The Vuforia software
module searches for the tag’s outline in the image obtained from the device’s camera
and, if detected, reads the code elements. The code elements are divided into “light” and
“dark”. The aggregate represents a binary code, which decryption can obtain a unique
product ID, links to the website with helpful information about it, and more.
Multi-Targets software is similar to conventional markers, but it uses more than
one marker on one real object, such as a cube to use. This is especially useful for
sizeable augmented reality objects that need to be covered from all sides, such as houses,
monuments, museums, etc.
Cylinder Targets are real ﬂat images on cylindrical surfaces. They allow one to track
markers in the form of twisted cones and cylinders. Such markers are used on cups,
bottles, wide legs, etc.
Object Scanner recognizes 3D-objects and makes them simpliﬁed primitives of the
geometric skeleton (tag objects). This allows one to identify a speciﬁc physical object
in the physical space in the future. To create a new object marker, the ﬁrst scan can be
realized using an existing Object Scanner with the object data ﬁle’s consequent automatic
generation. This ﬁle is uploaded to Vuforia Target Manager (up to 20 object data ﬁles
can be downloaded). The virtual objects’ position supplementing the real space should
be related to a speciﬁc ﬁxed real object concerning which they will be placed. These
objects are so-called “labels”.
The “Surface math AR” application was created using the following components:
a combination of the Android operating system, the Unity cross-platform development
environment, and the VuMark technology. The Vuforia software was chosen as the
development environment and toolkit.
Marker mockups were created in Adobe Illustrator using the VuMark Designer tool
and then uploaded to Target Manager. Design Elements of the VuMarks has ﬁve key
design components that contribute to its uniqueness, detectability, and data encoding
capabilities (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Key design components of the VuMarks Designer tool.
Vuforia initially detects the Contour circuit. After ﬁnding the contour, the algorithm
searches for the code and “reads” it to determine the value or “identiﬁer” encoded in
VuMark.TheoutlineisnotdisplayedexplicitlyorisnotvisibleintheVuMarkdesign.The
Contour is the line that appears where the other two parts of VuMark meet (Border and
Clear Space). The outline is determined by the contrast between two different colors of a
border and a transparent space. Remarkably, the border is usually the most recognizable

Mobile Applications in Engineering Based on the Technology of AR
371
and deﬁning in comparison with VuMark. The border is an external shape consisting of
six straight lines forming a hexagon. The clean space is a mandatory empty area that
appears next to the border along its entire length. It can be located both inside and outside
the border and is required to guarantee the sufﬁcient contrast of the algorithm to detect
the contour.
Each individual VuMark contains a unique code as a visual representation of the
encoded identiﬁer. The code consists of the element, the data type, and the encoded
value/identiﬁer’s length, determining the number of elements. The greater the length of
the value, the more elements are required.
Each element has the following two states: “dark” and “light”. A unique code is
generated by the setting elements in a dark or light state (approximately 50% of the
elements in each state).
The background or design area is the layer into which you can place any parts of
VuMark that are not used for detection.
After VuMark was developed in Adobe Illustrator, they were exported as a Scalable
Vector Graphics (SVG) ﬁle and then uploaded to Target Manager. VuMarks were added
to the corresponding databases that were conﬁgured online and then downloaded from
Target Manager. They were added to the authors’ Vuforia project using Unity, Android
Studio, Xcode, and Visual Studio 2015. They were packaged with an executable ﬁle of
the previously developed Surface Math AR application.
Students download the Surface Math AR application to their smartphone or tablet
from the Play Market, and the educator gives the assignment. It is necessary to ﬁnd
the area of existence of the function and draw it. Students calculate this area and draw
an image or drawing on paper. The educator gives out markers, and students turn on
the application and point the camera at the marker. A 3D-image of the ﬁgure appears.
This ﬁgure explores from the outside, as well as viewed from the inside, close and far.
Students appreciate the beauty and accuracy of the graphic design of the model.
4
Results
Modern engineering education has opened inexhaustible possibilities for using various
visualizationtools,suchasVRandAR,basedongeneratingaccurate3D-models[30,31].
In contrast to traditional educational and methodological materials, the main advantages
of AR-technology are simplicity, interactivity, and high performance [32, 33]. AR can
be fully implemented in the complete cycle of students’ engineering training, starting
with the creation of models of products [34–37]. The ability of the future engineer to
create and recognize the graphical representation of the products is essential. Moreover,
with the lack of classes, traditional methods of graphic training are unacceptable.
Given the foregoing, it becomes apparent that the AR is another inevitable step
towards improving the quality of engineering education. The introduction of a new
methodological approach to improve students’ spatial representation or listeners of train-
ing programs, understanding the relationship between the 3D-model, its drawings, and
personal views is relevant.
Mobile application “AR in Engineering Graphics” has been developed. It
allows demonstrating the visualization of 2D-drawings in 3D-objects using AR-
technology. This technology is implemented by installing the mobile application

372
T. Zhylenko et al.
from Google Play (https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=arieg.unity3d.sumdu.
edu.ua) a smartphone or tablet on the OS Android. When pointing the camera on a 2D-
drawing, the corresponding 3D-model will be visualized. The rotation of the drawing
on the desktop allows inspecting the 3D-model from all sides, analyze all design and
technological features [38, 39].
This application allows you to work with drawings and appropriate static 3D-
models of different conﬁgurations: ﬂat parts (Fig. 2 a); prismatic parts (Fig. 2 b); rota-
tional parts (Fig. 2 c). With the proposed solution, complex geometric objects become
understandable and straightforward, even when working with complex parts (Fig. 2 d).
b
a
d
c
Fig. 2. Visualization of ﬂat (a), prismatic (b), rotational (c), and complex (d) parts.
Using the developed application when working with assemblies allows showing the
look and showing all the structural elements belonging to this product. Thus, the process
of developing the technological scheme of assembly becomes simple and straightfor-
ward. The application’s functionality allows us to present/hide items with the same
design attributes, for example, show only standardized elements, or hide certain parts
(Fig. 3).

Mobile Applications in Engineering Based on the Technology of AR
373
b
a
Fig. 3. Visualization of assemblies.
AR allows carrying out the structural elements of the assembly unit, and therefore,
to demonstrate the process of assembly-disassembly (Fig. 4 a). If necessary, it’s possible
to make the unit’s cross-section, which will be realized as a dynamic mode (Fig. 4 b).
b
a
Fig. 4. Visualization of the functions “assembly/disassembly” (a) and “cross-section” (b).
5
Conclusions
The mobile applications extend the functionality of engineering education. It makes
the learning process more informative and exciting. The proposed and implemented
approach is more productive than the use of traditional, static axonometric images.
The appropriate form of education/training/retraining on the transfer of information in
a virtual environment is useful in avoiding the difﬁculties of perception of graphical
information by visualizing complex objects, contributing to a deeper understanding of
technical objects. Also, the use of AR-technology can signiﬁcantly reduce time costs.
Recent approaches, methods, and software based on AR-technology were studied,
new AR-applications in analytical geometry, mathematical analysis, descriptive geom-
etry, engineering graphics, and computer graphics were developed with the aim of the
educational/retraining process of engineers.
Further research will be focused on the improvement of reliability of the devel-
oped solutions, expanding technological capabilities and functionality, integration with
CAx-systems. AR-applications to the industry are the ﬁrst-priority step, especially for
production planning, assembly, quality control, etc.

374
T. Zhylenko et al.
References
1. Larkin, J.: Wayray calls for developers to compete in the ﬁrst true AR SDK challenge and
hackathon. Automot. Ind. AI 198(2) (2018)
2. Antosz, K.: Maintenance – identiﬁcation and analysis of the competency gap. Eksploatacja
i Niezawodnosc – Maintenance Reliab. 20(3), 484–494 (2018). https://doi.org/10.17531/ein.
2018.3.19
3. Dynnyk, O., Denysenko, Y., Zaloga, V., Ivchenko, O., Yashyna, T.: Information support for
the quality management system assessment of engineering enterprises. In: Ivanov, V., et al.
(eds.) DSMIE 2019. LNME, pp. 65–74. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-030-22365-6_7
4. Zheng, Y., Kuang, Y., Sugimoto, S.: Revisiting the PnP problem: a fast, general and optimal
solution. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV 2013, pp. 2344–2351
(2013)
5. Xia, L., Ding, H., Lu, J., Zhang, H.: Development and application of virtual collaborative
experiment technology based on Unity platform. In: Proceedings of 2018 IEEE International
Conference of Safety Produce Informatization, IICSPI 2018, pp. 546–550 (2019). https://doi.
org/10.1109/IICSPI.2018.8690340
6. Rana, K., Patel, B.: Augmented reality engine applications: a survey. In: Proceedings of the
2019 IEEE International Conference on Communication and Signal Processing, ICCSP 2019,
pp. 380–384 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCSP.2019.8697999
7. Rahman, H.R., Herumurti, D., Kuswardayan, I., Yuniarti, A., Khotimah, W.N., Fauzan, N.B.:
Location based augmented reality game using KudanSDK. In: Proceedings of the 11th Inter-
national Conference on Information and Communication Technology and System, ICTS 2017,
pp. 307–310 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTS.2017.8265689
8. Wong, P.K., Vong, C.M., Wong, K.I., Ma, Z.: Development of a wireless inspection and
notiﬁcation system with minimum monitoring hardware for real-time vehicle engine health
inspection. Transp. Res. Part C: Emerg. Technol. 58, 29–45 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.trc.2015.07.001
9. Babak, N.G., Kryukov, A.F.: Mobile application for visualization of the advertising booklet
using augmented reality. In: 2018 4th International Conference on Information Technologies
in Engineering Education, Inforino 2018 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/INFORINO.2018.
8581841
10. Makino, R., Yamamoto, K.: Spatiotemporal information system using mixed reality for
area-based learning and sightseeing. In: Geertman, S., Zhan, Q., Allan, A., Pettit, C. (eds.)
CUPUM 2019. LNGC, pp. 283–302. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-19424-6_16
11. Verner, I., Cuperman, D., Romm, T., Reitman, M., Chong, S.K., Gong, Z.: Intelligent robotics
in high school: an educational paradigm for the industry 4.0 era. In: Auer, M.E., Tsiatsos,
T. (eds.) ICL 2018. AISC, vol. 916, pp. 824–832. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-030-11932-4_76
12. Židek, K., Lazorík, P., Piteˇl, J., Pavlenko, I., Hošovský, A.: Automated training of con-
volutional networks by virtual 3D models for parts recognition in assembly process. In:
Trojanowska, J., Ciszak, O., Machado, J.M., Pavlenko, I. (eds.) MANUFACTURING 2019.
LNME, pp. 287–297. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18715-6_24
13. Bawa, M., Caganova, D., Szilva, I., Spirkova, D.: Importance of Internet of Things and
big data in building smart city and what would be its challenges. In: Leon-Garcia, A., et al.
(eds.) SmartCity 360 2015-2016. LNICSSITE, vol. 166, pp. 605–616. Springer, Cham (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-33681-7_52

Mobile Applications in Engineering Based on the Technology of AR
375
14. Caganova, D., Cambal, M., Luptakova, S.W.: Intercultural management - trend of contempo-
rary globalized world. ElektronikaIrElektrotechnika 6, 51–54 (2010)
15. Sobrino, D.R.D., Kos’al, P., Caganova, D., Cambal, M.: On the possibilities of intelligence
implementation in manufacturing: the role of simulation. In: 3rd Central European Conference
on Logistics, CECOL 2012, vol. 309, pp. 96–104 (2013). https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scient
iﬁc.net/AMM.309.96
16. Varela, M.L.R., Putnik, G.D., Manupati, V.K., Rajyalakshmi, G., Trojanowska, J., Machado,
J.: Collaborative manufacturing based on cloud, and on other I4.0 oriented principles and
technologies: a systematic literature review and reﬂections. Manag. Prod. Eng. Rev. 9(3),
90–99 (2018). https://doi.org/10.24425/119538
17. Pavlenko, I., Ivanov, V., Kuric, I., Gusak, O., Liaposhchenko, O.: Ensuring vibration reliability
of turbopump units using artiﬁcial neural networks. In: Trojanowska, J., Ciszak, O., Machado,
J.M., Pavlenko, I. (eds.) MANUFACTURING 2019. LNME, pp. 165–175. Springer, Cham
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18715-6_14
18. Pavlenko, I., Neamtu, C., Verbovyi, A., Pitel, J., Ivanov, V., Pop, G.: Using computer mod-
eling and artiﬁcial neural networks for ensuring the vibration reliability of rotors. In: 2nd
International Workshop on Computer Modeling and Intelligent Systems, CMIS 2019. CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, vol. 2353, pp. 702–716 (2019)
19. Ivanov, V., Pavlenko, I., Liaposhchenko, O., Gusak, O., Pavlenko, V.: Determination of contact
pointsbetweenworkpieceandﬁxtureelementsasatoolforaugmentedrealityinﬁxturedesign.
Wirel. Netw. 27(3), 1657–1664 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-019-02026-2
20. Zidek, K., Lazorik, P., Pitel’, J., Hosovsky, A.: An automated training of deep learning net-
works by 3D virtual models for object recognition. Symmetry 11(4), Article number 496
(2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/sym11040496
21. Adamenko, D., Pluhnau, R., Nagarajah, A.: Case study of model-based deﬁnition and mixed
reality implementation in product lifecycle. In: Ivanov, V., et al. (eds.) DSMIE 2019. LNME,
pp. 3–12. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-22365-6_1
22. Crisan, A.N., Pop, G.M.: Creative, quality oriented rethinking of the assessment strategy at
the university level courses. a case study. In: Ivanov, V., et al. (eds.) DSMIE 2019. LNME,
pp. 33–42. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-22365-6_4
23. Kudrna, J., Miller, A., Edl, M.: Methods of industrial engineering used in network orga-
nizations. Paper Presented at the Creating Global Competitive Economies: A 360-Degree
Approach. In: Proceedings of the 17th International Business Information Management
Association Conference, IBIMA 2011, vol. 4, pp. 2037–2042 (2011)
24. Maydaniuk, V.P., Arseniuk, I.R., Lishchuk, O.O.: Increasing the speed of fractal image com-
pression using two-dimensional approximating transformations. J. Eng. Sci. 6(1), E16–E20
(2019). https://doi.org/10.21272/jes.2019.6(1).e3
25. Al Salaimeh, S.: Development of the computer graphics management system using text of
natural language. J. Eng. Sci. 5(2), E7–E9 (2018). https://doi.org/10.21272/jes.2018.5(2).e2
26. Kuric, I., Kandera, M., Klarák, J., Ivanov, V., Wi˛ecek, D.: Visual product inspection based on
deep learning methods. In: Tonkonogyi, V., et al. (eds.) InterPartner 2019. LNME, pp. 148–
156. Springer, Cham (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-40724-7_15
27. Fesenko, A., Basova, Y., Ivanov, V., Ivanova, M., Yevsiukova, F., Gasanov, M.: Increasing
of equipment efﬁciency by intensiﬁcation of technological processes. Periodica Polytechnica
Mech. Eng. 63(1), 67–73 (2019). https://doi.org/10.3311/PPme.13198
28. Sokolov, V., Krol, O., Stepanova, O.: Nonlinear simulation of electrohydraulic drive for tech-
nological equipment. In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1278, no. 1, p. 012003
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1278/1/012003
29. Adrianto, D., Hidajat, M., Yesmaya, V.: Augmented reality using Vuforia for marketing resi-
dence. In: 2016 1st International Conference on Game, Game Art, and Gamiﬁcation, ICGGAG
2016 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICGGAG.2016.8052642

376
T. Zhylenko et al.
30. Blanco-Pons, S., Carrión-Ruiz, B., Lerma, J.L.: Augmented reality application assessment
for disseminating rock art. Multimed. Tools Appl. 78(8), 10265–10286 (2018). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11042-018-6609-x
31. Azkorreta, K.O., Rodríguez, H.O.: Augmented reality applications in the engineering envi-
ronment. In: Zaphiris, P., Ioannou, A. (eds.) LCT 2014. LNCS, vol. 8524, pp. 83–90. Springer,
Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-07485-6_9
32. Dangelmaier, W., Fischer, M., Gausemeier, J., Grafe, M., Matysczok, C., Mueck, B.: Virtual
and augmented reality support for discrete manufacturing system simulation. Comput. Ind.
56(4), 371–383 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2005.01.007
33. Martin-Gutierrez, J., Fernandez, M.D.M.: Applying augmented reality in engineering educa-
tion to improve academic performance & student motivation. Int. J. Eng. Educ. 30, 625–635
(2014)
34. Liarokapis, F., et al.: Web3D and augmented reality to support engineering education. World
Trans. Eng. Technol. Educ. 3(1), 11–14 (2004)
35. Chen, H., Feng, K., Mo, C., Cheng, S., Guo, Z., Huang, Y.: Application of augmented reality
in engineering graphics education. In: 2011 International Symposium on IT in Medicine and
Education, vol. 2, pp. 362–365 (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/ITiME.2011.6132125
36. Veide, Z., Strozheva, V., Dobelis, M.: Application of augmented reality for teaching descrip-
tive geometry and engineering graphics course to ﬁrst-year students. In: Joint Interna-
tional Conference on Engineering Education and International Conference on Information
Technology, pp. 158–164 (2014)
37. Parmar, D., Pelmahale, K., Kothwade, R., Badguajar, P.: Augmented reality system for
engineering graphics. Int. J. Adv. Res. Comput. Commun. Eng. 4(10), 327–330 (2015)
38. Bun, P., Trojanowska, J., Ivanov, V., Pavlenko, I.: The use of virtual reality training application
to increase the effectiveness of workshops in the ﬁeld of lean manufacturing. In: Bruzzone,
A.G., Ginters, E., Mendivil, E.G., et al. (eds.) 4th International Conference of the Virtual and
Augmented Reality in Education, VARE 2018, pp. 65–71 (2018)
39. Ivanov, V., Pavlenko, I., Trojanowska, J., Zuban, Y., Samokhvalov, D., Bun, P.: Using the
augmented reality for training engineering students. In: Bruzzone, A.G., Ginters, E., Mendivil,
E.G., et al. (eds.) 4th International Conference of the Virtual and Augmented Reality in
Education, VARE 2018, pp. 57–64 (2018)

A Review in the Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
in Textile Industry
Filipe Pereira1(B), Vítor Carvalho1,2, Rosa Vasconcelos3, and Filomena Soares1
1 Algoritmi R&D Centre, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
vcarvalho@ipca.pt, fsoares@dei.uminho.pt
2 2Ai Lab, School of Technology, IPCA, Barcelos, Portugal
3 2C2T R&D Centre, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
rosa@det.uminho.pt
Abstract. This paper presents an analysis of the state of the art of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence applications in the textile industry. A review of the existing literature was
performed. This article presents three methods of analyzing textile yarn. Some
techniques, used in textile fabric inspection, are presented throughout this paper,
as well as the use of artiﬁcial intelligence on improving the performance of produc-
tive systems using neural networks and artiﬁcial vision. The preliminary results
demonstrate that the techniques covered are an asset in obtaining defects in textile
fabrics at the industrial level. Taking into account the various methods of inspec-
tion and analysis of textile yarn, all present pros and cons in applicability in the
textile area. In terms of advantages, all allow a better analysis of the textile yarn
and defect detection with high quality, but with applicability in more complex
systems. As a disadvantage, they present the fact that they do not have an already
standardized algorithm that can be used, which makes its use more complex. Some
possible future applications are also described.
Keywords: Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) · Textile industry · Industry 4.0 · Yarn
evaluation · Machine learning · Image processing
1
Introduction
The textile sector is one of the most important for the quality of life of the entire world
population. Clothing is part of one of the basic needs of the human being.
Among the strategies used to stay competitive in the market, one of the most essential
for the textile industry is innovation. New practices, use of computer intelligence and
development of sustainable materials are increasingly present in the universe of fashion,
sport, uniforms and objects. The technological evolution of fabrics brings important
functionalities and can be a differentiating factor in this type of industry.
The manufacture of fabrics and clothing has gone through an update process that goes
from choosing the raw material to the production methods. Low environmental impact
solutions have been the subject of ongoing research and investment in new production
machines, energy and methods.
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 377–392, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_34

378
F. Pereira et al.
One of the applications that has been widely used at an industrial level is the use of
vision systems, which allows the analysis and recognition of patterns in fabrics in the
textile industry. One of the companies that uses this technology is COGNEX. For this,
it uses a platform called Cognex ViDi that analyzes patterns in textile fabrics, such as
ﬁnishes. The main objective is to integrate this technology in an industrial textile system
in order to obtain predeﬁned images of fabric samples, to carry out two analyzes. The
ﬁrst analysis will be more preliminary to detect more visible defects and, at a later stage,
a more detailed analysis of defects that are not visible to the naked eye (Fig. 1) [1].
Fig. 1. Yarn dye plaid image capture system [1]
This renewal meets new market needs in order to add value to the product while
rethinking costs. Some biological processes applied in the dyeing phase, for example,
can reduce, on average, 30% in water and electricity consumption [2].
The outline of this paper is as follows. In Sect. 2, Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) in
textile industry is presented. In Sect. 3, it is described a yarn analysis solution using
AI. Section 4 presents the description of the AI used techniques and in Sect. 5 there are
presented some future work proposals based on existing identiﬁed gaps and challenges.
Finally, in Sect. 6, ﬁnal remarks are enunciated.
2
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Textile Industry
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is a branch of computer science dedicated to the study of com-
putational activities that requires intelligence when performed by humans. “Intelligence”
is the computational part of the ability to achieve goals [3].
The main purpose of AI systems is to perform functions that, if supposed to be
performed by a human being, would be considered intelligent. It is a very broad concept,
and one that receives so many deﬁnitions when we give the word intelligence different
meanings [3].
Machine Learning is a subﬁeld of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and its main approach is
to learn through experience to ﬁnd patterns in a data set. It involves teaching a computer,

A Review in the Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Textile Industry
379
through examples, to recognize patterns instead of programming it with speciﬁc rules
[4].
In Machine Learning there are three main classiﬁcations with respect to the
algorithms used and the type of learning of the same, namely:
• Supervised Learning
• Unsupervised Learning
• Reinforcement Learning
The choice of which of the three methods will be used will depend on the data set
you have and the problem you want to solve.
Fig. 2. Types of machine learning [4]
Most machine learning practices use supervised learning. In supervised learning,
a set of data is provided and we know what the correct result should be, as there is a
relationship between the input and the output, that is, it has the inputs (X) and the outputs
(Y) and uses the algorithm to map the learning function that will image the input (X) to
the output (Y) (Y = f (X)) [4].
The goal is that, when you have a new input (X), you can predict what the output (Y)
is, based on the model produced containing the rules learned with the learning function
[4].
In Unsupervised Learning, there is only the input (X) of data and not the corre-
sponding output (Y). The objective in this case is to model the underlying structure or
distribution of the data to learn more about it. Unsupervised Learning is called that,
because there is no feedback based on the prediction results as in the previous case,
in fact there is no way out and there is no teacher. The algorithms are left by their
own mechanisms to discover and present the data structure, this allows us to approach
problems with little or no idea about the results.
Reinforcement Learning is a trial-and-error method. Their approach is similar to that
of a baby who is learning new things. The machine knows nothing at ﬁrst. She will then
try something and, depending on the results, decide whether it was a good decision or

380
F. Pereira et al.
Fig. 3. Supervised learning [4]
Fig. 4. Unsupervised learning [4]
a bad decision. After countless attempts, if the model is well learned, the machine will
become better and better and, eventually, it will only make good decisions. The difﬁculty
lies in the fact that the actions taken by the agent can change the environment, and the
agent can obtain his reward long after his action. So, it becomes difﬁcult to know which
actions led to which reward.
Fig. 5. Reinforcement learning [4]

A Review in the Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Textile Industry
381
Several sectors of activity used AI including robotics, artiﬁcial vision, comprehen-
sion, artiﬁcial neural networks and a branch of AI denominated “expert systems”. AI
has been particularly useful in solving a number of problems in different areas of the
textile industry [4]. Expert Systems, Fuzzy Logic and Artiﬁcial neural networks will be
covered in the following subsections.
2.1
Fuzzy Logic
One of the techniques used in textile industry is the neuro-fuzzy. The neuro-fuzzy hybrid
system is a combination of fuzzy and neural network techniques. A neuro-fuzzy system
(SNF) is a type of embedded hybrid system consisting of the combination of two well-
known modeling techniques such as ANN (Artiﬁcial Neural Networks) and FL (Fuzzy
Logic). At present, SNFs are of great interest as they bring beneﬁts from both ANN and
FL systems, thus eliminating individual disadvantages by combining common features.
In addition, different SNF architectures have been researched in various application
areas, especially in industrial process control [5–7].
Fan et al. (2001) have employed an adaptive neuro-fuzzy system for the prediction
of cotton yarn strength from HVI (High Volume Instrument) ﬁber properties garment
drape and forecasting circular knitting machine parameters. However, the neuro-fuzzy
systems are yet to be applied in the ﬁeld of yarn property prediction [8].
2.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks
Artiﬁcial neural networks are created from algorithms designed for a particular purpose
and basically resembles the human brain at two points: knowledge is obtained through
learning steps, and synaptic weights are used to store knowledge.
Synapse is the name given to the connection between neurons and the connections
are assigned values, which are called synaptic weights. Thus, artiﬁcial neural networks
have in its constitution a series of artiﬁcial (or virtual) neurons that will be connected to
each other, forming a network of processing elements [9].
Defects in yarn reduce the value of textile products. In order to try to eliminate
this problem, Artiﬁcial Intelligence techniques, such as ANN, are applied to identify
defects in textile inspection of fabrics. This principle is based on obtaining images that
are analyzed in the image acquisition system and saved in the relevant standard format
(JPEG, PNG, among others.). Resources are extracted from the acquired image and the
image analysis method is used to reduce the feature set dimensionality by creating a new
smaller size feature set, which is a combination of older features. [9].
2.3
Expert Systems
This is a technology derived from the family of artiﬁcial intelligence, being one of
the main practical applications based on knowledge. The specialists seek to apply the
knowledge of an expert in the systems and generate actions inherent to the human being
to bring innovative solutions and thereby advance in the ﬁeld or area of application. An
expert system is a computational system that tries to imitate human specialists, applying
methodologies of reasoning or knowledge about a speciﬁc area [10].
The components that make up expert systems are:

382
F. Pereira et al.
– Knowledge base: rules, facts and heuristics corresponding to the knowledge of
specialists in the domain on which the system was built;
– Development team: composed of one or more experts who are in charge of the
knowledge base, who translate the knowledge described by the experts into a set
of production standards;
– Development environment: also known as AI shells, they are user-friendly devel-
opment environments, which quickly and efﬁciently generate user interface screens,
capture the knowledge base and manage search strategies in the standards base (Fig. 6).
Fig. 6. Expert system concept [10]
One of the applications of the Systems of specialists in the textile industry, is the
veriﬁcation of the coloring in textiles in terms of ﬁnish. The work carried out by the sys-
tems of specialists in production management is of fabric machines, aided by computer,
is evaluated elsewhere.
One of the applications of the expert systems was in the company Sandoz AZ. This
company developed an expert system called Wooly. This has been applied in textile
dyeing, where it can predict the performance of solidity in a wide range of tests on
patterns and colors in textile fabrics and provides corrections to the fabric such as, better
dyeing methods, suitable dyes and is able to interact with a color matching system.
In the next chapter, one of the techniques used by expert systems, in color detection,
which is the Kubelka-Munk theory, is discussed.

A Review in the Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Textile Industry
383
3
Yarn Analysis Solutions Using AI
3.1
Yarn Identiﬁcation Using Image Processing
This section describes the various methods that exist in the analysis of textile yarn, using
artiﬁcial intelligence. Three methods using artiﬁcial intelligence are described, the ﬁrst
using image processing, the second method identiﬁes patterns using artiﬁcial neural
networks and the third method veriﬁes the correspondence of textile colors using ANN
and the Kubelka-Munk theory.
In the textile industry, there are automatic and manual inspection systems, in which
these are the most used in determining the quality of the textile yarn, such as uniformity
and impurities. The manual inspection method has several disadvantages, such as solving
time-consuming and complex problems. This type of inspection will cause tiredness, lack
of attention and errors on the part of the operator, which would cause the unreliability
of the products obtained and also the inaccuracy of the results obtained.
The automatic textile thread inspection systems are a very effective method in the
continuous improvement of the quality of the textiles, when inserting the image process-
ing and analysis technique. This allowed for greater efﬁciency in obtaining defects and
in the continuous improvement of the industrial process.
The image processing technique allows to transform the data of an image and convert
it to mathematical values. This technological solution is very reliable and very efﬁcient.
Comparatively with existing solutions, such as human visual analysis, this manages to
eliminate all the disadvantages of traditional techniques.
There are more and more studies and research in the identiﬁcation of defects in textile
yarn through image processing that have given very promising results.
There is an ongoing investigation, in which a system was developed that extracts
neps images (highly tangled cotton knots) [11] and then classiﬁes it, according to a
probabilistic neural network (PNN).
When this test was performed in this investigation, a k-fold cross-validation method-
ology was used, which is a technique to assess the generalizability of a model, based on
a data set. Thus, it was possible to measure what would be the performance of the PNN
classiﬁer.
The results obtained through this technique demonstrated that the neps classiﬁcation,
which was carried out through image recognition by the PNN classiﬁer, were very good
and validate the technique used in this analysis [12].
Vítor Carvalho et al. (2009) presented a paper on how to apply a textile thread
analysis tool using AI and image processing techniques, in order to obtain textile yarn
characteristics and prediction models [12].
3.2
Pattern Inspection Using ANN
The importance of product quality inspection is important in companies, as quality
defects can signiﬁcantly reduce the process (for example, in the textile industry, defects
can reach 60%). In textile production, online inspection is a slow process due to the
slower movement of the fabric out of the weaving machine, making human inspection
an inexpensive option [13].

384
F. Pereira et al.
The patterns of the fabrics can have several aspects, such as fabric, knitting, braids,
ﬁnishes and prints. Changing the visual inspection at the factory level by inspection
based on vision systems, can help manufacturers in the textile industry avoid fatigue
and human errors in defect detection. Typically, camera-based inspection systems are
installed that feature immense defect analysis images with “OK” and “NOT OK” ﬁnal
results [13].
Vision systems to analyze patterns in fabrics, ﬁrst “learn” the pattern of the fabric, the
properties of the textile yarn, the colors and tolerable imperfections from these images.
This “teaching” time can be a few weeks, after which the platform can potentially
begin to detect defects (such as incorrect knitting patterns) in the ﬁnal textile fabric,
saving the human effort of evaluating hundreds of meters of material. Several challenges
are inherent to the inspection of textile fabric patterns, such as its shape, complexity,
variability and the large number of types of knitwear [13].
Ajay Kumar et al., (2003) used a feed-forward neural network to segment defects in
pattern textile fabric. According to him, “every defect in the textile mesh changes the
gray level arrangement of neighboring pixels, and this change is used to segment the
defects” [13].
Each pixel acquired from an image is characterized in an information vector. A sim-
pliﬁed characterization of the texture of the textile fabric is used based on the connections
between the pixels in the neighborhood [13].
The gray-level values of neighboring pixels form the resource vector for each pixel.
This information vectors captures certain local textural properties of the fabric, such as
thickness, directionality, regularity, patterns, colors, etc. [13].
3.3
Textile Color Matching Using ANN and Kubelka-Munk Theory
The color of a textile fabric can be considered “acceptable” or “not acceptable” or else
“very light”, “very red” or “very blue”. Such analyzes can be done visually or using
equipment, based on the difference between an ideal pattern of textile fabric or a sample
[14].
Color tolerance is based on numerical color descriptions through “instrumental tol-
erance systems”. As this method presented very wrong results, compared to the visual
checks of the fabric, an AI-based system was developed, presenting results of the
Pass/Fail (P/F) type in order to improve the precision and efﬁciency of the instrumental
tolerance and errors committed by the analysis by the human eye [14].
To solve this problem of the textile industry related to color patterns, several
computer-based methods have been presented in the last few years, using artiﬁcial neural
networks and Kubelka-Munk (K-M) theory [14].
The color of an opaque material is a function of its absorption and dispersion prop-
erties of visible light. While the dispersion changes the direction of the light rays, the
absorption converts them into heat [14].
Rocco Furferi et al. (2016) presented a method for accurate estimation of the spec-
trophotometric response of a textile mixture composed of different colored ﬁbers made
of different materials. In particular, the performance of the K-M theory is improved with
the introduction of artiﬁcial intelligence to determine a more consistent value for the
nonlinear function relationship between the mixture and its components. Therefore, a

A Review in the Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Textile Industry
385
hybrid system composed of K-M + ANN, was developed with the purpose of modeling
the color mixing mechanism in order to predict the reﬂectance values of a mixture [14].
4
Description of the Used AI Techniques
This section describes in a more technical way the systems most used in the analysis of
textile yarn. In the ﬁrst system, the YSQ (Yarn System Quality) project that uses image
processing to check the quality of the textile yarn was approached. In the second system,
the technique on how to carry out the analysis of ﬁbers and spinning using artiﬁcial
neural networks was discussed. In the third system, an analysis of how to perform color
matching in the textile industry was carried out.
4.1
Yarn Analysis Tool Using Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Image Processing
In the last ten years there has been a very signiﬁcant advance in terms of commercial
solutions in obtaining the characteristics of the textile yarn. In this area, USTER Tech-
nologies AG has some machines that provide some characteristics but do not obtain all
the characteristics of the textile yarn, especially if it is in continuous movement.
There is a prototype, designated as YSQ [15] that obtained some preliminary algo-
rithms in order to obtain a signiﬁcant amount and variety of characteristics of a textile
yarn.
The YSQ prototype [15] consists of an image acquisition and processing system
using a microscope attached to a USB camera, which can be subdivided into hardware
and software components. At the software level, National Instruments’ IMAQ Vision is
used to perform image acquisition and processing.
The hardware of this system consists of a USB camera that is in the prototype next
to the output plane of an analog microscope. In order to obtain the images, any image
processing system needs a light source. In this prototype, a monochromatic light source
was used, in order to obtain better contrasts for the relief of the wire geometry (Fig. 1).
This system allows to obtain the following characteristics in textile yarn, namely: the
orientation and twist of the ﬁbers, the twisting step and the orientation in folded yarns
and the number of cables, spun yarns (single cable) or folded yarn (multiple cables) [15].
4.2
Artiﬁcial Neural Network in Fibers and Spinning Analysis
Artiﬁcial neural networks are increasingly used to analyze problems in the textile indus-
try. Its use in the textile industry involves the integration of a large number of variables.
Due to the high degree of variability of the raw materials, the processing in several
stages and the lack of precision in the control of the process parameters, the analysis of
the relationship between these variables and the product properties depends on human
knowledge [16].
The ability to predict these properties accurately has become a challenge due to
the fact that textile materials have a non-linear behavior. As there is a need to forecast
some properties or performances of an industrial process in advance, to minimize the
cost of installation and time, it becomes important to use the functions performed with

386
F. Pereira et al.
Fig. 7. Yarn image capture system [15]
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, since it does not have a constant understanding, but it can
be changed dynamically [17]. An ANN is normally used to predict the composition of
the copolymer.
A copolymer is a polymer formed when two (or more) different types of monomers
are linked in the same polymeric chain, as opposed to a homopolymer where only one
monomer is used. Copolymer refers to a type of polymer that contains two or more
distinct repeating units called “monomers”. It produces substances of high molecular
weight bychemical combinationor polymerizationof monomers. Theﬁnal results that an
ANN can indicate related to the composition of the copolymer correctly, will depend on
the reaction conditions and conversions. Figure 2 shows an intelligent ﬁber classiﬁcation
system. In this case, ANN is used to identify two types of animal ﬁbers, Merino and
Mohair. This ANN model extracts six parameter scales with image processing and the
rest using an unsupervised neural network to extract resources automatically, which are
determined according to the complexity and accuracy of the obtained model. It can obtain
greater precision to the increasing number of colors for learning, since the precision of
the ANN depends largely on the selected parameters, this type of algorithm can be used
to develop models for previewing and to generate a cotton classiﬁcation [17].
In [17] it is analyzed the set of elastic properties of the ﬁber yarn properties. Figure 3
shows an artiﬁcial model of neural network for textile thread engineering, developing a
“reverse” model of yarn for textile ﬁber using an ANN.
This one model is totally different from future models, which predict the properties
of the ﬁnal yarn using the properties of the ﬁber as input elements. The cost reduction
of cotton ﬁber was ensured with the use of linear programming in conjunction with an
ANN algorithm (Fig. 4). [17] (Fig. 9).

A Review in the Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Textile Industry
387
Fig. 8. Intelligent ﬁbre classiﬁcation system [17]
INPUTS
Staple lenght
Fineness
Strength
Cohesivness
ANN Model
OUTPUTS
Yarn tenacity
Yarn 
elongaƟon
Yarn evenness
Yarn hairiness
Fig. 9. ANN model for yarn engineering [17]
The Uster fabric scan machine system uses this ANN in the analysis of wrinkled tex-
tile fabrics using image processing analysis. Figure 7 shows the artiﬁcial neural network
model for textile engineering as well as the USTER machine (Fig. 10).
4.3
Artiﬁcial Neural Network and Kubelka-Munk (K-M) in Color Matching
Analysis
Rocco Furferi et al. (2016), refers that after a mixture of colors is created, an instrumental
comparison is always performed against a deﬁned pattern, with the aim of determining
the difference between them.

388
F. Pereira et al.
Fig. 10. Artiﬁcial neural network for textile engineering (left) and USTER machine (right) [17]
The Kubelka-Munk functions is:
F (R) = (1 −R)2/2R = k/s = Ac/s
(1)
Where:
R = reﬂectance; k = absorption coefﬁcient; s = scattering coefﬁcient; c =
concentration of the absorbing species; A = absorbance [18].
The comparison is evaluated in various color spaces such as CIELAB under a number
of standard illuminants, as shown in Fig. 5 [18].
The hybrid method K-M + ANN used is done in three steps, namely:
1. Deﬁnition of the equivalent tissue substrate using the simpliﬁed model described in
[19].
2. Teach an ANN to infer variations of the recipe in the K-S ratio of the substrate; this
proportion is then used to predict the spectral response of the tissue mixture. The
sum of steps 1 and 2 will result in a hybrid K-M + ANN system [19].
3. Derive (from the K-M + ANN method) a practical graph that can roughly replace
the ANN software in everyday use [19] (Fig. 11).

A Review in the Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Textile Industry
389
Fig. 11. Recipe-based mixing conceptual process [20].
5
Future Work Proposals Based on Existing Gaps and Challenges
Identiﬁed
The commercial use of AI in the analysis of pre-production textile processing appears
to be limited to only a few applications today, particularly in the identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation of textile ﬁbers and yarns.
The identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of the ﬁber in terms of color, length, uniformity,
among others, may be analyzed with the use of AI and with the possibility that it will
be more used and developed in the coming years.
The experience of employees who have acquired a lot of know-how over several
years cannot be easily automated. This knowledge is usually lost, unless measures are
taken to store knowledge and experience in an appropriate mechanism that allows for
easy retrieval and later use.
One way to get around this negative aspect of expert systems is to allow a combination
of these in domains familiar with programming languages and available shells, in order
to build their own expert systems. For that they should need to ally specialists in artiﬁcial
intelligence.
On the textile production side, AI can be used, for example, to detect visual defects
in shirts or collars, or it can be applied to automatically detect and measure wrinkles in
the fabric (Fig. 12 and 13). The measurement of the roughness of the textile fabric, based
on an artiﬁcial vein, can help the textile industries to reduce costs and productivity time
in the industrial manufacturing process [21].
Another application and a challenge for the future is the use of artiﬁcial intelligence
in the design of the textile industry ‘3D models’ of yarn ﬁbers in their designs and
prototypes, that can model the properties of yarns and ﬁbers in an automatic and realistic
way, without much effort and intervention by the human being [22].
For the future, human 3D modeling experts would have to create a yarn from individ-
ual ‘virtual ﬁbers’ and the objective would also be to use a CT (Computed Tomography)

390
F. Pereira et al.
Fig. 12. Comparison of wrinkles in actual wear and those generated by wrinkle simulator; a)
wrinkles at the elbow, b) wrinkles at the knee, c) wrinkles in the simulator, d) elbow wrinkles
when the coat is spread, e) wrinkles of fabric 3 when it is spread, f) knee wrinkles when the
trousers are spread, g) wrinkles of fabric when it is spread [21].
Fig. 13. Image process of wrinkled fabric; a) coloured image, b) grey level image, c) median
ﬁltered image, d) binary image, e) edge detected image [22].
scanner, using an AI algorithm in order to convert the data obtained by the CT into a 3D
ﬁber model, as shown in Fig. 8 [23] (Fig. 14).
Fig. 14. 3D ﬁber model [24].
6
Final Remarks
The implementation of AI in the textile sector is currently relatively low compared to
other industrial sectors. Currently, most AI applications in textiles involve the use of
artiﬁcial vision systems on machines to replace humans. These allow the analysis and
detection of errors that, even in some cases, is carried out by humans in textile yarn
samples.

A Review in the Use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Textile Industry
391
Currently, the technology presented in this article leaves many promising aspects and
allows analyzing the various research and development activities that are being carried
out in universities and other institutions.
AI applications in the textile sector are not yet fully in practice. This is due to the
simple fact that cutting-edge AI manufacturing applications are more likely to reach
larger and more modern sectors of activity.
In conclusion, the use of AI in the textile industry begins to be widely used and in
the coming years it will play a major role in the production and ﬁnal quality of products,
taking into account technological advances and market competitiveness.
The implementation of a new project aims to develop a new technological solution,
based on image processing and artiﬁcial intelligence techniques, for automatic character-
ization of the main parameters of a textile yarn, with the highest level of parameterization
in relation to commercial solutions. These technologies associated with a new develop-
ment of a solution to be used “online” at an industrial level in the textile area, will
contribute to increase the efﬁciency of the textile industry and the quality of the ﬁnal
products.
Acknowledgements. This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e
Tecnologia within the R&D Units Project Scope: UIDP/04077/2020 and UIDB/04077/2020.
References
1. Textile inspection - industry overview. COGNEX (2019). Accessed 30 Jan 2020
2. Bullon, J., et al.: Manufacturing processes in the textile industry. Expert systems for fab-
rics production. In: ADCAIJ: Advances in Distributed Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Journal, Salamanca, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 15–23 (2017). ISSN 2255-2863. Accessed 08 Nov 2019
3. Kuo, J., Lee, C.-J., Tsai, C.-C.: Using a neural network to identify fabric defects in dynamic
cloth inspection. Text. Res. J. – TEXT. RES. J. 73, 238–244 (2003)
4. Jeyaraj, P., Nadar, E.R.S.: Computer vision for automatic detection and classiﬁcation of fabric
defect employing deep learning algorithm. Int. J. Cloth. Sci. Technol. (2019)
5. Giarratano, J., Riley, G.: Expert Systems: Principles and Programming, 3rd edn. PWS
Publishing, USA (1998)
6. Ahlawat, N., Gautam, A., Sharma, N.: Use of logic gates to make edge avoider robot. Int. J.
Inf. Comput. Technol. 4(6), 630 (2014). ISSN 0974-2239
7. Leão, C.P., et al.: Web-assisted laboratory for control education: remote and virtual environ-
ments. In: Uckelmann, D., Scholz-Reiter, B., Rügge, I., Hong, B., Rizzi, A. (eds.) ImViReLL
2012. CCIS, vol. 282, pp. 62–72. Springer, Heidelberg (2012). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-642-28816-6_7
8. Veit, D.: Fuzzy logic and its application to textile technology. In Simulation in Textile Tech-
nology: Theory and Applications, pp. 112–141 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1533/978085709
7088.112
9. Majumdar, A., Majumdar, P.K., Sarkar, B.: Application of an adaptive neuro-fuzzy system
for the prediction of cotton yarn strength from HVI ﬁber properties. J. Text. Inst. 96(1), 55–60
(2005)
10. Chauhan, N., Yadav, N., Arya, N.: Applications of artiﬁcial neural network in textiles. Int. J.
Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci. 7(04), 3134–3143 (2018). https://doi.org/10.20546/ijcmas.2018.
704.356

392
F. Pereira et al.
11. Shamey, R., Shim, W.S., Joines, J.: Development and application of expert systems in the
textile industry (2010)
12. Ghosh,A.,Hasnat,A.,Halder,S.,Das,S.:Aproposedsystemforcottonyarndefectsclassiﬁca-
tion using probabilistic neural network. In: Recent Advances and Innovations in Engineering
(ICRAIE) (2014)
13. Carvalho, V., Cardoso, P., Belsley, M., Vasconcelos, R., Soares, F.O.: Yarn hairiness char-
acterization using two orthogonal directions. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 58(3), 594–601
(2009)
14. Chattopadhyay, R., Guha, A.: Artiﬁcial neural networks: applications to textiles. Text. Prog.
35(1), 1–46 (2004)
15. Shamey, R., Hussain, T.: Artiﬁcial intelligence in the colour and textile industry. Rev. Progr.
Colorat. 33, 33–45 (2003)
16. Carvalho, V., Soares, F., Vasconcelos, R.: Artiﬁcial intelligence and image processing-based
techniques: a tool for yarns parameterization and fabrics prediction, pp.1–4 (2009). https://
doi.org/10.1109/ETFA.2009.5347255
17. Zhang, Y., Lu, Z., Li, J.: Fabric defect classiﬁcation using radial basis function network.
Pattern Recogn. Lett. 31, 2033–2042 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patrec.2010.05.030
18. Kumar, A.: Neural network-based detection of local textile defects. Pattern Recogn. 36, 1645–
1659 (2003)
19. Furferi, R., Governi, L., Volpe, Y.: Color matching of fabric blends: hybrid Kubelka-Munk+
artiﬁcial neural network-based method. J. Electron. Imag. 25(6), 061402 (2016)
20. Furferi, R., Governi, L.: Prediction of the spectrophotometric response of a carded ﬁber
composed by different kinds of coloured raw materials: an artiﬁcial neural network-based
approach. Color Res. Appl. 36(3), 179–191 (2011)
21. Islam, A., Akhter, S., Mursalin, T.: Automated textile defect recognition system using
computer vision and artiﬁcial neural networks (2004)
22. Aspland, R., Shanbhag, P.: Comparison of color difference equations for textiles: CMC (2:1)
and CIEDE2000. AATCC Rev. 4(6), 26–30 (2004)
23. Liu, C.: New method of fabric wrinkle measurement based on image processing. Fibres Text.
Eastern Eur. 103, 51–55 (2014)
24. Zhao, S., Luan, F., Bala, K.: Fitting procedural yarn models for realistic cloth rendering. ACM
Trans. Graph. 35(4), 11 (2016). Article 51

HiZeca: A Serious Game for Emotions
Recognition
Pedro Santos1, Vinícius Silva2, João Sena Esteves3(B), Ana Paula Pereira4,
and Filomena Soares3
1 Department of Industrial Electronics, School of Engineering,
University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
a74504@alunos.uminho.pt
2 R&D Centre Algoritmi, School of Engineering, University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
a65312@alunos.uminho.pt
3 R&D Centre Algoritmi, Department of Industrial Electronics, School of Engineering,
University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
{sena,fsoares}@dei.uminho.pt
4 CIEd, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal
appereira@ie.uminho.pt
Abstract. To comprehend human behavior can be a very difﬁcult task for chil-
dren with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). These children have difﬁculties in
social interaction, and they manifest repetitive patterns. Furthermore, they present
deﬁcits in imitation which can be directly linked to impairments in social interac-
tion skills. Taking this into account, this paper presents the serious game HiZeca,
in which a virtual agent (ZECA Avatar) is able to interact with a child, in order
to promote social interaction and training certain facial movements that will be
validated, and that will facilitate imitation and recognition of emotions (content,
sad, surprised, among others). In order to validate the system, tests were conducted
with typically developing children and children with ASD. The results show that,
in general, the game was accepted with a positive feedback from the children.
Keywords: Serious game · Facial expressions · Emotions · Human-computer
interaction · Autism Spectrum Disorder
1
Introduction
Theemotionalstateismostlydeﬁnedbytheexpressionofdifferentnon-behaviouralcues,
such as facial prompts. The learning of such facial cues starts from early age when pupils
mirror the facial movements of others [1]. Learning by imitation is fundamental to the
development of cognitive and social communication behaviours. Furthermore, it directly
inﬂuences the cognitive empathy that allows a human being to logically comprehend
the emotional states of the others, being paramount for successful social interactions.
However, children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) present deﬁcits in imitation
which can be directly linked to impairments in social interaction skills [2].
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 393–405, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_35

394
P. Santos et al.
In order to mitigate these impairments, several works in the literature focus on the
use of technological tools such as robots with different conﬁgurations (from animal-like
to humanoid designs) or virtual agents. The humanoid design has been recently more
employed by the researchers in different projects in order to promote social interac-
tion with children with ASD. The humanoid design provides a more realistic approach
to explore several facets of emotional skills. One example is project ZECA [3] (Por-
tuguese acronym for Zeno Engaging Children with Autism), that uses a humanoid robot
developed by Hanson Robotics. This robot allows to promote social interaction with the
children providing the communication and the development of capacities of understand-
ing the emotions. Another more recent example is the QTrobot [4] (launched in 2018),
created by LuxAI to assist children in interpreting facial expressions and promoting
social interaction.
However, the technological robots used to support children with ASD are usually
expensive and making them widely available in intervention settings may be impractical.
A less expensive alternative is using software applications, which design is an area that
has been increasing. These applications have several concepts underlined, such as the
association of words with images to teach emotions, used by Sono Flex [5], or simply
allowing the user to choose an item and producing the audio or video that is linked
with that item, used by Livox [6]. A more advanced concept is proposed by TippyTalk
[7], which enables an individual with verbal disabilities to communicate by translating
pictures into text messages, allowing a child to communicate and express a desire, need,
or feeling. Studies conducted with children [8] showed that signiﬁcant progress has
been made in their behaviour regarding relationships with colleagues and teachers, for
example.
As addressed in [1], facial expressions play an important role during a social inter-
action and children with ASD lack the skills to perceive them. For this reason, the
development of applications that are capable of aiding in the learning of emotions and
the understanding of states of mind becomes a relevant solution. Furthermore, the design
of applications with virtual agents that can infer the user non-behavioural cues may offer
a unique opportunity to explore and promote the development of social skills in a wider
scale.
This paper presents a serious game called HiZeca, used to aid in the learning of
emotions and to promote social interaction with children with ASD. The game aims at
offeringavirtual alternativetothephysical robot ZECAfor interactingwithchildrenwith
ASD, at a much lower cost. It can be used anywhere with a general purpose computer.
The main character of the game is ZECA Avatar, a virtual agent that a child interacts
with using his facial expressions to imitate the avatar’s face. In turn, the avatar mimics
the child’s expressions. Thus, the child’s face will be monitored – using a tool previously
presented in [9] – in order to verify the execution of his facial movements and to support
their improvement, if they are not executed correctly. ZECA Avatar will encourage the
improvement of possible incorrect movements. The game has three levels of complexity.
It explores and fosters the child’s ability to mimic, recognize, and infer the emotional
states of ZECA Avatar.
This paper is organized in four sections. Section 2 presents the proposed serious
game; Sect. 3 shows the preliminary results obtained so far; and the ﬁnal remarks and
future work are addressed in Sect. 4.

HiZeca: A Serious Game for Emotions Recognition
395
2
The Serious Game HiZeca
The serious game HiZeca is devoted to mimicking facial expressions and emotion recog-
nition. The challenges that are presented to the user will allow to understand the type
of emotion and interpret emotional states. For this, the user’s face will be monitored in
order to verify the execution of the facial movements.
HiZeca has three levels with increased difﬁculty and running in three different
scenarios: Movement Training, Expression Training and Emotion Identiﬁcation (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Game levels
In the ﬁrst scenario, Movement Training, the purpose is to train some facial move-
ments that will help the user in the execution of emotional expressions. This level also
serves to familiarize the user to the main character. The movements made by the user
are replicated by ZECA Avatar in an imitation context by model [10]. In this case, the
user serves as a model for the avatar to copy. For this, the user is asked to perform a set
of basic movements (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Level 1 - movement training (in Portuguese).

396
P. Santos et al.
In the second scenario, Expression Training, various facial expressions associated
with ﬁve emotions are trained: happiness, sadness, anger, fear and surprise. The user
is asked to execute some expressions where the avatar serves as a model. As the user
successfully imitates the expression, the avatar moves away becoming smaller, until it
disappears remaining only the label of the emotion (Fig. 3). A control bar has been
placed strategically so that the user can control the intensity of his/her expression. This
scene is an example of learning by deferred imitation [11].
Fig. 3. Level 2 - expression training (in Portuguese).
In the third level, Emotion Identiﬁcation, the story mode was implemented where
the child is invited to listen to a set of 15 different stories and identify the associated
emotional state corresponding to one of the previously trained. Figure 4 presents the
menu for the emotion selection. In case the answer given by the user is incorrect, the
number of lives (options) is decreased and the answer button disappears.
Fig. 4. Level 3 - emotion identiﬁcation: menu emotion selection.
3
Results
Laboratory tests involving adults were performed in order to test the robustness of the
game and validate the implemented methods. Tests were also performed in a school
environment, both with typically developed children and children with ASD, in order to
verify the acceptance of the tool by children between 6 and 8 years old. Each child was
seated strategically, with the face at the level of the camera or webcam.

HiZeca: A Serious Game for Emotions Recognition
397
3.1
Typically Developed Children
The values shown in Table 1 are related to the tests performed for level 1 with three
typically developed children. A small ﬂaw in the validation of the mouth opening move-
ment was detected. Only one timeout was recorded, which resulted in a detection rate
of 66.67%. For the smile movement, two timeouts were recorded, resulting in a lower
validation rate, with a value of 33.33%. For the movement of raising the eyebrows, it
was also veriﬁed that the validation limits should be high, leading to a timeout for this
movement. The movement with the highest average response time was to frown. This
movement has a 100% validation rate, but it has a high average time due to the difﬁculty
that the children encountered in executing the movement. As expected, it was also in
this movement that a maximum response time was recorded: 39 s. The computation of
the average times shown in Table 1 did not include the timeouts that occurred. The small
number of children being tested implies that the ﬂuctuation in the values corresponding
to the responses of each child greatly affects mean values and validation rates.
Table 2 shows the values related to the tests performed for level 2 with three typically
developed children. Each emotion was tested ﬁve times by each of the three children,
resulting in a total of 15 validations per emotion. In this second level, the happiness and
fear emotions were those that registered a maximum validation rate: 100%. For these
emotions the average response times were exactly the same: 6.8 s. The value recorded
for the emotion of disgust was the lowest of all: 80%. This is an emotion that, although
usual, is not one of the most present in everyday life, hence the difﬁculty in expressing it.
Regarding the average times, the lowest value was registered for the emotion of surprise:
6.56 s. On the other hand, the highest value was registered for the emotion of disgust:
8.08 s.
Table 3 shows the values related to the tests performed for level 3 (story mode)
with three typically developed children. In this third level, some wrong answers were
recorded in some stories, as well as some repetitions, which happened when the children
felt the need to listen again and see the story to give their ﬁnal answer. For stories 4 and
11, two wrong answers were recorded, this being the largest number of wrong answers
in all tests. The story with the highest average response time was story 3, related to angry
emotion, with a value of 13.67 s. The maximum response time was recorded for story
10. At this level, the children’s reasoning ability to quickly associate emotions with the
story in question was noted. Of the three levels tested, the third and last level was the one
that showed the best performance and acceptance results by these typically developed
children.
3.2
Children with ASD
Tests were performed with two children with ASD, who have very different character-
istics (named child A and child B).
Child A has a high degree of autonomy. He can speak ﬂuently and read, which
promotes the interaction because, at all levels, in addition to sound there are written
elements.

398
P. Santos et al.
Table 1. Summary table with average values of the results of tests in school environment for level
1 with typically developed children.
Movement
Detection
Timeout
Average time (s)
Maximum time (s)
Open the mouth
66,67%
1
5,5
7
Lower the head
100%
0
5
10
Raise the head
100%
0
9,67
13
Tilt head to the left
100%
0
15
21
Tilt head to the right
100%
0
11,33
23
Look to the left
100%
0
4,67
6
Look to the right
100%
0
9,67
16
Raise eyebrows
66,67%
1
8,5
15
Smile
33,33%
2
5
5
Wink
100%
0
10,33
20
Frown
100%
0
16
39
Tilt head to the side
100%
0
5,33
8
Look to the side
100%
0
7,33
11
Table 2. Summary table with average values of the results of tests in school environment for level
2 with typically developed children.
Emotion
Validation
Average time (s)
Maximum time
(s)
Happiness
100%
6,80
19
Surprise
93,33%
6,56
22
Fear
100%
6,80
28
Sadness
80%
6,70
18
Anger
86,87%
6,85
20
Disgust
80%
8,08
27
Table 4 summarizes the performance of the child A at level 1. At this level, he
just failed to correctly perform two movements: tilting his head to the side and raising
his eyebrows. He was unable to perform the movement of raising his eyebrows due
to difﬁculties in controlling each isolated movement of the face. For this reason, the
maximum time for executing the movement has been exceeded. Another difﬁculty felt
was the distinction between the right and the left. For this reason, movements that involve
the distinction between right and left have high response times, as can be seen in Table
4. For example, the movement of tilting the head to the right has an answering time of
28 s.

HiZeca: A Serious Game for Emotions Recognition
399
Table 3. Summary table with average values of the results of tests in school environment for level
3 with typically developed children.
Story
Wrong answers
Repetitions
Average time (s)
Maximum time (s)
Story 1
0
0
11
22
Story 2
1
1
7
12
Story 3
0
0
13,67
17
Story 4
2
1
11,5
14
Story 5
0
0
6,33
11
Story 6
0
1
7,33
16
Story 7
0
0
7,33
15
Story 8
0
0
2,33
4
Story 9
0
1
2,67
6
Story 10
0
0
8,33
18
Story 11
2
0
7
9
Story 12
0
0
3
5
Story 13
1
0
9,67
13
Story 14
0
1
5,67
8
Story 15
1
0
4,67
7
Table 5 summarizes the performance of child A level 2. At this level, where the ability
to express emotions is tested, the child’s performance was surprising. In addition to being
able to express all emotions correctly, he performed each expression in acceptable times.
For the expression of angry, for example, the response times were low (never exceeding
5 s) which translates to an ease in the expression of the emotion. At the last moment only
the name of the emotion remains, and the child was able to express each emotion very
quickly. The ﬁrst time the expression associated with disgust was asked, the child had
some difﬁculties, evidenced by the 28 s of response time. But in all the identical requests
that followed, response times were low. This means that, after a period of learning, the
child was able to easily express the emotion.
Table 6 summarizes the performance of child A at level 3 (story mode). In this
third level, there was no story in which the maximum response time was reached or the
number of lives exhausted. However, from the recorded data it can be seen that there
were three moments in which the repetition of the story was necessary for the child to
clarify which emotion was right. For example, in story 5 the child initially selected a
wrong answer but, after repeating the story, was able to select the right emotion. As with
typically developed children, this third level was the one that aroused the most interest
for the child. Since this child said everything he was thinking it was possible to realize
that, after hearing the story and having watched the face of the avatar, he associated the
expression and context of the story with the right emotion, except in stories 1 and 5.
The fact that the child knows how to read also helped when doubts arose regarding the

400
P. Santos et al.
expression or image present, as he was able to associate the emotion with the name of
the button.
Child B has many difﬁculties in concentrating and is a very active child. These
complications led to greater difﬁculty in performing the tests. There were also times
when the child ﬁxed his attention and concentration on elements external to the game,
resulting in total inattention to the game.
At level 1, the validation of movements was affected by the child’s constant move-
ments that caused difﬁculties in detecting his face. For this reason, the level 1 test was
not completed, with only a few movements being tested (Table 7).
Table 4. Summary of the performance of child A at level 1.
Movement
Right answer Answering time
Open the mouth
Yes
00:00:08
Lower the head
Yes
00:00:10
Raise the head
Yes
00:00:11
Tilt head to the left
Yes
00:00:28
Tilt head to the right Yes
00:00:28
Look to the left
Yes
00:00:20
Look to the right
Yes
00:00:06
Raise eyebrows
No
TimeOut
Smile
Yes
00:00:06
Wink
Yes
00:00:03
Frown
Yes
00:00:02
Tilt head to the side
No
TimeOut
Look to the side
Yes
00:00:04
Level 2 tests achieved better results. At this level, the child was initially able to
express some emotions (Table 8). For the surprise emotion, the child associated the
movement of opening the mouth to this emotion having obtained acceptable response
times.
At the third and ﬁnal level this child’s behavior changed signiﬁcantly (Table 9).
For the ﬁrst story presented, two wrong answers were recorded. Then the child was
encouraged to listen and see the story again, after which he was able to answer correctly.
In the following stories the child’s attention and concentration increased signiﬁcantly.
It was necessary to repeat some stories. In these cases, the child could understand the
emotion. Response times were better than expected. The acceptance of this third level
was also noted and the child’s performance was surprising.
After completing all tests with typically developed children and children with ASD,
it can be said that the feedback is positive. The acceptance HiZeca of was good at all
levels. Level 3 was the level that attracted the most interest from all children.

HiZeca: A Serious Game for Emotions Recognition
401
Table 5. Summary of the performance of child A at level 2.
Emotion
Right answer Answering time
Happiness 1 Yes
00:00:05
Happiness 2 Yes
00:00:10
Happiness 3 Yes
00:00:06
Happiness 4 Yes
00:00:03
Happiness 5 Yes
00:00:03
Sadness 1
Yes
00:00:05
Sadness 2
Yes
00:00:02
Sadness 3
Yes
00:00:05
Sadness 4
Yes
00:00:02
Sadness 5
Yes
00:00:02
Disgust 1
Yes
00:00:28
Disgust 2
Yes
00:00:02
Disgust 3
Yes
00:00:03
Disgust 4
Yes
00:00:03
Disgust 5
Yes
00:00:03
Fear 1
Yes
00:00:04
Fear 2
Yes
00:00:04
Fear 3
Yes
00:00:06
Fear 4
Yes
00:00:11
Fear 5
Yes
00:00:08
Surprise 1
Yes
00:00:04
Surprise 2
Yes
00:00:14
Surprise 3
Yes
00:00:03
Surprise 4
Yes
00:00:02
Surprise 5
Yes
00:00:03
Anger 1
Yes
00:00:04
Anger 2
Yes
00:00:05
Anger 3
Yes
00:00:02
Anger 4
Yes
00:00:02
Anger 5
Yes
00:00:02

402
P. Santos et al.
Table 6. Summary of the performance of child A at level 3.
Story
Right answer
Answering
time
Story 3
Repetition
Story 3
Yes
00:00:33
Story 6
Yes
00:00:17
Story 9
Repetition
Story 9
Yes
00:00:04
Story 12
Yes
00:00:10
Story 15
Yes
00:00:11
Story 14
Yes
00:00:32
Story 11
Yes
00:00:09
Story 8
Yes
00:00:07
Story 5
No
Story 5
Repetition
Story 5
Yes
00:00:13
Story 2
Yes
00:00:11
Story 1
No
Story 1
Yes
00:00:59
Story 4
Yes
00:00:07
Story 7
Yes
00:00:15
Story 10
Yes
00:00:12
Story 13
Yes
00:00:25
Table 7. Summary of the performance of the child B at level 1.
Movement
Right answer Answering time
Lower the head
Yes
00:00:23
Raise the head
Yes
00:00:26
Tilt head to the left
No
TimeOut
Tilt head to the right No
TimeOut
Smile
Yes
00:00:39
Frown
Yes
00:00:04
Tilt head to the side
No
TimeOut

HiZeca: A Serious Game for Emotions Recognition
403
Table 8. Summary of the performance of child B at level 2.
Emotion
Right answer Answering time
Happiness 1 No
TimeOut
Happiness 2 No
TimeOut
Happiness 3 No
TimeOut
Happiness 4 No
TimeOut
Happiness 5 No
TimeOut
Sadness 1
Yes
00:00:15
Sadness 2
Yes
00:00:16
Sadness 3
Yes
00:00:02
Sadness 4
Yes
00:00:05
Sadness 5
Yes
00:00:05
Disgust 1
Yes
00:00:08
Disgust 2
Yes
00:00:03
Disgust 3
Yes
00:00:15
Disgust 4
Yes
00:00:12
Disgust 5
Yes
00:00:20
Fear 1
Yes
00:00:06
Fear 2
Yes
00:00:03
Fear 3
Yes
00:00:05
Fear 4
Yes
00:00:07
Fear 5
Yes
00:00:07
Surprise 1
Yes
00:00:05
Surprise 2
Yes
00:00:02
Surprise 3
Yes
00:00:04
Surprise 4
Yes
00:00:16
Surprise 5
Yes
00:00:03
Anger 1
Yes
00:00:28
Anger 2
No
TimeOut
Anger 3
Yes
00:00:19
Anger 4
Yes
00:00:19
Anger 5
Yes
00:00:30
4
Final Remarks
In order to understand the other’s emotional states, it is important to be able to interpret
their non behavioural cues, for example facial expressions. This ability allows human

404
P. Santos et al.
beings to adjust their behaviour and react suitably. Consequently, understanding facial
expressions correctly and extracting the pertinent social information from them is impor-
tant for social interactions and communication. Individuals with ASD present deﬁcits in
imitation which can be directly linked to impairments in social interaction skills.
This paper presented the serious game HiZeca, used to aid in the learning of emotions
and promote social interaction with children with ASD. It aims at offering a virtual
alternative to the physical robot ZECA for interacting with these children, at a much
lower cost. It can be used anywhere with a general purpose computer.
Table 9. Summary of the performance of child B at level 3.
Story
Right answer
Answering
time
Story 1
No
Story 1
No
Story 1
Repetition
Story 1
Yes
00:00:17
Story 4
No
Story 4
Repetition
Story 4
No
Story 4
Yes
00:00:51
Story 13
Yes
00:00:09
Story 2
Yes
00:00:12
Story 5
Repetition
Story 5
Yes
00:00:17
Story 3
Yes
00:00:12
Story 6
Yes
00:00:07
Story 14
Repetition
Story 14
Yes
00:00:02
Story 7
Yes
00:00:05
Story 10
Yes
00:00:05
Story 8
Repetition
Story 8
Yes
00:00:12
Story 15
Yes
00:00:03
Story 11
Yes
00:00:04
Story 9
Repetition
Story 9
Yes
00:00:23
Story 12
Yes
00:00:06

HiZeca: A Serious Game for Emotions Recognition
405
The game, with three levels of complexity, explores and fosters the child’s ability to
mimic, recognize, and infer the emotional states of virtual agent ZECA Avatar, the main
character.
Preliminary tests were conducted in a school environment, both with typically devel-
oped children and children with ASD, in order to verify the acceptance of the tool by
children between 6 and 8 years old.
After completing all tests with typically developed children and children with ASD,
it can be said that the feedback is positive. The acceptance of HiZeca was good at all
levels. Level 3 was the level that attracted the most interest from all children.
Future work considers optimizing further the system by improving the automatic
recognition of facial expressions, and conducting tests in a school environment with a
larger sample of children with ASD, in order to ﬁnd out if the game can actually be a
complementary intervention tool. With this game, children are expected to promote their
cognitive abilities and improve their ability to communicate and interact with peers.
Acknowledgments. This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnolo-
gia within the R&D Units Project Scope: UIDB/00319/2020. Vinicius Silva also thanks FCT for
the PhD scholarship SFRH/BD/ SFRH/BD/133314/2017.
References
1. Piaget: Piaget and His School. Springer, Heidelberg (1976). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-46323-5
2. Ingersoll, B.: The social role of imitation in autism. Infants Young Child. 21(2), 107–119
(2008)
3. Silva, V., Soares, F., Sena Esteves, J.: Mirroring emotion system – on-line synthesizing facial
expressions on a robot face. In: 8th International Congress on Ultra Modern Telecommu-
nications and Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT), Lisbon, Portugal, 18–20 October
2016
4. LuxAI, QTrobot - LuxAI.com. http://luxai.com/qtrobot/. Accessed 6 Dec 2018
5. Tobii Dynavox logo, Sono Flex for Communicator 5 - Tobii Dynavox. https://www.tobiidyna
vox.com/software/content/sono-ﬂex-for-communicator-5/. Accessed 7 Dec 2018
6. Livox, Livox: para pessoas com deﬁciências e transtornos de aprendizagem. http://www.livox.
com.br/pt/quem-somos/#sobre. Accessed 6 Dec 2018 (in Portuguese)
7. TippyTalk - Comunicação Instantânea para Pessoas Não Verbais. (n.d.). http://www.tippy-
talk.com/. Accessed 16 Jan 2019. (in Portuguese)
8. Ferreira, V.: Utilização das tecnologias em crianças com perturbações do espectro autista
em contexto da Prática de Ensino Supervisionada. Universidade Católica Portuguesa, Centro
Regional de Braga, Faculdade de Ciências Sociais, Braga (2013).(in Portuguese)
9. Santos,P.,Silva,V.,Soares,F.,Simões,A.:Facialvirtualtracking:asystemtomirroremotions.
In: Moura Oliveira, P., Novais, P., Reis, L.P. (eds.) EPIA 2019. LNCS (LNAI), vol. 11805,
pp. 68–79. Springer, Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30244-3_7
10. McLeod, S.: Bandura - Social Learning Theory (2016)
11. Moura, M.L., Ribas, A.: Imitação e desenvolvimento inicial: evidências empíricas, expli-
cações e implicações teóricas. Estudos de Psicologia (2002). (in Portuguese)

Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People
M. Leonor Castro-Ribeiro1, A. A. Vilaça1, Mariana A. Pires1, Karolina Bezerra2,
Cândida Vilarinho2, and Ana Olival1(B)
1 School of Engineering, University of Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal
2 METRICs Research Center, University of Minho, 4800-058 Guimarães, Portugal
Abstract. A portable bathing system for bedridden people was designed to help
facilitate the bath and to reduce the lack of privacy of such patients. This system
comprises a cylindric stainless steel reservoir with an insulation of polyurethane
foam, a rectangular low-density polyethylene board and a galvanized steel trans-
port system. This system allows the reproduction of a conventional shower bath at
a constant temperature, improving the bedridden hygiene, self-esteem and quality
of life, while reducing the physical effort made by the caregiver. The modeling of
the three components and the analysis of the transport system was done with Inven-
tor® Software, obtaining for the transport system a maximum stress of 0.011 MPa
and a maximum displacement of 3.438 × 10–6 mm, for an applied load of 200 kg.
Since the displacement was relatively small, the system can withstand the load.
Keywords: Bedridden · Portable bath · Medical device
1
Introduction
According to the World Health Organization more than one billion people, about 15% of
the world’s population, have some form of disability and between 110 million and 190
million adults have signiﬁcant movement difﬁculties [1]. Consequently, it is necessary
to create devices to aid these people and their caregivers [2].
These disability rates are increasing due to population aging and increased chronic
health conditions. It is estimated that the world’s population over 60 years of age will
grow to double in 32 years [2].
Disabledpeopleneedhelpinnumerousbasicactivities,especiallyinthebathwhichis
essential for a person’s health. Hygiene care is based on an initial assessment of the needs
and preferences of the user. This evaluation leads to the establishment of the following
objectives: comfort and relaxation, circulation stimulation, cleaning, improving self-
image and treating the skin [3].
The bedridden people bath can be a full bath in the bed (caregiver totally washes the
person using wipes, face towel, bath towels and bath bowls), a partial bath in bed (given
by the caregiver who helps cleaning areas where secretions accumulate: face, hands,
armpits and perineal area) and self-help bath in bed (for people conﬁned to the bed, but
able to wash themselves completely except for the back, legs and feet) [3].
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 406–421, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_36

Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People
407
These forms of sanitation compromise the health of the patient, which can cause the
appearance of ulcers, bedsores, rashes and urinary infections. In addition, it is a very
exhausting procedure for the caregiver who performs the bath [4].
The proposed project consists in the development of a portable shower system with a
shower, a waterproof ﬂexible tub-shaped board and a transport system. The main purpose
of the project is to enable and facilitate the shower of a bedridden person.
This device was developed to reduce the stress of the caregiver and the patient
associated with this activity, offer the bedridden greater thermal comfort and privacy,
improve skin hydration and enable a shower bath sensation.
Thus, it is intended that this device could be used domestically, in homes, hospitals
and day centers.
2
State of Art
As the number of people with physical limitations increases, it is necessary to develop
better devices and techniques to assist caregivers. In this context, technological solutions
have been developed to assist the bed bath, improving the quality and efﬁcacy of the
bedridden people bath.
Some examples of these devices are a portable bathtub, a water reservoir and a
hygiene apparatus.
The portable bathtub was created with the aim of innovating and improving the
quality of nursing care, allowing patient mobility without causing much discomfort. This
design includes a vertical stand that allows the side areas of the bed to have different
heights,allowingittoaccommodatemultiplebeds.Thetubismadeofaﬂexiblepolyvinyl
chloride (PVC) laminate. This bed is also attached to a silicone tube and to the shower
in the bathroom. This tube at one end has the showerhead and at the other end a water
drain valve [5].
GADE Hospital has developed FlexCare, a portable system for bathing, to maintain a
constant temperature, throughout the procedure providing greater comfort for the patient.
The system is made by a digital panel with temperature control and an ergonomically
designed trolley that has swivel handles and casters [6].
Hygienic apparatuses have also been developed to support bathing in bed, including
a hygienic bath system designed to provide comfort, stimulate blood circulation and
hydrate the skin of bedridden patients, especially in the intensive care unit. This device
is portable and has a rotating massager, moved by compressed air pressure [4].
In addition to the devices presented there are several patented systems that have the
purpose of assisting the bathing of people in bed, as we can see in Table 1.
US6802088B1 and WO2011138660A1 are patents of devices that can be used as
bathtubs in beds, which are comfortable and improve the bedridden bath.
The device of the Comfort bed bath patent consists of a portable bed with a horizontal
bottom surrounded by vertical walls and an opening at the top thus having the shape of
a bath. The tub has a removable side panel incorporated into at least one side wall with
a latching mechanism. This is used to attach the removable side panel to the tub. This
device has an adjustable backrest/footrest. The bathtub has a ﬂexible inlet conduit and a

408
M. L. Castro-Ribeiro et al.
Table 1. Patents of devices related to bathing systems for bedridden patients.
Patent
Inventor
Name
US3778848A [8]
T Lyytinen
Mobile hospital bathing unit
US5054136A [9]
Jitsuo Inagaki
Bed with a bathtub
US5729848A [10]
Yukigaya Precision Industry Co.,
Ltd
Bed with a wash tub for pubes
US20020125179A1 [11]
Chi-An Chang
Air cushion bed with
water-draining device
WO2002078491A1 [12]
George Khait
Universal service bed
US6802088B1 [7]
Daniel M Gruner
Comfort bed bath
WO2008069767A1 [13]
Mehmet Akdemir
Bed system performing
automatic cleaning of bedridden
patients
WO2011138660A1 [14]
Minurri Donato
Bathing system bedridden
patients
ﬂexible outlet conduit for introduction of water. Water can be supplied by a conventional
showerhead. This tub is designed for use on beds or stretchers [7].
The Bathing system for bedridden patients of patent WO2011138660A1 is a device
composed of an inﬂatable PVC air tube. This device has an inﬂatable and ergonomic
main central body, a user support headrest and a tubular air wall [14]. This system
protects the user against accidental falls, prevents overﬂow of water during the bath and
channels the waste water into the drain hole. An important aspect of this system is that it
allows the patient’s elevated position in relation to the waste water, guaranteeing a better
hygiene of the body [14].
The devices and patents presented are examples that need improvement in order to be
applied. Despite improving the bed bath experience when compared to the conventional
methods there are some components that should be improved. Some of these devices are
difﬁcult to transport and not straightforward to use, while others rely on the existence
of water sources. Moreover, the patient may need to be moved and their privacy cannot
be ensured.
3
Methodology
In the elaboration of the project it was necessary to follow a certain methodology that
guarantees the introduction of rational procedures. This methodology consisted of Brain-
storming, an Objectives Tree, Interviews, elaboration of a House of Quality and the
establishment of the project components.
The brainstorming performed allowed the drafting of possible future designs of the
device, insertion of new elements, improvement of existing products, clariﬁcation of
some of the objectives of this project and the need to carry out future interviews and
surveys.

Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People
409
The ﬁrst idea of this system was to be constituted by a reservoir of water for the bath,
a reservoir for the residual water and a waterproof plate to put in the bed.
An Objectives Tree was built, consisting of the main objectives of the project,
presented in Fig. 1.
This proposal has as its main function “Bathe people in bed” and in the line of
development of this objective were deﬁned a series of main objectives concerning char-
acteristics that the device must have to satisfy the caregiver and bedridden needs. Is also
take in consideration that the project must be achievable and ecologic.
Fig. 1. Objective tree of the portable bathing system
The interviews allowed a better understanding of the opinion of patients, caregivers
and health professionals. The interviewees were a quadriplegic patient, one nurse, a
caregiver and a technical director of Retirement Home Nossa Senhora da Misericórdia,
Braga, Portugal.
In a general way, it was given greater importance to following aspects: mechanism
of the plate, the portability of the device, the reduction of the physical effort, the thermal
comfort and the cost/beneﬁt relation. The interviewees also suggested possible appli-
cations for this device in houses, retirement homes, Palliative Care Units and in the
provision of Home Care.
A survey was carried out, Portable Bathing System - Consumer Requirements, to
realizethemostimportantrequirementsandtheirrespectiveweightforbuyers,caregivers
and users.
With the results of the surveys answered by 54 people, a House of Quality was built.
The design requirements that were given more importance were the following: design of
the reservoir; design of the plate; and plate material: antimicrobial, foldable and resistant.
3.1
Project Components
This system is composed of a reservoir with two compartments, one for warm water and
other for residual water. This reservoir needs a heating system and a pumping system.
The diagram of the overall system is presented in Fig. 2.

410
M. L. Castro-Ribeiro et al.
Fig. 2. Overall diagram of the system.
Heating System
To ensure a safe and comfortable bath for the user, temperature is an essential fac-
tor. According to the Association of Manufacturers of Thermostatic Mixing Valves the
temperature cannot exceed 42 °C, nor be below 38 °C [15].
This solution would require users to make a small change to the faucet to be used to
ﬁll the reservoir, avoiding problems with other heating solutions that required shutdown
of the device.
This change consists on the placement of quick couplings between the water source
and the faucet. After the water enters the system, it passes through the thermostatic valve
and then through the ﬁlter, accumulating in the hot water reservoir. In this tank there are
a temperature sensor, an air trap and a level sensor. The water exits the reservoir and
is propelled into the shower through a suction pump. After going through the shower,
the water ﬂows down the board to the place where it is collected by a tube that, due to
gravity, takes it to a reservoir of residual water.
Pumping System
The main purpose of the pumping system is to ensure the pumping of water from the
reservoir to the shower.
The water ﬂow chosen was 30 L in 10 min i.e. 5 × 10–3 m3/s. Thus, to ensure that
the water ﬂow has this value, it was necessary to dimension the water circulation ducts
[16].
For the ﬂow value 5 × 10–3 m3/s and for a maximum velocity of 1.5 m/s the minimum
diameter of the selected pipe is 0.0065 m. The commercial selected tubes are shown in
Table 2.
Table 2. Pipes main characteristics and estimated head loss (Hc)
Parts
Material
Diameter (m)
Length (m)
J (m m−1)
Hc(m)
Tube 1 [17]
PPR
0.0144
0.1
1.01E−02
1.01E−03
Tube 2 [18]
Stainless steel
0.008
1,5
2.29E−01
3.44E−01
J – Head loss estimated with the empirical Hazen-Williams equation.

Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People
411
To choose the most appropriate hydraulic pump for this project, the maximum desired
water ﬂow rate, manometric head and operating voltage of the pump has been consid-
ered [19]. The desired water ﬂow rate, as mention before, is 3 L/min. In this system
the maximum height that the pump must pump the water is 1.5 m corresponding to a
manometric head of 3.19 bar. Therefore, the pump chosen for this system should allow
this pressure to be selected for the desired water ﬂow rate.
Morphologic Map
To select the individual necessary components, a morphological map, shown in Fig. 3,
was constructed.
s
n
oitulo
S
s
n
oitc
n
u
F
1 
Water Capacity
6 L 
15 L 
30 L 
2 
Pump[20–22]
3 
Air Vent[23–25]
4 
Thermostatic 
Mixing Valve[26–
28] 
5 
Water Filter[29–
31]
6 
Support[32–34]
7 
Wheels[35–37]
8 
Shower 
Head[38–40]
9 
Temperature 
Sensor[41–43]
10 
Level Sen-
sor[44–46]
Fig. 3. Morphological map of the project.
Initially, it was considered that a water capacity between 6 and 10 L. would be
necessary. However, after the interviews with professionals involved in the bedding
process, we chose a capacity of 30 L.
The pump chosen for this system was the SHURﬂo diaphragm pump model 2088-
474-144 which, with a pressure switch, allows to select the pressure between 2,1 and
3,4 bar to obtain a certain ﬂow rate. Thus, with this pump, the approximate pressure of

412
M. L. Castro-Ribeiro et al.
3,2 bar would be selected to obtain an approximate ﬂow rate of 3 L/min. This model is
a pump with nominal voltage of 24 V and pumps liquids of temperatures up to 54 ºC.
These characteristics prove that it is adequate and safe for this system [20].
This design includes an air vent to prevent negative phenomena that could impair
the system reservoir’s durability and performance, such as corrosive processes caused
by oxygen, air pockets and cavitation. The selected air trap was VALCONTROL air
cleaner, with a ½′′ diameter [25].
After selecting the heating system, it was necessary to select the thermostatic valve
that corresponds to the requirements of the design with respect to the diameter of the
same, respective minimum ﬂow to ensure a stable temperature and good resistance to
temperature and wear. A Thermostatic Mixer with Calefﬁreplaceable cartridge, with a
diameter of ½′′, was selected [28].
Because the water in the network may contain impurities and high concentrations
of chlorine, it is important to use a water ﬁlter in the tubes to ensure that the water that
contacts with the bedridden is adequate. The selected ﬁlter was a Pentek 158623 Clear
Housing with ½′′ diameter [30].
To make the entire system portable, a four-wheeled car with an elongated handle was
selected to carry both tanks. Thus, 4 polypropylene wheels with steel brakes, a 80 mm
diameter and capable of holding 75 kg each were selected [37].
The shower head selected should allow water-saving, to respect the ecological needs.
In this way, an ECCO Sensea Shower was selected from Leroy Merlin. This device has
a Stop feature, which allows the control of the water ﬂow through the shower [38].
For the user to conﬁrm the reservoir water temperature, Baumer’s CombiTemp ™
TFRx temperature sensor with a platinum resistance, which is applicable for liquid
measurement, was selected. This sensor has at one end a digital display showing the
measured temperature [43].
On the other hand, for the user to know when the tank is full or, for some reason, with
lower water level than expected a Kobold level sensor was selected [44]. This sensor
must measure water levels of 330 mm or more and have a maximum length of 250 mm.
3.2
Developed Reservoir Prototype
The system must have a reservoir that allows the storage of water. This tank must have a
sufﬁcient volume for the required amount of water and for the placement of the system
elements (temperature sensor and level sensor).
The reservoir consists of two cylindrical reservoirs: one for heated water and another
for residual water, which simpliﬁes its design.
For the system to be portable, a 4-wheel structure was also coupled to the reservoir
to support the weight of the reservoir.
Materials
The selected material was 316L stainless steel because it has low thermal conductivity,
is resistant to corrosion in several chemical environments and steel is commonly used
for the construction of several different types of water reservoirs [47, 48]. Since this
material also has a high modulus of elasticity it was selected for the outer constitution
of the reservoir.

Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People
413
This material was also selected for the constitution of the residual water reservoir.
An insulation was selected with the objective of minimizing heat transfer from the
interior of the reservoir to the environment. The material selected was polyurethane foam
because it has low thermal conductivity and density.
Design
As mentioned before the reservoirs for residual water and hot water that make up the
reservoir must have a capacity of 30 L. Stainless steel hot water containers should have
a thickness between 1.4 mm and 2 mm. In this project the thickness chosen was 2 mm
[15].
In this design the vessel was sized to prevent water from cooling 1 °C in an hour.
This way it was chosen an insulation thickness of 25 mm. Factors taken in account were:
heat transfer values, the ﬁnal dimensions of the hot water reservoir, the existence of heat
losses on the ﬂat faces of the reservoir and that polyurethane foam is not very dense.
The residual water tank does not require insulation and the thickness of stainless-steel
chosen was 1,4 mm.
Reservoir Prototype
A 3D model of the prototype was developed in Inventor Software considering the dimen-
sions necessary to incorporate all the electronics and meet the full set of requirements.
This prototype was created to be easily used by caregivers, healthcare professionals
or common citizens. The system can be divided, as mentioned before in a warm water
reservoir and a residual water reservoir. Both reservoirs are cylindric and can be separate
and have removable caps for future cleaning.
The warm water reservoir, seen in Fig. 4, has a structure where the second reservoir
ﬁts and it is suggested the use of screws to ﬁxate the two reservoirs.
Fig. 4. Warm water reservoir prototype

414
M. L. Castro-Ribeiro et al.
The dimensions include a base with a diameter of 418 mm and a height of 860.4 mm.
system.InFig.5itcanbeseenthereservoirandtheentrancesforthedifferentcomponents
included in the reservoir. The entrance number 1 refers to the entrance of residual water
coming from the bed board, 2 is the entrance of warm water close to the level sensor, 4
is the place of the temperature sensor and 5 is the pump entrance.
Fig. 5. Reservoir Prototype in which at the left 1 represents the entrance of residual water, 2 the
entrance of warm water, 3 the entrance of the level sensor, 4 the entrance of the temperature sensor
and at the right 5 represents the entrance of the pump.
The technical drawing of the reservoir can be seen in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Technical drawing of the reservoir developed.

Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People
415
3.3
Developed Plaque Prototype
The board serves as an interface between the water and the bed of the bedridden people.
In this way, the board needs to be: waterproof (to allow it to not wet the bed of the
bedridden), foldable (to fold and take the form of a bathtub and facilitate its transport
and storage); resistant (not to break); and antimicrobial (to facilitate cleaning).
Considering that privacy is important for the bedridden person, the board has the
sides high enough to ensure that the bedridden person feels comfortable regarding their
privacy. The raised margins are also important to ensure that water does not overﬂow
during bathing in bed. The chosen method to connect the margins was the use of a
common zipper.
The board needs to connect with the water waste reservoir. This way it was chosen
a nipple DIN8063 of PVC, to avoid outﬂow of water from the adapter it is necessary to
cover the inner part in contact with the board with polyethylene plastic.
Materials
The material chosen was low density polyethylene (LDPE). This material is inert com-
pared to most common chemicals because of its parafﬁnic nature, high molecular weight
and partially crystalline structure, and ethylene polymers are non-toxic [49]. This mate-
rial has a unique combination of properties like toughness, high impact strength, high
ﬂexibility, good processability, stability and remarkable electrical properties [49].
Antimicrobial additives can be added to the polyethylene, so the material has
antimicrobial properties [50].
Dimensions
The dimensions of the board should conform to the general measurements of most
hospital beds. From a bibliographical research, it was veriﬁed that there are several
models of hospital beds with different dimensions [51, 52].
In this way, the dimensions chosen were for the central board a length of 200 cm,
width of 90 cm and for the margins that will rise and give the plate the shape of a bath
20 cm high.
As the chosen material is very malleable it has been deﬁned that the central body of
the board should be 5 mm thick and the areas at the tips of the board 1 mm thick. The
zipper is installed in the remaining 0.4 cm where materials of different thicknesses are
not connected.

416
M. L. Castro-Ribeiro et al.
Plaque Prototype
The board was modeled in 3D in two positions: extended and closed. The prototype of
the board extended can be seen in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. 3D model of the board extended.
The board closed with a tub format can be seen in Fig. 8.
Fig. 8. 3D model of the folded board.
The technical drawings of the plate are in Fig. 9.

Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People
417
Fig. 9. Technical drawings of the board developed.
3.4
Developed Support System Prototype
Modelling
The support selected to carry the bath system was modeled in 3D using Inventor®
software and it is shown in Fig. 10. This support is integrally made of galvanized steel,
suitable due to its mechanical strength properties. To allow the whole structure to be
movable, as mentioned before, 4 wheels were placed under the support, the constitution
of which includes stainless steel on the metal parts and polypropylene on the wheels.

418
M. L. Castro-Ribeiro et al.
The support includes a region that allows the user to push the system, another for
accommodating the reservoir and another to accommodate the pump.
Fig. 10. 3D model of the transport system.
Analysis
As the support will have to support all components of the bath system, a ﬁnite element
analysis was performed, using the Inventor® software.
This analysis was done by assigning a bearing restriction to each of the wheels of
the support and a restraint restriction to the connection of the wheels to the support.
The applied force was of 1960 N to predict if the support would be able to withstand
a load of 200 kg.
The stress distribution, according to the von Misses criterion, is represented in
Fig. 11, showing a greater accumulation of stress in the place where the force is applied,
representing the reservoir, with a maximum stress 0.011 MPa.
Fig. 11. Analysis of the stress distribution in the transport system.
In addition to the stress, the strain distribution was also obtained along the support,
shown in Fig. 12. It was veriﬁed that the support bars accumulated more deformation,
mainly in the “handle”, being the maximum displacement obtained 3.438 × 10–6 mm.

Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People
419
Fig. 12. Analysis of the displacement distribution in the transport system.
Since the displacement that occurred during the test was relatively low, it can be
deduced that the system can withstand the applied load. Control part [53] is not detailed
in this study.
4
Conclusions and Future Perspective
This work consisted in the development of a portable bathing system for bedridden
patients that helps to facilitate the bath and to reduce the lack of privacy. Thus, a reser-
voir, a board and a transport system were designed, and the materials were chosen to
correspond to the initial objectives.
The system aims to facilitate the work of any user compared to existing traditional
methods, as it reduces the time spent in bathing, relieves stress of the caregiver and
reduces repetitive efforts. This system beneﬁts the bedridden person because it is possible
to reproduce a conventional shower bath at a constant temperature and with greater
hygiene increasing their self-esteem and quality of life.
In the future, this work may be studied in greater depth to improve some of its
characteristics and the concept needs to be validated.
As polyurethane foam is very porous, in future studies, the thickness of the
polyurethane could be changed to 40 mm or higher and the thickness of the stainless steel
changed to 1,4 mm. This would change the design, weight and heat transfers of the reser-
voir. These modiﬁcations should be analysed to see if they would bring improvements
to this project.
5
Responsibility Notice
The authors are the only responsible for the printed material included in this paper.
Acknowledgments. This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e
Tecnologia within the R&D Units Project Scope: UIDP/04077/2020.
The authors are grateful for the contribution of Dr. Isabel Rocha, Director of Santa Casa da
Misericordia in Braga, Portugal.

420
M. L. Castro-Ribeiro et al.
References
1. WHO: World Report on Disability. World Health Organization, Malta (2011)
2. Disability and Health. http://www.who.int. Accessed 10 May 2018
3. Bolander, V.B.: Sorensen e Luckmann enfermagem fundamental: uma abordagem psicoﬁsi-
ológica, 1st edn. Lusodidacta, Lisboa (1998)
4. Honna, S.H., Ferreira, A.C.M., Curimbaba, R.G.: Desenvolvimento de um aparelho para
higienização de pacientes acamados. In: III Encontro Cientíﬁco do GEPro Grupo de Estudo
de Produção, p. 12 (2014)
5. Backes, D.S., Gomes, C.A., Pereira, S.B., Teles, N.F., Backes, M.T.S.: Portable bathtub:
technology for bed bath in bedridden patients. Rev. Bras. Enferm. 70, 364–369 (2017)
6. FlexCare. Comprovação Laboratorial. http://gadehospitalar.com.br. Accessed 16 May 2018
7. Gruner, D.M.: Comfort bed bath (U.S. Patent No. US6802088B1) (2004). https://patents.goo
gle.com/patent/US6802088
8. Lyytinen, T.: Mobile hospital bathing unit (U.S. Patent No. US3778848A) (1971). https://pat
ents.google.com/patent/US3778848A/en
9. Inagaki, J.: Bed with a bath-tub (U.S. Patent No. US5054136A) (1989). https://patents.goo
gle.com/patent/US5054136A/en
10. Yamagish, T.: Bed with a wash tub for pubes (U.S. Patent No. US5729848A) (1994). https://
patents.google.com/patent/US5729848
11. Chang,
C.-A.:
Air
cushion
bed
with
water-draining
device
(U.S.
Patent
No.
US20020125179A1) (2002). https://patents.google.com/patent/US20020125179
12. Khait, G.: Universal service bed (WO Patent No. WO2002078491A1) (2002). https://patents.
google.com/patent/WO2002078491A1/en
13. Akdemir, M.: Bed system performing automatic cleaning of bedridden patients (WO Patent
No. WO2008069767A1) (2008). https://patents.google.com/patent/WO2008069767A1/pt
14. Donato, M.: Bathing system for assisted and non-sufﬁcient bedridden patients (WO Patent
No. WO2011138660A1) (2011). https://patents.google.com/patent/WO2011138660A1/en
15. Bezerra, K., et al.: Bath-ambience—a mechatronic system for assisting the caregivers of
bedridden people. Sensors 17, 1156 (2017)
16. Brater, E.F., King, H.W., Lindell, J.E., Wei, C.Y.: Handbook of Hydraulics, for the Solution
of Hydraulic Engineering Problem, 7th edn. McGraw-Hill, New York (1996)
17. Ficha Técnica: alfa PP-H.Alfa Tubo Engineering Pipes. http://www.alfatubo.pt. Accessed 22
Apr 2018
18. Stainless steel uncoated. http://kottmann.eu. Accessed 22 Apr 2018
19. Quintela, A.: Hidráulica, 12th edn. Fundação Calouste Gulbenkian, Lisboa (2000)
20. SHURﬂo. Product Data Sheet. Model: 2088-474-144. http://shurﬂo.com/. Accessed 22 May
2018
21. 3.6L/Min Mini DC Brushless Submersible Water Pump. https://www.lightobject.com.
Accessed 22 May 2018
22. TL-A02. http://www.topsﬂo.com. Accessed 22 May 2018
23. 5020 MINICAL - Purgador de ar automático 3/8′′ M e 1/2′′M. https://www.calefﬁ.com.
Accessed 13 May 2018
24. 5022 VALCAL - Purgador de ar automático 1/4′′M, 3/8′′ e 1/2′′M. Cromado. https://www.
calefﬁ.com. Accessed 13 May 2018
25. VALCONTROL. Purgador de ar. http://www.valcontrol.pt/. Accessed 13 May 2018
26. Válvula Misturadora Termostática AQS. https://www.zantia.com/. Accessed 13 May 2018
27. Válvula Misturador Termostática. http://www.lusosol.com. Accessed 13 May 2018
28. 520 Misturadora termostática regulável. https://www.calefﬁ.com. Accessed 13 May 2018
29. Filtro água LATÃO Y PN16 1/2′′. http://www.leroymerlin.pt. Accessed 13 May 2018

Portable Bathing System for Bedridden People
421
30. Pentek 158623 1/2′′ 3G Slim Line 10′′ Clear Housing 12-Pack. https://www.ﬁltersfast.com.
Accessed 13 May 2018
31. Aquaﬁlter 10′′ Water/Biodiesel Filter Housing 1′′ 3/4′′ 1/2′′ BSP PRV. https://www.ebay.
com. Accessed 13 May 2018
32. Carro Plataforma em Aço com Capacidade de 300 Kg Tm52 Marcon. https://www.ferrament
askennedy.com.br/. Accessed 13 Apr 2018
33. Carrinho de carga manual com posição horizontal/de movimentação/de aço. http://www.dir
ectindustry.com/. Accessed 13 Apr 2018
34. Plataforma. http://www.directindustry.com/. Accessed 13 Apr 2018
35. Roda pivotante industrial rodízio de metais com freio 75 mm. http://www.cablematic.pt.
Accessed 13 Apr 2018
36. Roda sem travão D48MM 35KG. http://www.leroymerlin.pt. Accessed 13 Apr 2018
37. Roda com travão D80MM 75KG. http://www.leroymerlin.pt. Accessed 13 Apr 2018
38. Chuveiro ECCO SENSEA. http://www.leroymerlin.pt. Accessed 10 Apr 2018
39. Chuveiro VITALIO GET. http://www.leroymerlin.pt. Accessed 10 Apr 2018
40. Bathroom Booster SPA Anion Water-saving Handheld Rain Shower Head Nozzle. https://
www.banggood.com. Accessed 10 Apr 2018
41. Termômetro Digital LCD com Leitura Instantânea Detector Impermeável. http://www.direct
industry.com/pt. Accessed 10 Apr 2018
42. Termômetro Digital LCD com Leitura Instantânea Detector Impermeável – PRETO. https://
pt.gearbest.com. Accessed 10 Apr 2018
43. Sensor de temperatura com sensor PT100/de resistência de platina/com rosca/com carcaça
metalica. http://www.directindustry.com/pt/. Accessed 10 Apr 2018
44. KOBOLD. Level Sensors. Model D/R. https://kobold.com. Accessed 15 Apr 2018
45. Sensor de nível para liquidos/com sensor de temperatura/programável/analógico. http://www.
directindustry.com/pt. Accessed 15 Apr 2018
46. Sensor de nível LFP Cubic TDR – Sick. https://www.ffonseca.com/pt/. Accessed 15 Apr 2018
47. Stainless Steel - Grade 316L - Properties, Fabrication and Applications (UNS S31603). https://
www.azom.com/. Accessed 22 Apr 2018
48. Votruba, L., Broža, V.: Water management in reservoirs. In: Developments in Water Science,
1st edn. Elsevier Science (1989)
49. Coutinho,F.M.B.,Mello,I.L.,deSantaMaria,L.C.:Polietileno:principais tipos,propriedades
e aplicações. Polímeros 13, 01–13 (2003)
50. BioCote. Antimicrobial Technology. https://www.biocote.com. Accessed 24 Apr 2018
51. ARTIFOFO Camas. http://www.artifofo.pt. Accessed 25 Apr 2018
52. Camas EUPHORIA. http://www.orthosxxi.com. Accessed 25 Apr 2018
53. Barros, C., Leão, C.P., Soares, F., Minas, G., Machado, J.: RePhyS: a multidisciplinary expe-
rience in remote physiological systems laboratory. Int. J. Online Eng. 9(SPL.ISSUE5), 21–24
(2013). https://doi.org/10.3991/ijoe.v9iS5.2756

Manufacture of Facial Orthosis in ABS
by the Additive Manufacturing Process:
A Customized Application in High Performance
Sports
Anna Kellssya Leite Filgueira(B)
, Isabella Diniz Gallardo
,
Ketinlly Yasmyne Nascimento Martins
, Rodolfo Ramos Castelo Branco
,
Karolina Celi Tavares Bezerra
, and Misael Elias de Morais
State University of Paraíba (UEPB), Campina Grande, Paraíba, Brazil
{yasmyne.martins,rodolfo.ramos}@nutes.uepb.br
Abstract. The aim of the present study is to manufacture a customized facial
orthosis with Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) material using the Additive
Manufacturing process with fused deposition modeling technology (FDM) and to
present its beneﬁts when applied in high performance sports. The facial orthosis
manufacture was possible due to the combination of three-dimensional technolo-
gies and medical images from computed tomography (CT). The development pro-
cess was carried out in six stages: 1. Capture of the individual’s digital image; 2.
Manipulation of CAD (Computer-Aided Design) software - which runs through
the following substeps - geometric mesh treatment, combination of the desired
bone region, mirror of the region (offset) of interest for orthosis and device’s
digital three-dimensional modeling; 3. Simulation by ﬁnite elements; 4. Device
additive manufacturing; 5. Post-processing of Additive Manufacturing; 6. Device
validation. The design is totally directed towards the individual’s anatomy perfect
coupling, having two lateral holes for the wrap ﬁtting that will ﬁx the device in the
cranial box during use. The choice of ABS material provided a thickness of 3 mm
in the device, maintaining the characteristic of resistance to impact, ensuring light-
ness, excellent visual aspect, good ﬁnish, which guaranteed the maintenance of the
athlete’s performance. The FDM process powered these beneﬁts by adding char-
acteristics such as low cost and customization to the device. The study provides
an alternative for the development of automated and fully customized orthoses,
in addition to demonstrating a good applicability of the ABS material, increasing
the scientiﬁc subsidies on the subject and its correlations.
Keywords: Orthopedic devices · Three-dimensional printing · Manufacturing
1
Introduction
The term additive manufacturing (AM) refers to a manufacturing process through the
addition of material through successive and ﬂat layers [1]. The great advantage of using
AM is the possibility of producing a physical object of any complexity in a relatively
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 422–432, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_37

Manufacture of Facial Orthosis in ABS
423
short period of time [2]. A simple way to classify the processes related to it is through
the state or raw materials initial form used in the manufacture (liquid, solid and pow-
der). For this, the ISO/ASTM 52900:2015(E) [3] proposes framing in seven categories:
Vat Polymerization; Material Extrusion; Material Jetting; Binder Jetting; Powder Bed
Fusion; Sheet Lamination; Directed Energy Deposition.
Fused deposition modeling (FDM) technology, in the category of material extrusion
technology, has the ability to build robust, durable and dimensionally stable parts through
specialized three-dimensional (3D) printers, providing better accuracy and repeatability
when compared to any other three-dimensional printing technology available [4]. FDM
is the most used method among all AM techniques for the manufacture of pure plastic
parts, as they receive characteristics such as low cost, minimum waste and great material
variability [5, 6].
In this process, the construction material is heated in an extrusion head where the
temperature is controlled. In addition, there is a controlled chamber temperature. The
semi-liquidmaterialinﬁlamentformisextractedfromtheextrusionheadandisdeposited
layer by layer [7]. Of all material possibilities, those commonly processed include Poly-
carbonate (PC), Polyphenylsulfone (PPSU), Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS) and
Lactic Polyacid (PLA) [8, 9]. ABS, in particular, is an industrial thermoplastic widely
used in FDM technology. It is a resistant and ductile material, which has heat tolerance
and wear resistance, maintaining an extrusion temperature in a range of approximately
230 ºC to 240 ºC. Besides that, it has speciﬁc properties such as good impact, tensile
and abrasion resistance [10].
The combination of these characteristics that unite the FDM process and the ABS
material when associated with digital modeling software enables the construction of
a light, resistant, durable, comfortable and fully planned device according to the indi-
vidual’s needs. In this context, a wide range of applicability is emphasized, especially
with regard to the area of medical devices, especially the development of orthoses - a
device indicated for resting, immobilizing, protecting, providing feedback, correcting
and promoting tissue healing [11].
One of the types of orthoses in which the manufacture using AM has a particularity
are the facial orthoses applied to the sports area. These aim to provide the athlete’s early
return safely, protecting the injured area from a new impact and avoiding aggravation
situation from simple to complex. The increase in three-dimensional technology, in these
cases, is a personalization feature related to the process allowing the body structure’s
perfect coupling [12].
Therefore, the objective of the present study is to manufacture a customized facial
orthosis with ABS material by the AM process using FDM technology and to present
its referred beneﬁts when applied in high performance sports.
2
Material and Methods
The present study was developed in the period of November 2020, at the Laboratory
of Three-dimensional Technologies (LT3D) of the Center for Strategic Technologies in
Health (NUTES), located at the State University of Paraíba (UEPB). Refers to a scientiﬁc
research of an applied nature and qualitative approach that was submitted and approved
by the ethics committee under the CAAE 36304820.0.0000.5187.

424
A. K. L. Filgueira et al.
The manufacture of the facial orthosis was possible due to the combination of three-
dimensional technologies and medical images from computed tomography (CT). The
manufacturing process comprises six steps, expressed in ﬂowchart 1 (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Methodological steps ﬂowchart (Source: Elaborated by the author, 2021).
The step 1 refers to capturing the individual’s digital image. This was performed by
means of CT, which allowed obtaining the reliable anatomical contour.
Step 2 is marked by the manipulation of CAD (Computer-Aided Design) software
for medical images. It is through these softwares that it will be possible to carry out,
respectively, the following substeps: Geometric mesh’s treatment; Segmentation of the
necessary bone region; Mirroring of the region (offset) of interest for orthosis; And
ﬁnally, a digital three-dimensional modeling of the device. In this phase, the ﬁle, bulletin
in.DICOM, will be converted to.STL (Standard Triangle Language) format that refers
to a standard language of triangles to form the surface mesh. The digital modeling of
the device was performed based on the anatomical contour and requirements regarding
the clinical case and the use applicability.
The Step 3 deals with ﬁnite element simulation using CAE (Computer-Aided Engi-
neering) software. This phase has signiﬁcant relevance for the digital model mate-
rial structure behavior analysis, carried out through stress and deformation parameters

Manufacture of Facial Orthosis in ABS
425
of the produced device, making it possible to make necessary corrections before the
manufacturing step itself.
Step 4 is the manufacture of the device. To accomplish this step, a 3D printer with
FDM technology and ABS was used. The choice of material was based on the mechanical
properties that were desired to be achieved in the device.
Step 5 refers to the post-processing of additive manufacturing, where all the support
material is removed and the device ﬁnishes superﬁcially.
Step 6 indicates device validation. Some points of the device applicability were ana-
lyzed, such as: Material resistance during use, Individual’s comfort, Correlation between
device thickness and ﬁeld of view, Limitations provided and Device adjustment.
3
Theoretical Reference
The AM, deﬁned as the process of adding layers by layers, is intended for the construction
of parts used directly as ﬁnal products or components, in a fast, automated and totally
ﬂexible way [1, 8]. This method offers several advantages in many applications when
compared to classic manufacturing processes based on material removal, such as milling
or turning, allowing, in most cases, that the desired objects are produced in a reduced
time and at a lower cost [13].
There are several sectors that can beneﬁt from the use of AM technologies, being
currently widespread in the aerospace, automobile, bioengineering (medicine and den-
tistry), electrical products (household appliances), electronic products in general, and in
the jewelery, arts, civil engineering and architecture sectors [1].
In health sciences, in barriers that go beyond the medical ﬁeld, AM has taken on large
proportions, with the potential to revolutionize the future of this area. The most expanded
application, in this sense, currently, is the use of biomodels for surgical planning, ﬁrst
reported by Paul D’Urso. The method consists of using medical image acquisition to
produce reliable physical models of human anatomy that guide the performance of
surgeries [1]. The process is reported in the diagram in Fig. 2.
For Volpato [1], this process can also be applied in the assistive technology (AT)
development, another area that has emerged with the advances of AM. The possibility
of expanding the functional capacity of people with physical disabilities, disability or
reduced mobility, with personalized assistance in the creation of products adapted to
anatomy and according to the speciﬁc needs of each patient quickly and with low cost-
effectiveness makes the effectiveness of the process increase [14].
The creation through 3D printing of tools, utensils and other medical equipment,
represents speed and cost reduction [5]. It is estimated that the time and cost savings
provided by the application of AM techniques in the construction of models is between
70% and 90% [13].
Another great advantage of AM is that it is not restricted to just one type of tech-
nology, but it achieves numerous alternatives of variant processes between the states
of liquid, solid and powder, when analyzing the initial conditions of the raw material
[15]. With regard to information on the addition and adhesion mechanisms involved,
the variants are classiﬁed as: Vat Polymerization; Material Extrusion; Material Jetting;
Binder Jetting; Powder Bed Fusion; Sheet Lamination; Directed Energy Deposition.

426
A. K. L. Filgueira et al.
Fig. 2. Processing and manufacturing of biomodels diagram (Source: VOLPATO, 2017)
3.1
Fused Deposition Modeling Technology (FDM)
This technology is characterized by the deposition of extruded material continuously in
the form of a wire, heating it to a semi-liquid or pasty point. The table, consisting of a
lift mechanism, positioned on the Z axis, receives the material through the movements
of the extrusion head on the xy axes, where, to expel the material through a calibrated
nozzle, the ﬁlament traction itself works as a plunger to beginning of the process system.
Thus, when the extruded thin ﬁlament material comes in contact with the part surface
material, it solidiﬁes and adheres to the previous layer (Fig. 3) [1].
Fig. 3. FDM process principle (Source: VOLPATO, 2017)

Manufacture of Facial Orthosis in ABS
427
In the machine, the liquefactor head plays an important role, which is the key to the
success of the molten deposition: The material in the form of ﬁlament is pulled or pushed
with the help of the driving wheels that are connected to the electric motors and then
enters the heating chamber. The material ﬂows through the tube blender and is deposited
through an extrusion tip [7].
The printer specialized in FDM features an additional exclusive extruder nozzle for
adding the supports, since it is necessary to create a structure so that the parts that do not
articulate with the ﬁrst layers can be connected. In the absence of support, the nozzle
deposits material in an empty space causing deformation in the part [1].
In most commercial 3D printers it is not possible to control the material’s deposition
trajectory, but the positioning of the part on the printing table can interfere with the char-
acteristics desired by the product. This positioning is related to the printing parameters
that are determined in CAM (Computer Aided Manufacturing) software [16].
CAM software, deﬁned as computer-aided manufacturing, has a main function aimed
at converting a component geometry to be manufactured in a machine programming
language, tool path performing calculation, from the geometric representation of the
part, treats therefore, speciﬁc software for printing parameters [17].
In FDM processing, the monoﬁlaments used are generally made of engineering
thermoplastic polymers, such as ABS, polycarbonate and polycarbonate blends [18].
In this process, due to the large number of parameters and the interaction over them,
it is often difﬁcult to determine the actual parameter levels in order to achieve the best
component properties manufactured by FDM [4].
3.2
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS)
ABS plastic is a petroleum-derived thermoplastic resin consisting of the copolymer-
ization of three monomers (Fig. 4): acrylonitrile (synthetic monomer produced from
propylene hydrocarbon and ammonia - from 15% to 30%), butadiene (alkene obtained
from dehydrogenation of butane - from 5% to 15%) and styrene (produced from the
dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene - from 40% to 60%).
With regard to the manufacturing process for this material, a study compared the
mechanical properties of two types of ABS prototypes made by two different techniques
[19], where one is the removal of material made by a CNC machining center (milling
machine) and another by PR, by adding material in the FDM process and concluded that
the specimens printed by FDM showed a better performance compared to the machined
ones in the tests, obtaining better results in comparison of tensile strength.
A speciﬁc study carried out with the ABS material, analyzed the layer height, scan-
ningangleanddensityﬁlling[4],understoodasitsmechanicalpropertieswhenprocessed
by FDM. In this, in turn, it is reported that the ideal manufacturing parameters appear
to be 55° for raster angle (angle of the deposited beads in relation to the x axis of the
construction table), 0.5 mm layer thickness and a percentage of 80% ﬁll. However, they
also point out that when the percentage of ﬁlling is increased, the properties of ﬁnal
traction, strength, modulus of elasticity and resistance to ﬂow are also increased.

428
A. K. L. Filgueira et al.
Fig. 4. ABS plastic composition (Source: MaisPolímeros, 2021).
4
Results and Discussion
The orthosis was developed for a male soccer player, who was selected as a midﬁelder
of a semi-professional team from Paraíba, who had a clinical picture of nasal fracture.
The capture of images, obtained by the CT examination, when processed by the com-
putational software of reading .DICOM, allowed to create a virtual three-dimensional
model of the individual (Fig. 5).
Fig. 5. Individual three-dimensional model (Source: Research data, 2020).
From this representation, the 3D model was imported into CAD software for medical
images, InVersalius 3, which is free software for reconstructing images from CT or

Manufacture of Facial Orthosis in ABS
429
MRI (magnetic resonance image) equipment, for the correction and smoothing of the
triangular mesh, generating a digital ﬁle of images in .STL format, which represents a
triangular mesh characterized by the surface of the analyzed region.
With the digital model ﬁnalized, an offset (mirror) of the region of interest was
created to start the device modeling phase. For this, aspects such as device applicability,
device’s functionality correlation with the need to maintain the athlete’s complete ﬁeld
of view, comfort, usability and lightness were taken into account.
The key point for the device development was the thickness - ﬁnally deﬁned at 3 mm.
The reach of this parameter was only possible due to the realization of a direct correlation
with the material of manufacture, since the clinical case required minimum thickness
so that there was no athlete’s ﬁeld of vision interruption, at the same time that there is
a need that the device maintains good impact absorption due to the direct confrontation
generated by the sport.
In this regard, among all the possibilities, ABS was deﬁned as a viable option for
providing lightness, excellent visual aspect, good ﬁnish, good resistance to impact, trac-
tion, abrasion, heat and wear [10, 20]. In addition, according to studies by Davanço and
collaborators [19], the characteristics of this material are enhanced when manufactured
by deposition.
Another important aspect to be reported that directly inﬂuenced the material’s choice
was the characteristics of compressive strength. The study of Martinez and colleagues
(2019), compared the axial compression data between ABS and PLA through a specimen
with internal structural mesh. This study, for the ABS samples, the graphics tension-
deformation showed similar inclinations to the same ﬁber density and the elasticity
modulus proved to be superior to the PLA [21].
The roughness control provided by the temperature control characteristic in the
chamber of this type of material also adds a potential beneﬁt for biomedical use with
regard to the accuracy of the device.
In an intermediate phase, after modeling and before manufacture, the device digital
model (Fig. 6) was tested for stress and strain parameters through ﬁnite element simula-
tion using the CAE software. This step allowed the product performance to be veriﬁed
in terms of strength, stiffness, fatigue, temperature and dynamics, before the physical
model production, providing an increase in the process economy.
The device design is totally directed towards the perfect coupling of the individual’s
anatomy, having two lateral holes for the wrap’s ﬁtting that will ﬁx the device in the
cranial box during use. With the virtual modeling stage closed and the material deﬁned,
the manufacturing process itself begins. For this, the FDM type AM process was used,
with the Raise 3D printer, and the CAM system embedded in the machine itself, in which
the parameters for printing are planned and deﬁned. After the printing parameters were
determined, the G-code (Geometric Code) ﬁle was generated, which stores all associated
parameters.
The entire manufacturing process lasted four hours, ending in printed material with
associated support (Fig. 7). According to Volpato [1], FDM technology needs support to
connect the parts that are not associated with the previous layer, without prejudice to the
ﬁnal production of the device, making it possible to build parts that differ from blocks.

430
A. K. L. Filgueira et al.
Fig. 6. Device digital model produced (Source: Research data, 2020).
Fig. 7. Device after complete manufacturing step. (Source: Research data, 2020).
After these steps, the device is directed to the only step of post-processing, which is
the support removall. Figure 8 shows the ﬁnished device.
For validation, the athlete used the device during a complete soccer match, corre-
sponding to 90 min. After ﬁnishing, he demonstrated satisfaction with the feedback
usability, reporting that in no time did the mask interrupt its performance during the
game, including that it allowed direct head shocks with the ball and the other players,
without any damage. In addition, he emphasized the perfect maintenance of his ﬁeld of
vision, the comfort and the lightness that the device provides.

Manufacture of Facial Orthosis in ABS
431
Fig. 8. Final Device. (Source: Research data, 2020).
5
Conclusions
The study proposal was successfully achieved once it provided an alternative for the
development of facial orthoses in a fast, automated and fully customized way. One of
the factors to be highlighted was the use of 3D technologies in the device manufacturing
process, which characterizes it as an innovative process in the use of health technologies.
The ABS type material used in the manufacture, provided to the developed device
with a minimum thickness, without causing damage to the athlete’s ﬁeld of vision, but
maintaining this material impact resistance property. In addition, it allowed comfort and
lightness that maintained the athlete’s complete performance, due to its characteristics
of good resistance to compression, impact, traction, abrasion, heat and wear.
The FDM process, in turn, enhanced these beneﬁts by adding resources such as low
cost and the device customization. In this case, post-processing is not necessary to ﬁnish
the device, only to remove the support material that is necessary for structuring it in the
printing process.
Further studies are needed in different types of materials with application in athletes
to offer greater diversity of data, besides that to encourage the fomentation of quantitative
research being this the study limitation point.
References
1. Volpato,N.:Manufaturaaditiva:tecnologiaseaplicaçõesdaimpressão3D.SãoPaulo,Blucher
(2017)
2. Chua, C.K., Leong, K.F., Lim, C.S.: Rapid Prototyping, Principles and Applications. World
Scientiﬁc Publishing (2003)
3. ISO/ASTM 52900:2015(E): Standard terminology for additive manufacturing – general
principles – terminology. Genève, West Conshohocken (2016)

432
A. K. L. Filgueira et al.
4. Samykano, M., Selvamani, S.K., Kadirgama, K., Ngui, W.K., Kanagaraj, G., Sudhakar, K.:
Mechanical property of FDM printed ABS: inﬂuence of printing parameters. Int. J. Adv.
Manuf.Technol.102(9–12),2779–2796(2019).https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-019-03313-0
5. Stratasys
Homepage.
http://www.stratasys.com/~/media/Main/Secure/Technical_Applic
ation_Guides. Accessed 12 Dec 2020
6. Kai, C.C, Fai, L.K., Sing, L.C.: Rapid Prototyping: Principles and Applications, 2nd edn,
448p (2003)
7. Arivazhagan, A., Masood, S.H.: Dynamic mechanical properties of ABS material processed
by fused deposition modelling. Int. J. Eng. Res. Aplicativos (IJERA) 2, 2009–2014 (2012)
8. Hopkinson, N., Hague, R., Dickens, P.: Rapid Manufacturing: An Industrial Revolution for
the Digital Age. Chichester, London (2006)
9. Gibson, I., Rosen, D.W., Stucker, B.: Generalized: additive manufacturing process chain. In:
GIBSON, I. et al (ed.). Additive Manufacturing Technologies: Rapid Prototyping to Direct
Digital Manufacturing. Springer, Heidelberg (2010). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-112
0-9_3
10. Filho, E.G.: Desenvolvimento e fabricação de moldes ﬂexíveis (tpu) de baixo custo por man-
ufatura aditiva para produção de próteses cranianas de PMMA. Dissertação. Universidade
Tecnológica Federal do Paraná, Curitiba (2019)
11. Carvalho, J.A.: Amputações de Membros Inferiores: em busca da plena reabilitação, 23nd
ed. São Paulo, Manole (2003)
12. Ghoseiri, K., Ghoseiri, G., Bavi, A.: Ghoseiri, R: Face-protective orthosis in sport-related
injuries. Prosthet. Orthot. Int. 37(4), 329–331 (2013)
13. Garcia, L.H.T.: Desenvolvimento e fabricação de uma mini-impressora 3D para cerâmica.
Dissertação. Escola de Engenharia de São Carlos (2010)
14. Rodrigues, J.: Cruz Lms; Sarmanho APS: Impressora 3D no Desenvolvimento de Pesquisas
com Próteses. Rev. Interinst. Bras. Ter. Ocup. v2(2), pp. 398–413 (2018)
15. Chua, C.K., Leong, K.F., Lim, C.S.: Rapid prototyping: principles and applications. 3edn.
Singapore (2010)
16. Bellini, A., Güçeri, S.: Mechanical characterization of parts fabricated using fused deposition
modeling. Rapid Prototyping J. 9(4), 252–264 (2003)
17. Holzmann, H.A.: Uso do software CAM em auxílio a estimativa de custos de fabricação na
fase inicial do desenvolvimento de produtos poliméricos injetados. Universidade Tecnológica
Federal do Paraná, Dissertação (2014)
18. Nikzard, M., Masood, S.H., Sbarski, I.: Thermo-mechanical properties of highly ﬁlled
polymeric composites for fused deposition modeling. Mater. Des. 32, 3448–3456 (2011)
19. Davanço, L. Furhmann, J.G. Chuan, C.T.: Estudo comparativo das propriedades mecânicas
entreplásticoABSprototipadopordeposiçãoxUsinadoemcnc.CongressoTécnicoCientíﬁco
da Engenharia e da Agronomia. Belém, Pará (2017)
20. Mais Polimeros Homepage. http://www.maispolimeros.com.br/2018/09/24/plastico-abs-e-
suas-principais-caracteristicas-eaplicacoes/#:~:text=Det%C3%A9m%20propriedades%20e
spec%C3%ADficas%20como%20boa,C%20a%2080%C2%B0C. Accessed 12 Jan 2021
21. Martinez, A.C.P., Souza, D.L., Santos, D.M., Pedroti, L.G., Carlo, J.C., Martins, M.A.D.:
Avaliação do comportamento mecânico dos polímeros ABS e PLA em impressão 3D visando
simulação de desempenho estrutural. Gestão e Tecnologia de Projetos 14(1), 125–141 (2019)

E-Health in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan
M. Irfanullah Arfeen1(B)
, Adil Ali Shah2, and Demetrios Sarantis3
1 QASMS, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan
m.arfeen@qau.edu.pk
2 Center for Advanced Studies in Engineering (CASE), Islamabad, Pakistan
3 United Nations University Operating Unit on Policy-Driven Electronic Governance,
Guimarães, Portugal
sarantis@unu.edu
Abstract. Almost all the developed countries have adopted E-health system and
Pakistan is also one of these countries where E-health is now being partially
implemented.Inadditiontothisimplementationtheneedofthedayistoimplement
E-health in Health Projects such as Internally Displaced People (IDP) Camps to
make the projects even more successful and result oriented. Not many studies have
been conducted to ﬁnd the rationale behind E-Health system not being adopted in
IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan. This research is an attempt to ﬁll the gap and
identify the challenges due to which E-health is not yet adopted in Health Projects.
The data gathered through the questionnaire was then structured and regression
analysis with signiﬁcant test was conducted to identify the factors that contribute in
non implementation of E-health system in IDPs Health Projects. The result shows
that the healthcare staffs are willing to adopt E-health system but due to lack of
ICT at the Project Implementation Unit level such E-health system could not be
implemented. Therefore in order to make Health Projects more successful using
E-health system basic ICT facilities should be provided at Project Implementation
Unit.
Keywords: ICT · e-health · IDP
1
Introduction
Information Communication Technology (ICT) has always been a source of informa-
tion for healthcare not only for public but also for doctors. According to the survey
74% people use internet to search health related issues and problems (“Internet World
Stats” 2008). Not only general public but doctors and physicians use Internet to gather
information about health related issues [1]. E-Health was ﬁrst launched in 1999 when
health information was available via internet [2]. E-health has positive as well as nega-
tive impacts on doctors and patients. Using technology many patients now tend to use
E-health for information gathering and to avoid going to doctors [3] which has been a
drawback and disappointment for some [4].
E-health can also be deﬁned as a healthcare application that improve the services,
effectiveness, efﬁciency and quality of health sector and hence the health of patient [5].
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 433–448, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_38

434
M. I. Arfeen et al.
Health sector around the world has witness major changes since year 2000. Developed
countries in the world are consistently trying to make improvements in health sector,
such improvements demand not only reducing the cost but also improving the quality of
healthcare easier and accessible [6].
The information regarding when exactly the ﬁrst time health was used electronically
is not know as there is very less literature available, however according to [7] about 8 mil-
lion people search health related information on net in year 1996, which increased to 23
million in 1999 and about 100 million in 2001. According to [8] more than 70% internet
users search health related information through credible sources. Before the introduction
of E-health in developed countries traditional paper based healthcare approach was used
to maintain the health record of patients in hospitals and clinics. This practice is used in
many developing countries like Pakistan where the book keeping procedure is used to
record data. The main disadvantage of this method is that paper based record keeping is
decentralized method because of which the information of patients cannot be shared.
Since past few decades, E-Health has been used for various you tubes purposes
in the developed countries that include recording and maintaining of patients details,
sometimes for research purposes and trend analysis. The main advantage of using E-
health is that the data and record is become centralized and so can be shared anywhere
when required. In the modern era E-health is also been used to circulate health resources
which enables to use these resources efﬁciently and effectively.
1.1
E-Health in Pakistan
Healthcare in any country is important in building a prosperous society. Pakistan is one
of the developing countries where health facilities are not up to the standard and SOPs
deﬁned by World Health Organization [9]. In a recent report it has been observed that
only 29% of people in Pakistan enjoy full health services. Pakistan has the lowest budgets
allocated to health in the entire region [9]. On the other hand the population is increasing
on a rapid scale. In year 2000 the population of Pakistan was around 142 million which
has increased to 198 million in 2014, but the budget allocated to health sector has not
increased [10]. The recent survey has shown the doctor to patient ratio in Pakistan in
around 1:1,378 while the nurse patient ratio is around 1:22,346 [11]. To overcome the
doctor patient ratio and provide a basic facility to people, use of ICT in health sector was
introduced which helped in improving the quality of health services around the world.
This phenomenon helped in working beyond the conventional method. The idea of E-
health was given in 1994 during a World Telecommunication Development Conference.
In 2005 E-health was also recognized by World Health Organization (WHO) in order to
achieve cost effective and improved quality of healthcare [12].
In November 2008, a Non Proﬁt Organization in the name of E-HAP was established
in Pakistan in order to enhance and spread the knowledge of E-health among the people
of Pakistan. The main vision of E-HAP was to improve the health sector and provide
quality and improved healthcare to people especially in rural area of the country by
implementing E-health Practice in Pakistan [13].
In Pakistan around 62% of population is living in rural area [14]. Basic health units
(BHUs) are established in parts of rural area in Pakistan to provide healthcare to people.
But the question arises that despite so many advantages of E-health system, why it is

E-Health in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan
435
not yet adopted and implemented in Pakistani BHUs especially in IDPs camps where
the basic health facilities are not up to the standard and the serious patients had to visit
travel to major cities for health services.
1.2
IDP Camps in Pakistan
Many international NGOs have developed their own deﬁnition of IDP mainly focus on
their own perspective which reﬂects their concern for people, but Cohen and Deng in
1998 expressed the IDPs in more appropriate way. According to them;
IDPs are people who are forced to leave their place and homes and to migrate to
other place within a country without their will in order to avoid violence or arm conﬂict
or due to a natural or human made disaster [14].
According to [14] millions of people are displaced in the world due to conﬂicts
annually. Thousands of them ﬁnd refuge with their relatives while many of them are
forced to live in camps where they become victim of physical and mental stress which
destroy their health [15]. In 2014 more than youtube32 million people are displaced
due to conﬂicts around the world of which mostly are the victim of conﬂicts in Syria
and Congo [15]. According to survey around 2.6 million people were displaced in North
Africa and Middle East in 2009 with Sahara Africa region considered to place the largest
number of IDPs which is around 10.5 million [14].
Fata is an integral part of Pakistan that comprise of seven agencies. The Population
of FATA is approximately four million [16]. Since ten years this part of the country
is affected by challenges and instability as it is considered as the hub of terrorism in
Pakistan [16]. The conﬂict among the Taliban and Pak Army across the FATA has
seriously affected the lives of local people which forced them to move to camps in other
part of the Province.
In year 2009, an operation was carried out against the militants in FATA that forced
to displace more than two million people [17]. According to an estimate about 0.55
million people have shifted from FATA to KPK Province. Another 0.9 million people
were shifted and registered as IDPs in parts of KPK [18]. According to report 90% of
people were adjusted in KPK Province as IDPs [14].
The Government of Pakistan in collaboration with many INGOs including United
Nations and others established several camps for displaced people of FATA in Nowshera,
Hangu, Peshawar, D.I.Khan, Tank and parts of Mohmand Agencies [14]. According to
the survey by FATA Disaster Management Authority (FDMA), about 0.4 million families
are still registered and living in IDP camps in parts of KPK Province.
According to Fata Disaster Management Authority and UNHCR latest report in
Khyber Pakthoonkhwa Province there are three main camps; Jalozai, New Durani and
Togh Serai camp and several small camps with Jalozai Camp located in Nowshera is the
biggest camp in terms of population i-e 12,400 families followed by New Durrani and
Togh serai camp with 11,000 and 110 families respectively. Following table shows the
total number of families living in these camps.
The total registered IDP families were about 0.38 million that are registered with
NADRA Pakistan of which 12,302 are living in Jalozai Camp, 10,400 families in New
Durrani Togh and 86 families hosted by Serai Camp [18]. According to [14] 54% of the

436
M. I. Arfeen et al.
IDPs Population consists of men while 46% comprise of women. 9% of IDPs comprise
of age between 5 to 11 and 7% between 0–5 years (Table 1).
Table 1. No of displaced families
Agency
Displaced
families
Returned families
Total balance
Bajaur
86,406
66,200
155,606
FR Tank
2,260
960
3,220
Khyber
86,400
37,210
123,610
Khuram
48,650
18,606
67,256
Mohmand
45,950
16,23
47,573
Orakzai
48,990
23,121
72,111
SWA
56,296
21,363
77,659
Total Balance
3,74,952
1,69,083
5,47,035
A startling ﬁnding about the IDPs is that healthcare awareness among them is gen-
erally very low. According to ([19] hygiene and health are the major issues among the
people of Tribal area mainly because they are uneducated and lack knowledge about
the healthcare because of which majority of IDPs from FATA are facing severe health
issues. However it has been observed that the guidance and knowledge provided by the
LHVs to females in IDP Camps has help them a lot in regard to hygiene [19]. In 2012 a
study was done by WHO which highlighted that 60% of the IDPs suffer from different
diseases and health problems including malaria, scabies, diarrhea etc.s because of lack
of knowledge about health.
1.3
IDP Camps in Pakistan
The Statement of Research Problem.
The research problem are speciﬁcally focused on the issues and reasons behind
non implementation of E-health in health Projects in IDP Camps in Pakistan. For this,
research problems have been identiﬁed to evaluate its reasons.
1.4
IDP Camps in Pakistan
Research Problem 1
To investigate the variety of perceptions among health care staff about E-Health and to
systematically survey the availability of organizational support at basic information and
communication (ICT) level.
Solution Methodology: A systematic survey will be done to know the perception of
health care staff work in IDPs health Projects and basic ICT resources available.

E-Health in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan
437
1.5
IDP Camps in Pakistan
Research Problem 2
Extracting “signiﬁcant factor’s” to identify the reasons behind the failure of adoption
and implementation of E-Health in health projects for IDPs in Pakistan.
1.6
IDP Camps in Pakistan
Solution Methodology: A detailed questionnaire was the research tool developed to
identify the signiﬁcant factors that are contributing in non implementation of E-Health
in Health Projects. The data gathered would be then analyzed using SPSS.
2
Literature Review
The literature related to E-Health is adequate as E-health is being used around the world
since decade. However literature related to E-health in Pakistan is scarce. The intensity
is much more if we try to pursue literature related to E-health in rural areas of Pakistan
and that in IDP Camps in Pakistan. The author was unable to search literature related
to E-health in IDP Camps in Pakistan. However literatures related to E-health in rural
areas of developing and under developed countries were available. Parts of literature
were found but it was hardly in the interest of author and related to thesis.
Relevant researches were identiﬁed and collected from different sources and were
thoroughly studied and analyzed to check the current status of E-health around the world.
The studied researches reveled that majority of the studies were conducted to investigate
the beneﬁts of implementing E-health in BHU’s, issues in implementing E-health and
willingness of stakeholders for the implementation E-health in BHU’s were studied.
The relevant researches were grouped in accordance to beneﬁts; issues in implementing
E-Health and willingness to implementing E-health discussed below were divided into
categories.
The ﬁrst category of reviewed literature that were obtained; speciﬁcally focused on
the beneﬁts of using E-health in health sector. The information obtained was generally
from book written by famous authors about the health and its beneﬁts were obtained.
Literature also includes journals published recently, articles related to E-health, and
online articles about E-health and its beneﬁts of using E-health.
The second category of literature that was obtained; speciﬁcally focused on ‘issues
in implementation E-health Literature related to this literature was easily available in
form of researches that includes journal papers and conferences; online articles and from
other reliable sources including web pages.
The third category of literature focused on willingness to use of E-health by organi-
zations stakeholders. Data for this literature was collected from Journals, Online reports
and articles, and case studies.

438
M. I. Arfeen et al.
2.1
E-health and Its Beneﬁts
This section of chapter will determine the beneﬁts of using E-health in healthcare sector.
Majority of the studies were of view that E-health had more beneﬁts than having draw
backs. The main aim of E-health is to offer beneﬁts to end users by providing better health
facilities. E-health is speciﬁcally helpful in rural areas where people can receive expert
medical support from distant health units with easy access to patient medical history. [20]
in their study described E-health as a tool take enable us to make more effective decision
making and hence improve the quality of health care. Having E-health not only improves
the quality and but also is more cost and time effective for patients who live in areas where
health care support is not easily available. [21] in his book illustrate e-health double face
as it not only improves the quality of healthcare but also it enables to reduce the overall
time and cost of healthcare. [22] also in a study examined that implementation of e-health
reduces the overall medical expense of the end users signiﬁcantly. Related researched
have also been done in past which highlights the beneﬁts of E-health application. [23]
in his study observed positive outcomes using E-health in chronic disease management.
[24] in their study also concluded that health information system has a positive outcome
when it comes to quality, efﬁciency and satisfaction. They also found that more than 92%
of the recent studies were positive about the beneﬁts of using health information system.
[25] in his research stated that E-health could be very useful for mental health patients
and advance collaborative management. A famous butler project studied the satisfaction
and acceptance level of E-health through connection of patients with different E-health
applications. The results showed that the patients had a positive impact and shoed great
improvement in their daily activities.
Studies show that there are various beneﬁts of using E-health application subject
to successful implementation and acceptance by the organization and stakeholders.
However its adaptation is also inﬂuenced by the culture, skills, policies and individual
perception.
2.2
Issues in Implementation, Acceptance and Adoption of E-Health
Implementation of E-health has always been difﬁcult as many factors need to be con-
sidered such as social, cultural issues. Organization issues also play its part in use of
technology in the ﬁeld of health. These issues need to be addressed in order to assure
implementationofTechnologyinhealthsector.Beforetheimplementationofanysystem,
proper planning and research must be done in order to assure its success. Implementa-
tions of Technology in health sector also require a great deal of research and planning
to make it successful in that part of the world. South Korea, in this regard was the most
successful country where E-health application was promoted in 2003 by the Government
and by the end of year 2008, E-health was implemented and adopted in most part of the
country.
[26] in their study described introduction of Technology in healthcare as a dynamic
process, that require certain planning at organizational level before its implementation
can be done. [27] in his study reported the challenges and issues that were faced during
the implementation of E-health in European countries. The authors observed the use
of E-health especially telemedicine is the future and were of view that implementation

E-Health in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan
439
of E-health can be useful in different aspects including history of patient data to any
specialist and doctor. Other uses of E-health could be telenursing, teleconsulting and
online inspection of patient’s data with full patient history and records which could be
very useful and convenient for patients as well as doctors. The author is in a view that
using E-health health call centers could also be established to provide online health
facilities to patients in future. Patients with chronic diseases could be easily paid more
attention using online health services. The author emphasized that the use of E-health
application can be beneﬁcial for both end users which can improve the issues and reduce
the cost, time and improve the standard of life and health for patients especially in rural
areaswherebasichealthfacilitiesarenotuptothedesiredstandard.Theauthorswerealso
of a view that that implementation of E-health in would be difﬁcult initially as acceptance
level of end users will low due the change of health system but slowly and gradually the
patients and health care staff will accept and adopt the new style of health treatment.
[28] designed an online questionnaire to examine the level of acceptance of E-health
among the patients of different culture. The research consisted of three models of IT
acceptance among patients who registered for E-health services. The results showed that
the acceptance level of all tested IT models were positive which proved that the patients
were intended to use E-health system in future. In [29] in their research examined Clinical
Communications Implementation (ECCI) its adoption and use on among healthcare staff
in different hospitals and private clinics in Scotland. ECCI initially found to be useful
for end users however different issues found like inconsistency and data duplicity and
reliability made it less effective than expected.
In past decade several researches have been conducted to examine use and beneﬁts
of E-health. In spite of several beneﬁts of electronic health it is many countries in the
world are still reluctant to adopt e-health system facility among its rural areas. The
adaptation and implementation issues are more found in under develop and developing
countries. The main reason could be because the trend of acceptance of new technology
in these countries are less as compared to developed countries where they are more
interested in new innovations and adoption of latest technologies and systems. Other
reasons such as implementation and its maintenance issues, unawareness among the
users and acceptance by stakeholder, language and culture barriers could also play its
part in non-implementation of E-health system in some countries. Therefore in order to
ensure successful implementation of E-health system it is important that the stakeholders
and government and NGOs should play its part for adoption and implementation of
E-health system.
2.3
Willingness to Use E-Health
In order to assure successful execution of a system, the most signiﬁcant step is to take
stakeholders into conﬁdence to prevent the system from failure. Hence various researches
have been conducted to assess the willingness of use of E-health system around the
world. [30] in his research designed a tool to assess the willingness to use E-health
system in under developed countries health departments. The tool was developed with
an aim to examine the willingness of doctors and managers to use E-health system in
their institutes. Two different tools were designed by the authors one of which was for
the managers and doctors while other tool was designed to cover the healthcare staff.

440
M. I. Arfeen et al.
The tools consisted of three categories with each category represent determinant to
use and implementation of E-health system. These tools contained both qualitative and
quantitative questions and was interviewed based. These tools were later applied on trial
basis in the hospitals in Pakistan.
[31] examined E-Health in Hospitals in Pakistan as a test case. They found E-Health
to be very useful and found that majority of the healthcare staff had knowledge about
E-Health system and its use. [32] examined the willingness of end user E-Health system
using grid-based model. Through this framework the author deﬁned levels of prepared-
ness as high, medium and low and identiﬁes four main requirements. These include pre
deﬁned policies, government interest and willingness and proper IT structure in order
to ensure that the E-health system is proper implemented and the users are willing to
use it. On the other hand some impact needs to be address before doing so that include
knowledge about ICT and culture issues to be solved in order to achieve the desired
objectives. The framework was very useful to examine the essentials that are needed
to implement the E-health system in an organization. The framework designed in their
study was very useful to recognize the preparedness of using E-health system, but it
had certain limitations that were later addressed by Chattopadhyay in his study. [33]
recommended an abstract framework theory and integrated approach to assess the will-
ingness of organizations to use ICT in health department. The framework designed was
applied at different levels to identify and measure the willingness of use of E-health
system at each level including Government and Non Government organization level.
The framework was initially implemented in Cardiogly health department. The work
done was later extended by Li et al. in his research in 2009 by assessing the willingness
level speciﬁcally focusing on Electronic Health Record in E-health system. Both the
studies conducted had certain limitation. One of the major drawbacks of the studies was
that both the frameworks were theoretical in nature and needed empirical validation to
real assumptions. [34] found E-Health to be very useful and were optimistic about the
implementation of E-Health around the continent soon.
The available literature discussed above related to implementation, adoption and
willingness to use E-health system was generally related to developed countries and it
seems that no real study related to E-health in Pakistani perspective has been conducted.
However many researchers have been done by Pakistani researches related to E-health
and some scattered attempts have been found but again no real research have been
found realted to implementation, adaptation and willingness to use E-health system in
health departments in rural areas speciﬁcally in IDPs camp in KPK and other provinces.
To overcome this gap, the current research is conducted in Pakistani perspective. The
research tries to examine the awareness of E-health system among health staff and
willingness to use E-health system speciﬁcally in IDPs health projects in Pakistan. To
do so, following research questions were developed to know the real reasons.
To investigate the variety of perceptions among health care staff about E-Health and
to systematically survey the availability of organizational support at basic information
and communication (ICT) level.
Extracting “signiﬁcant factor’s” to identify the reasons behind the failure of adoption
and implementation of E-Health in health projects for IDPs in Pakistan.

E-Health in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan
441
3
Analysis and Discussion
Data collected through questionnaire was later structured into nine identiﬁed factors
with eight independent variables and one dependent variable and were accessed using
SPSS for extracting signiﬁcation factors to know the reasons why E-health has not been
adopted in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan (Table 2).
Table 2. Factors/attributes in 3 point scale. Factors identiﬁed (One Dependent & Eight
Independent Variables).
S. no
Factors
Three point scales
1
Basic Knowledge of Computer
Advance (2.0); Basic (1.0); No (0)
2
Are you willing to use Computer at
BHU
Yes (2.0); Not Sure (1.0); No (0)
3
Knowledge of Electronic Health
Record (EHR)
Advance (2.0); Basic (1.0); No (0)
4
Use of Electronic Health Record at
Work Place
Yes (2.0); Not Sure (1.0); No (0)
5
Availability of Electricity at Work Place Yes (2.0); Sometimes (1.0); No (0)
6
Availability of Computer with Internet
Connection at Work Place
Yes (2.0); Sometimes (1.0); No (0)
7
Total Computers for Ofﬁcial Use at
Work Place
<2 (2.0); 1–2(1.0); 0 (0)
8
Use of Computer at Work Place
Ofﬁce Use(2.0); Personal & Ofﬁcial (1.0);
Personal (0)
9
Are you Satisﬁed with existing Paper
based Health Record System?
Extremely Satisﬁed (2.0); Not Sure (1.0);
Not Satisﬁed (0)
Factors 1 to 8 are Independent Variables while Factor 9 is dependent variable.
4
Perception of Healthcare Staff
On the basis questionnaire based research tool that was developed to know the perception
of Healthcare Staff following response were received from the respondents (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Knowledge of computer

442
M. I. Arfeen et al.
Basic Knowledge of Computer?
The above ﬁgure shows that the respondents with advance and intermediate knowl-
edge of computer were almost the same with very few respondents had no or very
little knowledge of computer i-e 28% only while 36% respondents had advance and
intermediate knowledge of computer (Fig. 2).
Willingness to have a computer at BHU?
Fig. 2. Willingness to have computer
The graph shows that almost half of the respondents were willing to use computer
for electronic health record while 28& of the respondents were not sure about using
computer at BHUs and 24% were not in favor of using computer to record patients
health data electronically (Fig. 3).
Knowledge of Electronic Health record (EHR).
Fig. 3. EHR knowledge
The level of knowledge of Electronic health Record (EHR) among all the respondents
is almost of equal ratio. 28% of respondents had advance knowledge of EHR while 34%
and 38% of the respondents had intermediate or no knowledge of Electronic Health
Record (Fig. 4).
Use of Electronic Health Record (EHR) in BHUs and its training.
Fig. 4. Use of EHR

E-Health in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan
443
The level of knowledge of Electronic health Record (EHR) among all the respondents
is almost of equal ratio. 28% of respondents had advance knowledge of EHR while 34%
and 38% of the respondents had intermediate or no knowledge of Electronic Health
Record (Fig. 5).
Satisfaction using current paper-based Personal Health Record (PHR) system?
Fig. 5. Satisfaction using PHR
The satisfaction level of respondents using Paper based record is high compare to
non satisfaction which is around 26% while majority of the respondents were neither
highly satisﬁed not satisﬁed with the current PHR system (Fig. 6).
Availability of steady electricity in BHUs?
Fig. 6. Availability of electricity
One of the most important factors in implementing E-Health in IDPs Health Project
is availability of Electricity. The above graph shows that the electricity availability to
77% of the respondents is sometimes while 17% has no facility of electricity at their
BHUs and only 6% of BHUs ha continuous supply or availability of steady electricity
(Fig. 7).
3.2.7 Availability of Computer and Steady Internet Connection?
Fig. 7. Availability of steady internet

444
M. I. Arfeen et al.
Another important factor that contributes in the implementation of E-health is avail-
ability of steady internet connection. Unfortunately only 23% of the respondents working
on health projects have availability of computer with steady internet connection with
19% of the respondents have no facility of internet. Another 59% of the respondents
sometimes have the facility of internet at their BHUs (Fig. 8).
Available Computers with software in BHUs?
Fig. 8. Available computers with software’s
The above ﬁgure shows that majority of the respondents have one to two computers
only with software that are essential in implementing E-Health while 23% do not have
any computers at BHUs and only 8% have got two or more than two computers with
software’s (Fig. 9).
Nature of use of computers at BHU?
Fig. 9. Use of computer
Interestingly according to the above ﬁgure 30% of the healthcare staff use computer
for their personal use in Health Project while only 2% of the staff use computers for
ofﬁcial work while 68% of the healthcare staff use computer for both personal and ofﬁcial
purpose at their work place (Fig. 10).
Perception of Healthcare Staff about Use of E-Health System.
Can E-Health system be applied to improve quality and reduce the cost of healthcare?
Fig. 10. Can E-Health improve Quality & Cost of health

E-Health in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan
445
Majority of the respondents were of a view that using E-Health system can improve
the quality and cost of healthcare while 31% of respondents were not sure and 13% of a
view that implementing E-Health will not have effect on cost and quality of healthcare
(Fig. 11).
Can E-health improve the quality of services in Health Projects?
Fig. 11. Can E-Health improve the Quality of Service
The above graph shows that majority of the respondents believe that using E-health
technology can improve the quality of service that are provided to IDPs in BHUs
(Fig. 12).
How often patients are referred to another healthcare center or hospital other than
BHUs for treatment?
Fig. 12. No. of Patients referred to other Hospitals
The above result shows that due to lack of resources 70% of the times the patients in
IDPs camp are referred to other hospital. The main reason is lack of resources which can
overcome with the help of technology. Therefore it is essential to use E-health system
in rural areas like IDP Camps.
5
Statistical Data Using SPSS
The data collected through questionnaire were structured and multiple regression and
signiﬁcant tests were performed using SPSS to identify the correlation among the vari-
ables and signiﬁcant factors which are important to identify in order to know the factors
due to which E-health is yet to be implemented in IDPs Health Project in Pakistan.
In total nine factor were checked with eight independent variables and one dependent
variable.

446
M. I. Arfeen et al.
6
Findings, Conclusions and Recommendations
The data was analyzed using SPSS to know the signiﬁcant factors. The results shows
that at personal level the healthcare staffs working in 11 NGOs/INGOs in IDP camps in
Pakistan are willing to adopt and use E-Health system (refer to signiﬁcant factor “A”)
but due to unavailability of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) (refer to
signiﬁcant factor’s B, C, D) that is essential in implementation of E-Health system. In
other words we can say that the stakeholders know the beneﬁts of E-health system but
cannot implement due to basic ICT facilities in project units. These include unavailabil-
ity of electricity, steady internet facility and because of which the organizations have
not provided staff with computers, printers, fax machines and other ICT infrastructure.
However, these ICT infrastructures can easily be improved and provided by the organi-
zations and others stakeholders by providing health units with generators for continuous
supply of electricity; steady internet can also be provided as many internet wiﬁdevices
are easily available now a days; and provide computers or laptops to staff with acces-
sories including printers, fax and photo copier machines, and scanners with important
software including EHR and other renowned software’s. Through ICT connections can
easily be established with the province major hospitals, specialists, surgeons in order to
share data of patients and provide quality and cost effective health services to people of
camps.
7
Recommendations
On the basis of results it can easily be inferred that lack of basic ICT facilities at Health
Project Unit is the reason why paper based health record (PHR) approach is still used in
this modern era. Before the start of research it was believed that may be the healthcare
staff are reluctant to use E-Health system and are happy with the PHR system but
the research results are opposite to that. At personal level majority of the staff is not
highly satisﬁed with PHR system and they want E-Health system to be implemented
but due to lack of facilities the system is yet to be implemented. Hence organization
and other stakeholders that are implementing health projects in IDP Camps are to be
blamed for lack of ICT infrastructure. It is therefore the responsibility of provincial
health department who heads the overall projects to compel all the organizations to
provide basic ICT infrastructure in health units. The health department should assure
before the start of project that health units have all the facilities that are required for
electronic health record (EHR) of patients. It must be assured that the entire patient’s
medical history is recorded with and patients who require surgeons and specialist advice
can make connection via teleconference and medical history of patient is shared with
particular specialist so that proper health treatment can be advised rather than referring
patients to hospital in other cities which is costly, time consuming and difﬁcult for a
patient. Therefore in order to provide quality health service with cost and time effective
it is important to adopt E-Health system in IDPs health projects too, which not be
contribute in project success but can have all the medical history of patients intact that
can be helpful in providing patients more effective healthcare facilities.

E-Health in IDPs Health Projects in Pakistan
447
8
Future Work
The research can be enhanced in more depth.
The primary focus in this research was health projects that are implemented in IDPs
Camps in KPK only. In future other health projects around the country can also be
focused with more detailed analysis.
The study can form a baseline for the needs assessment and the actual need of the
healthcare organizations in the rural and remote areas of Pakistan as well as IDP camps.
References
1. Bennett, N.L., Casebeer, L.L., Zheng, S., Kristofco, R.: Information-seeking behaviors and
reﬂective practice. J. Contin. Educ. Heal. Prof. 26(2), 120–127 (2006)
2. Eysenbach, G.: What is e-health? J. Med. Internet Res. 3(2), e20 (2001)
3. Chew, F., Grant, W., Tote, R.: Doctors online: using diffusion of innovations theory to
understand internet use. Family Med.-Kansas City 36, 645–650 (2004)
4. Broom, A.: Virtually he@ lthy: the impact of internet use on disease experience and the
doctor-patient relationship. Qual. Health Res. 15(3), 325–345 (2005)
5. HIMSS SIG develops proposed e-health deﬁnition. HIMSS News 13(7), 12 (2003)
6. Docteur, E., Oxley, H.: Health-care systems: lessons from the reform experience (2003)
7. Tustin, N.: The role of patient satisfaction in online health information seeking. J. Health
Commun. 15(1), 3–17 (2010)
8. Hesse, B.W., et al.: Trust and sources of health information: the impact of the internet and
its implications for health care providers: ﬁndings from the ﬁrst Health information national
trends survey. Arch. Int. Med. 165(22), 2618–2624 (2005)
9. WHO. http://www.who.int/countries/pak/en/ (2012)
10. Qureshi, Q.A., Ahmad, I., Nawaz, A.: Readiness for e-health in the developing countries like
Pakistan. Gomal J. Med. Sci. 10(1) (2012)
11. Nasrullah, M., Muazzam, S., Bhutta, Z.A., Raj, A.: Girl child marriage and its effect on fertility
in Pakistan: ﬁndings from Pakistan demographic and health survey, 2006–2007. Matern. Child
Health J. 18(3), 534–543 (2014)
12. http://www.drzaki.org/associations/ehap/. Accessed 22 Oct 2014
13. Powell, S., Rosner, R., Butollo, W., Tedeschi, R.G., Calhoun, L.G.: Posttraumatic growth
after war: a study with former refugees and displaced people in Sarajevo. J. Clin. Psychol.
59(1), 71–83 (2003)
14. http://www.unhcr.org/pages/49c3646c146.html. Accessed 6 Nov 2016
15. http://www.internal-displacement.org/publications/2013/global-overview-2012-people-int
ernally-displaced-by-conﬂict-and-violence/. Accessed 24 Mar 2015
16. Chaudhry, S.A.: A report by FATA Research Centre on crisis of IDPs in FATA: issues,
challenges and way forward (2014)
17. Said, S.: The unrealized crisis of FATA IDPs, 1 November 2013. [http://frc.com.pk/articles/
the-unrealized-crisis-offata-idps/] (2012)
18. Khan, Z.A.: Military operations in FATA and PATA: implications for Pakistan. Strateg. Stud.
31, 136–145 (2012)
19. Khan, S.: Health assistance to internally displaced persons of South Waziristan Agency in
camps and host community (2014)
20. Black, A.D., et al.: The impact of eHealth on the quality and safety of health care: a systematic
overview. PLoS Med. 8(1), 188 (2011)

448
M. I. Arfeen et al.
21. Gerkin, D.G.: E-health can be a two-edged sword for the medical doctor. Tenn. Med. 102,
7–8 (2009)
22. Akematsu, Y., Tsuji, M.: An empirical analysis of the reduction in medical expenditure by
e-health users. J. Telemed. Telecare 15(3), 109–111 (2009)
23. Marziali, E.: E-health program for patients with chronic disease. Telemed. J. E Health 15,
176–181 (2009)
24. Buntin, M.B., Burke, M.F., Hoaglin, M.C., Blumenthal, D.: The beneﬁts of health information
technology: a review of the recent literature shows predominantly positive results. Health
Affairs 30(3), 464–471 (2011)
25. Cornish, P.A., Church, E., Callanan, T., Bethune, C., Robbins, C., Miller, R.: Rural interdis-
ciplinary mental health team building via satellite: a demonstration project. Telemed. J. E
Health 9(1), 63–71 (2003)
26. Cresswell, K.M., Worth, A., Sheikh, A.: Actor-network theory and its role in understanding the
implementation of information technology developments in healthcare. BMC Med. Inform.
Decis. Making 10(1), 67 (2010)
27. Vitacca, M., Mazzù, M., Scalvini, S.: Socio-technical and organizational challenges to wider
e-Health implementation. Chron. Respir. Dis. 6(2), 91–97 (2009)
28. Wilson, E.V., Lankton, N.K.: Interdisciplinary research and publication opportunites in
information systems and health care. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 14(1), 51 (2004)
29. Pagliari, C., Donnan, P., Morrison, J., Ricketts, I., Gregor, P., Sullivan, F.: Adoption and
perception of electronic clinical communications in Scotland. Inf. Prim. Care 13(2), 97–104
(2005)
30. Khoja, S., Scott, R.E., Casebeer, A.L., Mohsin, M., Ishaq, A.F.M., Gilani, S.: e-Health readi-
ness assessment tools for healthcare institutions in developing countries. Telemed. e-Health
13(4), 425–432 (2007)
31. Shoaib, S.F., Mirza, S., Murad, F., Malik, A.Z.: Current status of e-health awareness among
healthcare professionals in teaching hospitals of Rawalpindi: a survey. Telemed. e-Health
15(4), 347–352 (2009)
32. Wickramasinghe, N.S., Fadlalla, A.M., Geisler, E., Schaffer, J.L.: A framework for assessing
e-health preparedness. Int. J. Electron. Healthc. 1(3), 316–334 (2005)
33. Chattopadhyay, S., Li, J., Land, L., Ray, P.: A framework for assessing ICT preparedness
for e-health implementations. In: 10th International Conference on e-health Networking,
Applications and Services, 2008. HealthCom 2008, pp. 124–129 (2008)
34. Li, J., Land, L.P.W., Ray, P., Chattopadhyaya, S.: E-Health readiness framework from
electronic health records perspective. Int. J. Internet Enterprise Manage. 6(4), 326–348 (2010)
35. Durrani, H., Khoja, S.: A systematic review of the use of telehealth in Asian countries. J.
Telemed. Telecare 15(4), 175–218 (2009)

Environmental Parameters Monitoring System
with an Application Interface for Smartphone
Jorge Ramos1
, André Teixeira2
, Carlos Arantes3
, Sérgio Lopes4
,
and João Sena Esteves4(B)
1 Smart Grid Division, Efacec, Porto, Portugal
jorge.silva.ramos@efacec.com
2 Department of Industrial Electronics, School of Engineering, University of Minho,
Guimarães, Portugal
a71913@alunos.uminho.pt
3 Protection, Automation and Control Division, Efacec, Porto, Portugal
carlos.arantes@efacec.com
4 R&D Centre Algoritmi, Department of Industrial Electronics, School of Engineering,
University of Minho, Guimarães, Portugal
{sergio.lopes,sena}@dei.uminho.pt
Abstract. Air pollution has become a major cause of health problems and mor-
tality. Monitoring systems based on ﬁxed stations are not able to adequately char-
acterize air pollution on a large area such as city. This paper describes the study,
development, implementation and validation of a mobile system for monitoring
environ-mental parameters. The system consists of a sensor network, a commu-
nications system, a web application and a smartphone application. The sensor
network is scalable as it has a bus topology and can collect data about nitrogen
dioxide and particulate matter. The communications system aggregates the col-
lected data and sends it to a remote web server using the HTTP protocol and a
3G mobile network. The web and the smartphone applications provide ways for
viewing the data stored on the remote web server. The Google Maps API was used
to represent the obtained records on a map. All system components were tested
individually and, at a later stage, in an integrated manner. The results obtained
in tests with the developed system were compared with the results from ﬁxed
stations. The measurement errors were less than 10%.
Keywords: Environmental monitoring · Mobile monitoring system · HTTP
protocol · Smartphone application
1
Introduction
The daily life of society has been affected by the increase in environmental pollution,
either at atmospheric level or at sound level. According to a report by the European
Environment Agency in 2016, air pollution was responsible for 467 000 premature
deaths in Europe [1]. In order to reduce these numbers, systems have been implemented
to monitor ambient air. These systems allow the creation of air quality indicators and,
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 449–459, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_39

450
J. Ramos et al.
consequently, the determination of critical points and the implementation of air pollution
prevention and reduction measures. Monitoring consists of a “series of observations
and measurements of some physical, chemical or biological variables, which make it
possible to understand and predict some environmental changes” [2]. The main polluting
substances monitored are carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, ozone and
particulate material [1, 3]. This last substance consists of solid or liquid material that is
suspended on the air in the form of particles [4].
Traditionally, air monitoring is done from networks of stationary stations. These
networks (still used today) are made up of stations with air quality sensors, installed
in strategic areas of the cities. From the data fusion from each station, it is possible
to measure air pollution in respective city spots. To characterize the air pollution in
the city, the number of stations that make up the network should be proportional to
the area to be monitored. For example, in 2017 a monitoring system of this type was
introduced in the Philippines. This system consists of 4 new large ﬁxed stations, which
allow the monitoring of particulate material, sulfur dioxide, ozone and nitrogen dioxide
in real time. This system constantly measures the levels of concentrations of polluting
substances and generates, on an hourly basis, the average for each one [3].
Despite their high dissemination, these networks of ﬁxed stations require high instal-
lation and maintenance costs. Thus, most cities contain a reduced number of stations for
the area to be covered, making the data collected inefﬁcient and the characterization of
the environment incomplete [5]. For example, the city of Beijing, with about 16.800 km2,
is covered by only 35 monitoring stations [6]. In this way, areas outside the reach of
stations are estimated using mathematical methods, making it impossible to detect local
changes in air quality, such as sporadic emissions and heavy trafﬁc [8–10].
The main objectives of the work described in this paper were the study, develop-
ment, implementation and validation of a mobile system for monitoring environmental
parameters. The goals of the project were:
a)
ﬂexibility to install a variable number of sensors to measure different environmental
parameters;
b) georeferentiation of every sensor reading, enabling to provide detailed maps of air
quality on given areas;
c)
to provide the data through multiples platforms, web and mobile, in real-time.
2
Related Work
This chapter presents two examples of existing air quality monitoring stations, one ﬁxed
and one mobile, with the latter being implemented in vehicles. The main characteristics,
advantages and drawbacks of these two types of stations are summarized.
2.1
Fixed Monitoring Station
The CitySense project, implemented in Cambridge, is an example of the implementation
of ﬁxed stations [11]. Each station is made up of a set of sensors capable of measuring
temperature, relative humidity, wind speed and atmospheric pressure. In addition, it also
consists of a box of reduced dimensions (about 8 × 8 cm), containing carbon dioxide
sensors and all the necessary hardware for data communication via GSM (Global System

Environmental Parameters Monitoring System
451
for Mobile Communications). The carbon dioxide sensors used are Vaisala GMP343.
These sensors are characterized by having low energy consumption, good accuracy and
a total cost of around 2500 e [11, 12].
From this example, it may be concluded that the use of small stations scattered
around cities is a possibility for air quality monitoring systems. Since the cost and size
of these stations is signiﬁcantly less than that of conventional stations, it is possible to
introduce a larger number across cities. In this way, more values are obtained for the
area to be covered, improving the characterization of air quality [6]. Although this is just
one example, it has the characteristics common to other ﬁxed systems described in [6].
In Table 1, the advantages and disadvantages related to monitoring from ﬁxed stations
are pointed out [6, 7].
Table 1. Main advantages and disadvantages of a ﬁxed monitoring station
Advantages
Disadvantages
Use of high-quality hardware, allowing the
acquisition of accurate and reliable data
Careful placement of monitoring stations due
to the lack of air pollution standard
Lack of localization systems
Placement of a number of stations
proportional to the area to be covered
Use of several sensors without constraints
regarding the physical dimensions and total
weight of the system
Use of mathematical methods in order to
predict air quality in unmonitored areas
(extrapolation)
Easy system maintenance
Limited measurement area
High cost of implementation
2.2
Mobile Monitoring Stations
Google,inpartnershipwithAclima,acompanyintheﬁeldofairquality,hasimplemented
three street view cars systems that collect data about air quality. The main polluting sub-
stances monitored were nitrogen monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and black carbon particles.
Data collection was done for one year across all streets within the residential, industrial
and commercial areas of Oakland, California. After that year, all the data obtained were
analyzed, concluding that this type of monitoring reveals a “remarkable and stable het-
erogeneity in the daily concentrations of some pollutants” [13]. In addition, it was found
that some areas within the city have a greater air pollution, for example, in the vicinity
of a metal scrap the levels of nitrogen monoxide and dioxide were higher than the levels
of the rest of the street. The same happened near highways, that is, as the collection was
carried out farther from the highways, the concentrations of the parameters decreased
[13].
This monitoring system consists of an air collection system on the top of the car
and a measurement system implemented in the trunk of the car. The collection system
enables the ambient air to be sent to the measurement system, ensuring that it is con-
stantly changed. Regarding the measurement system, it consists of high cost laboratory

452
J. Ramos et al.
analyzers, which allows to acquire precision and accuracy in the measurements made.
Whenever new measurements are collected, they are sent to the Aclima cloud where they
will be further processed [13]. Table 2 shows the advantages and disadvantages related
to monitoring from mobile stations [14].
Table 2. Main advantages and disadvantages of a mobile monitoring station.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Data acquisition in different locations
Data redundancy directly related to the number
of vehicles traveling in an area
Visualization of the values collected in
different locations in real time
Introduction of a localization module to
geo-reference the values obtained
Lower cost in the implementation and
acquisition of the system
Introduction of a communication module for
sending data from the respective collection site.
Thus, it will be necessary to use mobile data,
leading to an increase in the cost of use
3
System Architecture
This section describes the components and procedures of the proposed monitoring
system. The developed system architecture is represented in Fig. 1.
Each Monitoring Unit is based on a microcontroller connected with sensors. These
units are responsible for collecting data related to the environmental parameters and
sending them to the local Central Unit through a LIN bus. The LIN bus implements a
sensor network that offers: (1) scalability, to increase the number and variety of sensors,
for example to monitor also cabin air parameters such as CO2; (2) easier deployment
in vehicles, by minimizing the cables necessary to interconnect exterior/engine and
cabin units and facilitating the installation of sensors in different vehicle locations. The
sensors used consist of one MiCS-4514 to measure the Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) and
a HPMA115S0-XXX to measure the particulate material, namely PM2.5 and PM10.
In addition, a DHT 11 sensor was implemented to measure temperature and relative
humidity measurement. These sensors have the best cost-beneﬁt ratio for the proposed
system.
The Central Unit consists of a microcontroller, a GPS module and a 3G commu-
nications module. This unit receives the data collected from Monitoring Units through
LIN BUS protocol, groups it and sends it to the Cloud Service along with geographic
coordinates.
The Cloud Service saves the data received from central units and makes it available
to client applications, namely a web application and an Android application that allows
users to easily access real-time air quality data for the location they are at.
In the android application, the AQI (Air Quality Index) values are computed using
the data read from the Cloud and represented on a map. This is explained in more detail
in subsection below.

Environmental Parameters Monitoring System
453
Fig. 1. Block diagram of the monitoring system, adapted from [15].
3.1
Monitoring Units and Central Unit
The Monitoring Unit architecture is presented side by side with the respective PCB in
Fig. 2. As shown in the ﬁgure, the monitoring units are equipped with a UART, I2C and
ADC interfaces that allow the choice of parameters and sensors to be used by the end
user. In addition, a connector for gas sensors of the MQ series was introduced as they ﬁt
into low-cost sensors for measuring a wide variety of gases. The unit is powered by the
12 V voltage of the Central Unit and LIN protocol is used for communication between
all units.
Fig. 2. Monitoring Unit architecture on the left and the respective PCB on the right.
Figure 3 presents the architecture and the PCB of the Central Unit. The board has a
3G modem, a GPS module and connectors for the LIN and CAN communication proto-
col. The 3G module was chosen considering the available budget. The CAN Bus is used
to enable communication with the car’s CAN network. This unit is powered by a +12 V
power supply, such as a car battery or cigarette lighter adapter.

454
J. Ramos et al.
Fig. 3. Central unit architecture on the left and the respective PCB on the right.
4
Data Transmission and Storage
The Cloud Service is based on the ThingSpeak IoT platform. This platform provides
storage, analysis and real time data visualization. It stores data in channels, each one with
a maximum of 8 data ﬁelds. In the developed Cloud Service, each channel corresponds
to a Central Unit, and each ﬁeld is a measured parameter (temperature, humidity, PM2.5,
PM10, NO2, latitude, longitude).
The communication with Central Units as well as client applications is implemented
using HTTP protocol. For sending data, an HTTP POST method is used by Central Units
in which, the data frame sent contains the sensor measured values and the location at
which they were obtained. A message is sent periodically every 10 s.
The HTTP POST message structure is presented in Fig. 4 and displays the ﬁelds for
each monitored parameter. It is important to note that ﬁeld 6 is not deﬁned since it is
used for testing purposes. After receiving the message, the Cloud Services assigns this
dataset an identiﬁer (entry_ID).
Fig. 4. HTTP Post frame structure.

Environmental Parameters Monitoring System
455
Client applications request data from the Cloud Service using HTTP GET method.
The desired channel is deﬁned in the URL and the reading api key required for private
channels is added as query parameters. The response contains the last saved data in a
json format as shown below:
{“created_at”: “2020-11-29T12:13:23Z”, “entry_id”:142, “Temperature”: “15”,
“Humidity”: “60”, “PM2.5”: “1.3”, “PM10”: “6.0”, “NO2”: “25.1”, “Latitude”:
“41.407067”, “Longitude”: “ −8.520499”}
The ﬁrst key/value pair corresponds to the time the data was recorded in the Cloud.
The keys ﬁeld 1 to ﬁeld 5 and their respective values represent the environmental param-
eters sent. Finally, the last two key/value pairs correspond to the location (latitude and
longitude respectively).
5
Mobile Application
A mobile application was developed to present the data collected by the mobile envi-
ronmental station. It is an Android app that computes the Air Quality Index (AQI) for
a central unit and shows their data on a map. The AQI consists of a color classiﬁcation
for the different levels of the air quality. The color assignment is related to an AQI value
calculated from the pollutant concentrations. The Android app was writ-ten in Java and
it uses the Google Maps service API. Its interface consists of a unique Activity with a
map where colored markers are displayed according to the calculated AQI value. The
markers also show the individuals sensor values obtained from the Cloud Service.
The app ﬂowchart is represented in Fig. 5. First, an HTTP GET is made to obtain
the json data that contains the latest sensor readings. The entry_ID value is compared
with the last entry_ID to ensure that a new marker is only drawn when a new dataset is
uploaded to the Cloud. If the entry_IDs does not match, the AQI calculation for each
pollutant is performed by comparing the values of concentration with a reference table
values, using the following mathematical model:
Ip =
IHi −ILo
BPHi −BPLo

Cp −BPLo

+ ILo
(1)
Where:
– Ip is the index for pollutant p;
– Cp is the concentration of the pollutant p;
– BPHi is the concentration breakpoint that is greater than or equal to Cp (Table 3);
– BPLo is the concentration breakpoint that is less than or equal to Cp (Table 3);
– IHi is the AQI value for the upper limit BPHi (Table 3);
– ILo is the AQI value for the lower limit BPLo (Table 3).
Then, the ﬁnal AQI value is obtained by the maximum value of the AQI calculated
for each pollutant. Finally, a custom marker with the corresponding AQI color is drawn
on the map. When pressing the marker, pollutant information, temperature and humidity
and occurrence date are shown. All previous markers remain on the map.
This algorithm is executed every 5 s, so that the Cloud data is periodically read.
All these procedures are executed in background to avoid freezing the map interface.

456
J. Ramos et al.
Table 3. AQI table [16]
Pollutant /
Classification
PM10 (μg/m3) 
PM2.5 (μg/m3) 
NO2 (μg/m3) 
Min
Max
Min
Max
Min
Max
Very good
0-25
0 
15
0 
10
0 
50
Good
25-50
15
30
10
20
50
100
Fair
50-75
30
50
20
30
100
200
Bad
75-100
50
100
30
60
200
400
Very Bad
>10
100
-
60
-
401
-
Fig. 5. Android app ﬂowchart
6
Results
The results obtained from experimental tests carried out on the Android application,
which include communication with the Cloud, are presented below in order to vali-date
the system implementation.

Environmental Parameters Monitoring System
457
Whenever the application starts-up, a Google map is created and the marker cor-
responding to the last data transmission is added. As a new marker is added the focus
of the map is redirected to that point (see Fig. 6). The added marker shows the color
corresponding to the AQI. The marker info window was customized in order to display
the detailed information in a table format. To access this window, it is only necessary to
click on the desired marker. On top of the info window the AQI classiﬁcation obtained
with the appropriate color is presented. The parameters, the measurements and the AQI
value calculated for each one appear below. At the end, the time and date when the
measurement took place are displayed.
The application also allows switching the map view between normal, satellite, or
hybrid.
Fig. 6. Android Interface.
7
Conclusions and Future Work
The use of ﬁxed monitoring stations has several limitations in terms of environmental
monitoring. The need to estimate data for an area based on measurements made in a few
places was a problem for this type of system, as it makes it impossible to create reliable

458
J. Ramos et al.
air quality proﬁles that follow the change and the existing standards in a given area. The
use of mobile monitoring stations, namely systems implemented on mobile platforms,
makes it possible to take advantage of the movements of these platforms to collect data
from different zones. In this way, measurements are taken in more places, achieving a
better characterization of the monitored areas.
A fully functional prototype of a monitoring system was developed to be implement-
ed in a car, which allows the monitoring of some of the main polluting substances:
particulate matter and nitrogen dioxide. This system has a sensors network that make it
scalable, enabling the addition of new units for measurement both inside and out-side
the vehicle. In addition, the expandability of the sensor network is also guaranteed by
the modularity of the monitoring units – the existence of several interfaces facilitates
the replacement of the sensors. The implemented system makes possible to send data
to a remote server or to the car’s CAN network. This last feature enables, for example,
to generate an alert whenever the air quality of the passenger compartment is outside a
deﬁned range. The data sent to the Cloud can be available online, allowing it to be viewed
by the population, as well as the deﬁnition of long-term policies to improve air quality.
The smartphone application is responsible for viewing the data as it allows viewing the
records on a virtual map provided by the Google Maps service and also for the treatment
and processing of the data obtained. The prototype developed is a low cost system that
easily provides valuable data for responsible authorities and for citizens through both
web and mobile platforms.
The achieved results fulﬁll the proposed objectives. In the ﬁrst tests, the values
obtained with the new system were compared with the results from the ﬁxed stations,
obtaining measurement errors of less than 10%. In the remaining tests carried out, the
system collected data in several areas, taking advantage of the car’s movement. Using
the system, it was found that the air quality in the city center of Vila Nova de Famalicão,
Portugal, is lower than the air quality in its periphery. In order to reach this conclusion,
a large number of measurements were made in each of the zones under evaluation.
Regarding future work, there are some aspects of the current system that could be
improved. The following changes are suggested:
– Use of electrochemical sensors in the monitoring units to reduce the error of the
measurements, obtaining more accurate values;
– Addition of an SPI interface allowing the introduction of more sensors;
– Provide wider coverage and reduce communications cost by replacing the 3G module
with one that supports NB-Iot;
– Implementation of an interpolation of the obtained data to be able to provide a
continuous map of air quality.
Acknowledgements. This work has been supported by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e Tec-
nologia within the R&D Units Project Scope: UIDB/00319/2020. The authors are also grateful
to CEIIA – Centre of Engineering and Product Development. CEIIA provided a very signiﬁcant
support in several parts of this work, namely the ones related with hardware development and
software communication.

Environmental Parameters Monitoring System
459
References
1. Guerreiro, C., González Ortiz, A., Leeuw, F., Viana, M., Horálek, J.: Air quality in Europe -
2016 report. European Environment Agency (EEA) (2016)
2. Lovett, G., et al.: Who needs environmental monitoring? Front. Ecol. Environ. 5, 253–260
(2007)
3. GMA
NEWS.
https://www.gmanetwork.com/news/scitech/technology/612877/denr-lau
nches-eu-backed-air-quality-monitoring-system/story. Accessed 01 Jun 2018
4. EEA: “EEA Signals 2013: Every breath we take - Improving air quality in Europe” EEA
Signals 2013 (2013)
5. Lo Re, G., Peri, D., Vassallo, S.D.: Urban air quality Monitoring using vehicular sensor
networks. In: Gaglio, S., Lo Re, G. (eds.) Advances onto the Internet of Things. AISC, vol.
260, pp. 311–323. Springer, Cham (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-03992-3_22
6. Yi, W., Lo, K., Mak, T., Leung, K., Leung, Y., Meng, M.: A survey of wireless sensor network
based air pollution monitoring systems. Sensors 15, 31392–31427 (2015)
7. Dhingra, S., Madda, R., Gandomi, A., Patan, R., Daneshmand, M.: Internet of Things mobile-
air pollution monitoring system (IoT-Mobair). IEEE Internet Things J. 6, 5577–5584 (2019)
8. Völgyesi, P., Nádas, A., Koutsoukos, X., Lédeczi, Á.: Air quality monitoring with SensorMap.
In: 2008 International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (ipsn 2008)
(2008)
9. Aeroqual. https://www.aeroqual.com/mobile-air-quality-monitoring. Accessed 11 Dec 2017
10. Katulski, R., Stefa´nski, J., Sadowski, J., Ambroziak, S., Namie´snik, J., Wardencki, W.: Mobile
monitoring system for control of atmospheric air quality. Polish J. Environ. Stud. 20, 677–681
(2011)
11. Murty, R., Mainland, G., Rose, I., Chowdhury, A., Gosain, A., Bers, J., Welsh, M.: City-
Sense: an urban-scale wireless sensor network and testbed. In: 2008 IEEE Conference on
Technologies for Homeland Security, pp. 583–588. Waltham, MA, USA (2008)
12. Vaisala. https://www.vaisala.com/pt/products/instrumentos-sensores-e-outros-dispositivos-
de-medicao/instrumentos-para-medicoes-industriais/gmp343. Accessed 15 Dec 2018
13. Apte, J., et al.: High-resolution air pollution mapping with google street view cars: exploiting
big data. Environ. Sci. Technol. 51, 6999–7008 (2017)
14. Silva, L., Mendes, B., Rodrigues, D., Ribeiro, P., Mendes, J.: A mobile environmental
monitoring station for sustainable cities. Int. J. Sustain. Dev. Plan. 11, 949–958 (2016)
15. ThingSpeak. https://thingspeak.com/pages/commercial_learn_more. Accessed 3 Nov 2020
16. https://www.airqualitynow.eu/about_indices_deﬁnition.php?fbclid=IwAR3o2V5Gpgnfn
mKc-hNKsIFk5vaZavWJoMheK_evsBkWHU0_09-HbdjCVis. Accessed 30 Nov 2020

Mechatronic Design of a Wall-Climbing Drone
for the Inspection of Structures
and Infrastructure
Erika Ottaviano1, Pierluigi Rea2(B), Massimo Cavacece1, and Giorgio Figliolini1
1 Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, University of Cassino and Southern Lazio,
Cassino, Italy
ottaviano@unicas.it
2 Department of Mechanical, Chemical and Materials Engineering, University of Cagliari,
Via Marengo, 2, 09123 Cagliari, CA, Italy
pierluigi.rea@dimcm.unica.it
Abstract. The inspection of structures and infrastructure is nowadays a relevant
problem in Europe, and especially in Italy, after the recent collapses of bridges.
Large research activity has been therefore devoted towards the inspection for fur-
ther management and maintenance of large areas. For those infrastructures difﬁ-
cult to access UAVs, mobile, and climbing robots are the key solution for carrying
instrumentation and sensors. UAVs in most of cases are an efﬁcient solution, but
they suffer of some drawbacks, among all the security distance to maintain during
the ﬂight operation, avoiding the robot to get next to, or in contact to the surface to
inspect. Additionally, when dealing with structures exposed to harsh environmen-
tal conditions such as strong wind, the possibility of having collisions between
to the robot and the surface is quite high. Therefore, to limit possible crashes to
surfaces or walls for indoor and even outdoor inspection, wall-climbing drones
have been recently conceived being able to ﬂy next to and climb vertical surfaces.
In this paper, we present a novel wall-climbing drone based on a multirotor having
legs and passive wheels. First preliminary design simulation is reported together
with a built prototype.
Keywords: Robotics · Mechatronics · Wall-climbing drone · Robotic inspection
1
Introduction
The integrity of infrastructure and structures, such as bridges, skyscrapers, wind turbines
and large aircraft, is closely related to safety issues. Nowadays, due to their aging and
potential concerns about their damage or even their collapse, the interest in Structural
Health Monitoring (SHM) has increased worldwide, [1, 2]. Although there is a great
deal of research on inspecting large structures difﬁcult to access using Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) or mobile robotics [3–9], in most of cases the inspection still require
great human efforts, installation of additional structures or the use magnet-based tech-
nology or vacuum adhesion, and it is time consuming and high-cost. In addition, in most
of cases, it requires the stop of the trafﬁc causing big problems to the viability. The
new trend in robotics inspections made by UAVs addresses the development of a new
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 460–467, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_40

Mechatronic Design of a Wall-Climbing Drone for the Inspection
461
concept of a wall-climbing drone, which allows approaching to any type of structure
by ﬂying and adhering to the target using a perching mechanism. Furthermore, it does
not require the installation of any additional infrastructure and which offers maximum
mobility and safety such as the robot to wall. These robots have greater mobility than
existing wall robots because they can ﬂy. Furthermore, the robot can also adhere to
the surface, therefore, it can perform a close inspection and eventually the maintenance
operation of the structure [10]. An example is the SCAMP (Stanford Climbing and
Aerial Maneuvering Platform) project [11], which is able to ﬂy, passively perch, climb,
and take off. Small drones are generally perfect for resisting to small impacts such as
collisions with a wall, they are extremely quick in movements and changes in direction,
and can reach higher adhesive forces than larger drones. SCAMP is able to ﬂy, climb,
immediately recover stability in the event of a fall and slip into those tunnels where
other larger drones cannot access. For its construction, carbon ﬁber materials were used,
drawbacks are related to small dimension (and duration) of the battery. Another example
is the VOLIRO [12], which is a novel aerial platform that incorporates the advantages of
existing multi-rotor systems with the agility of omnidirectional controllable platforms. It
consists of a hexa-copter with tiltable rotors allowing the system to decouple the control
of position and orientation. Nowadays, multirotor drones have reached a high level of
popularity. Although drones with four or six rotors are common and particularly fast,
they are not known for their ﬂexibility due to their ﬁxed rotors [13].
The novelty of VOLIRO is the use of six rotors that operate independently and can
rotate 360° achieving interesting features, such as ﬂying on the side, ﬂying upside down
and in an upright position. Having in mind the above-mentioned technical solutions, in
this paper, we present simulation results and a ﬁrst prototype of a wall-climbing drone,
which can be used for in indoor and outdoor inspections.
2
Mechatronic Design of a Wall-Climbing Drone
The wall-climbing drone should have the characteristics here described: it must ﬂy and
move close or attached to walls maintaining the contact or staying at given distance;
it must be equipped by suitable sensors, e.g., a camera; it should be low-cost and easy
operation. The wall-climbing drone is designed for the inspection of structures and
infrastructures. Wall-climbing robots are classiﬁed as wall-sticking mechanisms, tilt-
rotor-based drones, or multi oriented rotors, as it was recalled in the previous section.
In this context, we have developed a wall-climbing drone composed by four ﬁxed
rotors, which are used for the ﬂying mode. The novel idea is to redesign the mechanical
architecture by using two additional rotors with ﬁxed axes that are mounted at 90° with
respect to the ﬁrst four ones. To be able to get close to a wall keeping a ﬁxed distance, two
limbs are used having passive wheels at the end tips. The two rotors produce a speciﬁc
propulsion needed to keep the contact to a vertical surface, the passive wheels are used
to reduce the friction when climbing the surface.
Figure 1 shows the mechanical design of the wall-climbing drone.
The two legs are equipped with lightweight wheels for maintaining the contact with
any vertical surface. Suitable springs allow the damping and reduce the contact impact
with the wall. Figure 2 shows the design of the spring whose main characteristics are K

462
E. Ottaviano et al.
Fig. 1. 3D view of the novel wall-climbing drone.
a) 
b) 
0.11
0.30
0.50
0.69
0.89
1.08
1.27
1.47
1.66
1.86
2.04
F_H [N]
838
854
870
887
903
D_w (mm)
Fig. 2. Design of the spring a); b) distance from the wall D_w VS propulsion force F_H.

Mechatronic Design of a Wall-Climbing Drone for the Inspection
463
= 0.5 N/mm; C = 0.01 N/(mm/s); L = 32.34 mm; initial elongation is L0 = 30 mm. The
legs’ maximum range is 60–140°. Mechanical speciﬁcations are reported in Table 1.
Table 1. Speciﬁcations.
Component
Characteristics
Quantity
Frame
Diagonal wheelbase 450 mm
Frame mass 282 g
Takeoff mass 800 g–1600 g
2 (top and bottom)
ESC
OPTO current 30 A
Signal frequency 30 Hz–450 Hz
Power pack 3S–4S LiPo
4 + 2
Motor
Stator dim. 22 × 12 mm - KV 920 rpm/V
Propeller 10 × 3.8 in; 8 × 4.5 in
4 + 2
KK multi-controller V.5.5
4 rotors control
Integrated circuit Atmega IC
1
Propeller pairs
10 in
6
Battery
11.1 V–5000 mAh – mass 440 g
1
Wheel
Dimensions: 8 × 8 × 178 mm
Mass 9.07 g
2
Spring
K 0.5 N/mm; C = 0.01 N/(mm/s);
L0 30 mm
2
3
Simulation Results
Simulations of the wall-climbing drone have been developed ﬁrstly for sizing the
actuation and springs allowing then the system to stick and climb a vertical wall.
A simulation has been carried out considering motion sequence of the approach and
contact to a vertical surface, as it is shown in Fig. 3. For the reported numerical results,
the horizontal propulsion is considered, while simulation results for the four propellers
with vertical axis are not shown. The motion laws used to drive the climbing drone
toward the wall is shown in Fig. 4a. In particular, it is worth noting that the horizontal
Fig. 3. A sequence for the simulation of the surface approach of the wall-climbing drone.

464
E. Ottaviano et al.
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
0.01
0.51
1.01
1.51
2.01
2.51
3.01
3.51
4.01
4.51
5.00
Time [sec]
0.1
0.6
1.1
1.6
2.0
F_H [N]
0.01
0.51
1.01
1.51
2.01
2.51
3.01
3.51
4.01
4.51
5.00
Time [sec]
634
670
705
740
776
D_w [mm]
0.01
0.51
1.01
1.51
2.01
2.51
3.01
3.51
4.01
4.51
5.00
Tempo (sec)
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.5
R_w [N]
0.01
0.51
1.01
1.51
2.01
2.51
3.01
3.51
4.01
4.51
5.00
Time [(sec]
0
1
2
4
5
F_s [N]
Fig. 4. Numerical results of the simulation in Fig. 3: a) propulsion force F_H; b) wall distance
D_w; c) wheel reaction force against the wall R_w; d) spring force F_s.

Mechatronic Design of a Wall-Climbing Drone for the Inspection
465
propulsion force increases in order to get the drone closer to the wall. The distance from
the wall is shown in Fig. 4b. In particular, the force of the propellers has a suitable initial
value, because a starting threshold of the force is required for getting close to the wall.
Subsequently, when the wheels get in contact with the surface this force grows.
4
Mechatronic Design
Figure 5 shows the built prototype, which is currently under testing to reduce masses and
static and dynamic balancing. A scheme for the control of the propellers is reported in
Fig. 6. It is worth noting that this solution allows decoupling the control of the propellers
with vertical axis and those with horizontal axis (labeled as motor 5 and 6 in Fig. 6), the
latter used only when approaching to a surface. The idea of decoupled control strategies
has been also used in [14–16] for the mechatronic design of multibody systems. The
synthesis procedures for the mechanics are described in [17].
The Electronic Speed Controller (ESC) for the drone is a robust, powerful component
that connects the ﬂight controller to the motors. Given that each brushless motor requires
an ESC, a quadcopter will require 4 ESCs. The ESC takes the signal from the ﬂight
controller and power from the battery and makes the brushless motor spin.
The ESC communicates with the control board using a Pulse Position Modulation
PPMdigitalmodulationtechnique.Inparticular,theFC(FlightControl)sendsasequence
of square wave pulses to the ESC which, interpreting their position and/or duration (τ),
varies the angular speed of the motors, Fig. 6. The FC sends a pulse of period T and the
duration τ in which the signal is high is the factor that determines the ﬁnal angular speed
of the motor. Having chosen motors with a maximum absorption of 10.6 A, an ESC of
at least 20 A must be used. ESC can be programmed by speciﬁc software. The used KK
multi-controller is a ﬂight control board for remote control of multi-copters with 2, 3, 4
and 6 rotors, which is used to stabilize the drone during ﬂight. It takes signals coming
from the 3 gyroscopes on the board (roll, pitch, yaw) and sends the information to the
Fig. 5. Built prototype.

466
E. Ottaviano et al.
Motor 5 
Motor 6 
Ch6 
Ch5 
Ch4 
Ch3 
Ch2 
Ch1 
Radio 
Fig. 6. A scheme of the control for the wall-climbing-drone.
Atmega IC circuit. The latter processes the information according the KK software and
sends in output a control signal to the ESCs, which are plugged onto the board and
connected to the actuators. Based on the signal from the IC, the ESCs will modify the
speed of actuators to control the ﬂight.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, the design and ﬁrst prototype are presented for a wall-climbing drone that
can be used for inspection of structures and infrastructure. Simulation results of the
system approaching a vertical surface are reported, they are used both in design stage,
for sizing the legs and springs, and for deﬁning the operations during the experiments.
A ﬁrst prototype has been built for experimental tests and it is currently under testing.
Acknowledgments. The proposed paper is part of a project, which has received funds from the
Research Fund for Coal and Steel RFCS under grant agreement No 800687.
References
1. Yeum, C.M., Dyke, S.J.: Vision-based automated crack detection for bridge inspection.
Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 30, 759–770 (2015)
2. Lin, Y.Z., Nie, Z.H., Ma, H.W.: Structural damage detection with automatic feature-extraction
through deep learning. Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 32(12), 1025–1046 (2017)

Mechatronic Design of a Wall-Climbing Drone for the Inspection
467
3. Ottaviano, E., Rea, P., Castelli, G.: THROO: a tracked hybrid rover to overpass obstacles.
Adv. Robot. 28(10), 683–694 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1080/01691864.2014.891949
4. Rea, P., Pelliccio, A., Ottaviano, E., Saccucci, M.: The heritage management and preservation
using the mechatronic survey. Int. J. Archit. Heritage 11(8), 1121–1132 (2017). https://doi.
org/10.1080/15583058.2017.1338790
5. Rea, P., Ottaviano, E.: Design and development of an inspection robotic system for indoor
applications. Rob. Comput. Integr. Manuf. 49, 143–151 (2018)
6. Figliolini, G., Ceccarelli, M., Di Gioia, M.: Descending stairs with EP-WAR3 biped robot.
In: IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM), vol.
2, Paper number: 1225436, pp. 747–752 (2003)
7. Figliolini, G., Ceccarelli, M.: EP-WAR3 biped robot for climbing and descending stairs.
Robotica 22(4), 405–417 (2004)
8. Figliolini, G., Rea, P., Conte, M.: Mechanical design of a novel biped climbing and walking
robot. In: Parenti Castelli, V., Schiehlen, W. (eds.) ROMANSY 18 Robot Design, Dynamics
and Control. CICMS, vol. 524, pp. 199–206. Springer, Vienna (2010). https://doi.org/10.
1007/978-3-7091-0277-0_23
9. Ottaviano, E., Rea, P.: Design and operation of a 2-DOF leg-wheel hybrid robot. Robotica
31(8), 1319–1325 (2013)
10. PhyOrg: Development of a wall-climbing drone (2016). https://phys.org/news/2016-03-wall-
climbing-drone.html
11. SCAMP, webpage (2021). http://bdml.stanford.edu/Main/MultiModalRobots
12. Mina, S.K., Verling, S., Elkhatib, O., Gilitschenski, I., Gilitschenski, I.: Voliro: an omnidi-
rectional hexacopter with tiltable rotors. arXiv, Cornell University (2018)
13. Alkalla, M.G., Fanni, M.A., Abdelfatah, M.M.: A novel propeller–type climbing robot for
vessels inspection. In: IEEE International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics
(AIM) (2018)
14. Rea, P., Ottaviano, E., Castelli, G.: A procedure for the design of novel assisting devices for
the sit-to-stand. J. Bionic Eng. 10(4), 488–496 (2013)
15. Ceccarelli, M., Ottaviano, E., Galvagno, M.: A 3-DOF parallel manipulator as earthquake
motionsimulator.In:Proceedingsofthe7thInternationalConferenceonControl,Automation,
Robotics and Vision, ICARCV 2002, pp. 944–949 (2002)
16. Rea, P., Ottaviano, E., Conte, M., D’Aguanno, A.D., Carolis, D.: The design of a novel tilt
seat for inversion therapy. Int. J. Imaging Rob. 11(3), 1–10 (2013)
17. Figliolini, G., Rea, P., Angeles, J.: The synthesis of the axodes of RCCC linkages. J. Mech.
Robot 8 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4031950. ISSN 19424302

Inﬂuence of Magnitude of Interaction
on Control in Decentralized Adaptive Control
of Two Input Two Output Systems
Karel Perutka(B)
Tomas Bata University, Nam. T.G.M. 5555, 76001 Zlin, Czech Republic
kperutka@utb.cz
Abstract. This paper presents an analysis of the inﬂuence of interactions on the
course of the control process using the chosen method of decentralized adaptive
control of two input two output systems. In the paper, after the general introduc-
tion to decentralized and adaptive control, the necessary theoretical framework
is presented. In this chapter, there is described the method used for decentral-
ized control, the method of identifying the system parameters and the method
of calculating the parameters of the controller. In the examples, the effect of the
change in the gain of the interaction transfer function in one branch and the effect
of the change in the gain of the interaction transfer functions in both branches
were tested. Furthermore, it was veriﬁed that the change of the pole value in the
interaction in one branch inﬂuences the control, and the effect of the change of
the pole value in the transfer functions of the interaction in both branches. The
results of these veriﬁcations are presented on selected examples and ﬁnally their
evaluation is performed.
Keywords: Adaptive control · Self-tuning controller · decentralized control ·
suboptimal linear quadratic tracking · least squares method · Interaction · Gain ·
poles
1
Introduction
Most systems in nature and engineering are multi-input and multi-output systems. The
simplest example is two-input and two-output systems. These systems are often con-
trolled by a multivariable or decentralized controller. The decentralized control is widely
used in practice. Decentralized control could be used for a class of two-time-scale inter-
connected networks with unknown slow dynamics. The network in this case consists
of m lower-level subsystems interconnected through an upper-level main system with
unknown dynamics [1]. Decentralized control can employ fuzzy control such as the
case of the adaptive decentralized fuzzy dynamic surface control scheme for a class
of nonlinear large-scale systems with input and interconnection delays. It was proven
that this method can ensure that all signals of the closed-loop large-scale systems in
the presence of both interconnection and input delays [2]. Frequency control is another
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 468–479, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1_41

Inﬂuence of Magnitude of Interaction on Control
469
area of application, for example, decentralized and discretized control of storage sys-
tems offering primary frequency control. It was shown that primary frequency control
is a suitable and economically viable service for small-scale energy storage (ES) sys-
tems [3]. Even PI control can be used, such as adaptive decentralized output feedback
PI tracking control design for uncertain interconnected nonlinear systems with input
quantization. By designing an input-driven ﬁlter, the unknown states are estimated and
then an adaptive decentralized output feedback PI tracking controller is constructed via
the backstepping method and neural network technique. The stability of the closed-loop
system is addressed based on the Lyapunov function technique plus graph theory, and
all the signals in the closed-loop system are uniformly ultimately bounded [4]. The
decentralized control is also used in robotics, for example as recursive decentralized
control for robotic manipulators, where decentralized robust control is designed under
the assumption that communications are allowed in the decentralized controllers. The
communicated information includes the relative motion states at the joints, the geom-
etry and mass parameters, and the control torques. These communications enable to
recursively construct the nominal part of the physical interactions for compensation [5].
Or it is used as torque sensorless decentralized neuro-optimal control for modular and
reconﬁgurable robots with uncertain environments [6]. Backstepping can be also used to
design controller, for example backstepping-based decentralized tracking control for a
class of interconnected stochastic nonlinear systems coupled via a directed graph, using
quartic Lyapunov functions and graph theory, where the signals of the resulting closed-
loop system are globally bounded in probability, and the tracking errors converge to a
compact set, whose radius can be adjusted by choosing different controller design param-
eters [7]. In practice, decentralized control is used for example in aircraft [8], heating
loads [9], electric vehicle aggregator [10], or in chillers [11].
Adaptive control extends the possibility of use in more systems. One of the possi-
ble algorithms is the use of self-tuning controllers, which combine the calculation of the
online identiﬁcation of the parameters of the controlled system together with the calcula-
tion of the controller’s parameters by the chosen method. For example, the least-squares
identiﬁcation method can be used and the linear-quadratic suboptimal tracking method
can be used to calculate the parameters. From theoretical point of view, nice paper about
adaptive control is, for example, adaptive output feedback control for a class of nonlinear
time-varying delay systems. It discusses the adaptive control problem for a class of non-
linear time-varying delay systems with triangular structure, whose nonlinearities satisfy
uncertain homogeneous conditions [12]. We can ﬁnd a lot of applications of adaptive
control in practice, such as in rotor systems [13], at control of autonomous ships [14],
at space-crafts [15], or at aircraft [16].
In this paper, the method of decentralized self-tuning control is used. It includes
recursive least squares identiﬁcation method and linear-quadratic suboptimal tracking
method with exponential forgetting employing regression polynomials. It discusses the
effect of the change of the gain and/or the poles of the interaction transfer function(s)
at the given example of a two-input two-output system. The paper is organized in the
following way. Firstly, theoretical background of the used methods is given. It is followed
by examples of the inﬂuences of the changes in the gains and poles of interaction transfer
functions. Finally, the conclusion is given.

470
K. Perutka
2
Theoretical Background
All theoretical background is based on the work of perutka. [17] this paper is referred
to the articles, on which the theoretical background is based on.
2.1
Decentralized Approach
Using the decentralized approach, the control is divided into a set of sub-tasks that are
matched by simple controllers. These partial tasks will then give us the overall course of
control. The main advantages of decentralized control are primarily that a more complex
system is divided into a set of simple tasks and the resulting controller is more ﬂexible.
GR11
GS11
GS21
GS12
GS22
GR22
w1
w2
e1
e2
u1
u2
y1
y2
Fig. 1. Decentralized system control with two inputs and two outputs, the so-called P structure
A special example of multidimensional systems is a system with two inputs and two
outputs. This can be realized by the so-called P structure, see Fig. 1. In this case, the
inputs to the systems describing the interactions are the values of the action signals of
the SISO controllers and their outputs are added to the opposite outputs of the main
diagonal systems. From this ﬁgure, we get the transfer function equations of the model
in the form
GS11 = GS12GS21GR22
1 + GR22GS22
(1)
GS22 = GS21GS12GR11
1 + GR11GS11
(2)
2.2
Recursive Identiﬁcation Using Approximation Polynomials
A prerequisite for good control is the most accurate description of the regulated system.
Identiﬁcation is the procedure by which the mathematical model of a system is obtained.

Inﬂuence of Magnitude of Interaction on Control
471
The beginnings of identiﬁcation based on continuous models date back to the middle of
the 20th century. For continuous-time identiﬁcation, the identiﬁed model is in the form
of the differential equations. Differential equations contain expressions with derivatives
over time that are not measurable. It is possible to replace the segment by an approxi-
mation polynomial whose derivatives can be calculated analytically in advance and then
calculated numerically, see Fig. 2. This approach was for example used by Perutka [20].
controlled system
polynomial 
approximation 
polynomial
approximation
computation of  
derivation of  
polynomial
approximation
computation of 
derivation of 
polynomial
approximation
identification
u(t)
y(t)
ai
bj
Ts
Ts
uL(j)(t)
uL  (tk)
(j)
yL  (tk)
(i)
yL  (t)
(i)
Fig. 2. Identiﬁcation scheme for continuous-time systems
Least Squares Method with Exponential Forgetting
The estimation of model parameters is computed as
ˆ(k) = ˆ(k −1) + K(k)ˆe(k)
(3)
The gain vector is calculated as
K(k) =
C(k −1)φ(k)
1 + φT(k)C(k −1)φ(k)
(4)
and covariance matrix
C(k) = C(k −1) −C(k −1)φ(k)φT(k)C(k −1)
1 + φT(k)C(k −1)φ(k)
(5)
The following applies to the calculation of the prediction error
ˆe(k) = y(k) −φT(k) ˆ(k −1)
(6)

472
K. Perutka
In the case of exponential forgetting, the criterion of identiﬁcation is
J =
k
i=k0

ϕk−ie(i)
2
(7)
where the exponential forgetting factor is chosen in the range of 0 to 1, the most
common near 1. If
φT(k)C(k −1)φ(k) > 0
(8)
then
C(k) = C(k −1) −C(k −1)φ(k)φT(k)C(k −1)
η−1 + φT(k)C(k −1)φ(k)
(9)
where
η(k) = ϕ(k) −1 −ϕ(k)
ξ(k)
(10)
If
φT(k)C(k −1)φ(k) = 0
(11)
then
C(k) = C(k −1)
(12)
Furthermore
ϕ(k) =

1 + (1 + ρ)[ln(1 + ξ(k −1))] +
 (v(k −1) + 1)η(k −1)
1 + ξ(k −1) + η(k −1) −1

ξ(k −1)
1 + ξ(k −1)
−1
(13)
η(k) = ˆe2(k)
λ(k)
(14)
v(k) = ϕ(k)[v(k −1) + 1]
(15)
λ(k) = ϕ(k)

λ(k −1) +
ˆe2(k)
1 + ξ(k −1)

(16)
ξ(k) = φT(k)C(k −1)φ(k)
(17)
The parameters estimation vector is in the form
ˆT(k) =

ˆa0, ˆa1, . . . , ˆadeg(a), ˆb0, ˆb1, . . . , ˆbdeg(b), d

(18)
and regressor
φT(k) =

−y(tk), . . . , −y(n−1)
L
(tk), u(tk), . . . , u(m)
L (tk), 1

(19)

Inﬂuence of Magnitude of Interaction on Control
473
2.3
Self-tuning Controller
The main reason for using adaptive control is that the systems change over time or the
characteristics of the controlled system are unknown. the basic principle of adaptive
systems is to change the characteristics of the controller based on the characteristics of
the controlled process [19] the general scheme of the self-tuning controller is shown in
Fig. 3.
controller
w
controlled 
system
u
y
n
recursive identification  
of model parameters  
of controlled system
controller 
parameters 
computation 
q
v
QS
Qi
Θ
Fig. 3. The general scheme of the self-tuning controller
2.4
Suboptimal Linear Quadratic Tracking Controller
The method was introduced by Dostál [18]. If the system of Fig. 4 is considered
Q = q/p
w
F = 1/f
G = b/a
e
u
y
Fig. 4. The system with a feedback controller
Let’s minimize a quadratic function with two penalty constants
J =
	 ∞
0

μe2(t) + ϕ˜u2(t)

dt
(20)
The Laplace image of the setpoint holds
w(s) = hw(s)
s˜fw(s)
(21)

474
K. Perutka
It holds for degrees of polynomials
deg(hw) ≤deg(fw), fw(0) ̸= 0
(22)
We calculate stable polynomials g and n as results of spectral factorizations
(as)∗ϕas + b∗μb = g∗g, n∗n = a∗a
(23)
we solve the following diophantine equation
asp + bq = gn
(24)
Considering the transfer function of the system
G(s) =
b0
s2 + a1s + a0
(25)
then the controller is
F(s)Q(s) =
q2s2 + q1s + q0
s

p2s2 + p1s + p0

(26)
In this case, the polynomials have the form
g(s) = g3s3 + g2s2 + g1s + g0
(27)
n(s) = s2 + n1s + n0
(28)
and to calculate their coefﬁcients obtained by spectral factorization
g0 =

μb2
0
(29)
g1 =

2g2g0 + ϕa2
0
(30)
g2 =

2g3g1 + ϕ

a2
1 −2a0

(31)
g3 = √ϕ
(32)
n0 =

a0
2
(33)
n1 =

2n0 −a2
1 −2a0
(34)

Inﬂuence of Magnitude of Interaction on Control
475
2.5
Calculation of Derivatives Using Approximation Functions
To calculate the derivatives, we approximate the closest neighborhood for a given time
by the approximation function. For example, we will use the Lagrange polynomial in
the form
P2(x) = (x −b)(x −c)
(a −b)(a −c)f (a) + (x −a)(x −c)
(b −a)(b −c)f (b) + (x −b)(x −b)
(c −a)(c −b)f (ac)
(35)
whose ﬁrst derivative is
f /(x) ∼= P−
2 (x) =
2x −(b + c)
(a −b)(a −c)f (a) + 2x −(a + c)
(b −a)(b −c)f (b) + 2x −(a + b)
(c −a)(c −b)f (c)
(36)
and the second derivative is
f //(x) ∼= P//
2 (x) =
2f (a)
(a −b)(a −c) +
2f (b)
(b −a)(b −c) +
2f (c)
(c −a)(c −b)
(37)
2.6
Numerical Solution of Differential Equations
The chosen method of numerical solution of differential equations was used for realiza-
tion, namely the Runge-Kutta-Fehlberg method, which can be described by the following
equations
yn+1 = yn +
 16
135k1 + 6656
12825k3 + 28561
56430k4 −9
50k5 + 2
55k6

(38)
k1 = tf (tn, yn)
(39)
k2 = tf

tn + 1
4h, yn + 1
4k1

(40)
k3 = tf

tn + 3
8h, yn + 3
32k1 + 9
32k2

(41)
k4 = tf

tn + 12
13h, yn + 1932
2197k1 −7200
2197k2 + 7296
2197k3

(42)
k5 = tf

tn + h, yn + 439
216k1 −8k2 + 3680
513 k3 −845
4104k4

(43)
The reason for using this method in the computational algorithm is the higher speed
of computation than the implicit ones.
k6 = tf

tn + 1
2h, yn −8
27k1 + 2k2 −3544
2565k3 + 1859
4104k4 −11
40k5

(44)

476
K. Perutka
3
Results
The system is described as
G11(s) =
2
s2+3s+2, G22(s) =
1.5
s2+2.4s+3.1, G21(s) =
k1
T1s+1, G12(s) =
k2
T2s+1
3.1
Increase of First Interaction Gain
See Figs. 5 and 6.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
t
w1, u1, y1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
t
w2, u2, y2
Fig. 5. Output of control – 1st subsystem (left), 2nd (right), for k1 = 0.1, T1 = 0.1, k2 = 1, T2
= 1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
t
w1, u1, y1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
t
w2, u2, y2
Fig. 6. Output of control – 1st subsystem (left), 2nd (right), for k1 = 0.3, T1 = 0.1, k2 = 1, T2
= 1

Inﬂuence of Magnitude of Interaction on Control
477
3.2
Increase of Both Interaction Gains
See Fig. 7.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
t
w2, u2, y2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
t
w2, u2, y2
Fig. 7. Output of control – 1st subsystem (left), 2nd (right), for k1 = 0.2, T1 = 0.1, k2 = 1.4, T2
= 1
3.3
Increase of First Interaction Pole
See Fig. 8.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
t
w1, u1, y1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
t
w2, u2, y2
Fig. 8. Output of control – 1st subsystem (left), 2nd (right), for k1 = 0.2, T1 = 1, k2 = 1.4, T2
= 1
3.4
Increase of Both Interaction Poles
See Fig. 9.

478
K. Perutka
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
-1.2
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
t
w1, u1, y1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.5
1
1.5
t
w2, u2, y2
Fig. 9. Output of control – 1st subsystem (left), 2nd (right), for k1 = 0.2, T1 = 1, k2 = 1.4, T2
= 5
4
Conclusion
During the experimental veriﬁcation it was found that the change of one value of the
time constant and the gain will be reﬂected in both output control processes, the same it
is for the change of quantities in both interactions. If the time constant is increased, this
will be reﬂected in a long time to reach the set-point of the 2nd output. Increasing the
gain value increases the overshoot value of the output signal at output 2.
References
1. Zhou, L., Zhao, J., Ma, L., Yang, C.: Decentralized composite suboptimal control for a class
of two-time-scale interconnected networks with unknown slow dynamics. Neurocomputing
382, 71–79 (2020)
2. Baigzadehnoe, B., Rahmani, Z., Khosravi, A., Rezaie, B.: Adaptive decentralized fuzzy
dynamic surface control scheme for a class of nonlinear large-scale systems with input and
interconnection delays. Eur. J. Control 54, 33–48 (2020)
3. Ziras, C., Prostejovsky, A.M., Bindner, H.W., Marinelli, M.: Decentralized and discretized
control for storage systems offering primary frequency control. Eng. Procedia 157, 1253–1265
(2020)
4. Sun, H., Zong, G., Chen, P.: Adaptive decentralized output feedback PI tracking control
design for uncertain interconnected nonlinear systems with input quantization. Inf. Sci. 512,
186–206 (2020)
5. Hu, Q., Guo, C., Zhang, Y., Zhang, J.: Recursive decentralized control for robotic manipula-
tors. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 76, 374–385 (2018)
6. Dong, B., Zhou, F., Liu, K., Li, Y.: Torque sensorless decentralized neuro-optimal control
for modular and reconﬁgurable robots with uncertain environments. Neurocomputing 282,
60–73 (2018)
7. Li, X.-J., Ren, X.-X., Yang, G.-H.: Backstepping-based decentralized tracking control for a
class of interconnected stochastic nonlinear systems coupled via a directed graph. Inf. Sci.
477, 302–320 (2019)
8. Pan, M., Chao, L., Zhou, W., Huang, J., Chen, Y.-H.: Robust decentralized control design for
aircraft engines: a fractional type. Chin. J. Aeronaut. 32(2), 347–360 (2019)
9. Zhou, Y., Cheng, M., Wu, J., Long, C.: Decentralized control of industrial heating loads for
providing multiple levels and types of primary frequency control service. Eng. Procedia 158,
3138–3143 (2019)

Inﬂuence of Magnitude of Interaction on Control
479
10. Xu, S., Yan, Z., Feng, D., Zhao, X.: Decentralized charging control strategy of the electric
vehicle aggregator based on augmented Lagrangian method. Int. J. Elect. Power Eng. Syst.
104, 673–679 (2019)
11. Dai,Y.,Jiang,Z.,Wang,S.:Decentralizedcontrolofparallel-connectedchillers.Eng.Procedia
122, 86–91 (2017)
12. Zhou, H., Zhai, J.: Adaptive output feedback control for a class of nonlinear time-varying
delay systems. Appl. Math. Comput. 365, 124692 (2020)
13. Nevaranta, N., Jaatinen, P., Vuojolainen, J., Sillanpää, T., Pyrhönen, O.: Adaptive MIMO
pole placement control for commissioning of a rotor system with active magnetic bearings.
Mechatronics 65, 102313 (2020)
14. Haseltalab, A., Negenborn, R.R.: Adaptive control of autonomous ships with uncertain model
and unknown propeller dynamics. Control Eng. Practice 91, 104116 (2019)
15. Hu, H., Liu, L., Wang, Y., Cheng, Z., Luo, Q.: Active fault-tolerant attitude tracking control
with adaptive gain for spacecrafts. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 98, 105706 (2020)
16. Maity, A., Höcht, L., Holzapfel, F.: Time-varying parameter model reference adaptive control
and its applications to aircraft. Eur. J. Control 50, 161–175 (2019)
17. Perutka, K.: Decentralized adaptive suboptimal LQ control in microsoft excel VBA. In:
Machado, J., Soares, F., Veiga, G. (eds.) HELIX 2018. LNEE, vol. 505, pp. 116–123. Springer,
Cham (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-91334-6_17
18. Dostál, P., Bobál, V.: The suboptimal tracking problem in linear systems. In: Proceedings of
the 7th Conference on Control and Automation, Haifa, Israel, pp. 667–673 (1999)
19. Bobal, V., Böhm, J., Fessl, J., Machacek, J.: Digital Self-tuning Controllers. Springer, London
(2005)
20. Perutka, K.: Adaptive LQ control with pre-identiﬁcation of two tanks laboratory model. In:
Annals of DAAAM and Proceedings of the International DAAAM Symposium, Vienna,
Austria, pp. 439–440 (2009)

Author Index
A
Amorim, Ana Rita, 129
Andrade, Marina A. P., 164
Arantes, Carlos, 449
Arfeen, M. Irfanullah, 433
A¸stilean, Adina, 119, 141
Avram, Camelia, 119, 141
Avram, Mihai, 90
B
Bakircio˘glu, Veli, 81
Bezerra, Karolina, 406
Bezerra, Karolina Celi Tavares, 422
Bonilla, Silvia Helena, 236
Borucka, Anna, 44
Braga, Ana Cristina, 1, 129
C
Çabuk, Nihat, 81
Calhamonas, Gabriel, 164
Cartal, Adrian, 189
Carvalho, Vítor, 119, 334, 377
Castelo Branco, Rodolfo Ramos, 422
Castillo-García, Fernando J., 313
Castro-Ribeiro, M. Leonor, 406
Cavacece, Massimo, 460
Císar, Miroslav, 112
Coand˘a, Philip, 90
Constantin, Victor, 90
Cunha, Pedro, 119
D
da Silva, António Ferreira, 301
de Morais, Misael Elias, 422
de Sousa, Mário, 301
Delgado, Pedro, 1
Dionísio, Rogério, 213
Dostatni, Ewa, 14
F
Ferreira, Marco, 154
Ferreira, Pedro José Gabriel, 236
Figliolini, Giorgio, 460
Filgueira, Anna Kellssya Leite, 422
Freitas, Luis, 221
G
Gallardo, Isabella Diniz, 422
Gazdos, Frantisek, 99
Gheorghe, Gheorghe, 270
Goli´nski, Marek, 351
Gonçalves, A. Manuela, 221
Gonçalves, Gil, 213, 322
Gonzalez-Rodríguez, Antonio, 313
Graczyk-Kucharska, Magdalena, 257
Gr˘amescu, Bogdan, 90, 189
Gütmen, Selma, 257
H
Hashim, Ahmed Sachit, 189
Hrybiuk, Olena, 55
I
Ilie, Iulian, 270
Ivanov, Vitalii, 366
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license
to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022
J. Machado et al. (Eds.): icieng 2021, LNME, pp. 481–483, 2022.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-79168-1

482
Author Index
K
Kandera, Matej, 112
Karpov, Vadym, 201
Klarák, Jaromír, 112
Kotlarz, Piotr, 14
Kozłowski, Edward, 44
Kunz, Guilherme, 69
Kuric, Ivan, 112
L
Leiras, Valdemar, 129
Liu, Yiliu, 44
Lopes, Hugo Baptista, 334
Lopes, Isabel, 1
Lopes, Sérgio, 449
M
Machado, José, 285
Magalhães, António, 301
Malhão, Sérgio, 213
Malheiro, Teresa, 221
Marques, Mário J. Simões, 164
Martins, Cristina, 1
Martins, Ketinlly Yasmyne Nascimento, 422
Martins, Nuno, 178
Martynova, Nataliia, 366
Mazurkiewicz, Dariusz, 44
Mi˛adowicz, Marek, 351
Modoranu, Mihai, 141
Monteiro, Caetano, 154
Monteiro, Paula, 221
N
Neto, Luís, 213
Nit,u, Constantin, 189
Nunes, Isabel, 164
O
Olival, Ana, 406
Oliveira, Rui, 221
Ottaviano, Erika, 313, 460
P
Pavlenko, Ivan, 366
Pereira, Ana Paula, 393
Pereira, Eliseu, 322
Pereira, Filipe, 377
Perondi, Eduardo A., 25
Perutka, Karel, 468
Pires, Mariana A., 406
Providência, Bernardo, 245
R
Radu, Dan, 141
Ralha, Sónia, 178
Ramos, Jorge, 449
Rea, Pierluigi, 313, 460
Reis, João, 322
Reis, Luís Paulo, 322
Ribeiro, Pedro, 221
Rijo, Marcos G. Q., 25
Rocha, Ana Paula, 322
Rodrigues, Miguel, 154
Rojek, Izabela, 14
S
Sacomano, José Benedito, 236
Samokhvalov, Dmytro, 366
Santos, Adriano A., 301
Santos, Pedro, 393
Sarantis, Demetrios, 433
Sarmanho Jr., Carlos A. C., 25
Sarmanova, Lenka, 99
Seabra, Eurico, 129
Sena Esteves, João, 393, 449
Shah, Adil Ali, 433
Silva, Bárbara, 129
Silva, João, 285
Silva, Luís F., 129
Silva, Rute, 245
Silva, Vinícius, 393
Simion, Ionel, 37
Simoes, Ricardo, 178
Sivykh, Dmytro, 201
Soares, Filomena, 119, 377, 393
Sobczyk S., Mário R., 25
Sorin-Ionut, Badea, 270
Sousa, João, 285
Spacek, Lubos, 293
Spychała, Małgorzata, 351
Strimovskyi, Sergii, 201
Sylla, Cristina, 334
Szafra´nski, Maciej, 257
T
Tanasie, Marian, 37
Teixeira, André, 449
Teixeira, Humberto Nuno, 1
Teodoro, M. Filomena, 164
Tîrnovan, Tudor Claudiu, 119
Torres, Pedro, 213
V
Vasconcelos, Rosa, 377
Veretennikov, Ievgenii, 201
Veronica, Despa, 270
Viana, Rui, 129
Vicente, José, 221
Vilaça, A. A., 406
Vilarinho, Cândida, 406

Author Index
483
Vojtesek, Jiri, 293
Volontsevich, Dmitriy, 201
W
Weber, Gerhard Wilhelm, 257
Y
Yildirim, ¸Sahin, 81
Z
Zajaˇcko, Ivan, 112
Zhylenko, Tetiana, 366
Zuban, Yurii, 366

