
S. Mac Lane 
Categories for the Working 
Mathematician 
Springer-Verlag New York Heidelberg Berlin 
. 
Preface 
Category Theory has developed rapidly. This book aims to present 
those ideas and methods which can now be effectively used by Mathe- 
maticians working in a variety of other fields of Mathematical research. 
Thls occurs at several levels. On the first level, categories provide a 
convenient conceptual language, based on the notions of category, 
functor, natural transformation, contravariance, and functor category. 
These notions are presented, with appropriate examples, in Chapters I 
and 11. Next comes the fundamental idea of an adjoint pair of functors. 
This appears in many substantially equivalent forms: That of universal 
construction, that of direct and inverse limit, and that of pairs of functors 
with a natural isomorphism between corresponding sets of arrows. All 
these forms, with their interrelations, are examined in Chapters 111 to V. 
The slogan is "Adjoint functors arise everywhere". 
Alternatively, the fundamental notion of category theory is that of a 
monoid-aset witha binary operation ofmultiplicationwhichisassocfative 
and which has a unit; a category itself can be regarded as a sort of general- 
ized monoid. Chapters VI and VII explore this notion and its generaliza- 
tions. Its close connection to pairs of adjoint functors illuminates the 
ideas of universal algebra and culminates in Beck's theoremcharacterizing 
categories of algebras; on the other hand, categories with- a monoidal 
structure (given by a tensor product) lead inter alia to the study of more 
convenient categories of topological spaces. 
Since a category consists of arrows, our subject could also'be de- 
scribed as learning how to live without elements, using arrows instead. 
This line of thought, present from the start, comes to a focus in 
Chapter VIII, which covers the elementary theory of abelian categories 
and the means to prove all the diagram lemmas without ever chasing 
an element around a diagram. 
Finally, the basic notions of category theory are assembled in the 
last two chapters: More exigent properties of limits, especially of filtered 
limits, a calculus of "ends", and the notion of Kan extensions. This is the 
deeper form of the basic constructions of adjoints. We end with the ob- 
servations that all concepts of category theory are Kan extensions 
(ยง 7 of Chapter X). 

Preface 
I have had many opportunities to lecture on the materials of these 
chapters: At Chicago; at Boulder. in a series of Colloquium lectures to 
the American Mathematical Society; at St . Andrews. thanks to the Edin . 
burgh Mathematical Society; at Zurich. thanks to Beno Eckmann and 
the Forschungsinstitut fiir Mathematlk; at London. thanks to A . Frohlich 
and Kings and Queens Colleges: at Heidelberg. thanks to H.Seifert 
and Albrecht Dold: at Canberra. thanks to Neumann. Neumann. and a 
Fulbright grant: at Bowdoin. thanks to Dan Christie and the National 
Science Foundation: at Tulane. thanks to Paul Mostert and the Ford 
Foundation. and again at Chlcago. thanks ultimately to Robert Maynard 
Hutchins and Marshall Harvey Stone . 
Many colleagues have helped my studies . I have profited much from* 
a succession of visitors to Chicago (made possible by effective support 
from the Air Force Office of Scientific Research. the Office of Naval 
Research. and the National Science Foundation): M.AndrC, J . B6nabou. 
E . Dubuc. F . W . Lawvere. and F . E . J . Linton . I have had good' counsel 
from Michael Barr. John Gray. Myles Tierney. and Fritz Ulmer. and 
sage advice from Brian Abrahamson. Ronald Brown. W . H . Cockcroft. 
and Paul Halmos . Daniel Feigin and Geoffrey Phillips both managed 
to bring some of my lectures into effective written form . My old friend. 
A.H.Clifford, and others at Tulane were of great assistance . John 
MacDonald and Ross Street gave pertinent advice on several chapters; 
Spencer Dickson. S . A . Huq. and Miguel La Plaza gave a critical reading 
of other material . Peter May's trknchant advice vitally improved the 
emphasis and arrangement. and Max Kelly's eagle eye caught many soft 
spots in the final manuscript . I am grateful to Dorothy Mac Lane and 
Tere Shuman for typing, to Dorothy Mac Lane for preparing the index 
and to M . K . Kwong for careful proof reading - but the errors which 
remain. and the choice of emphasis and arrangement. are mine . 
Dune Acres. March 27. 1971 
Saunders Mac Lane 
Table of Contents 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Introduction 
I 
I . Categories. Functors and Natural Transformations 
. . . .  
7 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1 . Axioms for Categories 
7 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2 . Categories 
10 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. 
3 Functors 
13 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
4 . Natural Transformations 
16 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5 . Monics, Epis. and Zeros 
19 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
6 . Foundations 
21 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
7 . Large Categories 
24 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
8 . Horn-sets 
: . . .  27 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. 
I1 Constructions on Categories 
31 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
1 . Duality 
31 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
2 . Contravariance and Opposites 
33 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
3 . Products of Categories 
36 
4 . Functor Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
5 . The Category of All Categories 
42 
6 . CommaCategories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  46 
7 . Graphs and Free Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  48 . 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
8 . Quotient Categories 
51 
111 . Universals and Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55 
1 . Universal Arrows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  55 
2 . The Yoneda Lemma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  59 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. 
3 Coproducts and Colimits 
62 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. 
4 Products and Limits 
68 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. 
5 Categories with Finite Products 
72 
6 . Groups in Categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  75 
VII 


Category theory starts with the observation that many properties of 
mathematical systems can be unified and simplified by a presentation 
with diagrams of arrows. Each arrow f : X- Y represents a function; 
that is, a set X, a set Y, and a rule x  - f x  which assigns to each element 
x E X  an element f x  E Y; whenever possible we write f x and not f (x), 
omitting unnecessary parentheses. A typical diagram of sets and func- 
tions is 
it is commutative when h is h = g = f, where g 2  f is the usual composite 
function g3 f : X-Z, defined by x h g ( f x ) .  The same diagrams apply 
in other mathematical contexts; thus in the "category" of all topological 
spaces, the letters X ,  Y, and Z represent topological spaces while f, g, and h 
stand for continuous maps. Again, in the "category" of all groups, 
X, Y, and Z stand for groups, f, g, and h for homomorphisms. 
Many properties of mathematical constructions may be represented 
by universal properties of diagrams. Consider the cartesian product 
X x Y of two sets, consisting as usual of all ordered pairs (x, y )  ofelements 
x E X  and y  E Y. The projections (x, y )  e x ,  (x, y )  t+ 
y  of the product 
on its "axes" X and Y are functions p : X x Y+X, q : X x Y 4  Y. Any 
function h : W-X x Y from a third set W is uniquely determined by its 
composites p 0 h and q 0 h. Conversely, given W and two functions 
fand g as in the diagram below, there is a unique function h which makes 
the diagram commute; namely, h w  = (f w, g w ) :  
Thus, given X and Y. (p, q) is "universal" among pairs of functions from 
some set to X and Y, because any other such pair (1, 
g) factors uniquely 
(via h )  through the pair (p. q). This property describes the cartesian 
product X x Y uniquely (up to a bijection); the same diagram. read in the 
category oftopo1ogicalspacrsorofgroups.describesuniquely thecartesian 
product of spaces or of the direct product of groups. 
Adjointness is another expression for these universal properties. 
If we write hom(W. X) for the set of all functions f :  W + X  and 
hom((U, V ) .  (X, Y)) for the set of all pairs of functions f :  
U+X, 
g : V+ Y, the correspondence h .- ( p  h, q h )  = (f, g) indica.ted in the 
diagram above is a bijection 
hom(W. X x Y) I 
horn(( W. W). (X, Y)) . 
This bijection is "natural" in the sense (to be made more precise later) 
that it is defined in "the same way" for all sets Wand for all pairs of sets 
( X ,  Y) (and it is likewise "natural" when interpreted for topological 
spaces or for groups). This natural bijection involves two constructions 
on sets: The construction W-- W, Wwhich sends each set to the diagonal 
pair A W = (M'. W), and the construction (X, Y)+X x Y which sends 
each pair of sets to its cartesian product. Given the bijection above, 
we say that the construction X x Y is a right adjoint to the construction A, 
and that A is left adjoint to the product. Adjoints, as we shall see, occur 
throughout mathematics. 
The construction "cartesian product" is called a "functor" because it 
applies suitably to sets and to the functions between them; two functions 
k : X+X' and t :  Y+ Y' have a function k x t as their cartesian product: 
k x t :  X  x Y+X'x Y', 
( x ,  y ) t + ( k x , f y )  
Observe also that the one-point set 1 = ( 0 )  serves as an identity under the 
operation "cartesian product", in view of the bijections 
given by E.(O, x )  = x, q ( x ,  0) = x. 
The notion of a monoid (a semigroup with identity) plays a central 
role in category theory. A monoid M may be described as a set M to- 
gether with two functions 
such that the following two diagrams commute 

Introduction 
3 
here 1 in 1 x p IS the identity funct~on M - i M ,  and 1 In 1 x M 1s the one- 
point set 1 = (01, whlle A and Q are the blje~t10nS of (1) above. To say 
that these diagrams commute means that the following composites are 
equal : 
p ( l x p ) = p  ( p x l ) .  
p (vxl)=>.. p ( l x q ) = e  
These diagrams may be rewritten with elements, writing the function p 
(saylas a product p(x, y) = xy for x, y E M and replacing the function q 
on the one-point set 1 = {0} by its (only) value, an element q(0) = u E M. 
The diagrams above then become 
They are exactly the familiar axioms on a monoid, that the multiplica- 
tion be associative and have an element u as left and right identity. 
This indicates, conversely, how"q?gebraic identities may be expressed by 
commutative diagrams. The same process applies to other identities; 
for example, one may describe a group as a monoid M equipped with 
a function 5 : M-rM (of course, the function x-x-') 
such that the 
following diagram commutes 
here 6 : M -. M x M is the diagonal function x t .  (x, x) for x e M,. 
while the unnamed vertical arrow M--, 1 = {Oj is the evident (and unique) 
function from M to the one-point set. As indicated just to the right. 
this diagram does state that I; assigns to each element x E M an element 
x-I which is a right inverse to x. 
This definition of a group by arrows p, q, and I; in such commutative 
diagrams makes no explicit mention of group elements, so applies 
to other circumstances. If the letter M stands for a topological space 
(not just a set) and the arrows are continuous maps (not just functians), 
then the conditions (3) and (4) define a topological group - for they 
spec~fy that M 1s a topolog~cal space with a blnary operation C( of multi- 
plication which 1s continuous (simultaneously In its arguments) and 
which has a continuous right Inverse, all sattsfylng the usual group 
axioms. Again, if the letter M stands for a differentiable manifold (of 
4 
Introduction 
class C") while 1 is the one-point manifold and the arrows 1. q. and ; 
are smooth mappings of manifolds, then the dlagrams (3) and (4) become 
the definition of a Lie group. Thus groups, topological groups, and Lie 
groups can all be described as "diagrammatic" groups in the respective 
categories of sets. of topological spaces, and of differentiable manifolds. 
This definition of a group in a category depended (for the inverse 
in (4)) on the diagonal map 6 : M-M x M to the cartesian square 
M x M. The definition ofa monoid is more general, because the cartesian 
product x in M x M may be replaced by any other operation IJ on two 
objects which is associative and which has a unit 1 in the sense prescribed 
by the isomorphisms (1). We can then speak of a monoid in the system 
(C, 0, 
I), where C is the category. 0 is such an operation, and 1 is 'its 
unit. Consider, for example, a monoid M in (Ab, @, Z), where Ab is 
the category of abelian groups, x is replaced by the usual tensor product 
of abelian groups, and 1 is replaced by Z, the usual group of integers; 
then (1) is replaced by the familiar isomorphism 
Z @ X z X = X @ Z ,  
Xanabeliangroup. 
Then a monoid M in (Ab, @, 2) 
is, we claim, simply a ring. For the given 
morphism C( : M@ M-*M is, by the definition of @, just a function 
M x M d M .  call it multiplication, which is bilinear; i.e., distributive 
over addition on the left and on the right, while the morphism q : Z+M 
of abelian groups is completely determined by picking out one element 
of M; namely, the image u of the generator 1 of Z. The commutative 
diagrams (3) now assert that the multiplication p in the abelian group M 
is associative and has u as left and right unit: - in other words, that M 
is indeed a ring (with identity = unit). 
The (homo)-morphisms of an algebraic system can also be described 
by diagrams. If (M, p, q) and (M', 
p'. q') are two monoids, each described 
by diagrams as above, then a morphism of the first to the second may 
be defined as a function f :  M 4 M '  such that the following diagrams 
commute 
M', 
M ' x M ' .  
"' PM', 
1--+MI 
In terms of elements, this ,asserts that f (x y) = (fx) (f y )  and j'u = d, 
with u and u' the unit elements; thus a homomorphism is. as usual. just 
a function preserving composite and units. If M and M' are monoids 
in (Ab, @, Z); that is, rings, then a homomorphism I' as here defined is 
just a morphisrn of rings (preserving the units). 

Introduction 
5 
Finally, an action of a monoid (M, p, q )  on a set S is defined to be 
a function v : M  x S+S such that the following two diagrams commute 
M x M x S  '"' bMxS 
1 x S  ' " ' + M x S  
If we write v(x, s) = x . s to denote the result of the action of the monoid 
element x on the element s E S, these diagrams state just that 
for all x, y E M and all s E S. These are the usual conditions for the action 
of a monoid on a set, familiar especially in the case of a group acting 
on a set as a group of transformations. If we shift from the category of 
sets to the category of topological spaces, we get the usual continuous 
action of a topological monoid M on a topological space S. If we take 
(M, p, q )  to be a monoid in (Ab, Q, Z), then an action of M on an object 
S of Ab is just a left module S over the ring M. 
I. Cakgories, Functors, and Natural Transformations 
1. Axioms for Categories 
First we describe categories directly by means of axioms, without 
using any set theory, and calling them "metacategories". Actualty, we 
begin with a simpler notion, a (meta)graph. 
A metagraph consists of objects a, b, c, ..., arrows f, g, h, ..., and two 
operations, as follows: 
Domain, which assigns to each arrow f an object a = dom f; 
Codornuin, which assigns to each arrow f an object b =cod f .  
These operations on f are best indicated by displaying f as an actual 
arrow starting at its domain (or "source") and ending at it's codomain 
(or "target"): 
A finite graph may be readily exhibited: Thus -, -, or . =t *. 
A metacategory is a metagraph with two additional operations: 
Identity, which assigns to each object a an arrow id, = 1, :a+@; 
Composition, which assigns to each pair (g, f )  of arrows with 
domg = cod f an arrow g f, called their composite, with g f : dom f 
+codg. This operation may be pictured by the diagram 
which exhibits all domains and codomains involved. These operations 
in a metacategory are subject to the two following axioms: 
Associativity. For given objects and arrows in the configuration 
one always has the equality 

8 
Categories, Functors, and Natural Transformations 
This axiom asserts that the associative law holds for the operation of 
composition whenever it makes sense (i.e., whenever the composites on 
either side of (1) are defined). This equation is represented pictorially 
by the statement that the following diagram is commutative 
Unit law. For all arrows f :  a+b and g : b--rc composition with 
the identity arrow 1 ,  gives 
This axiom asserts that the identity arrow 1, of each object b acts as an 
identity for the operation of composition, whenever this makes sense. 
The Eqs. (2) may be represented pictorially by the statement that the 
following diagram is commutative: 
We use many such diagrams consisting of vertices (labelled by objects 
~f a category) and edges (labelled by arrows of the same category). 
Such a diagram is commutative when, for each pair of vertices c and c', 
any two paths formed from directed edges leading from c to c' yield, 
by composition of labels, equal arrows from c to c'. A considerable part 
of the effectiveness of categorical methods rests on the fact that such 
diagrams in each situation vividly represent the actions of the arrows 
at hand. 
If b is any object of a metacategory C, the corresponding identity 
arrow 1, is uniquely determined by the properties (2). For this reason, it 
is sometimes convenient to identify the identity arrow 1, with the object b 
itself, writing b : b+ b. Thus 1, = b = id,, as may be convenient. 
A metacategory is to be any interpretation which satisfies all. these 
axioms. An example is the metacategory of sets, which has objects all 
sets and arrows all functions, with the usual identity functions and the 
usual composition of functions. Here "function" means a function with 
specified domain and specified codomain. Thus a function f :  X -+ Y 
consists of a set X ,  its domain, a set Y, its codomain, and a rule x i -  f x 
(i.e., a suitable set of ordered pairs ( x ,  fx)) which assigns, to each element 
x E X, an element f x E Y. These values will be written as f x, f,, or f (x), 
Axioms for Categories 
9 
as may be convenient. For example, for any set S, the assignment s i - s  
for all S E  S describes the identity function ls : S+S; if S is a subset of Y, 
the assignment S - s  also describes the inclusion or insertion function 
S-+ Y ;  these functions are diferent unless S = Y. Given functions f : X - r  Y 
and g: Y-Z, 
the composite function g 
: X + Z  is defined by 
(g f ) x  = g ( f x )  for all x E X. Observe that g f will mean first apply f, 
then g - in keeping with the practice of writing each function f to the 
left of its argument. Note, however, that many authors use the opposite 
convention. 
To summarize, the metacategory of all sets has as objects, all sets, as 
arrows, all functions with the usual composition. The metacategory of all 
groups is described similarly: Objects are all groups G, H, K; arrows are 
all those functions'f from the set G to the set H for which f :  G-H 
is a homomorphism of groups. There are many other metacategories: 
All topological spaces with continuous functions as arrows; all compact 
Hausdorff spaces with the same arrows; all ringed spaces with their 
morphisms, etc. The arrows of any metacategory are often called its 
morphisms. 
Since the objects of a metacategory correspond exactly to its identity 
arrows, it is technically possible to bgense altogether with the objects 
and deal only with arrows. The data for an arrows-only metacategory C 
consist of arrows, certain ordered pairs (g, f ), called the composable 
pairs of arrows, and an operation assigning to each composable pair 
(9, f )  an arrow go f, called their composite. We say "go f is defined" 
for ?(g, f )  is a composable pair". 
With these data one defines an identity of C to be an arrow u such 
that f 0 u = f whenever the composite f 0 u is defined and u o g = g when- 
ever ucg is defined. The data are then required to satisfy the following 
three axioms: 
(i) The composite (k g)o f is defined if and only if the composite 
k 0 (g f )  is defined. When either is defined: they are equal (and this 
triple composite is written as kg f ). 
(ii) The triple composite kg f is defined whenever both composites kg 
and g f are defined. 
(iii) For each arrow g of C there exist identity arrows u and u' of C 
such that u' g and g o  u are defined. 
In view of the explicit definition given above for identity arrows, the 
last axiom is a quite powerful one; it implies that u' and u are unique in 
(iii), and it gives for each arrow g a codomain u' and a domain u. These 
axioms are equivalent to the preceding ones. More explicitly, given a 
metacategory of objects and arrows, its arrows, with the given composi- 
tion, satisfy the "arrows-only" axioms; conversely, an arrows-only 
metacategory satisfies the objects-and-arrows axioms when the identity 
arrows, defined as above, are taken as the objects (Proof as exercise!. 

10 
Categories, Functors, and Natural Transformations 
2. Categories 
A category (as distinguished from a metacategory) will mean any 
interpretation of the category axioms within set theory. Here are the 
details.' A graph (also called a "diagram scheme") is a set 0 of objects, 
a set A of arrows, and two functions 
dom 
A Z O .  
cod 
In this graph. the set of composable pairs of arrows is the set 
Ax,A={(g,f)lg,f~A 
and domg=codf}, 
called the "product over 0 .  
A category is a graph with two additional functions 
called identity and composition, such that 
for all objects a E 0 and all composable pairs of arrows (g, f )  E A x .A, 
and such that the associativity and unit axioms (1.1) and (1.2) hold. 
In treating a category C, we usually drop the letters A and 0, and write 
for "c is an object of C" and " f is an arrow of C", respectively. We also 
write 
hom(b, c) = (f ( f in C, dom f = b, cod f = c) 
(5) 
for the set of arrows from b to c. Categories can be defined directly in 
terms of composition acting on these 'horn-sets" (9 8 below); we do not 
follow this custom because we put the emphasisnot on sets(arather special 
category), but on axioms, arrows, and diagrams of arrows. We will 
later observe that our definition of a category amounts to saying that a 
category is a monoid for the product x o, in the general sense described 
in the introduction. For the moment, we consider examples. 
0 is the empty category'(n0 objects, no arrows); 
1 is the category D with one object and one (identity) arrow; 
2 is the category D --+a with two objects a, 6, and just one arrow 
a+b not the identity; 
Categories 
11 
3 is the category with three objects whose non-identity arrows are 
7-l 
arranged as in the triangle . + . ; 
II is the category with two objects a, b and just two arrows a 3 6  
not the identity arrows. We call two such arrows parallel arrows. 
In each of the cases above there is only one possible definition of 
composition. 
Discrete Categories. A category is discrete when every arrow is an 
identity. Every set X is the set of objects of a discrete category Qust add 
one identity arrow x+x for each x E X), and every discrete category is 
so determined by its set of objects. Thus, discrete categories are sets. 
Monoids. A monoid is a category with one object. Each monoid is 
thus determined by the set of all its arrows, by the identity arrow, and 
by the rule for the composition of arrows. Since any two arrows have a 
composite, a monoid may then be described as a set M with a binary 
operation M x M-M 
which is associative and has an identity (= unit). 
Thus a monoid is exactly a semigroup with identity element. For any 
category C and any object a~ C, the set hom(a, a) of all arrows a-a 
is a monoid. 
Groups. A group is a category with one object in which every arrow 
has a (two-sided) inverse under composition. 
Matrices. For each commutative ring K, the set Matr, of all *ct- 
angular matrices with entries in K is a category; the objects are all 
positive integers m, n, . . . , and each m x n matrix A is regarded as a arrow 
A : n-+m, with composition the usual matrix product. 
Sets:If 
V is any set of sets, we take Ens, to be the category with 
objects all sets X E  V, arrows all functions f :  X--r Y, with the usual 
composition of functions. By Ens we mean any one of these'categories. 
Preorders. By a preorder we mean a category P in which, given 
objects p and p', there is at most one arrow p-+p'. In any preo- 
define a binary relation 5 on the objects of P with p 5 p' if and only if. 
there is an arrow p-p' 
in P. This binary relation is reflexive (because 
there is an identity arrow p-+p for each p) and transitive (because arrows 
can be composed). Hence a preorder is a set (of objects) equipped with 
a reflexive and transitive binary relation. Conversely, any set P with 
such a relation determines a preorder, in which the arrows p-p' 
are 
exactly those ordered pairs (p, p') for which p p'. Since the relation is 
transitive, there is a unique way of composing these arrows; since it is 
reflexive, there are the necessary identity arrows. 
Preorders include partial o;ders (pieorders with the added axiom 
that p sp' and p ' s  p imply p = p') and linear orders (partial orders 
such that, given p and p', either p 
p' or p' 5 p). 
Ordinal Numbers. We regard each ordinal number n as the linearly 
ordered set of all the preceding ordinals n = {O, 1, . . . , n - 1) ; in particular 

12 
Categories. Functors, and Natural Transformations 
0 is the empty set, while the first infinite ordinal is 0 =  
(0, 1,2. ...). 
Each ordinal n is linearly ordered, and hence is a category (a preorder). 
For example, the categories 1.2, and 3 listed above are the preorders be- 
longing to the (linearly 0rdered)ordinal numbers 1, 2, and 3. Another 
example is the linear order o. As a category, it consists of the arrows 
all their composites. and the identity arrows for each object. 
A is the category with objects all finite ordinals and arrows f :  m+n 
all order-preserving functions (i 2 j in m implies fi 5 1; in n). This category 
A, sometimes called the simplicia1 category, plays a central role 
(Chapter VII). 
Finord = Set,is thecategory withobjectsall finiteordinalsn and arrows 
f :  m+n all functions from m to n. This is essentially the category of all 
finite sets, using just one finite set n for each finite cardinal number n. 
Large Categories. In addition to the metacategory of all sets - which 
is not a set - we want an actual category Set, the category of all small 
sets. We shall assume that there is a big enough set C', the "universe", 
then describe a set x as "small" if it is a member of the universe, and take 
Set to be the category whose set U of objects is the set of all small sets, with 
arrows all functions from one small set to anolher. With this device 
(details in 4 7 below) we construct other familiar large categories, as 
follows : 
Set: Objects, all small sets; arrows, all functions between them. 
Set,: Objects, small sets each with a selected base-point; arrows, 
base-point preserving functions. 
Ens: Category of all sets and functions within a (variable) set V. 
Cat: Objects, all small categories; arrows, all functors ($3). 
Mon: Objects, all small monoids; arrows, all morphisms of monoids. 
Grp: Objects, all small groups; arrows, all morphisms of groups. 
Ab: Objects, all small (additive) abelian groups, with morphisms 
of such. 
Rng: All small rings, with the ring morphisrns (preserving units) 
between them. 
CRng: All small commutative rings and their morphisms. 
R-Mod: 
All small left modules over the ring R, with linear maps. 
Mod-R: Small right R-modules. 
K-Mod: 
Small modules over the commutative ring K. 
Top: Small topologicrtl spaces and continuous maps. 
Toph: Topological spaces, with arrows homotopy classes of maps. 
Top, : Spaces with selected base point, base point-preserving maps. 
Particular categories (like these) will always appear in bold-face type. 
Script capitals are used by many authors to denote categories. 
Functors 
13 
3. Functors 
A functor is a morphism of categories. In detail, for categories C and B 
afunctor T: C+B with domain Cand codomain Bconsists oftwo suitably 
related functions: The object functi~n T, which assigns to each object 
c of C an object Tc of B and the arrow function (also written T) which 
assigns to each arrow f : c+c' of C an arrow Tf : Tc+ Tc' of B, in such 
a way that 
c
=
c
 T ( g a f ) = T g ~ T f ,  
(1) 
the latter whenever the composite g 0 f is defined in C. A functor, like a 
category, can be described in the "arrows-only" fashion: It is a function T 
from arrows f of C to arrows T f of B, carrying each identity of C to 
an identity of B and each composable pair (g, f) in C to a composable 
pair (Tg, Tf) in B, with Tg o Tf = T(g 0 f). 
A simple example is the power set functor B :Set+Set. Its object 
function assigns to each set X the usual power set B X ,  with elements all 
subsets SCX; its arrow function assigns to each f :  X - Y  
that map 
9 f : 9 x 4 9  Y which sends each S c X to its image f S c Y. Since both 
8(1,) = I,, 
and B(g0 f) = B g  .B f, this clearly defines a functor 
8 : Set-Set. 
Functors were first explicitly recognized in algebraic topol'ogy, 
where they a r k  naturally when geometric properties are described by 
means of algebraic invariants. For example, singular homology in a 
given dimension n (n a natural number) assigns to each top logical space 
X an abelian group Hn(X), the n t h  homology group of 
and also to 
each continuous map f : X--, 
Y of spaces a corresponding hom morphism 
< 
Hn( f )  : H,(X)+ Hn(Y) of groups, and this in such a way that -comes 
a functor Top- Ab. For example, if X = Y = S1 is the circle, HI (ST* 2, 
so the group homomorphism HI( f) : Z+Z is determined by an integer d 
(the image of 1); this integer is the usual "degree" of the continuous 
map f: 
S1-+S1. In this case and in general, homotopic maps f, g : X-, Y 
yield the same homomorphism Hn(X)-+Hn(Y), so Hn can actually be 
regarded as a functor Toph- Grp, defined on the homotopy category. 
The Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms for homology start with the axioms that 
Hn, for each natural number n, is a functor on Toph, and continue with 
certain additional pfoperties of these functors. The more recently 
developed extraordinary homology and cohomology theories are also 
functors on.Topb. The homotopy groups q,(X) of a space X can also 
be regarded as functors; since they depend on the choice of a base point 
in X, they are functors Top, -+ Grp. The leading idea in the use of functors 
in topology is that Hn or n, gives an algebraic picture or image not just 
of the topological spaces, but also of all the continuous maps between 
them. 

14 
Categories, Functors, and Natural Transformations 
Functors 
15 
Functors arise naturally in algebra. To any commutative ring K 
the set of all non-singular n x n matrices with entries in K is the usual 
general linear group GL,(K); moreover, each homomorphism f: K-K' 
of rings produces in the evident way a homomorphism GL, f GLJK) 
+GL,(K1) of groups. These data define for each natural number n a 
functor GL, : CRng-+Grp. For any group G the set of all products 
of commutators x y  x-' y - l  (x, y E G) is a normal subgroup [G, GI of G, 
called the commutator subgroup. Since any homomorphism G+H 
of groups carries commutators to commutators, the assignment 
G r [G, GI defines an evident functor Grp- Grp, while G t- G/[G, GI 
defmes a functor Grp+Ab, the factor-commutator functor. Observe, 
however, that the center Z(G) of G (all a E G with a x  = xa for all x) does 
not naturally define a functor Grp-Grp, 
because a homomorphism 
G--+ H may carry an element in the center of G to one not in the center of H. 
A functor which simply "forgets" some or all-of the structure of an 
algebraic object is commonly called a forgetful functor (or, an underlying 
functor). Thus the forgetful functor U : Grp+Set assigns to each group G 
the set UG of its elements ("forgetting" the multiplication and hence the 
group structure), and assigns to each morphism f : G+G' of groups the 
same function f, regarded just as a function between sets. The forgetful 
functor U : Rng+Ab assigns to each ring R the additive abelian group 
of R and to each morphism f : R+R' of rings the same function, regarded 
just as a morphism of addition. 
Functors may be composed. Explicitly, given functors 
between categories A, B, and C. the composite functions 
on objects c and arrows f of C define a functor S T :  C+ A. called the 
composite (in that order) of S with T. This composition is associative. 
For each category B there is an identity functor I,: B+B. which acts as 
an identity for this composition. Thus we may consider the metacategory 
of all categories: its objects are all categories, its arrows are all functors 
with the composition above. Similarly, we may form the category 
Cat of all small categories - but not the category of all categories. 
An isomorphism T :  C+B of categories is a functor T from C to B 
which is a bijection, both on objects and on arrows. Alternatively. but 
equivalently, a functor T :  C--rB is an isomorphism if and only if there 
is a functor S :  B-C 
for which both composites S T and T S are 
identity functors; then S is the two-sided inw-se S =  7-I. 
Certain properties much weaker than isomorphism will be useful. 
A functor T :  C-+B is ,full when to every pair c. c' of objects of C 
and to every arrow y: Tc-Tc' 
of B, there is an arrow / : ( . - + i f  of C 
with g = 71. 
Clearly the composite of two full functors 1s a full functor. 
A functor T :  C+ B is faithful (or an embedding) when to every pair 
c, c' of objects of C and to every pair j;, j; : c-c' of parallel arrows of 
C theequality Tj, = TJ; : Tc + Tc' irn~1ies.f~ 
= .f2. Again, composites of 
faithful functors are faithful. For example, the forgetful functor Grp+Set 
is faithful but not full and not a bijection on objects. 
These two properties may be visualized in terms of horn-sets (see (2.5)). 
Given a pair of objects c, C ' E  C. the arrow function of T: C+B assigns 
to each 
, f  : c+c' 
an arrow T f ' :  T r - +  Tc' and so defines a function 
T.,.. : horn@, c')+ horn (Tc. 
TC') . f 
TJ.. 
Then T is full when every such function is surjective, and faithful when 
every such function is injective. For a [unctor which is both full and 
faithful, every such function is a bijection, but this need not mean that 
the functor itself is an isomorphism of categories. for there may be objects 
of B not in the image of T. 
A subcategor!: S of a category C is a collection of some of the objects 
and some of the arrows of C. which includes with each arrow f both the 
object dom f and the object cod.f, with each object s its identity arrow 
1, and with each pair of composable arrows s+s'+s" 
their composite. 
These conditions insure that these collections of objects and 
arrows themselves constitute a category S. Moreover. the injection 
(inclusion) map S+C which sends each object and each arrow of S to 
itself (in C) is a functor, the iirclusion ,finctor.. This inclusion functor is 
automatically faithful. We say that S is a ,full subcarryor.$ of C when the 
inclusion functor S+C 
is full. A full subcategory, iven C, is thus 
determined by giving just the set of its objects. since th arrows between 
any two of these objects s. s' are all morphisms s 4 . s '  i C. For example, 
the category Setl of all finite sets is a full subcategory o the category.!M. 
i 
\ 
Exercises 
I. Show how each of the follow~ng constructions can be regarded as a functor: 
The field of quotients of an mtegral domain: the Lie algebra of a Lie group. 
2. Show that functors 1+C, 2-C. and 3-rC correspond respectnely 10 objects. 
arrows. and composable pairs of arrows in C. 
3. Interpret "functor" in the following special types of categories: (a) A functor 
between two preorders is a function T which is monotonic (i.e.. p i p '  implies 
Tp S Tp'). (b)A functor between two groups (one-object categories) is a morphism 
of groups. (c) If G is a group. a functor G-rSet is a permutation representation 
of G. while G-rMatr, is a matrix representation of G. 
4. Prove that there is no functor Crp-+Ab sending each group G to its center 
(ConsiderS,+S,-+S,. 
the symmetric groups). 
5. Find two different fuktors T :  Grp- Grp with object function T ( G )  = G the 
identity for every group G. 

16 
Categories. Functors, and Natural Transformaiions 
4. Natural Transformations 
Given two functors S, T: C+B. 
a nntrtrul transformation r :  S*T 
1s a function which assigns to each object c of C an arrow 7, = T C  : Sc--+ Tc 
of B in such a way that every arrow f ' :  c+c' in C yields a diagram 
c 
S c  A
T
c
 
which is commutative. When this holds, we also say that T,: Sc-+Tc 
is natured in c. If we think of the functor S as giving a picture in B of 
(all the objects and arrows ofl C, then a natural transformation r is a 
set of arrows mapping (or, translating) the picture S to the picture T, 
with all squares (and parallelograms!) like that above commutative: 
We call T a. T b, 7 c, . . . , the components of the natural transformation T. 
A natural transformation is often called a morphism of functors; 
a natural transformation T with every component r c  invertible in B 
is called a natural equivalence or better a natural isomorphism; in symbols, 
r : S 2 T. In this case, the inverses (re)-' in B are the components of a 
natural isomorphism r-' : T-rS. 
The determinant is a natural transformation. To be explicit, let 
detKM be the determinant of the n x n matrix M with entries in the 
commutative ring K, while K* denotes the group of units (invertible 
elements) of K. Thus M is non-singular when detKM is a unit, and det, 
is a morphism GL, K+K* of groups (an arrow in Grp). Because the 
determinant is defined by the same formula for all rings K, 
each morphism 
f :  K-K' 
of comrnu'tative rings leads to a commuta 
This states that the transformation det: GLn-.*( )* is na 
diagram 
(2) 
1 between 
two functors CRng+ Grp. 
For each group G the projection p,: G-GI1G.q to the factor- 
commutator gr'oup defines a transformation p from the identity functor 
Natural Transformations 
17 
on Grp to the factor-commutator functor Grp+Ab-+ Crp. Moreover, 
p is natural, because each group homomorphism f :  G-+H defines the 
evident homomorphism f' for which the following diagram commutes: 
The double character group yields a suggestive example in the 
category Ab of all abelian groups G. Let D(G) denote the character 
group of G, so that DG = hom(G, R/Z) is the set of all homomorphisms 
t : G+R/Z with the familiar group structure, where R/Z is the additive 
group of real numbers modulo 1. Each arrow f :  G'+ G in Ab determines 
an arrow D f : D G -+ D G' 
(opposite direction!) in Ab, with 
(D f )  t = t f : G'+ R/Z for 
each 
t; 
for 
composable 
arrows, 
D(g o f)= D f 0 Dg. Because of this reversal D is not a functor (it is a 
"contravariant" functor on Ab to Ab, see 4 11.2); however, the twice 
iterated character group G + D(D G) and the identity I(G).= G are both 
functors Ab-+Ab. For each group G there is a homomorphism 
obtained in a familiar way: To each ~
E
G
 
assign the function 
TGg : DG+R/Z given for any character t a DG by t-tg; thus (Tog)$ = '(8). 
One verifies at once that T is a natural transformation T :  1-DD; 
this 
statement is just a precise expression for the elementary observation that 
the definition of r depends on no artificial choices of bases, generators, or 
the like. In case G is finite, r, is an isomorphism; thus, if we restrict 
all functors to the category Abf of finite abelian groups, r is a natural 
isomorphism. 
On the other hand, for each finite abelian group G there is an iso- 
morphism a, : G z DG of G to its character group, but this isomorphism 
depends on a representation of G as a direct product of cyclic goups 
and so cannot be natural. More explicitly, we can make D into a co- 
variant functor D': AbLi+AbKi on the category AbLi with objects 
all finite abelian groups and arrows all isomorphisms f between such 
groups, setting D'G- DG and D'f =D f -'. Then a,: G-D'G 
is a 
map a : I+D' of functors Abf,l+Ab,,l, but it is not natural in the sense 
of our definition. 
A parallel example is the familiar natural isomorphism of a finite- 
dimensional vector space to its double dual. 
' 
Another example of naturality arises when we compare the dategory 
Fioord of all finite ordinal numbers n with the category Set, of all finite 

18 
Categories. Functors. and Natural Transformations 
sets (in some universe (I). Every ordinal n = (0, 1, . . ., n - 1) is a finite 
set, so the inclusion S is a functor S : Fhord+Setj. On the other hand, 
each finite set X determines an ordinal number n = # X. the number of 
elements in X ;  
we may choose for each X a bijection 8, : X -  + X. For 
any functionf : X-t Ybetween finite sets wemay then define acorrespond- 
ing function + f : # X- # Y between ordinals by + f= 0, jfli ' ; this 
insures that the diagram 
X 
+ # X  
will commute, and makes # a functor + : Set,-tPmord. If X is itself. 
an ordinal number, we may take 0, to be the identity. This insures that 
the composite functor # 0 S is the identity functor I' of F i r d .  On the 
other hand, the composite S 0 X is not the identity functor 1 : Sotj4-.Setj. 
because it sends each finite set X to a special finite set - the ordinal number 
n with the same number of elements as X. However, the square diagram 
above does show that 8: I-S + is a natural isomorphism. All told we 
h a v e I z S o # , l ' = + o S .  
More generally, an equivalence between categories C and D is defined 
to be a pair of functors S: C-+D, T: D-+C together with natural iso- 
morphisms lc - T O  S, h 2 S 0 T This example shows that this notion 
(to be examined in 4 1V.4) allows us to compare citegories which are 
,-- 
.-alike" but of very different "sizes". 
We shall use many other examples of naturality. As Eilenberg- 
Mac Lane first observed, "category" has been defined in order to detine 
LLfunctor7' 
and 'bfunctor" has been defined in order to define "natural 
transformation". 
Exercises 
1. Let S be a fixed set, and xS the set of all functions h : S- X .  Show that X 
Xs 
is the object function of a functor Set4S4 and that evaluation ex : Xs X S^X. 
defined by e(h, s) = h(s), the value of the function h at s s S, is a natural trans- 
formation. 
2. ~f H is a fixed p u p ,  show that G c H x G defines a funitor H x - : -4 w* 
and that each morphism f : H 4 K  of groups defines a natural transformation i , 
HX - & K x  -. 
3 If B and C are groups (regarded as categofies with one object each) and 
S, 7: 
B--4 are functors (homomorphisms of groups), show that there is a 
natural transformation S 4 7  if and only if S and T are conjugate; i.e.. if and 
only if there is iin element h e  C with Tg = h(Sg)h-' for ail g E B. 
Monics, Epis and Zeros 
19 
4. For functors S, T : C-rP where C is a category and P a preorder, show that 
there is a natural transformation S+T (which is then unique) if and only if 
Sc $ Tc for every obiect c E C. 
- 
- 
- - 
5. Show that every natural transformation r : S+ Tdefina a function (also called r) 
which sends each arrow f : c-rc' of C to an arrow r f : Sc- Tc' of B in such a 
way that Tq r f  = 7(s.I') 
= TB - S f  for each composable pair (g. I). 
Conversely. 
show that every such function r wmes from a unique natural transfonnation 
with r, = ~(1,). (This gives an "arrows only" description of a natural transfor- 
mation.) 
6. Let F be a field. Show that the category of all finitedimensional vector spaces 
over F [with morphisms all linear transformations) is equivalent to the categoe 
hlatr, described in 8 2. 
5. Monics, Epis, and Zeros 
In categorical treatments many properties ordinarily formulated by 
means of elements (elements of a set or of a group) are instead formulated 
in terms of arrows. For example instead of saying that a set X has just 
one element, one can say that for any other set Y there in exactly one 
function Y+X. We now formulate a few more instances of such methods 
of "doing without elements". 
An arrow e : a - b is invertible in C if there is an arrow el: b-ra 
in C with e'e = la and eel = 1,. If such an e' exists, it is unique, and is 
written as el= e-'. By the usual prooc (e, e,)-l= eT1e;', provided the 
composite el e, is delined and both el and e2 are invertible. Two objects 
a and b are isomorphic in the category C if there is an invertible anow 
(an isomorphism) e : a- b; we write a" b. The relation of isomorphism 
is manifestly reflexive, symmetric, and transitive. 
An arrow m :  a-b 
is monk in C when for any two parallel arrows 
f,, f2 : d-a the equality mo f1 =mo f2 implies f, = f,; in other words, 
m is monk if it can always be cancelled on the left (is lep cmceilablej. 
In Set and in Grp the monic arrows are precisely the injections (mono- 
morphisms) in the usual sense; i.e., the functions which are one-me into. 
An arrow h : a--tb is epi in C when for any two arrows g,, g, : b-c 
the equality g, 
= g2 o h implies g, = g, ; in other words, h is epi when it is 
right cancellable. In Set the epi arrows are precisely the surjections 
(epimorphisms) in the usual sense; i.e., the functions onto. 
For an arrow h : a-b, a right inverse is an arrow r :  b-a 
with 
hr = I,. A right inverse (which is usually not unique) is also callad a 
section of h. If h has a right inverse, it is evidently epi; the converse holds 
in Set, but fails in Grp. Similarly, a le/r inverse for h is called a retraction 
for h, and any arrow with a left inverse is necessarily monic If gh = la, 
then g is a split epi, h a split monic, and the composite /= hg is defined 

20 
Categories, Functors, and Natural Transformations 
and 1s an idempotent. Generally, an arrow f :  b-+ b is called idempotent 
when f 2  = j; an idempotent is said to split when there exist arrows g 
and h such that f = hg and g h = 1. 
An object t is terminal in C if to each object a in C there is exactly 
one arrow a--,r. If r is terminal, the only arrow t d t  is the identity, and 
any two terminal objects of C are isomorphic in C. An object s is initial 
in C if to each object a there is exactly one arrow s-a. For example, 
in the category Set, the empty set is an initial object and any one-point 
set is a termindl object. In Grp, the group with one element is both 
initial and terminal. 
A null object z in C is an object which is both initial and terminal. 
If C has a null object, that object is unique up to isomorphism, while for 
any two objects a and b of C there is a unique arrow a - + z - + b  (the 
composite through z), called the zero arrow from a to b. Any composite 
with a zero arrow is itself a zero arrow. For example, the categories Ab 
and R-Mod have null objects (namely O!), as does Set, (namely the one- 
point set). 
A groupoid is a category in which every arrow is invertible. A typical 
groupoid is the fundamental groupoid z ( X )  of a topological space X. 
An object of n(X) is a point x of X, and an arrow x+xt of n(X) is a 
homotopy class of paths f from x to xt. (Such a path f is a continuous 
function I d X ,  I the closed interval 1 = [0, 11, with f (0) = x, f (1) = x', 
while two paths f, g with the same end-points x alnd x' are homotopic 
when there is a continuous function F : I x I+X with F(t, 0) = f(t), 
F(t, 1) = g(t), and F(0, s) = x, F(l, s) = x' for all s and t in I.) The composite 
of paths g : x'+ x" and f : x+xt is the path h which is " f followed by g", 
given explicitly by 
Composition applies also to homotopy classes, aid makes n(X) a 
category and a groupoid (the inverse of any path is the same path traced 
in the opposite direction). 
Since each arrow in a groupoid G is invertible, each object x in 
G determines a group homG(x, x), consisting of all g : x+x. If there is 
an arrow f : x- x', the groups hom$x, x) and homG(xt, xt) are isomorphic. 
under g w  fg f -' (i.e., under conjugation). A groupoid is said to be 
connected if there is an arrow joining any two of its objects. One may 
readily show that a connected groupoid is determined up to isomorphism 
by a group (one of the groups horn&, x)) and by a set (the set of all 
objects). In this way, the fundamental groupoid n(X) of a path-connected 
space X is determined by the set of points in the space and a group 
h ~ r n , ( ~ , ( x ,  
x) -- tht: ,!iundamental group of X .  
Foundations 
2 1 
Exercises 
1. Find a category with an arrow which is both epi and monic, but not invertible 
(e.g., dense subset of a topological space). 
2. Prove that the composite of monics is monic, and likewise for epis. 
3. If a composite g = f is monic, so is f. Is this true of g? 
4. Show that the inclusion Z-Q is epi in the category w. 
5. In Grp prove that every epi is surjective (Hint. If cp : G-D H has image M not H, 
use the factor group HIM if M has index 2. Otherwise, let Perm H k the group 
of all permutations of the set H, choose three different cosets M, 
M u  and M v 
of M, define a e Penn H by a(x u) = x v, a(x u) = X U  for x E MI 
and a otherwise 
the identity. Let w : H+ Penn H send each h to left multiplication tp, by h, while 
y; a u - ' y n a  Then y p  = ~ ' p ,  
but y, +p'). 
6. In Set, show that all idempotents split. 
7. An arrow f : 4 4 b  in a category C is regular when there exists an arrow g : b+a 
such that fg f = f. Show that f is regular if it has either a I& or a right inverse, 
and prove that every arrow in Set is regular. 
8. Consider the category with objects (X, 
e, t), where X  is a set, e E X ,  and t : X d X ,  
and with arrows f : (X. 
e, t)-<X: e', t') the functions f on X  to X' with 
f e = e' and f t = fl f. Prove that this category has an initial objact in which X 
is the set of natural numbers. e -0. and t is the successor function. 
9. If the functor T: C+B is faithful and Tf is monk prow j nionic. 
One of the main objectives of category theory is to discuss properties 
of totalities of Mathematical objects such as the "set" of all groups or 
the "set" of all homomorphisms between any two groups. Now it is the 
custom to regard a group as a set with certain added structure, so we 
are here proposing to consider a set of all sets with some given structure, 
This amounts to applying a comprehension principle: Given a property 
cp(x) of sets x, form the set { x  I ~ ( x ) )  
of all sets x with this property. 
However such a principle cannot be adopted in this generality, since it 
would lead to some of the famous paradoxical sets, such as the set of all 
sets not members of themselves. 
For this reason, the standard practise in naive set theory, with the 
usual membership relation^, is to restrict theapplication ofthecompdm- 
sion principle. One allows the formation from given sets y v OF the! set 
{u, v )  (the set with exactly u and v as elements), of the ordered pair 
(u, v), of an infinite set (the set o= 
{0,1,2, ...) of all finite ordinals), 
and of 
The Cartesian Product 
u x v - ( < x , y ) ) ( x e u  and y s v ) ,  
The Power Set 
B u = { v l u C u ) ,  
TheUnion(ofasetxofsets) u x = ( y ( y ~ z  
forsome zex). 

22 
Categories, Functors, and Natural Transformations 
Foundations 
23 
Finally, given a property rp(x) (technically, a property expressed in 
terms of x, the membership relation, and the usual logical connectives, 
including "for all sets t" and "there exists a set r") and given a set u one 
allows 
Comprehension for elements of u: 
{x I x E u and cp(x)} 
In words: One allows the set of all those x with a given property rp 
which are members of an already given set u. 
To this practise, we add one more assumption: The existence of a 
universe. A universe is defined to be a set U with the following (somewhat 
redundant) properties : 
(i) x E u E U implies x E U , 
(ii) u E U and v E U imply {u, v), (u, v), and u x v E U . 
(iii) x E U implies B x  E U and v x E U , 
(iv) o 
E U (here 0 = (0, 1,2, . . .) is the set of all finite ordinals), 
(v) iff : a-*b is a surjective function with a E U and b C U, then b E U. 
These closure properties for U insure that any of the standard opera- 
tions of set theory applied to elements of U will always produce elements 
of U ;  
in particular, o E U provides that U also contains all the usual 
sets of real numbers and related infinite sets. We can then regard 
"ordinary" Mathematics as carried out exclusively within U (i.e., on 
elements of U) while U itself and sets formed from U are to be used for 
the construction of the desired large categories. 
* 
Now hold the universe U fixed, and call a set u E U a small set. Thus 
the universe U is the set of all small sets. Similarly, call a function f : u+v 
d
l
 
when u and v are small sets. This implies that f itself can be regarded 
as a small set - say, as the ordered' triple <u, Gf, 
v), with Gf c u x v 
the usual set of all ( x ,  y) with x E y y = f x. The limited comprehension 
principle thus allows the construction of the set A of all those sets which 
are small functions, since these functions are all elements of U. We can 
now define the category Set of all small sets to be that category in which U 
(the set of all small sets) is the set of objects and A (the set of all small 
functions) is the set of arrows. Henceforth Set will always denote this 
category. 
A small group is similarly a small set with a group structure; i.e., is 
an ordered pair <u, m), where u is a small set and m : u x u+u a function 
(binary operation on u) satisfying the usual group axioms. Since any 
small group is an element of U, 
we may form the set of all small groups 
and the set of all homomorphisms between two small groups. They 
constitute the category Grp of all small groups. 
The same process will construct the category of all small Mathematical 
objects of other types. For example, a category is small if the set of its 
arrows and the set of' its objects are both small sets; we will soon form the 
category Cat of all small categories. Observe, however, that Set is not 
a small category, because the set U of its objects is not a small set (other- 
wise U E U, 
and this is contrary to the axiom of regularity, which asserts 
that there are no infinite chains . . . x,, E x,,-~ E x,,-~ 
E ... E x.). Similarly, 
Grp is not small. 
This description of the foundations may be put in axiomatic form. 
We are assuming the standard Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms for set thegry, 
plus the existence of a set U which is a universe. The Zermelo-Fraenkel 
axioms (on a membership relation E) are: Extensionality (sets with the 
same elements are equal), existence of the null set, existence of the sets 
{u, v}, (u, v), Bu, 
and u x  for all sets u, v, and x, the axiom of infinity, 
the axiom of choice, the axiom of regularity, and the replacement axiom: 
Replacement. Let a be a set and q(x, y) a property which is functional 
for x in a, in the sense that p(x, y) and rp(x, y') for x E a imply y = y', 
and that for each x E a there exists a y with q(x, y). Then there exists a 
set consisting of all those y such that q(x, y) holds for x E a. 
Briefly speaking, the replacement axiom states that the image of a set 
a under a "function" p is a set. It can be shown that the replacement 
axiom implies the comprehension axiom, as stated above. Moreover, 
our conditions defining a universe U imply that all the sets x E U (all 
the small sets) do satisfy the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms - for example, 
condition (v) in the definition of a universe corresponds to replacement. 
We shall see that our assumption of one universe suffices for the purposes 
of category theory. 
Some authors assume instead sets and "classes", using, for these 
concepts, the Godel-Bernays axioms. To explain this, define a class C 
to be any subset CC U of the universe. Since x E u E U implies X E  U, 
every element of U is also a subset of U, therefore every smal! set is also a 
class; but conversely, some classes (such as U itself) are not small sets. 
These latter are called the proper classes. Together, the small sets and the 
classes satisfy the standard Godel-Bernays axioms (see Godel [1940]). 
A large category is one in which both the set lof objects and the set of. 
arrows are classes (proper or otherwise). Using only small sets and all 
classes one can describe many of the needed categories - in particular, 
our categories Set, Grp, etc. are proper classes, hence are large categories 
in this sense. Initially, category theory was restricted to the study of small 
and large categories (and based on the Godel-Bernays axioms). However, 
we will have many occasions to form categories which are not classes. 
One such is the category Cis of all classes: Its objects are all classes; 
its arrows all functions f :  C-+ C' between classes. Then the set of objects 
of Cls is the set B(U) of all subsets of U; it is not a class; in fact, its cardinal 
number is larger than the cardinal of the universe U. Another useful 
category is Cat1, the category of all large categories. It is not a class. 
In the sequel we shall drop the notation U for the chosen universe 
and speak simply of small sets, of classes, and of sets, observing that the 

24 
Categories. Functors, and Natural Tr~nsformations 
"sets" include the small sets and the classes, as hell as many other sets 
such as b ( U L  b 8 ( U ) ,  { U ) ,  and the like. Note, in particular. that {L'} 
is a set which has only one element (namely, the universe U). It is thus 
intuitively very '-small", but it is not a small set in our sense; {U} E U 
would imply U E U, a contradiction to the axiom of regularity. Thus 
"small set" for us means a member of the universe, and rzor a set with a 
small cardinal number. 
Our foundation by means of one universe does provide, within set 
theory, an accurate way of discussing the category of all small sets and all 
small groups, but it does not provide sets to represent certain meta- 
categories, such as the metacategory of all sets or that of all groups. 
Grothendieck uses an alternative device. He assumes that for every set X 
there is a universe U with X E U. This stronger assumption evidently 
provides for each universe U a category of all those groups which are 
members of U. However, this does not provide any category of all 
groups. For this reason, there has been considerable discussion of a 
foundation for category theory (and for all of Mathematics) not based 
on set theory. This is why we initially gave the definition of a category C 
in a set-free form, simply by regarding the axioms as first-order axioms 
on undefined terms "object of C', "arrow of C", "composite", "identity", 
"domain", and "codomain". In this style, Lawbere [I964 has given 
axioms for the elementary (i.e., first-order) theory of the category of all 
sets, as an alternative to the usual axioms on mehbership. 
Exercises 
1. Given a universe U and a function f : 1-b with domain I E U and with every 
value fi an element of U, 
for i E I, prove that the usual artesian product 4 ji is 
an elcmcnt of U. 
2. (a) Given a universe U and a function / : 1-6 
with domain I E U, show that 
the usual union u, f, is a set of U. 
(b) Show that this one closure property of U may replace condition (v) and the 
condition x E U implies u x  E U in the definition of a universe. 
7. Large Categories 
In many relevant examples, a category consists of all (small) Mathe- 
matical objects with a given structure, with arrows all the functions which 
preserve that structure. We list useful such examples. 
Ab, the category of all small abelian groups, has objects all small 
(additive) abelian groups A, B, . . . and arrows all homomorphisms 
f :  A-+B of abelian groups, with the usual composition. In this category, 
an arrow is monic if and only if it is a,monomorphism (one-one into). . 
Large Categories 
25 
Also, an epimorphism (a homomorphism onto) is clearly epi. Conversely, 
a homomorphism f :  A-B 
which is epi as an arrow must be onto 
as a function. For, otherwise, the quotient group B/fA is nonzero, so 
there are then two different morphisms B-B/fA, 
the projection p 
and the zero morphism 0, which have p f = 0 = 0 f ,  a contradiction to the 
assumption that f is epi. In Ab, the zero group is both initial and terminal. 
A small ring R is a small set with binary operations of addition and 
multiplication which satisfy the usual axioms for a ring - including the 
existence of a two-sided identity (= unit) 1 for multiplication. Rng 
will denote the category of all small rings; the objects are the small 
rings R, the arrows f :  R+S the (homo)morphisms of rings - where 
a morphism of rings is assumed to carry the unit of R to that of S. In 
this category the zero ring is terminal, and the ring Z of integers is 
initial since 2-R 
is the unique arrow carrying 1 E Z to the unit of the 
ring R. The monic arrows are precisely the monomorphisms of rings. 
Every epimorphism of rings is epi as an arrow, but the inclusion Z-+Q 
of Z in the field Q of rational numbers is epi, but not an epimorphism. 
If R is any small ring, the category R-Mod has objects all small 
left R-modules A, B, . . . and arrows f : A-B 
all morphisms of R- 
modules (R-linear maps). In this category monics are mon6morphisms, 
epics are epimorphisms, and the zero module is initial and terminal. 
If F is a field the category F-Mod, also written Vct,, is that of all vector 
spaces (linear spaces) over F. By Mod-R we denote the category of all 
small right R-modules. If R and S are two rings, R-Mod4 is the category 
of all small R-S-birnodules (left R-, right S-modules A with r(as)=(ra)s 
for all r ' ~  
R, a E A, and s E S). One may similarly construct categories of 
small algebraic objects of any given type. 
The category Top of topological spaces has as objects all small 
topological spaces X, Y, . . . and as morphisms all continuous maps 
f : X+ Y. Again, the monics are the injections and the epis the surjections. 
The one-point space is terminal, and the empty space is initial. Similarly,. 
one may form the category of all small Hausdorff spaces or of all small 
compact Hausdorff spaces. 
The category Toph has as objects all small topological spaces X, Y, . . ., 
while a morphism u : X- Y is a homotopy class of continuous maps 
f :  X--+ Y ;  in other words, two homotopic maps f - g : X+ Y determine 
the same morphism from X to Y. The composition of morphisms is the 
usual composition of homotopy classes of maps. 1n this category, the 
homotopy class of an injection need not be a monic, as one may see, for 
example, for the injection of a circle into a disc (as the bounding circle 
of that disc). This category Toph, which arises naturally in homotopy 
theory, shows that an arrow in a category need not be the same thing 
as a function. There are a number of other categories which are useful 
in homotopy theory: For example, the categories of C W-complexes, 

26 
C'ntegmries. Functors. and Natrml Trnnsforn:ations 
of simplicia1 sets, of compactlj generated spaces (see 4 VII.8). and of 
Kan complexes. 
Set, will denote the category of small pointed sets (often called-based" 
sets). By a pointed set is meant a nonvoid set P with a selected element, 
written * or *, and called the "base point" of P. A map f :  P-+Q of 
pointed sets is a function on the set P to the set Q which carries base 
point to base point: i.e., which satisfies f'(*,)= *Q. The pointed sets w ~ t h  
these maps as morphisms constitute the category Set,. In this category 
the set {*) with just one point (the base point) is both an initial and a 
terminal object. A morphism j- is monic in Set, if and only if it has a left 
inverse, epi if and only if it has a right inverse, and invertible if and only 
if it is both monic and epic. 
Similarly, Top, denotes the category of small pointed topological 
spaces: the objects are spaces X with a designated base point *; the mor- 
phisms are continuous maps f': X-* Y which send the base point of X 
to that of Y. Again, Toph, is the category with objects pointed spaces and 
morphisms homotopy classes of continuous base-point-preserving maps 
(where also the homotopies are to preserve base points). Both categories 
arise in homotopy theory, where the choice of a base point is always 
needed in defining the fundamental group or higher homotopy groups 
of a space. 
Binary relations can be regarded as the arrows of a category Rel. 
The objects are all small sets X, Y, . . . , and the arrows R : X-* Y are the 
binary relations on X to Y ;  that is, the subsets R C X x Y. If S : Y-+Z 
is another such relation, the composite relation S 0 R : X+Z is defined 
to be 
S a R = {(x, z) 1 for some y  E Y, ( x ,  y) E R and ( y ,  z) E S }  . 
The identity arrow X-+X is the identity relation on X, consisting of all 
(x, x) for x E X. The axioms for a category evidently hold. This category 
Re1 contains Set as a subcategory on the same objects, where each func- 
tion f : X--+ Y is interpreted as the relation consisting of all pairs (x, f x) 
for x E X. But Rel has added structure: For each R : X--, 
Y there is a 
converse relation IZ( : Y+X consisting of all pairs (y, x> with (x, y )  E R. 
A concrete category is a pair (C, U) where C is a category and U 
a faithful functor U :  
C-Set. Since U is faithful, we may identify each 
arrow f of C with the function U f. In these terms, a concrete category 
may be described as a category C in which each object c comes equipped 
with an "underlying" set U c, each arrow f : b-c 
is an actual function 
U b--t U c, and composition of arrows is composition of functions. Many 
of the explicit large catego'ries described above are concrete categories 
in this sense, relative to the evident forgetful functor U, 
but this is not 
so for Toph or for Rel. For the applications, the notion of category is 
simpler (and more '-abstractw) than that of concrete category. 
For objects a and b in the category C the hom-set 
consists of all arrows of the category with domain a and codomain b. 
The notation for this set is frequently and variously abbreviated as 
hom,(a, b)= C(a, b)= horn@, b)=(a, b)=(a, b), . 
A category may be defined in terms of hom-sets as follows. A category 
is given by the following data: 
(i) A set of objects a, b,c, ..., 
(ii) A function which assigns to each ordered pair (a, b) of objects a 
set hom (a, b). 
(iii) For each ordered triple (a, b, c) of objects a function 
called composition, and written 
(g, f )  t+g 0 f for g~ hom(b, c), 
f E hom (a, b). 
(iv) For each object b,an element 1, E hom(b, b),called theidentity ofb. 
These data are required to satisfy the familiar associativity and unit 
axioms (1.1) and (1.2), plus an added "disjointness" axiom: 
(v) If (a, b) 8 (a', b'), then hom (a, b) n hom (a', b') = 0, where 0 is 
the empty set. 
In particular, the associativity axiom may be restated as the require- 
ment that the following diagram, with each arrow given in the evident 
way by composition, be a commutative diagram: 
This definition of a category is equivalent to the original definition 
of $2. Axiom (v) above requires that "distinct" horn-sets be disjoint; 
it is included to insure that each arrow have a definite domain and a 
definite codomain. Should this axiom fail in an example, it can be readily 
reinstated by adjusting the hom-sets so that they do become disjoint. 
For example, we can replace each original set hom(a, b) by the set 
{a} x hom(a, b) x (bf ; this amounts to "labelling" each f G hom(a, b) 
with its domain a and codomain b. Some authors omit this axiom (v). 

28 
Categories, Functors, and Natural ~iansformations 
A functor T: C-+B may be described in terms of hom-sets as the 
(usual) object function T together with a collection of functions 
T,,,. : C(c, c')--tB(Tc, Tc') 
(namely, the functions f r Tf, for f E C(c, c')) such that each T,,, 1, = lTC 
and such that every diagram 
I 
T=.,.,. 
X T,.,. 
I 
TC,,,, 
B(Tcl, Tc") x B(Tc, Tcf)-B(Tc, 
Tc"), 
with horizontal arrows the composition in B and C, is commutative. 
We leave the reader to describe a natural transformation 7 :  S-T 
in terms of functions C(c, c')-+ B(S c, Tc'). 
In many relevant examples, the hom-sets of a category themselves 
have some structure; for instance, in the category of vector spaces V, W, . . . 
over a fixed field, each hom(V, W) is itself a vector space (of all 
linear transformations V-+ W). The simplest such case is that in 
which the horn-sets are abelian groups. Formally, define an Ab-category 
(also called a preadditiue category) to be a category A in which each 
hom-set A(a, b) is an additive abelian group and for which composition 
is bilinear: For arrows f, f '  : a--+b and g, g' : b+c, 
Thus Ab, R-Mod, Mod-R and the like are all Ab-categories. 
Because the composition (g, f )t.g 
0 f is bilinear, 
it can also be written (using the tensor product @ = BZ) 
as a linear map 
and the Ab-category A may be described completely in these terms 
(without assuming ahead of time that it is a category). Thus an Ab- 
category is given by the data ' 
(i) A set of objects a, b, c, . . . ; 
(ii) A function which assigns to each ordered pair of objects (b, c) 
an abelian group A(b, c); 
(iii) For each ordered triple of objects (a, b, c) a morphism 
of abelian groups called composition, and written g@ f w g  0 f ;  
(iv) For each object, a morphism Z+ A(a, a). (Here Z is the additive 
abelian group of integers; this morphism is completely determined by 
the image of 1 E 2, 
which may be written as I,.) 
These data are required to satisfy the associative and unit laws 
for composition, stated as in (1.1) and (l.2), or by diagrams. The definition 
of Ab-category is just like the definition of category by hom-sets: Set is 
replaced by Ab, cartesian product x of sets by tensor product in Ab, 
and the one-point set * is replaced by 2. 
There is an evident generalization 
to categories A which have hom-objects A(b, c) in a category like Ab 
which is equipped with a multiplication like @ and a unit like Z for this 
multiplication. 
If A and B are Ab-categories, a functor T: A+B is said to be additive 
when every function T: A(a, af)+B(Ta, Ta') is a homomorphism of 
abelian groups; that is, when T( f + f ') = Tf + Tf' for all parallel pairs f 
and f '. Clearly, the composite of additive functors is additive. Abcat 
will denote the category of all small Abcategories, with arrows additive 
functors. 
Notes. 
These notes, like those at the end of later chapters, are infonnal remarks 
on the background and prospects of our subject, with references to the biblio- 
graphy (for example, H. Petard [I980 b] refers to the second article by Pttard listed 
for the year 1980). 
The fundamental idea of representing a function by an arrow first appeared 
in topology about 1940, probably in papers or lectures by W. Hurewia on rtlative 
homotopy groups; c.f. [I94 I]. 
His initiative immediately attracted the attention of R. H. Fox (see Fox 119431) 
and N. E. Steenrod, whose [I9411 paper used arrows and (implicitly) functors; 
see also Hurewin-Steenrod [1941]). The arrow f : X - r  Y rapidly displaced the 
occasional notation f (X) 
C Y for a function. It expressed well a central interest of 
topology. Thus a notation (the arrow) led to a concept (category). 
Commutative diagrams were probably also first used by Hurewicz. 
Categories, functors, and natural transformations themselves were discovered 
by Eilenberg-Mac Lane [I9421 in their study of limits (via natural transformations) 
for universal coeficient theorems in Cech cohomology. In this paper commutative 
. - 
diagrams appeared in print (probably for the first time). Thus Ext was one of the 
first functors considered. A direct treatment of categories in their own right appeared 
in Eilenberg-Mac Lane [1945]. Now the discovery of ideas as general as these is 
chiefly the willingness to make a brash or speculative abstraction, in this case sup- 
ported by the pleasure of purloining words from the philosophe~s: "Category" 

30 
Categories. Functors. and Natural Transformations 
11. Constructions on Categories 
from Aristotle and Kant, "Functor" from Carnap (Logische Syntax der Sprache), 
and "natural transformation" from then current informal parlance. Initially, 
categories were used chiefly as a language, notably and effectively in the Eilenberg- 
Steenrod axioms for homology and cohomology theories. With recent increasing 
use, the question of proper foundations has come to the fore. Here experts are still 
not in agreement; our present assumption of "one universe" is an adequate stopgap, 
not a forecast of the future. 
Category theory asks of every type of Mathematical object: "What are the mor- 
phisms?"; it suggests that these morphisms should be described at the same time 
as the objects. Categorists, however, ordinarily name their large categories by the 
common name of the objects; thusset, Cat. Only Ehresmann [1%5] and his school 
have the courage to name each category by the common name of its arrows: 
our Cat is their category of functors. 
1. Duality 
Categorical duality is the process "Reverse all arrows". An exact de- 
scription of this process will be made on an axiomatic basis in this section 
and on a set-theoretical basis in the next section. Hence for this section 
a category will not be described by set3 (of objects and of arrows) and 
functions (domain, codomain, composition) but by axioms as in 4 1.1. 
The elementary theory of an abstract category (ETAC) consists of 
certain statements C which involve letters a, b, c, . .. for objects and 
letters f, g, h, ... for arrows. These statements are the ones built up from 
the atomic statements which involve the usual undefined term3 of category 
theory; thus, atomic statements are "a is the domain off ", "b is the 
codomain off': "i is the identity arrow of a", and "g can be composed 
with f and h is the composite", "a = b" and " f = 8". These atomic state- 
ments can also be written as equations in the familiar way: "a = dom f ", 
"h = g 0 f': A statement C is defined to be any phrase (well formed formula) 
built up from the types of atomic statements listed above in the usual 
fashion by means of the ordinary propositional connectives (and, or, not, 
implies, ifand only if) and the usual quantifiers ("for all a", "for all f ";*there 
exists an a . . .", "there exists an f . . ."). Thus "f: a+b" is the abbrevia- 
tion we have adopted for the statement, "a is the domain off and b is 
the codomain off ". 
A sentence is a statement with all variables quantified(i.e.,all variables 
are "bound", none being "free"). For example, "for all f there exist a 
and b with f: a-b" 
is a sentence (one which in fact is an axiom, true 
in every category). The axioms of ETAC (as given in $1.1) are certain 
such sentences. 
The dual of any statement Z of ETAC is formed by making the 
following replacements throughout in C :  "domain" by "codomain", 
"codomain" by "domain" and "h is the composite of g with f" by "h is 
the composite off with g"; arrows and composites are reversed. Logic 
(and, or, . . .) is unchanged. This gives the following table (a more extensive 
table appears in Exercise IV.3.1). 

32 - 
Constructions on Categories 
Statement Z 
f:a+b 
a = dom f 
i =  la 
h=g:f 
f is monic 
u is a right inverse of h 
f is invertible 
t is a terminal object 
Dual statement C* 
f :  b+a 
a = cod f 
i =  la 
h = f . g  
f is epi 
u is a left inverse of h 
f is invertible 
t is an initial object. 
Note that the dual of the dual is the original statement (C** = C). If a 
statement involves a diagram, the dual statement involves that diagram 
with all arrows reversed. 
The dual of each of the axioms for a category is also an axiom. Hence 
in any proof of a theorem about an arbitrary category from the axioms, 
replacing each statement by its dual gives a valid proof (of the dual 
conclusion). This is the duality principle: If a statement C of the elementary 
theory of an abstract category is a consequence of the axioms, so is the 
dual statement C*. For example, we noted the (elementary) theorem that 
a terminal object of a category, if it exists, is unique up to isomorphism. 
Therefore we have the dual theorem: An initial object, if it exists, is unique 
up to isomorphism. For more complicated theorems, the duality principle 
is a handy way to have (at once) the dual theorem. No proof of the dual 
theorem need be given. We usually leave even the formulation of the 
dual theorem to the reader. 
The duality principle also applies to statements involving several 
categories and functors between them. The simplest (and typical) case is 
the elementary theory of one functor; i.e., of two categories C and B 
and a functor T: C+B. For this theory, the atomic statements are those 
listed above for the category C, a corresponding list for the category B, 
as well as the statements "Tc = b" or "Tf = h", giving the values of the 
object and arrow functions of T on'objects c and arrows f of C. The 
axioms include the axioms for a category for C and for B and also the 
statements T(g f )  = (Tg) (Tf) and T(1,) = 1, 
which assert that T is 
a functor. The dual of a statement is formed by simultaneously dualizing 
the atomic parts referring to C and to B (i.e., reversing arrows in C 
and in B). Since the statement that T is a functor is self-dual, the duality 
principle above is still true.' 
We emphasize that duality for a statement involvingseveral categories 
and furxtors between them reverses the arrows in each category but does 
not reverse the functors. 
Contravariance and Opposites 
2. Contravarianceand Opposites 
To each category C we also associate the opposite category Cop. The 
objects of CP are the objects of C, the arrows of COP are arrows fOp, 
in one-one correspondence f + f Op with the arrows f of C. For each 
arrow f: a+b of C, the domain and codomain of the corresponding 
fOP are as in f o p :  b - + a  (the direction is reversed). The composite 
fOP goP = (g f )"p is defined in Cop exactly when the composite g f is defined 
in C. This clearly makes Cop a category. Moreover, the domain of f"p 
is the codomain off, f "P is monic if and only iff is epi, and so on. Indeed, 
this process translates any statement C about C into the dual statement 
C* about Cop. In detail, an evident induction on the construction of Z 
from atomic statements proves that ifC is any statement with free variables 
f, g, . . . in the elementary theory of an abstract category, then C is true 
for arrows f, g, ... of a category C if and only if the dual statement C* 
is true for the arrows f"P, gop, . . . of the opposite category Cop. In particular, 
a sentence C is true in Cop if and only if the dual sentence Z* is true in C. 
This observation allows us to interpret the dual of a property X as the 
original property applied to the opposite category (some authors call 
Cop the "dual" category, and write it COP = C*). 
If T: C--* B is a functor, its object function c b  Tc and its mapping 
function f h Tf, rewritten as f o p  w(Tf )Op, together define a functor 
from Cop to BOP, which we denote as Top: COP-+BOP. The assignments 
CwCoP and TI+ Top define a (covariant!) functor Cat-Cat. 
Consider a functor S: CoP-*B. By the definition of a functor, it 
assigns to each object c E COP an object Sc of B and to each arrow 
fOP : b-ra of Cop an arrow Sf OP: Sb-Sa 
of B, with S( f Opgop)=(S f P)(Sgop) 
whenever fpgop is defined. The functor S so described may be expressed 
directly in terms of the original category C if we write Sf for S f"P; 
then is a contravariant functor on C to B, which assigns to each object 
c E C an object Sc E B and to each arrow f: a A b  an arrow Sf: $bb-*Sa 
(in the opposite direction), all in such a way that 
the latter whenever the composite f g is defined in C. Note that the arrow 
function 3 of a contravariant functor inverts the order of composition. 
Specific examples of contravariant functors may be conveniently presented 
in this form; i.e., as functions S inverting com,position. An example is 
the contravariant power-set functor F on Set to Set: For each set X, 
PX = {S I S c X) is the set of all subsets of X; for each function f: X - r  Y, 
Ff: PY-PX 
sends each subset T C  Y to its inverse image f-'Tc X. 
Another example is the familiar process which assigns to each vector 
space V its dual (conjugate) vector space V* and to each linear trans- 
formation f: V- W its dual f * : W*+ V*; these assignments describe a 

34 
Constructions on Categories 
contravariant functor on the category of all vector spaces (over a fixed 
field) to itself. 
To contrast, a functor T: C-. B as previously defined, in 
1.3, is 
called a covariant functor on C to B. For general discussions it is much 
more convenient to represent a contravariant functor 5 on C to B as a 
covariant functor S: CoP-+B, or sometimes as a covariant functor 
Sop : C-+ BOP. In this book an arrow between (symbols for) categories will 
always denote a covariant functor T: C+ B or S : Cop+ B between the 
designated categories. 
Hom-sets provide an important example of co- and contravariant 
functors. Suppose that C is a category with small hom-sets, so that each 
hom(a, b) = (f I f :  a+ b in C) is a small set, hence an object of the category 
Set of all small sets. Thus we have for each object a E C the covariant 
horn- functor 
C(a, -) = hom(a, -) : C+Set ; 
(2) 
its object function sends each object b to the set hom(a, b); its arrow 
function sends each arrow k : b+b' to the function 
defined by the assignment f w k o  f for each f: a+b. To simplify the 
notation, this function hom(a, k) is sometimes written k, and called 
"composition with k on the left", or "the map induced by k". 
The contravariant horn- functor, for each object b E C, will be written 
covariantly, as 
C(-, b)= horn(-, b): CP+Set; 
(4) 
it sends each object a to the set hom(a, b), and each arrow g :  a+al 
of C to the function 
defined by f +fig. Omitting the object b, this function horn@, b) is 
sometimes written simply as g* and called "composition with g on the 
right". Thus, for each f: a'+ b, 
For two arrows g : a-+a' and k ;  b-+b' the diagram 
.1. 
1 
hom(al, b') '' *horn(a, b') 
in Set is commutative, because both paths send f E hom(af, b) to k fg. 
Contravariance and Opposites 
3 5 
These hom-functors have been defined only for a category C with 
small hom-sets. The familiar large categories Grp, Set,Top, etc. do have 
this property. To include categories without this property, we can proceed 
as follows: Given a category C, take h set V large enough to include all 
subsets of the set of arrows of C (for example, V could be the power set 
of the set of arrows of C). Let Ens =Set, be the category with objects 
all sets X E V, arrows all functions f :  X-+ Y between two such sets and 
composition the usual composition of functions. Then each hom-set 
C(a, b) = hom(a, b) is an object of this category Ens, so the above procedure 
defines two hom-functors 
C(a, - ), : C--t Ens, 
C( - , h) : Cop+ Ens . 
(7) 
In particular, when Vis the universe of all small sets, Ens =Set; in general, 
Ens is a (variable) category of sets which acts as a receiving category for 
the horn-functors of a category or categories of interest. 
There are many other examples of contravariant functors. For X a 
topological space, the set Open(X) of all open subsets U of X, when 
ordered by inclusion, is a partial order and hence a category; there is an 
arrow V-+ U precisely when V c U. 
Let C(U) denote the set of all conti- 
nuous real-valued functions h : U-R; the assignment h h h  ( Vrestricting 
each h to the subset V is a function C ( U ) - + ~ ( V )  
for each VC U. This 
makes 
a contravariant functor on Open (X) to Set. This functor is 
called the sheaf of germs of continuous functions on X. On a smooth 
manifold, the sheaf of germs of Cw-differentiable functions is constructed 
in similar'fashion. 
Mod-R is a contravariant functor from rings R to categ~ries. Spe- 
cifically, if Q : R-+ S is any morphism of (small) rings, each right S-module 
B becomes a right R-module Be = (Mode)B by "pull-back"' along 
Q : Each r E R acts on b E B by b . r = b . (Q r). Clearly Mode is a functor 
Mod-S+Mod-R, and Mod(@, Q,) = (Mode,) (Mode,), so Mod itself 
can be regarded as a contravariant functor on Rng to Cat1, the category 
of all large categories. 
One may also form the category Mod of all (right) modules over all 
rings. An object of Mod is a p$ir (R, A), where R is a small ring and A 
a small right R-module. A morphism (R, A )  -+ (S, B) is a pair (Q, f ), 
where Q : R-+S is a morphism of rings and f: 
A-+(Mode)B is a morphism 
of right R-modules. With the evident composition, this yields a category 
Mod. A projection functor Mod-+Rng is given by (R, A )  I-. R. Further 
study of the relation of this functor to the previous functor Rng-+Catl 
leads to the theory of jibered categories. (Mod is fibered over Rng, 
the fiber over each R being the category Mod-R.) 

36 
Constructions on Categories 
3. Products of Categories 
Froiii two given categories B and C we construct a new category 
B x C, called the product of B and C, as follows. An object of B x C 
is a pair (h, c )  of objects b of B and c of C; an arrow (b, c)-+(bl, c') 
of B x C is a pair ( f .  g ) of arrows f :  b+b' and g : c-+cl, and the com- 
posite of two such arrows 
is defined in terms of the composites in B and C by 
called the projections of the product, are defined on (objects and) arrows by 
They have the following property: Given any category D and two functors 
there is a unique functor F : D- B x C with P F = R, Q F = T; explicitly, 
these two conditions require that Fh, for any arrow h in D, must be 
(Rh, Th); conversely, this value for Fh does make F a functor with the 
required properties. The construction' of F may be visualized by the 
following commutative diagram of functors: 
This property of the product category states that the projections P 
and Q are "universal" among pairs of functors to B and C. It is exactly 
like a similar property of the projections from the (cartesian) product of 
two sets, two groups, or two spaces. The general properties of such pro- 
ducts in any category will be considered in Chapter 111. 
Two functors U : B + B' 
and 
V: C -. C' have a product 
U x V: B x C-+B' x C' which. may be defined explicitly on objects and 
arrows as 
( V r . v ) ( l ~ . ~ ~ ) = ( L ~ l , , v c )  
( L r x V ) ( f , g ) = ( U f , V g ) .  
Products of Categories 
37 
Alternatively, this functor U x V may be described as the unique functor 
(as in the diagram above) which makes the following diagram commuta- 
tive: 
B I  
BXCQC 
The product x is thus a pair of functions: To each pair (B, C) ofcategories, 
a new category B x C; to each pair of functors (U, V) a new functor 
U x V. Moreover, when the composites U ' o  U and V ' o  V are defined one 
clearly has (U' x V') (U x V )  = U' U x V' V. Hence the operation x itself 
is a functor; more exactly, on restricting to small categories, it is a functor 
x : Cat x Cat-+Cat 
There are similar functors Grp x Grp- Grp, Top xTop-Top, 
etc. 
Our definition of product categories has included in (2) the descrip- 
tion of functors F : D+ B x C to a product category. On the other hand, 
functors S: B x C+D from a product category are called bijiunctors 
(on B and C) or functors of two variable objects (in B and in C). Such 
bifunctors occur frequently; for instance, the cartesian product X x Y 
of two sets X and Y is (the object function of) a bifunctor Set x Set-Set. 
Thus our definition of product category gives an automatic definition 
of "functor of two variables" -just as the definition of the product X x Y 
of two topological spaces gives an automatic definition of "continuous 
function of two variables". 
Fix one argument in a bifunctor S; the result is an ordinary functor 
of the remaining argument. The whole bifunctor S is determined by these 
two arrays of one-variable functors in the following elelnentary way. 
Proposition 1. Let B, C, and D be categories. For all objects ~ I E  
C 
and b E B, let 
L,:B+D, 
Mb:C-'D 
be functors such that M,(c) = L,(b) for all b and c. Then there exists 
a bifunctor S:BxC-D 
with S(-,c)=L, for all c and S(b,-)=Mb 
for all b if and only if for every pair of arrows f : b+b' and g : c+cl one has 
These equal arrows (4) in D are then the value S(f,g) of the arrow 
function of S. 
Proof. If we write b and c for the corresponding identity arrows, 
the definition (1) of the composite in B x C shows that 

Constructions on Categories 
Applying the functor S to this equation gives 
S(bf, g) S(f, 4 = S(f, c') S(b, g) ; 
as a commutative diagram 
S(b, c) S'b.g' 
S(b, c') 
S ( f .  CI I 
I 
S ( / . C ' )  
S(b'; c) S'b' 
S(bf, c') . 
This is just condition (4) rewritten, so that condition (4) is necessary. 
Conversely, given all LC and M,, this condition defines S( f, g) for every 
pair f,g; it may be verified that this definition does yield a bifunctor S 
with the required prope.rties. 
One may also form products of three or more categories, or combine 
the construction of product categories a d  opposite categories. There 
is an evident isomorphism (B x C)"P z B o p  x COP. A functor BOP x C-D 
is often called a bifunctor, contravariant in B and covariant in C, with 
values in D. For example, if C is a category with small hom-sets, the 
hom-sets define such a bifunctor 
- 
horn : Cop x C-Set . 
Indeed, the commutative diagram (6) of $2 shows.exactly that the co- 
and contravariant hom-functors 
horn(-, c) : C"P+Set, 
hom(b, -) : C-Set 
do &tisfy the condition (4) of the theorem, necessary to make' horn 
a bifunctor. 
Next 
consider natural 
transformations 
between 
bifunctors 
S, S: B x C-D. 
Let a be a function which assigns to each pair of objects 
b E B, c E C an arrow 
- 
in D. Call a natural in b if for each c E C the components a(b, c) for a11 b 
define 
a(-,c): S(-, c)+S(-, c), 
a natural transformation of functors B--t D. The reader may readily 
prove the useful result: 
Proposition 2. For bifunctors S, S', the function a displayed in (5) 
is a natural transformation a : S 4  S' (i.e., of bifunctors) if and only ifa(b, C )  
is natural in b for each c E C'and nutural in c for each b E B. 
Such natural transformations appear in the fundamental definition of 
adjoint functors (Chapter IV). A functor F :  X-+C is the lefr adjoint 
Products of Categories 
39 
of a functor G :  C - X  (opposite direction) when there is a bijection 
homc(Fx, c) r hom,(x, Gc) 
natural in x E X and c E C. Here homc(F -, -) is a bifunctor, the com- 
posite 
Fop, Id 
XOP x C - 
Cop x C 
+Set, 
and horn,(-, 
G-) similarly (at least when X and C have small hom- 
sets). 
The product category can be visualized in the case C x 2, where 2 
is the category with one non-identity arrow 0-4 1; explicitly C x 2 
consists of two copies C x 0 and C x 1 of C with arrows joining the first 
to the second, as in the figure ("diagonal" arrows omitted) for C= 3: 
Here the functors To, 7, 
: C-C x 2 ("bottom" and "topn, respectively) 
are defined for each arrow f of C by To f = (f, 0) and T, f = (f, 1). 
If 1 denotes the unique non-identity arrow 0--+ 1 of 2, then we may define 
a transformation between To, TI : C- C x 2 by 
for any object c. It maps "bottom" to "top" and is clearly natural. We 
call p the universal natural transformation from C for the following 
reason. Given any natural transformation r : S-L) T between S, T: C-+ B. 
there is a unique functor F : C x 2+ B with F p  c = t c for any object c. 
Specifically, F is, when f : c-c', 
F(f,O)=Sf, 
F(f,l)=Tf, 
F(f, J)=Tf.tc=tc'oSf. 
(6) 
It may'be readily verified that these assignments do define a bifunctor 
F: C x  2-43, 
and that F ~ = T .  
Exercises 
1. Show that the product of categories includes the following known special cases: 
The product of monoids (categories with one object), of groups, of sets (discrete 
categories). 
2. Show that the product of two preorders is a preorder. 

40 
Constructions on Categories 
3. If {Ci 1 i~ I }  is a family of categories indexed by a set I, describe the product 
C = n i C i ,  its projections Pi: C-C,. and establish the universal property of 
these projections. 
4. Describe the opposite of the category Matr, of $1.2. 
5. Show that the ring of continuous real-valued functions on a topological space 
is the object function of a contravariant functor on Top to Rng. 
4. Functor Categories 
Given categories C and B, we consider all functors R. S, T. . . . : C--* B. 
If a : R-S 
and r : S - 4  T are two natural transformations, their com- 
ponents for each c E C define composite arrows (r . u)c = rc a c  which 
are the components of a transformation r a : R- T. To show 7. a 
natural, take any f: 
c-+c' in C and consider the diagram 
Tc 
Tc' 
Since a and .r are natural, both small squares are commutative. Hence 
the rectangle commutes, so r . a is natural. 
This composition of transformations is associative; moreover it has 
for each functor Tan identity, the natural transformation ll. : T-, T with 
components l,c = lTc. Hence, given the categories B and C, we may 
construct formally a functor category lIC = Funct(C, B) with objects 
the functors T: C d B  and morphisms the natural transformations 
between two such functors. It is often suggestive to write 
Nat(S, T) = P(S, T) = {r ( r : S+ T natural) 
(1) 
for the "hom-set" of this category. It need hot be a small set. 
Fmctor categories will be used extensively. For example, if B and C 
are sets (categories with all arrows identities), then BC is also a set; 
namely, the familiar "function-set" consisting of all functions C - r B  
In particular, for B = (0, 1) a two-point set, (0, 1lC is (isomorphic to) 
the set of all subsets of C (the "power set" PC). For any category B, 
B1'is isomorphic to B, while B2 is called the category of arrows of B; 
its objects are arrows f: a+ b of B, and its arrows f- f' are those pairs 
Functor Categories 
41 
(h, k) of arrows in B for which the square 
* 
'Ir 
b 
b b '  
commutes. If M is a monoid (category with one object) SeP is the 
category with objects the actions of M (on some set) and arrows the 
morphisms of such actions. An object of the functor category GrpM is a 
group with operators M. 
If K is a commutative ring and G a group, then the functor category 
 mo mod)^ is the category of (K-linear) representations of G. Spe- 
cifically, each functor T: G- K-Mod is determined by a K-module V 
(the image of the single object of the category G) and a morphism 
T: G-+Aut(V) of groups (a representation of G by linear transformations 
V--, V). If T' is a second such representation, a natural transformation 
a: T* T' is given by a single arrow a : V-+ V' (its component at the 
single object of G) such that the diagram 
commutes for every g E G. In representation theory, such a ts is called 
an intertwining opetator. Thus ope mod)^ is the category with objects 
the representations of G and morphisms the intertwininp operators. 
Next we consider the "size" of functor categories. Since every category 
B or Cis (essentially) a set of morphisms, within our set theory one can 
always form the set of all functors C+ B and the set of all natural trhs- 
formations between two such functors. Hence the functor category BC 
always exists, but it can be "largern than B and C. Recall that a small 
set is an element of the (fixed) universe, and a large set (a class) is a sub- 
set of the universe. We will show: 
If B and C are both small categories, so is BC; 
If the category B is a class and C is small, BC is large; 
If B has small hom-sets and C is small, BC has small hom-sets. 
The first is evident. Next consider the second. Since B and C are 
fixed, each functor T: C+B is determined by its arrow function 
T: Arr C+Arr B. But C is small, so ArrC is a small set, as is therefore the 
image of Arr C under T and therefore the representation of T as a set of 
ordered pairs. With each functor Trepresented by a small set in this way, 
one may form the set of all these small sets. This set (the set of objects 

42 
Constructions on Categories 
of p) 
will be a subset of the universe, hence a class. Similarly, the set of 
all arrows in BC is a class. Therefore BC is large, as asserted. 
Consider the third assertion. Given S and T, each natural trans- 
formation r : S 4  T is determined by the usual function ct-+ r c, 
t : Obj C- u 
B(Sc, Tc) . 
where the union is taken over the small set of all objects c E C. But B 
has small hom-sets, so each B(-, -) is small, as is their union. Therefore 
the set of all these functions r is a small set, so BC has small hom-sets. 
When the category C is large, the functor category B' 
need not be a 
subset of the universe. For example, if B = {0,1) is the set with just two 
elements, while C is the set U, 
then a functor U - r  B is just a function on 
U to a set with two elements. The possible such functions correspond 
(as characteristic functions) to the possible subsets of U. Therefore the 
set of objects in {O,l)" is equivalent to the set P(U) 
of all subsets of U, 
and this set has a larger cardinal number than U. 
Exercises 
1. For R a ring, describe R-Mod as a full subcategory of the functor category ~
b
~
.
 
2. Describe EX, for X a finite set (a finite discrete category). 
3. Let N be the discrete category of natural numbers. Describe the functor category 
AbN (commonly known as the category of graded abelim groups). 
4. If P and Q are preorders, describe the functor category QP and show that it is 
a preorder. 
5. If Fin is the category of all finite sets and G is a finite group, describe  in^ (the 
- - 
category of all permutation representations of G). 
6. LaM be the infinite cyclic monoid (elements 1, m, m2, . . .). In the functor categories 
(MatrJ1 and (Maw# show that objects are matrices and isomorphic objects 
(mat-) 
are exactly equivalent and similar matrices, respectively, in the usual 
sense of linear algebra. 
7. Given categories B, C, and the functor category B2, show that each functor 
H : C--BZ determines two functors S, T: C--r B and a natural transformation 
7 : S-r+ T, and show that this assignment H w (S, T, 7) is a bijection. 
8. Relate the functor H of Exercise 7 to F of (3.6). 
5. The Category of AU Categories 
We have defined a "vertical" composite t a, 
of two natural transformations. There is another "horizontal" composi- 
tion for natural transformations. Given functors and natural trans- 
The Category of All Categories 
43 
formations 
one may form first the composite functors S'o S and T', T: C-+A and 
then construct a square 
S ' S C ~ T S C  
which is commutative because of the naturality of r' for the arrows t c  
of B. Now define (r'o r ) c  to be the diagonal of this square; 
To show $ 0  t : S'S- TI T natural, form 
for any arrow f of C. Horizontally, the composites by definition are 
(7'0 r ) c  and (r'o t ) b ;  the left-hand square commutes because T is natural 
and S' is a functor, while the right-hand square commutes because r' is 
natural 'and Tf: Tc+ Tb is an arrow. The commutativity of the outside 
of the diagram states that T'O t is natural. 
This composition (t', 
r ) + t l o  r is readily shown to be'associative. 
It moreover has identities. If I,: B-+B is the identity functor for the 
category B and 1,: I,--I, 
the identity natural transformation of that 
functor to itself, one has 1,. r = t and r'o 1, = 7'. Thus 1 ,  is the identity 
for the composition 0; it is also the identity for the composition *. It is' 
convenient to let the symbol S for a functor also denote the identity 
transformation S--S. With this notation in the situation above we have 
composite natural transformations 
The definition (2) can then be rewritten, using also the vertical 
composition, as 
r r o r = ( T o r ) - ( t f o S ) = ( t ' o  T).(S'or). 

44 
Constructions on Categories 
the "vertical" composites under . and the "horizontal" composites under a 
are related by the identity (interchange law) 
The reader may enjoy writing down the evident diagrams needed to prove 
this fact. 
These results may be summarized as follows (considering only small 
categories): 
Theorem 1. The collection of all natural transjbrmations is the set 
of arrows of two dirfrent categories under two different operations of 
composition, and 0, which satisfy the interchange law (5). Moreover, any 
arrow (transformation) which is an identity for the composition 3 is also 
an identity for the composition .. 
Note that the objects for the horizontal compositionoare the categories, 
for the vertical composition, the functors. In using these compositions, 
the symbol 0 for the "horizontal" composition is often omitted (as it is 
usually in writing composition of arrows in a category), while the solid 
dot designatingL'vertical" composition is retained. Observe that objects 
and arrows of C may be written as functors c : 1+C or f: 2- 
C; then 
symbols such as o c = ac have their accepted meaning in a situation 
such as 
By a double category (Ehresmann) is meant a set which (like the set of 
all natural transformations) is the set of arrows for two different composi- 
tions which together satisfy (5). A Zdategory (short for two-dimensional 
category) is a double category in which every identity arrow for the first 
composition is also an identity for the second composition. For example, 
the category of all commutative squares in Set is a double category 
(under the evident horizontal and vertical compositions) but not a 
2-category. There are also n-categories for higher n. 
Two (partially defined) binary operations and 0 are said to satisfy 
the interchange law when (5) holds wherever the composites on either 
side are defined. Here some other examples. If C is a category and 
: C x C 4  C is a functor (for example, a tensor product), while o, a', r 
and r' are arrows of C such that the composites a'. a and t ' o  T are defined, 
then the interchange law (5) holds; indeed, it is precisely the requirement 
that the functor . preserve composition 0. If a, a', 5, and t' are rectangular 
matrices such that the usual matrix products a'. a and 7'0 r are defined, 
while re a denotes the mafrix 
with blocks r and a along the diagpnal, zeroes elsewhere, then (5) holds. 
The Category of All Categories 
45 
The functor category BC is itself a functor of the categories B and C, 
covariant in B and contravariant in C. Specifically, if we consider only 
the category Cat of all small categories, it is a functor CatOP x Cat-+Cat; 
the object function sends a pair of categories (C, B) to the functor 
category BC, and the arrow function sends a pair of functors F :  B-r B' 
and G : C'+ C to the functor 
defined on objects S E BC as FGS = F 0 So G and on arrows r : S* 
T in 
BC as FGr = F o  t o  G. Note, for example, that F'= is just "compose with 
F on the left" while B~ is L L ~ ~ m p ~ ~ e  
with G on the right". This functor 
is an exact analogue to the hom-functor SeP x Set-Set. 
Exercises 
1. For small categories A, B, and C establish a bijection 
and show it natural in A, B, and C. Hence show that - x B : Cat+Cat has a 
right adjoint. 
2. For categories A, B, and C establish natural isomorphisms 
Compare the second isomorphism with the bijection of Exercise 1. 
3. Use Theorem 1 to show that horizontal composition is a functoz 
4. Let G be a topological group with identity element e, while o, a', r, r', arc can- 
tinuous paths in G starting and ending at e (thus, if 1 is the unit interval, o : I-G 
is continuous with o(0) = e = ~(1)). Define 5 a to be the path a followed by the' 
path r, as in (1.5.1). Define r a to be the pointwise product of r and o, so that 
(I a 6) t = (7 t) ( o  t) for 0 5 t 4 1. Prove that the interchange law (5) holds. 
5. (Hilton-Eckmann). Let S be a set with two (everywhere defined) binary operations 
.: S x S+S, 
O :  S x S+S which both have the same (two-sided) unit element e 
and which satisfy the interchange identity (5). Prove that and 0 are equal, and 
that each is commutative. 
6. Combine Exercises 4 and 5 to prove that the fundamental group of a topological 
group is abelian. 
7. If T: A+D is a functor, show that its arrow functions T,,, : A(a, b)+D(Ta, Tb) 
define a natural transformation between functors AOp x Adset. 
8. For the identity functor I, of any category, the natural transformations 
a : Ic+IC form a commutative monoid. Find this monoid in the cases C = Crp, 
Ab, and Set. 

46 
Constructions on Categories 
6. Comma Categories 
There is another general construction of a category whose objects 
are certain arrows, as in the following several special cases. 
If b is an object of the category C, the category of objects under b 
is the category (b 1 C) with objects all pairs ( j ,  c}), where c is an object 
of C and f :  b d c  an arrow of C, and with arrows h : (f, c)-+( f ', c') 
those arrows h : c-c' 
of C for which h f = f '. Thus an object of (b 1 C) 
is just an arrow in C from b and an arrow of (b 1 C) is a commutative 
triangle with top vertex b. In displayed form: 
b 
b 
The composition of arrows in (b 1 C) is then given by the composition in C 
of the base arrows h of these triangles. 
For example, if * denotes any one-point set, while X is any set, each 
function *-+X is just a selection of a point in the set X; hence (* 1 Set) 
is just the category of pointed sets. Similarly, (Z 1 Ab) is the category of 
abelian groups, each with a selected element. 
If a is an object of C, the category (C 1 a) of objec~s over a has 
c 
c h c f  
objects: 
f ;  arrows: jbe 
, 
I 
the triangle commutative. For example, * is terminal in Set so there is 
always a unique X + * ;  therefore (Set 1 *) isomorphic to Set. Or again, 
Z is a ring, and the category (Rng 1 Z) is the category whose objects are 
rings equipped with a morphism E : R-+Z (called a ring R with an 
"augmeptation" E )  and whose morphisms are morphisms of rings preserv- 
ing the augmentation. 
If b is an object of C and S :  D-C 
a functor, the category (b 1 S) 
of objects S-ppder b has as objects all pairs ( f ,  d) with d E Obj D and 
f: b+Sd and as arrows h :  (f,d)+(fl,d') 
all those arrows h:d+d' 
in D for which f' = S h  f. In pictures, 
b 
b 
objects: 
; 
arrows h: 
(3) 
Sd 
Sd- 
Sd' (commutative) . 
Again, composition is given by composition of the arrows h in D. Note 
especially that equality of arrows in (b 1 S) means their equality as 
arrows of D. 
Comma Categories 
47 
For example, let U :  
Grp-Set 
be the forgetful functor. Then for 
each set x an object of (x 1 U) is a function x-r Ug from x into the 
underlying set of some group g; for example, the function mapping x 
into the underlying set of the free group generated by the elements of the 
set x is one such object. This category (x 1 U) - and others like it - will 
be used extensively in the treatment of adjoint functors. 
Again, if a E C and T: E -+ C is a functor, one may construct a category 
( T i  a) of objects T-over a. 
Here is the general construction. Given categories and functors 
the comma category (T 1 S), also written (T, S), has as objects all triples 
(e, d, f ), with d E ObjD, e E ObjE, and f: Te+Sd, and as arrows 
(e, d, f )-(e', d f ') all pairs (k, h )  of arrows k : e-.el, 
h  : d-d' 
such 
that f ' 0  Tk = S h 0 f. In pictures, 
Te rk Te' 
Objects (e, d, f )  : f ; 
arrows (k, h )  : 
I 
Sd 
with the square commutative. The composite (k', h') 0 (k, h) is 
( k ' o  k, h'o h), when defined. 
This general description of the comma category (T 1 S) does include 
all the cases listed. Indeed, an object b of C may be regarded as a functor 
b : 1 -+ C. Taking T = b in this sense, the comma category ( T  1. S) becomes 
the category (b 1 S) of objects S-under b. IfS = Cis the identity functor of C, 
this becomes in particular the category (b 1 C) of objects of C under b. 
Similarly, one may take S to be a functor l+C; i.e., an object a of C. 
Again, take S =  T =  the identity functor of C. Then (CLC) is exactly 
the category C2 of all arrows of C. Or take S and T to be objects a and b 
of C; then (T 1 S) = (b 1 a) is the category with objects all arrows f: b-a 
and morphisms only the Identity arrow for each object; in other words 
(b 1 a) is the set (the discrete category) horn,-(b, a). This case is the reason 
for the choice of the name "comma category" and the notation (T, S) - 
a notation which we avoid because the comma is already overworked. 
The construction of the comma category ( T  1 S) may be visualized 
by the following diagram of categories and functors 

48 
Constructions on Categories 
here d,. d ,  are the two functors 1 4 2 ,  the functor category CZ is just 
the category of arrows f of C, and so the functors CdO, Cdl (defined as at 
the end of the last section) are simply the functors which send each arrow 
f of C to its domain and its codomain, respectively. The functors P and Q 
(called the projections of the comma category) and the functor R are 
defined,(on objects) as suggested in the diagram 
(e, d, f: Te-,Sd) 
r T \  
(6) 
Exercises 
1. If K is a commutative ring, show that the comma category (K 1 CRng) is the 
(usual) category of all small commutative K-algebras. 
2. If t is a terminal object in C, prove that (C 1 t) is isomorphic to C. 
3. Complete (6) by defining P, Q, and R on arrows. 
4. (S.A.Huq). Given functors T, S: D+C, show that a natural transformation 
r : T-S is the same thing as a functor r : D-+(T1 S) such that Pr = Qr 5 idD, 
with P and Q the projections of (5). 
5. Given any commutative diagram of categories and functors 
(bottom row as in (I)), prove that there is a unique functor L: X-(TL S) 
for which P = PL, Q' = QL.,.and R' = RL. (This describes ( T i  S) as a "pull- 
back", c.f. ยง 111.4.) 
6. (a) For fixed small C, D, and E, show that (T, S) w(T 1 S) is the object function 
of a functor (CE)q x (CD)+ 
Cat. 
(b) Describe a similar functor for variable C, D, and E. 
7. Graphs and Free Categories 
Recall that a (directed) graph G ($1.2) is a set 0 of objects (vertices), 
and a set A of arrows f (edges), and a pair of functions A Z O :  
30 
A 9 
0, 8, f = domain f ,  a, f = codomain f 
A mrphism D : G-r G' of graphs is a pair of functions Do: 0--+Of and 
DA : A+ A' such that 
Doa,f=a,DAf 
and 
Doalf=dlDAf 
Graphs and Free Categories 
49 
for every arrow f E A. These morphisrns, with the evident composition, 
are the arrows of the category Grph of all small graphs (a graph is small 
if both 0 and A are small sets). Each graph may be pictured by a diagram 
of vertices (objects) and arrows, just like the diagram for a category 
except that neither composite arrows nor identity arrows are provided. 
Hence a graph is often called a diagram scheme or a precategory. 
Every category C determines a graph U C with the same objects and 
arrows, forgetting which arrows are composites and which are identities. 
Every functor F: C-+C' is also a morphism UF: UC+ UC' between 
the corresponding graphs. These observations define the forgetful functor 
U : Cat-+Grph from small categories to small graphs. 
Let 0 be a fixed set. An 0-graph will be one with 0 as its set of objects; 
a morphism D of 0-graphs will be one with D, : 0-0 the identity. The 
simplest 0-graph 0 is O = = t O ,  with both functions domain and range 
the identity. If A and B are (the sets of arrows of) two 0-graphs, the 
product over 0 is 
AxOB={<g,f)laoS=alf, BEA, f ~ w ;  
(1) 
it is the set of "composable pairs" of arrows 4 4 *. The definitions 
ao<q,f)=aof 
al<S,f)=a,g 
(2) 
make this set a 0-graph. This product operation on 0-graphs is associative, 
since for any three 0-graphs A, B, and C there is an evident isomorphism 
A x .(B x . 
C) z (A x . 
B) x .C. For the special 0-graph 0 there is also 
an isomorphism A z A x ,O, given by f C. (f, a, f ). 
A category with objects 0 may be described as an 0-graph A equipped 
with two morphisms c : A x 0  A+ A and i : 0- A of 0-graphs (composi- 
tion and identity) such that the diagrams. 
are commutatjve, where 1 x c is short for 1 x .c, etc. Indeed, composable 
arrows (g, f )  have a composite given by c as c(g, f), each object b E 0 
has an identity arrow given by i ( b ) ~  
A, while the first diagram states 
that composition is associative and the second that each i(a) acts as 
a left and right identity for composition. In this sense, a category is like 
a monoid, as described in the introduction: Set is replaced by 0-Grph, and 
product of sets by x  .. 
Any 0-graph G may be used to "generate" a category C on the same 
set 0 of objects; the arrows of this category will be the "strings7' of com- 
posable arrows of G, so that an arrow of C from b to a may be pictured 

50 
Constructions on Categories 
as a path from b to a, consisting of successive edges of G. This category 
C will be written C = C(G) and called the free category generated by the 
graph G. Its basic properties may be stated as follows. 
Theorem 1. Let G = { A  Z 
0 )  be a small graph. There is a small 
category C = C, with 0 as set of objects and a morphism P :  G-+ U C 
of graphs from G to the underlying graph U C  of C with the following 
property. Given any category B and any morphism D : G-+ U B of graphs, 
there isa unique functor D' : C+ B with (UD') 0 P = D, as in thecommutative 
diagram 
c GPUC 
In particular, if B has 0 as set of objects and D is a morphism of 0-graphs, 
then D' is the identity on objects. 
The property of P stated in (4) is equivalent to stating that the arrow 
P : G-+ U C is an initial object in the comma category (G 1 U). Hence P 
is unique up to an isomorphism (of C). Similar properties appear often; 
we shall say that P is "universal" among morphisms from G to the 
underlying-graph functor U. 
Proof. Take the objects of C to be those of G and the arrows of C 
to be the finite strings (or "paths") 
composed of n objects a,, ..., a, of G copnected by n - 1 arrowsf,: ai+ai+, 
of G. Regard each such string as an arrow (4, f,, . . .,f,- ,,an) :a,-+an 
in C, and define the composite of two strings by juxtaposition (i.e., by 
concatenation), identifying the common end. This composition is mani- 
festly associative, and strings (a,) of length n = 1 are its identities. Every 
string of length n > 1 is a composite of strings of length 2: 
The desired morphism P : G-+ U C of graphs sends each arrow f : a, -+a, 
of the given graph G to the string (a,, f, a,) of length 2. 
Now consider any other morphism D : G+ U B of the given graph 
G to the underlying graph of some category B. If there is a functor 
D' : C+ B with U D'o P = D, as in the commutative diagram (4), then D' 
must be D'<a) = Da on objects and D1(a,, f!, a,) = D f, on arrows. 
Since any string of length n > 1 is a composite (5) m C, D' must be given by 
Conversely, this fermula does define a functor D' : B-*C for which the 
indicated diagram commutes, q.e.d. . 
Quotient Categories 
5 1 
Here are some easy examples. For the graph consisting of a single 
arrow f with a, f = a, f, the free category consists ofall arrows 1, f, f 2, . . . . 
For the graph consisting of a single arrow g with different ends, the free 
category consists of this arrow plus two identity arrows (one at each end). 
For the graph +. -+ with three different vertices the free graph is a 
commutative triangle (add one composite arrow and three identity 
arrows). 
When 0 consists of one point, the graph G reduces simply to a set 
X (the set X = A of arrows) and the theorem provides the familiar 
construction of a free monoid M generated by X, as follows: 
Corollary 2. To any set X there is a monoid M and a function 
p : X+ U M, where U M is the underlying set of M, with the following 
universal property: For any monoid L and any function h : X-, U L there 
is a unique morphism h' : M- L of monoids with h = U h'o p. 
The elements of M are the identity and strings (x,, ..., x,-,), for 
xi E X. 
Graphs may be used to describe diagrams. If G is any graph, a 
diagram of the shape G in the category B may be defined to be a morphism 
D : G+ U B of graphs. By the Theorem, these morphisms D correspond 
exactly to functors D' : C,+ B, via the bijection D ' w D  = UD'o P. This 
bijection 
Cat(C,, B) r Grph(G, U B) 
(6) 
is natural in G and B, so asserts that C : Grph-Cat is left adjoint to the 
forgetful functor U : Cat- Grph. 
Exercises 
1. Define "opposite graphn and "product of two graphs" to agree with t.he cor- 
responding definitions for categories (i.e., so that the functor U will prrracre 
opposites and products). 
2. Show that every finite ordinal number is a free category. 
3. Show that each graph G generates a free groupoid F (i.e., one which ;utirlies 
Theorem 1 with "category C" replaced by 'groupoid F" and "category B" 
by "groupoid En). Deduce as a corollary that every set X generates a fne gaup. 
8. Quotient Categories 
Certain categories may be described by generators and relations, as 
follows: 
Proposition 1. For a given category C, let R be a ficncrion which 
assigns to each pair of objects a, b Of C a binary relation Re,, on the hom- 
set C(a, b). Then there exist a category CIR and a functor Q = QR : C--, C/R 
such that (i) I f  f R,., f' in C, then Q f = Q f '; (ii) If H : C-D 
is an! 

52 
Constructions on Categories 
functor from C for which f R,, f' implies H f = H f' for all f and f ', 
then there is a unique functor H' : C/R-D with H ' o  QR = H. Moreover, 
the functor QR is a bijection on objects. 
Put briefly: Q is the universal functor on C with Q f = Q f' whenever 
f R  f'. 
For example, if C =Top and f Rf' means that f is homotopic to f', 
then the desired quotient category C/R is just the category Toph of 1.7, 
with objects topological spaces and arrows homotopy classes of con- 
tinuous maps. This direct construction is possible for Toph because the 
relation of homotopy between maps is an equivalence relation preserved 
by composition. The general case requires a preliminary construction 
on the relation R to achieve these properties. 
Sketch of proof. Call. R a congruence on C if (i) For each pair a, b 
of objects, R , ,  is a reflexive, symmetric, and transitive relation on 
C(a, 6); (ii) If f, f' : a-rb have f  RaVb 
f  ', then for all g : ar+a and all 
h: b-+b' one has (h f g)Ra.,y(hf'g). Given any R, there is a least con- 
gruence R' on C with R C R' (proof as exercise). Now take the objects of 
C/R to be the objects of C, and take each horn-set (C/R) (a, b) to be the 
quotient C(a, b)/Rfab of C(a, b) by the equivalence relation R' there. 
Because the relation is preserved by composition, the composite in C 
carries over to C/R by the evident projection Q : C-+C/R. Now for any 
functor H: C+D the sets See,= { f, f':a+b] H $ = H f l )  evidently . 
form a congruence on C. Thus, if S 2 R one also has S :, Rf, and H factors 
as H = H'o QR, 
as required. 
In case C is the free category generated by a graph G we call C/R 
the category with generators G and relptions R. For example, 3 may be 
described as the category generated by three objects O,1,2, three arrows 
f :  0+ 1, g : 1--2, and h : 0-2, and one relation h = g of. As a special 
case, (one object) we may speak of a monoid given by generators and 
relations. 
Exercises 
1. Show that the category generated by the graph 
with the one relation g'f = f'g has four identity arrows and exactly five non- 
identity arrows f, g, f', g' and'g'f = f'g. 
2. If C is a group G (regarded as a category with one object) show that to each con- 
gruence R on C there is a normal subgroup N of G with f Rg if and only if 
g - ' f ~ N  
Quotient CategorieS 
53 
Notes. 
The leading idea of this chapter is to make the simple notion of a functor apply 
to complex cases by defining suitable complex categories - the opposite category for 
contravariant functors, the product category for bifunctors, the functor category 
really as an adjoint to the product, and the comma category to reduce universal 
arrows to initial objects. The importance of the use of functor categories (soma 
times called "categories of diagrams") was emphasized by Grothendieck [I9571 
and Freyd [1964]. The notion of a comma category, often used in special cases, was 
introduced in full generality in Lawvere's (unpublished) thesis [1963], in order to 
give a set-free description of adjoint functors. For a time it was a sort of secret tool 
in the arsenal of knowledgeable experts. 
Duality has a long history. The duality between point and line in geometry, 
especially projective geometry, led to a sharp description of axiomatic duality in 
the monumental treatise by Veblen-Young on projective geometry. The explicit 
description of duality by opposite categories is often preferable, as in the Pontrjagin 
duality which appears (4 IV.3) as an equivalence between categories, or as an 
equivalence between a category and an opposite category (see Negtepontis [1971]). 

111. Universals and Limits 
Universal constructions appear throughout mathematics in various 
guises - as universal arrows to a given functor, as universal arrows from 
a given functor, or as universal elements of a set-valued functor. Each 
universal determines a representation of a corresponding set-valued 
functor as a hom-functor. Such representations, in turn, are analyzed 
by the Yoneda Lemma. Limits are an important example of universals - 
both the inverse limits (= projective limits = limits = left roots) and their 
duals, the direct limits (= inductive limits = colimits = right roots). In 
this chapter we define universals and limits and examine a few basic 
types of limits (products, pullbacks, and equalizers . . .). Deeper properties 
will appear in Chapter IX on special limits, while the relation'to adjoints 
will be treated in Chapter V. 
1. Universal Arrows 
Given the forgetful functor U : Cat-Grph 
and a graph G, we have 
constructed($II.7) the free category C on Gand the morphism P : G+ U C 
of graphs which embeds G in C, and we have shown that this arrow P 
is "universal" from G to U. A similar universality property holds for the 
morphisms embedding generators into free algebraic systems of other 
types. Here is the general concept. 
Definition. If S : D--+ C is a functor and c an object of C. a universal 
arrow from c to S is a pair (r, u )  consisting of an object r of D and an arrow 
u: c+Sr of C, such that to every palr (d. f') with d an object of D cad 
f: 
c-+Sd an arrow of C. there is a unique arroM- f ': r--rd ofD with S.f: u= *f. 
In orhm words. every arrow f to S ,factors uniquely through the uniliersal 
arrow u, as in the cor~lntutari~~e 
diagram 
56 
Universals and Limits 
Equivalently. u : c+Sr is universal from c to S when the pair (r, u) 
is an initial object in the comma category (c 1 S), whose objects are the 
arrows c+Sd. As with any initial object, it follows that (r, u) is unique 
up to isomorphism in (c 1 S); in particular, the object r of D is unique 
up to isomorphism in D. This remark is typical of the use of comma 
categories. 
This notion of a universal arrow has a great variety of examples: 
we list a few: 
Bases of Vector Spaces. Let Vct, denote the category of all vector 
spaces over a fixed field K, with arrows linear transformations, while 
U :  
Vct,-*Set is the forgetful functor, sending each vector space V to 
the set of its elements. For any set X there is a familiar vector space Vx 
with X asa set of basis vectors; it consists of all formal K-linear combina- 
tions of the elements of X. The function which sends each x E X into 
the same x regarded as a vector of Vx is an arrow j: X--+U(VX). For 
any other vector space W, it is a fact that each function .f: X--+ 
U ( W )  
can be extended to a unique linear transforn~ation f ' :  V,--. W with 
U 
f'c j = f. This familiar fact states exactly that j is a universal arrow 
from X to U. 
Free Caregories from Graphs. Theorem 11.7.1 states exactly that the 
functor P : G--+ C'C is universal. The same observation applies to the 
free monoid on a given set of generators, the free group on a given set of 
generators, the free R-module (over a given ring R) on a given set of 
generators, the polynomial algebra over a given commutative ring in a 
given set of generators, and so on in many cases of free algebraic systems. 
Fields of Quotients. To any integral domain D a familiar construction 
gives a field Q(D) of quotients of D together with a monomorphism 
j : D+Q(D) (which is often formulated by making D a subdomain of Q(D)). 
This field of quotients is usually described as the smallest field containing 
D, in the sense that for each D C K with K a field there is a monomorphism 
f :  Q(D)+ K of fields which is the identity on the common subdomain D. 
However, this inclusion D c K  may readily be replaced by any mono- 
morphism D-+K of domains. Hence our statement means that the pair 
(Q(D),j) is universal for the forgetful functor Fld-+Dom, from the 
category of fields to that of domains - provided we take arrows of 
Dom, to be the monomorphisms of integral domains (note that a homo- 
morphism of fields is necessarily a monomorphism). Howe\:er. for the 
larger category Dom with arrows all homomorphisms of integral domains 
there does not exist a universal arrow from each domain. For instance. 
for the domain Z of integers there is for each prime p a homomorphism 
Z-+Z,: the reader should observe that this makes impossible the con- 
struction of a universal arrow from Z to the functor Fld--+ Dom. 
Co~wplet~ 
Mervic Spaces. Let Met be the category of all metric spaces 
X, Y. . .. with arrows X- Y those functions which pr&ervc the metric 

Universal Arrows 
57 
58 
Universals and Limits 
(and which therefore are necessarily injections). The complete metric 
spaces form (the objects ot) a full subcategory. The familiar completion 
X of a metric space X provides an arrow x+X which is universal for 
the evident forgetful functor (from complete metric spaces to metric 
spaces). 
In many other cases, the function embedding a mathematical object 
in a suitably completed object can be interpreted as a universal arrow. 
The general fact of the uniqueness of the universal arrow implies the 
uniqueness of the completed object, up to a unique isomorphism (who 
wants more?). 
The idea of universality is sometimes expressed in terms of "universal 
elements". If D is a category and H : D-+Set a functor, a universal element 
of the functor H is a pair (r, e) consisting of an object r E D and an element 
e E H r such that for every pair ( d ,  x) with x E H d  there is a unique 
arrow f : r - d  of D with (Hf)e=x. 
Many familiar constructions are naturally examples of universal 
elements. For instance, consider an equivalence relation E on a set S, 
the corresponding quotient set S/E consisting of the equivalence classes 
of elements of S under E, and the projection p : S-+S/E which sends each 
s E S to its E-equivalence class. Now S/E has the familiar property that 
any function f on S which respects the equivalence relation can be re- 
garded as a function on SIE. More formally, this means that if f: S - t X  
has f s = f  s' whenever s Es', then f can be written as a composite f  = f'p 
for a unique function f' : S/E+ X : 
This states exactly that (S/E, p) is a universal element for that functor. 
H : Set-+Set which assigns to each set X the set HX of all those functions 
f : S-+X for which s E s' implies f s = f s'. 
Again, let N be a normal subgroup of a group G. The usual projection 
p : G-+ GIN which sends each g E G to its coset pg = g N in the quotient 
group %IN is a universal element for that functor H : Grp-&t 
which 
assigns to each group G' the set H G' of all those homomorphisms f :  G-G' 
which kill N (have f  N = 1). Indeed, every such homomorphism factors 
as f = f  'p, for a unique f' : GIN+ G'. Now the quotient group is usually 
described as a group whose elements are cosets. However, once the cosets 
are used to prove this one "universal" property of p : G-GIN, all other 
properties of quotient groups - for example, the isomorphism theorems - 
can be proved with no further mention of cosets (see Mac Lane-Birk- 
hoff [1967]). All that is needed is the existence of a universal element 
p of the functor H. For that matter, even this existence could be proved 
without using cosets (see jj V.6). 
Tensor products provide another example of universal elements. 
Given two vector spaces V and V' over the field K, the function H which 
assigns to each vector space W the set H W = Bilin(V, V'; W) of all bi- 
linear functions V x V'-+ W is the object function of a functor 
H : Vect,+Set, and the usual construction of the tensor product provides 
both a vector space V@ V' and a bilinear function Q : V x V'--, V Q  V', 
usually written ( v ,  v')++v@ v', so that the pair ( V @  V', Q) is a universal 
element for the functor H = Bilin(V, V'; -). This applies equally well 
when the field K is replaced by a commutative ring (and vector spaces 
by K-modules). 
The notion "universal element" is a special case of the notion "universal 
arrow". Indeed, if * is the set with one point, then any element e G H r 
can be regarded as an arrow e : * -+ H r  in Ens. Thus a universal element 
(r, e )  for H is exactly a universal arrow from * to H. Conversely, if C 
has small hom-sets, the notion "universal arrow" is a special case of the 
notion "universal element". Indeed, if S :  D+C is a functor and c E C 
is an object, then ( r ,  u :  c-+Sr) is a universal arrow from c to S if and 
only if the pair (r, u E C(c, Sr)) is a universal element of the functor 
H =  C(c, S -). This is the functor which acts on objects d and arrows 
h o f D b y  
Hitherto we have treated universal arrows from an object C E  C 
to a functor S : D-+ C. The dual concept is also useful. A universal arrow 
from S to c is a pair (r, v )  consisting of an object r E D and an arrow 
v : Sr-+c with codomain c such that to every pair (d, f )  with f: S d - + c  
there is a unique f' : d-+r with f = o 0 Sf ', as in the commutative diagram 
The projections p : a x b+a, 
q : a x b+b of a product in C (for 
C = Grp, Set, Cat, . ..) are examples of such a universal. Indeed, given 
any other pair of arrows f: c+a, g : c+b to a and b, there is a unique 
h : c+a x b with p h = f, qh = g. Therefore (p, q )  is a "universal pair7'. 
To make it a universal arrow, introduce the diagonal functor 
.A : C- C x C, with A c = (c, c). Then the pair f, g above becomes an 
arrow ( f ,  g )  : A c - +  
( a ,  b )  in C x C, and (p, q )  is a universal arrow from 
A to the object (a, 2,). 

The Yoneda Ltmma 
59 
Similarly, the kernel of a homomorphism (in Ab, Grp, Rng, R-Mod, . . .) 
is a universal, more exactly, a universal for a suitable contravariant 
functor. 
Note that we say "universal arrow to S' and "universal arrow from S' 
rather than "universal" and "couniversal". 
Exercises 
1. Show how each of the following familiar constructions can be interpreted as a 
universal arrow: 
(a) The integral group ring of a group (better, of a monoid). 
(b) The tensor algebra of a vector space. 
(c) The exterior algebra of a vector space. 
2. Find a universal element for the contravariant power set functor b : SetOD-Sd 
3. Find (from any given object) universal arrows to the following forgetful functors: 
Ab- Grp, Rng+Ab (forget the multiplication), Top-Sqt, 
Set,+Set. 
4. Use only universality (of projections) to prove the followipg isomocphwns of 
group theory: 
(a) For norplal subgroups M, N of G with M C N, (G/IM)/(N}M) Z G/M. 
(b) For subgroups S and N of G, N normal, with join SN, SNf.Wa S/SnN. 
5. Show that the quotient K-module A/S (S a submodule of A) has a description by 
universality. Derive isomorphism theorems 
6. Describe quotients of a ring by a tweaided ideal by universality. 
7. Show that the construction of the polynomial ring K[x] in an indeterinin& x 
over a commutative ring K is a universal construction. 
2. The Yoneda Lemma 
Next we consider some conceptual properties of universality. First, 
universality can be formulated with horn-sets, as follows: 
Proposition 1. For a functor S : D- C a pair (r, u : c-Sr) is mbersal 
from c to S if and only if the function sending each f': r-d 
into 
S f  ' 0  u : c-+Sd is a bijection of hom-sets 
D(r, d) 2 C(c, Sd) . 
(1) 
This bijection is natural in d. Conversely, given r and c, any natural iso- 
morphism (1) is determined in this way by a unique arrow u : c-Sr 
such 
that (r, u) is universal from c to S. 
Proof. The statement that (r, u )  is universal is exactly the statement 
that f 'I+ S f ' o  u = f is a bijection. This bijection is natural in d, for if 
g1:d+d', then S(g'fl)ou=Sg'o(Sf'ou). 
Conversely, a natural isomorphism (1) gives for each object d of D 
a bijection cp, : D(r, d)-+ C(c, Sd). In particular, choose the object d to be r; 
60 
Universals and Limits 
the identity 1
,
~
 
~ ( r ,  
r) then goes by q, to an arrow u :  c+Sr in C. For 
any f '  : r+d the diagram 
commutes because 9 is natural. But in this diagram, 1, E D(r, r) is mapped 
(top and right) to S f  '0 u and (left and bottom) to qd( f 
I). Since cp, is a bi- 
jection, this states precisely that each f: c+Sd 
has the form f = Sf ' 0  u 
for a unique f'. This is precisely the statement that (r, u )  is universal. 
If C and D have small hom-sets, this result (1) states that the functor 
C(c, S -) to Set is naturally isomorphic to a covariant hom-functor 
D(r, -). Such isomorphisms are called representations: 
Definition. Let D haue small hom-sets. A representation of a functor 
K : D-+Set is a pair (r, y), with r an object of D and 
a natural isomorphism. The object r is called the representing object. 
The functor K is said to be representable when such a representation exists. 
Up to isomorphism, a representable functor is thus just a covariant 
hom-functor D(r, -). This notion can be related to universal arrows as 
follows. 
Proposition 2. Let * denote any one-point set and let D have small 
hom-sets. If (r, u : *- K r )  is a universal arrow from * to K : D+Set, 
then the function y which for each object'd of D sends the arrow f' : r+d 
to K( f ') (u*) E Kd is a representation of K. Every representation of K 
is obtained in this way from exactly one such universal arrow. 
Proof. For any set X, a function f :  * +X from the one-point set * 
to X is determined by the element f (*) E X. This correspondence f !+ f (*) 
is a bijection Set(*, X)+X, natural in X โฌSet. Composing with K yields 
a natural isomorphism Set(*, K -)+K. 
This plus the representation tp 
of (3) gives 
Set(*, K -) 2 K r D(r, -) . 
Therefore a representation of K amounts to a natural isomorphism 
Set(*, K -) z D(r, -). The proposition thus follows from the previous 
one. 
A direct proof is equally easy: Given the universal arrow u, the 
correspondence f' ++ K( f ') (u(*)) is a representation; given a representa- 
tion ly as in (3), ly, maps 1 : r-+r to an element of Kr, which is a universal 
element, hence also a universal arrow * -+ K r. 


Coproducts and Colirnits 
63 
the object c is necessarily unique (up to isomorphism in C); it is written 
c = a LI b or c =a + b and is called a coproduct object. The coproduct 
diagram then is 
a-a 
ll b-b 
; 
the arrows i and j are called the injections qf the coproduct a LI b (though 
they are not required to be injective as functions). The universality of this 
diagram states that any diagram of the following form can be filled in 
uniquely (at h) so as to be commutative: 
Hence the assignment (f, g) ++h is a bijection 
natural in d, with inverse h -(hi, hj). If every pair of objects a, b in C 
has a coproduct then, choosing a coproduct diagram for each pair, the 
coproduct LI : C x C+C is a bifunctor, with h LI k defined for arrows 
h : a-a', 
k : b-b' 
as the unique arrow h LI k : a Ll b+af LI b" with 
(h LI k) i = i' h, (h LI k)j = j' k (draw the diagram !). 
The diagram (I) is more familiar in other guises. For example, in 
Set take a LI b to be a disjoint union of the sets a and b (i.e., a union of 
disjoint copies of a and b), while i and j are the inclusion maps a c a U b, 
b c a  LI b. Now a function h on a disjoint union is uniqueli determined 
by independently giving its values on a and on b; i.e., by giving the 
composites hi and hj. This says exactly that diagram (1) can 
filled 
in uniquely at h. To be sure, a disjoint union is not unique, but it is unique 
up to a bijection, as befits a universal. 
The coproduct of any two objects exists in many of the familiar cate- 
gories, where it has a variety of names as indicated in the following list: 
Set . 
disjoint union of sets, 
TOP 
disjoint union of spaces, 
TOP* 
wedge product (join two spaces at base point), 
Ab, R-Mod direct sum A @ B, 
GrP 
free product, 
CRng 
tensor product R @IS . 
In a preorder P, a least upper bound a u b  of two elements a and b, 
if it exists, is an element a u b  with the properties (i) a $ aub, b l a u b ;  
and (ii) if a =( c and b c, then a u  b 5 c. These properties state exactly 
that a u b  is a coproduct of a and b in P, regarded as a category. 
64 
Universals and Limits 
Infinite Coproducts. In the description of the coproduct, replace 
C x C = C2 by CX for any set X. Here the set X is regarded as a discrete 
category, so the functor category CX has as its objects the X-indexed, 
families a = {a, 1 x E X) of objects of C. The corresponding diagonal 
functor A : C+CX sends each c to the constant family (all c, =c). A 
universal arrow from a to A is an X-fold coproduct diagram; it consists 
of a coproduct object LI,a, E C and arrows (coproduct injections) 
i,: a,-+LI,a, of C with the requisite universal property. This universal 
property states that the assignment f -{ f  i, ( x E X) is a bijection 
natural in c. In Set, a coproduct is an X-fold disjoint union. 
Copowers. If the factors in a coproduct are all equal (a, = b for all x), 
the coproduct LI,b is called a copower and is written X .  b, so that 
natural in c. For example, in Set, with b =  Y a set, the copower 
X Y .= X x Y is the artesian product of the sets X and Y. 
Cokernels. Suppose that C has a zero object z, so that for any two 
objects b,c c C  there is a zero arrow 0: b+z-.c. 
The cokernel of 
f: a-.b is then an arrow u  : b-+e such that (i) u f = 0 : a-+e; (ii) if h : b+c 
has h f = 0, then h = h'u for a unique arrow h' : e d c .  The picture is 
In Ab, the cokernel off : A-B 
is the projection B+B/ f A to a quotient 
group of B, and in many other such categories a cokernel is essentially a 
suitable quotient object. However, in categories without a zero object 
cokernels are not available. Hence we consider more generally certain 
"coequalizers". 
Coequalizers. Given in C a pair f, g : a+b of arrows with the same 
domain a and the same codomain b,.a coequalizer of < f, g) is an arrow 
u : b-e 
(or, a pair (e, u)) such that (i) u f '= ug; (ii) if h : b+c has h f = hg, 
then h = h'u for a unique arrow h': e-c. 
The picture is 
f 
a 3 b A e  ' u f = u g  
\
!
 
A coequalizer u can be interpreted as a universal arrow as follows. 
Let 11 denote the category which h q  precisely two objects and two 

Coproducts and Colimits 
65 
non-identity arrows from the first object to the second; thus thecategory is 
3 .. Form the functor category CL1. An object in C" is then a functor 
from .ao 
to C; that is, a pair (f, g) : a-+b of parallel arrows a=t b 
in C. An arrow in CL' from one such pair (f, g) to another (f ', g') is 
a natural transformation between the corresponding functors; this 
means that it is a pair (h, k) of arrows h : a-+a1 and k : b+b' in C 
a+b a 
kg=gth, 
I. 
a
'
,
 
I 
kf = f'h, 
which make the f-square and the g-square commute. There is also a 
diagonal functor A : C-c", 
defined on objects c and arrows r of C as 
insymbols, Ac = (I,, 1,) and Ar = (r, r). Now given the pair (f, g) : a-b, 
an arrow h : b-*c 
with h f = hg is the same thing as an arrow 
(h f = hg, h) : (f, g)+(l,, 
1,) in the functor category Chi: 
s 
a
i
b
 
I 
a 
hf-hg. 
c*c, 
In other words, the arrows h which "coequalize" f and g are the arrows 
from (f, g) to A. Therefore a coequalizer (e, u) of the pair ( f ,  g) is 
just a universal arrow from ( f, g) to the functor A. 
Coequalizers of any set of maps from a to b are defined in the same way. 
In Ab, the coequalizer of two homomorphisms f, g : A-B 
is the 
projection B-+B/(f -g)A on a quotient group of B (by the image of 
the difference homomorphism). In Int, the coequalizer of two functions 
f, g : X+ Y is the projection p : Y- 
Y/E on the quotient set of Y by the 
least equivalence relation E C Y x Y which Contains all pairs (f x, gx) 
for x c X. The same construction, using the quotient topology, gives 
coequalizers in Top. 
Pushours. Given in C a pair f: a--, b, g : a+c of arrows with a common 
domain a, a pushout of (f, g) is a commutative square, such as that on 
66 
Universals and Limits 
the left below 
such that to every other commutative square (right above) built on f, g 
there is a unique t: r+s with t u =  h and t v =  k. In other words, the 
pushout is the universal way of filling out a commutative square on the 
sides f , g .  It may be interpreted as a universal arrow. Let *c.-. 
denote the category which looks just like that. An object in the functor 
category C"" 
' is then a pair of arrows (f, g) in C with a common. 
domain, while A(c) = (I,, I,) is the object function of an evident "diagonal" 
functor A :  C+Ct". 
A commutative square h f = kg as on the right 
above can then be read as an arrow 
in C"' 
from (f,g) to As, The pushout is a universal such arrow. 
Its vertex r, which is uniquely determined up to (a unique) isomorphism, is 
often written as a coproduct "'over a" 
and called a "fibered sum" or (the vertex of) a "cocartesian square". 
In Set, the pushout of (f, g) always exists; it is the disjoint union b LI c 
with the elements f x and g x identified for each x E a. A similar construction 
gives pushouts in Top - they include such useful cons.tructions as ad- 
junction spaces. Pushouts exist in Grp; in particular, iff and g above 
are monic in Grp, the arrows u and v of the pushout square are also monic, 
and the vertex r is called the "amalgamated product" of b with c. 
Cokernel Pair. Given an arrow, f :a+b in C, the pushout off with 
f is called the cokernel pair off. Thus the cokernel pair off consists of an 
object r and a parallel pair of arrows u, v : b-*r, with domain b, such that 
u f = v f and such that to any parallel pair h, k : b-s 
with h f = k f 
there is a unique t:r-+s with tu=h and tv=k: 

Coproducts and Colimits 
67 
Colitnits. The precedingcases all deal with particular functor categories 
and have the following pattern. Let C and J be categories (J for index 
category, usually small and often finite). The diagonal functor 
sends each object c to the constant functor d c  - the functor which has 
the value c at each object i~ J and the value 1, at each arrow of .I. If 
f :  c-c' is an arrow of C, A f  is the natural transformation A f :  Ac-.Acl 
which has the same value f at each object i of J. Each functor F: J--+C 
is an object of CJ. A universal arrow (r, u )  from F to A is called a colimit 
(a "direct limit" or "inductive limit") diagram for the functor F. It consists 
of an object r of C, usually written r = Lim F or r = ColimF, together 
C* 
i 
with a natural transformation u :  F r A r  which is iniversal among 
natural transformations 7: F-rdc. Since Ac is the constant functor, 
the natural transformation 7 consists of arrows 7, : F , t c  of C, one for 
each object i of J, with T, - Fu = 7i for each arrow u : i-j of J. 
all the squares in the following schematic diagram (for a special choice 
must commute. It is convenient to visualize these diagrams with all the 
"bottom" objects identified. For this reason, a natural transformation 
r : F-rAc, often written as 7: F-c, 
omitting A, is called a cone from ihe 
base F to the vertex c, as in the figure 
(all triangles c o m m u t a ~ , , I n  this language, a colimit of F :  J-C 
consists of an object 
E C and a cone p : F+A(LimF) from the 
- 
base F to the vertex % F which is universal: For any cone T :  F 4 A e  
-. 
from the base F there is a unique arrow t' : &F+c 
with T, = t'p, for 
every index i e J. We call p the limiting cone or the universal cone (from F). 
For example, let J = o = {O-1-2+3+ 
and consider a functor 
F : o-+Set which maps every arrow of o to an inclusion (subset in set). 
Such a functor F is simply a nested sequence of sets F, c F, c F, c .... 
The union U of all sets F,. with the cone given by the inclusion maps 
68 
Universals and Limits 
F,,+ C', is 3
F
 
The same interpretation of unions as special colimits 
applies in Grp, Ab. and other familiar categories. The reader mav wish 
to convince himself now of what we shall soon prove: For J small, 
any F : J-+Set has a colimit. 
Exercises 
I. In the category of commutative rings, show that R-+R@S+S. 
with maps 
r w r @  1, I @ s + i s ,  is a coproduct diagram. 
2. If a category has (binary) coproducts and coequalizers, prove that it also has 
pushouts. Apply to Set, Grp, and Top. 
3. In the category Matr, of g 1.2, describe the coequalizer of two m x n matrices 
A, B (i.e., of two arrows n-+m in Matr,). 
4. Describe coproducts (and show that they exist) in Cat, in Mon, and in Grph. 
5. If E is an equivalence relation on n set X, show that the usual set XIE of equiv- 
alence classes can be described by a coequalizer in Set. 
6. Show that a and b have a coproduct in C if and only if the following functor 
is representable: C(a, -) x C(b, -) : C-rSet, by c rC(a, c) x C(b, c). 
7. (Every abelian group is a colimit of its finitely generated subgroups.) If A is an 
abelian group, and J, the preorder with objects all finitely generated subgroups 
SC A ordered by inclusion, show that A is the colimit of the evident functor 
J,+ 
Ab. Generalize. 
4. Products and Limits 
The limit notion is dual to that of a colimit. Given categories C, J, 
and the diagonal functor ,A : C--+C!, a limit for a functor F :  J-*C 
i s  a universal arrow (r, u) from A to F. It consists of an object r of C, 
usually written r = @F or LimF and called the limit object (the 
"inverse limit" or ..projective limit") of the functor F, together with a 
natural transformation v :  Ar-F 
which is universal among natural 
transformations T : Ac* 
F, for objects c of C. Since Ac : J-C 
is the 
functor constantly c, this natural transformation 7 consists of one arrow 
7,: c+F, of C for each object i of J such that for every arrow u : i-+j 
of J one has r j  = Fu ri . We may call T : c- F a cone to the base F from 
the vertex c. (We say ..cone to the base F' rather than '-cocone"). The 
universal property of v is this: It is a cone to the base F from the vertex 
LimF; for any cone T to F from an object c, there is a unique arrow 
C- 
r : c- C- 
Lim F such that t, = v, r for all i. The situation may be pictured as 
c b L i m F  =LimF, 
v = limiting cone , 

Products and Limits 
69 
each cone is represented by a commuting triangle (just one of many). 
with vertex up; there is a unique arrow t which makes all the added 
(vertex down) triangles commute. As with any universal. the object 
LimF and its lirtzitirlg COIW 1, : LimF--t F are determined uniquely by the 
e- 
C- 
functor F, up to isomorphism in C. 
The properties of j-im and Lim are summarized in the diagram 
-4 
Lim F = Lim F- 
F ' * Lim F = Colim F 
t- 
- 
* 
where the horizontal arrows are cones, the vertical arrows arearrows in C. 
When the limits exist. there are natural isomorphisms 
C(c. I_im F) z Nat(Ac, F )  = Cone(c, F), 
(2) 
Cone(F. c) = Nat(F. 3 c )  z C(Lini F. c ) .  
----* 
(3) 
There are familiar names for mrious special limits. dual to those for 
coliniits : 
Products. I f  J is the discrete category (0. 1 ). a functor F: (0. I {  --.C 
is a pair of objects ((I. b) of C. The limit object is called a prorlricr of u 
and h. and is written a x  h or a l l  h: the limit diagram consists of a x  h 
and two arrows p. (1 (or somctimez pr,. p r z ) .  
called the projeclioas of the product. By the r-eprctsen tation $\.en bj; the 
Yoneda lemma there is a bijection of' scts 
natural in L.. \$.liich scnds c~tch 11 :(.-(I 
x h to the pair of composites 
(ph. q h). Convers~.ly. gi\ cn CII-I-OU.~ 1 : 1 -+u i~tld g : ~ - 4 1 1 .  thcr~ is a 
unique 11: c--+(I x h uith plr = , f  i111d 1111 = ( I .  \Vc \\.rile 
and call h thc arrow ~ v i t h  c~or~rpc)~~~wrs 
,:' and ! I .  \i'c II;I\L' alre;td! ohser-\.r.d 
(in 8 11.3) that thc product oran!. [no olyccrs c.sist> in Cat. In Grp. i n  Top. 
and in Mon: in tl1c.s~ c a w  (2nd in man! otha-3) i~ is called thc i1irc~c.r 
protllwr. I n  a preorder. a pr-oducr is a prcatcst 1onc.r bound. 
11!li11irc p~~)tllrc~\ 
If J is ;t sct ( =. di.;cl.cic catcgor! = catcgor) M lrtl 
all arrows idcnti~ies). thcn a iunctor., I-': J-*C is sinlpl! n J-indcxcd 
70 
Universals and Limits 
family of objects ajE C, while a cone with vertex c and base a, is just a 
J-indexed family of arrows & : c+aj. A universal cone pj : njaj-+aj 
thus consists of an object Iljaj, called the product of the factors aj, 
and of arrows pj, called the projections of the product, with the following 
universal property: To each J-indexed family (=cone) jj: c--+aj there is 
a unique f 
f:c--,17,aj, 
with 
p j f = f , ,  j c J .  
The arrow f uniquely determined by this property is called the map 
(to the product) with components j,, j~ J. Also (1; I j~ J }  F+ f is a bi- 
jection 
n,C(c, aj) z C(c, n j a j ) ,  
(5) 
natural in c. Here the right hand product is that in C, while the left-hand 
product is taken in Set (where we assume that C has small hom-sets). 
Observe that the hom-functor C(c, -)carries products in C to products 
in Set (see sV.4). Products over any small set J exist in Set, in Top, 
and in Grp; in each case they are just the familiar cartesian products. 
Powers. If the factors in a product are all equal (ai = b E C for all i), 
the product nisi = n i b  is called a power and is written n i b  = hJ, so that 
natural in c. The power on the left is that in Set, where every small power 
XJ exists (and is the set of all functions J--, X). 
Equalizers. If J = 11, a functor F: l l + C  is a pair f, 9 : b-+a of 
parallel arrows of C. A limit object d of F, when it exists, is called an 
equalizer (or, a "diflerence kernel") of f and g. The limit diagram is 
(the limit arrow e amounts to a cone a t d + h  from the vertex 4. The 
' limit arrow is often called the equalizer off and g; its universal property 
reads: To any h : c--+h with f h  = y h there is a unique h' : c-+d with 
eh'=It. 
In Set, the equalizer always exists; d is the set {s E b It's = g s )  and 
e: d-+b is the injection of this subset of b into h. In Top. the equalizer 
has the same description (d has the subspace topology) In Ab the equalizer 
d of f and g is the usual kernel of the difference homomorphism 
f - 8 :  h - + a .  
Equalizers for any set of arrows from h to u are described similarly. 
Any equalizer e is necessarily a monk 

Products and Limits 
71 
Pullbacks. If J = (--r +), a functor F : (--+ +)-C 
is a pair of arrows 
b&&d 
of C with a common codomain a. A cone over such a functor 
is a pair of arrows from a vertex c such that the square (on the left) 
commutes. A universal cone is then a commutative square of this form, 
with new vertex written b x .d and arrows p, q as shown on the right, 
such that for any square with vertex c there is a unique r : c+b x ,d 
with k = qr, h = pr. The square formed by this universal cone is called a 
pullback square or a"cartesian square" and the vertex b x ,d ofthe universal 
cone is called a pullback, a "fibered product", or a product ovir (the 
object) a. This construction, possibl in many categories, first became 
prominent in the category Top. If g : b +a is a .'fiber map" (of some type) 
with "base" a and f is a continuous map into the base, then the projec- 
tion p of the pullback is the '.induced fiber map" (of the type considered). 
The pullback of a pair of equal arrows f: 
b--+a-b : f, when it exists, 
is called the kernel pair off. It is an object d and a pair of arrowsp, q : d d b  
such that f p  = f q : d-a 
and such that any pair h, k : c+a with fh = f k 
can be written as h=pr, k = q r  for a unique r:c+d. 
If J = 0 is the empty category, there is exactly one functor 0 - 4 ;  
namely, the empty functor; a cone over this functor is just an object 
c E C (i.e., just a vertex). Hence a universal cone on 0 is an object t of C 
such that each object C E  C has a unique arrow c--+t. 1n.other words, 
a limit of the empty functor to C is a terminal object of C. 
Limits are sometimes defined for diagrams rather than for functors. 
In detail, let C be a category, U C  the underlying graph of C, and G , 
any graph. Then a diagram in C of shape G is a morphism D : G 4  
U C of 
graphs. Now define a cone p : c-rD to be a function assigning to each 
object i E G an arrow pi: c+Di 
of C such that Dho p, =pj for every 
arrow h : i+j of the graph G. This is just the previous definition of a cone 
(a natural transformation) p : Ac-D), 
coupled with the observation 
that this definition uses the composition of arrows in C but not in the 
domain G of D. A limit for the diagram D is now a univemal cone 1 : cr, D. 
This variation on the definition of a limit yields no essentially new 
information. For, let F G be a free category generated by the graph G, 
and P : G-+ U(F G) the corresponding universal diagram. Then each 
diagram D :  G--+ U C can be written uniquely as D = UD'o P for a 
(unique) functor D': FG+C, and one readily observes that limits 
(and limiting cones) for D' correspond exactly to those for D. 
72 
Universals and Limits 
Exercises 
1. In Set, show that the pullback off: X+Z and g : Y-Z is given by the set of 
pairs ((x, y )  I x E X, 
y E Y, f x = g y}. Describe pullbacks in Top. 
2. Show that the usual cartesian product over an index set J, with its projectiohs, 
is a (categorical) product in Set and in Top. 
3. If the category J has an initial object s, prove that every functor F : J+C to 
any category C has a limit, namely F(s). Dualize. 
4. In any category, prove that j: a+b is epi if and only if the following square is 
a pushout: 
I 
a-b 
5. Iii 3 pullback square (a), show that f monic implies q monic. 
6. In Sct, show that the kernel pair off: X-+ Y is given by the equivalence relation 
E P {(x, x') I X, X' E X and f x = f x'), with suitable maps E S X .  . 
7. (Kernel pairs via products and equalizers.) If C has finite products and equalizers, 
show that the kernel pair off: a+b may be expressed in terms of the projections 
p,, p2 : a x  a-a 
as p, e, p,e, where e is the equalizer of f p,, f p, : a x a--rb 
(cf. Exercise 6). Dualize. 
8. Consider the following commutative diagram 
(a) If both squares are pullbacks, prove. that the outside rectangle (with top 
and bottom edges the evident composites) is a pullback. 
(b) If the outside rectangle and the right-hand square are pullbacks, so is the 
left-hand square. 
9. (Eaualizers via ~roducts and pullbacks.) Show that the equalixr off, g : b-+a 
&a; be constructed as the 
of 
10. If C has pullbacks and a terminal object, prove that C has all products and 
equalizers. 
5. Categories with Finite Products 
A category C is said to have finite products if to any finite number of 
objects c,, . . . , c,, of C there exists a product diagram, consisting of a 
product object c, x . .. x c,, and n projections pi : c, x 
x c,,-rc,, for 
i = 1, ..., n, with the usual universal property. In particular. C then has a 
product of no objects, which is simply a terminal o b j p  t in C, as well 

Categories with Finite Products 
73 
as a product for any two objects. The diagonal map 6, : c - t c  x c is defined 
for each c by p, 6, = 1, = p, 6,; it is a natural transformation. 
Proposition 1. If a category C has a terminal object t and a product 
diagram a +a x b+b for any two of its objects, then C has allJnite products. 
The product objects provide, by (a, b )  h a  x b, a bifuncror C x C-r C. 
For any three objects a, b, and c there is an isomorphism 
natural in a, 6, and c. For any object a there are isomorphisms 
which are natural in a, where t is the terminal object of C. 
Proof. A product of one object c is just the diagram c-c formed 
with the identity map of c, so is present in any category. Now suppose 
that any two objects a,, a, of C have a product. If we choose one such 
product diagram a, -a, x a, -+a, for each pair ofobjects, then x becomq 
a functor when f, x f, is defined on arrows fi by p,(f, x f , ) = f , p , .  
One may then form a product of three objects a, b, and c by'forming the 
iterated product object a x (b x c) with projections as in the diagram 
The projections to a and the two indicated composites give three arrows 
from a x (b x c) to a, b, and c respectively. By the universality dl the 
given projections (from two factors) it follows readily that these three. 
arrows form a product diagram for a, b, and c. Product diagrams for 
more factors can be found by iteration in much the same way. For three 
factors, one could also form a product diagram by the iteration (a x b) x  c; 
the uniqueness of the product objects then yields a unique isomorphism 
a x (b x C )  z (a x b) x c commuting with the given projections to a, 6, and c. 
This is the isomorphism a of the proposition, and it is natural. Finally, 
since every object has a unique arrow to the terminal object t, the diagram 
t + a A a  is a product diagram for t and a. The uniqueness of the product 
object t x a then yields an isomorphism I, : t x a+a, and similarly 
Q, : a x r-a. Naturality of A and p follows. 
The dual result holds for finite coproducts; in particular a coproduct 
of no factors is an initial object. For m objects a,, a coproduct diagram 
consists of m injections ij:a,-a, LI .. LIa, and any map f: a, L 1 . e .  LIa,+c 
74 
Universals and Limits 
is uniquely determined by its n~ cocorirponenrs J' i, = j,: a,--.c for 
j =  1, ..., tn. In particular, if C has both finite products and finite co- 
products, the arrows 
a,U...Ua,--+b, x ... x b, 
from a coproduct to a product are determined uniquely by an n x n  
matrix of arrows 
= Pr f i, : aJ+b,, where j = 1, . . ., m, k = I. . . . . n. In 
categories of finite dimensional vector spaces, where finite coproduct co- 
incides with finite product, this matrix is exactly the usual matrix of a 
linear transformation relative to given bases in its domain and codomain. 
More generally, let C be any category with a null object z (an object 
z which is both initial and terminal), so that the arrow a+z-+b through 
z is the zero arrow 0: a+b. If C also has finite products and finite co- 
products, there is then a "canonical" arrow 
of the coproduct to the product - namely, that arrow which has the 
identity n x n matrix (identities on the diagonal and zeroes elsewhere). 
This canonical arrow may be an isomorphism (in Ab or R-Mod), a 
proper monic (in Top* or Set*) or a proper epi (in Grp or Rng). 
Exercises 
1. Prove that the diagonal 6, : c - + c  x c is natural in C. 
2. In any category with finite products, prove that the following diagrams in- 
volving the canonical maps a, q,d of (1) and (2) always commute: 
a x  (b x (cxd))*(a x b) x ( c x d ) * ( ( a  x b) x c ) x d  
I,.. 
1 a.l 
a x ((b x C) x d) 
a 
+(a x ( b  x c ) ) x d ,  
t x(bxc)+(t 
x b ) x c  
b x c  = b x c ,  
: a  x ( t  x c ) + ( a x t ) x c  
I 
1 
. a x c  = a x c .  
3. (a) Prove that Cat has pullbtlcks (cf. Exercise 11.6.5). 
. 
(b) Show that the comma categories (b 1 C) and (C l a )  are pullbacks in Cat. 
4. Prove that Cat has all small coproducts. 
5. If B has (finite) products show that any functor category B' 
also has (finite) 
products (calculated "pointwise"). 

Groups in Categories 
75 
6. Groups in Categories 
We return to the ideas of the introduction. Let C be a category with 
finite products and a terminal object t. Then a monoid in C is a triple 
(c, p : c x c+c, q : t+c), 
such that the following diagrams commute 
(This is exactly the definition of the introduction, except for the explicit 
use in the first diagram of the associativity isomorphism a of (5.1).) 
We now define a group in C to be a monoid (c, p, q )  together with an 
arrow [ : C+C 
which makes the diagram (with 8, the diagonal) 
commute (this suggests that [ sends each x
~
c
 
to its right inverse). 
By similar diagrams, one may define rings in C, lattices in C, etc.; 
the process applies to any type of algebraic system defined by operations 
and identities between them. 
It is a familiar fact that if G is an (ordinary) group, so is the function 
set GX for any X; indeed the product of two functions f, f '  in cX is 
defined pointwise, as (f . f ') (x) = f x . f 'x. In the present context this. 
construction takes the following form. 
Proposition 1. If C is a category with finite products, then an object c 
is a group (or, a monoid) in C if and only if 
the horn functor C(-, c) is 
a group (respectively, a manoid) in the functor category setcop. 
Proof. Each multiplication C( for c determines a corresponding 
multiplication ji for the horn-set C(- , c) : CoP+Set, as the composite 
C(-, c) x C(-, c)-%C(-,cx 
c ) A C ( - , c )  
where v = p, = C(-, p), while the first natural isomorphism is that given 
(cf. (4.4)) by the definition of the product object c x c. Conversely, given 
any natural v as above, the Yoneda lemma proves that there is a unique 
p : c x c+c with v = p,. A "diagram chase" shows that p is associative if 
and only if ji is; the chase uses the definition of the associativity iso- 
76 
Universals and Limits 
morphism r by its commutation with the projections of the threefold 
product. The rest of the proof is left as an exercise. 
Since the functor category SetcoP always has finite products 
(Exercise 5.5) we can consider objects c in C such that C(-, c) is a group 
in this functor category even if the category Cdoes not have finite products; 
however, I know no real use of this added generality. 
Exercises 
(Throughout, C is a category with finite products and a terminal object t . )  
1. Describe the category of monoids in C, and show that it has finite products. 
2. Show that the category of groups in C has finite products. 
3. Show that a functor T: B+Set is a group in SetB if and only if each Tb, for b 
an object of B, is an (ordinary) group and each Tf,f in 8, is a morphism ofgroups. 
4. (a) If A  is an abelian group (in Set) show that its multiplication A x  A+A, 
its unit I --+ A, and its inverse A+ A  are all morphisms of groups (where A x  A 
is regarded as the direct product group). Deduce that A with these structure maps 
is a group in Grp. (b) Prove that every group in Grp has this form. 
Notes 
The Yoneda Lemma made an early appearance in the work of the Japanese pioneer 
N. 
Yoneda [19543; with time its importance has grown. 
Representable functors probably first appeared in topology in the form of'uni- 
versa1 examples", such as the universal examples of cohomology operations (for 
instance, in J. P. Serre's 1953 calculations of the cohomology, modulo 2, of Eilenberg- 
Mac Lane spaces). 
Universal arrows are unique only up to isomorphism; perhaps this lack of 
absolute uniqueness is why the notion was slow to develop. Examples had long 
been present; the bold step of really formulating the general notion of a universal 
arrow was taken by Samuel in 1948; thegeneral notion was then lavishly popularized. 
by Bourbaki. The idea that the ordinary cartesian products could be described by 
universal properties of their projections was formulated about the same time 
(Mac Lane [1948, 19501). On the other hand the notions of limit and colimit have 
a long history in various concrete examples. Thus colimits were used in the proofs 
of theorems in which infinite abelian groups are represented as unions of their 
finitely generated subgroups. Limits (over ordered sets) appear in the p-adic 
numbers of Hensel and in the construction of tech homology and cohomology 
by limit processes as formalized by Pontrjagin. An adequate tteatement of the 
natural isomorphisms occuring for such limits was a major motivation of the 
first Eilenberg-Mac Lane paper on category theory [194S]. E. H. Moore's general 
analysis (about 1913) used limits over certain directed sets. In all these classical casek, 
limits appeared only for functors F: J+C with J a linearly or partly ordered set. 
Then Kan [1960] took the step of considering limits for all functors, while Freyd 
[I9641 for the general case used the word '.root7' in place of "limit". His followers 
have chosen to extend the original word ..limit" to this general meaning. Properties 
special to limits over directed sets will be studied in Chapter IX. 

IV. Adpi.ts 
78 
Adjoints 
1, Adjunctions 
We now present a basic concept due to Kan, which provides a different 
formulation for the properties of free objects and other universal con- 
structions. As motivation, we first reexamine the construction (ยง 111.1) 
of a vector space V, with basis X. For a fixed field K consider the functors 
v 
Set F V c t ,  , 
where, for each vector space W, U(W) 
is the set of all vectors in W, 
so that U is the forgetful functor, while, for any set X, V(X) is the vector 
space with basis X. The vectors of V(X) are thus the formal finite linear 
combinations C r,x, with scalar coefficients ri E K and with each xi e X, 
with the evident vector operations. Each function g : X-, U( 
W) extends 
to a unique linear transformation f: V(X)+ W, 
given explicitly by 
f (Z rix,) = Zri@xi) (i.e., formal linear combinations in V(X) 
to actual 
linear combinations in W ) .  This correspondence w : g r-. f has an inverse 
rp : f w f ] X ,  the restriction of / to X, hence is a bijection 
cp : Vct,(V(X), W) zSet(X, U( 
W)) . 
This bijection rp = cp,, , 
is defined "in the same way" for all sets X and 
all vector spaces W .  This means that the cp,, 
are the components of a 
natural transformation cp when both sides above are regarded as functors 
of X and W. It sufices to verify naturality in X and in W separately. 
Naturality in X means that for each arrow h :  X'+X 
the diagram 
where h* g = g 0 h, will commute. This commutativity follows from the 
definition of 
by a routine calculation, as does also the naturality in W. 
. Note next several similar examples. 
The free category C = FG on a given (small) graph G is a functor 
Grph-+Cat: it is related to the forgetful functor U :  
Cat+Grph by the 
fact (4 11.7) that each morphism D : G--r Lr B of graphs extends to a unique 
map D': FG+B of categories; moreover, Di--D' is a natural isomor- 
phism 
Cat(FG, B) z Crph(G. U B) . 
In thecategory ofsmallsets,each function y : S x T 4 R  oftwo variables 
can be treated as a function vg :S-+hom(T. R) of one variable (in S) 
whose values are functions of a second variable (in TI; explicitly, 
[(~g)s] r =g(s, r) for s E S, t E T. This describes y! as a bijection 
It is natural in S, T, 
and R. If we hold the set 7' fixed and define functors 
F, G:Set-+Set by F(S)=S x T, G(R)=hom(T, R), the bijection takes 
the form 
hom(F(S1, R) r hom(~, 
G(R)) 
natural in S and R, and much like the previous examples. 
For modules A, B, and C over a commutative ring K there is a 
similar isomorphism 
natural in all three arguments. 
Definition. Let A and X be categories. An adjunction fiom X to A 
is a triple (F, G, cp) : X-A, where F and G are functors 
F  
X s d ,  
while cp is a function which assigns to each pair of objects x E X ,  a~ A 
a bijection 
cp = cp,., : A(Fx, a) r X(x, G a) 
(1) 
which is natural in x and a. 
Here the left hand side A(Fx, a) is the bifunctor 
which sends each pair of objects ( x ,  a )  to the hom-set A(Fx, a), and the 
right hand sideisasimilarbifunctor XO* 
x A+Set.Thereforethe naturality 
of the bijection cp means that for all k : a-a' 
and h : xf-x both the 
diagrams : 
A(Fx, a) * + X ( x ,  G,a) 
A(Fx, a) 
*X(x, Ga) 
I 
(Gk). 
( F W  I 
A(Fx, a') ' rX(x, Ga') 
A(Fxf, a) ' hX(x1, Ga) 

Adjunctions 
79 
will commute. Here k ,  is short for A(Fx, k), the operation of composition 
with k. and h* = X(h, Ga). 
This discussion assumes that all the hom-sets of X and A are small. 
If not, we just replace Set above by a suitable larger category Ens of sets. 
An adjunction may also be described without horn-sets directly in 
terms of arrows. It is a bijection which assigns to each arrow f :  Fx-+a 
an arrow cp f = rad f : x+ Ga, the right adjunct o f f ,  in such a way that 
the naturality conditions of (2). 
hold for all f and all arrows k : .x'-x and k : a+a'. It is equivalent to 
require that cp-' 
be natural; i.e., that for every h, k and g :  x-Ga 
one 
has 
cp-'(gh)=cp-'g- F h ,  
cp-'(Gkog)=k cp-'g. 
(4) 
Given such an adjunction, the functor F is said to be a lefr-adjoint 
for G, while G is called a right adjoint for F. (Some authors write F - G ;  
others say that F is the "adjoint" of G and G the '.coadjointW of F, but 
other authors say the opposite; therefore we shall stick to deft" ahd 
"right" adjoints.) 
Every adjunction yields a universal arrow. Specifically, set a = Fx 
in (1). The left hand hom-set of(1) then contains the identity 1 : Fx+Fx; 
call its cp-image q,. By Yoneda's Proposition 111.2.1, this q, is a univerkal 
arrow 
qx: x d G F x ,  
0, = NF,), 
from x g X to G. The adjunction gives such a universal arrow q, for 
every object x. Moreover, the function x-q, 
is a natural transformation 
1,- 
G F because every diagram 
is commutative. This one proves by the calculation 
based on the Eq. (3) describing the naturality of cp. This calculation may 
also be visualized by the commutative diagram 
where h* = X(h, 1 )  and h, = X(l, h). 
Adjoints 
The bijection cp can be expressed in terms of the arrows q, as 
indeed, by the naturality (3) of cp we may compute that 
~ ( f  
) = ( ~ ( f  l ~ x ) = G f -  l ~ x = G f ' q x  
This computation may be visualized by chasing 1 around thecommutative 
square 
A(Fx, Fx) ' X(.u, G Fx) 
1 l-------* tl, 
I.. 
I,~.. I 
I 
A(Fx, a) ' + X ( x ,  Ga) 
f- 
l ~ + c p f = G f : q ~ .  
Dually, the adjunction gives a universal arrow from F. Indeed, 
set x =  Ga in the adjunction (1). The identity arrow 1 : Ga+Ga is now 
present in the right hand hom-set; its image under cp-' 
is called E,, 
to: F G a - + a ,  &,=cp-'(IGa), 
~ E A ,  
and is a universal arrow from F to a. As before, t is a natural transforma- 
tion E :  GF+lA, and 
cp-'(g) = E, 2 Fg 
for 
g : x-+Ga . 
Finally, take x = Ga. Then ta = cp-'(lGO) gives, by the formula (5) for cp, 
This asserts that the composite natural transformation 
G fl .GFG& 
G 
is the identity transformation. 
To summarize, we have proved 
Theorem 1. An adjunction ( F ,  G, cp) : X-A 
determines 
(i) A natural transformation q : 1,*G 
F such that for each object x the 
arrow q, is universal to G from x, while the right adjunct of each f :  F x 4 a  is 
cpf =Gf.q,:x-.Ga; 
(6) 
(ii) A natural transformation E :  FG-I,, 
such that each arrow 8, is 
universal to a from F, while each g : x-. 
Ga has left adjunct 
cp-!g=&,> Fg: Fx-a. 
(7) 
Moreover, both the following composites are the identities (of G, resp. F). 
G*~-GFG 
C" P G ,  F 
F" ,FGF&F. 
(8) 

Adjunctions 
81 
We call q the unit and E the counit of the adjunction. (Formerly, 
we called q a "front adjunction" and E a "back adjunction".) 
The given adjunction is actually already determined by various 
portions of all these data, in the following sense. 
Theorem 2. Each adjunction ( F ,  G, cp) : X- A is completely determined 
by the i t e m  in any one of the following lists:, 
(i) Functors F, G, and a natural transformation q :  lx*GF 
such 
that each q, : x- G Fx is universal to G ,from x. Then cp is defined by (6). 
(ii) The functor G : A+X 
and for each x E X an object Fox E A and 
a universal arrow q, : x- G Fox from x to G. Then the functor F has 
object function Fo and is defined on arrows h : x-x' 
by GFh 0 q, = qx. 0 h. 
(iii) Functors F, G, and a natural rrans$ormation 
E : F G+ I, such 
that each E, : F Ga-a 
is universal from F to a. Here cp-' is defined by (7). 
(iv) The functor F : X+ A and for each a E A an object Goa E X and 
an arrow E, : F Goa+a universal from F to a. 
(v) Functors F, G and natural transformations q : lx+ G F and 
E : F G I .  I, such that both composites (8) are the identity transformations. 
Here cp is defined by (6) and cp-' 
by (7). 
Because of (v), we often denote the adjunction (F, G, (p) by 
(F, 
G, q, E )  : X- A. 
Proof. Ad (i): The statement that q, is universal means that toeeach 
f: x-+Ga there is exactly one g as in the commutative diagram 
This states precisely that ~ ( g )  
= Gg 0 q, defines a bijection 
This bijection w is natural in x because q is natural, and natural in a 
because G is a functor, hence gives an adjunction (F, G, y). In case q 
was the unit obtained from an adjunction (F, G, cp), then y = cp. 
The data (ii) can be expanded to (i), and hence determine the adjunc- 
tion. In (ii) we are given simply a universal arrow (Fox, qx) for every 
object x E X; we shall show that there is exactly one way to make F,, 
the object function of a functor F for which q : 1,rGF will be natural. 
Specifically, for each h : x+x' 
the universality of q, states that there is 
exactly one arrow (dotted) 
Fo x 
x 
q x  rGFox 
I 
82 
Adjoints 
which can make the diagram commute. Choose this arrow as 
Fh : Fox--+Fox1; the commutativity states that q is now natural, and it is 
easy to check that this choice of Fh makes F a functor. 
The proofs of parts (iii) and (iv) are dual. 
To prove part (v) we use q and E to define functions 
A(Fx, a ) + ~ ( x ,  Go) 
by cp f = G f -  q, for each f :  Fx+a and 89 = E, - Fg for each g : x-Ga. 
Then since G is a functor and q is natural 
But our hypothesis (8) states that GE, 
3 qG, = 1. Hence cpe = id. Dualiy 
O q  = id. Therefore cp is a bijection (with inverse 0). It is clearly natural, 
hence is an adjunction (and, if we started with an adjunction, it is the one 
from which we started). 
This theorem is very useful. For example, parts (ii) and (iv) construct 
an adjunction whenever we have a universal arrow from (or to) every 
object of a given category. For example, the category C has finite products 
when for each pair (a, b) E C X C  there is a universal arrow from 
A : C-C 
x C to (a, b). By the theorem above we conclude that the func- 
tion (a, b) --+ a x b giving the product object is actually a functor 
C x C+ C, and that this functor is right adjoint to th; diagonal functor A :  
cp : (C x C) (Ac, (a, b)) s C(c, a x b) 
Using the definition of the arrows in C x C, this is 
c p :  C(c, a) x C(c, b)g C(c,a x b). 
The counit of this adjunction (set c=a x b on the right) is an arrow 
( a  x b, a x b)+(a, 
b ) ;  it is thus just a pair of arrows a c a  x b-b; 
namely, the projections p : a x b+a 
and q : a x b-b 
of the product. 
The adjunction cp-' sends each f :  c+a x b to the pair ( p  f, q f >; this is the 
way in which cp is determined by the counit e. 
Similarly, if the category C has coproducts (a, b )  -a LI b, they 
define a functor C x C-+C which is a left adjoint to A: 
C(a LI b, c) r (C x C) ((a, b), Ac) . 
All the other examples of limits (when they always exist) can be similarly 
read as exan~ples of adjoints. In many further applications, it turns 
out that proving universality is an easy way of showing that adjoints 
are present. 

Adjunctions 
83 
On the other hand, part (v) of the theorem describes an adjunction 
by two simple identities 
on the unit and counit of the adjunction. These triangular identities 
make no explicit use of the objects of the categories A and X, and so are 
easy to manipulate. As we shall soon see, this is convenient for discussing 
properties of adjunctions. (For some authors, these identities are said to 
make q a "quasi-inverse" to E.) 
Corollary 1. Any two lefr-adjoints F and F' of a functor G :  A--rX 
are naturally isomorphic. 
The proof is just an application of the fact that a universal arrow, 
like an initial object, is unique up to isomorphism. Explicitly, adjunctions 
(F, G, cp) and (F', G, I$) give to each x two universal arrows x--r G F x  
and x-+ G F'x; hence there is a unique isomorphism 8, : Fx-F'x 
with 
GO, - q, = I]:; 
it is easy to verify that 0 : Ft+ F' is natural. 
Corollary 2. A functor G: 
A-X 
has a left adjoint if and only if, 
for each x E X, the functor X(x, G a )  is representable as a functor of a E A. 
Zf 
cp : A(F,x, a) 2 X(x, Ga) is a representation of this functor, then Fo is 
the objdct function of a left-adjoint of G for which the bijection cp is natural 
in a and gives the adjunction. 
This is just a restatement of part (ii) of the theorem. ~ ~ u i v a l e n t l ~ ,  
G has a left-adjoint if and only if there is a universal arrow to G from every 
X E X .  
We leave the reader to state the duals. 
Adjoints of additive functors are additive. 
Theorem 3. If the additiue functor G : A- M between Ab-categories 
A and M has a left adjoint F : M-A, then F is additive and the adjunction 
bijections 
cp : A(Fm, a) z M(m, Ga) 
are isomorphisms of abelian groups (for all m E M ,  a E A) 
Proof. If I] : 1-GF 
is the unit of the adjunction, then 50 may be 
written as cp f = G f- q, for any f :  Fm-a. 
If also f' : Fm-a, the ad- 
ditivity of G gives 
cp(f + f '1 = G(f + f O?, = (Gf + G f  ')v, = GS. q, + G f  'O rt, = c p f  + cpf '. 
84 
Adjoints 
Therefore cp is a morphism of abelian groups. Next take g,g' : m+n 
in M. Since q is natural, 
On the other hand, since G is additive, 
The equality of these two results and the universal property of q, show 
that F(g + g') = Fg + Fg'. Hence F is additive. 
Dually, any right adjoint of an additive functor is additive. 
Exercises 
1. Show that Theorem 2 can.have an added clause (and its dual): 
(vi) A functor G : A+X and for each x c  X a representation cp, of the functor 
X(x, G -) : A+Set. 
2. (Lawvcre). Given functors G: A 4 X  and F : X-+ A, show that each adjunction 
(F, G, r p )  can be described as an isomorphism 0 of comma categories such that 
the following diagram commutes 
Here the vertical maps have components the projection functors P and Q. 
3. For the adjunction (A, x , cp) - product right adjoint to diagonal - show that 
the unit 6, : c 4 c  x c for each object c E Cis the unique arrow such that the diagram 
C 
commutes. (This arrow 6, is often called the diagonal arrow of c.) If C =Set, 
show that 6,x = (x, X) for x E C, 
4. (Park). Given functors G: 
A+X 
and K: 
X+A and natural transformations 
E :  KG--idA, 
Q :  idx+GK such that Ge-qG= I,: G- GKG-r G, prove that 
EK K Q : K-K 
is an idempotent in AX and that G has a left adjoint if and only if 
this idempotent splits; explicitly if e K  KQ splits as a .  j with /3 a = l and 
B : K+F, then F is a left adjoint of G with unit GB. 
Q and wunit E .  aG. 
2. Examples of Adjoints 
We now summarize a number of examples of adjoints, beginning with 
a table of left-adjoints of typical forgetful functors. 

Examples of Adjoints 
Forgerful functor 
U : R-Mod-rSet 
U : Cat + Crph 
U : Ab-, Grp 
U : Rng--Man 
(cf. Exercise 111.1.1) 
U: Fld-rDcm, 
(cf. 9 111.1) 
U : Compmet-rMet 
Left adjoint F 
X w F X  
Free R-module, basis X 
GwCG 
Free category on graph G 
X w F X  
Free group, generators 
x e X  
XwF,X 
Free abelian group on X 
GI- 
G/[G, GI 
. 
Factor commutator group 
A r R @ A  
M w Z ( M )  
(integral) monoid ring 
VwTV 
Tensor algebra on V 
DwQD 
Field of quotients 
Unit of adjunction 
j: X+UFX(cf.ยง 111.1) 
"insertion of generators" 
G+UCG 
"insertion of generators" 
X-rUFX 
"insertion of generators" 
"insertion of generatorsw 
G+ GICG. GI 
projection on the quotient 
A+U(R@ A) 
a w 1 8 a  
A+U(A@S) 
a w l @ a  
M-+UZM 
m w m  
V C  TV 
inclusion of generators 
D C U Q D  
inclusion of D : a wall 
Completion of metric space (# 111.1) 
There is a similar description of counits. For exampfe, in the free 
R-module FX generated by elements j x  = ( x )  for x E X ,  the elements 
may be written as finite sums Z ri(xi) with scalars ri E R. Then for any 
R-module A the counit E., : F U A+ A is Z 
r,(ai) I-.Z r,ai (linear com- 
binations in A). In other words e~ is the epimorphism appearing in the 
standard representation of an arbitrary R-module as a quotient of a 
free module (the free module on its own elements as generators). 
Next, we list some left and right adjoints (which need not mist in 
every category C) for diagonal functors: 
Diagonal 
Adjoint 
functor 
Unit 
Counit 
A : C-C x C 
Lett: Coproduct 
(pair of) injections 
"folding" map 
Li:CxC+C 
i:a-raUb 
cUc+c 
(a, b)++aI.I b 
j:b+aLlb 
i x r x ,  ~ X W X  
Right: Product 
Diagonal arrow 
(pair on projections 
lT:CxC.-.C 
d,:c-+cxc 
p:axb-a 
(a,b)woxb 
x +. 
(x, X) 
q:axb+b 
86 
Diagonal 
functor 
C+l 
A : C?CLL 
(111.3.6) 
(111.4.7) 
A  : C--C'" 
A :  C 4 C J  
Left: Initial object s 
Right: Terminal object t 
Left: Coequalizer 
(f, g) rcoeq. object e 
Right: Equalizer d 
(f, g) bequal. object 
Left: (Vertex of) pushout 
(111.3.7) 
Right: (Vertex of) pullback 
(111.4.8) 
Left: Colimit object 
Right: Limit object 
Adjoints 
Coequalizing arrow 
Identity 
(f, 
I : c-c 
Identity 
Equalizing arrow 
(d, d)+<f, g )  
Universal cone 
Universal cone 
In the case of limits, the form of the unit depends on the number 
of connected components of J. Here a category J is called connected 
when to any two objects j, k E J there is a finite sequence of arrows 
j=jo-j,~j2-.,.-+j2,,-, tj2,,= 
k 
(both directions possible) 
joining j to k (see Exercises 7, 8). 
Duality functors provide further examples. For vector spaces V, W  
over a field K, the dual b is a contravariant functor on Vct to Vct, 
given on objects by b V = Vct(V, K) 
with the usual vector space structure 
and on arrows h : V-+ W as b h  : D W-8 V, where (D h) f = f h for 'each 
f: W-+K. A function 
- 
is defined for ~ : v + B w  by [(cph)w]v=(hv)w for all v e V ,  W E  W. 
Since cps,cpv,w 
is the identity, each cp is a bijection. The contravariant 
functor D leads to two different (covariant!) functors with the same object 
function, 
D : vCtOp--r vct , 
DO" : vct-4 vctop , 
defined (as usual) for arrows hop : W-+ 
V and h : V+ W by 
The bijection cp of (1) above may now be written as 
Vctop(Dop 
W, V )  z Vet( W, D V) , 
(2) 
natural in V and W. Therefore DOP is the left adjoint of D. (Warning: 
It is not a right adjoin: of D, 
sees V.5, Exercise 2.) If K, : w - . B ~  MI is the 
usual canonical map to the double dual, the unit of the adjunction 

Examples of Adjoints, 
8.7 
88 
Adjoints 
(set V = DOP Win (2)) is this map q, = K,+, : W-+DDOP W, and the ooPit 
is an arrow E,,: DOPD V--,V in VctOP which turns out to be E , = ( K ~ ~  
for the same K 
This example illustrates the way in which adjunctions may replace 
isomorphisms of categories For finite dimensional vector spaces, D 
and DOP are isomorphisms; for the general case, this is not true, but D is 
the right adjoint of Dop. 
This example also bears on adjoints for other contravariant functors. 
Two contravariant functors ffrom A to X and Tfrom X to A are "adjoint 
on the right" (Freyd) when there is a bijection A(a, T x )  r X(x, fa), 
natural in a and x. We shall not need this terminology, because we can 
replace 5 and T by the covariant functors S : AoP-+X and T: XoD+ A 
and form the dual Sop : A-+XoP, also covariant: thus the natural bijection 
above becomes XOP(S"Pa, x) z A(a, Tx), and so states that PP is left 
adjoint (in our usual sense) to T - or, equivalently, that Top is left adjoint 
to S. It is not necessarily equivalent to say that Tand 3 are adjoint 
"on the left". 
The next three sections will be concerned with three other types of 
adjoints: A left adjoint to an inclusion functor (of a full subcategory) 
is called a reflection; certain other special sorts of 'adjoints are 
"equivalences" of categories. Some other amusing examples of adjoints 
are given in the exercises to follow, some of which require knowledge 
of the subject matter involved. Goguen [I9711 shows for finite state 
machines that the functor "minimal realization" is left adjoint to the 
functor."behavior". The reader is urged t o  find his own examples as well. 
Exercises 
1. For K a field and V a vector space over K, there is an "exterior algebra" E(V), 
which is a graded, anticommutative algebra. Show that E is the left adjoint 
of a suitable forgetful functor (one which is not faithful). 
2. Show that the functor U : R-Mod--.Ab has not only a left adjoint A - R @ A ,  
but also a right adjoint At.hom,(R, A). 
3. For K a field, let Lie, be the category of all (small) Lie algebras L over K. 
with arrows the morphisrns of K-modules which also preserve the Lie bracket 
operation (a, b) t. [a, b]. Let V : Alg,+ Lie, be the functor which assigns toeach 
(associative) algebra A the Lie algebra V A  on the same vector space, with 
bracket [a, b] = ab - ba for a, b E A. Using the Poincar&Birkhoff-Witt Theorem 
show that the functor E, where EL is the enveloping associative algebra of L, 
is a left adjoint for V. 
4. Let Rng' denote the category of rings R which do not necessarily have an identity 
element for multiplication. Show that the standard processofadding an identity 
to R provides a left adjoint for the forgetful functor Rng-Rng' 
(forget the 
presence of the identity). 
5. If a monoid .\.I is regarded as a discrete category, with object> thc. elements 
X E  iLI. then the multiplication of M is a bifunctor 1 1 :  I1 x .\I-.\[ 
(f .M is a 
group. show that :M(?.,x-' Z )  = .L~(.YJ. 
:)= .ll(r, 
:!.-I) 
pro~idrs right adjoints 
for both functors p(s. - I and ,I( -. y) : M-.M 
Conwrselj. docs the presence 
of such adjoints make a monoid into a group? 
6. Describe units and counits for pushout and pullback. 
7. If the category J is a disjoint union (coproduct) U J, of categories J,. for index 
k in some set K ,  with 1, : J,+ J the injections of the coproduct. thcn euch functor 
F: J--rC determines functors Fk = FI, : J,-.C. 
(a) Prove that LimF z /7, LimF,. if the limits on the right exist. 
(b) Show that every category J is a disjoint union of connected categories 
(called the corrwctrd cornponrrlts of J). 
(c) Conclude that all limits can be obtained from products and limits over 
connected categories. 
8. (a) If the category J is connected, prove for any c E C that Lim.Jc = c and 
Colim A c = c, where ii c : J+ C is the diagonal functor. 
(b) Describe the unit for the right adjoint to A :  C+CJ. 
9. (Smythe). Show that the functor 0: 
Cat-+Set assigning to each category C 
the set of its objects has a left adjoint D which assigns to each set ,Y the discrete 
category on X, and that D in turn has a left adjoint assigning to each category 
the set of its connected components. Also show that 0 has a right adjoint 
which assigns to each set X a category with objects X and exactly one arrow 
in every horn-set. 
10. If a category C has both cokernel pairs and equalizers. show that the functor 
K: C2-Cu 
which assigns to each arrow of C its cokernel pair has as right 
adjoint the functor which assigns to each parallel pair ofarrows its equalizing 
arrow. 
1 I. If C has finite coproducts and a E C, prove that the projection Q :(a 1 C)--C 
of the comma category (Q(a+c) = c) has a left adjoint. with c+(u--ru Ll c). 
12. If X is a set and C a category with powers and copowers, prove that the copower 
CI-X . c is left adjoint to the power cwcX. 
3. Reflective Subcategories 
For many of the forgetful functors U :  
A-X 
listed in S 2, the counit 
E :  FU+IA of the adjunction assigns to each a โฌ  A the epimorphism 
E, : F(Ua)-+a which gives the standard representation of a as a quotient 
of a free object. This is a general fact: Whenever a right adjoint G is 
faithful, every counit ea of the adjunction is epi. 
Theorem 1. For an adjunction ( F ,  G, q, .i) 
: X - 
A : (i) G is faithful 
if and only $ every component E, of the counit E is epi, (iil G is full i j  and 
only if every E, is a split monic. Hence G is full and faithful if and only 
if each E, is an isomorphism F G a  z a. 
The proof depends on a lemma. 

Reflective Subcategories 
89 
Lemma. Let f* : A(a, - )+ A(b, - ) be the natural transformation 
induced by an arrow f: 
b+a of A. Then f * is rnonic if and only i f f  is epi, 
while f * is epi if and only i f f  is a split rnonic (i.e., if and only i f f  has a 
left inverse). 
Note that f * +-+ f is the bijection Nat(A(a, - ), A(b, - ))r 
A(b, a) 
given by the Yoneda lemma. 
Observe, also, that for functors S, T: C-r B, a natural transformation 
r : S* 
T is epi (respectively, rnonic) in BC if and only if every component 
r, : S,- 
T, is epi (respectively, monic) in B for B =Set; this follows by 
Exercise 111.4.4, computing the product pointwise as in Exercise 111.5.5. 
Proof. For h E A(a, c), f * h = h f .  Hence the first result is just the 
definition of an epi f .  If f * is epi, there is an ho : a+b 
with 
f * ho = ho f = 1 : b-+b, so f has a left inverse. The converse is immediate. 
Now we prove the theorem. Apply the Yoneda Lemma to the natural 
transformation (arrow function of G followed by the adjunction) 
It is determined (set c = a )  by the image of 1 : a-+a, which is exactly the 
definition of the counit 8,: FGa-a. But cp-' is an isomorphism, hence 
this natural transformation is rnonic or epi, respectively, when every G,., 
is injective or surjective, respectively; that is, when G is faithful or full, 
respectively. The result now follows by the lemma. 
A subcategory A ofB is called reflective in B when the inclusion functor 
K :  A+B has a left adjoint F :  B-A. 
This functor F may be called a 
rejector and the adjunction (F, K, 
cp) = (F, cp) : B-A a reflection of B 
in its subcategory A. Since the inclusion functor K is always faithful, 
the counit E of a reflection is always epi. A reflection can be described in 
terms of the composite functor R = K F : B-B; indeed, A c B is reflective 
in B if and only if there is a functor R : B +B with values in the subcategory 
A and a bijection of sets 
natural in b E B and a E A. A reflection may be described in terms of 
universal arrows: A C B is reflective if and only if to each b E B there is 
an object R b of the subcategory A and an arrow qb : b-+Rb such that 
every arrow g: b - U E A  has the form g=f. qb for a unique arrow 
f: 
Rb-a 
of A. As usual, R is then (the object function of) a functor 
B-B (with values in A). 
If a full subcategory A C B is reflective in B, then by Theorem 1 each 
object 4 E A is isomorphic to F Ko, and hence R a z a for all a. 
Dually, A C  B is cor@?ectiw in B when the inclusion functor A-+B 
has a right adjoint. (Warning: Mitchell [I9651 has interchanged the 
meanings of "reflection" and -coreflection".) 
90 
Adjoin ts 
Here are some examples. Ab is reflective in Grp. For, if 
G/[G, GI is the usual factor-commutator group of a group G, then 
horn(G/[G, GI, A ) z  hom(G, A )  for A abelian, and Ab is full in Grp. 
Or consider the category of all metric spaces X, with arrows uniformly 
continuous functions. The (full) subcategory of complete metric spaces 
is reflective; the reflector sends each metric space to its completion. 
Again, consider the category of all completely regular Hausdorff spaces 
(with arrows all continuous functions). The (full) subcategory of all 
compact Hausdorffspaces is reflective: the reflector sends each completely 
regular space to its stone-Cech compactification. 
A coreflective subcategory of Ab is the full subcategory of all torsion 
abelian groups (a group is torsion if all elements have finite order); 
the coreflector sends each.abelian group A to the subgroup T A  of all 
elements of finite order in A. 
Exercises 
I. Show that the table of dual statements (8 11.1) extends as follows: 
Statement 
Dual statetnmt 
S, T :  C-+B are functors 
S, T: C+B are functors 
T is full 
T is full 
T is faithful 
T is faithful 
: S--. T is a natural transformation. 
q : T+S is a natural transformation 
(F, G, cp) : X - A  is an adjunction 
( G ,  F, cp-I) : A - X  is an adjunction 
is the unit of (F. G, cp). 
q is the counit of,(G, F, cp- I). 
2. Show that the torsion-free abelian groups form a full reflective subcategory of Ab. 
3. If (G, F, cp) : X - A  
is an adjunction with G full and every unit q, a monic, 
then every q, is also epi. 
4. Show the following subcategories to bc reflective. 
(a) The full subcategory of all partial orders in thecategory Preord ofall preorders, 
with arrows all monotone functions. 
(b) The full subcategory of To-spaces in Top. 
5. Given an adjunction (F, G, cp) : X -  A, prove that G is faithful if and only if cp-I 
carries epis to epis. 
6. Givenan adjunction (F, G, q, E )  with either F or G full, prove that GE : GFG--,G 
is invertible with inverse q G : G-r G FG. 
7. If A is a full and reflective subcategory of B, prove that every functor S : J-+A 
with a limit in B has a limit in A. 
4. Equivalence of Categories 
A functor S: A+C 
is an isomorphism of categories when there is a 
functor T :  C + A (backwards) such that S T = 1 : C -+ C and 
TS= 1 : A--+A. In this case, the identity natural transformations 

Equivalence of Categories 
91 
q : 1 +ST and 
E : TS+ 1 make (T, S; q, E )  : C- A an adjunction. 
In other words, a two-sided inverse T of a functor S is a left-adjoint 
of S - and for that matter, T is also a right-adjoint of S. 
There is a more general (and more useful) notion: 
A functor S : A-C is an equivalence of categories (and the categories 
A and C are equivalent) when there is a functor T: C-A (backwards) 
and natural isomorphisms S T s 1 : C-. C and TS z 1 : A+ A. In this 
case T: C+A is also an equivalence of categories. We shall soon see 
that T is then both a,left adjoint and a right adjoint of S. 
Here is an example. In any category C a skeleton of C is any full 
subcategory A such that each object of C is isomorphic (in C )  to exactly 
one object of A. Then A is equivalent to C and the inclusion K : A- C is 
an equivalence of categories. For, select to each c E C an isomorphism 
8, : c r Tc with Tc an object of A. Then we can make Ta functor T: C-+ A 
in exactly one way so that 8 will become a natural isomorphism 8: 1 z K T. 
Moreover TK z 1, so K is indeed an equivalence: A category is equivalent 
to (any one of) its skeletons. For example, the category of all finite sets 
has as a skeleton the full subcategory with objects all finite ordinal 
numbers 0, 1, 2, ..., n, ... . (Here 0 is the empty set and each 
n={O, 1, ..., n -  11.) 
A category is called skeletal when any two isomorphic objects are 
identical; i.e., when the category is its own skeleton. 
An adjoinrequivalenceofcategories is an adjunction (T, S; q, E )  : C-A 
in which both the unit q : I-S T  and the counit E : TS+I are natural 
isomorphisms: I z ST, T S s  I .  Then 1-' and E-' 
are also natural 
isomorphisms, and the triangular identities E T -  T q =  1, S & - q S =  1 
can be written as Tq-' 
E-' T  = 1, q-' S . SE-' = 1 ,  respectively. These 
identities then state that (S, T, E - ' ,  q-') : A-C 
is an adjunction with 
E - I  : I-TS 
as unit and q-' : ST-I 
as counit. Thus in an qdjoint 
equivalence (T, S, -, - ) the functor T: C-. A is the left adjoint of 
S : A+ C with unit q and at the same time T  is the right adjoint of S, 
with unit E - I .  
We can now state the main facts about equivalence. 
Theorem 1 .  The following properties of a functor S :  A+C 
are 
, 
logically equivalent: 
i) S is an equivalence of categories, 
ii) S is part of an adjoint equivalence (T, S; q, E )  : C-A, 
iii) S is full and faithful, and each object c E C is isomorphic to Sa 
for some object a E A. 
Proof. Trivially, (ii) implies (i). To prove that (i) implies (iii), note 
that S T  s 1 shows that each c E C has the form c z S(Tc) for an a = T c  E A. 
The natural isomorphism 8 : TS r I gives for each f :  ads' the com- 
92 
Adjoints 
mutative square 
TSa 
On +a 
Hence f = 8,. TS f 0,' ; it follows that S is faithful. Symmetrically, 
S T 2  I proves T faithful. To show S full, consider any h : Sa-.Saf 
and set f = O,.J T h  8,'. Then the square above commutes also with 
Sf replaced by h, so TS f = Th. Since T is faithful, S/ = h, which means 
that S is full. 
To prove that (iii) implies (ii) we must construct from S a (left) ad- 
joint T. For each c E C we can choose some object a, = T,c E A and an 
isomorphism q, : 
For every arrow f :  c-Sa, the composite fi q;' has the form Sg for 
some g because S is full; this g is unique because S is faithful. In other 
words, f = Sg o q, for a unique g, so q, is universar from c to S. There- 
fore To can be made a functor T: C-+A in exactly one way so that 
q :  1+S T is natural, and then T is the left adjoint of S with unit the 
isomorphism q. As with any adjunction, SE, qSa = 1 (put c = Sa, .f = 1 
in the diagram above). Thus SE, =(qS,)-' is invertible. Since S is full and 
faithful, the counit E, is also invertible. Therefore ( T ,  S; q, E )  : C - A  
is an adjoint equivalence, and the proof is complete. 
In this proof, suppose that A is a full subcategory of C and that 
S = K : A -+ C is the insertion. For objects a E A C C we can then choose 
a, = a = K a  and q,, the identity. Then KE, = 1 ,  hence E, = 1 for all a. 
This proves 
Proposition 2. If A is a full subcategory of C and every CE C is iso- 
morphic (in C) to some object of A, then the insertion K :  A+C is an 
equivalence and is part of an adjoint equivalence (T, K ; q, 1 )  : C- A 
with counit the identity. Therefore A is reflective in C. 
This includes in particular the case already noted, when A is a 
skeleton of C. 
A functor F : X 4  A is said to be a leji-adjoint-left-inverse of G : A-X 
when there is an adjunction (F; G; q, 1 )  : X - A  with counit the identity. 
This means (Exercise 4) that G is an isomorphian of A to a reflective 
subcategory of X. In the case of the Proposition 2 just above, we have 
shown that the insertion A-+C has a left-adjoint-left-inverse. 

Adjoints for Preorders 
93 
94 
Adjoints 
Duality theorems in functional analysis are often instances of equiv- 
alences. For example, let CAb be the category of compact topological 
abelian groups, and let P assign to each such group G its character group 
PG, consisting of all continuous homomorphisms G-+R/Z. The 
Pontrjagin duality theorem asserts that P :  CAb-+AboP is an equivalence 
of categories. Similarly, the Gelfand-Naimark theorem states that the 
functor C which assigns to each compact Hausdorff space X its abelian 
C*-algebra of continuous complex-valued functions is an equivalence 
of categories (see Negrepontis [1971]). 
Exercises 
1. Prove: (a) Any two skeletons of a category C are isomorphic. 
(b) If A, is a skeleton of A and C ,  a skeleton of C ,  then A and C are equivalent 
if and only if A, and Co are isomorphic. 
2. (a) Prove: the composite of two equivalences D-C, C-A is an equivalence. 
(b) State and prove the corresponding fact for adjoint equivalences. 
3. If S : A-C is full, faithful, and surjective on objects (each c E C is c = So for 
some a s  A), prove that there is an adjoint equivalence <T,S; I, E )  :C-A 
with unit the identity (and thence that T is a left-adjoint-right-inverse of S). 
4. Given a functor G: A-rX, prove the three following conditibns logically 
equivalent: 
(a) G has a left-adjoint-left-inverse, 
(b) G has a left adjoint, and is full, faithful, and injective on objects. 
(c) There is a full reflective subcategory Y of X and an isomorphism H : A  r Y 
such that G = K H, where K : Y+ X is the insertion. 
5. If J is a connected category and A : C - + C J  has a left adjoint (colimit), show that 
this left adjoint is a left-adjoint-left -mverse. 
' 
5. Adjoints for Preorders 
Recall that a preorder P is a set P = {p, p', . . .) equipped with a reflexive 
and transitive binary relation p $ p', and that preorders may be regarded 
as categories so that order-preserving functions become functors. An 
order-reversing function 
on P to Q is then a functor L: P+Q"P. 
Theorem 1 .  (Galois connections are adjoint pairs). Let P, Q be two 
preorders and L : P+QoP, R : Qop+ P two order-preserving functions. 
Then L (regarded as a functor) is a left adjoint to R if and only if,,for all 
p e p a n d  ~ E Q ,  
L p z q  in Q ifandonlyif p S R q  in P .  
(1) 
When this is the case, there is exactly one adjunction q d i n g  L the lefl 
adjoint of R. Forallpandq,pSRLpand LRq2q;hencealso 
Proof. Recall that P becomes a category in which there is (exactly) 
one arrow p+p' whenever p 5 p'. Thus the condition (1) states precisely 
that there is a bijection homQOp(Lp, 
q) z hom,(p, Rq); siwe eachhom- 
set has at most one element, this bijection is automatically natural. 
The unit of the adjunction, is the inequality p 5 RLp for all p, while 
thecounit is L R q  2 q for allq. The two Eqs. (2) are the triangular identities 
connecting unit and counit. In the convenient case when both P and Q 
are posets (i.e., when both the relations 5 are antisymmetric) these 
conditions become L = L R L, and R = R L R (each three passages reduce 
to one !). 
A pair of order-preserving functions L and R which satisfy (1) is 
called a Galois connection from P to Q. Here is the fundamental example,, 
for a group .G acting on a set U, by (a, x) w o  - x  for o~ G, x E U .  
Take P =3(U), 
the set of all subsets X C U ,  ordered by inclusion, while 
Q = 9(G) is the set of subsets S C G also ordered by inclusion (S 6 S' if 
andonly ifSCS'). Let LX={aIx~Xirnplies cr-X=X},RS={XIOES 
implies a x = x) ; in other words, LX is the subgroup of G which fixes 
all points x E X and RS is the set of fixed points of the automorphisms 
ofS.Then L X z S i n Q i f a n d  only i f a . x = x  f o r a l l a ~ S a n d a l l x ~ X ,  
which in turn holds if and only if X 
RS in P. Therefore, L and R form 
an adjoint pair (a Galois connection). The original instance is that with 
G a group of automorphisms of a field U ,  as in the classical Galois theory. 
If U and V are sets, the set .P(U) of all subsets of U is a preorder 
under inclusion. For each function f: U+ V the direct image f,, defined 
by f,(X) = { f (x) I x E XJ is an order-preserving function and hence a 
functor f, : P(U)+P(V). The inverse image f *(Y) = { x  If x = y for 
some y E Y} defines a functor'f * : 9(V)--,g(IJ) in the opposite direction. 
Since f, X c Y if and only if X C f * Y, the direct image functor f, is 
left adjoint to the inverse image functor f *. 
Certain adjoints for Boolean algebras are closely related to the basic 
connectives in logic. We again regard P(U) as a preorder, and hence as a 
category. The diagonal functor A : B(U)-.P(U) x P(U) has (as we have 
already noted) a right adjoint n, sending subsets X, Y to their inter- 
section XnY, and a left adjoint u, with (X, Y ) b X u  Y, the union. 
If X is a fixed subset of U, then intersection with X is a functor 
X n  - : S(U)-@(U). Since X n  Y 
Z if and only if Y $ X'uZ, where 
X' is the complement of X in U, the right adjoint of X n  - is X' u - . 
Thus the construction of suitable adjoints yields the Boolean operations 
n, u, and ' corresponding to "and, "or", and "not". Now consider 
the first projection P: U x V-+U from the product of two sets U and V. 
Each subset S C  U x V defines two corresponding subsets of U by 
P , S = ( x 3 y  
and 
( x , y ) ~ S ) ,  
P, S = {x 1 V y, y E V 
implies 
( x ,  y) S} ; 

Cartesian Closed Categories 
95 
they arise from (x, y) E S by applying the existential quantifier 3y, 
.-there exists a y" and the universal quantifier Vy, "for all y", respectively. 
Also P,S is the direct image of S under the projection P. Now for all 
subsets X c U one has 
S ~ P * X 9 P * S ~ X ;  
P * X ~ S o X i P , S ,  
where -o" 
means -.if and only if'. These state that P*, the inverse image 
operation, has both a left adjoint P, and a right adjoint P,. In this sense, 
both quantifiers 3 and V can be interpreted as adjoints. 
There is also a geometric interpretation: P*X is the cylinder 
X x  VcUxVoverthebaseXCU, P,SistheprojectionofS~UxVon 
the base U, and P, S is the largest subset X of U such that the cylinder on 
X is wholly contained in S. 
Exercises 
1. Let H be a space with an inner product (e.g., Hilbert space). If P = Q is the set 
of all subsets S of H, ordered by inclusion, show that LS = RS = the orthogonal 
complement of S gives a Galois connection. 
2. In a Galois connection between posets, show that the subset (pip= RLp} of 
P equals { p ( p  = Rq for some q} and give a bijection from this set to the subset 
{ q  / q = LRq} of Q. What are these sets in the case of a group of automorphisms 
of a field? Does this generalize to an arbitrary adjunction? 
3. For C a category with pullbacks, each arrow f :a-ral defines a functor 
(Ci f )  = fa: (C j a)--+(Cla1) which carries each object x+a of (Cia) to the 
composite x-+a+a'. Show that f, has a right adjoint J* with f *(x'+a')=y-+u, 
where y is the vertex of the pullback of a+a'+xf. 
6. Cartesian Closed Categories 
Much of the force of category theory will be seen to reside in using 
categories with specified additional structures. One basic example will 
be the closed categories (4 VII. 7); at present we can define readily one 
useful special case, "cartesian closed". 
To assert that a category C has all finite products and coproducts is to 
assert that the functors C--r 1 and A : C+ C x C have both left and right 
adjoints. Indeed, the left adjoints give initial object and coprodud. 
respectively, while the right adjoints give terminal object and product, 
respectively. 
Using just adjoints we will now define "cartesian closed category". 
A category C with all finite products specifically given is called cartesian 
closed when each of the following functors 
96 
Adjoints 
has a specified right adjoint (with a specified adjunction). These adjoints 
are written as follows 
Thus to specify the first is to specify a terminal object t in C, and specifying 
the second is specifying for each pair of objects a, b E C a product object 
a x b together with its projections a c a  x b + +  
b. These projections 
determine the adjunction (they constitute the counit of the adjunction); 
as already noted, x is then a bifunctor. The third required adjoint 
specifies for each functor - x b: C+C a right adjoint, with the corre- 
sponding bijection 
natural in a and in c. By the parameter theorem (to be proved in the next 
section), (b, c)-&'is 
then (the object function ot) a bifunctor Cop x C-C. 
Specifying the adjunction amounts to specifying for each c and ban arrow e 
which is natural in c and universal from - x b to c. We call e= e,, 
the 
evaluation map. It amounts to the ordinary evaluation (f, 
x) H f x of a 
function f at an argument x in both of the following cases: 
Set is a cartesian closed category, with cb = hom(b, c). 
Cat is cartesian closed, with CB the functor category. 
A closely related example is the functor 
which has a right adjoint hom,(B, -); the adjunction is determined by 
a counit horn, (B, A) @,B+ A given by evaluation. 
Exercises 
1. (a) If U is any set, show that the preorder 9(U) 
of all subsets of U is a cartesian 
closed category. 
(b) Show that any Boolean algebra, regarded as a preorder, is cartesian closed. 
2. In some elementary theory T, consider the set S =  {p, q, ...} of sentences of T 
as a preorder, with p s q  meaning "p entails q" (i.e., q is a consequence of p 
on the basis of the axioms of T). Prove that S is a cartesian closed category, 
with product given by conjunction and exponential q p  given by "p implies q". 
3. In any cartesian closed category,, prove c'r c and Pxb'z (fl. 
4. In any cartesian closed category obtain a natural transformation cb x ba-rP 
which agrees in Set with composition of functions. Prove it (like composition) 
associative. 
5. Show that A cartesian closed need not imply A' cartesian closed. 

Transformations of Adjoints 
97 
7. Transformations of Adjoints 
We next study maps comparing different adjunctions. Given two 
adjunctions 
we define a map of adjunctions (from the first to the second adjunction) 
to be a pair of functors K : A--, A' and L : X--+XI such that both squares 
of functors commute, and such that the diagram of hom-sets and 
adjunctions 
K = K F x , .  
' 
x'xf", 
Af(KFx, Ka) 
X'(Lx, LGa) 
II 
II 
A1(F'Lx, Ka) " r X1(Lx, G'Ka) 
commutes for all objects x E X and a E A. Here K,,,, is the map f I+K f 
given by the functor K. 
Proposition 1. Given adjunctions (1) and functors K and L satisfying (2), 
the condition (3) on horn-sets is equivalent to Lq = q'L and also to E'K = KE. 
Proof. Given (3) commutative, set a= Fx and chase the identity 
arrow 1 : Fx--+ Fx to get the units q, q' and the equality 
(Lq: L+LGF) = (q'L: L+GIF'L) , 
where LGF = G'F'L by (2). Conversely, given the equality Lq = q'L of 
natural transformations, the definition of the adjunctions cp and Q' by 
their units gives (3). The case of the counits is dual io this one. 
Next, given two adjunctions 
between the same categories, two natural transformations 
a: F-rF', 
T :  G ' r G  
98 
Adjoints 
are said to be cotgiugate (for the given adjunctions) when the diagram 
V' 
A(F1x, 
I 
a) 2 X ( x ,  
I G'a) 
1 
A(Fx, a) 2 X(x, Ga) 
commutes for every pair of objects x E X, a E A. 
Theorem 2. Given the two adjunctions (4), the natural transformations 
a and t are conjugate ifand only if any one of the.fotir following diagrams 
(of natural transformations) commutes 
GFG' 
GaG. b GF'G', 
FG'F' 
FGF', 
Also, given the adjunctions (4) and the natural transformation a :  F+F', 
there is a unique T : G ' r G  such that the pair (a, T )  is conjugate. Dually, 
given (4) and T ,  there is a unique a with (a, T) conjugate. 
Proof. First, (5) implies (6) and (5) implies (7). For, put x = G'a in (5), 
start with the identity arrow 1 : G'a+ G'a in the upper right and use the 
description of cp and cp' by unit and counit to chase this element 1 around 
the diagram as follows 
The result (lower right) is the first equality of (6). A slightly different 
chase yields 
The resulting equality is the first diagram of (7). The second halves of (6) 
and (7)'are duals. 

Transformations of Adjoints 
99 
100 
Adjoints 
Next. suppose a but not r given. Then the Yoneda Lemma applied 
to the composite transformation cp (a,)* 9'-' 
(three legs of (5)) shows 
that there is a unique family of arrows rb for which (5) commutes, and this 
family is a natural transformation. Since each E, : FGa-a 
is universal 
from F to a, there is also a unique family of arrows r;' for which the first 
of (7) commutes. Since (5) implies (7), 7; = rl. In other words, if s = r" 
makes the first square of(7) commute, it also makes (5) commute. Therefore 
the first square of (7) implies (5). Given a, there is immediately a unique 
natural transformation r : G'-G 
for which the first of (6) commutes; 
since (5) implies (6), rb = r,, and hence the solutions rb of (5) are necessarily 
natural; moreover (6) implies (5). 
The reader may also show that (6) implies (5) or (7) by constructing 
suitable diagrams of natural transformations. 
We now regard a conjugate pair (a, r )  of natural transformations as a 
transformation (or morphism) from the first to the second adjunction. 
The "vertical" composite of two such 
(F, G, 4, E )  
(F';Gf, qr, E')(- 
( F ,  G", qtl, 6") 
(8) 
is evidently (say by condition (5)) a transformation (a', r') a (a, r) 
= (a' o, r . r') from the first to the third adjunction. For the two given 
categories X and A  we thus have a new category ~
(
~
~
j
)
~
,
 
the category of 
adjunctions from X  to A ;  its objects are the adjunctions (F, G;q,'E): 
its arrows are the transformations (conjugate pairs) (a, s), with the 
composition just noted. Also there are two evident "forgetful" functors 
to the ordinary functor categories, as follows 
A typical example for Set is the bijection 
hom(S x T, R) r hom(S, hom(T, R)) 
(9) 
discussed in Q 1 as an example of an adjunction (for each fixed set T). If 
t : T+T' is a function between two such sets, then - x t is a natural 
tran formation of functors - x T-- - x T'. Its conjugate is the natural 
trans \ 
rmation hom(t, -): hom(T', -)+ hom(T, -); this is, as it should 
be, in the reverse direction, corresponding to the fact that S x T is 
covariant and hom (T, R) contravariant in the argument T. We may call 
(9) an adjunction with a "parameter" TโฌSet. For a commutative ring 
K the adjunction hlod,(A@,B, C) 2 ModK(A, Hom,(B, C)) has a para- 
meter B E  Mod,. Here is general statement: 
Theorem 3 (Adjut~ctions with a parameter). Gitm a bifunctor 
F :  X x P-+A, assutne jior each object p~ P that F(-,p): X + A  has a 
right adjoint G(p, -) : A--+X, cia an adjunction 
hom (F (x, p), a) z hom (x, G ( p ,  a)) , 
( 10) 
natural in x and a. There is then a unique way to assign to each arrow 
h : p-+p' of P and each object a E A an arrow G(h, a) : G(pl, a)-+G(p, a) of 
X so that G becomes a bifunctor Pop x A+X for which the bijection of 
the adjunction (10) is natural in all three variables x, p, and a.'This 
assignment of arrows G(h, a) to (h, a )  may also be described as the unique 
way to make G(h, - ) a natural transformation conjugate to F(-, h). 
Proof. The condition that the adjunction (10) be natural in p E P is 
the commutativity of the square 
hom (F (x, p), a) r hom (x, G (p, a)) 
I 
F ( x .  hi* 
I 
G(h,a)r 
hom(F(x, p'), a) r hom(x, G(p', a)) 
This commutativity (for all a) states precisely that G(h,-) : G(pt,-)+G(p,-) 
must be chosen as the conjugate to , F(-, h) : F(-, p)-- F(-, p'). By the 
previous theorem, there exists a unique choice of G(h, -) to realize this - 
and the condition of conjugacy may be expressed in any of the five 
equivalent ways stated there. For a second arrow h' :p'+p", 
the 
uniqueness of the choice of conjugates shows for h'h that G(hlh, -) 
= G(h, - ) o  G(hl, -), so that G(-, a) is a functor and G a bifunctor, as 
required. 
Dually, given a bifunctor G : P"P x A-X 
where each G(p, -) has a 
right adjoint F(-,p), there is a unique way to make F a bifunctor 
X x P--+ A. 
Exercises 
1. Interpret the defmition C(X - a, c) aSet(X, C(c, a)) of copowers X . a in C as 
an adjunction with parameter a. 
2. Let qx: x-+G(p, F(x, p)) be the unit of an adjunction with parameter. It is 
natural in x, but what property ofq corresponds to the naturality of the adjunction 
(10) in p? 
3. In the functor category 
let s be that full subcategory with objects those 
functors F : X + A  which have a right adjoint R F  : A+X. Make R a functor 
P + X A  by choosing one RF for each F, with Ru the conjugate of a. 

Composition of Adjoints 
101 
102 
Adjoints 
4. (Kelly) An adjoinr square is an array of categories, functors, adjunctions, and 
natural transformations 
X 
(F*G.~).A u:F'H+KF, 
In 
IK 
X' (F',G'.Q'> .A', 
T :  HG+G'K, 
such that the following diagram of hom-sets always commutes 
A(Fx,a) -? 
AV(KFx, 
Ka) 
A'(F'HX, Ka) 
IQ 
X(x, Ga) 
Xr(Hx, H G ~ ) &  
IQ, 
X'(Hx, G'Ka) . 
Express this last condition variously in terms of unit and counit of the ad- 
junctions and prove that each of o, 7 determines the other. (The case 
H = K = identity functor is that treated in the text above.) 
5. (Palmquist) Given H, K, and the two adjunctions as in Exercise4, establish a 
bijection between natural transformations a :  F'HG-K 
and natural trans- 
formations 4 : H* G'KF. 
8. Composition of Adjoints 
Two successive adjunctions compose to give a single adjunction, in 
the following sense: 
~hebrem 1. Given two adjunctions 
the composite functors yield an adjunction 
Proof. With hom-sets, the two given adjunctions yield a composite 
isomorphism, natural in x E X and d E D: 
This makes the composite FF left adjoint to GG. Settiq d = FFX, and 
applying these two isomorphisms to the identity 1 : FFX-FFX, we 
find that the unit of the composite adjunction is x* 
G FX% 
GGFFX, 
so is GVF .q, as asserted. By the dual argument, the counit is 8.F.&, 
q.e.d. One can also calculate directly that these last formulas give 
natural transformations I-~GGFF 
and FFG& I which satisfy the 
triangular identities. 
Using this composition, we may form a category Adj, whose objects 
are all (small) categories X, A, D, . .. and whose arrows are the adjunctions 
( F ,  G, q, E )  : X - A, composed as above; the identity arrow for each 
category A is the identity adjunction A -A. 
This category has additional structure. Each horn-set Adj(X, A) 
may be regarded as a category; to wit, the category 
of adjunciions 
from X to A as described in the last section. Its objects are these ad- 
junctions and its arrows are the conjugate pairs (o, r), under "vertical" 
composition defined in (7.8). 
Theorem 2. Given two conjugate pairs 
the (horizontal) composite natural transjormations ??a and t'S yield a 
conjugate pair zu : FFIIFF: r? : G'CII G G of natural transformations 
for the composite adjunctions. 
The proof may be visualized by the diagram of hom-sets 
D(FF'x, d)r A(F'x, c d ) a  X(X, G ' G ~ )  
I 
faax)* 
I 
(ax)*(?d). 
( r t d ,  
I .  
~ ( F F x , ~ )  
z A(Fx, Gd) 
X(x, ~ 6 d )  
. 
Moreover, this operation of (horizontal) composition is a bifunctor 
Adj (A, D) x Adj (X, A)+ Adj (X, D) . 
(1) 
This means that Adj is a "two-dimensional" category, as is Cat (see 5 11.5). 
Exercises 
1. Prove that horizontal composition is a bifunctor, as in (I), and that this implies 
an interchange law between horizontal and vertical composition of conjugate 
pairs. 
2. Show that the adjunction with right adjoint the forgetful functor Rng+Set can 
be obtained as a composite adjunction in two ways, Rng-+Ab-+Set and 
Rng-+Moa+Set. 
3. Let R, S, and T be rings. 
(a) For a bimodule REs, show that - @ R E  : ModR+Mds has a right adjoint 
horn.dE. -1. 
(b) Show that this is an adjunction with parameter E E R-Mod-S. 
(c) Describe the composite of this adjunction with a similar adjunction 
Mod,- 
Mod,. 

Composition of Adjoints 
103 
V. Limits 
Notes 
The multiple examples, here and elsewhere, of adjoint functors tend to show that 
adjoints occur almost everywhere in many branches of Mathematics. It is the 
thesis of this book that a systematic use of all these adjunctions illuminates and 
clarifies these subjects. Nevertheless, the notion of an adjoint pair of functors was 
developed only very recently. The word "adjoint" seems to have arisen first (and 
long ago) to describe linear differential operators. About 1930 the concept was 
carried over to a Hilbert space H, where the adjoint T* of a given linear transfor- 
mation T o n  H is defined by equality of the inner products 
for all vectors x, y E H. Clearly, there is a formal analogy to the definition of adjoint 
functor. 
Daniel Kan in [I9581 was the first to recognize and study adjoint functors. 
He needed them for the study of simplicia1 objects, and he developed the basic 
properties such as units and counits, limits as adjoints, adjunctions with a parameter, 
and conjugate transformations, as well as an important existence theorem (the 
Kan extension - see Chapter X). Note that his discovery came ten years after 
the exact formulation of universal constructions. Initially, the idea of adjunctions 
took on slowly, and the relation to universal arrows was not clear. Freyd in his 
1960 Princeton thesis (unpublished but widely circulated) and in his book [1964] 
and Lawvere [1963, 19641 emphasized the dominant position of adjunctions. One 
must pause to ask if there are other basic general notions still to be discovered. 
One may also speculate as to why the discovery of adjoint functors was sa 
delayed. Ideas about Hilbert space or universal constructions in general topology 
might have suggested adjoints, but they did not; perhaps the 1939-1945 war 
interrupted this development. During the next decade 1945-55 there were very 
few stud!es of categories, category theory was just a language, and possible workers 
may have been discouraged by the widespread pragmatic distrust of "general 
abstract nonsense" (category theory). Bourbaki just missed ([1948], Appendix 111). 
HIS definition of universal construction was clumsy, because it avoided categorical 
language, but it amounted to studying a bifunctor W : XoP x A+Set and asking 
for a universal element of W(x, -) for each x. This amounts to asking for objects 
F x  E A and a natural isomorphism W(x, o) I A(Fx, a); it includes the problem . 
of finding a left adjoint F ro a functor G : A+X, with W(x, a) = homx(x, Ga). It 
also includes the problem of finding a tensor product for two modules A and B, 
with W((A, B), C) taken to be the set of bilinear functions A x B-C. Momvcr, 
the tensor product A @ B  is not in this way an example af a left adjoint (though it 
is an example of our universal arrows). In other words Bourbaki's idea of universal 
construction was devised to be so general as to include more - and in particular, 
to include the ideas of multilinear algebra which were important to French Mathe- 
matical traditions. In retrospect, this added generality seems mistaken; Bourbaki's 
construction problem emphasized representable functors, and asked "Find Fx 
so that W(x, a) z A(Fx, a]". This formulation lacks the symmetry of the adjunction 
problem, "Find Fx so that X(x, Ga) z A(Fx, a)" - and so missed a basic discovery; 
this discovery was left to s younger man, perhaps one less beholden to tradition or 
to fashion. Put differently, good general theory does not search for the maxlmum 
generality, but for the right generality. 
This chapter examines the construction and properties of limits, as 
well as the relation of limits to adjoints. This relation is then used in the 
basic existence theorems for adjoint functors, which give universals and 
adjoints in a wide variety of cases. The chapter closes with some indic- 
ations of the uses of adjoint functors in topology. 
1. Creation of Limits 
A category C is called small-complete (sometimes just complete) if all 
small diagrams in C have limits in C; that is, if every functor F : J+C 
to C from a small category J has a limit. We shall show that Set, Grp, Ab, 
and many other categories of algebras are small-complete. 
The construction of limits in Set may be illustrated by considering 
the limit of a functor F : ooP+Set; here o, 
the linearly ordered set of all 
finite ordinals, is the free category generated by the graph 
The functor F: oOp+Set is just a list of sets F, and of functions f,, 
as in the first row of the diagram below 
niF; 
c 
insl. 
L = LimF 
Given F, form first the product set 17,Fi; it consists of all strings 
x = {xo, x,, x, ...} of elements, with each x, E F,, and it has projections 
p,: niFi+F,, 
but the triangles formed by these projections do not 
commute (j.p,+, + p,). A limit must be at least a vertex of a set of 
commuting triangles (a cone). So take the subset L of those strings x 
which "match" under f, in that f,,x,+, = x, for all n. Then functions 
p, : L 4  
F, are defined by p,,x = x,; since the string x matches, f.p,+, = p,, 

106 
Limits 
Creation of Limits 
107 
for all n, so ,u : L-F 
is a cone from the vertex L E  Set to the base F. 
If 7 : M+F is any other cone from a set M as vertex, each tn E M de- 
termines a string {r,m) which matches and hence a function g : M- L, 
with gm = {rnm), so with pg = r. Since g is the unique such function this 
shows that p is a universal cone to F, and so that L is the limit set of F. 
A string x which "matches" is the same thing as a cone x : *-F 
to 
F from the one point set *. Hence the limit L above can be described as 
the set L = Cone (*, F) of all such cones. The same construction applies 
for any domain category (in place of ooP). 
Theorem 1 (Completeness of Set). If the category J is small, any 
functor F :  J-Set 
has a limit which is the set Cone (*, F) of all cones 
a: **F 
from the one point set * to F, while the limiting cone v, with 
vj : Cone (*, F)4Fj, 
a w o j ,  
(2) 
is that function sending each cone a to the element uj E Fj. 
For example, if J is discrete, the set Cone(*, F) is just the cartesian 
product ZIj Fj. 
Proof. Smce J is small, Cone (*, F) is a small set, hence an object of 
Set. If u : j+k is any arrow of J, then Funj = a, because a is a cone; 
hence v as defined in (2) is a cone to the base F. To prove it universal, 
consider any other cone T : X - F  
to F from some set X. Then for 
each x E X, 7x is a cone to F from one point, so there is a unique function 
h: X+Cone(*, F) sending each x to rx, q.e.d. 
The crux of this proof is the (natural) bijection 
Cone (X, F) z Set(X, Cone (*, F)) 
(3) 
given by rwh, as above. Since a cone is just a natural transformation, 
this may be rewritten as an adjunction 
Nat (A X, F) 2 Set (X, Cone(*, F)) . 
By the very definition of limit, this proves that LimF aCone(*, F). 
Limits in Grp and other categories may be constructed from the set 
of all cones in much the same way. For example, if F :  ooP+Grp, as 
displayed in (I), then each Fn is a group, the set L of all cones (all matching 
strings x) is also a group under pointwise multiplication ((xy), = xnyn), 
and, the projection p, : L+Fn with xwx, is a group homomorphism, 
so that p : L+F is a limiting cone in Grp. 
The p-adic integers Zp (with p a prime) illustrate this construction. 
Take F : wOP+Rng with Fn = Z/pnZ, the ring of integers modulo pn, and 
with Fn +, + Fn the canonical projection Z/pn+ ' Z-+Z/pnZ. Then 
Z , = e F  exists. An element A of Z, is a cone from * to F; that is, 
1 can be written as a sequence A = {A,, I,, . . .) of integers with 
A,,, 
=A,(modpn) for all n, where A=X holds when A,=Ab(modpn) 
for all n. Two p-adic integers i, and p can be added and multiplied "term- 
wise", by the formulas 
These operations make Zp = Lim F a ring, the ring of p-adic integers, and 
this description completely determines Z,. This description is quicker 
than the classical one, which first defines a p-adic valuation (and thus a 
topology) in Z, and then observes that each p-adic integer E, is represented 
by a Cauchy sequence in that topology. 
Formal power series rings also can be described as limits (Ex. 7). 
Again, in Top, take each object F,, to be a circle S1, and each arrow 
f n  : S'+S1 to be the continuous map wrapping the domain circle S1 
uniformly p times around the codomain circle. The inverse limit set L 
then becomes a topological space when we introduce just those open 
sets in L necessary to make all the functions p,: L+S1 continuous. 
This L is the limit space in Top; it is known as the p-adic solenoid. 
Here is the general construction for groups. 
Theorem 2. Let U : Grp-+Set be the forgetful functor. If H : J+ Grp 
is such that the composite UH has a limit L and a limiting cone v : L 4  
UH 
in Set, then there is exactly one group structure on the set L for which 
each arrow vj : L- U Hj of the cone v is a morphism of groups; moreover, 
this group L is a limit of H with v as limiting cone. 
Proof. By Theorem I, take L = Cone (*, UH); define the product of 
two such cones a, r E Cone (*, UH) by ( a ~ ) ~  
= cisj (the product in the 
group Hj) and the inverse by 
= a; (the inverse in Hi). These defin- 
itions make L a group and each component of v a morphlsm of groups; 
conversely, if v given by 7
~
7
~
 
is to be a morphism of groups for each j, 
then the product of a, r E L  must be given by this formula. ' 
Now if G is any group and I : G+H any cone in Grp (consisting of 
group morphisms lj : G+Hj for j E J), then UL : UG- UH is a cone in 
Set, so by universality U I  = (Uv) h for a unique function h : U G + L  
For any two group elements g, and 9, in G, 
because I is a morphism of groups, so is h, and therefore L is indeed the 
limit in Grp. 
This argument is just a formalization of the familiar termwise con- 
struction of the multiplication in cartesian products of groups, in the 
p-adic numbers, etc. The conclusion of the Theorem constructs limits in 
Grp from the limits in Set in a unique way, using U. The same argument 
will construct all small limits in Rng, Ab, R-Mod and similar algebraic 
categories, using the forgetful functors U to Set. In other words, each 
forgetful functor "creates" limits in the sense of the following definition: 

108 
Limits 
Definition. A functor V :  A+X creates limits fora functor F : J-+A if 
(i) To every limiting cone T : x* V F  in X there is exactly one pair 
(a, a )  consisting of an object a E A with Va = x and a cone (T : a+ F with 
VCT = T, and if, moreover, 
(ii) This cone a : a+F 
is a limiting cone in A. 
Similarly, we may define "V creates products" (the above, with J 
restricted to be discrete); "V creates finite limits" (the above, with J 
finite), or "V creates colimits" (the above with the arrows in all cones 
reversed). Note especially that "V creates limits" means only that V 
produces limits for functors F whose composite V F  already has a limit. 
In this terminology, Theorem 2 now reads 
Theorem 3. The forgetful functor U : Grp+Set creates limits. 
Exercises 
1. Prove that the projections (x1C)-+C of the comma category create limits. 
2. If Comp Ham C Top is the full subcategorj of all compact Hausdorff spaces, show 
that the forgetful functor Comp Haladset creates limits. 
3. For any category X, show that the projection X2-+X x X which sends each 
arrow f :  x 4 y  in X to the pair (x, y) creates limits. 
4. Prove that the category of all small finite sets is finitely complete (i.e., has all 
finite limits). 
5. Prove that Cat is small-complete. 
6. Show that each p-adic integer 1 is determined by a string of integers ai with all 
aie{O, 1, ..., p- l},witheach~=a,+a,p+...+a. -,pa-' (modp"). Show that 
addition and multiplication of p-adic integers correspond to the usual operations 
of addition and multiplication of infinite "decimals" . . . a,. . . a, (with base p, 
the decimals extending infinitely to the left). 
7. Let K [x] be the usual ring ofpolynomials in x with coefficients in thecommutative 
ring K, while F : oOP-+Rng is defined by F,=K[x]/(xn), with the evident 
projections, and (xu) the usual principal ideal. Prove that Lim F is the ring of 
formal power series in x, coefficients in K. 
2. Limits by Products and Equalizers 
The construction of the limit of F: J+Set as the set of all cones 
Cone (*, F) c l7 F, 
can be made in two steps: Each cone a is an element x of the product 
n j F j  with projections p,; to fequire that an element x of the product be a 
cone is to require that (Fu)xj = x, for every arrow u : j-k 
in J ;  this 
amounts to requiring that x lie in the equalizer of (Fu) pj and p, : njFj-+F,. 
Here is the general formulation: 
. 
Limits by Products and Equalizers 
109 
Theorem 1. For categories C and J, if C has equalizers of all pairs 
of arrows and all products indexed by the sets obj ( J )  and arr (J), then 
C has a limit for every functor F : J+ C. 
The proof constructs the following diagram in stages, with i denoting 
an object and u : j+k 
an arrow of the index category J. By assumption, 
the products UiFi and n,Fk and their projections exist, where the second 
product is taken over all arrows u of J, with argument at each arrow u the 
value F, = F,,, 
of F at the codomain object of u. Since nUFk is a product, 
there is a unique arrow f such that the upper square commutes for 
every u and a unique arrow g such that the lower square commutes for 
every u. By hypothesis, 
Fcdu 
= Fcodu 
Th 
there exists an equalizer e for f and g. Its composite with the projections 
pi give arrows pi = pie : d+ Fi for each i. Since e equalizes f and g, one 
has Fupj=pk for every u:j+k; hence p: Ad+F 
is a cone from the 
vertex d to the base F. If r is any other such cone, of vertex c, its maps 
ri combine to yield a unique map h : c+niFi to the product; r a cone 
implies f h =gh. Hence h factors uniquely through e and therefore the 
cone T factors uniquely through the cone p. This proves that d and the 
cone p provide a limit for F. For the record: 
Theorem 2 (Limits by product and equalizers, continued). The limit 
of F :  J+C 
is the equalizer e of f,g: ~iFi-*nuFcodu 
( u ~ a r r  
J , ~ E  
J), 
where pu f = pcodu, pug = Fu a p,,,.; 
the limiting cone p is 
= pje, for, 
j E J ,  all as in (1). 
This theorem has several useful consequences and special cases. 
Corollary 1. If a category C has a terminal object, equalizers of all 
pairs of 'arrows, and products of all pairs of objects, then C has all finite 
limits. 
Here a jnite limit is a limit of J+C, 
with the category J finite. 
C d a r y  2. If C has equalizers of all pairs of arrows and all small 
products, then C is small-complete. 
For example, this gives another proof that Set is small-complete. 
The concept of completeness is useful chiefly for large categories and 
for preorders. In a preorder P, a product of objects ai, j E J, is an object d 
with d $ a, for all j and such that c $ a] for all j implies c $ d; in other 

110 
Limits 
words a product is just a greatest lower bound or meet of the factors aj 
(dually, a coproduct is a least upper bound or join). 
Proposition 3. (Freyd). A small category C which is small-complete 
is simply a preorder which has a greatest lower bound for et:ery small 
set of its.elements. 
Proof. Suppose C is not a preorder. Then there are objects a, b E C 
with arrows f + g  : a-b. For any small set J form the product Iljb 
of factors bj all equal to b. Then an arrow h : a-+ZZjb is determined 
by its components, which can be f or g. There are thus at least 2J arrows 
a-+njb. If the small set J has cardinal larger than Arr C, this is a contra- 
diction. 
Exercises 
1. (Manes) A parallel pair of arrows S,g : a+b in C has a common left incerse h 
when there is an arrow h : b-a with h f = 1 = hg. 
(a) Prove that a category C with all small products and with equalizers for all 
those parallel pairs with a common left inverse is small complete. (Hint: 
The parallel pair used in the proof of Theorem 1 does in fact have a common 
left inverse.) 
(b) In Set, show that a parallel pair of arrows f, g : X+ Y has a common right 
inverse if and only if the corresponding function (f, 
g) : X-+ Y x Y has image 
containing the diagonal {(y, y )  1 y E Y ) .  
2. Prove that C,. C, complete (or cocomplete) imply the same for the product 
category C, x C2. 
3. (&and 9 
as functors). If F, F' : J+C have limiting cones fi,pf(or colimiting 
cones v, v'), show that each natural transformation P :  F-F' 
determines 
uniquely arrows I@p or IQp 
such that the following diagram commutes. 
where A : C+CJ is the diagonal functor: 
ASFA 
F A 
A(L&F) 
C 
Allimp') j 
I AOim@I 
+ + 
+ '  
- 
AL&F'&F'& 
A(=F'). 
Conclude: If C is complete, L>(or 3) 
is a functor CJ-+C. 
4. (Limits of composites). Given composable functors 
J'-&J4C4cf 
and limiting cones v for F, v' for H F W, observe that A j,(Hc) = H o A, c W: J'+C', 
and show that there is a unique "canonical" arrow t : H a  
& F + E H F  
W 
such that the following diagram commutes 
A,.(HO ~
i
m
~
)
a
 
HFW 
A ,.(L&HFW) 
Aq 
, 
11 
1 AP cs, 
~,.(&IHFw)- 
HFW%A,(H 
JLAF). 
Dually, construct s :  3 H F  
W -  H &F 
as indicated at the right. 
Limits with Parameters 
11 1 
5. (Limit as a functor on the comma category of all diagrams in C) 
(a) Interpret W of Ex. 4 as an arrow in (CatlC) to show (for C complete) that 
Lim is a functor (Cat 1 CYP--rC. 
C 
(b) Let (CatIC) be the("super-comma")category with objects F : J+C, arrows 
, 
(Q, W) : F'+F those pairs consisting of a functor W: J'+J and a natural 
transformation p :  F W r F ' .  Combine Exercise 3 and Exercise 4 to show 
(for C complete) that LQn is a functor (Cat $ C)OP-+C. Dualize. 
3. Limits with Parameters 
Let T :  J x P-X 
be a bifunctor, and suppose for each value p E P of 
the "parameter" p that T ( - , p ) :  J+X has a limit. Then these limits 
for all p form the object function pwLimjT(j, p) of a functor P-X. 
Instead of proving this directly, we replace functors P--,X by objects 
of the functor category XP. This replaces T :  J x P-X 
by its adjunct 
S : J-xP, under the adjunction Cat (J x P, X )  z Cat(J, XP). Recall that 
for each object p~ P there is a functor Ep: XP--+X, "evaluate at p", 
given for arrows (natural transformations) a : H - r  H' of X P  as 
EpH=H,, 
E , a = a p : H p + H ~ .  
(1) 
Theorem 1. y S  : J+XP is such that for each object p 6 P the composite 
EpS : J-X 
has a limit L, with a limiting cone 7 ,  : Lp+EpS, then there 
is a unique functor L : P-X 
with object function p w L p  such that pb7, 
is a natural transformation r : AL = AJL*S; moreover, this r is a limiting 
cone from the vertex L E xP to the base S : J--r XP. 
Proof. Let h :  p - q  be any arrow of P. Then, writing EpS as S,, 
the given cones 7, and 7, for a typical arrow u : j-k 
of J have the form 
The triangles commute because 7 ,  and 7, are cones and the parallelograms 
because S is a functor. Since the inside cone is universal there is a 
unique arrow L, : Lp+ L, such that rQ 0 L, = SJ 0 7J for all j E J. The 
assignment hwL, makes L a functor (Proof: put another cone outside) 
and 7 a natural transformation AL-rS (a cone from the object L G XP 
to the functor S :  J-+X"). It is a limiting cone; for if a :  M - r S  is any 


114 
Limits 
Adjoints on Limits 
115 
In any category an object p is called projective if every arrow h : p+c 
from p factors through every epi g : b+c, as h = gh' for some h' 
It is equivalent to require that g epi implies hom@,g): hom(p,b)+hom(p,c) 
epi in Set. In other words, p is projective exactly when horn@, -) 
preserves epi's. Dually, an object q is injective when horn(-, q) carries 
monics to epis. These notions are especially useful in R-Mod and other 
Ab-categories; in R-Mod the projectives are the direct summands of 
the free modules. 
Exercises 
1. Prove that the composite of continuous functors is continuous. 
2. If C is complete, and H : C+D preserves all small products and all equalizers 
(of parallel pairs) prove that H is continuous. 
3. Show that the functor F :Set+ Ab sending each set X to the free abelian group 
generated by the set X is not continuous. 
4. For any small set X, show that the functor (product with X) X x - : Set-+Set 
preserves all colimits. 
5. (Preservation of Limits.) Given H : C - C  and a functor F: J--.C such that F 
and HF have limits, prove that H preserves the limits of F if and only if the 
canonical arrow H 0 &I F+ L& 
HF of Exercise 2.4 is an isomorphism (This 
is a natural way to describe, the preservation of limits when both categories C 
and C' are given with specified limits). ' 
5. Adjoints on Limits 
One of the most useful properties of adjoints is this: A functor which 
is a right adjoint preserves all the limits which exist in its domain: 
Theorem 1. If the functor G : A d X  has a lefr adjoint, while the 
functor T: J+A has a limiting cone r : a+T in A, then GT has the 
limiting cone G r : Ga+ G T in X. 
Pwf. By composition, Gr is indeed a cone from the vertex Ga in X. 
If F is a left adjoint to G, and if we apply the adjunction isomorphism 
to every arlpw of a cone a : x+ G T, we get arrows (uJb : Fx- Ti for 
i E J which form a cone ab : Fx+ T in A. But r : a+ T is universal among 
cones to T in A, so there is a unique arrow h: Fx-o 
with rh=ab. 
Taking adjuncts again, this gives a unique arrow hs: x+Ga with 
(sh)" GT h' = (ab)' = cr. The uniqueness of the arrow h' states precisely 
that Gr : Ga- T is universal, q.e.d. 
The proof may be illustrated by the following diagrams (where 
u : i-+j is any arrow of J). 
This proof can also be cast in a more sophisticated form by using 
the fact that Lim is right adjoint to the diagonal functor A. In fact, 
given an adjunction 
(F,G,q,&):X-A 
and any index category J, one may form the functor categories (from J) 
and hence the diagram 
(FJ, GJ, qJ, 2) : XJ- AJ , 
where FJ(S) = F S  for each functor S : J-X, and rfS = qS : S+GFS, etc. 
The triangular identities for q and yield the same identities for q
'
 
and 2, 
so the second diagram is indeed an adjunction (in brief, adjunctions 
pass to the functor category). Now we have the diagram of adjoint pairs 
The definitions of the diagonal functors A show at once that.FJA = AF, 
so the diagram of left adjoints commutes in this square. Since compositions 
of adjoints give adjoints, it follows that the composites &ma 
GJ and 
G9 
Lim are both right adjoints to FJ A = A 0 F. Since the right adjoiqt 
of a given functor is unique ,up to natural isomorphism, it now follows 
that Limo GJ s Go Lim. This proves again for each functor T: J-+A 
with limit a (and limiting cone r :  a-*T in A) that Ga = GLimT 
= LimGJ(T) = Lim GT. The reader should show that the same argument 
proves that G preserves limiting cones (put units and counits in the 
square diagram above, and recall that the limiting cone r : a+ T is just 
the value of the counit of the adjunction (A, Lim, ...) : A- A' on the 
functor T.). 
The dual of the theorem is equally useful: Any functor P which 
has a right adjoint (i.e., which is a left adjoint) must preserve colimits 
(coproducts, coequalizers, etc.). This explains why the coproduct (free 
product) of two free groups is again a free group (on the disjoint union of 
the sets of generators). 

116 
Limits 
Freyd's Adjoint Functor Theorem 
117 
Similarly (by the original theorem) all the typical forgetful functors 
in algebra preserve products, kernels, equalizers, and other types of 
limits. Typically, the product of two algebraic systems (groups, rings, 
etc.) has as underlying set just the (cartesian) product of the two under- 
lying sets. This, and other similar facts, are immediate consequences of 
this one (easy) theorem. The theorem can also be used to show that 
certain functors do not have adjoints. 
Exercises 
1. Show that, for a fixed set X, the functor X x - :Set+Set cannot have a left 
adjoint, unless X is a one-point set. 
2. For the functor D : VctoP-+Vet of (IV. 2.2) show that D has no right adjoint (and 
hence, in particular, is not the left adjoint of DOP). 
3. If C is a full and reflective subcategory of a small-cocomplete category D, prove 
that C is small-cocomplete. 
4. Prove that SePP is not cartesian closed. 
6. Freyd's Adjoint Functor Theorem 
To formulate the basic theorem for the existence ofa left adjoint to a 
given functor, we first treat the case of the existence of an initial object 
in a category and then use the fact that each universal arrow defined by 
the unit of a left adjoint is an initial object in a suitable comma category. 
Theorem l.(Existence of an initial object). Let D be a small-complete 
category with small hom-sets. Then D has an initial object $ and only 
if it satisfies the following 
Solution Set Condition. There exists a small set 1 and an I-indexed 
family k, of objects of D such that for every d E D there is an i E I and 
an arrow k,-d 
of D. 
Proof. This solution set condition is necessary: If D has an initial 
object k, then k indexed by the one-point set realizes the condition, since 
there is always a (unique) arrow k+d. 
Conversely, assume the solution set condition. Since D is small- 
complete, it contains a product object w = nk, of the given I-indexed 
family. For each d E D, there is at least one arrow w-d, for example, a 
composite w = n k , 4  kt-+d, where the first arrow is a projection of the 
product. By hypothesis, the set of endomorphisms D(w, w) of w is small 
and D is complete, so we can construct the equalizer e : v+ w of the set 
of all the endomorphisms of w. For each d E D, there is by v-w-d 
at least one arrow v-d. 
Suppose there were two, f, g : v-d, and take 
their equalizer el as in the figure below 
By the construction of w, there is an arrow s :  w-u, 
so the composite 
eels is, like I,, an endomorphism of w. But e was defined as the equalizer 
of all endomorphisms of w, so 
eelse= lye= el,. 
Now e is an equalizer, hence is rnonic; cancelling e on the left gives 
else = 1,. This states that the equalizer el off and g has a right inverse. 
Like any equalizer, el is monic, hence is an isomorphism. Therefore, 
f = g; this conclusion means that v is initial in.D. 
This proof will be reformulated in 8 X.2. 
Theorem 2. (The Freyd Adjoint Functor Theorem). Given a small- 
complete category A with small hom-sets, a functor G : A+* 
has a left 
adjoint if and only if it preserves all small limits and satisfies the following 
Solution Set Condition. For each object x E X there is a small set I 
and an I-indexed family of arrows fi: x+Gai 
such that every arrow 
h : x-+ Ga can be written as a composite h = Gt 0 fi for some index i 
and some t : a,--, a. 
Proof. If G has a left adjoint F, then it must preserve all the limits 
which exist in its domain A; in particular, all the small ones..Moreover, 
the universal arrow q,: x-GFx 
which is the unit of the adjunction 
satisfies the solution set condition for x, with 1 the one-point set. 
Conversely, given these conditions, it will suffice to construct a uni- 
versal arrow x+Ga from each x E X to G; then G has a left adjoint by 
the pointwise construction of adjoints. This universal arrow is an initial 
object in the comma category ( x  1 G) = D, so we need only verify the 
conditions of the previous theorem for this category. The solution set 
condition for G clearly gives the condition of the same name for (xlG) = D. 
Since A has small horn-sets, so does D. To show D small-complete we 
need only arbitrary small products and equalizers of parallel pairs. 
They may be created as follows: 
Lemma. If G : A+X 
preserves all small products (or, all equalizers) 
then for each x E X the projection 
of the comma category creates all small products (or, all equalizers). 

118 
Limits 
Proof. Let J be a set (a discrete category) and f j  : x-+ Gaj a J-indexed 
family of objects of (x 1 G) such that the product diagram pj : Ha,+ aJ 
exists in A. Since G preserves products, Gpj: G17a,+Gaj is a product 
diagram in X, 
so there is a unique arrow f : x--t Gna, in X with(Gpj) f = fJ 
for all j: 
na, 
Gnaj 
I 
,a I 
This equation states that pj : f 4 fj is a cone of arrows in (xi G); indeed, 
it is the unique cone there which projects under Q to the given cone 
p,: no,-a,. 
One then verifies that this cone p, is a product diagram in . 
(xlG); these two results show that Q creates products. 
Similarly, we "create" the equalizer of two arrows s, t : f -+g in (xlG). 
As in the figure below, we are given the equalizer e of Qs, Qt; - that 
is, of s and t as arrows in A. Since G preserves equalizers, Ge is then the 
equalizer of Gs and Gt. But Gso f =g = Gta f, so there is a unique 
arrow h : x+Ga making Ge 0 h = f, as below. In other words e: h- f in 
(x1G) is the unique arrow of (x1G) with Q-projection e : a+b. 
It remains to show that the arrow e is an equalizer in (xlG). So 
consider another object k:x+Gd of (xlG) and an arrow r: k+ f 
of (x1G) with sr = tr in (xlG). Then sr = tr in A, so there is a unique r' 
in A with r = er'. It remains only to show r' an arrow k+h of (xlG); but 
Ge(Grl 0 k) = G(erf) 
0 k = Gr 0 k = f, so by the unique choice of h, GrI0 k = h, 
which states that r' is an arrow of (x 1 G). 
This line of argument applies not just to products or equalizers, but 
to the creation of any limit (Exercise 1). 
.Thqrem 3. (The Representability Theorem). Let the category D be 
small complete with small hom-sets. A functor K : D+Set is representable 
if and only if K preserves all smal limits and satisfies the following 
Solution Set Condition. There exists a small set S of objects of D 
such that for any object d s D and any element x E Kd there exist an s E S, 
an element y E Ks and an arrow f :  s-d 
with (K f )  y = x. 
Freyd's Adjoint Functor Theorem 
119 
Proof. This is another reformulation of the existence Theorem 1 for 
initial objects. Indeed, a representation of K is a universal arrow from the 
one-point set * to K (Proposition III.2.2), hence an initial object in the 
comma category (* / K ) ,  which is small-complete because K is assumed 
continuous. Conversely, if K is representable, it is necessarily continuous. 
The solution set condition (or something like it) is requisite in all 
three theorems. For an example, let Ord be the ordered set of all small 
ordinal numbers a, 8, . . .; it is a category with hom-set Ord(a, b) empty 
or the one-point set according as a > 8 or a 5 b. The category OrdoP is 
small-complete, because the product of any small set of ordinals is 
their least upper bound. The functor K : OrdoP-+Set with Ka = * the 
one-point set for every a is clearly continuous. However K is not 
representable: Were Ka r OrdoP(B, a) for some B, then a 5 fl for all a, 
so 8 would be a largest small ordinal, which is known to be impossible. 
Complete Boolean algebras provide another example to show that 
some solution set condition is requisite. For a given denumerable set 
D one can construct an arbitrarily large complete Boolean algebra 
generated by D (Solovay [1966]); this implies that there is no free complete 
Boolean algebra generated by D, and hence that the forgetful functor 
Comp Bool+Set has no left adjoint - though it is continuous and 
Comp Boo1 is small-complete. 
The adjoint functor theorem has many applications. 
For example$ gives aleft adjoint to the forgetful functor U : Grp+Set. 
Indeed, we already know that U creates all limits (Theorem 1.3), hence 
that Grp is small-complete and U continuous. It remains to find a solution- 
set for each X โฌSet. Consider any function f : X--, UG for G a group, 
and take the subgroup S of G generated by all elements f x, for x e X. 
Every element ofS is then a finite product, say (f x,)* ' (f x,)" 
(f x,Jf ', 
of these generators and their inverses so the cardinal number of S is 
bounded, given X. Taking one copy of each isomorphism class of such 
groups S then gives a small set of groups, and the set of all functions 
X-P US is then a solution set. 
This left adjoint F :Set+ Grp assigns to each set X the free group 
F X  generated by X, so our theorem has produced this free group 
without entering into the usual (rather fussy) explicit construction of 
the elements of FX as equivalence classes of words in letters of X. To 
be sure, the usual construction also shows that the universal arrow 
X+ UFX is injective (different elements of X are different as generators 
of the free group). However, we can also obtain this fact by general 
arguments and the observation that there does exist a group H with 
two different elements h + k. Indeed, for any two elements x + y in X 
we then take a function f : X+ U H  with f x = h and f y = k. Since f 
must factor through the universal X-, U FX, it follows that this universal 
must be an injection. 


122 
Limits 
7. Subobjects and Generators 
Concepts such as subring, subspace, and subfield will now be treated 
categorically, using arrows instead of elements. For instance we will 
regard a subgroup S of a group G not as a set of elements of G, but as 
the rnonomorphism S-+G given by insertion. 
Let A be any category. If u :  s-a and o :  r h a  are two rnonics with 
a common codomain a, write u s v  when u factors through v ;  that is, 
when u = vu' for some arrow u' (which is then necessarily also rnonic). 
When both u 5 o and v u, write u = u; this defines an equivalence 
relation r among the monics with codomain a, and the corresponding 
equivalence classes of these rnonics are called the subobjects of a. It is. 
often convenient to say that a rnonic u : s-a is a subobject of a - that is, 
to identify u with the equivalence class of all o = u9, for 0 : s'+s an 
invertible arrow. These subobjects do correspond to the usual subobjects 
(defined via elements) in familiar large categories such as Rng, Grp, Ab, 
and R-Mod, but not in Top. 
Lemma. In any square pullback diagram 
f monic implies f' monic (and g rnonic implies g' monic). 
Briefly, pullbacks of rnonics are rnonic. 
Proof. Consider a parallel pair h, k, as shown, with f ' h  = f 'k. Then 
g f 'h = g f 'k, so f g'h = f g'k. Since f is rnonic, this gives g'h = g'k. But 
we also have f'h = f'k; these two equations, since p is a pullback, imply 
h = k. Therefore f '  is rnonic. 
The set of all subobjects of each a E A is partly ordered by the binary 
relation u S v. If u : s+a and v : t+a are two subobjects of a, and A has 
pullbacks, the pullback of these two arrows gives (Lemma above) another 
monic w : p-+a with codomain a and with w 5 u, w 5 v ;  it is the intersection 
(= meet or greatest lower bound) of the sub0bjects.u and v in the partly 
ordered set of all subobjects of a E A. Similarly, if J is any set and ui : s p a  
for i E J any J-indexed set of subobjects of a E A, the pullback of all 
these arrows, if it exists, gives the intersection of the subobjects ui of a. 
The union (=join or least upper bound) of subobjects can be found 
under added hypotheses. 
Dually, two epis r, s with domain a are equivalent when r = 8 s  for 
some invertible 8. The equivalence classes of such epis are the quotient 
objects of a, partly ordered by the relation r s s ,  which holds when r 
factors through s as r = r's. This definition of quotients by duality is 
Subobjects and Generators 
123 
simpler than the usual definition of quotient algebras by equivalence 
classes, and agrees with the usual definition in those categories where 
epis are onto. This latter is the case, for example, in Grp. Hence every 
quotient object of a group G in Grp is represented by the projection 
p : G-+ GIN of G onto the factor group GIN of G by some normal subgroup 
N of G, and GIM $ GIN holds if and only if M 3 N (in general, the relation 
r $ s for quotients mean that in r "more" is divided out!). 
A set S of objects of the category C is said to generate C when to 
any parallel pair h, h' : c-d of arrows of C, h $: h' implies that there is an 
s E S and an arrow f : s+cLwith h f + h'f (The term "generates" is well 
established but poorly chosen; "separates" would have been better). 
This definition includes the case of a single object s generating a category 
C. For example, any one-point set generates Set, Z generates Ab and 
Grp, and R generates R-Mod. The set of finite cyclic groups is a generator 
for the category of all finite abelian groups (or, of all torsion abelian 
groups). 
Dually, a set Q of objects is a cogenerating set for the category C 
when to every parallel pair h + h' : a-b of arrows of C there is an object 
q E Q and an arrow g : b -+ q with g h 9 g h'. A single object 
q is a cogenerator when {q) is a cogenerating set. For example, 
any two-point set is a cogenerator in Set. 
In terms of subobjects we can examine further the construction of 
solution sets. Given any functor G : A+X an arrow f :  x-Ga is said to 
span a when there is no proper monomorphism s-a 
in A such that f 
factors' through Gs-Ga. 
Lemma. In the category A, suppose that every set of pubobjects of 
an object a E A has a pullback. 7hen if G : A+X preserves all these pull- 
backs, every arrow h : x-Ga factors through an arrow f : x-Gb 
which 
spans b. 
Proof. Consider the set of all those subobjects u j :  s,+a such that h 
factors through Guj as h = Guj hi. Take the pullback v : b+a of all the uj. 
Then, as in the diagrams 
Go : Gb- Ga is still a pullback (for the Gu,), so h factors through Gv viaf, 
as shown. It follows from the construction that f spans b. 
This lemma states that a solution set for x can be the set of all arrows 
from x which span. 

124 
Limits 
As an application consider the category of algebras of given type T. 
Given an arrow f :  S+GA, the algebra A has a subalgebra consisting 
of all elements obtained from elements of f(S) by iterated applications 
of operators w E R. The cardinal number of this subalgebra A, is then 
bounded by the cardinal of S and,that of Q. Since f factors through 
S+G A,, these latter arrows from the set S form a small set which is a 
solution set for G :  Alg,-rSet. They are spanning arrows in the sense 
of the lemma, provided a subobject of a is redefined to be a morphism 
u :  s+a for which Gu is injective in Set. 
Another example of the use of this lemma with the adjoint functor 
theorem is the proof of the existence of tensor products of modules. 
Given modules A and B over a commutative ring K, a tensor product is a 
universal element of the set Bilin (A, B; C )  of bilinear functions 
/? : A x B 4 C  to some third K-module C. This set is (the object function 
of) a functor of C. To get a solution set for given A and B, if suffices to 
consider only those bilinear P which span C (do not factor through a 
proper submodule of C). Then C consists of all finite sums Z/?(ai, bi), 
so the solution set condition holds; since K-Mod is small-complete 
and Bilin: K-Mod+Set is continuous, a tensor product @ : A x B+A @ B 
exists. The usual (more explicit) construction is wholly needless, since 
all the properties of the tensor product follow directly from the uni- 
versality. 
Exercises 
1. Use the adjoint functor theorem to construct the coproduct in Grp (the co- 
product GUH in Grp is usually called 'the free product). Using the product 
G x H, show also that the injections G-GUH and H-GLIH 
of the coproduct 
are both rnonic, and that their images intersect in the identity subgroup. 
2. Make a similar construction for the coproduct of rings. 
3. If R is a ring, A a right R-module and B a left R-module, use the adjoint functor 
theorem to construct A@,B (this tensor product is an abelian group, with a 
function (a, b) ++a@ b E A 
which is biadditive, has ar@ b =a@ rb for all 
aโฌ A, r E R, and b E B, and is universal with these properties). Prove that A a R B  
is spanned (as an abelian group) by the elements a@b. If S+R is a morphism 
of rings, examine the relation of A@$ to A@,B. 
4. Construct coequalizers in Alg, by the adjoint functor theorem. 
8. The Special Adjoint Functor Theorem 
We now consider another existence theorem for adjoints which avoids 
the solution set condition by assuming a small set of objects which 
cogenerates. 
Theorem l.(Special Initial-Object Theorem). If the category D is 
small-complete, has small horn-sets, and a small cogenerating set Q, then D 
The Special Adjoint Functor Theorem 
125 
has an initial object provided every set of subobjects of each d E D has an 
intersection. 
Proof. Form the product q, = nqeaq of all the objects in the small 
cogenerating set Q and take the intersection r of all subobjects of go. For 
any object d E D, there is at most one arrow r-rd, for if there were two 
different arrows, their equalizer would be a proper rnonic to r, hence a sub- 
object of q, smaller than the intersection r. 
To show r initial in D, we thus need only construct an arrow r+d 
for each d. So consider the set H of all arrows h : d+q E Q and the (small) 
product n,,,q. 
Take the arrow j:d+li',,,q 
with components h 
(i.e., with p,o j = h for each projection p,). Since the set Q cogenerates, 
j is rnonic. Form the pullback 
where k is the arrow with components p, k =p, for each h : d+q. Then 
j', as pullback of a rnonic j, is rnonic, so c is a subobject of q,. But r was 
the intersection of all subobjects of go, so there is an arrow' r-c. The 
composite r+c-d 
is the desired arrow. 
Theorem 2. (The Special Adjoint Functor Theorem). Let the category 
A be small-complete, with small hom-sets, and a small cogenerating set Q, 
while every set of subobjects of an object a E A has apullback (and hence has 
an intersection). Let the category X have small horn-sets. ?hen a functor 
G : A-+X has a left-adjoint if and only if G preserves all small limits Md 
all pullbacks of families of monics. 
Proof. The conditions are necessary, since any right adjoint functor 
must indeed preserve all limits (in particular, all pullbacks). Conversely, it 
suffices as usual to construct for each x E X an initial object in the comma 
category D = (xi G). We shall show that this category satisfies the hypothe- ' 
ses of the previous theorem for the construction of an initial object. 
First we verify that subobjects in (xlG) have the expected form. 
Lemma. An arrow h : ( f  : x+Ga, a)+( f' : x+Gaf, a') in the comma 
category ( x l G )  is rnonic if and only if h : a-a' 
is monic in A. 
Proof. Trivially, h : a-a' 
rnonic implies h : f + f' tnonic. For the 
converse, observe that h rnonic means exactly that its kernel pair (the 
pullback of h with h) is I,, 1,: a 3 a .  On the other hand, by the lemma 
of ยง 6 the projection 
of the comma category creates all limits, and in particular, creates kernel 
pairs. Moreover, A has all kernel pairs. Therefore (Theorem4.2), the 

126 
Limits 
The Special Adjoint Functor Theorem 
127 
projection of the comma category preserves all kernel pairs, in particular, 
the kernel pair la, la, and consequently carries monics (in(x1G)) to 
monics in A, as desired. 
Now return to the theorem. We are given a small cogenerating set Q 
in A. Since X has small horn-sets, the set Q' of all 0bjects.k : x+Gq 
with q E Q is small. It is, moreover, cogeperating in (xlG). Given s 9 t : 
( f :  x+Ga, a ) + (  f': x-+Ga',a') in (xlG), there is a q , โฌ Q  and an 
arrow h : a'--+go with hs $; ht, and this h can be regarded as an arrow 
h : (f' : x+Gal, a')-+(f,: x+G40,40>, 
where f,, = G h s f ' ,  with hs 9 ht in (xlG). Therefore Q' cogenerates 
( x  1 a. 
Since A small-complete and G continuous imply (xi G) small-complete 
it remains only to construct an intersection in (xlG) for every set of 
subobjects hi : ( fi : x+ Ga,, a,) -+ ( f  : x-+ Ga, a), where i E J. By the 
lemma, the corresponding arrows hi : a,--+a are monics in A. By iiypothe- 
sis, they then have a pullback h : b+a in A 
ai 
x 
= 
x 
= 
' 8 ,  ;:\;: 
[I,, 
I 
i 
1. 
1. 
b ----h-- 
+ a ,  
Gb 
+ Gai 
t G a .  
"' 
The functor G preserves pullbacks, so Gh : Gb+Ga with Gh = Gh, Gs, 
is a pullback of the Gh, in X. Since also Gh, f, = j for all i E J, there is a 
unique fo: x-+Gb with fi 
= Gsia fo; the resulting arrow h : ( fo,b)+( f, a )  
is then a pullback in ( x i  G) of the given 'hi (again, because the projection 
of the comma category creates pullbacks). This pullback is the required 
intersection of the hi. 
There is another form of this theorem. Define a category to be well- 
powered when the subobjects of each object a E A can be indexed by a 
small set; that is, when there is to each a a small set J ,  and a bijection 
from J, to the set of all subobjects of a. Many familiar large categories - 
Top, Grp, R-Mod, etc. - are well powered; the dual notion is called 
co-well-powered. If A is well-powered and small-complete, then any 
set of subobjects of an a e A has an intersection, formed by the usual 
pullback. Therefore the special adjoint functor theorem specializes as 
follows: 
Corollary. If A is small complete, well-powered, with small horn-sets, 
and a small cogenerating set, while X has small horn-sets, then a functor 
G : A-X 
has a left adjoint ifvand only if it is continuous. In particular, 
any continuous K : A-Set 
is representable. 
This classical form of the special adjoint functor theorem (sometimes 
called SAFT) often appears without an explicit "small hom-set" hypothe- 
sis - in sources which consider only categories with small hom-sets. 
Some authors use "locally small category" to mean "well-powered"; 
others use it to mean "has small hom-sets", so we avoid this term! 
The classical form of SAF T can be deduced directly from the adjoint 
functor theorem by constructing a solution set (as in Freyd [1964, p. 891, 
or Schubert C1970, p. 881). 
A typical example is the inclusion functor 
G : Comp Haus C Top 
(1) 
of the full subcategory of compact Hausdorff spaces in Top. As already 
noted, Comp Haus is small complete; it also has small hom-sets. The 
Urysohn lemma states that to any two points x 9 y in a compact Hausdorff 
space X there is a continuous function f :  X+I to the unit interval I 
with f x = 0, f y = 1. It follows that I is a cogenerator for Comp Haus. 
Hence the special adjoint functor theorem gives a left adjoint for the 
mclusion G above. This left-adjoint (or sometimes, its restriction to the 
full subcategory of completely regular spaces) is called the stone-tech 
compactification. This includes the case of a discrete space, as done in @ 6. 
Watt's Theorem [I9601 is another example. Any ring R is a generator 
in the category R-Mod, hence a cogenerator in (R-ModYP. It' follows that 
any contravariant additive functor T on R-Mod to Ab which takes 
small colimits to limits is representable by a group isomorphism 
T s horn,(-, 
C) for some R-module C. Indeed, by the special adjoint 
functor. theorem T: (R-ModPP+Ab has a left adjoint F; sinceTis additive, 
the adjunction 
AWG, TA) z hom,(A, FG) , 
G E Ab , 
A E R-Mod , 
is an isomorphism of additive groups; set G = Z to get 
T A  z Ab(Z, TA) z hom,(A, F Z )  . 
Exercises 
1. Let K : A-+Set be any functor. If K has a left adjoint, prove that it is representable. 
Conversely, if A has all small copowers and K is representable as K z A(a, -) 
for some a c A prove that K has a left adjoint (which assigns to each set X the 
small copower X . a). 
2. For A a left R-module, B a right R-module and G an abelian group, estaPlish 
adjunctions 
(a) horn, (A, hornz(& G)) z homZ(B@,A, G) r hom,(B, homz(A, G)), where 
hom,(B, G) has a suitable (left or right) R-module structure, and where horn, 
denotes the hom-set in R-Mod, hom, that in Ab. 
(b) The additive group Q/Z of rational numbers modulo 1 is known to be an 
injective cogenerator of Ab. Use (a) to prove that homz(R, Q/Z) is an injective 
cogenerator of R-Mod ("injective" object as defined in 5 4). 

Adjoints in Topology 
1 29 
3. Use Exercise 2(b) and the special adjoint functor theorem to prove that any 
continuous additive functor T: R-Mod+Ab is representable. (Watt's theorem). 
4. (stone-tech compactification.) If X is a completely regular topological space, 
show that the universal arrow X 4 G F X  for the left adjoint to (1) is an injection. 
(Use the Urysohn lemma: For x + y  in X completely regular there exists a 
continuous j: X-I 
with /x+ jy and I the unit interval.) Classical sources 
describe this compactification only when X 1s completely regular. This restriction 
is needless; it arose from the idea of considering just universal injections. not 
universal arrows. 
9. Adpints in Topology 
Top is the category with objects all (small) topological spaces X, Y, ... 
and arrows all continuous maps f : X + Y .  The standard forgetful 
functor (usually a nameless orphan!) 
sends X to GX, the set of points in X, is faithful, and has a left adjoint 
D which assigns to each set S the discrete topology on S (i.e., all subsets of 
S are open). Therefore G preserves all limits which may exist in Top 
(this is why the underlying set of the product of spaces is the cartesian 
product of their underlying sets). The forgetful functor G also has a 
right adjoint D', which assigns to each set S the indiscrete topology 
on S (with only S and 0 open). Therefore G preserves all colimits which 
may exist in Top - and this is why the coproduct of two spaces is formed 
by putting a topology on the disjoint union of the underlying sets. 
Next consider the subspace topology on a set SC GX. 
If X is a fixed topological space, G induces a functor 
J 
J. 
Y' 
I' + X  GY' 
"' 
~ G X ,  
here ,f and ,f' are objects and h an arrow of the comma category (Topix). 
This functor G 1 X has a right adjoint L. Indeed. an object r : S-* G X in 
(SetlGX) is a set S and a function r on S to GX. Put on S the topology 
with open sets all t-' U for U open in X. and call the resulting space 
LS: then t is a continuous map Lt: L S - X .  (For example. if S is a 
subset of GX, then LS is just S with the usual "subspace topology"). 
This topology on LS has the familiar universal property: Any continuous 
map f :  Y+X which factors through t as G f = t o  s, in Set, 
has s :  Y d L S  continuous. This property just restates the desired 
adjunction: hom(Gf, t )  z hom( f, Lt). Observe that (GJX) - L = Id; L is 
a "right-adjoint-right-inverse" to (G 1 X). 
Note especially that the universal property of the subspace topology 
on a subset SC GX refers not only to the other subspaces of X, but to 
other spaces Y and any continuous f :  Y+X which factors through 
the inclusion t :  S+GX (i.e., has image contained in the subset S). 
This adjoint may be used to construct (the usual) equalizers in Top 
by the following general process: 
Proposition 1. If G : C-+ D is a faitl$ul functor, if D has equalizers, 
and if, for each x E C, (G 1 x): (C 1 x)--r(D 1 Gx) has a right-adioint- 
right-incerse L, then C has equalizers. 
Proof. To get the equalizer of a parallel pair f,/' : x-y, 
apply G, 
take the equalizer t : s+Gx of G,f, Gf' in D and apply L; the universal 
property of the adjunction shows Lt: Ls+x an equalizer in C. 
This argument is just an element-free version of the usual definition 
of the equalizer: Given two continuous maps f.,f' : X-* Y, take the set S 
of points x of X with f x = f 'x and impose the subspace topology. The 
adjunction explains why the subspace topology. 
Now Top is well known to be complete: To prove this one needs 
only equalizers (of parallel pairs) and products. The product of any 
family XI, i e J, of spaces is constructed by taking the product UGX, of 
the underlying se\ts and putting on it the (universal) topology in which . 
all projections p, : I7G XI+ GX,. i e J. are continuous. The general fact 
that to spaces XI. a set S, and functions t, : S--+GX, there is a "universal" 
topology with exactly those open sets on S required to make all t, con- 
tinuous can be expressed categorically (Exercise 3). 
Colimits may be treated in dual fashion. For any space X the functor 
has a left adjoint M. Indeed. an object of (GX 1Set) is a function r : G X-+S 
to a set S. Put on S the topology with open sets all subsets 1;cS with 
r - '  V open in X and call the resulting space MS. (If r :  GXAS is a 
surjection, this is the familiar "quotient topology" or "identification 
topology" on S.) Then the function r is a continuous map M t  : S-+:MS. 

130 
Limits 
Adjoints in Topology 
131 
Moreover, f : X +  Y  continuous and G f = k s  t for some function k, 
implies that k : Ms-, Y  is continuous. Thus k b k  is an adjunction 
with unit the identity map, so M is left-adjoint-right-inverse to XJG. 
Now Proposition 1 was proved just from the axioms for a category, 
so its dual is also true. This dual proposition and the above adjunction 
prove that Top has coequalizers. 
Similar constructions yield coproducts (=disjoint unions) and 
general colimits in Top. Such colimits appear often, usually under other 
names, as for instance in the basic process of constructing spaces by 
gluing pieces together. For example, let {Ui j i E J )  be an open cover of a 
space X. Each continuous f :  X--+ Y determines a J-indexed family of 
restrictions f 1 Ui : Ui+ Y; conversely, a familiar result states that a 
J-indexed family of continuous maps fi : U i 4  Y  determines a map f 
continuous on all of X if and only if fi I(Uin U,) = fjl (Uin Uj) 
for all 
i and j. This result may be expressed by the statement that the following 
diagram is an equalizer 
where the arrows are given by restriction, as above. This result may 
equally well be expressed by the statement that X is the colimit in Top, 
with colimitingcone the inclusion maps Ui+X, of the functor U : Y--.Top, 
where J' is the category with objects the pairs of indices (i, j), the single 
indices {i), and the (non-identity) maps (i,j)+(i), 
(i,j>+(j), while U 
is the functor with U (i, j) = Uin Uj, U ( i )  = Ui, with U on (non-identity) 
arrows the inclusion maps. 
Another coequalizer is the space X/A obtained from the space X 
by collapsing the subset A to a point. It is the coequalizer 
of the set of all the arrows sending the one point space * to one of the 
points a E A. It is used in homotopy theory. If we consider the category 
Top'2) whose objects are pairs (X, A) (a space X with a subset A) and 
whose arrows (X, A )  -+ ( X ' ,  A') are ,continuous maps X+ X' sending 
A to A', then the definition of X / A ,  for Y  a pointed topological space, 
reads : 
Thus (X, A) w X / A  is left adjoint to the functor Y -( Y, *) which sends 
each pointed space to the pair ( Y ,  *). 
There are many familiar subcategories of Top. 
Proposition 2. Haus, the full subcategory of all Hausdorff spaces in 
Top, is complete and cocomplete. The inclusion functor Haus+Top has a 
left adjoint H ,  as does the forgerful functor Haus-Set. 
Proof. The left adjoint H will be obtained by the adjoint functor 
theorem. First, any product of Hausdorff spaces or subspace of a Haus- 
dorff space is also Hausdorff, hence Haus is complete and the inclusion 
functor is continuous (i.e., it preserves small limits). It remains only to 
verify the solution set condition for every topological space X. But any 
continuous map of X to a Hausdorff space Y factors through the image, 
a subspace of Y, hence Hausdorff. This image is a quotient set of X with 
some topology, so there is at most a small set of (non-isomorphic) sur- 
jections X + Y  to a Hausdorff Y. This is the solution set condition. 
The resulting left adjoint H assigns to each space X a Hausdorff space 
HX and a continuous map q : X+ HX, universal from X to a Hausdorff 
space. Now q universal implies that q is a surjection, so HX may be 
described as the "largest Hausdorff quotient" of X. If X is already 
Hausdorff, we may take H X  = X and r] = 1, so H is a left-adjoint-left- 
inverse to the inclusion. 
Since H is a left adjoint, it preserves colimits. It follows that Haw 
has all small colimits (is cocomplete). In particular, the coproduct in 
Haus is the coproduct in Top (because a coproduct of Hausdorff spaces 
is Hausdorff), while a coequalizer in Haus is the largest Hausdorff 
quotient of the coequalizer in Top. 
The full subcategory of compactly generated Hausdorff spaces is 
especially convenient because it is cartesian closed (9 VII.8). 
Exercises 
1. For the full subcategory L conn of locally connected spaces in Top, prove that 
D : Set-+L conn has a left adjoint C, assigning to each space X the set of its 
connected components, but show that this functor C can have no left adjoint 
(because of misbehavior on equalizers). 
2. Show that the right adjoint D':Set+Top to the forgetul functor has no right 
adjoint (misbehavior on coproducts). 
3. (Categorical construction of the usual products in Top.) 
(a) For diagonal functors A : C-+CJ, A' : D + d ,  and T E  CJ, each G : C+D 
defines G,:(AiT)-r(A'JGT) by ( z : c * T )  i- 
( G r :  Gc-GT). IfG, hasa 
left adjoint and GT a limit in D, prove that T has a limit in C. 

132 
Limits 
(b) For G the forgetful functor Top+Set and J discrete. construct a left adjoint 
for G,, showing that it constructs on a set S the weakest topology making 
a given J-mdexed family of functions f, : S--+G 
X, contmous. 
(c) Conclude that Top has all (the usual) products. 
4. Construct left adjoints for each of the inclusion functors Top,+,-+Top,, 
n=0,1,2,3, where Top, denotes the full subcategory of all T,-spaces in Top, 
with T, = Normal. T, = Regular, T2 = Hausdorff, etc. 
5. Show that the inclusion Haus-+Top has no right adjoint, by showing that a 
coequalizer in Top of Hausdorff spaces need not be Hausdorff. Conclude that 
the forgetful functor Haus+Set has no right adjoint. 
Notes. 
Instances and special cases of the adjoint functor theorem abound; there have 
been many partial discoveries or rediscoveries. One version is Bourbaki's condition 
[I9571 for the existence of universal arrows; this version clearly formulated a 
solution set condition. but was cumbersome because Bourbaki's notion of 
"structures" did not make use of categorical ideas. The present version of the 
adjoint functor theorem was formulated and popularized by Freyd [1964], who 
also formulated SAFT. Our version of the special initial-object theorem is due 
to G. M. Kelly (private communication). 
VI. Monads and Algebras 
In this chapter we will examine more closely the relation between uni- 
versal algebra and adjoint functors. For each type r of algebras. we have 
the category Alg, of all algebras of the given type. the forgetful functor 
G: Alg,--+Set, and its left adjoint F. which assigns to each set S the 
free algebra FS of type T generated by elements of S. A trace of this 
adjunction (F, G, cp) : Set- Alg, resides in the category Set; indeed, the 
composite T =  G F  is a functor Set--+Set. which assigns to each set S 
the set of all elements of its corresponding free algebra. Moreover. this 
functor T is equipped with certain natural transformations which give 
it a monoid-like structure. called a "monad". The remarkable part is then 
that the whole category Alg, can be reconstructed from this monad inset. 
Another principal result is a theorem due to Beck. which describes 
exactly those categorics A with adjunctions (F. G. q )  . X- A which 
can be so reconstructed from a monad T i n  the base category X. It then 
turns out that algebras in this last sense are so general as to include the 
compact Hausdorff spaces (2 9). 
1. Monads in a Category 
Any endofunctor T: X --+ X has composites T 2  = 7 T :  X - + X  and 
T 3  = T~ T :  X--r X .  If 11 : T 2 a  T is a natural transformation. - with 
components p, : T's- T s  for each s E XI. then Tp : TJ+ T' denotes. 
the natural transformation with components (Tpl, = T(p,) : T . ' . Y ~  T2x 
while p T :  T 3 4  T2 has componcnts ( p  T), = pr.,. Indeed. Tp and p T 
are "horizontal" coniposites in the sense of # 11.5. 
Definition. A i~rotwd T = (T. 11. p )  ill u r ~ ~ t c p r !  
X corisisr\. of' o 
jirtlctor 7 :  X--+ X nrd two ritrtirrirl tr.irtlsfhrr~irrtio~i.s 
1 : I
,
 
T. 
/ r  : TI-- T 
( 1  

134 
Monads and Algebras 
Formally, the definition of a monad is like that of a monoid M in 
sets, as described in the introduction. The set M of elements of the monoid 
is replaced by the endofunctor T: X - X ,  while the cartesian product x 
of two sets is replaced by composite of two functors, the binary operation 
p : M x M+ M of multiplication by the transformation p : T2+ T and 
the unit (identity) element r] : l-+ M by r] : I,y+ T. We shall thus call q 
the unit and p the multiplication of the monad T; the first commutative 
diagram of (2) is then the associative law for the monad, while the second 
and third diagrams express the left and right unit laws, respectively. 
All told, a monad in X is just a monoid in the category of endofunctors 
of X, with product x replaced by composition of endofunctors and unit 
set by the identity endofunctor. 
Terminology. These objects (X, T, q,p) have been variously called 
"dual standard construction", "triple", "monoid", and "triad". The 
frequent but unfortunate use of the word "triple" in this sense has achieved 
a maximum of needless confusion, what with the conflict with ordered 
triple, plus the use of associated terms such as "triple derived functors" 
for functors which are not three times derived from anything in the world. 
Hence the term monad. 
Every adjunction ( F ,  G, q, E) : X - A  gives rise to a monad in the 
category X. Specifically, the two functors F : X--*A and G : A+ X have 
composite T =  GF an endofunctor, the unit q of the adjunction is a 
natural transformation q : I -  T and the counit E.: FG* IA of the ad- 
junction yields by horizontal composition a natural transformation 
p = G E F : G F G FI, G F = T. The associative law of (2) above for this p 
becomes the commutativity of the first diagram below 
Dropping G in front and F behind, this amounts to the commutativity 
of the second diagram, which holds by the very definition (4 11.4) of the 
(horizontal) composite EE = E . (F G E )  = E . ( E  F G) (i.e., by the "interchange 
law" for functors and natural transformations). Similarly, the left and 
right unit laws of (2) reduce to the diagrams 
which are essentially just the two triangular identities 
Algebras for a Monad 
135 
for an adjunction. Therefore (GF,q, GEF) is indeed a monad in X. 
Call it the monad defined by the adjunction (F, G, q, E). 
For example, the free group monad in Set is the monad defined by 
the adjunction (F, G, cp) : Set- Grp, with G : Grp-Set 
the usual 
forgetful functor. 
Dually, a comonad in a category consists of a functor L and trans- 
formations 
which render commutative the diagrams 
Each adjunction (F, G,q, E): X-+A defines a comonad (FG, E, FqG) in A. 
What is a monad in a preorder P? A functor T: P+P is just a function 
T: P+P which is monotonic ( x  $ y in P implies Tx j Ty);, there are 
natural transformations q and p as in (I) precisely when 
for all x E P; the diagrams (2) then necessarily commute because in a 
preorder there is at most one arrow from here to yonder. The first equation 
of (3) gives Tx 5 T(Tx). Now suppose that the preorder P is a partial 
order ( x  5 y 5 x implies x = y). Then the Eqs. (3) imply that T(Tx) = Tx. 
Hence a monad Tin a partial order P is just a closure operation t in P ;  
that is, a monotonic function t : P-P with x I t x  and t(tx) = t x  for all 
X E  P. 
We leave the reader to describe a morphism (T, p, q)-*(T', 
p', $) 
of monads (a suitable natural transformation TI, T') and the category 
of all monads in a given category X .  
2. Algebras for a Monad 
The natural question, "Can every monad be defined by a suitable pair 
of adjoint functors?" has a positive answer, in fact there are two positive 
answers provided by two suitable pairs of adjoint functors. The first 
answer (due to Eilenberg-Moore [1965]) construct from a monad 
(T, q, p )  in X a category of xT of "T-algebras" and an adjunction 
X-XT 
which defines (T, q, p) in X. Formally, the definition of a 
T-algebra is that of a set on which the "monoid" T acts (6. 
the introduc; 
tion). 

136 
Monads and Algebras 
Definition. If T = (T, tl, p )  is a monad in X ,  a T-algebra ( x ,  h) is 
a pair consisting of an object x E X  
(the underlying object of the algebra) 
and an arrow h :  Tx-x oj X (called the structure map of' the algebra) 
which makes both the diagrams 
commute. (The first diagram is the associative law, the second the unit law.) 
A morphism f: 
(x, h)+ (x', h') of T-algebras is an arrow f: 
x+x' of 
X which renders commutative the diagram 
Theorem 1. (.Every monad is defined by its T-algebras.) If <T, q, p) 
is a monad in X ,  then the set of all T-algebras and their morphisms form 
a category X T .  There is an adjunction 
in which the functors Gr and Fr are given by the respective assignments 
while qT= q and $(x, h) = h /Or each T-algebra (x, h). The monad 
defined in X by this adjunction is the given monad <T, q, p). 
The proof is straightforward verification. If f: 
( x ,  h)+(x', h') 
and g: (x', h')-+<xM, h") are morphisms of T-algebras, so is their 
composite g f ;  with this composition of arrows, the T-algebras evidently 
form a category XT, as asserted. The functor GT : X T 4 X  is the evident 
functor which simply forgets the structure map of each T-algebra. On 
the other hand, for each x E X the pair (Tx, p, : T(Tx)--+ Tx) is a T- 
algebra (the free T-algebra on x), in view of the associative and (left) 
unit laws for the monad T. Hence X J ~ ( T X ,  
p,) does indeed define a 
functor FT : X-+XT, as asserted. Then Gf Frx = GT<Tx, A) = Tx, so 
the unit 7 of the given monad is a natural transformation q = qT : 1 ~ 4  
GT 
F? 
On the other hand, F'GT(x, h )  = (Tx, px), while the first square in the 
definition (1) of a T-algebra (x, h )  states that the structure map h: Tx-+x 
Algebras for a Monad 
137 
is a morphism (Tx, p,)d(x, h )  of T-algebras. The resulting trans- 
formation 
is natural, by the definition (above) of a morphism of T-algebras. The 
triangular identities for an adjunction read 
The first holds by the (right) unit law for T, the second by the unit law 
(see (1)) for a T-algebra. Therefore rf and E~ define an adjunction, as 
stated. 
This adjunction thus determines a monad in X. The endofunctor 
GT 
is the original T, its unit qT is the original unit, and its multiplica- 
tion pT = 
F~ has pTx = G ' E ~  (Tx, ~ c , )  = GTpK = ~c,, 
so is the original 
multiplication of T. The proof is complete. 
We now give several examples which show that the T-algebras for 
familiar monads are the familiar algebras. 
Closure. A closure operation T on a preorder P is a monad in P 
(see 9 1); a T-algebra is then an x E P with Tx 5 x (the structure map). 
Since x 5 Tx for all x, a T-algebra is simply an element x e  P with 
x S Tx 6 x. If P is a partial order, this means that x = Tx, so that a 
T-algebra is simply an element x of the partial order which is closed, 
in the usual sense. 
Group actions. If G is a (small) group, then for every (small) set X 
the definitions 
for x EX, gl , g2 E G and u the unit element of G,jefine a monad (T, q, p) 
on Set. A T-algebra is then a set X together with a function h : G x X- X 
(the structure map) such that always 
If we write g - x  for h(g, x), these are just the usual conditions that 
(g, x) - g .  x defines an action of the group G on the set X .  That T- 
algebras for the monad T are just the group actions is not a surprise, 
since our definition of T-algebras was constructed on the model of 
group actions. 

138 
Monads and Algebras 
Modules. If R is a (small) ring, then for each (small) abelian group A 
the definitions 
TA=RQA, 
A-RQA, 
R@(R@A)--tRQA, 
a b l Q a ,  
r,Q(r2Qa)~-.,r2Qa, 
for a E A, rl, r2 E R, define a monad on Ab. Much as in the previous case, 
the T-algebras are exactly the left R-modules. 
Exercises 
1. Complete semi-lattices (E. Manes; thesis). Recall that a complete semi-lattice is 
a partial order Q in which every subset S c Q has a supremum (least upper bound) 
in Q. Let B be the covariant power set functor on Set so that BX is the set of all 
subsets SCX, while for each function j :  X-Y, (9 j)S is the direct image of S 
under f. For each set X, let qx : X - B X  
send each x 6 X to the one point 
set {x), while ~ i ,  
: BBX-+PX sends each set of sets into its union. 
(a) Prove that (9, q,p) is a monad B on Set. 
(b) Prove that each 8-algebra (X, h) is a complete semi-lattice when x 5 y 
is defined by h{x, y} = y, and sups = hS for each SC X. 
(c) Prove conversely that every (small) complete semi-lattice is a 8-algebra 
in this way. 
(d) Conclude that the category of 8-algebras is the category of all (small) 
complete semi-lattices, with morphisms the order and sup-preserving 
functions. 
2. Show that GT: XT+X creates limits. 
3. (a) For monads (T, q, p) and (T: 
q', p') on X, define a morphism 8 of monads 
as a suitable natural transformation 8 : T+ T', and construct the category 
of all monads in X. 
(b) From 9 construct a functor B* : xT'+xT such that G*O 9* = G ~ '  
and a 
natural transformation FT+B* 0 FT'. 
3. The Comparison with Algebras 
Suppose we start with an adjunction X-A, 
construct the monad T 
defined in X by the adjunction and then the category XT of T-algebras; 
we then ask: How is this related to the original category A? A full answer 
will relate not only the categories, but the adjunctions, and is provided 
by the following comparison theorem. 
~heorem'l. (Comparison of adjunctions with algebras.) Let 
(F, 6, q, E) : X-A 
be an adjunc:ion, T = (G F, q, GE F) the monad it defines in X .  Then there 
is a unique functor K : A-+ xr with GTK = G and K F = FT. 
The Comparison with Algebras 
139 
Proof. The conclusion asserts that we can fill in the arrow K in the 
following diagram so that both the F-square and the G-square commute 
Now the counit E of the given adjunction defines for each a E A an arrow 
GE, : G F Ga+ Ga. This arrow may be considered as a structure map h 
for a T-algebra structure on the object Ga = x, for the requisite diagrams 
(cases of (2.1)) are 
They commute (the first is the definition of GEE, the second,is one of the 
triangular identities for the given adjunction). Therefore for any f :  a+a' 
in A we define K by 
since E is natural, the proposed arrow K f commutes with GE and so is 
a morphism of T-algebras. It is routine to verify that K is a functor with 
It remains to show K unique. First, each K a  must be a T-algebra, 
and the commutativity requirement GTK = G means that the underlying 
X-object of this T-algebra Ka is Ga. Therefore K a  must have the form' 
K a =  (Ga, h) for some structure map h; moreover GTK=G means 
that the value of K on an arrow f in A must be K f = G f, exactly as in (2) 
above. It remains only to determine the structure map h. Now (1) com- 
mutes, and the two adjunctions (F, G, ...) and ( F ~ ,  Gr, ...) have the 
same unit q, so the two functors K : A - + x ~  and the identity I : X+X 
define a map of the first adjunction to the second, in the sense considered 
in 5 IV.7. Proposition IV.7.1 for this map then states that K&=eTK. 
But K on arrows is G, so KE, = GE, for each a E A, while the definition 
of the counit E~ of an algebra gives cTKa = cT(Ga, h) = h. Thus K E = E ~ K  
implies GE. = h, so the structure map h is determined and K is unique. 
For many familiar adjunctions (F, G, . . .) this comparison functor K 
will be an isomorphism; we then say that G is monadic (tripleable). 

140 
Monads and Algebras 
However, here is an easy example when K is not an isomorphism, and, 
not even an equivalence. The forgetful functor G : Top-Set 
has a left 
adjoint D which assigns to each set X the discrete topological space 
(all subsets open in X), for the identity arrow q, : X-G DX is trivially 
universal from the object X to the functor G. This adjunction 
(D. G. q. . . .) : Set-Top 
defines on Set the monad 1 = ( I .  1,l) which is 
the identity (identity functor, identity as unit and as multiplication). 
The 1-algebras in Set are just the sets, so the comparison functor 
Top-Top' 
= Set is in this case the given forgetful functor G. 
4. Words and Free Semigroups 
The comparison functor can be illustrated explicitly in the case of 
semigroups A semigroup is a set S equipped with an associativr binary 
operation v : S x S-+S. The free semigroup W X  on a set X is like the 
free monoid on X (5 11.7). It consists of all words ( x , )  ... (x,) of positive 
length n spelled in letters xi E X, where we write ( x )  to distinguish the 
word ( x )  in W X from the element x E X. Words are multiplied by 
juxtaposition, 
K x , )  ... (x,))((y,) 
... (ym))= ( X I )  -.. (x") ( Y , )  ... (Y,) ; 
this multiplication v is associative, so makes FX = ( W X ,  v )  a semigroup, 
with the set WX the disjoint union LI Xn, n = 1-2, . . . . If G : SmgrpjSet 
is the forgetful functor from the category of all small semigroup (forget 
the multiplication), then the arrow q x :  X - t G F X  defined by x c ( x )  
(send each x to the one-letter word in x) is universal from X to G. There- 
fore F is a functor, left adjoint to G, and q defines an adjunction 
If S is any semigroup (set S with an associative binary operation S x S-S, 
written as multiplication) the counit E, of this adjunction is by definition 
that morphism 6: 
FGS+S of semigroup for which the composite 
G E ~ D  
qbS: GS+G FGS-GS 
is the identity; in other words, ss is the 
unique morphism of semi-group which sends each generator ( s )  to s. 
This means that 
eS((s1) . . . (s,)) = S ,  .. . S, 
(product in S) 
(1) 
for all si e S: The counit E removes the "pointy bracket'' < ). 
Propition 1. The monad on Set determined by the adjunction 
Set -Smgrp is 
W = ( W : S e t 4 S e t .  q:I+W, p :  w 2 4 , W >  
Words and Free Semigroups 
m 
where W X  = U Xn, qxx = ( x )  for each x e X ,  while px is 
n = I  
for all positive integers k, all k-tuples n,. . . . , nk of positive integers, and 
all xij E X .  
Proof. By definition, qx = ( x ) ,  whilep = G E  F : W2+ W is determined 
by the formula above for E,, where we have written each element of 
W 2  X as a word (of length k) in k words of the respective lengths n,, . .. , n,. 
More briefly, p, applied to a word of words, removes the outer pointy 
brackets. 
Note that this description allows direct verification of the unit and 
associative laws for the monad W, without overt reference to the notion 
of a semi-group. For example, the associative law for p amounts to an 
observation on three layers of pointy brackets, that removing first the 
middle brackets and then the outer brackets gives the same result as 
removing first the outer brackets and then the (newly) outer brackets. 
Proposition 2. For the above word-monad W in Set, the W-algebras 
have the form ( S ,  v,, v2, . . . ) : A set S equipped with one n-ary operation 
V ,  :S"-+S for each positive integer n, such that v, = 1 while for every 
positive k and every k-tuple of positive integers n,, . . . , nk one has the identity 
. s n r  + ...+ n k - 3 ,  
vk(vn, x '.. x vnk)= vnl + ... +nk . 
(2) 
A morphism f :  (S, v,, . . .)-+ (S', v;, . . .) of W-algebras is a function 
f :  S d S '  which commutes with each v,, so that f vn= vb f": Sn+S'. 
Proof. Consider a W-algebra (S, h : W S -  S). Since W S  = II Sn, the 
structure map h is a list of n-ary operations V, : Sn--+S, one for each n. 
The unit law for the algebra requires that hq, = 1, hence that v, be'the 
identity. On the other hand, since the product of sets is distributive over 
the coproducts of sets, 
where n runs over all k-tuples (n,, . . . , n,). 
With this notation, the 
associative law for the structure map h takes the stated form (2). 
The simplest case of this identity (2), for 3 = 2 + 1 = 1 + 2 and v, the 
identity, is 
If we write the binary operation v2 as multiplication, this states that the 
temary operation v3 satisfies, for all elements x, y, z E S, 

142 
Monads and Algebras 
Similarly, v, must be the n-fold product. An easy induction proves 
Corollary. The system (S, v , ,  v 2 ,  ...) is a W-algebra, as ubove, if 
and only if v, = 1, v ,  : S x S-+S is an associatice binary operatlon on S; 
and for all n 2 2, v ,  + , = v,(v, x 1 )  : S"+'-+ S. 
Thus, if we start with semigroups, regarded as sets (S, v) with one 
associative binary operation, define the resulting monad W o n  Set, and 
then construct the category of W-algebras, we get the same semigroups, 
now regarded as algebraic system (S, v,, v,, ...), where v ,  = 1, v ,  = v, 
and v,+, i s  v, iterated. The comparison functor K : Smgrp-+Setw is 
the evident map ( S ,  v )  H ( S ,  1 ,  v,, . . ., v,, ...) where v, is the iterate of 
the binary v. In other words, K is an isomorphism, but it replaces the. 
algebraic system (S, v )  with one binary operation by the same set with 
all the iterated operations derived from this binary operation. 
A similar description applies to algebras over other familiar monads 
(Exercises 1, 2). 
Exercises 
1. Let Wo be the monad in Set defined by the forgetful functor Mon-.Set. 
Show 
that a Wo-algebra is a set M with a string v,, v,, . . . of n-ary operations v,, where 
v, : *--+M is the unit of the monoid M and v, is the n-fold product. 
2. For any ring R with identity, the forgetful functor G :  R-Mod--+Set from the 
category of leR R-modules has a left adjoint and so defines a monad (T,, q.p) 
in Set. 
(a) Prove that this monad may be described as follows: For each set X, T,X 
is the set of all those functions f :  X-.R 
with only a finite number of non- 
zero values; for each function t : X-. 
Y and each y E Y, [(TRt) fly = Z'Ix, 
with sum taken over all x E X with hx = y ; for each x e X, qxx : X 4 R  is 
defined by (qxx)x = 1, (qxx)y =O; for each k~ T,(T,X), pxk: X-+R is 
defined for x e X by (p, k), = Zf k, f,, the sum taken over all f E TRX. 
(b) From this description, verify directly that (T,, q, 1) is a monad. 
(c) Show that the (T,, q,p)-algebras are the usual R-modules, described 
not via addition and scalar multiple, but via all operations of linear combina- 
tion (The structure map h assigns to each f the "linear combination with 
coefficients f x".) 
3. Give a similar complete description of the adjunction defined by the forgetful 
functor CRng-+Set,noting that TX is the ring of all polynomials with integral 
coeflicients in letters (i.e., indeterminates) x E X. 
4. The adjunction (F, G, q )  : Ab-Rng with G the functor "forget the multiplica- 
tion in a ring" defines a monad T in Ab. 
(a) Give a direct description of this monad, like that in the text for W. with X" 
replaced by the n-fold tensor power and coproduct LI by the (infinite) direct 
sum of abelian groups. 
(b) Give the corresponding description of T-algebras and show that the com- 
parison functor from rings to T-algebras is an isomorphism. 
Free Algebras for a Monad 
143 
5. Free Algebras for a Monad 
Given an adjunction 
any full subcategory B C A which contains all the objects Fx for x E X 
leads to another adjunction 
where the functor FB is just F with its codomain restricted from A to 
B, GB is G with domain restricted to B, while for x  E X and be B the 
given adjunction leads to a bijection cp, 
which is manifestly natural in x and b. Moreover, this second adjunction 
qB defines in X the same monad as did the first. This observation shows 
that one and the same monad in X can usually be defined by many 
different adjunctions. The "smallest" such adjunction will be the one 
where B is F X ,  the full subcategory of A with objects all the "free" 
objects F x  E A. The familiar properties of arrows F x - F y  between such 
free objects d o  suggest a way of constructing this subcategory F X  and 
the adjunction cp, directly from the monad. Here is the suggested con- 
struction, which really gives this category directly and not as a'sub- 
category (cf. Exercise 3). 
Theorem 1. (The Kleisli category of a monad, [1965]). Given a monad 
( 7 , ~ .  
p )  in a category X .  consider to each object x e X a new object xT 
and to each arrow f :  x- T y  in X a new arrow f : XT+YT. These new 
objects and arrows constitute a category when the composite of f b  with 
gb : yT+ zT is defined by 
Moreover, functors FT : X +  X T  and GT : XT+ X are defined by 
respectively, so that GTxT = T x  on objects. Then the blj.ection f'k f 
gives an adjunction (FT. G,. cp,) 
: X - X ,  
which defines in X precisely the 
gicen monad (T. ?I. p). 
Sketch of proof: The definition of the arrows f' amounts to a bi- 
jection XT(xT, J-,)Z X(.u. Tj*) on horn-sets, while the definition of the 
composite in X ,  refers to the composite 
.X 
T 
T9 > T Z i  " ~ T z  

1 44 
Monads and Algebras 
in X .  A suitable large diagram shows the new composition associative: 
Other diagrams prove that (qJ : xT+xT is a left and right unit for this 
composition. Another calculation shows that FT and GT as described 
are indeed functors. By construction, fb++ 
f is a bijection 
it is natural in x and y,, so yields the desired adjunction p,. Its unit 
is q, and its counit ET is given by (ET)YT = (I Tp)v : ( T Y ) ~ - + Y ~ .  
The resulting 
multiplication in X is GTsT FT, which by the definition of GT is exactly 
the given multiplication p. Therefore the adjunction does define the 
original monad T. 
Theorem 2. (The comparison theorem for the Kleisli construction.) 
Let (F, G, q, E )  : X -  A be an adjunction and T = ( G  F, q, G E  F )  the monad 
it dejnes in X .  Then there is a unique functor L : XT+ A with G L = GT 
and L FT = F. 
We leave the proof to the reader, noting that the uniqueness of L re- 
quires another (and somewhat different) application of Proposition IV.7.1 
on maps of adjunctions. 
The two comparison theorems may be summarized as follows: 
Theorem 3. Given a monad ( T ,  q, p )  in X ,  consider the category with 
objects all those adjunctions ( F ,  G, q, E )  : X -  A which dejine (T, q, p )  
in X ,  and with arrows those maps of adjunctions (4 IV.7) which are the 
identity on X .  This category has an initial object - the Kleisli construction- 
and a terminal object (FT, GT, q, ,zT) : X + X T :  
Exercises 
1. Construct the Kleisli comparison functor L. prove its uniqueness, and show 
that the image of X, under L is the full subcategory FX of A with objects all 
F x ,  x E X. 
2. Show that the restriction of L gives an equivalence of categories XT+ F X .  
3. Construct an example of an adjunction where F is not a bijection on objects. 
Deduce that the equivalence XT-+FX in Exercise 2 need not be an isomorphism 
(Suggestion: Sw T(S) = the one-point-set defines a monad in Set). 
4. In the summary comparison Theorem 3, does the category of all adjunctlons 
really exist? 
5. If ( F ,  G, q. c )  : X- B defines the monad (T, q. p )  in X ,  while a second adjunction 
(L. 
R. 17'. c') : B- A defines the identity monad in B (i e. R L= I,. rf = 1, and 
Rc' L = I). prove that the cornposlte adjunction X- 
A defines In ~ h h e  
same 
monad (T, q, p ) .  
Split Cocqualizers 
6. Split Coequalizers 
We need certain special types of coequalizers. By a fork in a category C 
we mean a diagram 
aab'.c T? 
(1) 
in C with edo = ea,. A fork is thus just a cone from the diagram a z b  
to the vertex c. Recall that an arrow e is a coequalizer of the parallel 
pair of arrows do and 8, if it is a fork and if any f: b+d with f do = f a, 
has the form f = f'e for a unique f': c-d. An arrow e is called an 
absolute coequalizer of a, and a, in C if for any functor T: C+X (to any 
category X whatever) the resulting fork 
still has T e  a coequalizer (of Td, and Td,). In particular, an absolute 
coequalizer is automatically a coequalizer. In the same way one can 
define absolute colimits (or absolute limits) of any other type. 
A split fork in C is a fork (1) with two more arrows 
which satisfy with the arrows (1) the conditions 
We say that s and t split the fork (1). These conditions imply that e is 
a split epi, with right inverse s. A split fork can also be represented as a 
pair of commutative squares 
such that both horizontal composites are the identity. Put differently: 
The arrows d, and e are objects in the functor category C2 and 
(So, e )  : 8, + e is an arrow between them which has (r, s) : e+ ?, as its 
right inverse: (a,, e )  ( t ,  s )  = (I, 1). 
Lemma. In every split fork, e is the coequalizei. of ?o aud ?,. 
Proof. For any arrow f :  b+d 
with f So = f 4 ,  take f '= f s  : c-d. 
Then, using the Eqs. (3) defining a split fork. 
so f factors through e. On the other hand, f = ke for some k : c-d 
implies f s  = kes = k, so k is necessarily j"= f s. and f '  is unique. 

146 
Monads and Algebras 
Beck's Theorem 
147 
By a split coequalizer of do and dl we shall mean the arrow e of such 
a split fork on do and a,. It is possible to characterize those parallel 
pairs a,, dl for which any (and hence every) coequalizer is split (Exercise 2). 
Since a split fork is' defined by equations involving only composites 
and identities, it remains a split fork under the application of any functor. 
Hence, 
Corollary. In every split fork, e is an absolute coequalizer of do and dl. 
Here is an example of a fork in Cat, for C any category: 
C2 is the category whose objects are the arrows of C; a. and 4 are 
the functors assigning to each arrow its domain and its codomain, 
respectively, while e is the functor which sends every object of C to the 
unique object of 1. If C has a terminal object a,, this fork is a split by 
the functor s which sends the unique object of 1 to a,, and the functor t 
which sends each ccC to the unique arrow cda,. 
Here is an example of a fork in Grp. Let N.a G be any normal sub- 
group of G and form the semidirect product G x ,N, which has elements 
the pairs (x, n) for x E G, n E N  with the (evidently associative) multi- 
plication (x, n) (y, m) = (x y, (Y-' n y) m). Then 
is a fork, where p is the usual projection to the quotient group GIN, 
while do(x, n) = x, a, (x, n) = xn. Moreover, in this fork p is clearly the 
coequalizer of do and al. This fork is not in general split, but if we apply 
the standard forgetful functor U : Grp-Set, 
the resulting fork in Set is 
split. Take s to be a function sending each coset (element of GIN) to a 
representative element in G, while tx = (x, x-l(spx)). This example 
incidentally, gives one way in which any quotient group can be regarded 
as a coequalizer in the category of groups. 
Exercises 
1. In Rng give a similar construction to show that every quotient RIA of a ring R 
by an ideal A can be represented as a coequalizer, and show that the resulting 
fork is split after the application of the forgetful functors to sets. 
2. A parallel pair do, d, : a z b  is,said to be contractible (Beck) if there is an arrow 
t:bdawith d,t=1 and a,td,=d,ta,. 
(a) In any split fork (I), prove a,, a, contractible; 
(b) If a contractible pair has a coequalizer, prove that this coequalizer is split. 
7. Beck's Theorem 
A basic construction in familiar categories of algebras is the formation 
ofcoequalizers- in Grp, via factor groups, in R-Mod via quotient modules, 
and the like. Beck's theorem will characterize the category of T-algebras 
for any monad T as a category with an adjunction in which the "forgetful" 
functor creates suitable coequalizers. We recall (Ej V.l) that a functor 
G : A-X 
creates coequalizers for a parallel pair f, g : a 3  
b in A when 
to each coequalizer u : Gb-z 
of G f, Gg in X there is a unique object c 
and a unique arrow e : b-c 
with Gc = z and Ge = u and when moreover 
this unique arrow is a coequalizer off and g. 
Theorem 1. (Beck's theorem characterizing algebras.) Let 
(F, G, q, E) : X-A 
(1) 
be an adjunction, (T, 
q, p) the monad which it dejines in X, XT the category 
of T-algebras for this monad, and 
(FT, GT, qT, cT) : X-XT 
(2) 
the corresponding adjunction. Then the following conditions are equivalent: 
(i) The (unique) comparison functor K : A-XT 
is an isomorphism; 
(ii) The functor G : A-X 
creates coequalizers for those parallel 
pairs f, g in A for which G f, Gg has an absolute coequalizer in X; 
(iii) The functor G : A+X 
creates coequalizers for those parallel 
pairs f, g in A for which G f, Gg has a split coequalizer in X. 
Proof. We first show that (i) implies (ii). Consider two maps 
of T-algebras for which the corresponding arrows in X have an absolute 
coequalizer 
do 
x
r
y
A
z
.
 
d 1 
To create a coequalizer for this parallel pair we must first find a unique 
T-algebra structure m: Tz-z 
on z such that e becomes a map of T- 
algebras, and then prove that this e is, in fact, a coequalizer of do, d, in 
the category XT of T-algebras. But on the left side of the diagram 
both the upper square (with do) and the lower square (with dl) commute, 
because do and d, are maps of algebras; it follows that ek has equal 

148 
Monads and Algebras 
Beck's Theorem 
149 
composites with Td, and Td,. But e is an absolute coequalizer, so Te 
is still a coequalizer: Therefore there is a unique vertical map m, as 
shown, which makes the right square commute. 
We now wish to show that this m is a structure map for z.   he 
associative law for m (outer square below) may be compared with the 
associative law for the structure map k (inner square below) by the diagram 
The left hand trapezoid commutes since p is natural, and the other three 
trapezoids commute by the definition of m above in terms of k and e. 
Therefore 
mo ~ m o  
~
~
e
=
m
~
~
o
~
~
e
.
 
But e is an absolute coequalizer, so T 2 e  is a coequalizer and thus is epi; 
cancelling ~~e gives the associative law for m The same style of argument 
will prove that m satisfies the unit law ma q, = 1 : z+z. 
We have found the desired unique T-algebra structure m on z, with 
e a map of T-algebras by the construction of m. To show that e is a 
coequalizer in XT, consider any other map f: (y, k)-+(w, n) of T- 
algebras with f do = f d, . Then f :  y--rw is an arrow in X with f do = f dl, 
while e is an (absolute) coequalizer of do, d, : x z y .  Therefore there is 
a map f' : z+ w with f = f 'e. An argument just like that for the diagram 
(3) shows that f' is in fact a map of T-algebras. Since it is unique with 
f = f 'e, this completes the proof that e is a coequalizer in XT, and hence 
that (i) implies (ii). 
Next, every split coequalizer is an absolute coequalizer, hence condi- 
tion (ii) of the theorem requires more creativity of G than does condition 
(iii). Therefore (ii) implies (iii). 
It remains to prove that (iii) implies (i). As a preliminary, consider 
a T-algebra (x, h); the conditions that h :  Tx-+x be a structure map 
of an algebra are exactly the conditions that 
be a fork in X split by TZx- 
T x a x .  Indeed, the fork condition 
hop, = ho Th for (4) is just the associative law for h, the composite 
h ; 
q, is 1 because of the unit law for ( x ,  h), while the equations 
px'rlTx=l, 
T h : ~ T x = ~ x ~ h  
hold by the unit law for the monad T and the naturality of q. 
For each object a E A, the adjunction (F, G, E, q) : X - A  provides 
a fork 
in A which we call the "canonical presentation" of a. It does correspond 
to a familiar presentation if A = Grp; then E, is just the projection on the 
group a of the free group generated by all the elements of a. If the functor G 
is applied to the fork (5) we get a split fork in X ;  indeed, that special 
case of the split fork (4) when (x, h) is the T-algebra (Ga, GE,) used 
in the comparison theorem. 
Now consider any other adjunction (F', G', q', E') : X -  A' which 
defines the same monad in X .  By a comparison (of F' to F) we mean a 
functor M : A'+A with M F' = F and G M  = G'; as already noted, such a 
comparison is a morphism of adjunctions and hence satisfies ME' = E M .  
Lemma. If G satisfies hypothesis (iii) of the theorem on the creation 
of coequalizers, then there is a unique comparison M : A1+A. 
Since GT is now known to satisfy this hypotheses, this lemma will 
incidentally provide a new proof of the comparison theorem (5 3). 
Proof. If M exists, then F G M = M F' G' and ME' = EM, SO M must 
carry the canonical presentation of a' to the canonical presentation 
of Ma'. In other words, the object Ma' must fit in a fork 
in A, and moreover k must be ME:, 
Map this fork to the category 
X by the functor G. The result is the fork 
in X which is split - since T = G F, it is a case of the fork (4) above, for 
x = G'a'. But the hypothesis (iii) insures that G creates coequalizers in 
this case. Therefore there is exactly one possible choice for k and Ma' 
above; (moreover, once Ma' is chosen, 
has the property required of 
k, so must be k.) This shows that the comparison M is unique if it exists. 
Now choose k and Ma' in this way. To show Ma functor consider any 
f :  a'+ b' in A'. In the diagram 
F G' 
FG' I 
! 
FG'F'G'J 
i M/ 
I 
F'G'bl---7FG'b' 
k b  + M b f  

150 
Monads and Algebras 
Beck's Theorem 
151 
both left-hand squares commute, so k, - F G'f must factor though the 
first coequalizer k by a unique arrow M a'-+ M b' as shown. Taking this 
arrow to be M f clearly makes M a functor A'+ A, just as required for 
the lemma. 
By this lemma we construct both the original comparison functor 
K :  A - + x ~  and a comparison functor M :  XT-A. 
The composite 
M K : A+ A is then a comparison (of the adjunction F.. . to itself), 
hence must be the identity, again by the lemma. Similarly, K M : xT--txT 
is a comparison of FT to FT, hence must be the identity. Now M K = 1 
and K M = 1 prove K  an isomorphism, as required for [i). 
The construction of M in this theorem may be further analyzed, 
using for parallel pairs the following notion of "reflection" of colimits: 
Definition. A functor G :  A-X 
reflects colimits of T :  J+A when 
every cone A :  T-a from T to a โฌ  A for which GA : G T-rGa is a co- 
limiting cone in X is already a colimiting cone in A. 
In particular, G reflects coequalizers when every fork in A which be- 
comes a coequalizer in X is already a coequalizer in A. Similarly, G 
reflects isomorphisms when, for all arrows t of A, G t  an isomorphism 
implies t an isomorphism. 
Beck's theorem has an acronym PTT for "precise tripleability 
theorem". There are many other versions: A "weak version, easier to 
prove, where there are hypotheses on the coequalizers of more pairs 
(Exercises 2, 3), an "equivalence" version, which gives conditions that the 
comparison functor K : A--+ XT be not an isomorphism but an equivalence 
of categories (Exercises 2, 6), a "constructive" version which analyses 
the hypotheses (certain hypotheses suffice to give a left adjoint for K ;  
others make this adjunction an equivalence: Exercises 2, S), a "crude" 
version (C T T or V T T) with strong hypotheses which apply well to the 
composite of several "forgetful" functors (Exercises 9-11). 
Exercises 
(Throughout, "coequalizers" means "coequalizers of parallel pairs".) 
1. If G creates coequalizers, prove that it also reflects coequalizers. 
2. Weak Tripleability Theorem (Beck's thesis). Given the adjunction (1) and the 
corresponding comparison functor K, give a direct proof of the following: 
(a) If A has all coequalizers, then K has a left adjoint L. 
(b) If, in addition, G preserves all coequalizers, then the unit of this adjunction 
is an isomorphism I z K L. 
(c) If, in addition, G reflects all coequalizers, then the counit of this adjunction 
is an isomorphism L K 2 I .  
3 (Alternative hypothesis for Exercise 2). If A has all coequalizers, G preserves 
all coequalizers, and G reflects isomorphisms, prove that G reflects all co- 
equalizers. 
4 (a) Show that the canonical presentation of a T-algebra (x, h) is 
(b) Show that the comparison functor M : x ~ - - ~ A  
in Beck's theorem appears 
as a coequalizer diagram 
5. Given the data (I), (2). and the comparison functor K, let P be the set of all those 
parallel pairs f, 
g : a 3  b in A such that G f, Gg has a split coequalizer. Using 
Exercise 4 (b), prove 
(a) If A has coequalizers of all pairs in P, K  has a left adjoint M. 
(b) If, in addition, G preserves all coequalizers of pairs in P, then the unit 
q : I+ K M of this adjunction is an isomorphism. 
(c) If, in addition to(a), G reflects coequalizers for all pairs in P, then the counit 
M K + l  of this adjunction is an isomorphism. 
6. Use the results of Exercise 5 and Theorem IV.4.1 to prove the following version 
of Beck's theorem, characterizing the category of T-algebras up to equivalence: 
Given the data (1) and (2), the following assertions are equivalent: 
(i) The comparison functor K : A--rXT is an equivalence of categories. 
(ii) If f, 
g is any parallel pair in A for which Gf, Gg has an absolute coequalizer, 
then A has a coequalizer for f, g, and G preserves and reflects coequalizers 
for these pairs. 
(iii) The same, with "absolute coequalizer" replaced by "split coequalizer". 
The next exercises use certain definitions of properties CT T, VT T, P T T 
for a functor G : A+X. Let C, (respectively S,) be the set of all those parallel 
pairs (f, g) in A such that (G f, Gg) has a coequalizer in X (respectively. a 
split coequalizer). Then G has CTT when G has a left adjoint, preserves and 
reflects all coequalizers which exist, and when A has coequalizers of all pairs 
in C,. Next, G has V T T  when G has a left adjoint, reflects coequalizers of all 
pairs in S,, and when A has split coequalizers of all pairs in S,. Finally, G is 
P T T when G has a left adjoint, preserves and reflects coeaualizen for all aain 
in S,, and when A has c&ualizers of all pairs in S,. ~ l e & l ~ ,  
C T T  and ~ T T  
imply PT T. 
7. C T T (Crude Tripleability Theorem; Barr-Beck). If G is C T T, prove that the 
comparison functor K is an equivalence of categories. 
8. V T T. If G is V T T, prove that the comparison functor is an equivalence of 
categories. 
9. Given functors G, : A-X, G, : X-+ Y, G, : Y+Z with G, C TT, G2 PTT, 
and G, V TT, prove that the composite functor G, G2 GI is P TT. 
10. Prove that the composite of two V T T functors is VTT. 
11. Prove that the composite of two C T T functors is CT T. 

152 
Monads and Algebras 
8. Algebras are T-algebras 
For semi-groups, monoids, and rings, we already know ($4) that the 
comparison functor is an isomorphism. This result holds more generally 
for any variety: 
Theorem 1. Let R be a set of operators, E a srr of identities (on 
the operators derived from Q), G the forgetful functor fiorn the category 
(Q, E)-Alg of all small (a, E)-algebras ro Set, and T the resulting monad 
in Set. Then the comparison functor K : ((2, ~ ) - ~ l g - + S e t ~  
is an iso- 
morphism. 
The proof will use Beck's theorem. Consider any parallel pair 
f, g : A= B
 of morphisms of (Q, E)-algebras for which the underlying 
functions have an absolute coequalizer e: 
G f 
G
A
t
G
B
 
+ X .  
G g 
(1) 
TO kreate coequalizers" we must show that the set-map e lifts to a unique 
morphism B-.? of algebras, and then that this map is a coequalizer of the 
algebra maps f, g. So consider any n-ary operator o E C2 with its given 
actions w ,  and O, on the sets A and B
 (as usual, we confuse the algebra A 
with its underlying set IAl). In the diagram below (ignore the right hand 
square) 
'" B~A+ 
p ..... h:?..-+ cn 
A" t 
(2) 
9 
the two left hand squares (with f and b, respectively) commute because 
f and g are morphisms of O-algebras. The function e is an absolute 
coequalizer in Set and therefore its n-th power e" is still a coequalizer 
(of jn and g"). But 
em, f" 
efw,= egw,= eo,gn, 
so ew, must factor uniquely through this coequalizer as emB = ox8. 
This defines the operation ox on X so that the square (2) on e commutes; 
that is, so that e is a morphism of R-algebras. The same diagram applies 
to all the derived operators A and defines A, uniquely; it follows that 
any identity 1, = p, valid in B is also valid in X, so X is a (0, 
E)-algebra. 
It remains to show e a coequalizer for algebras. So consider any 
morphism h :  B-+C of algebras with hf = hg. Then h f = hg in Set 
(apply the forgetful functor G), so h factors as h = h'e for a unique func- 
tion h'. We must show that the right hand square in (2) above commutes 
for every operator o. But h is a morphism of algebras, so 
h'wx@=hfew,= hwB= w,hn=wch'"en 
and e" a coequalizer means e" epi, hence gives h'mx = w,hrn, as required. 
Compact Hausdorff Spaces 
153 
Exercises 
1. Prove Theorem 1, using split coequalizers rather than absolute coequalizers, 
noting that each ox must be defined in terms of a splitting (s, t) of the fork (1) as 
o& ,,.... x,)=ewB(sx ,,.... S X , ) ,  
x i e x .  
(For n = 2, observe that this is like the usual definition of the product of cosets of 
a normal hbgroup.) 
2. If K is a commutative ring, show that Beck's theorem applies to the forgetful 
functor K-Alg+ K-Mod. 
9. Compact Hausdorff Spaces 
Theorem 1. The standard forgetful functor 
G : Cmpt Haus-*Set , 
which assigns to each (small) compact Hausdorff space its underlying 
set, is monadic. 
Proof. We already-know that G
 has a left adjoint F; indeed, we may 
take each F X  to be the stone-tech compactification (VA.2) of the set X 
with the discrete topology. 
For the remainder of the proof (given in a form due to R. Park [1971]) 
it is convenient to regard a topological space as a pair ( X ,  (-),) 
consist- 
ing of a set X and a closure operation s+S defined for all subsets 
S, TC X with the standard properties 
- 
0 = 0 ,  
SCS, S=S, SET=S'uT, 
with 0 the empty subset. A continuous map f :  ( X ,  ( -),)-+(Y, (-),) 
is 
then a function f : X-+ Y such that f SC fS for all S C X. Also a function 
j: X -  Y is closed if f 31 
f 3  for all S c X .  We recall the well-knowp 
Lemma. If X is a compact space and Y a HausdorfS spael?, then every 
continuous f :  ( X ,  (-)x)+(Y, ( -),) 
is closed. 
We must verify that the forgetful functor G, 
creates coequalizers for suitable pairs. So let f ,  g :(X,( 
-),)=f(Y, ( -)Y) 
be a pair of continuous maps such that there is a set Wand an absolute 
coequalizer e, 
in Set. Let P denote the covariant power set functor SetdSet; thus 
for each subset S C Y, (Pe)S C W is the usual direct image of S under e. 

154 
Monads and Algebras 
Compact Hausdorff Spaces 
155 
Since r is an absolute coequalizer, Pr is still a coequalizer. in the diagram 
(of sets) 
Since f and g are both continuous maps, both squares on the left (the 
square with f, and that with g) are commutative. It follows that 
But Pe is a coequalizer, so P e :  (-), 
factors through Pe. This gives a 
unique function (-),+, - the dotted arrow in (1) - which makes the right 
hand square in the diagram commute. This function may thus be described 
as follows: Given a subset TC W, choose any subset SC Y with ( P e ) S =  T; 
then T =  (pe)T, independent of the choice of S. In particular, if e-' TC Y 
is the usual inverse image of T, then T= Pe(e-' T). It is now routine to 
verify that this is a closure operation on W, hence that W is a topological 
space. 
By the commutativity of the diagram, e is then continuous and closed. 
Since Y is compact and e : Y--, W is surjective, W is also compact. Since 
Y is Hausdorff, each point in Y is a closed set there; since e is a closed map 
and is surjective, the points of W are closed. To show W  Hausdorff, 
consider two points w, + w, E W. They are closed in W, so e-' w ,  and 
e-' M!, are disjoint closed sets in Y. By a familiar property of the compact 
Hausdorff space Y, disjoint closed sets can be separated by disjoint 
open sets (every compact Hausdorff space is normal), so there are disjoint 
open sets U,, U, c Y with e-' w i  
E Ui. Their complements U; and U; 
in Y are then closed sets with U;U U; = Y. Since e is a closed map, 
e(U;) and e(U;) are closed sets in W with 
So take complements again, this time in W :  [(Pe) (J;]' and [(Pe) IT;]' 
are disjoint open neighborhoods of w, and w,, respectively, in W. 
Therefore W is a Hausdorff space. 
We have produced from the absolute coequalizer e in Set a unique 
topology on its codomain W such that e is continuous; moreover, this 
topology is compact Hausdorff. It remains to show that the continuous 
map e : (Y, ( - ),)-+( W, ( -),) 
is a coequalizer in Cmpt Haus. So consider 
any compact Hausdorff (Z,(.-).Z) and a continuous map h :  Y+Z, 
such that both composites in 
are equal. Since e is a coequalizer in Set, there is a unique function 
h' : W--*Z with h = h'e : Y-2; it remains to show h' continuous. Take 
TC Wand SC Y with ( P e ) S = T .  Then T = ( p e ) S ,  so - 
(Ph') T =  
(Ph') (Pe) g= P(h) g= P(h)S 
= (Ph1)(Pe)S=(Ph') T. 
Therefore h' is continuous (and closed). The proof is complete. 
Exercises 
1. Show that the topology on W introduced in the proof above is the "quotient 
topology" on W defined by e : Y-. W (i.e., that a set is open in W if and only if 
its inverse image is open in Y). 
Notes. 
The recognition of the power and simplicity of the use of monads and comonads 
came quite slowly, and started from their use in homological algebra (see 8 VIII.6). 
Mac Lane [I9561 mentioned in passing (his ยง 3) that all the standard resolutions 
could be obtained from universal arrows (i.e., from adjunctions). Then Godement 
[I9581 systematized these resolutions by using standard constructions (comonads). 
P. J. Huber [1961], starting from "homotopy theory" in the Eckmann-Hilton sense, 
explored the examples of derived functors which can be defined by comonads and 
thkn in [I9621 studied the resulting functorial simplicia1 resolutions for more 
general abelian categories. Then Hilton (and others) raised the question as to whether 
any monad arises from an adjunction. Two independent answers appeared: 
Kleisli's constructions in [I9651 of the "free algebra" realization and the decisive 
construction by Eilenberg-Moore 119651 of the category of algebras for a monad. 
Stimulated by this description of the algebras, Barr-Beck in [I9663 showed how the 
resolutions derived from monads and comonads can be used even in non-abelian 
categories - obtaining the surprising result that the free group monad in Set 
does lead to the standard cohomology of groups. Subsequent developments in 
this direction are sumarized in their paper [1969]. 
Thus, about 1965, it became urgent to decide how to characterize the category 
of algebras over a monad. Linton [I9661 treated the case for monads in Set, and 
then Beck established his theorem (unpublished, but presented at a conference in 
1966). The absblute "coequalizer" form of the theorem, due to Pare [1971], made 
possible Part's elegant proof (4 9) that compact Hausdorff spaces are monadic. 
. . 
Many other developments in this direction are summanzed in Manes' thesis 
(cf. [1969]). 
The description of algebras by monads is closely related to another description 
by algebraic theories (Lawvere [1963], described in Pareigis [1970]). 

VII. Monoids 
This chapter will explore the general notion of a monoid in a category. 
As we have already seen in the introduction, an ordinary monoid in Set 
is defined by the usual diagrams relative to the cartesiap product x in 
Set, while a ring is a monoid in Ab, relative to the tensor product 8 
there. Thus we shall begin with categories B equipped with a suitable 
bifunctor such as x or @, more generally denoted by 0. These categories 
will themselves be called "monoidal" categories because the bifunctor 
tJ 
: B x B - P  
B is required to be associative. Usually it is associative only 
"up to" an isomorphism; for example, for the tensor product of vector 
spaces there is an isomorphism U @(V @ W )  z (U@ V)@ W. Ordinarily 
we simply "identify" these two iterated product spaces by this isomorphism. 
Closer analysis shows that more care is requisite in this identification - 
one must use the right isomorphism, and one must verify that the 
resulting identification of multiple products can be made in a "coherent" 
way. 
Once the coherence question for monoidal categories is settled, we 
proceed to define monoids in such categories, the actions of monoids on 
objects of the category, and the construction of free monoids. Next, we 
introduce the simplicial category A, which turns out to be the basic 
monoidal category because it contains a "universal" monoid and 
because of its role in simplicial resolutions and simplicial topology. 
Finally, compactly generated spaces are used to illustrate closed moaoidal 
categories. 
1. Monoidd Categories 
A category is rnonoidal when it comes equipped with a "product" like 
the direct product x ,  the direct sum $, or the tensor product @. We 
write this product as 
(many authors write @) to cover all cases 
impartially. We consider first categories equipped with a multiplication 
which is strictly associative and has a strict two-sided identity object e. 
In detail, a strict monoidal category (B, 0, e) is a category B with a 
158 
Monoids 
bifunctor 
: B x B-+ B which is associative, 
and with an object e which is a left and right unit for 0. 
In writing the associative law (I), we have identified (B x B ) x  B with 
B x (B x B); in writing the unit law (2), we mean e x  1 to be the functor 
c w (e, c )  : B-+ B x B. The bifutictor 0 assigns to each pair of objects 
a, b E B an object a n  b of B and to each pair of arrows f : a-a', g : b-+b' 
an arrow f Oq: aOb-+arOb'. Thus 0 a bifunctor means that the 
interchange law 
holds whenever the composites f 'f and g'g are defined. The associative 
law (1) states that the binary operation 
is associative both for objects 
and for arrows; similarly, the unit law (2) means that eClc=c=cOe 
for objects c and that leu/ = f = f 
1, for arrows f. 
Any monoid M (in the usual sense, in Set), regarded as a discrete cate- 
gory, isa strict monoidal one with 
the multiplication of elements of M. If 
X is any category, the category End(X) with objects all endofunctors 
S: X+X and arrows all natural transformations 0 :  S+T is strict 
monoidal, with D the composition of functors. 
A (relaxed) inonoidal category is a category B with a bifunctor El, 
its multiplication, which is associative "up to" a natural isomorphism a, 
and which has an object e which is a left unit for 
up to a natural 
isomorphism A and a right unit up to Q. Moreover, "all" diagrams in- 
volving a, A, and g must commute. 
Formally, a monoidal category B = <B, 0, e, r, I, Q) is a category B, 
a bifunctor 
: B x B+B, an object e e  B, and three natural isomor- 
phisms I, I, Q. Explicitly, 
is natural for all a, b, c E B, and the pentagonal diagram 
commutes for all a, b, c, d E B. Again, 1 and Q are natural 

Monoidal Categories 
for all objects a E B, the triangular diagram 
commutes for all a, c E B, and also 
Soon we shall see that these three diagrams imply that all such 
diagrams commute. For the moment, we observe (Exercise 1) that they 
imply commutativity in the diagrams 
Any category with finite products is monoidal, if we take a O b  to be 
(any chosen) product of the objects a, b and e to be a terminal object, 
while a, d, and Q are the unique isomorphisms (Prop. 111.5.1) which 
commute with the respective projections. Then the pentagon (5) com- 
mutes (both legs commute with the projections of the four fold products), 
and so. does the triangle (7). Similarly, any category with finite co- 
products is monoidal, with 0 
the coproduct and e an initial object. 
The usual "tensor products" give monoidal categories. Ror example, 
the tensor product of two abelian groups A and B is defined by the 
condition that there is a function A x  B-+A@B, a, b+a@b, universal 
among bilinear functions on A x B to abelian groups. By iteration,'there 
is a universal trilinear A x (B x C)- A @I (B @ C); by the uniqueness of a. 
universal, there is then a unique isomorphism a : A@ (B@ :,)-.*(A@ B)@ C 
which is natural (because of its uniqueness); the corresponding pentagon 
(5) commutes because both legs are the unique comparisons of 
universal quadrilinear functions. The isomorphisms A : Z@ A s A, 
q :  A @ Z r  A are well known (and used to identitfy Z@A with A). 
All told, (Ab, @, Z, a, A, q) is a monoidal category. 
The pentagonal condition (5) for @ in Ab may also be verified 
directly on elements a E A, b E B, and c E C, by noting that a[a@(b@c)] 
=(a@b)@c. This suggests one role of this condition: It avoids the 
possible use of the "wrong" associativity; for example, of the isomorphism 
s' : A@(B@ C)-+(AQ,B)@C defined on elements of these abelian groups 
as af[a@(b@c)] = - (a@ b)@c. For this a', (5) fails to commute by a 
sign. 
160 
Monoids 
There are many other examples. A discussion like that for Ab shows 
for each commutative ring K that (K-Mod, @,, 
K) is monoidal. The 
same holds for graded K-modules and for differential graded K-modules 
(=chain complexes of K-modules) under the customary definition of 
the tensor product for such objects (Mac Lane [1963]). Similarly, the 
category of all K-algebras (or, all differential graded K-algebras) is 
monoidal, under the familiar tensor product of algebras. For any ring R, 
the category of all R - R bimodules is monoidal under @,. 
A (strict) morphism of monoidal categories. 
T: (B, 0, e, a, 1, Q)+(B', O', e', a', 2, 
Q') , 
is a functor T: B-B' 
such that, for all a, b, c, f, and g 
T(aOb)= TaOITb, 
T(f Og)= Tf O'Tg, 
Te=el, 
(10) 
Taa,b.c = aka, T~.TC, TAa = ZT., Tea = 4;. . 
(1 1) 
With these morphisms as arrows, we can form Moncat, the category of 
all small monoidal categories. This category has (the obvious) 
finite products; in particular 1 with the evident (strict) monoidal structure 
is terminal in Moncat. There is also a full subcategory consisting of all 
strict monoidal categories; naturally, the definition of morphisms T 
for these can omit the conditions (1 1) on a, 5 and q. 
Many useful morphisms between monoidal categories are, however, 
not strict in the sense of (lo) and (1 1). For example, the forgetful functor 
U: (K-Mod, @I,, -)+(Ab, 
@, ...) is not strict; indeed, for K-modules 
A and B, we have not an equality U(A@, B) = UA@ UB nor even an 
isomorphism, but just a natural morphism UA@ UB+ U(A& B), 
expressing the fact that 
B is a quotient of A@,B. A similar situation 
arises for the forgztful functor (Ab, @, ...)--,( Set, x ,...). We shall not 
formulate here the properties of these "relaxed morphisms between 
monoidal categories. 
One might be tempted to avoid all this fuss with a, A, and Q by simply 
identifying all isomorphic objects in B. This will not do, by the following 
argument due to Isbell. Let Set, be the skeleton of the category of sets; 
it has a product X x Y with projections p1 and p2 as usual. If D is a (the) 
denumerable set, then D = D x D, and both projections of this product 
are epis pl , p2 : D - P  
D. Now suppose that the isomorphism a : X x (Y x 2) 
= (X x Y) x Z, defined as usual to commute with the three projections, 
were always the identity; it is then the identity for X = Y = Z = D;..since 
a is natural, f x (g x h) = (f x g) x h for any three f, g, h : D-D. 
But x on 
functions is defined in terms of the projections p, and p2 above, so 
f ~ 1  
=p1(f x ( g x h ) ) p , ( ( f  xg)xh)=(f xg)p, :D+D, 
and p, is epi, so f = f x g. The corresponding argument with p2 gives 
f x g = g, hence j= g for any f, g : D+ D, an absurdity. A similar 
argument applies to the skeleton of (Ab, @I, . ..>. 

Coherence 
161 
Exercises 
1. Rove that (5) and (7) imply (9). Hint: Take the pentagon (5) with a= b = e  
and fill in the inside, adding Q in two places, the basic identity (7) twice, and 
suitable naturalities to get ( A 0  l ) a l =  A l  : eO(eO(c0d))-cad, and hence 
(1 an isomorphism) (LO 
l)u = L 
2. Construct the product in Moncat of two monoidal categories. 
3. For B monoidal, show that EPP has the (evident) monoidal structure. 
4. For B monoidal and C any category, show that the functor category BC is 
monoidal, with multiplication So T defined by (SO T)c = ScO Tc and e : C--rB 
the constant functor e. Show that the adjunction BCx * z (BC)D is an isomorphism 
of monoidal categories. 
5. Prove: A strict monoidal category with one object is a set (the set of arrows) 
with two binary operations O, 
which satisfy the interchange law and have a 
common (left and right) unit id,. 
6. Show by examples that the axioms (5) and (7) are independent. 
2. Coherence 
A coherence theorem asserts: "Every diagram commutes"; more modestly, 
that every diagram of a certain class commutes. The class of diag;ams at 
issue now are the diagrams in a monoidal category which, llke the 
pentagon (IS), are built up from instances of a, L and Q by multiplica- 
tions 0. 
However, two apparently or formally different vertices of such 
a diagram might become equal in a particular monoidal category, in 
such a way as to spoil the commutativity. Hence we prove only that 
every "brmal" diagram commutes, where a formal diagram is one in 
which the vertices are iterated formal 0-products of "vapables". We 
call these formal products -binary words"; they are exactly like the well- 
formed formulas and terms used in logical syntax in proof theory. 
The precise definition is by recursion. A binary word of length 0 is 
the symbol eo (the empty word); a binary word of length 1 is the symbol(-) 
(the variable or the place holder); if v and w are binary words of lengths 
m and n, respectively, then the symbol UO 
w = (u)O(w) is a binary word 
of length m + n. For example, (( - - ) eo) q - is a binary word of 
length 3. - an iterated 4-fold product, with chosen arrangement of 
parentheses, and a specified argument set equal to eo. For any two 
binary words u and w of the same length, introduce one arrow v-w. 
These words with these arrows form a category W (a preorder with 
every arrow invertible). It is a monoidal category under multiplication 
u, wkvOw, with unit eo, and with a,A, and Q the appropriate (and 
necessarily unique) arrows. 
By its very construction (unique arrows u- 
w) every diagram in W 
will commute. Morphisms from W to B then give the desired diagrams 
which commute in other monoidal categories B These morphisms are 
Monoids 
162 
given by the following theorem, which states in effect that W is the free 
monoidal category on one generator (-): 
Theorem 1. For any monoidal category B and any object b~ B, there 
is a unique morphism W -  B of monoidal categories wirh (-)++ b. 
Proof. We write the desired morphism as w c 
w,, to suggest that it 
means "Substitute b in all the blanks of the word w". On objects w we 
must set 
(e,),=e, 
(-)b=b, 
(VOW)~=V~OWL.: 
(1) 
by induction, these formulas uniquely determine all w,. 
For words of fixed length n we now construct a certain "basic" graph 
Gn = G , , .  Its vertices are all words w of length n which do not involve eo 
while its edges u-r w are to be identical with certain arrows vb-w, 
in B. 
Call them the "basic" arrows. Here each instance 
of associativity and each instance of a-I is basic, as are all arrows 
8 0  1 or 1 0 8  with 1 : vb.-va an identity and 8 already recognized as 
basic. Intuitively, each basic arrow is an arrow such as (1 0 a ) 0 ( 1 0  1) - 
one instance of a, boxed with identities. Observe then that each basic 
arrow is either "directed" (it involves a) or "antidirected" (with a-I). In 
the graph G,, the paths from u to w are thus the composable sequences 
of basic arrows from u,, to wb; by composition each path yields an arrow 
ub--+wb in B. The crux of our proof will be to show that any two paths 
from u to w yield by composition the same arrow Ub4Wb 
in B - i.e., 
.- 
. 
--- 
that the graph G, is a commutative diagram in B. 
First, take w'"' to be the unique word of length n which has all pairs 
of parentheses starting in front. There is a directed path in Gn from any 
w to w(*; indeed, we may choose such a path in a cano~eal way, suc- 
cessively moving outermost parentheses to the front by instances of a. 
For any two words u and w of length n the two canonical paths combine 
to give a path u-w'"-+w; 
this observation is really just the known proof 
of the "general associative law" for a product ab, given the usual assoc- 
iativelaia(bc)=(ab)c. 
. 
Define the rank Q of a word w by recursion, setting peo = 0, p(-) = 0, 
observe that pw = 0 means that all pairs of parentheses in w start at the 
front. 
Now we show that G. commutes. Along any path from u to w, join 
each vertex to the "bottom" vertex w("' by the canonical directed path. 

Coherence 
163 
A glance at the diagram 
indicates that it will suffice to show that any two directed paths (all a's, 
no a-I) from a vi to w'"' are equal. This will be proved by induction on 
the rank of vi = v. Suppose it true for all u of smaller rank, and consider 
two different directed paths starting at v with (directed) basic arrows 
fi and y, as in the figure 
Both /I and y decrease the rank. Hence it will suffice to show that one 
can "rejoin" their codomains o' and d' by directed paths to some com- 
mon vertex z in such a way that the diamond from o to z is commutative. 
This is done by a case subdivison. If p= y, take z= v'=v". If B+ y, 
write v as v = uOw and observe that B has one of the following three 
forms : 
B = /YO 1,; 
P acts "inside" the first factor u; 
/I = 1.0 p; B acts inside the second factor, 
/ 3 = ~ ~ , ~ , , ,  where v=uOw=uO(sOt). 
For y there are three corresponding cases. 
Now compare the cases for fi and y. If both act inside the game 
factor u, we can use induction on the length n. If fl acts inside u and y 
inside w, use the diamond 
which commutes because 0 is a bifunctor. There remains the case when 
one of B or y, say P, is /3 = a = a,,,, as in the third case above. Since 
L 64 
Monoids 
y 9 P, y must act inside u or inside w. If y acts inside u, we use a diamond 
from uO(sCi t) to (ulOs)O t, which commutes because a is natural. If :I 
is inside w =sot and actually inside s or inside t, natural~ty of a gives 
a similar diamond. There remains only the case where y is inside sat 
but not inside s or t. Then y must be an instance of 2, t must be a product 
t = puq, and our diamond must then start with 
This we can complete to a "diamond" by taking that diamond to be 
the pentagon of (5). This shows that the graph G, is commutative in B; 
it completes the coherence proof as far as associativity alone is concerned. 
It is trivial to "fold in" to this proof the applications of ,I and e. 
Formally, consider the graph G', with vertices all words of length n, 
including words involving e,, and with edges all basic arrows constructed, 
just as above, by boxing instances of a, A, and Q (and their inverses) 
with identities. This graph Gb is infinite, but contains the previous 
(finite) graph G, built from a alone. It remains to show GL commutative 
in B. For each word w, there is still at least one path w-w'"'. 
But the 
composite arrow obtained from any such path is equal to that for a 
different path which first removes all e's, then applies a. Indeed, if some 
e is removed by R : em b r b after some application of a, then that e can 
be removed before-either by naturality of a, or by (7), or by (9). Moreover 
by (8) it does not matter in eOe whether e is removed by A or by Q. 
Finally, this reduced path has composite equal to that for a'canonical 
path in which all the e's are removed in some specified order (say, 
starting with the left-most occurence of e). This process reduces Gn to 
Gn and proves that G:, is commutative in B, since G, is. 
We can now define the morphism W+B required in the theorem. 
The category W was constructed with exactly one arrow u--+ w between 
words v and w of the same length n ;  the morphism will send this arrow 
to the composite arrow for any path vb-+wb 
in G,, since we now know 
the composite to be unique (independent of the choice of the path). In 
virtue of this same uniqueness, this construction does define a functor 
W-B. Moreover this functor is a morphism of monoidal categories 
because 
f O g = f 0 1 0 1 ~ s = ( f O 1 ) " ( 1 O 9 )  
for any arrows f and g. 
The coherence result can be formulated in terms of graphs whose 
edges are the natural transformations a, A, and Q. To state this, note 
first that each word w of length n (in one variable) determines for each 

Coherence 
165 
166 
Monoids 
monoidal category B a functor w, : Bn = B x . . . x B+ B of n variables, 
obtained by replacing each blank (-) in the word w by the identity 
functor of B. The explicit definition of this functor, like (I), is by recursion; 
(e,), : 1 +B is the constant functor e E B and (-), 
is the identity functor 
B+B, while if w, and wk are already determined for words w and w' 
of the respective lengths n and n', then (WOW'), is the composite functor 
With this formulation, the coherence result is as follows: 
Corollary. Let B be a monoidal category. There is a function which 
assigns to each pair of words v, w of the same length n a (unique) natural 
isomorphism 
cang(v, W) : v B 4  wB : Bn+ B , 
(3) 
called the canonical map from oB to w,, in such a way that the identity 
arrow e-e 
is canonical (between functors of 0 variables), the identity 
transformation id, : 1,- I, is canonical, a, a-', A, A-', Q and Q-' are 
canonical, and the composite as well as the 0-product of two canonical 
maps is canonical. 
This sort of formulation, as will appear from the proof, applies also 
to the case considered in the theorem itself: For each b s  B there is a 
function which assigns to each pair of words v, w of the same length a 
canonical arrow can,(v, w) : v,- 
w,, with properties like those stated for 
canB. 
Proof. From the given monoidal category B we construct a category 
lt(B) with objects all pairs (n, T), T any functor T :  Bn-3, and with 
arrows f : (n, T)+(n, T') all natural transformations 
: T- T'. In 
this category we define a multiplication by (m, S) 0 (n, T) = (m+ n, SO T), 
where S O T  is the composite 
we take the unit e to be the functor 1-B 
constant at e and define 
A: em T+T for each T and then for each a e Bn as the arrow 
Ir,,:eO Ta-+ Ta of B. This I is natural in T. Similar pointwise defmitions 
give Q and a; it is routine to verify that It(B) is a (relaxed) monoidal 
category. 
The identity functor I : B-B is an object of It(B). Hence the theorem 
above stating that W is free monoidal on (-) gives (for b = I) a unique 
morphism W -  It@) of monoidal categories with (-)++I. In particular, 
this morphism sends each word w to the functor w, described in (2) 
above, while the unique arrow v-w, 
for v and w of the same length, is 
sent to a natural transformation vB+wB which we call can,@, w), as in (3). 
Sincethe functor is a morphism, it must preserve a, A, and Q. Thus, using 
our notation for words, 
can,(e,, e,) = 1, : e-e, 
can,((-), (-)) = id, : B-B , 
~ n B ( - O ( - 0 - ) , ( - 0 - ) ~ - ) = a :  BO(BOB)-~(BOB)CIB, 
canB(u 0 v', w 0 w') = can,(v,'w) 0 canB(vr, w') . 
This corollary states that every diagram of the following sort is 
commutative : 
Vertices. Words w of length n representing functors wB: Bn-+B. 
Edges. Natural transformations I,, id,, a, A, Q, and their (7 products. 
Moreover, the functors in question are e, I, - - and their composites, 
and each edge is a natural transformation between the functors represented 
by the vertices at its ends. 
Exercises 
1. Draw a diagram showing all canonical maps between binary words of length 5. 
(It can be regarded as a polyhedral subdivision of the surface of the sphere 
into 19 regions - 6 pentagons (instances of a) and 3 squares (which wmmute 
by naturality).) 
2 (Stasheff [1963]) Show that the diagram giving all canonical maps between 
words of length n +  3 can be regarded as a polyhedral subdivision of the 
surface of the n-sphere. 
3. Construct the free monoidal category on any set X, and prove for it the a p  
propriate universal property. (Hint: Its objects are words, with any X E  X a 
ward of length 1, and there is a surjection Wx-rMx from the set W, of words 
to the Frat monoid on X. Thm is a (uniq&) arrow v-w 
if and only if u and w 
a n  words with the same image in Mx). 
3. Monoids 
Following the ideas suggested in the introduction, we can now define 
the notion of a monoid in an arbitrary monoidal category (B, 0, e). 
A monoid c in B is an object c c  B together with two arrows 
p : c q c-c, 
q : e- 
c such that the diagiams 

Monoids 
167 
168 
Monoids 
are commutative. A morphism f : (c, p, q)+ (c', pi, q') of monoids is an 
arrow f : c-c' 
such that 
With these arrows, the monoids in B constitute a category Mon,, and 
(c, p, q )  w c  defines a forgetful functor U : Man,+ B. 
This definition includes a variety of cases; some already noted in 
our introduction: 
Monoidal Category 
Monoids Therein 
(ordinary) Monoids 
Topological monoids 
Monads (cf. Chapter VI!) 
Rings 
K-algebras 
Graded algebras 
Differential graded K-algebras 
Comonoids in B 
K-coalgebras 
Strict Monoidal categories 
Categories (cf. (11.7.3)). 
There is a "general associative law" which states that in a monoid 
( c , ~ ,  
tf) any two n-fold products are equal. Specifically, if w is any 
binary word and W,E B the corresponding object of B, as defined in 
Theorem 2.1, the w-fold product U, is an arrow p,,, : wc+c de,fined by the 
following recursion: If w = e,, p, : e+c is q; if w =(-), 
: c+c is the 
identity; if w = ( - ) O  ( - ), pw is p, and in general if w = u Ov, A,, is the 
evident composite 
Proposition 1 (General Associative Law). For (c, p, q )  a monoid in 8, 
the iterated products c(, and pw for any two words v and w of the m e  
length n satisfy 
where canc(v, w) : vc+wc is the canonical arrow of Theorem 2.1. 
Proof. The axioms (1) and (2) for a monoid are exactly those cases 
of (4) where the canonical arrow in question is a, 5 or Q. From these 
cqses, (4) may be verified by induction, since all canonical arrows are 
composites of a's, A'S, and q's. 
For example, one may define the n-th 0-power of every b E B to be 
bn=(bob)O...C]b 
(5) 
with "all parentheses in front"; thus b0 = e, b1 = b, bnC' = bnC]b. For the 
monoid (c. p, q) the n-fold product p'"' : c"+c is thendefined by recursion 
Then (4) includes the more familiar equation ("general associative law") 
valid for all natural numbers n and k , ,  ..., k,. 
Theorem 2 (Construction of free monoids). If the monoidal category 
B has denumerable coproducts, and if for each a โฌ  B the functors a 0  - 
and - m a :  B+B preserve these coproducts, then the forgetful functor 
U : Mono-+% has a left adjoint. 
Note: In many cases (B =Set, B = Ab, . . .) the functors a 0  - and 
- a themselves have right adjoints, hence automatically preserve co- 
products. 
Proof: The distributive law 8 : LI,,(n 0 
b,,) ? a 
u,,b,, holds for each 
denumerable coproduct LI,b, of objects bn E B because a 0  - preserves 
coproducts. Indeed, the definition of the coproduct injections i, : bn+ U, b, 
and j, shows that there is a unique arrow 8 which makes the diagram 
1 
. 
1 
aOLI,b,+...k .-.. Un(a bn) 
commute, and "preserves coproducts" means exactly that t9 is an iso- 
morphism. 
For given a, take b, =an to be the n-th power defined as in (5) and 
define a multiplication p on LInd by ''juxtaposition" amClanr am+". 
Formally, p is the unique arrow defined by the commutative diagram 
where the vertical map "can" is the canonical map (iterated associativity) 
given by the coherence theorem for B. q is that unique map on the 
coproduct LI,, which makes the square with the coproduct injections 
i,., and i, commute for all the natural numbers m and n, the map 8 = 8 
is the composite of two canonical isomorphisms 8 above (because 
is 
distributive over LI, and LI,), and the multiplicati~n p is p= q(e9 8). 

Monoids 
169 
A large but routine diagram (exercise!) shows this p to be associative, 
in the sense (1). A corresponding unit qa : e-U,a" 
is defined to be the 
injection i, : e = aO+LI,an of the coproduct. All told, (LInan, p, rl.) is a 
monoid in B. The injection Q, = i, : a = al+LI,a" of the coproduct is an 
arrow 
Qa : a-+ U(unan, P, tla) 
to the forgetful functor U : Man,-B. 
This arrow is universal from a to U. For let (c, p,, qc) be any monoid 
in B and f : a-c = U(c, pc, qc) an arrow in B. Then we define an arrow 
f' : LInan+c as the composite on the bottom of the commutative diagram 
Monoids 
3. (a) (Substitution of words in a word) Each word u of length n determines a 
functor u w  : Wn- W If vl, . . . , vn are n words. show that the word u,(s,, . . . , u 3  
has length the sum of the lengths of the v,, and that it corresponds (intutively) 
to substituting v,, . .., urn, in order, for the n blanks (-) in the word u. 
(b) If w = u w ( v , ,  . . . , un), show that the canonical maps p, 
of Proposition 1 
have the property that the composite 
P W ( P " ,  . . P V . ) .  
11" 
W, = u W ( u l c r  . . . r UJ 
uc 
+ C 
is equal to pw : w,-c. Show that this result includes Proposition 1. 
4. Actions 
Again, we work in a fixed monoidal category B. A left action of a monoid 
(c, p, 4 )  on an object a E B is an arrow v : clJa+a of B such that the. 
constructed as follows. First, take w to be the word of length n with all 
parentheses in front, so that w, = b", by our definition of b"; then 
p, : cn+c is the n-fold product defined in the general associative law (6), 
in and j, are coproduct injections, and the dotted arrows on the bottom 
are constructed, by universality of the coproducts, so as to make the 
indicated squares commute (for all n). A mutine large diagram will 
prove that f' is a morphism of monoids; by construction f' 0 
= f, so 
Q, is indeed universal and therefore LInd is a free monoid on a, as asserted 
in the theorem. 
The point of this quite formal proof is that it contains many separate 
instances of the same sort of formality. if B = {Set, x ,1, . . .), this is the 
standard construction (Corollary 11.7.2) of the free monoid gn the set a; 
in this case a" is the set of words of length n spelled in letters of a, and 
the free monoid is the disjoint union U , d ,  with product given by mm- 
position. If B = (K-Mod, @,, 
K, .. .), this is the standard construction 
(e.g., Mac Lane [1%3b], 
p. 179) of the tensor algebra @,An on the' 
K-module A. The same construction also gives "differential graded" 
tensor algebras, free topological monoids, etc. 
1. Row: if B has finite products, so does Mos,. 
2 (Cohcfcna for monoids) Interpret the proposition about the canonical map 
~ 4 .  
for a monoid <c, p, q )  as the following cohemce theorem. Consider a 
graph with vertias the binary words w and with arrows v--rw those arrows 
0,-+ we which are I, p, q, instances a(u:, tr',, 4) of a, instances of 1 and of p, and 
all O-products of such arrows Prove that any two paths w+(-) 
in this graph 
have qua1 composites, but show that this wouM not hold when the ending 
is not (-) but the word (-)a(-) of length 2. 
diagram 
cO(cOa) 
a .(cOc)Oa 
.coo4 "l e O a  
I 
commutes. For example, c acts on itself by the map p: c u c - c ;  this 
is the "left regular representation" of c. A morphism f : v+v' 
of left 
actions of c is an arrow / : a-a' in B such that v'(1 Cl f )  = fv : cOa+al. 
With these morphisrns as arrows, the left actions v for a fixed monoid c 
form a category ,Lad. Thew definitions clearly include familiar cases: 
an action of an ordinary monoid on a set, a left R-module regarded as 
an action of the ring R on an abelian group, and similarly with rings 
replaced by K-algebras, or DG-algebras. 
There is a forgetful functor cL.act-B, defined by (v : coo-+a) -a; 
it has a left adjoint which sends each b E B to c O  b, with action defined 
by the composite 
cCl(cOb) 
a 
) ( c n c ) O b  Ira' * c a b .  
-. 
Right actions o : bOc-+b of c are defined similarly. and commuting 
left-and-right actions of c on a may be defined to parallel the usual 
bimodules-(left and right R-modules). 
Exercises 
1. (Dubuc [1970], Prop ILl.1.) Let (7, 
q, p) be a monad in a category X. Show 
that the monad T has an action on an endohtor S : X-X 
if and only if S 
can be lifted to the category XT of T-algebras as S = G's', and show that these 
actions correspond one-one to the liftings S' : x+XT. 
2. Let a small strict monoidal category B (as a monoid in (Cat, x , . . .>) act on a 
megory C. Define then the action of a monoid in B on an objwt in C, and use 
this to extend the result of Exercise L to the case of functors S : A 4 X  from any 

Monoids 
The Simplicia1 Category 
171 
3. Describe the actions of a K-coalaebra. 
- ~
-
-
 
4. If B has coproducts preserved by all functors a 0  -, show that &act has co- 
products preserved by the forgetful functor to R. 
- - - -  -- -. 
5 If the base category 3 has fike products, so does the category M in such 
a way that the projections a x  a'-+% a' of the produa (in B) become rnorphisms 
of actions (in .Lact). 
6 (Generalization of the tensor product of a right module by a left module.) If B 
has coequalizers, c is a monoid, o: bat-b a right action, and v :  cma-a a 
left action, construct a "tensor product" b O , a e B  as the cocqualizer of two 
maps b O ( c 0 a ) - + b a a  given by the actions, and prove 0, a functor 
Oe : hct, x $act+ B. 
7. (Coherence result for an action.) Qiven a lefl action v: cOa-o of a monoid c, 
describe the properties of canonical maps vw : w.,.-u, 
w h e ~  
w is any word of 
length 2 1 with "Inn argument" (-) (define what this means), while we,. results 
from substituting a for the last argument and c for all the other arguments in w. 
5. The Simplicia1 Category 
We now describe a particular strict monoidal category A which plays a 
central role in topology and also provides a "universal" monoid. 
This category A has as objects all finite ordinal numbers 
n = (0, 1, . . ., n - 1) and as arrows f : n--r n' all (weakly) monotone 
functions; that is, all functions f such that 0 j i 6 j c n implies f, Sfi. 
In this category, the ordinal number 0 is initial, while t h  number 1 is 
terminal. Ordinal oddition is a bifunctor + : A x A--+ A, defined on 
ordinals n, m as the usual (ordered) sum n+m and on arrows f :  n - 4 ,  
g : m--, m' as 
(Thus the function f + g is just f and g placed .'side by side'). Moreover, 
(A, +, 0) is a strict monoidal category. Since 1 is terminal in A, then 
are unique arrows p : 2- 1,q : O- 
1 ; for the same reason, these arrows 
form a moaoid (I, p, q) in A. It is "universal" in the following me. 
Proplition 1. Given a monoid (e, p', q') in a stria monoidal category 
(B, 0, e), there is a unique morphia F : ( A ,  + ,O)- 
(I?, a, 
e )  such that 
F 1 = c, F p  = p' and Fq = 7: as in the figure 
The proof depends on showing that the arrows of A are exactly the 
iterated formal products (for the binary product p )  In detail, write p(k' 
for the unique arrow p'*' : k - r l .  Thus pC0' = 1, pl" is the identity, 
p = p : 2- 1, 
(This is the "genera! associative law"). On the other hand, if j :  m-.n 
is 
----fits in the subset 
any arrow of A, let m, be the (ordinal) number of elt...- 
f-'iofm; then 
n - 1  
f = p('"~) 
+ p("'11 + . . . + p('"n- I), 
1 
mi r m 
i = o  
(3) 
(note that some of the mi may be zero). This shows that any f is a sum 
of iterated products constructed from p and q. 
Now consider the functor F required in the Proposition. Since 
F(1) = c and F is to be a morphism of monoidal categories, F must have 
Fn = dm); 
this determines the object function of F. Next. F p = $  and 
Fq = q' imply that 
= jdn'; the representation (3) of any arrow f of 
A then determines the arrow function F f  of F. Thus F is unique. It 
remains only to show that the object and arrow functions so defined 
give a functor. But in A, composites are givm by (2), which corresponds 
exactly to the general associative law valid in B. q.e.d. 
This universal property gives a complete characterization of A. Its 
objects form the free monoid generated (under +) by 1; its arrows are 
generated by additions and compositions from p : 2+1 and p : 0 4  
1, 
using the associative law for p and the left and right unit laws for q and p. 
There is another description of the arrows of A, which starts by 
observing that a monotone function f : n-n' 
can be factored as f = g 3 h 
where h :  n-rn" is surjective and monotone, g : n"+nf is monotone and 
injective. Moreover, this injective function g will be determined just by 
giving the image of g, which is a subset of n" ordinals in the set n'. In 
particular, there are exactly n + 1 injective monotone functions n-tn + 1 ; 
namely, for i = 0, . . ., n, the injective monotone function 67 : n-rn + 1 
whose image omits i, thus 
* 
6;:n-n+1, 
S;{O ,..., n - 1 ) = ( 0  ,..., i ,..., n}, 
14) 
where on the right indicates that i is to be omitted. We display all 
these arrows (omitting the superscripts n) as 

The Simplicia1 Category 
173 
174 
Monoids 
On the other hand, a monotone h : n-n" which is surjective is determined 
by the subset Ql hj = hfj+ l), 0 S j 6 n - 2) of those n - n" arguments j at 
which h does not increase. In particular, there are n such arrows n + l+n; 
fori=O, ..., n -  1 they are 
We display them (without superscripts) as 
Proposition 2. The category A, with objects all finite ordinals, is 
generated by the arrows 6: : n-+n + 1 and a; : n + 1-n 
subject to the 
relations (1 I), (12), and (13). 
Proof. These relations suffice to put any composite of 6's and a's 
into the unique form (10) of the Lemma. 
The category A has a direct geometric interpretation by affine 
simplices, which give a functor 
These arrows may also be expressed in terms of p and q. Indeed 
6, : 0- 1 is q, 0, : 2- 
1 is p, and the definitions show that 
Lemma. In A, any arrow f : n-+n' has a unique representation 
where the ordinal numbers h and k satisfy n - h + k = n', while the strings 
of subscripts i and j satisfy 
Proof. By induction on i E n, any monotone f is determined by its 
image, a subset of n', and by the set of those j e n  at which it does not 
increase [ f (j) 
= f (j + I)]. Putting i,, .. .. i,, in reverse order, for those 
elements of n' not in the image and j,, . . . , j,, in order, for the elements j 
of n where f does not increase, it follows that the functions on both 
sides of (lo) are equal. 
In particular, the composite of any two 6's or d s  may be put into 
the canonical form (10). This yields the following list of three kinds of 
identities on these binary composities 
These identities may be verified directly. For example, (11) asserts that 
6;+'6; = 6;$:67 : n-n + 2 for any j 
n; one checks that each side of this 
equation is a monotone injection, and that both sides have the same 
image. 
representing A as a subcategory of Top. On objects n of A ,  take A ,  to 
be the empty topological space, and A,,, to be the "standard" n-. 
dimensional affine simplex - the subspace of Euclidean R"+' consisting 
of the following points 
here the non-negative real numbers to, . . . , t, are the barycentric co- 
ordinates of the point p~ A,, , . On arrows f: n + l+m+ 1, Ar: A,+,+A,+, 
is the (affine) map defined by 
Note carefully that (in this notation) A,,, has dimension n and n+ 1 
vertices, while AJ is the (unique) afline map which sends the vertex i of 
A,+ , to the vertex f i of A,,,; 
for example, A,, : A,,,-+A,+, 
is that 
affine map which sends the n-simplex d,,, 
to that n-dimensional face 
of A,,, which is opposite vertex number i. Geometrically, the "boundary" 
of a tetrahedron A, consists of the four triangular faces which arc the 
images of A ,  under do, dl, S1, and 6,. Using standard properties of affine 
geometry (Mac Lane-Birkhoff [1967], Chap. 12) one may verify (exer- 
cise) that A as defined is indeed a functor A-Top. 
Note that this functor A sends the ordinal number n+ 1 to the 
n-dimensional simplex: A is a subcategory of Top, but the geometric 
dimension is one less than the arithmetic one used in A. 
By A+ we denote the full subcategory of A with objects all the 
positive ordinals {1,2,3, . ..) (omit only 0). Topologists use this category, 
call it A, and rewrite its objects (using the geometric dimension) as 
(0, 1,2, . ..). Here we stick to our A, which contains the real 0, an object 
which is necessary if all face and degeneracy operations are to be ex- 
pressed, as in (3), in terms of binary product p and unit ?. 
Contravariant functors bn the category A' 
to Set are traditionally 
known as "simplicial sets". 
Thus, a simplicial object S in a category X is defined to be a functor 
S : (A+PP+X, and a morphism S+$' of simplicial objects is a natural 

The Simplicia1 Category 
175 
Monoids 
transformation 8 : S+S'. If we write this functor S as 
SO that Sn is in geometric dimension n, then a simpliclal object in X 
may be described in the traditional (and more complicated) way as a 
list of So. S,, . 
S . of objects of X (S,, : the object of n-simplices) 
with arrows ("face operators'') d, : S n - + S n - ,  for i = 0, ..., n, and n > 0, 
and arrows ("degeneracies") si : S,,+Sn+, for i = 0, .. ., n, n 2 0 which 
satisfy the identities dual to (ll), (I?), and (13). 
didj+,=d,di, 
i j j  
An augmented simplicial object in X is a functor S: AOP+X. A 
simplicial object S may be augmented (i.e., extended to a functor S') by 
finding one object S - ,  E X  and one arrow & : S o - S - ,  
ofX with 
&do = ed, : S, - S - ,  ; thus S'(6,) = e. Such an arrow e is (traditionally) an 
augmentation of S. 
A simplicial object S in an abelian category A (e.g. A =  Ab) gives 
homology, via a suitable "boundary" operation. Specifically construct 
from S the arrows 
where the boundary homomorphism a : Sn+,-Sm is the arrow defined as 
the alternating sum 8 = d o  - dl + ..- + (- l)'"ldn+l. The relations (llV) 
on the faces d, imply that 88 = 0 (This means that the diagram ( I 4  is 
a chain complex in A). Since ad = 0, 
and we can take the quotient object (see Chap.VII1) to be the n-th 
homology of S: 
Each augmentation of the functor S yields an augmentation of this 
chain complex; that is, an object S-, of A and an arrow 6 :  So-S-, 
with ad =0, hence an arrow H,(S)-S-,. 
The singular homology of a topological space is a classical example. 
Consider the composite functor 
where A : A 4 T o p  is the functor described above, while Z assigns to 
each set the free abelian group generated by the elements of that set. 
This composite determines for each topological space X an augmented 
simplicial object S = S(X) in Ab. Each arrow h~ hom(A,+,, X) is a 
singular n-simplex in X. so S,,+, is the free abelian group generated by 
all such simplices (all finite linear combinations with integral coefficients 
of singular n-simplices). The associated chain complex is the singular 
chain complex of the space X, with its homology the singular homology 
(see e.g. Mac Lane [I9631 Chap. 11). 
We may summarize the protean aspects of d thus: 
(a) A is the category of finite ordinal numbers, hence a full sub- 
category of the category Ord of all (linearly) ordered sets. 
(b) A is a full subcategory of Cat, if we interpret each ordinal n as. 
a category (finite preorder); the objects of A are the categories O,1,2,3, . . . . 
(c) A is the strict monoidal category containing the universal monoid, 
its arrows are all "iterated multiplications" p'"" + +... 
+ p(m, - 1) 
(d) A is a subcategory of Top. consisting of the standard ordered 
simplices (one for each dimension), with order preserving affine mappings. 
The simplicial objects defined via A provide a means of treating many 
question in algebraic topology, especially those dealing with homology. 
C W-complexes, Eilenberg-Mac Lane spaces, and cohomology operations. 
This line of development is presented in May [1967], Lamotke 119681, 
and Gabriel-Zisman [1967], the last presentation making full use of 
categorical techniques. 
Exercises 
1. In A, show that an arrow f : n-+n' is rnonic (or epi) if and only if the function f 
is injective (respectively, surjective). 
2. (a) Show that the subcategory A,,& 
A of all monics in A is generated by the 
arrows 4, subject to the relations (11). 
(b) Show that every arrow in A,,, 
is uniquely an iterated sum of q : 0- 1 and 
. . 
id: 1-+I. 
3. (a) Show that the subcategory A,,, c A of all epis in A is generated by the arrows 
a, subject to the relations (12). Show that A,# is a strict monoidal category. 
(b) A semigroup (c,p) in a strict monoidal category (C, O,E) is an object c 
with an arrow p :  clJc-c 
which is associative, in that p(pO1,)=p(l,Op). 
Show that 2 4  1 is a universal semigroup in A,,,. 
4. Show that the category of simplicial objects in Set is small-complete. 
6. Monads and Homology 
Monads and their duals, the comonads. play via A a central role in 
homological algebra, as we may now briefly indicate. Let L = (L, 
e, 6 )  
be a comonad in a category A; in other words L: A-+A is an endo- 

178 
Monoids 
Monads and Homology 
177 
functor, and the natural transformations E : L*IdA, 6: L 4 L 2  satisfy 
6L.6=L6.6:L*L3, 
E L ' ~ = ~ ~ . = L E ' ~ : L + L .  (1) 
This amounts to saying that (L, E, 6) is a comonoid in the strict monoidal 
category AA of endofunctors of A, where the functor 
(multiplication) 
is composition. 
Now A contains the universal monoid (1,O-+1,1+ 1-+1), so AoP 
contains the universal comonoid (1, 1-0, 
1- 1 + 1). Thus, by the dual 
of Theorem 5.1, any comonoid in a strict monoidal category (B, 0, e) 
determines a unique morphism AoP+B of monoidal categories, carrying 
the universal comonoid to the given one. This morphism AoP+B is an 
augmented simplicial object in B (and (A+)"*+B is a simplicia1 object). 
In particular, each comonad (L, E, 6) in A, as a comonoid in the 
functor category AA, determines an augmented simplicial object (functor) 
AOP+ AA, with 
(1. 0-1-1+1) 
Thus n w Ln = L 0 ... L, E is the augmentation, 6 = so : L-+ L2 is. the 
degeneracy arrow, and the faces and degeneracies in higher dimensions 
are given by the duals of the equations (8) and (9) of !j 5 (which express 6 
and a in terms of p and q): 
The whole simplicial object has the form 
Now suppose that A is an Ab-category (e.g., an abelian category, or 
that we have applied to Smp L a functor to some Ah-category). The 
simplicial identities on the face operations di then show that the alter- 
nating sums 
a=d,-dl +d,-a*- +(-l)"dn: Ln+'a-Lna 
satisfy aa=O, so are the boundary morphisms of a chain complex 
called L*a, 
L*a: Lac 
L2a* a 
L3ac 
a 
-.. 
with an augmentation E, : L a d a .  This complex is a standard "resolution" 
of a E A in the sense of homological algebra, and so may be used to 
construct derived functors; in particular, various cohomology functors. 
The cohomology of groups provides an example. 
The forgetful functor U : Rng-+Man (forget the addition) has (by 
the adjoint functor theorem) a left adjoint Z, sending each monoid M 
to the monoid ring ZM. In particular, if M =l7 is a (multiplicative) 
group, Z n  is the group ring: Its additive group is the free abefian group 
generated by the elements x G f7. and its multiplication is the unique 
bilinear map with (x, y)+xy, the product in n ,  for all x, y E n .  Let 
n-Mod denote the category of left n-modules A. 
The forgetful functor U : n-Mod+Ab has a left adjoint Z(n)@ - 
which assigns to each (additive) abelian group B the left Z(n)-module 
Z(n)@B. The unit and counit of this adjunction are the maps 
The composite fZ-Mod+ Ab+IZ-Mod determines a comonad (L, E, 6) 
in the category fZ-Mod, where L:l7-Mod--+IT-Mod is the functor 
L = Z(fZ)@ - (literally, Z(fZ)@ U -),E : L-Idis 
asabove, and6 : L--LIL~ 
is the natural transformation 6 = Z(n)@qU given explicitly for each 
l7-module A as 
6, : LA=Z(n)@ A + z ( n ) @ Z ( l 7 ) ~  
A =  L'A 
x@a-x@l@a, 
x ~ l 7 , a ~  
A, 
where 1 is the identity element of the group Z7. Take the l7-module 
A = Z = the abelian group Z regarded as a trivial n-module (x . m = m 
for all x E l7 and all integers m). Then Z(U)@ Z z Z(l7), and the simplicial 
object (Smp L)Z becomes 
where Z(Z7)'"' denotes the n-fold tensor product A, = Z(-n)@ *.. @ Z(l7). 
Explicitly, A,,, is the free abelian group with generators all elements 
(the alternative notation on the right is traditional) for all elements 
x, xi E l7. The n-module structure is determined (y E 17) by 
The face operators di : Z(fZ)(n+l'--+Z(lf)'n'; as determined (2) by E, are 

Monads and Homology 
179 
180 
Monoids 
The degeneracy operators si : Z(l7)'"'--rZ(n)("+'), as determined by 6 
according to (3). are the n-module maps 
Since l7-Mod is already an abelian category, this (augmented) simplicia1 
object determines an augmented chain complex in n-Mod of the form 
This is a "free resolution" of the trivial Z7-module Z; it is, in fact, the 
standard resolution used to define the homology and cohomology of 
the group l7. (Mac Lane [1963], Theorem IV. 5. I). 
The cohomology of n is obtained from the resolution as follows. Take a 
n-module A and the corresponding functor horn,(-, 
A):(n-M~cl)~~+Ab, 
where hornn(-, -) denotes the abelian group of n-module morphisms. 
Apply this functor to the chain complex above (dropping theaugmentation 
Z(n)+Z) to get a "cochain" complex 
with coboundary S =  horn,(& A). The cohomology groups of 'this 
complex are exactly the cohomology groups Hn(n, A) of the group J7 
with coefficients in A. The formulas for d, above give 6 explicitly. Thus, 
for example, HO(U, A) = {a 1 a E A and xa = a for all x }  ; H, 
(U, A) is the 
group of "crossed homomorphisms" If-A 
modulo the principal 
crossed homomorphisms, and H2(n, A) is the group of all'group ex- 
tensions of the additive group A by the multiplicative grow l7. with 
operations (conjugation) given-by thi~-module itructure i f  ~ ( ~ a c ~ a n e  
[1963], IV.2, IV.3). 
 he higher cohomology groups of groups appear in obstructionb 
problems (Mac Lane [1963], IV.8), in the theory of the K(l7,l) soaces 
in topology (Mac Lane [1963], IV.11), and class field thedry (~assels-- 
Frijhlich [1967]). 
The homology of l7 with coefficients in a right-n-module C is found 
in a similar way: To the standard resolutions apply not the functor 
hornn( -, A) but the (covariant, additive) functor C@, - : n-Mod+Ab. 
The homology of the resulting chain complex in Ab is the homology 
H,(If, 
C) of l7 with coefficients in C. For example (Mac Lane [1963], 
Prop. X.5.2) 
the latter is the factor commutator group of n. 
7. Closed Categories 
The ideas broached in this chapter have extensive further developments 
whichye shall indicate briefly. First, a monoidal category B is said to 
be symmetric when it is equipped with isomorphisms 
natural in a, b E B, such that the diagrams 
all commute. This selection of conditions sufiices (Mac Lane [1963b]) 
to prove that "all" such diagrams commute, much as in the coherence 
theorem of 0 2 above. Monoidal categories ( B ,  0, 
e, . . .), where 
is 
the categorical product or coproduct, are automatically symmetric 
when y : a x b z b x a is taken to be the (canonical) isomorphism which 
commutes with the projections. 
A closed category V is a symmetric, monoidal category in which 
each functor - Oh : V-+ V has a specified right adjoint ( )b: V-+V. For 
example, (Ab, @, -) is closed; the adjoint is given for abelian groups A 
and B as AB= hom(B, A), the abelian group of all morphisms B+A. 
Similarly, (K-Mod, OK, 
...) is closed for any commutative ring K. The 
cartesian closed categories, such as Set and Cat, are also closed categories 
in this Sense. In all these cases, the functor ( )b : V- V is a sort of "internal 
hom functor". 
An Ab-category (and in particular, an abelian category) has already 
been described (0 1.8) as a category with "horn-sets" in Ab. Similarly, 
one can describe "categories" with "hom-sets" in any monoidal category 
B : A set R of "objects" r, s, t ;  to each pair of objects r., s an object R(r, s) E B; 
to each ordered triple an arrow (composition!) 
in B; to each object r, an arrow e-+R(r, P) in B (unit!). These data are 
subject to the usual associativity and unit axioms on composition. The 
result is called a B-category, a B-based category, or a category relative 
to B - and often, replacing the letter B by V, a V-category. But observe 
that this structure R is not yet a category in the ordinary sense; it has 
only hom-objects R(r, s) and not hom-sets. These can be obtained only 
applying to the horn-objects R(r, s) a suitable functor U : B-+Set, say 
U =B(e, -), to get horn-sets UR(r, s). When there are such hom-sets, 

Compactly Generated Spaces 
181 
one says that the ordinary category UR has been "enrrched" by the 
objects R(r, s) E B. 
Practically all the basic theory of categories applles to enriched cat- 
egories, provided that the basic category B is not just monoidal, but 
closed. This development (for a presentation, see Dubuc [I9701 and 
references there) may provide a powerful method of treating at one time 
the cases of ordinary categories, additive categories based on closed 
categories of chain complexes (for relative homological algebra), and 
categories based on a suitable cartesian closed variant of Top. 
8. Compactly Generated Spaces 
A convenient category of topological spaces should be cartesian closed. 
The familiar adjunction which makes Set cartesian closed, 
which sends each f : X x Y-Z 
to fn 
: X-ZY, with ( f  *x)y = f (x, y), 
may be considered also for topological spaces X, Y, and Z. We obtain a 
topological space Cop(Y, 2) by imposing on the set Top(Y, 2) of all 
continuous maps Y+Z the compact open topology: A subbase for, the 
open sets consists of the sets N(C, U) where C is any compact subset of 
Y, U any open subset of 2, and N(C, U) consists of all those continuous 
h :  Y+Z for which h C c  U. A standard argument (which we will not 
need) shows that the basic adjunction f c f s  of ( 1 )  restricts to give an 
adjunction 
provided Y is locally compact Hausdorff. 
There have been many attempts to repair this situation for more' 
general spaces Y by using a variety of other topologies on the function 
space or other topologies on the product space. The best device is to so 
restrict the category of topological spaces that the (categorical) product 
X b X  x Y (with its intrinsic topology as a product) does always have 
a right adjoint (which will be a function space with a uniquely determined 
topalogy). 
A topological space X is compacrly generated when each subset A C X 
which intersects every compact subset C of X in a closed set is itself 
closed. By CGHaus we denote the category with objects all compactly 
generated Hausdorff spaces ( = Kelley spaces), with arrows all continuous 
functions X+ X'. 
Proposition 1. CGHaus is a full corej7ective subcategory of Haus 
Monoids 
It is a full subcategory by definition. To each Hausdorff space Y 
we construct a compactly generated space K Y with the same points as 
Y (the "Kelleyfication" of Y) by requiring that A C  Y be closed in K Y  
if and only if AnC is closed in Y for all compact sets C C Y. Thus all 
closed sets of Y are closed in K Y ,  K Y is Hausdorff, and the identity 
function cy : K Y-' 
Y is continuous. Any continuous map f : X+ Y from 
a compactly generated Hausdorff space X factors as f = E f '. 
where f '  : X--+K Y is the same function (as f )  and is continuous because 
X is compactly generated. This shows that E is universal from K to Y, 
so is the counit of an adjunction which makes CGHaus coreflective in 
Haus, as desired. 
The description of K Y  means also (see Fig. (3)) that a function 
g : Y+ Z to a topological space Z is continuous, on K Y as ge : K Y+ 2, 
if and only if the original g is continuous on all compact subsets of Y. 
Observe also that metrizable spaces and locally compact Hausdorff 
spaces are compactly generated. 
Proposition 2. CGHaus is (small) complete and cocomplete. 
Proof. The category Haus is complete (Proposition V.9.2) and a right 
adjoint such as K preserves limits. Hence CGHaus is complete. In 
particular, the product (written 0) of two spaces X and Y in CGHaus is 
obtained from their "ordinary" product X x Yin Haus as 
XOY=K(Xx Y). 
(4) 
In other words, the 0-product of Kelley spaces is the product of the 
underlying sets, with the Kelleyfication of the usual product topology. 
Cocompleteness follows readily. Since any coproduct in Ham 
(= disjoint union) of compactly generated spaces is also compactly 
generated, it will sulfife to construct the coequalizer of a parallel pair f, 
g : Y t X  in CGHaus Take the coequalizer p : X+Q in Haus(Prop. V.9.2) 
and form KQ : 
Since E : KQ+Q is universal, there is a unique confhuous p' : X-KQ 
with EP' = p and py = p'g Since p' is also a map in Ham and p is the 

Compactly Generated Spaces 
183 
184 
Monoids 
coequalizer off and g there, there is a continuous t : Q-KQ with p' = tp. 
Then p = ep' = etp, so E C  = 1 and ere = e. But e is monic (in Haw), so te = 1, 
and E is an isomorphism: The coequalizer in Haw lies in CCHaus. 
For example, if A is a subset of a compactly generated Hausdorff 
space X, then we get an identification space X//A as a coequalizer in 
CGHaus (collapse all of A to a point in CGHaus). It is the largest Haus- 
dorff quotient of the space X/A (collapsed in Top); its topology is auto- 
matically compactly generated. 
Theorem 3. CGHaus is a cartesian closed category. 
For two compactly generated Hausdorff spaces X and Y define 
the function space with the Kelleyfication of the compact-open topology. 
Define e :  X Y n  Y-X 
by evaluation; Cf,y)-fy. 
We claim that e is 
continuous; it suffices to prove that e :  XY x Y--+X is continuous on 
compact sets. Since any compact subset of the product space is contained 
in the product of its projections, it suffices to show that e is continuous on 
any set of the form D x C, where D is compact in Cop (Y,X) and C is 
compact in Y. Consider ( f , y ) ~ D  
x C, and let U be an open set of X 
containing fy. Since f : Y-X 
is continuous, there exists a neighborhood 
M of y in C whose closure satisfies f &? ;j U. But ~ ( a ,  
U) is a set of the 
subbase for Cop (Y,X) and [N (D, U)nD] x M is open in D x C, contains 
Cf, y), and is mapped by e into U. 
This proves e continuous. 
It remains to show e universal from - Yto X. So consider any map 
h : Z 
Y+X in CGHaus. Then we construct k : Z-Set 
(Y,X) as k = h'; 
that is, so that (kz)y = h(z,y) for all ZEZ and ~ E Y .  
A direct proof shows 
that kz: Y-X 
is continuous; thus kzโฌXY. Next, we prove that zwkz 
is continuous Z+XY. Since Z is compactly generated, it is enough to 
show Z+Cop(Y,X) continuous. So let N(C, U) be one of the open sets 
for the subbase of the compact-open topology, and s u p p o ~  that 
kzcN(C, U); thus h(C x { z ) ) ~  
U. Since U is open, C compact, and h 
continuous, there is a neighborhood Vof z such that h(C x V)C U. This 
implies that k V C N(C, U). Therefore k is continuous. 
We now have the commutative diagram 
by the adjunction in Set, there is at most one k with e (kO 
1) = h, and we 
have just shown this k continuous. Therefore e is universal, and defines 
the desired adjunction 
Since q designates the product in CGHaus, this category is cartesian 
closed. 
This adjunction (6) is a bijection of sets. One also wishes the corre- 
sponding homeomorphism 
of function spaces. This follows from the adjunction (6) for categorical 
reasons (Ex. IV.6.3). 
This summarizes the basic properties of the category CGHaus. More 
extensive work (Steenrod [I9671 and elsewhere) indicates that it is the 
convenient category for topological studies; Dubuc and Porta [I9711 
show that it is appropriate for topological algebra (extensions of the 
Gelfand duality). All told, this suggests that in Top we have been studying 
the wrong mathematical objects. 
The right ones are the spaces in CGHaus. 
Exercises 
I. If Yis Hausdorff, show that KYis the colimit (in Haus) of the compact subspaces 
of Y, ordered by inclusion. 
2. Prove that a closed (or open) subset of a space X E CGHaus with the usual 
subspaoe topology is itself in CGHaus. 
3. Prove that the inclusion CGHaus--+Haw creates colimits. 
4. If Z is locally compact Hausdorff and X E CGHaus, prove that Z 
X = Z x X. 
5. Prove that CGHausis equivalent to the following category: Objects, all Hausdorff 
spaces; arrows f :  X--. Yall functions continuous on compact sets. 
9. Loops and Suspensions 
For homotopy theory, we consider the category CGHaus, of pointed 
compactly generated Hausdorff spaces - with objects the spaces 
X ~ c G H a u s  with a selected base point, *,, 
and with arrows the con- 
tinuous maps preserving the base point. Let X'*" be the subspace of XY 
consisting of all base-point preserving maps. Since it is a closed subspace, 
it is compactly generated. It has a natural base-point (the continuous 
function sending all of X to *,). 
In the standard adjunction f+-f'. 
CGHaus ( 2 0  Y . X )  z CGHaus (z.XY) 
V 
V 
CGHaus, (? . X )  
z CGHaus,(Z, X'*IY). 
consider on the right the indicated subset: Those j" : Z+ 
XI*"' 
which 
preserve base-point. Thus (fSz)*, = *, and (fZ*,)y = *,, : that is. for all 

Loops and Suspensions 
185 
These are exactly the continuous functionsjwhich collapse the "wedge" 
Z V Y = (20 *) V (*O Y) to a point. The corresponding identification 
space is called the smash product 
(or sometimes Z # Y). This gives an adjunction 
The circle S1 may be obtained from the closed unit interval 
I = {tlO 5 t 5 1) as the identification space S1 = Ii/(O, 1); we regard it as a 
pointed space with base point 0 = + 1. The functors 2 (reduced suspension) 
and R (loop space) on CGHaus, to CGHaus, are defined as 
by the bijection above C : CGHaus,-+CGHaus, has 
as right adjoint. 
The points of Q X  are the loops in X at the base point; that is, the con- 
tinuous maps f :  I+X with f (0) = f ( I ) =  *,. 
On the other hand, CX is the 
cylinder X x I with top X x { +  I}, bottom X x (0). and generator * x I 
all collapsed to a single point, the (new) base point; equivalently it'is the 
double cone overX ( X  x I with top and bottom collapsed) and with the 
generator over * collapsed. as in the ligure 
For example, ZS1 = S' A S1 is the two sphere S'. Z"S1 thu ( 1 1  + 1)-sphere. 
The unit X+RCX 
of the adjunction sends .YE X to the function 
( s ,  - ) : I-+ZX: it has a vivid geometric picture: it sends each point .u E X 
to that generator of the cone which passes through x: this generator is a 
loop Iiom north pole to south pole = north pole. hence a point of RZX. 
By iteration. Zn is the left adjoint of 0': 
CGHaus,-+CGHaus,: this 
adjunction has a unit X-+R"ZnX which can be written as a composite 
x . + a r x ~ ~ ~ z z x ~  
... 
and R", as a right adjoint, preserves products: Rn(X Y) z RnXO R" Y. 
These and similar facts can be obtained either by direct topological 
arguments. or by application of the properties of adjunctions. 
186 
Monoids 
Exercises 
I. Construct a left adjoint for Set,(S. -) : Set,-Set,. 
2. Show that the smash product in CGHaus, is commutative and associative up to 
natural isomorphisms which make CGHaus, a symmetric monoidal category 
with unit the two-point space. 
3. In Top, show that - x Y does not have a right adjoint (because it does not 
preserve coproducts). 
4. The Path space functor P:CGHaus+CGHaus has PX = X'*", where 0 is 
taken as the base point of the interval 1. For each p a t h f ~  PX, f++ f(1)defines a 
natural transformation x : P-Id. 
Show that R can be obtained as the pullback 
of a diagram P--Id+* 
(Classically, R X  is the "fibre" of K, : P X + X ) .  
5. Describe the counit of the Z-R adjunction. 
Notes 
Monoidal categories were first explicitly formulated by BCnabou [1963, 19641, 
, 
who called them "catCgories avec multiplication" and by Mac Lane [1963b], who 
called them "categories with multiplication"; the renaming is due to Eilenberg. 
Coherence theorems were initiated by Stasheff in a 1963 treatment of higher 
homotopies, by Mac Lane [1963b], and by Epstein [1966], who needed them for a 
general definition of Steenrod operations. Coherence theorems are undergoing 
active development; Lambek [I9681 found a fascinating connection with the 
cut-elimination theorems of Gentzen-style proof theory: following his lead, Kelly- 
Mac Lane [I9701 proved a coherence theorem for closed categories. The simplicia1 
category. long implicit in the boundary formulas of algebraic topology, became 
explicit in the study oi EAenberg-Mac Lane spaces and of the Eilenberg-Zilber 
theorem about 1950, and played a role in the development of homological algebra 
(see the notes to Chap. VI). Our discussion of monads and homology is only a slight 
introduction to the recent proliferation of conceptual schemes for the organization 
of homological algebra. 
Compactly generated spaces first appeared in John Kelley's 1955 book on 
General Topology; their convenience for topology was emphasized by Steenrod 
[1967], Gabriel-Zisman [1967], and others. There are alternative closed categories 
convenient for topology, notably the quasi-topological spaces due to Spanier. 
The suspension Z of a topological space is a tool long used in homotopy theory. 
The Cartan-Serre attack (about 1951) on the difficult problem of computing the 
homotopy groups of spheres made essential use of loop spaces and suspension. 
These constructions originally seemed thoroughly geometric. Thus the natural 
map X+RZX came from a topological insight, but now appears in conceptual 
terms, as the unit of an adjunction. 

VIII. Abelian Categories 
188 
Abelian Categories 
This chapter will formulate the special properties which hold in 
categories such as Ab, R-Mod, Mod-R, and R-Mod-S: They are all 
Ab-categories (the hom-sets are abelian groups and composition is 
bilinear), all finite limits and colimits exist, and these limits - especially 
kernel and cokernel - are well behaved. This leads to a set of axioms 
describing an "abelian" category. The axioms suffice to prove all the 
facts about commuting diagrams and connecting morphisms which are 
proved in Ab by methods of chasing elements. We carry the subject 
exactly to this point, leaving the subsequent development of homological 
algebra to more specialized treatments. 
1. Kernels and Cokernels 
Recall (5 1.5) that a null object z in a category is an object which is both 
initial and terminal. If C has a null object, then to any a, b E C the unique 
arrows a-+z and z+b have a composite 0- Q : a+b called the zero 
arrow from a to b. It follows that any composite with one factor a zerois 
itself a zero arrow. The null object is unique up to isomorphism, and the 
notion of zero arrow is independent of the choice of the null. 
Let C have a null object. A kernel of an arrow f: a+b is defined to 
be an equalizer of the arrows f,O : a 3  b. Put more directly, k : 
s A a  is a 
kernel off : a+ b when f k = 0, and every h with f h = 0 factors uniquely 
through k (as h = kh') 
Thus any category with all equalizers (or, more generally, with all pull- 
backs or with all finite limits) and with a zero has kernels for all arrows, 
and the kernel k : s+a off is unique, up to an isomorphism of s. Like all 
equalizers, a kernel k is necessarily monic (kg' = kh' implies g' = h', by the 
unique factorization requirement in the definition). Hence it is convenient 
to think of the kernel k : s--+a as a subobject of a - as an equivalence class 
of rnonics s+a. 
For example, in Grp the group I with just one element (the identity 
element) is a null object, and for any two groups the zero morphism 
G+H is the unique morphism which sends all of G to the identity 
element in N. The kernel of an arbitrary morphism f : G-H 
of groups 
is the insertion N--*G of the usual kernel N, (with N = all x in G with 
f x = 1). Note that N is a normal subgroup of G, so in Grp every kernel is 
monic but there are monies which are not kernels. 
In the category Set, of pointed sets (9 1.71, the one-point set is a null 
object and the zero map P+Q is the function taking all of P to the base 
point *Q in Q. For any morphism f :  P+Q of pointed sets, the kernel 
S 4 P  is the insertion of the subset S  of those x E P with f x = *,, where 
the base point of S is identical with the base point of P. Much the same 
description gives kernels in Top,. In Grp, an epimorphism is determined 
(up to isomorphism) by its kernel, but this is by no means the case in Set, 
or in Top,. 
In any Ah-category A, all equalizers are kernels. Indeed, in such 
a category each hom-set A(b,c) is an abelian group. Hence, given a 
parallel pair f,g : 6--+c, a third arrow h : a - + b  satisfies f h =gh if and 
only if Cf - g ) h  = 0. Therefore the universal such h can be described either 
as the equalizer off and g or as the kernel off - g. This is the reason one 
usually deals with kernels and not with equalizers in R-Mod, Ab, etc. 
The dual notion of cokernel has already been described, in 9 111.3. 
Now suppose that the category C has a null object z and kernels and 
cokernels for a11 arrows. For each object c E C, the set PC of all arrows f 
with codomain c has a preorder 5, 
with g S f defined to mean that g 
factors through f (i. e., that g = fg' for some arrow g'). This reflexive and 
transitive relation S defines as usual an equivalence relation =, with 
f ~g meaning that f 5s; and g g f. The equivalence classes of arrows 
f E PC under this relation form a partially ordered set, which contains the 
partially ordered set of subobjects of c (restrict f to be a monomorphism; 
then g s  f is the inclusion relation already defined for subobjects in 
Q V.7). 
Dually, the set Qc of all arrows u with domain c is preordered, with 
u 2 v when u factors through u (v = v'u for some v'). 
Now choose a kernel for each arrow u from c and a cokernel for each 
arrow f to c. Then the definitions of kernel and cokernel state that 
These logical equivalences state exactly that the functions 

Kernels and Cokernels 
189 
190 
Abelian Categories 
define a Galois connection from the preorder Qc to the preorder~ PC, 
as defined in 3 IV.5. As for any such connection, the triangular identities 
read 
ker (coker (ker u)) = ker u , 
coker (ker(coker f )) = coker f ,  
and g is a kernel if and only if g = ker (cokerg). These facts are also readily 
provable directly from the definitions. 
If C has a null object, kernels, and cokernels, then any arrow f of 
C has a canonical factorization 
Lemma 1. Ifalso f = m'q', where m' is a kernel, then in the commutatiue 
square 
there is a (unique) diagonal arrow t with m = m't and q' = tq. Moreover, 
ifC has equalizers and every monic in C is a kernel, then q is epi. 
Proof. By assumption, m'= ker p' where pl=coker m'; take also 
p = coker m = coker f. Then p'm' = 0, so p'f = p'm'q' = 0, and p' factors 
through p asp' = wp for some w. Then p'm = wpm = 0, so m factors through 
m' = ker p' as m = m't for a unique monic t. Moreover, m'q' = m'tq and 
m' is monic, so q' = tq. This gives the desired diagram (3). 
Next, to prove that q is epi, consider some parallel pair of arrows 
r, s with rq = sq. Then q factors through the equalizer e of r and s as 
4 = eq' for some q', and f = mq = meq'. Now m' =me is monic, hence by 
- 
assumption is a kernel, so by the first conclusion of the lemma there is an 
arrow t with m = rn't = met and hence with 1 = et. The monic e thus has 
a right inverse, so is an isomorphism. But e was taken to be the equalizer 
of r and s, so r = s. This proves q epi. 
Thus (2) is now an epi-monic factorization of the arrow f. 
2. Additive Categories 
An Ab-category A, as defined in 9 1.8, is a category in which each hom-set 
A(b,c) is an additive abelian group (not necessarily small) and composi- 
tion of arrows is bilinear relative to this addition. Thus each abelian 
group A(b,c) has a zero element 0: b+c, ca!led the zero arrow (even 
though A may not have a null object in the previous sense). Again, 
a composite with a zero arrow is necessarily zero, since composition is 
distributive over addition. 
Proposition 1. The following properties of an object z in an Ab-category 
A are equivalent: (i) z is initial; (ii) z is terminal; (iii) I,= 0 : 1-2; (iv) the 
abelian group A(z,z) is the zero group. In particular, any initial (or any 
terminal) object in A is a null object. 
Prooj. If z is initial, there is a unique map z+z, hence 1, = O  and 
A(z,z)=O. If l,=O, then any f :b+z has f = lzf =Of =O:b+z, so 
there is a unique arrow, namely 0, from b to z, and z is terminal. The rest 
follows by duality. 
When there is a null (= initial and terminal) object z in the ~ b -  
category A, the unique maps b - + z  and z+c 
are the zero elements of 
A(b,z) and A(z,c) respectively. Hence the composite b+z-+c, 
which is 
the zero morphism 0 : b+c, as defined in $1, is also the zero element of 
the abelian group A (b, c). 
Next we consider products and coproducts in the Ab-category A. 
Definition. A biproduct diagram for the objects a, b E A is a diagram 
with arrows p,, p,, i,, i, which satisfy the identities 
Theorem 2. Two objects a and b in an ~b-category A haue a product in 
A ifand only if they have a biproduct in A. Specifically, given a biproduct 
diagram (I), the object c with the projections p, and p, is a product of a 
and b, while, dbally, c with i, and i, is a coproduct. In particular, two objects 
a and b have a product in A ifand only ifthey have a coproduct in A. 

Additive Categories 
191 
ProoJ First assume we have the biproduct diagram (1) with the 
condition (2). Then 
subtracting, p, i, = 0; symmetrically p2 it = 0. (These are familiar 
equations for the usual biproduct of modules.) Now consider any diagram 
f 
f 2  
a-d-b. 
The sum h = i  ,f,+iJ,:d-+c 
then has pih=fi; con- 
versely, if h' : d - w  has pihl =fi for i = 1,2, then 
so h' = h. This states that there is a unique h : d+c with pih = fi for i = 1,2, 
so the diagram a&c- 
b is indeed a product. The assignment 
h- (fl, f,) is an isomorphism 
of abelian groups, where 0 on the right is the direct sum of abelian 
groups. 
Conversely, given a product diagram a clIL a x b 
b, the defini- 
tion of this product provides a unique arrow i, : a-+a x b with com- 
ponents p,i, = I,, p2il = O  and a unique i, : b--+~ 
x b with p,iZ -0, 
p, i, = 1,. Then 
so ilpl + i,p, : a x b+a x b is the unique arrow with .components 
p, and p,, hence is the identity 1, ,,. 
Thus the given product diagram 
does indeed yield a biproduct, with (1) and (2). 
In special categories, such as Ab and R-Mod, the biproduct is often 
called a direct sum. Note also that the description of the bip;oduct 
diagram is "internal", since it involves only the objects a, b, and c and the 
arrows between them, while the standard categorical description of 
the product (or the coproduct) isUexternal", since it refers to construction 
of arrows in the whole category. 
Given objects a, b E A, the biproduct diagram (I), if it exists, is de- 
termined uniqpely up to an isomorphism of the object c. If all such 
biproducts exist, then a choice of c = a$b for each pair (a, b) determines 
a bifunctor $ : A x A+ A, with f1 @f2 defined for arrows f, : a-a' 
and f, : b-rb' either by the equations 
(i.e., defined as for a product x = $) or by the equations 
(ft@fi)ik=i;f~, 
k = l , 2 ,  
(4) 
192 
Abelian Categories 
that is, as for a coproduct @ = U, with i;, ii the injections of the second 
coproduct. Indeed, the first pair (3) of equations determines ft@f2 
uniquely as the arrow with components f,, 1;; then by the defining. 
equations for the second biproduct 
as in the second pair of equations, and dually. 
The conclusion may also be formulated thus: The identification of 
the product functor a x 6, with mapping function defined by (3), with 
the coproduct functor aLIb, mapping function defined by (4), is a natural 
isomorphism. 
Iteration, for given a,, . . . , a, E A, yields a biproduct @ aj charac- 
i 
terized (up to isomorphism in A) by the diagram 
and the equations 
i,p,+ ... +imp,= 1, 
pki.=Skj=O k * j ,  
J 
= 1 k = l .  
(9 
Moreover, for given c, , . . ., c, E A there is an isomorphism 
of abelian groups, where C denotes the iterated biproduct of abetian 
groups. This implies that each arrow f : @,ck+CBja, is determined by 
the n x rn matrix of its components f,, =p, fi,: ajdc,. Composition of 
arrows is then given by the usual matrix product of the matrices of 
components. In other words, the equations (5) contain the familiar 
calculus of matrices (cf. 5 111.5). 
An additive category is by definition an Ab-category which has a zero 
object 0 and a biproduct for each pair of its objects. 
Proposition 3. For parallel arrows f, f' : a+ b in an additive category A, 
f + f t = 8 * ( f @  ff)S.:a+b, 
(6) 
where 6, : a-ra x a is the diagonal map, sb : b@b = bLIb-b 
the co- 
diagonal. 
Here the diagonal is defined by p,d, = 1, = p,S, and the codiagonal 
by d'i, 
= 1,=6'i2. The proof is a direct calculation: 
gb(f @f')da=gb(f (fffl)(ilpl +iZ~2)8a 
=@(f @ f')il+gb(f @fi)i2 
= 6 i l f + 6 i , f 1 = f +  f ' .  

Additive Categories 
193 
Thts proposition suggests that the additive structure of A can be 
derived from the biproduct (cf. Exercise 4). 
If A and B are Ab-categories, an additive functor T :  A - + B  is a 
functor from A to B with 
for any parallel pair of arrows f, f' : b+c in A. It follows that TO = 0. 
Since the additive structure of A can be described in terms of the bi- 
product structure of A, this condition (7) can also be reformulated as 
follows: 
Proposition 4. If A and B are Ab-cate@ries, while A has all binary 
biproducts, then a functor T : A d  B is additive if and only if T carries 
each binary biproduct diagram in A to a biproduct diagram in B. 
Proof. Each of the equations p, i, = 1, p2i2 = 1, and i,p, + i2p, = 1 
describing a biproduct in terms of its insertions ij and projections p, is 
preserved by an additive functor; therefore each additive functor preserves 
biproducts. 
Conversely, suppose that T preserves all binary biproducts. Then 
a parallel pair of arrows f,, f2:a-+a1 has T(f,@ f2)=Tf,@ Tf, and 
therefore T( f, + f2) = Tf, + Tf2 by the formula (6) for sum in terms of 
direct sum and the equations T(SJ = 6,,, T(@) =ST", which follows 
at once from the definition of the diagonal 6 and the codiagonal'g in 
terms of product and coproduct. 
Our proposition can also be modified: Tis additive if and only if T 
carries each binary product diagram in A to a product diagram in B, or. 
if and only if it carries each binary coproduct in A to a coproduct in B. 
Many familiar functors for Ab-categories A are additive. For example, 
if A has small hom-sets each horn-functor 
A(a, -): A - + A b ,  A(-, a): AoP+Ab 
is additive. If A and B are Ab-categories, so is A x B, and the projectiond 
A x B+A, A x B-+B of t IS product are additive functors. The tensor 
F.." 
product of abelian groups tsa functor Abx Ab-+Ab. additive in each 
of its arguments, and so is the torsion product. 
1. In any additive category A, show that the canonical map 
(defined in 8 111.5) is an isomorphism (This is essentially a reformulation of 
Theorem 2). 
2. Define the corresponding danonica~ map r of an infinite coproduct to the 
corresponding infinite product, and show by an example that it need not be an 
isomorphism in every additive category. 
194 
Abelian Categories 
3. In an additive category, show that the biproduct is associative and commutative 
(up to a natural isomorphism). 
4. (Alternative definition of addition of arrows, to get an additive category). 
(a) Let A be a category with a null object, finite products, and finite coproducts in 
which the canonical arrow a,LIa,+a, 
x a, from the coproduct to the 
product (S 111.5) is always an isomorphism. For f, f '  :a+b 
define 
f + f'= bb(f x f ')ha. Prove that this addition makes each set A (a, b) 
a commutative monoid, and that composition is distributive over this 
addition. 
(b) If, moreover, there is for each a E A an arrow v, : a-+a with v, + I,= 0 : a h a ,  
prove that each A (a, b) is a group under the addition defined above, and 
hence that this addition gives A the structure of an additive category. (Mac 
Lane [1950]). 
5. (The free Ab-category on a given C). Given a category C, construct an Ab- 
category A and a functor C-+A which is universal from C to an Ab-category. 
(Hint: The objects of A are those of C, while A (b, c) = Z (C (b, c)) is the free 
abelian group on the set C (b, c).) 
6. (The free additive category) 
(a) Given an Ab-category A, construct an additive category Add (A) and an 
additive functor A-Add 
(A) which is universal from A to an additive 
category. (Hint: Objects of Add (A) are n-tuples of objects of A, for n = 0,1, . . . , 
while arrows are matrices of arrows of A). 
(b) If A is the commutative ring K, regarded as an additive category with one 
object, show that Add (K) is the category MatrKdescribed in 5 1.2. (Hint: Show 
that MstrK has the desired universal property.) 
3. Abelian Categories 
Definition. An abelian category A is an Ab-category satisfying the 
following conditions 
(i) A has a null object, 
(ii) A has binary biproducts, 
(iii) Every arrow in A has a kernel and a cokernel, 
(iv) Every monic arrow is a kernel, and every epi a cokernel. 
The first two conditions insure that A is an additive category, as 
described in 5 2. Instead of requiring a null object in (i), we could by 
Proposition 2.1 require a terminal object or an initial object. Instead of 
requiring all biproducts a@b, we could require all products a x b o r  all 
binary coproducts. 
With (i) and (ii), the existence of kernels in condition (iii) implies 
that A has all finite limits. Indeed, the equalizer off, g : a- b may be 
constructed as the kernel off -g, (i) and (ii) give finite products, and 
finite products and equalizers give all finite limits. Dually, the existence 
of cokernels implies the existence of all finite colimits. 

Abelian Categories 
195 
Condition (iv) is powerful. It implies, for example, that any arrow f 
which is both monic and epi is an isomorphism. For f : a - + b  rnonic 
means f = ker g for some g, hence g f = 0 = 0 f .  But f is epi, so cancels 
to give g = 0 : b+c, and the kernel of g = 0 is equivalent to the identity of 
b, hence is an isomorphism. 
The categories R-Mod, Mod-R, Ab (and many others) are all abelian, 
with the usual kernels and cokernels. If A is abelian, so is any functor 
category AJ, for arbitrary J. Specifically, if S, T :  J-A 
are any two 
functors, the set Nat(S, T)= AJ(S, T) of all natural transformations 
a, p :  S-T 
is an abelian group, with addition defined termwise - 
(a + p), = r, + Pj: Sj-* Tj for each j E J. The functor N : J- A everywhere 
equal to the null object of A is the null functor in AJ, the biproduct 
S O  T of two functors is defined termwise, as (SO 
T ) a  = Sa@ Ta, and 
the kernel K of a natural transformation a : S+ T is defined termwise, 
so that for each j, Kj-Sj 
is the kernel of uj. All the axioms follow, to 
make AJ abelian. 
Proposition 1. In an abelian category A, every arrow f has a factoriza- 
tion f = me, with m rnonic and e epi; moreover, 
m = ker (coker f )  , e = coker (ker f ) . 
(1) 
Given any other factorization f '  = m'e' with m' rnonic and e' epi and a 
commutative-square 
as shown at the left above, there is a unique k with e'g = ke, m'k = hm . 
(i.e., with the squares at the right commutative). 
Proof. To construct such a factorization off, take m = ker (coker f). 
Since (coker f )  0 f = 0, f factors as f = me for a unique e, and by Lemma 1 
of $ I, e is epi. Now m is monic, so for any composable t, f t = O  if and 
only if et = 0. This implies that kerf = kere. But e is epi, so the arrow 
e = coker (ker e) = coker (kerf ). We have proved (1). 
Now regard f and f' as objects in the arrow category A'; a morphism 
(g, h) : f -* f' is then just a commutative square as in (2) above. Consider 
the factorizations f =me and f '= m'e', and set u =kerf = ker e. Then 
0 = h f u = m'e'gu, so e'gu = 0, and e'g must factor through e = coker u 
as e'g = ke for a unique k. Then also m1ke= m'e'g = hme, so m'k = hm, 
and both squares commute in the rectangle of (2). 
196 
Abelian Categories 
This completes the proof. The second part shows that any morphism 
(g. h )  : f + f' must carry a factorization off to a factorization off', 
so that the factorization is functorial. In particular, for the identity 
morphism (1.1): f +  f, this proves that any two monic-epi factoriza- 
tions f = m e  and f = m'e' are isomorphic (k an isomorphism above). 
From this factorization, we define (the usual) image and coimage of 
f = m e : a + b  as 
m=imf, 
e=coimf, 
(3) 
uniquely up to isomorphism. Thus the image m off is a subobject of its 
codomain b, its coimage a quotient object of its domain. More generally, 
iff = m, re, with m, monic, t an isomorphism and e epi, then m, = im f, 
e, = coim f and t is (the usual) isomorphism of coimage to image. This is 
the situation which arises in familiar concrete categories like Ab. If' 
f : B-+C is a morphism in Ab with kernel a subgroup K of B, image a 
subgroup S of C, then f factors as a three-fold composite 
with e ,  the projection on the standard quotient group, m, the inclusion, 
and u the evident isomorphism of the coimage B/K to the image S. This 
three-fold factorization arises because each quotient object B/K has a 
canonical representation (by cosets). 
Exact sequences work as usual in any abelian category. 
Definition. A composable pair of arrows, 
is exact at b when im f = ker g (equiualence as subobjects of b) - or, 
equivulently, when coker f a coim g. 
Observe that im f 6 ker g if and only if g f = 0, while irn f 2 ker g if 
and only if every k with gk = 0 factors as k = mk', where m is the first 
factor in the monic-epi factorization f'= me. This bipartite definition of 
exactness is just the usual condition (say in Ab): (f, g )  exact means that 
the composite g f is zero and that every element killed by g is,in the 
image off. 
Definition. The diagram (with 0 the null object) 
is a short exact sequence when it is exact at a, at b, and at c. 
Since O+a is the zero arrow, exactness at a means just that f is 
rnonic; dually, exactness at c means g epi. All told, (5) short exact thus is 
equivalent to 
f = k e r g ,  
g=cokerf. 
(6) 

198 
Abelian Categories 
Abelian Categories 
197 
Similarly, the statement that h = coker f becomes the statement that the 
sequence 
is exact at b and at c. Classically, such a sequence (7) was called a short 
right exact sequence. Similarly, k = ker f is expressed by a short left 
exact sequence. 
The monic-epi factorization f = me of any arrow f determines two 
short exact sequences which appear (with the bordering zeros omitted) 
as the top and side of the following commutative diagram: 
A functor T : A-B between abelian categories A and B is, by defini- 
tion, exact when it preserves all finite limits and all finite colimits. In 
particular, an exact functor preserves kernels and cokernels, which 
means that 
ker(Tf)=T(kerf), 
coker(Tf)=T(cokerf); 
(9) 
it also preserves images, coimages, and carries exact sequences to exact 
sequences. By the familiar construction of limits from .products and 
equalizers and dual constructions, T : A+B is exact if and only if it is 
additive and preserves kernels and cokernels. 
A functor T is left exact when it preserves all finite limits. In other 
words, T is left exact if and only if it is additive and ker(Tf) = T(ker f )  
for all f: the last condition is equivalent to the requirement that Tpreserves 
short left exact sequences. 
Abelian categories have a more economical description, not involving 
a given abelian group structure on each hom-set. Explicitly, let A be any 
category which satisfies the axioms (i), (ii'), (iii), and (iv) just as above, 
except that (ii) is replaced by 
(ii') A has binary products and binary coproducts. 
Then the formula (2.6) can be used to introduce an addition in each 
hom-set A(a, b), and with this addition A is an abelian category. The 
somewhat fussy proof, Freyd [1964], Schubert [1970], will be omitted 
here because it seems of little use for the applications, where the categori~s 
usually come equipped with the needed addition in each A(a, b). 
Exercises 
1. For A, B abelian categories, show that an additive functor T :  A--.B is exact if 
and only if it carries all short exact sequences in A to short exact sequences In B. 
2. Prove: A and B abelian implies that the product category A x B is abelian. 
3. Show that the category of all free abelian groups is not abelian. 
4. Show that the category of all finite abelian groups (with arrows all morphisms 
of such) is abelian. 
5. If R is a left noetherian ring, show that the category of all finitely generated left 
R-modules (with arrows all morphisms of such modules) is abelian. 
6. For subobjects u s  o of an object a in an abelian category, define a "quotient" 
object v/u (to agree with the usual notion in Ab). If g f = 0, prove that ker glim f is 
isomorphic to the dual object coim glcoker f. 
4. Diagram Lemmas 
In an abelian category A, a chain complex is a sequence 
of composable arrows, with and, + , = 0 for all n. The sequence need not 
be exact at c,; the deviation from exactness is measured by the n-th 
homology object (for the quotient, cf. Exercise 3.6) 
Hnc = Ker (8, : cn+cn - ,)/Im (3, + , : c, + ,+c,) . 
(2) 
Initially in algebraic topology one used chain complexes only in Ab or 
in K-Mod (especially for K the integers modulo a prime), but more 
general considerations of sheaf theory and homologi~al algebra use 
complexes in many other abelian categories. The definition (2) of homo- 
logy applies in any abelian category; the development of its properties 
depends on certain manipulations of exact sequences, normally proved 
in Ab by chasing elements around diagrams. We will now show how the 
basic diagram lemmas hold in any (fixed) abelian categoryA. 
A morphism (m, e)-+(m1, e') of short exact sequences (in A) is by 
definition a triple (f, g, h) of arrows in A such that the diagram 
commutes. The short exact sequences with these morphisms constitute 
a category Ses A; in an evident way, it is additive. A first basic lemma is: 
Lemma 1. (The short five lemma.) In any commutative diagram (3) 
with short exact rows, f and h monk imply g monic, and f and h epi imply g epi. 

Diagram Lemmas 
199 
200 
Abeiian Categories 
In Ab, take any element x  in ker g; then g ( x )  = 0: 
so he(x) = 0 ,  e(x) = 0. By exactness of the first row, there must be an 
element x' with m ( x l )  = x .  By exactness of the second row, f(xf)=O, 
therefore x' = 0, and so x = 0. This argument is a "diagram chase" with x. 
In any abelian category, the same argument can be done without 
elements. Take k = ker g. Then hek = e'gk = 0; since h is monic, ek = 0. 
Therefore k  factors through m = ker e ask = mk'. But 0 = gk = gmkl= m'fk', 
and m' and f are rnonic, so k = 0. Since k = ker g, this proves g rnonic. 
The proof that g is epi is dual. 
In Ab, a pullback of a rnonic or an epi is monic or epi, respectively. 
This holds for pullbacks of monics in any category (Lemma V.7), and 
for pullbacks of epis in an abelian category, as follows. 
Proposition 2. Given a pullback square (on the right below) 
Now suppose u J ' = 0 for some u. Since j ' = p,~rr. uprm = 0. so u p ,  
factors through f p, - g p l  = coker 111 as u p ,  = u ' ( f p ,  - gp2) But 
p, i, = 0. so 
0 = u p z i l  = u'( f p ,  - g p z ) i l  = u'f p ,  i, = rr',f: 
Since ]'is epi, u' = 0; therefore f' is epi. as desired. 
Finally, consider k =kerf. The pair of arrows k : n-+ b and 0 : a+d 
have f k = 0 =go, so by the definition of the pullback s there is a unique 
arrow k' : a d s  with g1k'= k and f1k'= 0; since k is rnonic, so is k'. To 
show it the kernel of f" consider any arrow c with ("c=O. 
Then 
f g'c = g f 'v =0, so g'c factors through k =kerf as g'r = kr' for some v'. 
Then g l v =  g'(kfv') and f ' v  = 0 = f'(k1v'), so by the uniqueness involved 
in the definition of a pullback, c = k'c'. Therefore k' = ker f ' .  as desired.' 
In virtue of this Proposition, diagram chases can be made in any 
abelian category using "members" (in A) instead of elements (in Ab). 
Call an arrow x with codomain a E A a member of a, written x E, a, and 
define x r y for two members of a to mean that there are epls u, v with 
xu = yv. This relation is manifestly reflexive and symmetric. To prove it 
transitive, suppose also that y rv = zr for epis w and rand form the pullback 
square displayed at the upper left in the diagram 
in an abelian category, f epi implies f' epi. Also, the kernel k off factors as 
k = g'k'for a k' which is the kernel off '. 
In particular, given a short exact sequence a+b+c, 
each arrow 
g : d+c to the right-hand end object c yields by pullback a short exact 
sequence a-+s+d. This operation (and its dual) is basic to the description 
of Ext (c,a) (the set of "all" short exact sequences from a ti, c) as a bifunctor 
for an abelian category (Mac Lane [I9631 Chap. 111). 
Proof. The pullback s (like any pullback) is constructed from 
products and equalizers thus: Take b @ d  with projections p, and p,, 
form the left exact sequence 
(i.e., m is a kernel), and set gl=p,m, f1=p2m. 
Here f p, - g p ,  is epi. For suppose h( f p, - gp,) = 0 for some h. Then, 
using the injection i, of the biproduct, 
and h = 0 because f is given to be epi. 
By Proposition 2, v' and w' are epi, and hence x = z. Then a member of a 
is an equivalence class, for the relation E, of arrows to a. Since every 
arrow x  has a factorization x = me, every member of a is represented by a 
subobject (a monic m) of a, but we shall not need to use this fact. Each 
object a has zero member, the (equivalence class of the) zero arrow 
0--+a. Each member x E, a has a "negative" -. x. 
For any arrow f : a+b, each member x ~ , a  gives f x ~ ,  
b, and 
x = y in a implies f x = f y in b, so any arrow from a to b carries members 
of a to members of b -just as if they were elements of sets. 
Theorem 3. (Elementary rules for chasing diagrams). For the members 
in any ubelian category 
(i) f : & b is monic if and only if, for all x Emu, f x = 0 implies x = 0; 
(ii) f : a+ b is rnonic ifand only if, for all x, x' โฌ,a, f x = f x' inlplies x E x' ; 
(iii) g : b+c is epi ifand only iffor each z E,C there exist a y E, b with gy s 
z ;  

Diagram Lemmas 
20 1 
202 
Abel~an Categories 
fiv) h : r-s is the zero arrow fund only if, for all x Emr, hx = 0; 
(v) A sequence a& 
b A
c
 
is exact ar b if and only i f  g f = 0 and to 
euery y E,,, b with gy r 0 there exists x ~ , a  with f x a y; 
(vi) (Subtraction) Given g : b-c 
hnd x, y ~ , b  
with g x  r gy, there is a 
member z E, b with gz = 0; moreover, any f : b-d 
with f x = 0 has f y = f z 
and any h : b-+a with h y  a 0 has hx r - hz. 
Proof. Rules (i) and (ii) are just the definition of a rnonic. In (iii), 
if y is epi, then one can construct y ~,,,b 
with gy r z by pullback (using 
Proposition 2); conversely, jig is not epi, the member 1,~,c is not of the 
form gy = 1, for any y emb. Rule (iv) is trivial. 
For rule (v), take the standard factorization f =me, and suppose 
first that the given sequence is exact at b, so that m = ker g. If gysO, 
p 5 my, for some y, . Form the pullback at the left of the diagram 
since yei=mey, = f y; and e' is epi, y = fy',, as required. Conversely, 
given this property for all y ~ , b ,  take k 
ker g; then kemb and gk =O 
(in c). Therefore there is a member X E , ~  with f x ~ k ;  
that is, with 
ku = mexv for suitable epis u and v. But this equation implies that'thc 
monic k factors through m, and hence that i m f z  kerg. Combined with 
g f = 0, this gives the desired exactness. 
Rule (vi) is intended to replace the subtraction of elements in Ab. If 
gx = gy, there are epis u, v with gxu = gyv, and (vi) holds with 
z = y v - x u ~ ~ b .  
Here is an example of a diagram chase with these methods: 
Lemma 4. (The Five Lemma.) In a commutarive diagram 
with exact rows, f , ,  f2, 
f4, f5 isomorphisms imply f3 an isomorphism. 
Proof, By duality, it suffices to prove f, monic. In Ab one would 
"chase" an element x~ ker f,. Consider instead any member X E , , , ~ ,  
with f3x = 0. This gives f, g, x = 0; since f, is monic, g 3 x  = 0: 
By exactness at a, and Rule (v) of the theorem, there is a r 8 ~ , c t ,  with 
g,y=x.ThenO= f , x r  f , g , y h ,  f , y ,  so bye~actnessat b, thcre ~ s a  
y' ~,,,b, with h ,  y' E f, y Since f, is epi, there is a ;โฌ,a, with h , i ' ,  I = f 2  y 
or f, g, z = f2 y. But f, is rnonic, so, by Rule (ii), g, : 
= y and ..c = g, y 
=g,g, z = 0. Since any x with f , x  = 0 is itself 0, f 3  is monic, as required. 
As another illustration, consider any morphism ( f .  g, /I) of short 
exact sequences, as in (3); add the kernels and cokernels of /; g. and h to 
form a diagram 
where Ke f is the domain of kerf, Co f the codomain of coker f. etc. 
In this diagram the columns (with 0's added top and bottom) are exact 
sequences by construction, and both middle rows are given to be exact. 
By the definitions of kernel and cokernel, one may add unique arrows 
m,, e, in the top row and m,, e, in the bottom row so as to make the 
added squares commute. An easy diagram chase (by the method of 
Theorem 3) shows the Crst row exact at K e  f and K e g ;  dually, the last 
row is exact at C o g  and C o  h. However, the first row is not necessarily a 
short exact sequence because e, need not be epi; moreover, this happens 
precisely when m, is not rnonic. An easy example of this phenomenon 
(in Ab; g + 0) is 
0-0-z 
+z-0 
The failure of exactness can be repaired by the following striking 
lemma, which produces an added 6 called the connecting homomorphism 
- it is essentially the connecting homomorphism used for relative 
homology (a complex modulo a subcomplex) and for the connecting 
maps between derived functors in homological algebra. 
Lemma 5 (Ker-coker sequence = Snake lemma.) Given a morphism 
(f, 
g, h )  of short exact sequences, as in (3), there is an arrow 6 : Keh+ Co f 

Diagram Lemmas 
203 
204 
Abelian Categories 
such that the following sequence is exact 
Proof. 
From the map of short exact sequences we first build a 
different diagram; on the left in 
there is a member zz โฌ,a 
with f'z, r 2 which means that gtn:, r gy. 
Now form the "dlfference" member yo = y - mz,~,b. By Rule (vi) above, 
t h ~ s  dlfference member has ry, E ey = k x  and gy, = 0. But j : h,--+b is 
ker g. so there is an x, E, bo with ,jxo r yo: 
.yo F---+ 
eo xo 
x 
T 
T 
T 
c, = K e h ,  d is the pullback of e and k = ker h, so that u is epi with kernel 
s as in Proposition 2; dually, d' is the pushout of p = coker f and m', with 
cokernel s' as shown. Right down the middle runs an arrow 6, = p l g k ' :  
d+d', 
with s16,=hku=0 
and G0s=ufpf =O. Since u'=kersl and 
u = coker s, this means that 6, factors uniquely as 
So = u'du :d -* 
co 
d 
* a ,  
U' 
r d ' .  
The middle factor is the required "connecting" arrow 6 : co-+a,. 
The effect of this arrow 6 on a member x ~,,,c, can be described by 
the rig-zag staircase shown at the right of (7) above. Indeed, since e is 
epi there is a member y ~ , b  
with ey r kx. Then e'gy = hey 3 hkx = 0, so 
by exactness there is a member z โฌ,,,a' with m'z r gy. We claim that dx is 
then the member 2 ,  = pz โฌ,,,a,. For, d is a pullback so there is an x0โฌ,d 
with uxo = x, k'x, = y. Then 
and u' is monic, so 6x 3 z,. This argument also proves that (the equiva- 
lence class of) the member 2, is independent of the choices made in the 
construction of the rig-zag (7). This zig-zag is exactly the description 
usually given for the action of a connecting morphism 6 on the elements 
of abelian groups. 
Using the zig-zag description we can now prove the exactness of the 
ker-coker sequence (6), say the exactness at Keh. First, to show that 
6eo = 0, it suffices to show 6e, w =O for any member w e,bO = Keg. But 
the member e,w = x E,C, has kx = ke, w = ejw, where j = ker g as in (5); 
hence in the zig-zag (7) we may choose y = jw. Then g y  =gjw E 0, which 
proves that 6eo = 0. On the other hand, consider any x E,C, with 6 x  sz 0. 
This means that the z, constructed in the zig-zag has z ,  r 0; by exactness 
Then ke,x, = ey, = k x  and k is monic, so eoxo = x. We have shown that 
each x with 6.u r 0 has the form x  E eOxO, SO is in the image of e,. This 
proves exactness; in fact, it is exactly like the usual exactness proof with 
honest elements. 
Exercises 
1. In the five-lemma, obtain minimal hypotheses (on f ,, f,, and f, only) for f, to 
be monic. 
2. In the five-lemma, provef, epi using members (not cornernbers) (Hint: Rule (vi) 
of Theorem 3 is necessary in this proof). 
3. Complete the proof of the exactness of the ker-coker sequence. 
4. Show that the connecting morphism d is natural; i.e., that it is a natural transfor- 
mation between two appropriate functors defined on a suitable category whose 
objects are morphisms (3) of short exact sequences. 
5. A 3 x 3 diagram is one of the form (bordered by zeros) 
(a) Give a direct proof of the 3 x 3 lemma: If a 3 x 3 diagram is commutative 
and all three columns and the last two rows are short exact sequences, then 
so is the first row. 
(b) Show that this lemma also follows from the ker-coker sequence. 
(c) Prove the middle 3 x 3 lemma: If a 3 x 3 diagram is commutative, and all 
three columns and the first and third rows are short exact sequences, then so 
is the middle row. 
6. For two arrows f : a-b and g : b--+c establish an exact sequence 
O+Ke f+Keg f+Keg--+Cof+Cog f-+Cog-tO. 
7. Show explicitly that the category Ses (A) is not in generalabelian. 

Diagram Lemmas 
205 
Notes 
Shortly after the discovery of categories, Eilenberg and Steenrod [I9521 showed 
how the language of categories and functors could be used to give an axiomatic 
description of the homology and cohomology of a topological space. This, in turn, 
suggested the problem of describing those categories in which the values of such a 
homology theory could lie. After discussions with Eilenberg, this was done by 
Mac Lane [1948, 19501. His notion of an "abelian bicategory" was clumsy, and the 
subject languished until Buchsbaum's axiomatic study [I9553 and the discovery by 
Grothendieck [I9571 that categories of sheaves (ofabelian groups) over a topological 
space were abelian categories but not categories of modules, and that homological 
algebra in these categories was needed for a complete treatment ofsheafcohomology 
(Godement [1958]). With this impetus, abelian categories joined the establishment. 
This chapter has given only an elementary theory of abelian categories - a 
demonstration directly from the axioms of all the usual diagram lemmas. Our 
method of "chasing members" is an adaptation of the method given by Mac Lane 
[1963, Chap. XII]; the critical point is the snake lemma, which must construct an 
arrow. Earlier proofs of this lemma in abelian categories were obscure; the present 
version is due to M. Andre (private communication). These diagram lemmas can 
also be proved in abelian categories from the case of R-modules by using suitable 
embedding theorems (Lubkin-Heron-Freyd-Mitchell). These beautiful theorems 
construct for any small abelian category A a faithful, exact functor A--.Ab and a 
full and faithful exact functor A-+R-Mod for a suitable ring R. For proofs we 
refer to Mitchell [1965], Freyd [1964], and Pareigis [1970]. 
These sources will also indicate the further elegant developments for abelian 
categories: A Krull-Remak-Schmidt theorem,, Morita duality, the construction of 
"injective envelopes" in suitable abelian categories, the structure of Grothendieck 
categories, and the locally Noetherian categories (Gabriel [1962]). 
IX. Special Limits 
This chapter covers two useful types of limits (and colimits): The filtered 
limits, which are limits taken over preordered sets which are directed 
(and, more generally, over certain filtered categories), and the "ends", 
which are limits obtained from certain bifunctors, and which behave 
like integrals. 
1. Filtered Limits 
A preorder P is said to be directed when any two elements p, q E P have 
an upper bound in P; that is, an r with p $ r and q $ r (there is no re- 
quirement that r be unique). It follows that any finite set of elements of P 
has an upper bound in P. A directed preorder is also called a"directed.set" 
or a "filtered set". 
This notion (renanied) generalizes to categories. A category J is 
filtered when J is not empty and 
(a) To any two objects j, j ' ~  
J there is k E J and arrows j+k,j'-*k: 
(b) To any two parallel arrows u, v :  i-j 
in 3, there is k E 3 and an 
arrow w :j--+k such that w u =  wo, as in the commutative diamond 
Condition (a) states that the discrete diagram (j, j') is the base of a cone 
with vertex k. Condition (b) states that i=tj is the base ofa cone. It follows 
that any finite diagram in a filtered category J is the base of at least one 
cone with a vertex k E 3 .  

208 
Special Limits 
Filtered Limits 
209 
A filtered colimit is by definition a limit of a functor F : J-C defined 
on a filtered category J .  
Classically, colimits were defined only over directed preorders 
(sometimes just over directed orders). This has proved to be a needless 
conceptual restriction of the notion of colimit. What does remain relevant 
is the interchange formulas for filtered colimits (4 2) and the possibility 
of obtaining all colimits from finite coproducts, coequalizers, and colimits 
over directed preorders. Since we already know that (infinite) coproducts 
and coequalizers give all colirnits (Theorem V.2.1) this needs only the 
following result. 
Theorem 1. A category C with finite coproducts and colimits over all 
(small) directed preorders has all (small) coproducts. 
Proof. We wish to construct a colimit for a functor F : J + C ,  where J 
is a set (= a discrete category). Let J' be the preorder with objects all 
finite subsets S C  J, ordered by inclusion; clearly, J +  is filtered. Let F f  
assign to each finite subset S the coproduct LI Fs, taken over all s E S. 
If S c T is an arrow u : S+ T of J + ,  take F + u  to be the unique (dotted) 
arrow which makes the diagram 
commute for every s E S, with i and i' the injections of the coproducts. 
This evidently makes F +  a functor J f - + C  which agrees on J with the 
given functor F, if J is included in J +  by identifying each j with the one- 
- 
point subset u). 
Now consider any natural transformation 0 :  F f  +G to some other 
functor G : J ' 
+ C .  For each s E S the diagram 
commutes. By the definition of coproducts, this means that 0 is completely 
determined by the values 0, of 0 on Fs. In particular, each cone v+ : F + 4 c  
over F' 
is completely determined by its values on J, which form a cone 
v : F-c over F .  Moreover, v' 
is a limiting cone if and only if v is. Thus 
we can calculate the desired coproduct LI Fj, which is the colimit of F, 
as the colimit of F', 
known to exist because J t  is a directed preorder. 
As a typical application, we construct colimits in Grp. 
Proposition 2. The forgefful functor GrpdSet creates filtered colimits. 
Proof. We are given a filtered category J and a functor G : J-Grp; 
it assigns to arrows j+k group morphisms GJ-Gk; we shall write G, 
both for the group and its underlying set. We are also given a limiting 
cone p for the composite functor J--+ Grp+Set; it has a set S as vertex 
and assigns to each j E J a function pJ : G J - + S .  We first show that there 
is a unique group structure on the set S which will make all functions 
pJ morphisms of groups. First note that to each s E S there is at least one 
index j with a group element gJ for which p,g, = s ;  otherwise we could 
omit s from S to have a cone with a smaller set S' as vertex, an evident 
contradiction to the universality of S (there would be two functions 
S z S  having the same composite with p). 
Now we define a product of any two elements s, t 6 S. Write s = pJgj 
and t =pkgk for some j, k E J; since J is filtered, there is in J a cone 
overj, k with some vertex i. Theimage of this cone under G is Gj-+GicGk, 
so s and t E S both come from elements of the group G,; define their 
product in S to be pi of their product in G,. This product is independent 
of the choice of i, because a different choice i' is part of a cone G,-+ Gm+GI. 
of group morphisms. Also, the product of three factors r, s, t is associative, 
because we can choose G, to contain pre-images of all three, and muiti- 
plication is known to be associative in G,. Each group G, has a unit 
element, and each Gj+Gk maps unit to unit; the common image of 
these units is a unit for the multiplication in S. Inverses are formed 
similarly. 
We now have found a (unique) group structure on S for which 
p,: G,+S is a morphism of groups. This states that p is a cone from 
G to S in Crp. It is universal there: If v: G 4 T  
is another cone in Grp,. 
it is also a cone in Set, so there is a unique set map f: S--, T with f 1 = v; 
one checks as above that this map f must be a morphism of groups. 
This argument is clearly not restricted to Grp; it applies to each 
category Alg, of algebras of a fixed type r (defined by operators and 
identities). The same remark applies to the following corollary. 
Corollary 3. Grp has all (small) colimits. 
Proof. First, the one-element group is an initial object in Grp. Next, 
any two groups G and H have a coproduct G * H. Indeed, any pair of 

210 
Special Limits 
homomorphisms G-L. 
H+L to a third group L factors thr1ou:zh the 
subgroup of L generated by the images of G and H. The cardinal number 
of this subgroup is bounded; this verifies the solution set condition for 
an application of the adjoint functor theorem to construct the coproduct 
G * H. 
These two observations show that Grp has all finite coproducts. 
By Proposition 2, it has all filtered colimits. Hence, by Theorem 1, 
it has all small coproducts. To get all small colimits we then need only 
coequalizers, and the coequalizer of two homomorphisms u, v : G+ H 
is the projection H - H i N  
on the quotient group by the least normal 
subgroup N containing all the elements (ug) (vg)-' for g E G. 
This proof gives an explicit picture of the coproduct in Grp. The 
coproduct G * H of two groups is usually called the free product; its 
elements are finite words (g,, h,, g,, h,, . .. , g,, h,) 
spelled in letters 
gie C and hiโฌ H; these words are multiplied by juxtaposition, while 
equality is given by successive cancellations (if hi = 1 in H, drop it and 
multiply gigi+, in G, etc.). A direct proof of associativity of the multi- 
plication from this definition is fussy. By this corollary an infinite co- 
product LIiGi of groups Gi is obtained by pasting together all the finite 
coproducts 
Gil * Gi* *...* GiL 
(the inclusion maps make this a subgroup of any coproduct of more 
factors). Thus UiGi is the union of all these finite coproducts. 
Exercises 
I. Use the adjoint functor theorem to prove in one step that Crp has ail small 
colimits. 
2. Prove that Alg, has all small colimits; in particular, describe the initial object 
(when is it empty?). 
2. interchange of Limits 
Consider a bifunctor F : P x J-+X to a cocomplete category X. For values 
p E P of the parameter p, the colimits of F(p, -) : J+X 
define functors 
p r. Colim, F(p, j) of p, so that the colimiting cones. 
pPsj : F(p, j)--rC3&mJ 
FCpJ 
(1) 
are natural in p (Theorem V.3.1). One may prove readily ($8 below) that 
Colim, Colim, F(p, j) z 
(2) 
Interchange of Limits 
21 1 
with the isomorphism given by the -'canonical" map. Dually, limits 
commute. But limits need not commute with colimits, because 
the canonical map 
K : =mj 
Ern, 
F(p, jb&mp 
%mJ 
F(p, j) . 
(3) 
need not be an isomorphism. 
This canonical map exists as soon as all four limits and colimits in (3) 
exist, and is constructed as in the following diagram 
F(p,j)* ".' 
Lim F(p, j) 
Colim . Lim F@, j) 
- P  
I 
-J-P 
I a, 
l K 
+ 
i 
Colim, F(p, j)* '' Lim Colimj F(p, j) = Lim Colim F(p,j) 
- 
p
-
 
p
-
J
 
where v and v - .  for each j are limiting cones, and p, p, - for each p the 
colimiting cones. Since v is a cone in p and p is natural in p, the 
composite pPsj v, for fixed j is a cone in p; by the universality of v there 
then exist arrows a, for each j making the left hand squares commute. 
Since p ,  - is a cone in j, so is a; by the universality of p, there is then a 
map K making the right hand square commute. It is the desired canonical 
arrow. 
This K need not be an isomorphism. Consider, for example, the case 
when P = {l,2) and J = {1,2} are both discrete 2-object categories. The 
 canonical.^ (in evident notation) 
is given by two components a, and a,, where a, is determined by 
In Ab, K is evidently an isomorphism, but in Set it is not - the domain of K 
is a disjoint union of two sets, while the codomain of K is the four-fold 
disjoint union 
We now turn to conditions which suffice to make K an isomorphism. 
Theorem 1. If the category P is finite while J is small and filtered, then 
for any bifunctor F : P x J-Set 
the canonical arrow 
K : %mi 
Ern, 
F(p, j)-,&m, 
%mj 
F(p, j) 
is an isomorphism. 

212 
Special Limits 
This states that finite limits commute with filtered colimits in Set. 
Proof. By the construction of colimits in terms of coproducts and 
coequalizers (dual of Theorem V.2.2), 
Colim, F@, j )  = LI, F(p, j ) / E ,  
- 
( 5 )  
where LI, is the disjoint union and E is the equivalence relation defined 
for elements x E F(p,j) and x'e F(p,jl) in that union by xEx' if and 
only if there are arrows u : j-. k, u' : j'+k 
with F(p, u)x = F(p, u')xl. 
Write (x, j) for the E-equivalence class of an element x E F(p,j). Now J 
is filtered; condition (a) in the definition of "filtered" implies that any 
finite list (x,,j,), ...,( x,,j,) 
of such elements can be written as a list 
(y,, k), ..., (y,, k) with one second index k Condition (b) in the definition 
implies that every equality between elements of this list takes place 
after application of a suitable one arrow w :  k+k'. 
For any functor G : P-+Set, Em,Gp = Cone(*, G), the set of cones T 
over G with vertex a point *. If Gp = Colimj F(p, j) and P is finite, each 
such cone consists of a finite number of elements of %mj 
F(p,j) and 
the conditions that 7 be a cone involve a finite number of equations 
between these elements. Since J is directed, the observations above 
now mean that each cone T can consist of elements r, = (y,, k') for some 
one index k', where the ype F(p, &)already constituteacone y : *+F(-, 
k'). 
This cone y is an element of Lim,F(p, k'); its equivalence class (y, k') 
is an element of Colimj Lim,. The map 
TI+, 
k') E %mi 
Em, F(p, j ) ,  
which is independent of the choices made, is the desired (two-sided) 
inverse of the canonical arrow K. 
Exercises 
I. Show that K of (3) is natural for arrows a : F-F' in x'". 
2. (Verdier). A category J is pseudo-filtered when it satisfies condition (b) for filtered 
categories and the following condition (a'): Any two arrows i d j .  i-+j' with 
the same domain can be embedded in a commutative diamond 
Prove that a category J is filtered if and only if it is connected and pseudo- 
filtered. Prove that a category is pseudo-filtered if and only if its connected 
components are filtered. 
3. In Set, show that coproducts commute with pullback. 
4. Using Exercises 2 and 3, show that pseudo-filtered colimits commute with 
pullbacks in Set. 
Final Functors 
213 
3. Final Functors 
Colimits may often be computed over subcategories. For example, 
the colimit of a functor F: N-Cat, 
where N is the linearly ordered set 
of natural numbers, is clearly the same as the colimit of the restriction of 
F to any infinite subset S of N (i.e.. to any subcategory which contains 
at least one object "beyond" each object of N). In classical terminology, 
such a subset S was called "cofinal" in N; it now seems preferable to 
drop the "co", as not related to dualizations. Also, we will replace the 
subset S first by the inclusion functor S 4  
N and then by an arbitrary 
functor. 
A functor L : J'+ 
J is called final if for each k E J the comma category 
(k 1 L) is non-empty and connected. This means that to each k there is 
an object j' E J' and an arrow k-* Lj', and that any two such arrows can 
be joined to give finite commutative diagram of the form 
I 
I 
I k
=
 i 
+ . +---- 
LJl 
Li' . 
A subcategory is called final when the corresponding inclusion functor is 
final. For example, if J is a linear order, J' C J and L the inclusion, then 
L final means simply that to each k E J there is j' E J' with k Ij'. 
For L :  J ' - + J  and F: J--rX there is a canonical map 
defined when both colimits exist; if p' : F L - 9  F L  and p are the 
colimiting cones, h is the unique arrow of X with hp>, = p,,, for all j ' ~  
J: 
The main theorem now is: 
Theorem 1. If L :  Jf+ J is final and F : J - X  is a functor such that 
x = Colirn FL exists, then Colirn F exists and the canonical map ( 1 )  is 
- - 
an isomorphism. 
Proof. Given a colimiting cone p : F L+ Colim F L = x, we construct 
arrows 7,: F,-+x for each k E J by choosing an arrow u :  k+Ljl and 
taking r, to be the composite 
Since C( is a cone and (k 1 L) is connected, the connectivity diagram above 
readily shows T, independent of the choice of u and j'. It follows at once 
that r : F-x 
is a cone with vertex x and base F. On the other hand, if 
1 : F+y is another cone with this base F, then I L  : F L r y  is a cone with 
bafe EZ, so 6y cfie universal property ofp there exists a unique f :  x+ y 

214 
Special Limits 
with f p = i. L, and hence (because 2, = E.,, 
Fu) w~th f T = E.. This shows 
that s is a limiting cone and hence that x =  ColimF; clearly this also 
makes the canonical map h an isomorphism. 
The condition that L be final is necessary for the validity of this 
theorem (cf. Exercise 5). The dual of this result (the dual of final is "initial") 
is useful for limits. 
Exercises 
1. I f j  E J and 0') is the discrete subcategory of J with just the one object j, show 
that the inclusion b}-J is final if and only i f j  is a terminal object in J .  What 
does this say about colimits and terminal objects? 
2. Prove that a composite of final functors is final. 
3. If J is filtered, L : J'+ J /s full, and each (k 1 L) is non-empty (k E J )  prove that 
L is final. 
4. For the covariant horn-functor J(k, -): J-rSet, use the Yoneda Lemma 
to show that 
J(k, -) is the one-point set. 
5. (Converse of the Theorem of the text). Let L : J'+ J be a functor, where J' 
and J have small hom-sets, such that for every F: J+X with X cocomplete 
the canonical map C S F L + = F  
is an isomorphism. Prove that L must 
be final (Hint: Use F = J(k, -), X =Set, and Exercise 4). 
4 Diagonal Naturality 
We next consider an extension of the concept of naturality. Given 
categories C, B and functors S, T: Cop x C--+B, a dinatural transformation 
a: S 4 T  is a function a which assigns to each object c E C an arrow 
a, : S(c, c)+ T(c, c) of B, called the component of a at c, in such a way that 
for every arrow f :  c+cl of C the following hexagonal diagram 
is commutative. Observe that the contravariance of S and Tin the first 
argument is used in forming the arrows S( f, 1) and T( 
f, 1) in this diagram. 
Every ordinary natural' transformation T :  S-T 
between the bi- 
functors S and T, with components T,,. 
: S(c, c')--c T(c, c'), will yield a 
dinatural transformation a : S 4 T  between the same bifunctors, with 
components just the diagonal components of T; thus a, = t,,. More 
Diagonal Naturality 
215 
interesting examples arise from functors which are "dummy" in one or 
more variables. For example, T: Cop x C-+ B is dummy in its first variable 
if it is a composite 
CoDxC 
:C 
* B ,  
where Q is the projection on the second factor and T, is some functor 
(of one variable). Put differently, each functor T, : C-+B of one variable 
may be treated as a bifunctor Cop x C- B, dummy in the first variable. 
Again, a functor dummy in both variables is in effect a constant object 
b E B with T(c, c') = b for all objects c, c' E C and T ( f ,  f ') = lb for all 
arrows f and f '  in C. 
The following types of dinatural transformations S+T arise. If S 
is dummy in its second variable and T dummy in its first variable, a 
dinatural transformation a :  S*T 
sends a functor So: CoP+B to a 
covariant To : C--+ B by components a, : Soc+Toc which make the 
diagrams 
S0c 
)T0c 
so.] 
I TOJ 
(2) 
commute for each arrow f :  c+c' of C. Such a dinatural transformaiion 
might be called a natural transformation of the contravariant functor 
So to the covariant functor To. (Dually, of a covariant to a contravariant 
one.) 
If T =  b : Cop x C+B is dummy in both variables, a dinatural trans- 
formation x : S-b 
consists of components a, : S(c, c)--+b which make 
the diagram 
S(c', c) S'l." +S ( c' , C '1 
s u .  " 1 
I ..* 
(3) 
S(c, c
)
~
 
6 
commute for every f :  c-c'. (The right hand side of the hexagon (1) 
has collapsed to one object b.) Such a transformation a : S+b is called 
an extranatural transformation, a "supernatural" transformation or a 
wedge from S to b. The same terms are applied to the dual concept 
/? : b- T, g i ~ e n  by components /?, : b-+ T(c, c) such that every square 
is commutative. (The left hand side of the hexagon (1) has collapsed.) 

216 
Special Llrn~ts 
Diagonal Naturality 
217 
.We give an example of each type. A Euclidean vector space E is a 
vector space over the field R of real numbersequipped with an inner 
product function ( . ) : E x E-R 
which is bilinear, symmetric, and 
positive definite. These spaces are the objects of a category Euclid; 
with arrows those linear maps which preserve inner product. There are 
two functors 
U : Euclid- Vct, , 
* ; (Euclid)oP- Vct, 
to the category of real vector spaces: The (covariant) forgetful functor U 
"forget the inner product" and the contravariant functor "take the dual 
space". Now for each Euclidean vector space E the assignment e++(e, - ), 
for e E E, is a linear function K E :  E+ E*; these functions K ,  are the, 
components for a transformation x which is dinatural from U to * 
(dual of type (2)):-This is the fact, familiar in Riemannian geometry, that 
each Euclidean vector space is ndturallp isomorphic to its dual - and 
we need the notion of dinaturality to express this fact categorically. 
Ecaluation. Ex, for X a (small) set, takes the value of each function 
h :  X-A 
at each argument x E X. If the (small) set A is fixed, we may 
regard Ex as a function 
E , :  hom(X, A) x X-+A . 
( h ,  x)++hx, 
defined for each object X โฌSet. For two small sets X and Y, hom(X, A) x Y 
is the (object function of a) functor SeeP x Set-Set, 
while for every 
arrow j': Y-+ X the obvious property h( f x) = (h f )x of evaluation states 
that the square like (3) always commutes. Hence the functions Ex are 
the components of an extranatural transformation 
Observe that E is also natural (in the usual sense) in the argument A; 
we say that hom(X, A) x X-+A by evaluation is dinatural (= extra- 
natural) In X and natural In A. 
C~un!ts. For functors F : X x P -  A and G : Pop x A-+X a bijection 
natural in .u, p, and a is an adjunction w~th parameter p (Theorem IV.7.3); 
its counit, obtained by setting \- = G(p, a) in (3, 
is a collection of 
components 
: W(P, 
a), PI-- 
(6) 
natural in a and dinatural (=extranatural) in p. This includes the case 
of evaluation above. 
Here is an example of the dual type of dinaturality. In any category C 
the identity function assigns to each object c the identity arrow I,: C-c, 
which may be regarded as an element 1 , ~  
hom(c. c) or as an arrow 
I,: * -hom(c, c), where * is the one-point set. Now hom(c, c') is (the 
object function of) a functor Cop x C-Set, 
and for each arrow f :  c-c' 
the identity function 1 has the evident property f; I,= l,.= f, which states 
in the present language that 1 is a dinatural transformation 
All three types of dinatural transformations occur in combination 
with natural transformations in the previous sense (and indeed we will 
usually simply call all three types "natural transformations", dropping 
the "di" except where it is needed for emphasis). Thus given categories 
and functors 
a natural transformation y : S -  T is a function which assigns to each 
triple of objects c E C, a E A, and d E D an arrow 
of B such that (i) for c and d fixed, y(c, -, d) is natural in a, in the usual 
sense; (ii) for a and d fixed, y ( - ,  a, d) is dinatural in c; (iii) for c and a 
fixed, y(c, a, -) is dinatural in d. In the description of these natural trans- 
formations any one of the categories A, B, or C may be replaced by a 
product of several categories, and in each case naturality in a product 
argument c E C = C' x C" may be replaced by naturality in each argu- 
ment of the pair c =  (c', e") when the other is fixed (see Exercise 3 
below). For example, in any category the operation of composition 
is natural: i.e., natural in a, dinatural in b, and natural in e. 
The composite of two dinatural transformations need not be di- 
natural at all, but any dinatural transformation a : S--, Tmay be composed' 
on either side with transformations which are natural in both arguments. 
If o : S-rS and r : T+ T' are natural transformations, the composite 
arrows 
S ( C ,  C )  
ac'c *S(C, C) 
* T(c, C) b m c  + T'(c, C) 
are the components of a dinatural transformation S'-T'. 
Here is a 
more interesting case (easily proved). 
Proposition 1. Given functors 
and functions (for all c, d E C) 

218 
Special Lirni ts 
Ends 
219 
which are natural in c and rlinarural in d, the function which assigns to 
ench c E C the composite arrow 
is a natural transformation R 4 T .  
Exercises 
I. Prove that the unit q,: x--.G(p, F ( x , p ) )  of an adjunction with parameter is 
dinatural in p, and that this property is equivalent to the naturality of the ad- 
junction itself in p (cf. IV.7.. Exercise 2). Dualize. 
2. Formulate the triangular identities for an adjunction with parameter. 
3. (Naturality by separation of arguments.) Given b E B, a functor 
S : ( C X D ) ~ ~ X C X D - - - ~ B ,  
and a function j assigning to c E C, d E D an arrow 
of B. show that 8 :  S*b is dinatural if and only if it is dinatural in c (for each 
fixed d) and dinatural in d (for each fixed c). State the dual result. 
4. Extend the composition rule of Proposition 1 to the case when S is a functor 
C  x  Cop x C  x  eP 
x C--5. Do the same for any odd numbei of factors C. 
5. For S : Cop x C+B and b, b' E B, show that dinatural transformations b*S 
and S-b' 
do not in general have a well delined composite b-+b'. 
6. Extending Exercises 3 and 4, find a general rule for the composition of natural 
transformations in many variables. 
An "end is a special (and especially useful) type of limit, defined by 
universal wedges in place of universal cones. 
Defmition. An end of a junctor S : Cop x C+X is a universal dinatural 
transformation from a constant e to S ;  that is, an end of S is a pair (e, w), 
where e is an abject of X and w : e 4 S  is a wedge r'a dinatural transforma- 
tion) with the property that to every wedge P : x 4 S  there is a unique arrow 
h : x - + e  o f B  wirh p a = o a h  for all ~ E C .  
Thus for each arrow f :  b - w  of C there is a diagram 
such that both quadrilaterals commute (these are the dinaturality 
conditions); the universal property of w states that there is a unique h 
such that both triangles (at the left) commute. 
The uniqueness property which applies to any universal states in this 
case that if (e, o) and (e', of) are two ends for S, there is a unique iso- 
morphism u : e+e' with w' u = w (i.e., with w; u = wc for each c E C). 
We call w the ending wedge or the universal wedge, with components w,, 
while the object e itself, by abuse of language, is called the "end" of S 
and is written with integral notation as 
e = j S(c, C) = End of S . 
c .  
Note that the'-variable of integration" c appears twice under the integral 
sign (once contravariant, once covariant) and is "bound" by the integral 
sign, in that the result no longer depends on c and so is unchanged if "c" 
is replaced by any other letter standing for an object of the category C. 
These properties are like those ofthe letter x in the usual integral $ f (x) d x  
of the calculus. 
Natural transformations provide an example of ends. Two functors 
U, V: C - +  
X define a functor hom,(U -, V - ): Cop x C-Set, 
and if 
Y is any set, a wedge r : Y- hom,(U -, V -), with components 
7, : Y-+ hom,(U c, Vc) , 
c E C , 
assigns to each y E Y and to each c G C an arrow rc., : U c+ Vc of X 
such that for every arrow f: b-c 
one has the "wedge condition" 
Vf" r,., = r,, 
3 U f .  But this condition is just the commutativity of the 
square 
U b L V b  
which asserts that r-,,, for fixed y is a natural transformation r-,,.: U+ V. 
Thus, if we write Nat (U, V) for the set of all such natural transformations, 
the assignment y b 5 - . ,  is the unique function Y+Nat(U, V) which 
makes the following diagram commute. 
Y 
" 
+hom(Uc, Vc) 
I 
I 
I 
II 
L 
Nat(U, V) "' rhom(C c, Vc) , 
where wc assigns to each natural A : UI, V its component I., : Uc-+ Vc. 
This states exactly that w is a universal wedge. Hence 
Nat(U, V)= j hom(Uc, Vc); 
U, V: C - X .  
(2) 
C 

220 
Special Limits 
Every end ismanifestly a limit-specifically,a limit ofasuitablediagram 
in X made up of pieces like those pieces S(b, b)-+S(b,c)+-S(c, c), one 
for each f in C, which come up in the diagram (1) defining an end. This 
can be stated formally in terms of the following construction (to be used 
only in this section) of a category Cg depending on C. The objects of C ยง  
are all symbols c@ and f for C E  C and f an arrow in C (note especially 
that c b n d  (lc)@ 
are different objects). The arrows of Cยง are the identity 
arrows for these objects, plus for each arrow f: b d c  in C two arrows 
bs- fยง+c$ 
in C! The only meaningful compositions for these arrows in C ยง  are 
compositions with one factor an identity arrow. Thus we have defined 
a category 0, 
called the subdivision category of C. 
Each functor S :  CoPx C - X  
defines a functor Ss: C#+X by the 
assignments indicated (from top to bottom) in the following figure for 
a typical f : b - c  in C :  
Inspection of this figure shows that a cone t : x - - r ~ $  
is exactly the same 
thing as a wedge w : x-S. 
This proves that a limit of S O  is an end of S, 
in the following sense. 
Proposition I. For any functor S : Cop x C+X 
and the associated 
functor Sg : C b X ,  as defined above, there is un isomorphism 
U : f  S ( c , c ) z  Lim [ s ~ :  
C+-+X]. 
c 
C- 
In more detail, if either the indicated end or the indicated limit exists, 
then both exist, and there is a unique arrow 8 in X such that the diagram 
commutes .for every i. E C, where o is the ending wedge and A the limiting 
cone: moreoaer, this urrow 6 is an isomorphism. 
Corollary 2. If X is small-complete and C is small, every funcror 
S : Cop x C - X  has an end in X .  
The Proposition above has reduced ends to limits. The conperse is 
easier: Every limit may be regarded as an end! 
Ends 
22 1 
Proposition 3. For each functor T :  C - X  let S be the conlposite functor 
where Q is the second projection (c, c1)++c' of the product. Then 
(e, t : e 4  T )  is a limit for T in X if and only i f  (e, r : e+S) is an end 
for S in X .  
Proof. The components T ,  of a cone e r
T
 make the triangle 
re= Tfo r, commute (naturality condition!) for each f: 
b+c in C. This 
amounts to saying that every square 
commutes (S(-, - )  is '.dummy" in the first variable), and this in turn 
states exactly that r :  e-S is a wedge, It follows that r is universal as a 
cone if and only if it is universal as a wedge. 
This conclusion reads: There is an isomorphism 
S S ( c , c ) = J ~ c z ~ i m  
T 
c 
c 
valid when either the end or the limit exists, carrying the ending wedge 
to the limiting cone; the indicated notation thus allows us to write any 
limit as an integral (an end) withour explicitly mentioning. the dummy 
variablz (the first variable c of S). 
A functor H :  X- Y is said to preserve the end of a functor 
S : Cop x C + X  when w  : e* 
S an end ofS in X implies that H o  : H e 4  HS 
is an end for H S ;  in symbols 
H 1 S(c, C )  = j H  S(c, C) . 
C 
c 
Similarly, H creates the end of S when to each end v : y+H S in Y there is 
a unique wedge o : e 4 S  with H w  = v, and this wedge w is an end of S. 
Since an end (of the functor S) is the same thing as a limit (of the cor- 
responding s$) the properties we have established for the preservation 
of limits carry over to the preservation of ends. For example, the hom- 
fyhctors preserve (and reverse, see # 6) ends: 
X I, j S(c, cy = j X ( x .  S(c, c)) , 
\ 
c 
(3) 
C 

222 
Special Limits 
Coends 
223 
6. Coends 
The definition of the coend of a functor S :  PP 
x C 4 . Y  is dual to that 
of an end. A coei~d of S is a pair. ((1, I: 
S-d), 
consisting of an object 
l i ~  
X and a dinatural transformation ; 
(a wedge), universal among 
dinatural transformations from S to a constant. The object d (when it 
exists, unlque up to isomorphism) will usually be written with an integral 
sign uirri with the bound variable c as superscript; thus 
c 
S(c, c') 
'C 
r j  S(C. c )  = d . 
The formal properties of coends are dual to those of ends. 
Coends are familiar under other names. For example, the tensor 
product of modules over a ring R is a coend. Specifical!y. a ring R is an 
Ah-category with one object (which we call R again) and with arrows the 
elements re R, composition of arrows being their product in R. A left 
R-module B is an additive functor R-+Ab which sends the (one) object R 
to the abelian group B and each arrow r in R to the scalar multiplication 
i., : h + r h  in B. Sim~larly, a right R-module A is an additive functor 
R0'-+Ab (contravariant on R to Ab). If @I is the usual tensor product 
in Ab, then R L-. 
A @ B is a bifunctor R0P x R---+Ab. Moreover, the coend 
is exactly the usual tensor product over R. Indeed, a wedge i from the 
bifunctor A a B  to an abelian group hf is precisely a (single) morphism 
Q :  A @  B 4 M  of abelian groups such that the diagram 
commutes ior every arrow r in R. With the. above interpretation of modules 
as functors, this means for elements a E A and b E B that 
Therefore A4 is an end precisely when M is A@ B modulo all ar@ b - u@ rb, 
and this 1s precisel:, the usual description of the tensor product IM = A ORB. 
The point of these observations is not the reduction of the familiar 
to the unfamiliar (tensor products to coends) but the extension of the 
familiar to cover many more cases I f  B is any rnonoidal category with 
multiplication a, 
as in Chapter VII. then any two functors T :  P o P - + B  
and S: P 4 R  have a "tensor product" 
P 
T o p s =  J ( T P ) O ( S P ) ~  
an object of B. The simplicial category A of 4 VII.5 has a functor 
d : A 4 T o p  (each ordinal n + 1 realized by the n-dimensional affine 
s~mplex), while any S : AoP+Set is called a simplicia1 set. Now the co- 
power S X (set S times space X) is just the disjoint union L1,X of S 
coples of X. Hence n + + S n .  An is a functor AoP x A+Top and the coend 
n 
5 (Sn). An 
(1) 
is the usual geometric realization (Lamotke [1968], p. 34; May [1967], 
p. 55) of the simplicial set S. The coend formula describes the geometric 
realization in one gulp: Take the disjoint union of afine n-simplices, one 
for each t E Srz, and paste them together according to the given face and 
degeneracy operations (arrows of A). There is a similar efficient description 
of the (Stasheff-Milgram) classifying space of a topological monoid 
(best situated in the category CGHaus of 4 VII.8); see Mac Lane [1970]. 
Exercises 
1. For S : COP x C-Set, 
prove that the set Wedge (*, S) of all wedges o : **S 
from the one-point set * to S is an end of S, with ending wedge given by 
w+o,(*) 
E S(C, c). Compare with the explicit description of a limit in Set as a 
set of cones. 
2. Show directly (without using limits) that a category X with all small products 
and with equalizers has all small ends (cf. the corresponding proof for limits 
in 4 V.2). 
3. ~o-eachcate~or~ 
C there is a "twisted arrow categoryn C, with objects thearrows 
f :  a+b of C and arrows (h, k )  : f + f' the arrows h : a'+a (note the twist!) 
and k : b+b' such that f' = k f h. Then ( f  : a--+ b) I+ (a, b) is a functor 
K : C,--.Cop x C. For any S: Cop x C-B, 
prove that cones b+SK correspond 
to wedges b*S, 
and use this fact to give another proof of the reduction of ends 
to limits (Proposition 5.1). 
4. Let Fin (the skeletal category of finite non-empty sets) be the category with . 
objects finite nonzero ordinals n and arrows all functions f :  n-+m. For each 
set X, nt-+Xn defines (the object function of) a functor (Fi)"P+Set. For each 
ring R, the assignment nt-.Rn becomes a covariant functor R, , : &+R-Mod 
if each function f: 
n-rm (arrow in Fin) takes a list a,, ..., a,-, ER" to 
b,, . . ., b, -, 
E Rm. where bi = Caj, the sum over all those j e n with f,= i. Show 
that the free R-module generated by the set X is the coend 
and show that this formula is essentially the usual description of the elements 
of the free module as fmite formal sums Cxiai, i = 1, ..., n. 
5. If D is cocomplete, functors S : @P-Set 
and T : C-D have a tensor product 
C 
defined as the coend j(Sc)-(Tc), where. denotes the copower. Show that the 
tensor product is a functor Dc x SetCUp+ D. 

224 
Special Limits 
Ends with Parameters 
225 
7. Ends with Parameters 
The basic formal properties for ends are much like those for integrals 
in calculus. All these properties will apply equally well to limits (regarded 
as ends with a dummy variable). 
Proposition 1. (End or limit of' a narltrul rmnsformation). Given a 
natural transformation y : S- S' between functors S. S' : Cop x C--r X 
which both have ends (e, o )  and (e', o'), 
respectively, there is a unique 
arrow g = j y,,, : e-e' 
in X such that the following diagram commutes 
C 
for every c E C :  
S(C, c) "' r S(c, C )  
* 
I 
# = ~ ~ c . e '  
C
!
 
C 
4 
j S'(c, c) "; + S(c, c) . 
c 
Proof. The composites y,, J oc define a wedge, so g exists and is 
unique by the universality of the wedge o'. 
We call the arrow g the end of the natural transformation y. 
Composing y with another y' : S ' + S  yields the rule 
By this composition rule, a limit (or an end) ixivolving a parameter 
p (in some category P) can be shown to be a functor of that parameter 
in the following sense. 
Theorem 2. (Parameter 
Theorem for 
ends 
and 
limits). Let 
T :  P x Cw x X + X  
be a functor such that T(p, -, -) for euch object 
p E P has an end 
in X .  Then there is a unique functor Lr : P-.*.Y with object .fuuntrion 
U p  =: 1 T@, c, c) such that the components of the v,edyr (3) for each c E C 
define a transformation (cop), : U p 4  T(p, c, c), natural in p. 
Proof. Each arrow s : p-+q of P uefines a natural transformation 
-y = T(s, -, -) : T@, --, -)A T(q, -, -). Hence the arrow function of 
the desired functor Lr must have U s  = 1 T(s, c, c), defined as in (I), and 
C 
the composition rule (2) shows that this definition of Us does determine 
a functor CT : P - - 4 .  
The functor L' will bc written U - 1 ?'(--, c, c); thus 
C 
The notation suggests that this functor U is itself an end. Indeed, 
regard J T ( - ,  c, c) as an object of the functor category XP and rewrite 
c 
T: 
P x Cop x C+X as the functor T' : Cop x C+XP given on arrows 
(or objects) f, f' of C by 
Put differently, Tn is the image of T under the standard adjunction 
Theorem 3. (Parameter theorem, continued). Under the same hy- 
potheses on T, the functor T' has the end 
an :J T ( - , c , c ) + T ~  
c 
I 
where (a:), 
= (a,), for all p E P and c E C. 
Proof. The end j T ( - ,  c, c) is an object of XP, 
while Tn is a functor 
C 
with codomain XP. By the previous theorem, the arrows (a,), of X 
provide for each c an arrow of XP (a natural transformation) 
its component at p is (o:), 
= (a,),. Moreover, varying c, ws is a wedge 
j T(- .c,c)l-4 T'. It is a universal wedge, for, given any object F E XP 
C 
and any wedge P : F- T', each component P, factors uniquely through 
the corresponding component w,, so /? itself factors uniquely through - 
a*. 
This gives the end for T*, as required. 
This theorem can also be formulated wholly in terms of the functor 
category XP, as was done in the case of limits in Theorem V.3.1. 
Exercises 
1. (Dubuc) Construct a functor category XP and a functor T. C-+SP which has a 
limit not a pointwise limit (Suggestion: Take C = 2). 
2. State and prove the parameter theorem for coends 
3. If X 1s small complete and C 1s small, use Proposit~on 1 to prove that L z  . XC --. X 
is a functor (cf. Ex. V.2.3). 
4. For any categories X and P, show that the functor XP-+XIPI 
~nduccd by mc,tislon 
(of the discrete subcategory (PI) creates ends and coends (cf. Theorem V 3.21. 

226 
Special Limits 
8. Iterated Ends and Limits 
We now describe when the "double integrai" can be obtained as,an 
"iterated" integral (Fubini!). 
Proposition. Let S : PP 
x P x Cop x C-+X be a firnctor such that 
the end j S(p, q, c, c) exists for all pairs (p, q )  of objects of P :  by the 
c 
parameter theorems, regard these ends as a bifunctor PP 
x P+X, and 
regard S as a bifunctor (P x C)OP x (P x C)+X. Then there is an iso- 
morohism 
Indeed, the "double end" on the left exists if and only if the end j on the 
P 
right exists, and then there is a unique arrow 8 in X such that the diagram 
commutes, where the horizontal arrows e, q, and w  are the universal wedges 
belonging to the corresponding ends; moreoner, the arrow 0 is an iso- 
morphism. 
Proof. For each ( p ,  q )  E P x P we are given the end 
For any x E X each P-indexed famlj :,: x+ 1 S(p, p, c. c) of arrows 
C 
of X determines a (P x C)-indexed family t,,, as the composites 
ep,c : X 
Pn 
+ j S(p,p,c.c) 
*"'u'= * S(p, PI C ,  c) ; 
C 
for p fixed, < ; ,  -> is trivially a wedge in c. Conversely, since up,, is 
universal, every (P x C)-indexed family which is natural in c for each 
p is such a composite, for a unique family q. Now q or < is extranatural 
in p (the !atter for some c) if and only if the corresponding square below 
Iterated Ends and Limits 
227 
commutes for each arrow s : p+q in P. Also, the first square commutes 
precisely when it commutes after composition with the arrows up,,,, 
for 
all objects c. Form the cubical diagram with these two squares as 
front and back faces and with edges I,, w , , , ,  yp,.,, and wqsq,, (front 
to back). By our definitions the four side faces involving these edges 
commute; hence the front square commutes if and only if the back 
square commutes for all c. Therefore p is a wedge (in p) if and only if ( 
is a wedge (in (p, c)), so that wedges from x to J S(-, -, c, c) correspond 
c 
one-one to wedges from x to S. Since the end is a universal wedge, and 
since a universal is determined up to isomorphism, this gives the 
isomorphism 8 of the prooosition. 
Note one essential point: This proposition reduces double to iterated 
integrals provided the inner integral j S(p, q, c, c) exists for all pairs 
c 
(p, q )  (not just for p = q). The case of limits involves no such refinement. 
The familiar result on change of order of integrals follows from 
this one, expanding a double integral in two ways. 
Corollary. Let S : POP x P x Cop x C--cX be a functor such that the 
ends S S(p, q, c, c) and 1 S(p, p, b, c) exist, for all p, q E P and b, c E C. By 
C 
P 
the parameter theorems regard these ends as bifiunctors (of p, q or b, c) 
respectively; then there is an isomorphism 
Indeed, the (outside) iterated end on the left exists if and only if the 
(outside) iterated end on the right exists, and the isomorphism 8 is the 
unique arrow in X such that the diagrams 
commute for all p e P and c e C, where the horizontal arrows are the 
appropriate components of the universal wedges for the integrals involved. 
These results include the corresponding facts for limits and colimits. 
Thus, for a functor F : P x C+X with P and C small, X complete 
with the corresponding formula for coiimits. 

228 
Special Limits 
Notes 
A systematic treatment of all possible properties of limits was contamed in a 
manuscript by Chevalley on category theory; the manuscript was unfortunately 
lost by some shipping company. Verdier's elegant treatment of filtered llmits and 
final functors occurs in an exposition of prefaisceaux (= presheaves = category 
theory) in several editions (1963 and 1965) (none officially published as yet) of the 
Sminaire de Geometrie Algebrique of the Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifique 
Paris. 
Eilenberg and Kelly discovered the extranatural transformations (and all the 
rules for their composition) in [1966b], while diagonally natural transformations 
are due to Dubuc and Street [1970]. The tensor product of functors was Iirst 
defined by Kan [1958,ยง 141; these products have been further developed in 
unpublished work of F. Ulmer and Allen Clark. 
The idea of an end was discovered by Yoneda (19601,and its efficient utilization 
is due to Day and Kelly [1969], who observed that this notion is essential in cate- 
gories based not on Set but on other closed categories. 
X. Kan Extensions 
If M is a subset of C, any function t : M+ A to a non-empty set A can be 
extended to all of C in many ways, but there is no canonical or unique 
way of defining such an extension. However, if M is a subcategory of C, 
each functor T: 
M - A  
has in principle two canonical (or extreme) 
"extensions" from M to functors L, R : C+A. These extensions are 
characterized by the universality of appropriate natural transformations; 
they need not always exist, but when M is small and A is complete and 
cocomplete they do exist, and can be given as certain limits or as certain 
ends. These "Kan extensions" are fundamental concepts in category 
theory. With them we find again that each fundamental concept can be 
expressed in terms of the others. This chapter begins by expressing 
adjoints as limits and ends by expressing "everything" as Kan extensions. 
1. Adjoints and Limits 
Limits ,and colimits, if they exist for all functors J-rC, provide re- 
spectively right and left adjoints for the diagonal functor A : 
I,& 
I la I Lim 
(= right adjoint of A) . 
C- 
(1) 
Conversely, left adjoints can be interpreted as limits. First note that 
an initial object in any category C is a limit: 
Initial object C = Colim(O-+ C) = Lim(1d : C+ C) , 
(2) 
where 0 denotes the empty category (the ordinal 0) and O+C is the 
empty functor. The definition of the initial object e states exactly that 
it is the colimit of the empty functor. Moreover, the unique arrows 
pc : e-c, 
one for each c, define a cone e+Id,. 
If A : d+Id, is a cone 
from some other vertex, then there is a unique f :  d-+e with all ~ c ,  
f = Ac; 
indeed, this equation for c = e shows that f must be A,, and for f = A, 
this equation pcA,=A, does hold because A is a cone over Idc. This 

230 
Kan Extensions 
proves e =  Lim Idc. The converse property, that any limit of Id is initial, 
is a special case of 
Lemma 1. If L : d+ Idc is a cone over the identity functor and F : J+ C 
is a functor such that IF : d+ F is a limiting cone for F, then d is initial in C. 
Proof. Since 1 is a cone, the triangles 
commute for each i E J and each arrow f in $. But IF is a limiting' 
cone, so the first two triangles prove I, = 1. Then by the third triangle, 
f = A,: There is a unique arrow f from d to each c, and d is indeed initial. 
This result reduces initial objects to limits. Now a functor G : A+X 
has a left adjoint precisely when for each x the comma category (xJG) 
of all pairs (g : x+Ga, a), has an initial object. In this way we can 
express the left adjoint by limits. Recall that (g,a)wa defines the 
(second) projection Q : (xJ G)+ A of the comma category. 
Theorem 2.(Formal criterion for the existence of an adjoint.) 
A functor G : A+X 
has a left adjoint ij and only if both 
(i) G preserves all limits which exist in A; 
(ii) For each x E X ,  Lim(Q : ( x J  G)+ A) exists in A. 
When this is the case, a left adjoint F is given on each x E X  as 
and the left adjunct of each arrow g : x+Ga 
is the component 
1, : Fx-+Qg =a of the limiting cone I for the limit (3). 
Proof. Since right adjoints preserve all limits, (i) is necessary. Since 
a left adjoint F to G has each (q,: x+GFx, Fx) an initial object in 
(xlG), any functor on this comma category has a limit (namely, its value 
on that initial object). Hence (ii) is necessary. 
Now we consider the converse. By hypothesis (ii) the composite 
functor 
CvlG) 
Id 
b ( ~ l G ) - e , A  
(4) 
has a limit in A for each y E X. By hypothesis (i), G preserves all limits; 
hence, using the Lemma of 4 V.6, Q creates all limits. Therefore Id has 
a limit on (yJG). This limit is, by (2), an initial object there, say y+Ga. 
But then a is a value a = Fy for a left adjoint F, and 
(since Q preserves this limit' which it has created!). This is the desired 
formula; the rule for finding the left adjuncts follows at once. 
Weak Universality 
23 1 
Exercises 
1. State the dual of Theorem2. 
2. (enabou, formal criterion for representability). Let C have small horn-sets, 
while * is the one-point set. Prove: A functor K: C-+Set is representable if 
and only if (i) K preserves all limits which exist in C, and (ii) the projection 
Q: (*lK)-.C of the comma category has a limit in C. When this is the case, 
the limiting cone 2 : r+Q for this projection assigns to each h E Kc an arrow 
1, : r - w  and h+2, is a representation K r  C(r, -). 
3. (Formal criterion for a universal arrow). Let X have small horn-sets. Prove 
that there is a universal arrow from X E X  to G :  A-X 
if and only if 
(i) X(x, G -) : A+Set preserves all limits and (ii) LLm Q : ((xlG)-+ A) exists in A. 
4. (Refinements of formal existence criteria). 
(a) In the Theorem, show that condition (i) may be replaced by "G preserves 
the limits required to exist in (ii)". 
(b) In Ex. 2, show that condition (i) may be replaced by "K preserves the limit 
of Q .  
5. (Representables and adjoints; Snabou). Let C have small hom-sets, and 
construct from each K :  CdSet the category C, obtained by adjoining to C 
one new object a, with new hom-sets C,(co, c) = Kc, CK(co, a)= 
*, the one- 
point set and CK(c, a,) = 0, the empty set, with appropriate composition. Let 
J K :  C-C, 
be the inclusion. Prove that K is representable if and only if J ,  
has a left adjoint. 
2. Weak Universality 
Given a functor G : A-X 
and an object x E X, a weak universal arrow 
from x to G is a pair (r, w : x-+Gr) consisting of an object r E A and 
an arrow w of X ,  as indicated, such that for every arrow f :  x-Ga 
there exists an arrow f' : r--*a with f = G f' 0 w. This is just the definition 
of universal arrow, except that f' is not required to be unique. By the 
same device (Freyd) we can modify all the various types of universals, 
defining weak products, weak limits, weak coproducts (existence but 
not uniqueness in each case). 
As an application, we give a second proof of the Freyd existence theorem 
for an initial object (Theorem V.6.1). 
Theorem 1. If D is a small complete category with small horn-sets, then D 
has an initial object if and only if it has a small set S of objects which is 
weakly initial: For every d E D there exists s E S and an arrow s-d. 
Proof. Let S also denote the full subcategory of D with the objects s; 
since D has small hom-sets, S is still small, so by completeness the 
inclusion functor F : S--r D has a limiting cone p : v-- F. We shall prove 
v = Lim F initial in D. 

232 
Kan Extensions 
The Kan Extension 
233 
First, for every tl E D we choose s-d and define ;,, as the composite 
yd: &s+d. 
We claim that ;.: c-+Id, is a cone. For, take any arrow 
f :  d-d' 
and form the diagram 
Since S is small complete, there is a pull-back of s - d c s '  with vertex p; 
since S is weakly initial, there is an arrow v-s"+p. 
The two composite 
arrows sV+p-.s 
and sU-+p+s' are in S because S  is full, so the two 
upper quadrilaterals commute (p is a cone), while the pentagon commutes 
because p is a pull-back. This proves y a cone. 
If, in particular, we choose v-s+s 
to be p,, then y is a cone such 
that the composite y F : v+ F is the limiting cone p. By Lemma 1.1, v is 
initial in D, q.e.d. 
Carefully examined, this proof is just a refinement of the previous 
one (ยงV.6), where we took first a product Ils (to get a single weakly 
initial object) and then a suitable equalizer. In this proof, these operations 
are combined to one: Lim F for F : S C D. 
3. The Ken Extension 
Given a functor K  : M-.C 
and a category A .we consider the functor 
category AC, with objects the functors S  : C--*A and arrows the natural 
transformations u :  S-S', 
and we define the functor AK: AC+AM by 
the assignments 
( 0 :  S r S ' ) - ( a K  : S K + S I K ) .  
The problem of Kan extension is to find left and right adjoints to AK. 
We consider this problem first for right adjoints. 
Definition. Given functors K  : M +C and T: M+ A, a right Kan 
extension of T along K is a pair R, E : R K + T  consisting of a functor 
R E AC and a natural transformation E which is universal as an arrow from 
A" : AC+ AM to T E A ~ .  
As always, this universality determines the functor R = Ran,T 
uniquely, up to natural isomorphism. In detail, this universality means 
that for each pair S, a : S K 4  T there is a unique natural transformation 
a :  S 4 R  such that a = E . a K  : S K -  T. The diagram is 
The assignment at+& . a K  is a bijection 
Nat(S, RanKT) z Nat(SK, T), 
(2) 
natural in S; again, this natural bijection determines RanKT from K 
and T. It is a right Kan extension because it appears at the right in the 
hom-set "Nat" (But note that some authors call this R a "left" Kan 
extension). 
By the general result that universal arrows from the functor A' 
to 
all the objects T together constitute a left adjoint to the functor AK, 
it follows that if every functor TeAM has a right Kan extension 
<R, ET : RK- T), then T-R is (the object function of) a right adjoint 
to AK and E is the unit of this adjunction. In the sequel, we shall construct 
right Kan extensions for individual functors T, which may exist when 
(the whole of) the right adjoint of 
does not exist. 
A useful case is that in which M is a subcategory of C and K  : M+C 
the inclusion M c C; in this case, 
is the operation which restricts 
the domain of a functor S: C+A to the subcategory M. Conversely, 
for given T: M+ A we consider extensions E : C+ A of T  to C. Then 
Ec E A must have for each arrow f : c+m in C an arrow E f : Ec+ Tm 
in A, and these arrows must coqstitute a cone from the vertex Ec to the 
base T, where T is regarded as a functor on the category of arrows 
f :  c-m 
(fixed c to variable m). These arrows f are the objects of the 
comma category (clK), so a natural choice of Ec is the limit (with E f  
the limiting cone) of the functor T :  (clK)+A: 
This procedure (compare (1.3)) works in general. For each ~ E C ,  
the comma category (clK) has the objects ( f ,  m), written f for short, 
where f :  c+Km in C ,  while < f, m)wm is (the object function of) the 
projection functor Q : (clK)+ M. 
Theorem 1. (Right Kan extension as a point-wise limit). Given 
K :  M-+C, 
let T :  M + A  
be a functor such that the composite 

234 
Kan Extensions 
(c4K)--+M-+A has for each C E  C a limit in A. with limiting cone 1, 
written 
R c = @ ( ( c l K ) P * M ~ A ) =  Lim,-Tm. 
f ~ ( c l K ) .  
(3) 
Each g : c-+c' induces a unique arrow 
Rg : Lim TQ-+LLm TQ' 
commuting with the limiting cones. 7hese formulas dejne a functor 
R : C-+ A, and for each n E M. the components i,, ,n = E, of the limiting 
cones define a natural transformation E :  RK+T. and R. E is a right 
Kan extension of T along K. 
Proof. First, Rg is defined in (4) by the fact that the limit is a functor 
of ( c J K )  and hence of c. Specifically, given g : c--.c' and the projection 
Q' : (clJK)-+A, each f '  : c'-+Km determines f 'g : c+Km E (cl K), the 
components A,-.,: Rc-+Tm form a cone from Rc, and since the cone 
A' is universal, there is a unique arrow Rg which makes 
commute for all f'. (Actually, f'i-. f'g 
defines the functor 
(g1K) : (cllK)-+(clK), 
so that TQ' = T Q  a (gLK), and Rg is the canonical 
comparison (cf. "final functors")). This choice of Rg clearly makes R a 
functor. 
For each n E M, lKn is an object of (KnlK), so the limiting cone I 
has a component A,," : R Kn+ Tn, called E,. For each h : n+n' form the 
diagram 
RKn' ,; ,Tn'; 
K"' 
the lower triangle commutes by the definition of Rg for g = Kh, and 
the upper triangle commutes because A is a cone. Therefore the square 
commutes; this states that E : R K r  T is natural. 
Now let S :  C 3 A  be another functor, with a :  S K - T  natural. We 
construct ac : Sc+ Rc from the diagram 
Rc = Limf T
m
A
 
Tm -2L Tm' 
* 
,='+ 
t 
' ,' 
sc -----+ 
S K E  
S K h  
+ 
S f  
SKm' . 
The Kan Extension 
235 
For each arrow h : (f, m)+( f ', m') of (clK), where f '  = K h  cf, the 
right-hand square commutes because a is natural. This shows that the 
diagonal arrows a, o S f :  Sc+ Tm form a cone from Sc. Hence there 
is a unique arrow a,, as shown in (7). To prove a natural for g : c-c', 
form the diagram 
Ll", 
I 
1 
for each f ' :  cl+Km in (cllK). The right-hand square and the outer 
square commute by the definition of a, and the top box by the definition 
(5) of Rg. Therefore the left-hand (inner) square commutes afteq both 
legs are composed with A>, - and this for all f '. But I' is a limiting cone, 
so the left-hand square commutes. Therefore a is natural. 
The definition (7) of a for c = Kn, f = I,,, 
and m = n shows that 
a, = A,," a,,, hence that a = E . OK. This proves that E : R K-- T gives 
every a as u = E O K  for some a. The diagram (8) shows that o is unique 
with this property. Indeed, this property determines the components 
a,, 
of a; to determine other components, set c' = Kn, f '  = f ,,, and 
m= n in (8). The lefthand square commutes if a is natural, and then 
1, a, is determined for all g : c+Kn. But 1, is a limiting cone, so a, is 
determined. This shows that E is universal, q.e.d. 
Corollary 2. If M is small and A complete, any functor T :  M - + A  
has a right Kan extension along any K : M-+ C, and A, has a right adjoint. 
This applies in particular when A=Set; this is the case originally 
studied by Kan [1958]. 
Corollary 3. If the functor K in the theorem is full and faithful, then 
the universal arrow E :  R K r T  for the Kan extension R of T along K 
is a natural isomorphism E : R K  r T. 
Proof. For n~ M,RKn is obtained from a limit over the comma 
category ( c l K )  with c = Kn. Because K is full and faithful, every object 
f :  K n - + K m  in this comma category can be written as f = K h  for a 
unique h : n-+m. This states that 1 : Kn-Kn 
is an initial object in this 
comma category and hence that RKn=Limf TQ can be found by 
evaluating TQ just at this initial object: Thus R K n  = Tn, 8, = 1 ,  q.e.d. 
This also gives a case in which a Kan extension is an actual extension: 
Corollary 4. I f  M is a full subcategory of a category C and T :  M-+,4 
is a functor such that each composite (clK)-+ M + A  has a limit in A. 

236 
Kan Extensions 
then there is a functor R : C + A  with R K  = T (i.e., R extends T) such 
that the identity natural transformation 1 : RK+ T makes R the right 
Kan extension of T along the insertion K : M - r  C. 
Proof. Apply Corollary 3 to the insertion M -+ C. 
The left Kan extension L = Lan, T is described similarly, as a pair 
L, q : T+ LK with q universal from T to AK; this gives a bijection 
Nat (Lan, T, S) z Nat (T, SK) 
(9) 
natural in S E A ~ .  
When the requisite colimits exist, L is given by 
L = C ~ ~ ~ ~ ( ( K L C ) A  
M ~ - * A ) ,  
(10) 
where P is the projection (m, Krndc) wm. 
Exercises 
' 
' Exercises 1-4 refer to the data for a Kan extension: 
1. If A is the arrow category 2, and M and C are sets, then a functor T: M - 2  
can be regarded as a subset of M. Show that 2M is the contravariant power 
set BM, that Lan,T is the direct image of TC M under the function K, and 
describe RanK T. 
2. (Kan extensions of representable functors.) If A =Sef and M ,  C have small hom- 
sets, show that the left Kan extension of M(m, -) is C(Km, -) with unit 
q : Idnr-C(Km, K-) given by qm = I,,. 
3. If M ,  C, and A are all sets, while A has at least two elements and K is not sur- 
jective, prove that neither LanKT nor RanKT exists. 
4. (Ulmer.) Show that Corollary 3 still holds if the hypothesis "K is full and 
faithful" is replaced by "K is full, and as faithful as T". Here K "is as faithful 
as T" when, for armws h, h' : m-+n in M, K h  = Kh' implies Th = Th'. 
5. For any category M, let M, be the category formed by adding to M one new 
object m, terminal in Ma. For T: M-+A, prove (from first principles) that a 
colimiting cone for T is a left Kan extension of T along the inclusion functor 
M C M,, and conversely. 
4. Kan Extensions as Coends 
The calculus of coends gives an elegant formula for Kan extensions; for 
variety we treat the left Kan. 
Theorem 1. Gioen functors K : M-+C and T :  M +  A such that for 
all m, m' E M and all c E C the copowers C(Kml, c). Tm exist in A, then T 
has a left Kan extension L = Kan, T along K if for eliery c E C the 
following coend exists, and when this is the case, the object jiunctor of L 
is this coend 
In 
LC = (Lan, T)c = 1 C(Km, c) Tm. 
c E C . 
(1) 
Kan Extensions as Coends 
237 
Proof. By the parameter theorem, we may regard this coend as a 
functor of c. Compare it with any other functor S : C-+ A. Then 
A(Tm, SKm) z Nat(C(Km, -), A(Tm, S-)) 
I Ens(C(Km, c), A(Tm, Sc)) 
(2) 
C 
by the Yoneda lemma and the representation of the set of natural trans- 
formations as an end (in a sufficiently large full category Ens of sets). 
Now we can write down in succession the following isomorphisms 
Nat(L, S) r A(Lc, Sc) 
C 
(end formula for Nat) 
z A (7 ~ ( ~ r n ,  
c) ~ m ,  
Sc ) 
(Definition (1) of L) 
c 
z I A(C(Km, c) . Tm, Sc) 
(Continuity of A(-, Sc)) 
c m 
z J I Ens(C(Km, c), A(Tm, Sc)) (Definition of copowers) 
c m 
z I Ens(C(Km, c), A(Tm, Sc)) (Fubini) 
m c 
z 5 A(Tm, SKm) 
(by (2) above) 
m 
z Nat(T, SK) 
(end formula for Nat). 
Here the Fubini theorem (interchange of ends) applies because both 
indicated ends f and j exist, while Ens must be a sufficiently large 
m 
C 
category of sets (to contain all hom-sets for A and C and all sets Nat (L, S), 
Nat(T, SK) for all S :  C-A). Since each step is natural in S, the com- 
posite isomorphism is natural in S and proves that L = Lan, T. ' 
Note that we do not assert the converse: That if Lan,T exists, .it 
must be given for each c as the coend (1). 
The unit q of this Kan extension is obtained by setting S =  L and 
following the chain of isomorphisms. We record the result: 
Theorem 2. (Kan extensions as coends, continued.) For the Kan ex- 
tension (1) above the universal arrow q : T- LK is given for each nE M 
as the composite of an injection i,," of the copower (for f = lKn : K n-Kn) 
with a component of the ending wedge w : 
\ 
J C(K m, I - . K ~ ~  
K n) ~ r n  
= (Lan, T )  (K n) 

238 
Kan Extensions 
For the left Kan extension we thus have two formulas - (1) above 
by coends, and (3.10) by colimits. They are closely related, and simply 
constitute two ways of organizing the same colimit information (see 
Exercise 1 below). The corollaries of 3 can be deduced from either 
formula. Also right Kan extensions are given by a formula 
(Ran, T)c = 1 TmC'C~Km', 
m 
(3) 
valid when the indicated power (powers X, a w ax in A) and its end exist. 
Consider additive Kan extensions: M, C, and A are Ab-categories 
and the given functors K and Tare both additive. Then we can describe 
a right Ab-Kan extension of T along K as an additive functor R': C+ A 
with a bijection (3.2) given and nattlral for additive functors S. This 
functor R' need not agree with the ordinary right Kan extensions Ran, T 
obtained by forgetting that K, T (and S) are additive. However, R' 
can still be given by a formula (3) with an end, provided the power aC 
involved (f0r.a E A, C E Ab) is replaced by a "cotensor" aC defined by the 
adjunction 
A(b, cC) z Ab(C, A(b, c)) 
(4) 
for all b e  A (see Day and Kelly [1969], Dubuc [1970]). For example, 
if A= R-Mod, this makes uC=Ab(C, a) with the ev~dent R-module 
structure (induced from that of aโฌ R-Mod). 
Derived functors are an example. If T :  R-Mod-Ab 
is right exact, 
its left derived functors T, : R-Mod-Ab 
come equipped with certain 
connecting morphisms, which make them what is called a connected 
sequence of functors (Mac Lane [1963a], Cartan-Eilenberg [1956]); 
basic example: If A is a right R-module, the left-derived functors of the 
tensor product A @, - : R-Mod- Ab are the torsion products 
Tor,(A, -) : R-Mod* Ab. 
The left-derived functors T, of T can be described by the following 
"universal" property: To = T, and if S, is any connected sequence of 
(additive) functors, each natural transformation So--To 
extends to a 
unique morphism { S ,  I n 2 0) + {T, ( n 2 0) of connected sequences of 
functors. 
This property may be rewritten thus. Embed R-Mod in a larger 
Ab-category E with objects <C, n), C an R-module and n a nonnegative 
integer, while the horn-groups are E((C, n), (B, m)) = Extk-"(C, B), 
with composites given by the Yoneda product. Then C++(C, 0) is a 
functor K :  R-Mod-+E. A connected sequence of additive furictors 
{T, I n 2 0) is then the same thing as a single additive functor T, : E+Ab 
with T,(C, n) = T,(C), while T, on the morphisms ofE gives the connecting 
morphisms. The universal property stated above for the sequence T, 
of left derived functors of T now reads: 
Nat(S,K, T) E Naf(S,, T,) . 
Pointwise Kan Extensions 
239 
This states exactly that T, is the right Ab-Kan extension of T =  To 
along K : R-Mod--tE (and that the unit E :  T,K-T 
of this Kan ex- 
tension is the identity). 
For details we refer to Cartan-Eilenberg or to Mac Lane [1963a] 
(where the category E is treated in a different but equivalent way, as a 
"graded Ab-category"). 
Exercises 
1. If the coends in Theorem 1 exist, prove that these coends do give the colimits 
required In the formula (3.10) for Lan,. 
2. For fixed K ,  describe Lan,T and Ran,T, when they exist, as functors of T. 
3. (Dubuc) If Ran,T exists, while L: C+D is any functor, prove that RanL,T 
exists if and only if Ran,Ran,T exists and that then these two functors (and 
their universal arrows) are equal. 
4. (Ulmer; Day-Kelly; Kan extensions as a coend in a functor category A'.) 
If C(Km', c) . Tm exists for all m', rn e M and all c e C, show that 
(rn'.rn)+*C(Krn', -). Tm is (the object function of a) functor MoPx M+AC. 
Prove that T has a left Kan extenslon along K if and only if this bifunctor has 
a coend, and that then this coend is the Kan extension 
Describe the universal arrow for Lan,T in terms of the coend. 
5. (Ulmer.) As in Ex. 4, obtain a necessary and suficient condition for the existence 
of Ran,T in terms of the limit formula, interpreted in the functor category AC 
5. Pointwise Kan Extensions 
Given functors 
and a right Kan extension Ran, T with counit E : (Ran, T) K r 
T, we 
say that G preserves this right Kan extension when G 0 Ran, T is a right 
Kan extension of G T along K with counit GE : G(Ran, T) K* G T. 
This implies (but is stronger than) 
G 0 Ran, T r Ran,(G T) 
We already know that right adjoints G preserve limits. We now show 
that they also preserve Kan extensions. 
Theorem 1. If G :  A-+X has a left adjoint F, it preserves all right 
Kan extensions which exist in A. 
Proof. First a preliminary, for an adjunction 

240 
Kan Extensions 
Density 
24 1 
If in place of x we have a functor H : C+X and in place of a a functor 
L : C+A, then applying this adjunction at every LC and H c gives a 
bijection, 
Nat(F H, L) 2 Nat(H, G L) . 
(2) 
(As usual the adjunction switches F on the left to G on the right.) 
Now assume the adjunction and a right Kan extension Ran,T 
for some K and T: M-* A. Then for any functor H : C - X  we have the 
following bijections 
Nat (H, G o Ran, T) r Nat (F H, Ran, T) 
r Nat(F H K, T )  z Nat(H K, G T )  , 
natural in H; the first and third are instances of (2), and the second is the 
definition of the right Kan extension. The composite bijection (for all H) 
shows that G Q  Ran,T is the right Kan extension Ran,GT. To get its 
counit, we set H = G Ran, T and take the image of the identity; we 
get GE, where E : (RanK T)K+ T is the counit of the given Kan extension. 
Corollary 2. If R, E : R K r  T is a right Kan extension and A has small 
hom-sets and all small copowers, then for each a E A, A(a, K -) : C-Set, 
is the right Kan extension of A(a, T - ) :  M+Set, with counir A(a, -). 
Proof. The functor A(a, -): AhSet has the left adjoint X w X .  
a, 
the copower. 
Definition. Given C 
M & 
A, where A has small horn-sets, a 
right Kan extension R is point-wise when it is preserved by all representable 
functors A(a, -) : A+Set, for a E A. 
Theorem 3. A functor T: M+A has a pointwise right Kan extension 
along K : A.1-C 
ij and only if the limit of (c 1 K)+M-. A exists .fir 
all c. When this is the case, Ran, T is gicen by rhe/ormulas of Theorem 3.1. 
Proof. Since A(a, -) preserves limits, any Kan extension given by the 
limit formula is pointwise. 
Conversely, suppose for each a~ A that A(a, T -): M-+Set has a 
right Kan extension RO = A(a, R -), as in the figure 
Then Tor each functor I/, as shown, there is a bijection 
natural in V. This holds in particular when V = C(c. -) for some c E C, so 
Nat(C(c, -). A!a,R -))ENat(C(c,K-), A(a. T--)). 
We reduce the left hand side by the Yoneda Lemma and the right hand 
side by the lemma below to get 
A(a, Rc) r Cone(a, TQ : (c 1 @ - + A )  
This states that the set of cones is representable, hence that the limit 
of TQ exists, q.e.d. 
The missing lemma is 
Lemma. Given K : M-+C, there is a bijection 
Cone(a, (c 1 K)+ M-C) r Nat(C(c, K -), A(a, T -)) 
Proof. A cone 7: a+TQ assigns to each f:c+Km 
an arrow 
r( f, m) : a- Tm subject to the cone conditions; for each h : m-m', 
A natural transformation 8 : C(c, K - ) 4  A(a, T -) assigns to each 
m E M and to each f: c+Km an arrow b,,, f : a+ Tm, subject to the 
naturality condition, for each h : m'-+m. that 
P,.(Kh. f)=Th.P, f. 
The bijection 7-8 is now evident. 
This proof of the theorem also shows 
Corollary 4. R, E : R K r  T is a pointwise Kan extension of T along 
Kifand only if, for all ~ E A  
and CEC, 
sending g : a+ Rc to the transformation with the component 
at m E M is a bijection. 
Exercises 
1. In the situation (I), if RanKT and Ran,GT both exist, with counits E and E'. 
prove that there is a unique natural transformation (the canonical map) 
w : G = RanKT--Ran,G T with E' . W K  = GE, and prove that G preserves Ran, T 
if and only if w is an isomorphism. 
6. Density 
A subcategory M of C is said to be dense in C if every object of Cis a 
colimit of objects of M; more exactly, a colimit in a canonical way. 
for which the colimiting cone consists of all arrows m+c to c from an 
m E M. More generally, density can be defined not only for an inclusion 

242 
Kan Extensions 
Density 
243 
M c C, but for any functor K : M-C. 
The arrows m - w  are then re- 
placed by the objects (m. f :  Km-.c) 
of the comma category (K 1 c). 
Recall that the projections P, Q' of this comma category are given by. 
F ( m ,  f )  = m, Q'(m, f )  = f, and observe that (the object function of) Q' 
may also be regarded as a cone Qc : K P - c .  
Definition. A functor K : M - C  
is dense when for each c E C 
Colim ((K 1 c
)
-
2
 
M A C )  = c , 
(1) 
with colirniting cone the "canonical cone" QC. In particular, a subcategory 
M of C is dense in C when the inclusion functor M-+ C is dense in the sense 
just defined. 
The definition (1) is sometimes phrased, "The canonical map 
Colim K P + c  is an isomorphism"; here the canonical map is the unique 
arrow k : ColimK P-+c which carrles the colimiting cone to QC. 
For example, the one-point set * is dense in Set: For each set X, the 
comma category (* 1 X )  is just the set (discrete category) of elements 
X E  X, each regarded as a function x : *-X, while (1) becomes state- 
ment that each X is the coproduct LI x of its elements (i.e., that a function f 
with domain X can be uniquely determined by specifying the value 
f x at each x E X). 
Dually, a functor K : M-+C is codense when for each c E C 
with limiting cone the canonical cone sending (f :c-rKrn,m) to f. 
But this limit is precisely the one involved in the definition of Ran,K. 
Hence 
Proposition 1. The functor K :  M--tC is codense if and only if Id,, 
together with the identity natural transformation Id,: K r K ,  is the 
pointwise right Knn extension of K along K .  
In this case Corollary 5.4 simplifies (E is the identity) to the corre- 
spondence sending each f : a+c to the natural transformation 
f * = C ( , f , K - ) ; c ( c , K - ) - c ( ~ , K - ) "  
(3) 
(the transformation f * is "composition with f on the right". Hence 
Proposition 2. The functor K :  M--rC is codense if and only if the 
corresportdence f i-+ T( f, 
K - ) above is for all a and c E C a bijection 
C(a, C) z Nat(C(c, K-), C(a. K -)) ; 
(4) 
that is, if and only if the functor COP-EnsM defined by 
cwC(c, K - ) :  M-.Ens 
(5) 
is full and faithful. 
Corollary 3. 1f the hom-sets of M lie in a full category Ens of sets, 
then Yoneda embedding Y :  M-(Ene)"P, given by Ym = M(m, - ) iscodense 
Proof. By the Yoneda Lemma itself, for each F: M-Ens, 
(EnsMpp (F, Ym) = EnsM(Ym, F) 2 
F m  . 
Thus the right side of (4) above, with C = (EnsM)"*, a = F and c = G 
becomes 
Nat(G, F) = (Ens"YP (F, G) = C(F, G) , 
and (4) becomes an identity. 
This result is often stated thus: Any functor M-+Ens is a canonical 
limit of representable functors. 
The dual of Proposition 2 states that K :  M d C  is dense if and 
only if c - C ( K - ,  c) is a full and faithful functor C-+EnsMoP. As an 
application, we show that the full subcategory of finitely generated 
abelian groups is dense in Ab. We need only show that for any two 
abelian groups A and B the map 
Ab(A, B)-+Nat(Ab(K-, A), Ab(K -, B)) 
is a bijection. First, it is injective: Two homomorphisms f ,  g : A-B 
which agree on cyclic subgroups of A must agree everywhere. Also, it is 
surjective: Given r : Ab(K-, A)-rAb(K -, B), we define a function 
f : A - r B  by taking fa for each a c  A to be the value of T on the n a p  
2 - A  taking 1 to a. Because Z 8 Z  is a finitely generated group, this 
function must be a homomorphism. Its image under the map in question 
agrees with r ;  the proof is complete. Note that the argument proves 
more: The full subcategory with one object Z@Z is dense in Ab. (There 
are two summands Z required because abelian groups are algebraic 
systems defined by binary operations.) 
Exercises 
1. In R-Mod, show that the full subcategory with one object R @ R  is dense. 
2. Show that the full subcategory with one object Z is not dense in Ab. 
3. Show (IJrysohn Lemma) that the closed unit interval is a cogenerator in the 
category of all normal topological spaces (a full subcategory of Top). It is codense? 
4. Let the imuge category KM for K : M -.C be the subcategory of C with objects 
all Km for m E M and arrows all Kh, h in M .  Prove that K dense implies KM 
a dense subcategory of C. 
5. Prove that the objects of a subcategory IU generate C if and only if the functor 
C+EnsWop given by cr-.C(K -, c), is faithful. 
6. If all copowers C(Kml,c)- Krn exist in C, prove that K :  M+C is dense if 
and only if each object c E C is the coend 
m 
c =  j C ( K m , c ) . ~ m  
with coending wedge w i :  C(Km,c)* Km+c given on the injections if rtf the 
copower as o;i/ = f: Km+c. 

Kan Extenmns 
Ail Concepts are Kan Extensions 
245 
244 
7. All Concepts are Kan Extensions 
The notion of Kan extensions subsumes all the other fundamental 
concepts of category theory. 
Theorem 1. A functor 7': M-+ A has a d i m i t  i f  und oonly if it has a 
left Kan extension along the (unique) fiinctor K ,  : XI--1, 
and then 
Colim T is the oalue of LanK, T on the unique object of 1. 
Proof. A functor S: 1--+A is just an object a~ A, and a natural 
transformation r :  T - S K I ,  for K, 
: M--+I, is just a cone with base T 
and vertex a. Since the left Kan extension L = Lan,, T is constructed 
to provide the universal natural q : T - L ~  
L K , ,  it also provides the universal 
cone with base T, and hence the colimit of T. 
Dually, right Kan extensions along the same functor K ,  give limits. 
Theorem 2. (Formal criteria for the existence of an adjoint.) A functor 
G : A + X  
has n left adjoint if and only if the right Kan extension 
RanGI, : X - t A  exists and is preserved by G; when this is the case, this 
right Kun extension is a lejt adjoinr F = RanGI, for G, and the counit 
transformation E :  (RanGlA)G--1, 
.for the Kan extension is the counit 
E : FG- 1 of the adjunction. 
Proof. If G has a left adjoint F, with unit q :  lX-rCF and counit 
E : F G r  lA, then we can construct for all functors H : A--+ C (in particular, 
for the identity functor 1,) a bijection 
Nat(S, H F )  2 Nat(SG, H )  , 
(1) 
natural in S :  X-C, by the assignments 
The first followed by the second is the identity awn, because the diagram 
is commutative (the first square represents the horizontal composite oq 
in two ways, and the second square is H applied to one of the two 
triangular identities for q and  the composite in the other order is 
also an ident~ty, by a similar diagram. Hence we have the asserted 
bijection, clearly natural in S. If we take H = l,, this bijection shows 
that F = Ran, l,, its unit is the image of p = I,, so is E. If we take H = G, 
this bijection shows that GF = Ran,G, with unit GE. Hence G preserves 
the right Kan extension Ran,l,. 
We have proved the first half of the 
theorem. 
We have proved more: For any H, HF = Ran,H, with unit HE. Thus 
Ran,l, 
is preserved by any functor whatever (it is an absolute Kan 
extens~onl 
Proposition 3. If G : A-+X has a left adjoint F with counit E : FG- 1, 
then RanGI, exists, is equal to F with counit E, and is preserved by any 
functor whatet'er. 
Now suppose conversely that 1, has a right Kan extension R along G. 
and that this extension is preserved by G. We then have bijections 
natural in S : X + A  and H : X + X ,  with counit q , l =  6 : R G r  1, and 
v,, 1 = GE : G R G r  G. Define q : l r  
GR to be tpil(l : G-r C). Then 
lpq = 1, so 
G E - ~ G =  
lG. 
This is one of the two triangular identities for the proposed adjunction 
R : RG- 
I,, q : lX+GR. The other would be ER Rq = lR. ~ p p l y i n ~  
the 
bijection cp,, 
it will suffice to prove instead cp(eR. Rq) = E. Putting in 
the definition of cp in terms of E, we are to prove the following square 
commutative: 
'I 
1'"" 
1, 
RG. 
Insert the dotted arrow at the top and use R of the (known) triangular 
identity GR . qG = 1. The square then reduces to the equivalence of two 
expressions for cc : RGRG--r 1, q.e.d. 
The arguments .so far in this section have not used either formula 
for Kan extensions. We now examine the meaning of these formulas in 
the simple case of Kan extensions along the identity functor I : C-+C. 
The universal property defining Kan extensions shows at once for each 
T: C-+A that 
Lan,T=T, 
Ran,T=T. 
Consider in particular T: C--+Set, and assume that C has srnall hom- 
sets. Then, in the formula for Ran, as an end, all the powers ~n\ol\ed 
exist, so for every c E C 
Tc = (Ran, T ) c  = TmC(C*m' 
m 

246 
Kan Extensions 
Table of Terminology 
But in Set, XY =Set(Y, X), and by (1x52) the end reduces to a set of 
natural transformations 
Tc = Set(C(c, m), Tm) z Nat(C(c, -), T) . 
, 
m 
T h e  result is just the Yoneda Lemma. 
Exercises 
1. Show that the bijection (1) (and (5.2) as well) is a special case of a bijection 
defined for an adjoint square (Exercise IV.7.4) 
Nat(HG, G I K ) z  Nat(FfH, KG). 
2. Obtain the Yoneda Lemma from the limit formula for Ran,T. (This gives an' 
independent proof of the Yoneda Lemma, which was not used in the proof 
of 3). 
3. (a) IfK: M-Chasaright Kan e x t e n s i o n R , a l o n g i t s ~ N a t ( S K ,  
K), 
prove that (R, rl, p) is a monad in C, where q = cp-'(Id,), p = cp7'(e RE). 
(This is called the codensity monad of K). 
(b) Show that K is codense if and only if q is an isomorphism. 
(c) If G: A-+X has a left adjoint F: X-+A with unit q :ld--rGF and counit 
E :  FG-Id, 
then its codensity monad exists and is (GF,q, GEF). (The 
monad defined by the adjunction). 
Notes 
The formal criteria for adjoints are due to Bknabou [1965]. The construction of 
Kan extensions by limits and colimits, in the critical case when the receiving 
category A is Set, was achieved by Kan in [1960]. The impact of this construction 
was understood oniy gradually. In 1963 Lawvere used these extensions in functorial 
semantics. Ulmer emphasized theit importance, and in an unpublished paper 
gave the coend forlnula (without the name coend) for Lan,l'. 
Binabou (unpub- 
lished) and Day-Kelly El9691 describe Kart extensions in relative categories 
(including Ab-categories). Thls idea is further developed by Dubuc [1970]; here 
the mend formula for Kan extensions plays a central role. 
The Cartan-Eiknberg notion of derived functors is, as noted in $4, the original 
and decisive example of a Kan extension Vzrdier, by ernbeddmg each abelian 
agree. Isbell has developed the ideas further in characterizing categories of algebras 
[I 9641. 
The ubiquity crf Kan extensions has developed gradually; I have learned 
much in this chapter from my student Eduardo Dubuc; and Max Kelly has 
suggested major improvements, notably the use of pointwik Kan extensions. 
Table of Terminology 
This Book 
Elsewhere (for abbreviations, see below) 
arrow 
domain 
codomain 
graph 
natural transformation 
natural isomorphism 
monic 
epi 
idempotent 
opposite 
coproduct 
equalizer 
pullback 
pushout 
universal arrow 
limit exists 
limit 
colimit 
cone to a functor 
cone from a functor 
left adjoint 
right adjoint 
unit of adjunction 
triangular identities 
monad 
biproduct 
Ab-category 
category in a suitable derived category, has achieved an elegant form of this 
interpretation of derived functors by Kan .extensions. For an exposition, see 
Quillcn [1967l. 
Isbell, in a pioneering paper [196q, defined a functor K : M--+C to be "left 
adequate" when ct-.I C(K -, c) is full and faitliful. This assignment is the functor 
of the dual of Propjsition 6.2; hence by that theorem "left adequate" and "dense" 
map (E & M), morphism (Gr) 
source (Ehr) 
target (Ehr) 
precategory, diagram scheme (Mit) 
morphism of functors (Gr), functorial map (G-2) 
natural equivalence (E & M; now obsolete) 
rnonomorphism 
epimorphism, epic 
projector (Gr) 
dual 
sum 
kernel, difference kernel 
tibered product (Gr), cartesian square 
cocartesian square, comeet 
left liberty map (G-Z) 
llmit is representable (GI) 
projective limit, inverse limit 
inductive limit, direct limit 
projective cone, inverse cone (G-Z) 
inductive cone, co-cone 
coadjoint (Mit), adjoint 
adjoint (Mit), coadjoint 
adjunction morphism (G-2) 
E quasi-inverse to rl (G-Z) 
triple 
direct sum (in Ab-categories) 
preadditive category (old) 
Gr 
= Grothendieck 
Ehr 
= Ehresmann 
Mit 
=Mitchell 
E & M = Eilenberg & Mac Lane 
G-Z = Gabriel-Zisman 

250 
Bibliography 
Bibliography 
Andre, Michel [1967]: Methode simpliciale en algbbn homologique et algkbre 
commutative IV. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 32. Berlin-Heidelberg- 
New York: Springer 1967. 
- [1970]: Homology of simplicia1 objects. Ptoceeding of the AMS symposium 
in Pure Mathematics on Applications of Categorical Algebra, pp. 15-36. 
Providence: American Mathematical Society 1970. 
Barr, M., Beck, J. [1966]: Acyclic models and triples. Proceedings of the Con- 
ference on Categorical Algebra, La Jolla, 1965, pp. 33tL344. New York: 
Springer 1966. 
- 119691: Homology and standard constructions. Seminar on Triples and 
Categorical Homology Tneory, pp. 245-336. 
Vol. 80. Lecture Notes in Mathe- 
matics. Berlin-Heideiberg-New York: Springer 1969. 
Bass, Hyman 119681: Algebraic K-theory. Mathematics Lecture Note Series. 
New York-Amsterdam: W. A. Benjamin, Inc. 1968. 
Benabou, Jean 119631: Categories ava: multiplication. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 
256, 1887-1890 
(1963). 
- 119651: Crittres de reprksentabilitc des foncteurs. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 
260, 752-755 
(1965). 
Birkhot'f; Garrett 119671 : Lattice theory. AMS Colloquium Publications, Vol. 25, 
3 rd Ed. Providence : American Mathematical Society 1967. 
Bourbaki, N. [1948]: filkments de mathematique, Vol. VII., Algtbre, Livn 11, 
Algebre multilineaire, ch. 3. Actualitts scientifiques et industrielles, 1044. 
Paris: Hermann 1948. 
- [1957]. 6lkments de mathematique, Vol. XXII, Thborie dm ensembles, Livre I, 
Structures, ch. 4. Actualitis scientifiques et industrielles, 1258. Paris: Hermann 
1957. 
Brown, Ronald 119641. Function spaces and product topologies. Quart. J. Math. 
15, 238-250 
(1964). 
Buchsbaum, David A. [I9551 : Exact categories and duality. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 
So, 1-34 
(1955). 
Bucur, I., Deleanu, A. [I9681 : Introduction to the theory of categories and functon. 
London-New York-Sydney: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd. 1968. 
Cartan, H., Eilenberg, S. [1956]: Homological algebra. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press 1956. 
Cassels, J. W. S., Frohlich, A., Edrs. [I9671 : Algebraic number theory. London: 
Academic Press 1967. 
Cohen. Paul J. [1966]: Set iheory and the continuum hypothesis. N w  Yerk- 
Amsterdam: W. A. Benjam~n 1966. 
Cohn, P. M. [1965] : Universal algebra. New York-Evanston-London : Harper 
and Row 1965. 
Day, B. J., Kelly, G. M. [1969]: Enriched functor categories. Reports of the 
Midwest Category Seminar, Vol. 111, pp. 178-191, 
Vol. 106, Lecture Notes 
in Mathematics. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1969. 
Dubuc, E. J. [1970]: Kan extensions in enriched category theory. Lecture Notes 
in Mathematics, Vol. 145. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1970. 
Dubuc, E. J., Porta, H. [1971]: Convenient categories of topological algebras, 
and their duality theory. (To appear in: J. Pure Appl. Algebra.) 
Dubuc. E. J., Street, R. [1970]: Dinatural transformations. Reports of the Midwest 
Category Seminar,Vol. IV, pp. 126-138, 
Vol. 137, Lecture Notes in Mathe- 
matics. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1970. 
Ehresmann, Ch. [1965]: Categories et structures. Paris: Dunod 1965. 
Eilenberg, S., Elgot, S. E. [1970]: Recursiveness. New York-London: Academic 
Press 1970. 
Eilenberg, S., Kelly. G. M. [1966a]: Closed categories. Proceedings of the Con- 
ference on Categorical Algebra, La Jolla, 1965,321-562. New York: Springer 
1966. 
- [1966b]: A generalization of the functorial calculus. J. Algebra 3, 366-375 
(1966). 
Eilenberg, S., Mac Lane, S. [i942a]: Group extensions and homology. Ann. 
Math. 43, 757-831 
(1942). 
- [1942b]: Natural isomorphisms in group theory. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
28, 537--543 (1942). 
- [1943]: Relarions between homology and homotopy groups. Proc. Nat. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 29, l5S--l 58 (1943). 
- [1945]: General theory of natural equivalences. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 
58, 231-294 
(1945). 
- [1947]; Cohomology theory in abstract groups I. Ann. Math. 48, 51--78 
(1947). 
Eilenberg, S., Moore, J C. [1965]: Adjoint functors and triples. Illinois J. Math. 9, 
381 -398 
(1965) 
Eilenberg, S., Steenrod, N. E. [1952]: Foundations of algebraic topology. Prince- 
ton: Princeton University Press 1952. 
Epstem. D. B. A. 119661: Functors between tensored categories. Invent~ones 
Math. 1, 221-228 
(1966). 
Fox, R. H. [1943]: Natural systems of hornomorphlsms. Prelim~nary Report. 
Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 49, 373 (1943). 
Freyd, P. [i964]: Abelian caregorles: An introduct~on to the theory of functors. 
New York: Harper and Row 1964. 
Gabnel, P. [1962]: Des catkgories aMliennes. Bull. Soc. Math. France 90, 323- 
448 (1962). 
Gabnel, P., Zisman, M. [1967]: Calculus of fractions and homotopy theory. 
Ergebnisse der Mathematik, Vol. 35. Berlm-Heidelberg-New York. Springer 
1967. 
Godement, R. [I9581 : Theorie des faisceaux. Paris: Hermann 1958 

Bibliography 
25 1 
Godel, K. [1940]: The consistency of the continuum hypothesis. Studies, Ann. of 
Math., No. 3. Princeton: Princeton University 1940. 
Goguen, J. A. [1971]: Realization is universal. Forthcoming. 
Gratzer, G. [1968]: Unwersal algebra. Princeton: Van Nostrand and Co. Inc. 
1968. 
Grothendieck, A. [1957]: Sur quelques points d'algebre homologique. Tahoku 
Math. J. 9, 119-221 
(1957). 
Hatcher, W. S. [1968]: Foundations of mathematics. Philadelphia-London- 
Toronto: W. B. Saunders Co. 1968. 
Herrlich, H. [1968]: Topologische Reflexionen und Coreflexionen. Lecture 
Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 78. Berlin-Heldelberg-New York: Springer 1968. 
Huber, P. J. [i961]: Homotopy theory in general categories. Math. Ann. 144, 
361-385 
(1961). 
- [1962]: Standard Constructions in abelian categories. Math. Ann. 146, 
321--325 (1962). 
Hurewicz, W. [1941]: On duality theorems. Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 47, 562-563 
(1941). 
Isbell, J. R. [1960]: Adequate subcategories. Illinois J. Math. 4, 541-552 
(t960). 
- [1964]: Subobjects, adequacy completeness and categories of algebras, 
Rozprawy Mat. 36, 3-33 
(1964). 
- [1968]: Small subcategories and completeness. Math. Syst. Theory 2, 27-50 
( 1968). 
Kan, D. M. [1958]. Adjoint functors. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 87,294--329 (1958). 
Kelly, G. M. 119641: On Mac Lane's condition for coherence of natural asso- 
ciativities. J. Algebra 1, 3 9 7 4 2  (1964). 
Kleisli, H. [1962]: Homotopy theory in abelian categories. Canad. J. Math. 14, 
139-169 
(1962). 
[I9651 : Every standard construction is induced by a pair of adjoint functors. 
Proc. Am. Math. Soc. 16, 5-546 
(1965). 
Lambek, J. [1968]: Deductive systems and- categories 1. Math. Syst. Theory 
2.287-3 
18 (1968). 
Lamotke, K. [1968]:'Semisimpliziale algebraische Topologie. Berlin-Heide!bag- 
New York: Springer 1968. 
Lawvere, F. W. [1963]: Functorlal semantics of algebraic theories. Proc. Nat. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 50.869-473 (1963). 
- 
[1964]: An elementary theory of the category of sets. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. 52, 1506-151 
1 (1964). 
- [1966]: The category of categories as a foundation for mathematics. P r d -  
inds of the Conference on Categorical Algebra, La Jolla, 1965, pp. 1-21. 
New York: Springer 1966. 
Linton, F. E. J. [1966]: Some aspects of equational categories. Proceedings of 
the Conference on Categorical Algebra, La Jolla, 1965, pp. 84--95. New York: 
Springer 1966. 
Mac Lane, S. [I9481 : Groups, categories, and duality, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
34, 263-267 
(1948). 
- 11950J. Duality fbr groups. Bull. Am. Math. Soc. M, 485-516 
(1950). 
- [t956]: Homologie des anneaux et des modules. Colloque de topologie al- 
gebrique, Louvain 1956, pp. 55-80. 
252 
Bibliography 
- [1963a]. Homology. Berlin-Gottingen-Heidelberg: Springer 1963. 
- [1963b]: Natural associativity and commutativity. Rice Univ. Studies 49, 
2 8 4 6  ( 1963). 
- [1965]: Categorical algebra. Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 71, 40-106 
(1965). 
- [1969]: One universe as a foundation for category theory. Reports ol' the 
Midwest Category Seminar, Vol. 111, pp. 192-201. 
Lecture Notes in Mathe- 
matics. Vol. 106. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1969. 
- [1970]: The Milgram bar construction as a tensor product of' f'unctors; 
135-152 
in the Steenrod Algebra and its Applications, Lecture Notes in Mathe- 
matics, Vol. 168. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1970. 
Mac Lane, S., Birkhoff, G. [1967]: Algebra. New York: Macmillan 1967. 
Manes, E. [1969]. A triple-theoretic construction of compact algebras. Seminar 
on Triples and Categorical Homology Theory. pp. 91-1 
19. Lecture Notes 
in Mathematics, Vol. 80. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1969. 
May. J. P. [1967]: Simplicia1 ohjectsin algebraic topology. Princeton: Van Nostrand 
Co.. Inc. 1967. 
Mitchell, B. [1965]: Theory o!' categories. New York-London: Academic Press 
1965. 
Negrepontis. J. W.: Duality from the point of view of triples. To appear in: 
J. Algebra. 
Pare, R. [I9711 : On absolute colimits. To appear in: J. Algebra. 
Pareigis, R. [1970]: Categories and functors. New York: Academic Press 1970. 
Quillen, D, G. [I9671 : Homotopical algebra. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 43. 
Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer 1967. 
Samuel, P. r19481: On universal mappings and free topological groups. Bull. 
Am. Math. Soc. 54, 591-598 
(1948). 
Schubert. H. [t97Oa and b]: Kategorien, Vols. I and 11. Berlin-Heidelberg- 
New York: Springer 1970. 
Solovay, R. M. [t966]: New proof of' a theorem of Gaihan and Hales. Bull 
Am. ,Math. Soc. 72, 282-284 
(1966). 
Stasheff, J. D. [136!] : Homotopy associativity ofH-spaces, I. Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 
108. 775.- 292 ( 1963). 
Steenrod, N. E. [iY40]: Regular cycles of' compact metric spaces. Ann. Math. 
41, 833-851 
(1940). 
- - [.19671: A cun\enient category ot' topological spaces. Michigan Math. 3. (4, 
133-152 
( 1967). 
Swan. R. G .  r19681: Algebraic K-theory. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Vol. 76. 
~erlin-t~eidelbe&~ew 
York: Springer 1968. 
Ulmer. F. [1967a]: Properties of dense and relative adjoint functors. J. Algebra 
8, 77--95 (1967). 
[I 967 b] : Reprcscnta ble functors with values In arbitrary categories. J. Algebra 
8. 96--129 (1967). 
Watts, C. E. [1960]: Intrinsic characterizationc ot'some additive functors. Proc. 
Am. Math. Soc. 11. 5-43 (1960). 
Yoneda, N. 119541: On the homology theory of' modules. J. Fac. Sci. Tokyo, 
Sec I. 7, 193-227 
(19%). 
-- [1960]. On ext and exact sequences. J. Fac. Sci. Tokyo, Sec. 1. 8, 507-526 
(1960). 

Index 
Ab-category 
17,24,29, 
190, 194 
Abelian 
- categories 194 ff. 
- groups 24 
Absolute 
- coequalizer 145 
- Kan extension 245 
- limit 
145 
Action 
group - 137 
left - 
of a monoid 170 
- of operators 120 
Addition 
ordinal - 171 
- of arrows 192 
Additive 
- category 192 
- functor 28,83, 193,238 
- Kan extension 238 
Adjoint 2,85 
Freyd's - functor theorem 117 
Left - 2, 38, 70,85,230 
Left - left-inverse 92 
Right - 2, 79,82,230 
- equivalence 91 
- functor 38.79 
- pairs 93 
- square 101 ex. 
Adjointness 2 
Adjunct 79 
Adjunction 78, 80, 8 1 
category of - 99 
counit of - 81 
front and back - 81 
map of - 97 
monad defined by - 135 
unit of - 81 
- with a parameter 
100 
Algebraic system 120 
Algebras 
morphisms of T - 136 
structure map of T - 137 
T - 136 
Variety of - 120 
Amalgamated product 66 
Arity 120 
Arrows 
addition of - 194 ex. 
canonical - 74, 101 ex., 165 
category of - 40 
composablepair of - 9,10,49,196 
connecting - 203 
diagonal - 84 ex., 189 
epi - 19, 190 
factorization of - 195 
idempotent - 20 
identity - 7, 8, 12, 190 
invertible - 19 
kernel of - 187 
monic - 19, 190 
regular - 2 1 
universal - 8, 55, 58, 231 ex 
weak universal - 23 1 
zero - 20,74, 187, 190 
- function 
13 
- only-metacategory 9 
Associative law 8 
general - 167, 168, 171 
- for T-algebra 
136 
- for monad 
134 
- for monoid 
159 
- for monoidal categories 
162 
Associativity 7 
Atomic statement 31 
Augmentation 46, 175 
Augmented simplicial object 175 
Barycentric coordinates 174 
Based category 180 
Base point 26, 184 
Basic 
- arrows 162 
- graphs 162 
Beck's theorem 147 
Bifunctor 37. 191, 210 
Bhnear composltlon 28 
Binary 
- relation 26 
- words 
161 
B~product 190 ff. 
Bound 
greatest lower - 1 10, 122 
least upper - 110. 122 
- variable 31, 2 19 
Boundary 
- homomorphism 
175 
- of tetrahedron 
174 
Cancellable (left or right) 19 
Canonical 
- arrow 74, 110 ex., 167, 189,211 
- map 165, 167 
- presentation 149 
Cartesian 
- closed category 95 
- product 2,21 
- square 71 
Category 7, 10.27 
Ab - 28 
abelian - 194 
additive - 192 
based - 180 
cartesian closed - 95 
closed -- 180 
comma - 47 
complete - 105, 106 
concrete - 26 
connected - 86 
co-well powered - 126 
discrete - 1 1  
double - 44 
dual - 33 
empty - 229 
enriched - 181 
equivalence of - 20.91 
fibered - 35 
filtered - 207 
free - 50 
functor -- 
40,44, 1 15 
image - 243 ex. 
isomorphism of - 90 
large - 12,23 
locally small - 127 
Category 
monoidal - 157. 158, 167, 176 
free -- 
166 ex. 
strict - 157, 160, 171 
symmetric -- 
180 
opposite - 33 
preadditive - 28 
product - 36 
pseudo-filtered -- 212 
relative - 180 
simplicial - 12, 17 1 
subdivision - 220 
super-comma - I 1 1  ex. 
two-dimensional - 44, 102 
well-powered - 126 
- of adjunctions 99 
-- of algebras 
124 
- of arrows 40 
- of diagrams 53 
-- 
of small sets 12.24 
Chain complex 177, 198 
Character group 17 
Chase, diagram 75,200 
Class 23 
equational - 120 
Closed 
cartesian - categories 95 
- category 180 
Closure operation 
135, 137, 153 
Cochain complex 179 
Cocomponents of a map 74 
Codense functor 242 
Codensity monad 246 
Codomain 7, 10 
Coend 222,236 
Coequalizers 64 
absolute - 145 
creation of - 147. 152 
split - 146 
Cogenerating set 123 
Cogenerator 
123 
Coherence theorem 157, 161 
Coimage 196 
Cokernel 64 
- pair 66 
Colimit 67. 208, 210, 229, 236 
filtered - 208 
reflection of - 150 
Comma 
category 47 
Super - category 
1 1  1 ex. 
Comonad 135, 137 
Commutative diagram 1,8 
, 

Index 
Index 
Commutator 
17 
- subgroup 14 
Compact Hausdorff space 153 
Compactification 
121, 127 
Compactly generated spaces 18 1 
Compact-open topology 
18 1 
Comparison 
-- functor 139, 150, 152 
- theorem 
144 
Complete category 
105 
Component 69,214 
connected - 88 ex. 
matrix of - 192 
- of natural transformation 16 
- of wedge 2 19 
Composable pair 9, 10, 13,49 
Composite 7, 14 
horizontal - 42, 102, 133 
vertlcal - 42,99, 102 
- function 9 
- functor 14,43 
- of paths 20 
- of transformations 40, 102 
Composition 7, 27 
Comprehens~on principle 2 1 
Concrete category 26 
Cone 67,71, 106 
canonical - 242 
colimiting - 67, 210 
limiting - 67,69, 21 1 
universal - 67 
Congruence 52 
Conjugate natural transformation 99, 
102 
Conjugation 18 ex., 20 
Connected 
- category 86 
-- component 
88 ex. 
- groupord 20 
- sequence of functors 238 
Connecting homomorphism 202,238 
Connection, Galois 93, 94 
Continuous 
- functor 112 
- map 153,181 
Contractible parallel pair 146 ex. 
Contravariant 
- functor 17, 33 
- hom-functor 34 
Coordinates, barycentric 
174 
Copowers 64,237 
Coproduct 62 
denumerable - 168 
Coproduct 
finite - 208 
infinite - 64, 208 
injections of - 63 
- diagram 62 
- object 63 
Coreflect~ve 89, 18 1 
Counit of adjunction 81,85 
Covariant 
- functor 34 
- hom-functor 34 
- power-set functor 138 ex. 
Co-well-powered category 126 
Creaticn 
- of coequalizers 147, 152 
- of ends 221 
- of limits 
108 
CTT-Crude tripleability theorem 
151 ex. 
Degeneracy 
175 
Dense 
- functor 242 
- subcategory 241 
Derived 
- functor 238 
- operator 120 
Determinent 
16 
Diagonal 
- arrow 84, 189 
-- 
functor 67 
-- map 73, 192 
Diagram 2, 3,4, 51, 71, 196 
biproduct - 190 
category of - 53 
commutative - 3, 8, 161 
coproduct - 62 
limit - 69, 71 
product - 69 
- chase 75,200 
-- scheme 10.49.51 
Difference 
- kernel 70 
- member 204 
Dinatural transformation 
214 
Direct 
- product 69 
- sum 
191 
Directed 
- preorder 207 
- set 207 
Disjoint 
- hom-sets 27 
- union 63 
Domain 
7, 10 
Double 
- category 44 
- end 226 
Dual 31 
- category 33 
Duality principle 32 
Dummy 215 
Eilenberg-Moore category of a monad 
135 
Element, universal 57 
Embedding 15 
Empty 
- category 
10,229 
- functor 229 
End 218 
creation of - 221 
double - 226 
interchange of - 237 
preservation of - 221 
- of natural transformation 224 
Ending wedge 219 
Endofunctor 
133 
Enriched category 18 1 
Epi 19 
split - 20 
- monic factorization 190, 195 
Equalizer 70, iO9, 129 
Equational class 120 
Equivalence 
adjoint - 91 
natural - 16 
- of categories 
18. 91 
ETAC 31 
Euclidean vector spaces 216 
Evaluation map 96,216 
Exact 
196 
left -- functor 197 
right -- 
sequence 197 
, 
short - sequence 196 
- functor 197 
Extensions 229 
absolute Kan - 245 
Kan - 229 
left -- 238 
right -- 
232, 233 
Extranatural transformation 215 
Face operator 175 
Factorization of arrows 
190, 195 
Faithful functor 
15 
Fiber map 71 
Fibered 
- category 35 
- product 71 
- sum 66 
Fields of quotients 56 
Filtered 
- category 207 
- collmit 208 
-- set 207 
Final - functor 213, 234 
- subcategory 21 3 
Finite 
- limit 109 
- product 72 
Five Lemma 
198,201 
Forgetful functor 14, 85, 116, 140, 
153, 170,208 
Fork, split 145 
Formal criteria 
- for existence of adjoint 230, 244 
- for representability 23 1 
- for a universal arrow 23 1 
Free - category 50 
- monoid 51 
- monoidal category 
162 
- product 
124 ex., 210 
- T-algebra 
136 
Freyd 
- adjoint functor theorem 
11 7 
-- existence theorem for an initial 
object 116, 231 
Full functor 14 
Function 8 
arrow -- 
13 
composite 
9 
identity -- 
9 
inclusion - 9 
insertion - 9 
monotone - 172 
object - 13 
order preserving - 94 
-- 
set 40 
Functor 3, 13 
additive - 29,83, 193,238 
adjomt - 79 
codense - 242 
comparison - 138 
composite - 14 
continuous -.-. 112 
contravariant -- 
17,35 
'covariant - 34, 138 

Index 
257 
Index 
Functor 
dense - 242 
derived - 238 
diagonal - 67 
empty - 229 
exact - 197 
Homomorphism (see also morphism) 
crossed - 179 
Homotopy class 
- of maps 12,13,25 
- of paths 20 
Horizontal composite 42, 102, 133 
faithful - 1s 
final - 213,234 
ldempotent 20 
split - 20 
foraetful - 14, 85, 116, 140- 153, 
Identities (for algebras) 120 
170,208 
full - 14 
identity - 14, 165 
inclusion - 15 
left adequate - 246 
left exact - 197 
morphism of - 16 
power-set - 13, 33 
representable - 61 
underlymg - 14 
Yoneda - 61 
- category 40' 
Fundamental groupoid 
20 
Galois connections 93 ff. 
General linear group 14 
Generating 
-- object 
123 
- set 121 
Generators of a category 52 
Geometric realization 223 
Giidel-Bernays axioms 23 
Graded set 
120 
- 
Graph 
10,48 
Group 11,20,75 
fundamental - 20 
small -- 22 
- actions 137 
- 
in a category 3 
Groupoid 20 
Hausdorff spaces 121, 13 1 
compact - 121,153 
compactly generated - 181 
Hom-functor 35, 193 
contravariant - 34 
covariant -- 
34 
Horn-object 
IS0 
Hom-sets 10,27. 180 
disjoint - 27 
Homology 175,198 
singular 
175 
Homomorphism (see also morphis 
boundary - 175 
connectmg - 202 
Identity 7 (see also unit) 
triangular - 83 
- arrow 7,8, 10 
- function 9 
- functor 14, 43, 165 
- natural transformation 43 ff. 
Image 196 
Inclusion 
- function 9 
-- functor 15 
Induced map 34 
Infinite 
-- coproduct 64 
- product 69 
Initial functor 214 
Initial object 20, 229 
existence of - 116, 231 
Injection 
15, 19 
- of coproduct 63 
Injective 
- monotone function 
172 
- object 114 
Insertion function 9 
Integral 219 
double - 226 
iterated - 226 
Interchange 
- law 44, 134 
- of ends (Fubini) 237 
Internal horn functor 180 
Intersection of subobjects 
122 
Intertwining operator 41 
Inverse 14 
left adjoint-left - 92 
left or rlght - 19 
two-sided - 14 
- limit 68 
Invertible arrow 19 
Isomorphism 
14 
natural - 16 
reflection of - 150 
-- 
of categories 
14, 90 
- of objects 19 
Iterated integral 226 
Join 
110, 122 
Kan extensions 229 ff. 
absolute - 245 
additive - 238 
left -- 
as coends 238 
pointwise - 240 
right - 232 ff., 240 
Kelleyfication 
182 ff. 
Kelley spaces 
181 
Kernel 
187 
difference - 70 
- pair 71 
Kleisli category of a monad 143 
Large category 23 
Least upper bound 63 
Left - action 
170 
- adequate functor 246 
- adjoint 38, 79,83,229 
- adjoint - inverse 92 
- adjoint-right-inverse 
130 
- adjunct 79,230 
- cancellable 19 
- exact functor 
197 
-- inverse 19 
- Kan extensions 238,244 
- regular representation 170 
Lemma 
Five - 201 
Short five - 198 
snake - 202 
Yoneda - 61 
Length of words 161 
Limit 68,76. 109,211,229,234 
creation of - 108 
direct - 67 
filtered -- 
212 
finite - 109,211 
inductive - 67 
inverse - 68 
pointwise - 112,233 
preservation of - 112 
projectwe - 68 
- object 68 
- of a natural transformation 
Limiting cone 67,68, 114,232 
Linear order 
I I 
Locally small category 
127 
Loop space 185 
Map (see also arrow) 
canonical -- 
165,2 1 1,242 
continuous - 13, 153, 181 
diagonal - 73, 192 
evaluation - 96 
fiber - 71 
homotopic - 13 
structure - of algebras 
136, 139, 
148 
- of adjunctions 97 
Matrices 
11, 74, 192 
Matrix multiplication 
74, 192 
Meet 
110, 122 
Member 200 
Metacategory 7 ff. 
Metagraph 7 
Modules 12,28, 138 
Monad 133, 135, 176 
Codensity - 246 ex. 
free group - 135 
multiplication of - 134 
unit of - 134 
- defined by adjunction 
135 
Monadic 139 
split - 20 
- arrow 
19 
Monoid 2,4, 11,75, 134, 166 
free - 51, 168 
universal - 157 
Monoidal categories 4, 157, 158, 165 
free - 168 
strict - 157, 171 
symmetric - 180 
Monotone function 15 ex., 172 
Morphisms 9 
- of arrows 9 
- of categories 13 
- of functors 
16 
- of graphs 48 
- of monoidal categories 
162 
relaxed - 160 
strict - 160 
- of short exact sequences 198 
- of simplicia1 objects 174 
- 
of T-algebras 136 
- - 
Multiplication 
- in a monad 134 
224 
- of monoidal categories 158, 161 
Natural 38,217,234 
ComDonents of - transformation 

Index 
Index 
Natural 
conjugate - transformation 98 
universal - transformation 
39 
- bijection 
2 
- equivalence 16 
- isomorphism 
16,216 
- transformation 16,97 
Null object 20, 187, 190, 196 
Number, ordinal It, 171 
0-graph 49 
Object 7, 10,48 ff., 180 
coproduct - 63 
free - 143 
homology - 198 
initial - 20,229 
injective - 1 14 
limit - 68 
null - 20, 187, 190 
projective - 1 I4 
quotient - 122 
simplicia1 - 174, 175 
terminal - 20,73 
- function 
13 
- over 46 
- under 46 
Operator 120 
derived - 120 
intertwining -- 41 
Order 
linear - 1 1 
partial - 1 1 
- preserving function 93 ff. 
Ordinal 
finite - 12, 171, 176 
- addition 171 
- number 
11 
P-adic 
- integers 
107 
- solenoid 
107 
Pair 
adjoint - 93 
cokernel - 66 
conjugate - 102 
composable - 9,49,1% 
equalizer of - 70, 109 
kernel - 71 
parallel - 1 1, 65,70 
Parameter 99, 1 1 1, 216 
adjunction with a - 100, 216 
- theorem 224, 225 
Partial order 
11 
Path 50 
directed - 163 
Po~nted 
- set 26 
- topological s p a a  26, 184 
Pointwise 
- Kan extensions 239 ff. 
- limit 112 
Power 70 
- set 21 
- set functor 13, 33 
Preadditive category 28 
Precategory 49 
Precise tripleability theorem(Beck) 150 
Preorder 1 1,93 
directed - 207 
Presentation, canonical 149 
Preservation of 
- coproduct 
168 
- end of functor 221 
- limit 
112 
- right Kan extension 239-240 
Product 
1,69 ff. 
amalgamated - 66 
cartesian - 2 
direct - 69 
fibered - 71 
free - 124ex.,210 
infinite - 69 
iterated - 172, 176 
projections of - 1, 36,69 
smash - 185 
tensor - 124, 159 
- category 36 
- diagram 1,69 
- of objects 
1 13 
Projections 
1, 69 
- of comma category 48 
- of product 
1,36,69,70 
- of product category 36 
Projective object 114 
Proper class 23 
Pseudo-filtered category 212 
PTT-Beck 
150 
Pullback 48 ex., 71 
- square 71, 199 
Pushout 65 
Quasi-inverse 83 
Quotient 
field of - 56 
- object 
122, 198 
- topology 
129, 155 
Rank of word 
162 
Reflection 87,89 
- of colimits 
150 
- of isomorphisms 
150 
Reflective subcategory 89 
Reflector 89 
Regular arrow 19 
Relations 26, 174 
Relative category 180 
Relaxed morphism 160 
Replacement axiom 23 
Representability 
60 ff. 
formal criterion for - 23 1 
- theorem 
118 
Representation 60 ff. 
left regular - 170 
Resolution 177 ff. 
Retraction 
19 
Right 
- adjoint 2,79,83,85,229 
-- adjoint ;-- inverse 129 
- adjunct 79 
-- 
cancellable 19 
- exact sequence 197 
-- 
inverse 19 
- Kan extension 232,233 
Ring, small 25 
Root 76 (notes) 
SAFT 126 
Satisfaction of identities 120 
Scheme, diagram lo,@ 
Section (=: right inverse) 19 
Semigroup 140, 142,176 
free - 140 
Sequence 
right exacl - 197 
short exact --- 
196, 198 
Sets 11 
based 
2h 
category of small 
cogenerating - 
directed - 207 
filtered - 207 
functioil - 40 
generating - 123 
graded -- 
120 
linearly ordered - 176 
metacategory of - 8 
pomted -- 26 
siInplicial -- 
1'2. 174 
small - 12,22,62 
Sets 
solution - 116 ff., 231 ff. 
underlying - 120 
Sheaf $5 
- 
Simplex 174 ff. 
affine - 174 
singular - 176 
Simplicia1 
- category 
12, 174 
-- object 
174 
-set 
174 
S~ngular 
- chain complex 176 
-- homology 
176 
- simdex 176 
~. 
Skeleton (of a category) 91 
Small 
- - complete category 
10% 106 
- group 22 
-- pointed set 26 
- ;ing 
25 
set 22 
-- 
topological space 25 
Snake Lemma 202 
Smash product 
185 
Solenoid, p-adic 107 
Solution set (condition) 116 ff. 
Source 7 
Space 
compact Hdusdorff - 
compactly generated - 
Euclidean vector - 21 
function - 181 
Hausdorff - 131 
Ke!ley - 181 
loop -- 
185 
path -- 
1 8 6 ~ .  
topological - 12,25, 
vector - 25.56,77 
Span an object 
123 
Split 19, 145 
-. coequalizers 146 
- epi 19 
- fork 145 
idempotent 20 
monrc 19 
cartesian -- 
i ?  
cocartesian - 66 
pullback - 71, 199 
Statement, atomic 31 
Stone-Ctch compactification 127 

Index 
Index 
Strict monoidal category 171 
Structure map of algebras 139 
Subcategory 15 
codense - 242 
dense - 241 ff. 
final - 213 
full - 15 
reflective - 89 
Subdivision category 220 
Subobject 122 
Sum 
direct - 191 
fibered - 66 
Super-comma category 11 1 ex. 
Supernatural transformation 2 15 
St~rjective 19 
- monotone function 173 
Suspension 185 
Symmetric monoidal category 180 
System, algebraic 120 
T-algebras 136 ff. 
Target 7 
Tensor product 
124, 159,222 
Terminal object 20, 73 
Terminology, table of 247 
Theorems 
Beck's characterizing algebras - 
147 
Beck's precise tripleability -. 
150 
comparison - for algebras 138 
construction of free monoids - 
168 
formal criterion for existence of 
adjoints 
230,244 
Freyd's adjoint functor - 117,231 
Fubini - 226 
Kan extensions as a mend 237 
Kan extensions as a pointwise 
limit - 233 
parameter - for ends and limits 
224 ff. 
representability - 118 
special adjoint functor - 124 
special initial object - 124 
Topological spaces 25 
category of - 1, 12, 128 
compactly generated - 18 1 
small -- 
25, 128 
Topology 
compact open -- 
181 
Hausdorff - 131 
identification - 129 
Topology 
quotient - 129, 155 
subspace - 128 
Transformations 16,99 
components of - 16 
composite - 102 
conjugate natural - 98 
dinatural - 214 
extranatural - 215 
natural - 16 
supernatural - 215 
universal natural - 38 
Triad 134 
Triangular identities 83 
Triple 134 
Tripleable (=monadic) 
139 
Twodimensional category 44, 102 
Two-sided inverse 14 
Underlying 
- functor 14 
- sets 26, 120 
Union 21, 122 
Unit 85 
- law 8, 134 
- of adjunction 8l,85 
- of Kan extension 237 
- of monad 
134 
Universal 36 
- arrow 24, 55,58,61 
- cone 67 
- element 57 
- monoid 157, 171 
- natural transformation 39 
- property 2 
- wedge 219 
weak - arrow 231 
Universality 59 
- of Kan extensions 245 
Universe 12, 22 
Urysohn Lemma 128 ex. 
Variable 
bound - 3 1,224 
dummy - 215 
free - 31 
- of integration 219 
Variety of algebras 120 
Vector spaces 25, 56, 77 
Vertical composite 42, 102 
Watt's Theorem 127 
Weak universal arrow 231 
Wedge 185,215 
universal - 219 
Well-powered category 126 
Word 141 
binary - 161 
Yoneda 
- embedding 243 
- functor 61,62 
Yoneda 
- lemma 61,246 
Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms 23 
Zero - arrow 20,74, 187, 190 
- map 188 
- morphism 188 
Zigzag 203 

Saunders Mac Lane, born in Connecticut in 1909, 
studied mathematics at Yale. Chicago. and Gottingen 
end has taught mathematics at Haward. Cornell, and the 
University of Chicago. He is now the Max Mason Distin- 
guished Setvice Professor of Mathematics at the Uni- 
versity of Chicago. With Samuel Eilenberg he discov- 
ered the theory of categories and some of the basic 
ideas of homological algebra. His book Homology: cov- 
ering the latter subject, was published by Springer- 
. Vetlag in 1963. The present book, summarizing the ideas 
of category thewy, is based on his lectures at Chicago. 
Chnberra, Bowdoin, and Tulane. 
8BN @387-QOL)3$4 Springer-Verlag New York 
ISBN 3-540-WS-7 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 

