THE WORLD’S BEST-SELLING APPLE MAGAZINE
HOW TO PLAY
GAMES ON A MAC
FEBRUARY 2018
Apple in 2018:
What we expect, 
what we want
FROM IDG
Apple’s slimline powerhouse heralds new era for the Mac
Everything you need to know
Meltdown and Spectre: 
RETRO

2   Macworld • February 2018
19
CONTENTS
REVIEW
FEATURES
NEWS
NEWS ANALYSIS
4 
 Apple responds to claims it slows down old iPhones
19 
 Apple iMac Pro
34  Apple in 2018: what we expect, what we want
47  Year in review: 2017
6 
Meltdown and Spectre FAQ 
13 
Apple and Shazam
34

February 2018 • Macworld   3
CONTENTS
ROUND-UP
HOW TO
FEATURES
OPINION
6
Keep updated with all the latest Macworld 
news, by following us on Twitter and Facebook
Use GOG.com to play 
old games on a Mac    94
Should you buy an iMac Pro?    59
The T2 chip marks the start of a Mac revolution    66
What’s next for Face ID?    72
Help Desk    77
Apple off to a promising  
start with revamped iMac   103
Latest Mac games    83
94

4   Macworld • February 2018
NEWS
Apple responds to claims 
it slows down old iPhones
Apple answers its critics. Roman Loyola reports
A
pple has released a statement to 
TechCrunch to address accusations on 
the Internet that the company purposely 
throttles the performance of older iPhones in 
order to boost new iPhone sales. Here is the 
statement to TechCrunch:
“Our goal is to deliver the best experience for 
customers, which includes overall performance 

February 2018 • Macworld   5
NEWS
and prolonging the life of their devices. Lithium-ion 
batteries become less capable of supplying peak 
current demands when in cold conditions, have a 
low battery charge or as they age over time, which 
can result in the device unexpectedly shutting 
down to protect its electronic components.
“Last year we released a feature for iPhone 
6, iPhone 6s and iPhone SE to smooth out the 
instantaneous peaks only when needed to prevent 
the device from unexpectedly shutting down during 
these conditions. We’ve now extended that feature 
to iPhone 7 with iOS 11.2, and plan to add support 
for other products in the future.”
The batteries in iPhones, iPads, and other 
portable devices degrade over time, thanks to heat 
and age. This means an older battery becomes 
less suited to meet the demands of a device’s 
processing peak. With an iPhone, this could cause 
the device to shut down.
To address this, Apple last year updated iOS with 
power management features so that processing 
peaks were smoothed out by putting a cap on the 
power draw from the battery, or by distributing 
power requests over multiple cycles.
As TechCrunch points out, this is a problem 
with lithium-ion batteries, and Apple’s power 
management is an attempt to prolong the life of 
your device, not to shorten it. If Apple were truly 
trying to hamper performance to force sales of 
new devices, the company would be basically 
asking for legal and governmental problems.

6   Macworld • February 2018
NEWS ANALYSIS
Meltdown and Spectre FAQ
Brad Chacos and Michael Simon reveal what you need to know
M
assive security vulnerabilities in modern 
CPUs are forcing a redesign of the kernel 
software at the heart of all major operating 
systems. Since the issues – dubbed Meltdown 
and Spectre – exist in the CPU hardware itself, 
Windows, Linux, Android, Macs, Chromebooks, and 
other operating systems all need to protect against 
it. And worse, it appears that plugging the hole will 
negatively affect your PC’s performance.
Everyday home users shouldn’t panic too 
much, though. Just apply the latest operating 
system updates and keep your antivirus software 
vigilant, as ever.

February 2018 • Macworld   7
NEWS ANALYSIS
Here’s a look at what you need to know 
about Meltdown and Spectre, in plain language. 
If you want a deep-dive into the technical 
details, be sure to read Google’s post on the 
CPU vulnerabilities. We’ve updated this article 
repeatedly as new information becomes available.
The basics
Again, the CPU exploits in play here are extremely 
technical, but in a nutshell, the exploit allows 
access to your operating system’s sacrosanct 
kernel memory because of how the processors 
handle ‘speculative execution’, which modern chips 
perform to increase performance. An attacker 
can exploit these CPU vulnerabilities to expose 
sensitive data in your protected kernel memory, 
including passwords, cryptographic keys, personal 
photos, emails, or any other data on your PC.
Meltdown is the more serious exploit, and the 
one that operating systems are rushing to fix. It 
“breaks the most fundamental isolation between 
user applications and the operating system,” 
according to Google. This flaw most strongly 
affects Intel processors because of the aggressive 
way they handle speculative execution, though a 
few ARM cores are also susceptible.
Spectre affects AMD and ARM processors as 
well as Intel CPUs, which means mobile devices are 
at risk. It’s “harder to exploit than Meltdown, but 
it is also harder to mitigate,” Google says. There 
may be no hardware solution to Spectre, which 
“tricks other applications into accessing arbitrary 

8   Macworld • February 2018
NEWS ANALYSIS
locations in their memory.” Software needs to be 
hardened to guard against it. 
What’s a kernel?
The kernel inside your operating system is basically 
an invisible process that facilitates the way apps 
and functions work on your computer, talking 
directly to the hardware. It has complete access to 
your operating system, with the highest possible 
level of permissions. Standard software has much 
more limited access. 
How do I know if my Mac is at risk?
Short answer: it is. Probably.
Google says “effectively every” Intel processor 
released since 1995 is vulnerable to Meltdown, 
regardless of the operating system you are 
running or whether you have a desktop or laptop. 
Chips from Intel, AMD, and ARM are susceptible 
to Spectre attacks, though AMD says its hardware 
has ‘near zero’ risk because of the way its chip 
architecture is designed.
Intel said recently, though, that the patches that 
it is issuing – via firmware and operating system 
patches – “render those systems immune from 
both exploits.” That’s a big claim from Intel, and 
has yet to be confirmed. 
So if Meltdown’s a chip  
problem, then Intel needs to fix it?
Yes and no. While Intel may address the 
fundamental hardware problem in future chips, 

February 2018 • Macworld   9
NEWS ANALYSIS
the fix for PCs in the wild needs to come from the 
operating system manufacturer, as a microcode 
update alone won’t be able to properly repair it. 
Intel said on 4 January that it had been aware 
of both vulnerabilities since June 2017, which 
gives you an idea of how seriously the computing 
ecosystem has taken both Spectre and Meltdown.
Intel is also publishing firmware updates for its 
processors. You’ll need to snag them from your 
PC, laptop, or motherboard maker (such as HP or 
Gigabyte) rather than Intel itself. Intel’s support 
page for the flaw links to firmware updates and 
information from the PC manufacturers it works 
with. At the time of writing, Intel expects to have 
released firmware updates for 90 percent of 
processors released in the past five years by 12 
Intel’s Core i7-8700K 
‘Coffee Lake’ CPU

10   Macworld • February 2018
NEWS ANALYSIS
January. The company hasn’t announced its plans 
for older CPUs like the venerable Core i7-2600K 
or processors from last decade.
So, what can you do?
Not much besides updating your PC with Meltdown 
patches issued by operating system makers. Since 
the issue is such a deeply technical one there isn’t 
anything users can do to mitigate the potential 
issue other than wait for a fix to arrive. Definitely 
make sure you’re running security software in 
the meantime – advice that Intel also stresses.
Do you know when a fix will come?
It’s already here. Apple quietly protected against 
Meltdown in macOS High Sierra 10.13.2, which 
released on 6 December, according to developer 
Alex Ionescu. Additional safeguards will be found 
in macOS 10.13.3, he says. Kernel patches are 
also available for Linux.
So once I download the patch I’m good?
Well, the operating system patches will plug the 
risk of Meltdown, but you might not like the side 
effects. While the fix will prevent the chip’s kernel 
from leaking memory, it brings some unfortunate 
changes to the way the OS interacts with the 
processor. And that could lead to slowdowns.
How much slower will my Mac become?
It’s complicated. Fortunately, a growing number 
of tests seem to support Intel’s contention that 

February 2018 • Macworld   11
NEWS ANALYSIS
everyday Mac users won’t see dramatic slowdowns, 
although there’s one particular area of concern: 
drive read performance.
More recent Intel processors from the Haswell 
(4th-gen) era onward have a technology called 
PCID (Process-Context Identifiers) enabled and are 
said to suffer less of a performance hit. Plus, some 
applications – most notably virtualization tasks and 
data Centre/cloud workloads – are affected more 
than others. Intel confirmed that the performance 
loss will be dependent on workload, and should not 
be significant for average home computer users.
Will my games get slower?
Probably not. Phoronix also tested Dota 2, Counter-
Strike: Global Offensive, Deus Ex: Mankind Divided, 
Dawn of War III, F1 2017, and The Talos Principle on 
a Linux 4.15-rc6 machine with a Core i7-8700K and 
Intel processors 
have a severe kernel 
security flaw

12   Macworld • February 2018
NEWS ANALYSIS
Radeon Vega 64. None saw a frame rate change 
outside the margin of error range.
Are AMD processors affected?
Much, much less than Intel chips. All modern 
CPUs are vulnerable to Spectre attacks, but 
AMD says that its CPUs have ‘near zero’ risk to 
one variant due to the way they’re constructed. 
The performance impact of Spectre patches 
are expected to be ‘negligible’.
There is “zero AMD vulnerability” to Meltdown 
thanks to chip design, AMD says. If operating 
system patches exclude AMD CPUs from the 
new Meltdown restrictions, the performance 
war between Intel’s chips and AMD’s new 
Ryzen CPUs may get even tighter.
AMD says there is 
zero vulnerability 
to Meltdown

February 2018 • Macworld   13
NEWS ANALYSIS
Apple and Shazam
Apple’s purchase of Shazam means much more to the iPhone 
than its acquisition of Beats, writes Michael Simon
S
hazam was a true game-changer as one of 
the first apps to appear in the App Store 
back in July 2008. With just a tap, Shazam 
could identify nearly any song you heard without 
needing to know anything about it. Shazam was 
a magical app that I used to show off my iPhone, 
and unlike all those other apps whose novelty wore 
off in just a few weeks (anyone remember iBeer?), 

14   Macworld • February 2018
NEWS ANALYSIS
Shazam has only gotten better over the years. 
Apple has long had partnered with Shazam to 
power Siri’s song identification service, but now the 
Cupertino giant has confirmed that it is buying the 
company outright for a cool $400 million, a relative 
bargain in today’s tech dollars. On the surface, 
a Shazam purchase ensures that Siri will always 
be able to recognize the song you’re listening to 
and will provide a boost to Apple Music, but I think 
Apple has much bigger plans for the service.
Like everything else Apple seems to be doing 
now, it’s about augmented reality and machine 
learning. And it could be the thing that finally 
puts Siri back at the front of the pack.
Listen up
Shazam’s main strength is music identification, 
and that fits well into Apple’s current strategy. It’s 
not just Siri on our phones: AirPods, HomePod, 
and Apple Watch could benefit from Shazam’s 
uncanny ability to name that tune.
And we might not even have to ask. On the new 
Pixel phones, Google has implemented a feature 
that displays the name of a song playing nearby 
even if Assistant hasn’t been asked. It’s a neat 
feature that’s all done locally, and I use far more 
often than I thought I would. A similar feature 
would be great on the iPhone, and with Shazam’s 
massive library at Apple’s disposal it would be 
far superior to Google’s. 
But where Shazam could really help Siri’s 
ears is with HomePod. Apple wants its new home 

February 2018 • Macworld   15
NEWS ANALYSIS
speaker to ‘reinvent home music’, but if all it does 
is sound good, that’s hardly revolutionary. If Apple 
could leverage its Shazam acquisition to build 
some serious smarts into HomePod, it could be 
a difference maker. We will already be able to ask 
Siri to play things like the most popular song in 
1986, but Shazam could amplify its knowledge 
considerably. It would be great to tap your AirPods 
and ask “Play the song that goes like this ...” 
or “Play that Ed Sheeran song about Ireland”. 
Shazam might not be able to do that now, but the 
groundwork is certainly in place, particularly when 
paired with Apple’s own AI musical capabilities.
And it could go beyond simple song identification 
too. Apple could use Shazam to create personalized 
playlists right on HomePod, based on your 
It’s hoped you’ll 
be able to create 
playlists on a 
HomePod

16   Macworld • February 2018
NEWS ANALYSIS
listening habits and tastes. Apple Music already 
creates mixes that are pretty great, but Apple’s 
machine learning could use what it hears to create 
customized playlists for the time of day that only 
play in our homes. That alone could be a reason 
to spend £349 on a HomePod. 
Seeing is believing
Shazam may be a household name when it comes to 
song identification, but the underlying technology 
has much broader application. Back in 2015, 
Shazam added visual recognition to its portfolio, 
and while it hasn’t caught on quite as well as its 
audio capabilities, Apple’s new AR push could 
definitely benefit.
Even with ARKit, Apple is lagging when it comes 
to augmented reality, especially on the AI side 
of things. Most notably, Google has introduced 
a technology with the Pixel 2 called Lens, which 
works with Assistant to identify and interact with 
real-world objects. For example, you could point 
your phone at a building and Assistant will tell you 
about it, or you can scan a business card and it will 
automatically be added to your contacts. Google 
will soon be rolling out Lens to all Android phones, 
and once it does, Siri on the iPhone will seem even 
more outdated than it already does.
But Shazam could give Apple a real boost here. 
While the public face of Shazam’s visual recognition 
has mainly focuses on brands – like scanning a 
movie poster to access a trailer – but Apple could 
tap into Shazam’s engine to give Siri a whole new 

February 2018 • Macworld   17
NEWS ANALYSIS
class of intelligence. We’ve read enough rumours 
about the Apple car and Apple glasses to see that 
AR is the next area of focus, and Shazam could 
help bring that future into view. We know Shazam 
will amplify Siri’s ears, but it could be a boost to 
its vision too.
Better but not exclusive
When Apple bought Beats, I expected Apple would 
force users to buy an iPhone if they wanted a new 
pair. That hasn’t happened. Instead, Apple has 
made the experience better on the iPhone with 
seamless pairing, a feature that I suspect has 
sold more iPhones than forcing people to switch.
I expect something similar with Shazam. While 
conventional thinking would suggest that Apple 
It’s hoped that 
Shazam won’t 
be exclusive to 
iOS users

18   Macworld • February 2018
NEWS ANALYSIS
would shutter the Android app in a few months, 
I don’t think that will be the case. But I do think 
Shazam will be better on iOS. Android users will 
get the same song-identifying Shazam that’s 
available today while iOS users will enjoy more 
features, even beyond what’s baked into the 
newer products. Apple likely won’t cut people off, 
but it will add enough cool features for people to 
notice. I think we’ll see a delineation between the 
Shazam app on the Play Store and the App Store, 
as Apple enhances its capabilities on iOS and 
adds exclusive features.
Apple’s purchase of Shazam might have been 
a bigger deal three years ago, but it could have 
much more of an impact on your Apple devices now. 
Earlier today, TechCrunch reported that Spotify and 
Snap were also interested in purchasing Shazam, 
so the potential here is more than just cornering 
the market on song identification. Apple is poised 
to leap into the AI and AR race with both feet, and 
Shazam could be the perfect technology to vault 
them to the head of the class.
And if not, well, at least Siri will be better than 
Assistant and Cortana at IDing songs. That’s worth 
$400 million, right?

February 2018 • Macworld   19
REVIEW
W
e’re still waiting for the new Mac Pro 
(and don’t even know which year it’ll be 
launched in), but in the meantime Apple 
is placating its pro users with this high-powered 
slab of processing muscle.
It’s available with anywhere from eight to 18 
cores, and from 32- to 128GB of RAM. The thermal 
architecture, so problematic on the Mac Pro, has 
been redesigned with ‘dual blowers’ for a claimed 
80 percent increase in thermal capacity. And the 
Apple iMac Pro
RATING:
Entry-level model £4,899 inc VAT from fave.co/2COcC5s
Review unit £9,039 inc VAT from fave.co/2D0cCTy

20   Macworld • February 2018
REVIEW
machine looks great too, with the current ‘pregnant 
iMac’ design given a new and rather lovely Space 
Grey finish, and matching peripherals.
Design 
Picture the 2017 27in iMac (the i7 model – we’ll 
be making comparisons with this machine); now 
imagine it in Space Grey. That, in most external 
respects, is what you get with the Pro.
It’s an attractive, classic design. There are razor-
thin edges around the monitor, giving the illusion 
of a flat screen device, but most of the innards are 
concealed within a gently bulging belly on the back.
We like the reassuring heft and minimalist 
look of the stand, too, which is made from a 
single bent piece of aluminium of subtly varying 
thickness (thickest at the bend and tapering 
away as it approaches the user) and featuring a 
cleverly simple cutout to keep your power cable 
tidy and tucked away. And while it could never be 
described as lightweight (it’s 9.7kg) or mistaken 
for a portable device, the iMac Pro’s balance and 
shape are such that it’s surprisingly easy to pick 
up and lug to another room.
This is all old news, of course, since we’ve had 
this design in the iMac range for several years. So 
is the new colour worth talking about?
Colour finish
We’re going to be drilling down into hardcore 
processing performance in this article so it’s 
tempting to disregard cosmetic changes like colour 

February 2018 • Macworld   21
REVIEW
finish; but this would be a mistake. The Space Grey 
finish looks superb, and given that you’re going to 
be looking at this object for multiple hours a day 
that isn’t an unimportant factor. It looks modern, 
and classy, and still unmistakably Apple. It will 
look great in a studio.
The Space Grey Magic Keyboard, Magic Mouse 2 
and Magic Trackpad 2 that are available with the Pro 
are also stunning to look at, although the mouse 
in particular is a little less stunning to use; it’s so 
prone to collecting fingerprints that Macworld’s 
art director made us work with a substitute until 
we’d finished doing photography. And hilarious 
though it might seem to normal people, the bundled 
black Lightning cable that you use to charge the 
peripherals has tickled the fancy of Apple fans.

22   Macworld • February 2018
REVIEW
Thermal design
In its mea culpa to the creative and design 
community who depend on the Mac Pro, Apple 
admitted that machine’s thermal design was 
unsatisfactory, making it next to impossible to 
upgrade. The company expected the industry to 
move in the direction of multiple GPUs, whereas 
the trend was actually towards larger single GPUs, 
which generate more heat and which the Mac Pro’s 
trash can design is unable to deal with thermally.
The iMac Pro should have no such problems. 
Apple says it offers 75 percent more airflow than 
the 27in iMac (thanks to the ‘dual blowers’) and 80 
percent more system thermal capacity.
The significance and success of this redesign 
is hard to estimate at launch, since the Mac Pro 
seemed fine initially and the problems emerged only 

February 2018 • Macworld   23
REVIEW
later. Looking at the matter subjectively, however, 
we can report that when using the Unigine Valley 
graphics test on a loop (with Extreme HD settings) 
the GPU topped out at 91ºC.
That’s a little on the high side for what we’re 
used to, and a touch warmer than the iMac 2017, 
which peaked at 87 degrees while admittedly 
pumping out significantly lower frame rates. But it 
didn’t cause any detectable slowdowns, and there 
was very little noise from the fans. All the parts 
of the casing that are reachable from the front 
remained cool to the touch, although naturally there 
was a decent flow of hot air pumping out of the vent.
Ports
The Pro has a solid bank of ports round the back: 
four each of USB 3 and Thunderbolt 3/USB-C. In 

24   Macworld • February 2018
REVIEW
this respect it sits neatly between the 27in iMac 
(which has four and two) and the trash can Mac 
Pro (four and six, although the latter are only 
Thunderbolt 2).
There are four microphones on the Pro’s chassis: 
one on the top edge, just above the FaceTime 
camera (like on the 2015 iMac), one either side of 
the camera, and one on the back. The 2017 iMac 
has only one, on the bottom edge.
Display
The display is the same Retina 5K 27in unit you 
get with the larger of the 2017 iMac range. That 
means a whopping resolution of 5120x2880, 
claimed support for a billion colours, and 500 nits 
brightness. Subjectively it’s beautiful to look at: 
crisp, vivid and bright.

February 2018 • Macworld   25
REVIEW
Performance
The iMac Pro is a powerhouse of a system. We 
reviewed the 10-core model with 128GB RAM and 
the Vega 64 GPU with 16GB of memory; Apple has 
been keen to stress that in terms of both processor 
and GPU chips the new iMac Pros are the fastest 
machines it’s released.  
With all this power at our fingertips, we were 
excited to put it through our battery of tests. 
Here’s what we found out.
Geekbench 4.2 (64-bit)
The iMac Pro averaged 5,424 in the single-core 
segment of Geekbench 4.2’s CPU test, and a 
monstrous 36,901 in multi-core. This is a test of 
pure processing speed, and higher scores are 
better. The Pro’s results dwarf the numbers we saw 
Geekbench 
4 multi-core

26   Macworld • February 2018
REVIEW
with the 3.4GHz version of the 27in iMac (2017) 
in the multi-core segment, although that device 
managed a shade more in single-core: it scored 
5,507 and 17,567 respectively.
This category of performance is niche to say the 
least, and you’re unlikely to see much difference 
between those two machines in anything but the 
most processor-intensive applications - although 
the gap will become more readily apparent in the 
years to come. But even now video editors, visual 
effects artists and 3D illustrators, among others, 
will appreciate the extra processing welly.
AJA System Test Lite
We used AJA System Test Lite next. This 
benchmark evaluates drive performance, and 
again higher scores are better. (We tested using 
AJA System 
Test Lite (Read)

February 2018 • Macworld   27
REVIEW
the settings 5K RED, 4GB, single file and disk 
cache disable.)
The iMac Pro recorded an average of 3,149MB/s 
write speed (an exceptional result, and far higher 
than the iMac’s 1,985MB/s) and 2,636MB/s read 
speed (roughly the same as the iMac’s 2,606MB/s).
Apple predicted impressive drive performance 
for the iMac Pro partly because it’s split into two 
drives (512GB each in the starting configuration) for 
greater throughput. You’re also automatically given 
an SSD: there’s no option for a moving hard drive.
Unigine Valley
We ran the iMac Pro (and 2017 iMac) in Unigine 
Valley Benchmark 1.0, which evaluates performance 
and stability under high graphical workloads.
AJA System 
Test Lite (Write)

28   Macworld • February 2018
REVIEW
Using the Extreme HD presets, it recorded an 
impressive average frame rate of 60.2fps (maximum 
106.8fps, minimum 30.5fps) and scored 2,520 
points. That compares to the iMac’s average 39fps 
and score of 1,633. You should note that while it’s 
capable of high frame rates, this isn’t a gaming 
machine, and won’t provide value for money if that’s 
what you’re looking for. As mentioned above in the 
thermal design section, the Pro’s GPU got pretty 
warm during this stress testing, peaking at 91ºC, 
but didn’t display any signs of distress or slowdown. 
The thermal system coped fine.
Cinebench
Our colleagues at Digital Arts ran the iMac Pro 
in Cinebench, a benchmark suite which tests a 
Unigine Valley

February 2018 • Macworld   29
REVIEW
Cinebench OGL
Cinebench Render

30   Macworld • February 2018
REVIEW
system’s ability to render 3D scenes and stresses 
both CPU and GPU. They used the test, in which 
higher scores are better, to compare against the 
iMac 2017 and the late-2015 iMac 5K, too.
The Pro scored 135 in the OGL test, and 2065 
in the render: both very high scores, albeit not the 
highest we’ve seen (the Lenovo ThinkStation P900 
tops that particular list). The iMac 2017 scored 
126.93 and 892 respectively, and the late-2015 
iMac 5K 94.74 and 595.
After Effects
Again, our thanks to Digital Arts for this set of 
test results, using Adobe After Effects 2018 
(and in most cases using the CineWare plug-in) 
to evaluate the iMac Pro’s ability to complete 
complex graphical processing tasks. These are 
Cinema 4D

February 2018 • Macworld   31
REVIEW
times taken to finish the tasks, so in this case lower 
scores are better. In seven out of eight tests, the 
iMac Pro recorded a time less than half that of the 
iMac (which was noticeably faster in turn than the 
iMac 2015, as you’d expect), but we’d like to focus 
on the eighth test, Cinema 4D. This stresses the 
GPU, processor, disk input and output and RAM, 
and provides the clearest overall assessment of 
a system’s capabilities. In this test, the Pro took 
four minutes 27 seconds; the iMac 2017 took six 
minutes 16 seconds and the iMac 2015 took nine 
minutes 27 seconds.
Verdict
The iMac Pro is an exceptionally powerful and 
stable system, but that was never in doubt. The 
real question is whether you need its power and 
can justify its cost. This isn’t a gaming rig you’ll get 
similar specs at a fraction of the cost elsewhere. 
This is targeted at the niche of users in the creative, 
design, visual effects and illustration fields who 
need the ability to process major graphical and 
3D rendering and editing tasks at a decent speed. 
Those involved in music production may find it ticks 
their boxes, too, but this is likely to be expensive 
overkill for the rest of us. We love the Space Grey 
finish, incidentally, and the matching peripherals 
look fantastic. David Price
Specifications
•  27in (5120x2880) Retina 5K display
•  macOS High Sierra

32   Macworld • February 2018
REVIEW
•  10-core, 3GHz Intel Xeon W, Turbo Boost up to 
4.5GHz, 23.75MB cache
•  Radeon Pro Vega 56 graphics processor, with 
16GB of HBM2 memory
•  128GB of 2,666MHz DDR4 ECC RAM
•  2TB SSD
•  Wi-Fi 802.11ac
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  1080p FaceTime camera
•  Stereo speakers
•  Four microphones
•  3.5mm headphone jack
•  SDXC card slot with support for UHS-II
•  4x USB 3.0 ports
•  4x Thunderbolt 3 (USB Type-C)
•  Space Grey Magic Keyboard with Numeric Keypad
•  Space Grey Magic Mouse 2
•  650x516x203mm
•  9.7kg

FROM IDG
ISSUE 127
Guide to  
iOS 11.2
iPhone  
iPad
The
and
in
Get more from 
your iPhone X 
with our top tips
iPhone
BUYING 
GUIDE
+ 

34   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
Apple in 2018: what we 
expect, what we want
Apple had a big year, but 2018 can be even bigger. Here’s what 
Jason Cross expects from the world’s most valuable company
A
pple released some killer products in 2017, 
and made some really big software screw-
ups. Will the company continue its rapid 
pace of new product releases? Can it keep up 
the pace without sacrificing quality and security? 
What’s it going to do with its enormous pile of cash?

February 2018 • Macworld   35
FEATURE
Predicting the future of tech is notoriously 
hard, and doubly so with a company as famously 
secretive as Apple. Still, we have some idea of what 
to expect in 2018. Here are our own predictions and 
shameless wish list items for the coming year. 
A whole new iPad
It’s time for a new iPad. Apple dominates the 
premium tablet market, but it’s not going to keep 
things that way if it rests on its laurels. Sure, 
innovations like Apple Pencil are fantastic, but 
the iPad hasn’t seen a really big design refresh 
in a long time.
The bezel-less iPhone X is the perfect breaking 
point from which to re-imagine the iPad, and 
according to rumours, a new design is on the way.
We expect old-style iPad to continue to be sold, 
but at least one new iPad with slimmer bezels and 
no home button is probably on the horizon. It’ll 
have an A11X or similar ‘big A11’ processor, the best 
display ever in an iPad, and will probably be pitched 
as an augmented reality and AI powerhouse. 
iPads are often announced in the spring, but in 
2016 Apple took the lid off the new iPads during 
its WWDC keynote in June. In a way, that makes 
the most sense, as it gives a good opportunity to 
showcase them with upcoming iOS 12 features.
Face ID everywhere
Touch ID isn’t going to fully disappear this year, but 
it seems obvious that Apple’s a big believer in its 
TrueDepth camera system and Face ID. We might 

36   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
see better hardware in Apple’s camera-and-sensor 
array, but certainly, improved software will make 
Face ID faster and more secure.
It’ll also spread out to more products. Whatever 
comes after iPhone X will of course feature Face ID, 
and it’s a shoo-in for a new top-tier iPad model.
But we’d love to see it on Macs, too. Microsoft’s 
Hello tech has made it clear that facial recognition 
has a place in laptops and desktops, and the 
FaceTime cameras in the entire Mac lineup are in 
desperate need of improvement. Swapping it out for 
the TrueDepth module as seen on iPhone X could 
not only give Macs some really useful capabilities 
(like locking the system automatically as soon as 
you step away and unlocking when you come back), 
The 10.5in iPad Pro is 
the best tablet Apple’s 
ever built, but a design 
change is in order

February 2018 • Macworld   37
FEATURE
but would also rocket the webcam quality to the 
front of the class. Kill two birds, Apple.
iPhone X, part 2
If the rumours are to be believed, we will see a 
follow-up to the iPhone X, very similar in shape 
and size but with small refinements and an all-new, 
faster, better A12 system-on-chip.
It may be accompanied by a larger 6.5in version, 
virtually identical save for its larger size and higher-
resolution display. If Plus-model iPhone are any 
indication, it’ll also have a larger battery. We hope, 
however, that Apple doesn’t keep some functions 
only for that larger model, as it keeps the dual 
camera module exclusive to Plus-sized iPhones.
A third iPhone is also said to be in the works. It 
would carry a 6.1in display at a lower resolution, 
using and LCD instead of OLED, but still use the 
roughly 2:1 ratio of current iPhones with slim bezels 
and Face ID instead of Touch ID. This would be the 
more affordable of the new iPhones, but it will still 
probably cost somewhere around £700.
Of course, Apple will continue to fill out its 
line-up by selling last-year’s models, and two-year-
old models, too. So you’ll still be able to buy the 
iPhone 7 and 7 Plus, along with the 8 and 8 Plus, all 
at reduced prices. The iPhone SE may get a small 
spec bump, too, but nothing more.
Massive Siri improvements
If we’re being honest, Siri needs work. It’s in a 
distant third behind Google Assistant and Alexa. 

38   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
It doesn’t understand our speech as accurately. 
It doesn’t give us useful answers. It doesn’t 
integrate with as many other services and smart 
home appliances.
Just one example: if I ask for the status of 
United flight 580 (a textbook AI-assistant type 
of task), Siri performs a web search while Google 
gives me an answer.
It seems like Apple took its eye off the ball with 
Siri for a couple years, perhaps not realizing how 
much its competitors were investing in AI assistants 
and how quickly its lead in that area would vanish. 
What was once a competitive advantage has 
become a sore spot.
But Apple doesn’t iterate in public like some 
other companies do. We’ve got a sneaking 
Siri (left) can’t give a straightforward answer to many of the questions 
we’d expect an AI assistant to help with. Google Assistant (right) can

February 2018 • Macworld   39
FEATURE
suspicion that the company has been hard at work 
on major advances for Siri, the development of 
which recently changed hands from Eddy Cue’s 
team (Internet services like Apple Pay and Maps) 
to Craig Federighi’s (macOS, iOS).
Unfortunately, we’ll probably have to wait for 
iOS 12 to be unveiled at WWDC in the summer to 
see what Apple has in store for Siri. But we have a 
feeling it’s going to be big. It had better be!
More AR and AI
Apple’s betting big on augmented reality. The AR 
capabilities of the latest iPhones are industry-
leading, and ARKit was a really big first step 
toward enabling developers.
Apple rarely speaks definitively about the future, 
but at a recent earnings call, CEO Tim Cook said:
“I view AR as profound. Not today, not the app you’ll 
see on the App Store today, but what it will be, what 
it can be, I think it’s profound, and I think Apple is in 
a really unique position to lead in this area.”
So yeah, expect lots more AR stuff in 2018. 
It’s probably too early to expect a standalone AR 
headset. But augmented reality will be a major 
selling point of new iPhones and of iOS 12. It 
wouldn’t shock me in the slightest to see AR built 
into Apple Maps, the editing tools in Photos and 
iMovie, even AR stickers in iMessage.
Meanwhile, ARKit will surely become far more 
advanced for developers, enabling new features 

40   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
like vertical surface scanning, and ushering in 
a whole new wave of apps. This will be enabled, 
in part, by new machine learning advances and 
further breakthroughs in AI. 
Apple invests deeply in machine learning and 
leans on it for everything from improving the photos 
we take, to making Siri sound more natural, to 
measuring our workouts with the Apple Watch. 
It’s a fundamental, yet often unseen, aspect of so 
much of Apple’s software. 
Expect to hear a lot more in the coming 
year about how AI and machine learning is 
transforming Apple’s software.
Virtually placing IKEA chairs is just 
the tip of the iceberg. AR will get more 
advanced, and more useful, in 2018

February 2018 • Macworld   41
FEATURE
Mac Pro
All the way back in April 2017, Apple admitted 
that the ‘trash can’ design of the Mac Pro 
was a mistake. It made the product hard for 
the company to update frequently enough, 
and nearly impossible for users to upgrade or 
service themselves. 
It said a new Mac Pro is on the way with a 
“completely rethought” modular design. Oh, and 
new Apple Pro displays are coming with them. 
Well, 2018 is the year. It just has to be. If the 
whole year comes and goes without a big new Mac 
Pro reveal, Apple’s going to make a lot of its most 
important customers really upset. Besides, the 
company has apparently had top talent working on 
this product for some time. If not this year, when?
I’ve got no idea what a new Mac Pro would 
look like, but I suspect a more traditional tower 
(perhaps a ‘compact’ tower) is likely. That’s the 
best way to manage the thermals of a wide variety 
of modular components and to let users upgrade 
drives, ram, even graphics cards. It’ll probably 
have a whole lot of high-speed I/O ports (Apple 
has always considered that a core Pro requirement) 
and if I had to guess, whisper-quiet operation is 
going to be a selling point.
It will also be expensive, utilizing workstation-
class processors like Intel Xeons and workstation 
graphics cards. While I don’t think it’s likely, how 
cool would it be for Apple to offer system based 
on the next-generation Ryzen (or Threadripper) 
CPUs from AMD?

42   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
macOS 10.14
Apple’s not quite on the same cadence with macOS 
as it is with iOS. It’s just where their customers 
are. Still, a new version of macOS gets announced 
every year at WWDC in June, and released later in 
the year. macOS High Sierra (10.13) was somewhat 
of a “maintenance release,” adding only a few 
new features but mostly focusing on stability, 
performance, and under-the-hood upgrades like 
the Apple File System (APFS).
There will probably be a macOS 10.14 in 2018, 
but we don’t expect a major, feature-packed 
facelift. Like High Sierra, 10.14 will probably focus 
on a few core technologies and a small handful 
of comparatively minor new features, with major 
design changes landing in 2019. 
Apple will update its 
desktop OS in the autumn

February 2018 • Macworld   43
FEATURE
That said, we do have a few items on our wish 
list for a new version of macOS. The split-view 
multitasking on iPads is great, and would be a 
boon to laptop users (who often work full-screen). 
It’s less necessary on big 27in iMacs, but the Mac 
market leans heavily toward the laptop side.
The new Control Centre in iOS 11, with a series of 
simple user-selectable controls, would be welcome 
on macOS. It has been suggested that it replace 
the dated, and not very useful, Apple menu on the 
status bar. I think that’s a great idea. Of course, 
Control Centre on the Mac would have a different 
set of controls and customization options than on 
iOS, and an API for developers to allow optional 
Control Centre functions wouldn’t be a bad idea.
Finally, we really hope iTunes is getting a big 
overhaul. Removing apps in 12.7 was the first step, 
but it needs much further refinement. I’d love to see 
video watching, organization, and purchasing in one 
app and all the music stuff in another.
Code name: Marzipan
A recent report from Bloomberg suggested that 
Apple is planning a single, unified app development 
system for iOS and macOS.
“Starting as early as next year, software developers 
will be able to design a single application that 
works with a touchscreen or mouse and trackpad 
depending on whether it’s running on the iPhone 
and iPad operating system or on Mac hardware, 
according to people familiar with the matter.”

44   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
It’s even got an internal code name: Marzipan.
I’m sceptical, though. The whole ‘write once, 
run anywhere’ dream has been attempted many 
times in computer science, and it never really 
plays out. Besides, macOS and iOS are just too 
different. iOS has no concept of a mouse, macOS 
always assumes a pointer of some sort. iOS has 
supported multitouch as a core concept from 
the beginning, but Apple has been clear that it 
does not intend to bring touch to Macs (and the 
trackpad is no real substitute). 
That said, I wouldn’t be at all surprised if Apple 
is working on bringing together the macOS and iOS 
App Stores, and giving developers a new toolkit 
and suite of APIs that make developing cross-
compatible apps much easier. 
Apple could easily unify many aspects of app 
development, leaving developers to worry primarily 
about how to deal with different interaction models 
and variable window sizes. It could quite simply 
unify the macOS and iOS app stores, allowing users 
to ‘buy once and run anywhere’. This wouldn’t mean 
that every iOS app would run on macOS, but at 
least when a developer does make an app available 
across multiple platforms, we wouldn’t have to 
buy it twice. That’s a big win for everyone. 
There could even be shared iCloud configuration 
and save space for apps, so that your app 
preferences, game saves, and configurations would 
sync between iOS and macOS versions.
It’s a big undertaking, but it’s exactly the kind of 
thing Apple’s ecosystem needs. Apple’s the only 

February 2018 • Macworld   45
FEATURE
company left with a very popular mobile platform 
and a PC platform that sells tens of millions of units 
a year to consumers around the world. Overlapping 
iOS and macOS apps, to the degree that it makes 
sense and is technically feasible, could be a big win.
What we don’t expect in 2018
Speaking of TV shows, Apple’s going big into its 
own original content. It’s going to spend $1 billion 
on its own TV shows, including a $5 million-per-
episode revival of Spielberg’s Amazing Stories. 
We’ll just start to see the first of these efforts in 
2018, but it’s not going to be Apple’s ‘big TV year’. 
It takes plenty of time to develop, shoot, and edit a 
big TV series. Apple will be busy with all of that in 
2018, with the bulk of the shows premiering in 2019.
There’s a fair chance Apple will launch some sort 
of new video service in 2018, it’s own competitor 
Apple’s moving into 
TV, but 2018 won’t be 
the big year for it

46   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
to Netflix or Hulu, but I think we should temper 
our expectations here. Apple has reportedly been 
trying to make an over-the-top TV service for years, 
but I think that ship may have sailed. What we all 
want is an Apple Music for television – one price 
(more than £10 a month of course), with unlimited 
commercial-free access to new TV as it airs and old 
TV archives. Whatever Apple’s plans were, it clearly 
was never able to work out the licensing deals. 
Apple’s eventual video service is probably going to 
focus on original content and a sampling of older 
licensed movie and TV content – it’ll probably be 
more Netflix than Sling TV.
Also in the ‘coming eventually but not in 
2018’ mode is AR glasses. Apple’s betting big 
on augmented reality, and has a better shot than 
anyone of producing a wearable AR product people 
are actually to slap on their face. It’s an enormously 
complex task for which the technology simply won’t 
be ready until at least 2019, though.
Apple’s also not going to release a car (in 
2018 or ever). Apple’s probably working on 
some nifty car software combining some level of 
autonomous driving, safety, mapping, and maybe 
even something unique like a heads-up display. 
But Apple’s play there is to work with car makers 
to be the user-facing software platform for their 
cars, not to produce a car itself. Even just doing the 
software – without building an Apple car – would 
involve unravelling a complicated Gordian knot 
of dealership laws, hardware integration, testing 
regulations, and more.

February 2018 • Macworld   47
FEATURE
Year in review: 2017
Apple had one of its best years ever in 2017. And one of its 
worst. Jason Cross reports
I
t has become cliché to use the term ‘mixed bag’ 
to describe anything with both good and bad 
qualities, but there is no better term for the 
kind of year Apple has had in 2017. It was a year 
marked by some of Apple’s best product releases 
in years, and the company has the growing sales 
to match. At no point in Apple’s history has it has 
so many products that reach so many people, and 
it has never had a bigger impact on the world of 
consumer technology.

48   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
These bright notes are soured by a whole host 
of screw-ups, delays, and stagnation. Perhaps 
Apple’s doing too much too fast, but it seems that 
the most valuable company in the world should 
probably have the resources to maintain quality as 
it expands its reach.
Here’s a look back at Apple’s major hits and 
misses of 2017.
Catching up with hardware
Apple has always made sophisticated hardware 
with incredible craftsmanship, but Android 
enthusiasts could rightly lay claim to a few very 
desirable features. This year, Apple finally delivered 
wireless charging, an extremely ‘bezel-less’ design, 
fast charging via USB Power Delivery, and perhaps 
the world’s best OLED display in a mobile device. 
We could argue about other features like removable 
storage, but for the most part, the iPhone line is 
no longer feels like it’s missing significant features 
relative to top-tier Android phones.
Apple caught up in other areas, too. The Apple 
TV 4K feels like the last streaming box to support 
4K and HDR, but it’s one of the best. And Apple did 
the right thing by making iTunes movie purchases 
and rentals in 4K cost the same as the HD version, 
and even updated HD movies in your library to the 
4K version automatically (if available).
When it comes to smart watches, there’s 
Apple Watch and there’s everything else. Apple’s 
dominant position in this market hasn’t stopped 
fans from looking sidelong at those Galaxy Gear 

February 2018 • Macworld   49
FEATURE
watches with LTE, wishing Apple would get the 
hint. Apple delivered in a big way with Apple 
Watch Series 3, which manages to pack LTE 
support and a faster processor into the same 
form factor. When you look at the whole picture 
– speed, software support, interface, build quality, 
aesthetics, size, comfort, battery life – Apple 
Watch Series 3 is so far ahead of the rest of the 
smartwatch market it’s laughable.
Leading the way
While much of Apple’s hardware efforts in 2017 
could be viewed as catching up to features 
present in top competitors, we also saw 
industry-leading innovations.
Apple is late to the 4K streaming 
party, but it delivered a great box

50   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
Take Augmented Reality. ARKit in iOS 11 is 
leagues ahead of the competition. The maturity, 
accuracy, and robustness of these developer 
tools resulted in a mini-explosion of AR apps. And 
while Google’s Project Tango has never caught on, 
ARKit apps run on any iPhone or iPad sold in the 
past few years – hundreds of millions of devices. 
Google tried to catch up with ARCore, but it has 
limited reach and scale. It seems made in clear 
response to Apple’s ARKit.
Face ID on iPhone X is another great example of 
Apple pushing the industry forward. The TrueDepth 
camera is far more sophisticated than the front-
facing sensors on other phones. Apple’s not the 
Face ID is way ahead of 
anything on any other 
phone, and is going to 
be copied everywhere

February 2018 • Macworld   51
FEATURE
first to implement facial recognition in a phone, 
but it’s the first to do it with the speed, reliability, 
and security necessary for it to fully replace your 
fingerprint, even for authenticating purchases. 
There was controversy around Face ID and the 
elimination of Touch ID, but time has proven it to 
be a hit. You’re going to see Face ID and other 
TrueDepth features like Animoji copied by everyone 
else in the course of the next year or two.
And, while the iPad didn’t a major overhaul 
(we could see that in 2018), Apple continues to 
dominate the premium tablet market with features, 
performance, battery life, and app support far 
beyond its Android competitors. The 10.5in iPad 
Pro is easily the best iPad Apple’s ever made.
Falling behind
For all of Apple’s leading advances, there are some 
core products that feel like they’re coasting.
Siri is perhaps the most important area in which 
Apple is being left in the dust but its competitors. 
iOS 11 brought only marginal improvements, while 
Amazon’s Alexa and Google Assistant are in a 
whole other league. Siri simply understands our 
speech less effectively, delivers less desirable 
results, is all-around less reliable, and has a 
very limited feature set compared to Alexa and 
Assistant. For Siri to catch up, it has to make major 
strides along every axis, all while Google and 
Amazon drive forward as fast as they can. This is 
not an area where Apple should be content with 
second-best, much less distant third.

52   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
Apple’s Photos app suffers similar deficiencies 
compared to the best from Google. From a service 
standpoint, Google offers free unlimited photo 
and video storage with the purchase of one of 
its phones; a huge benefit that would be trivial 
for Apple to replicate. Google Photos’ ability to 
quickly and accurately identify people in our photo 
libraries is light years beyond Apple’s (it even does 
pets), and its AI-powered search functions are an 
order of magnitude more advanced. 
Apple has rarely jumped aboard the latest 
processor releases as fast as the Windows 
ecosystem, but there’s little excuse for the 
MacBook Pro to still sport a dual-core CPU when 
those quad-core 8th Generation Core i7 processors 
are all over the Windows laptop scene. It’s not a 
big platform overhaul – these are almost drop-in 
replacements. 
We’ve got a laundry list of substantial changes 
we’d like to see in the MacBook line, but in 
the meantime, Apple could at least keep the 
processors current, especially when the new model 
offers such enormous performance benefits.
iOS 11’s big leap forward
iOS 11 is a really, really big update. It’s the most 
ambitious iOS update in years, and incorporates a 
lot of new under-the-hood technologies together 
with significant new design changes.
There’s so much ‘new’ in there. New setup 
experience. New Control Centre. New app store. 
There are new toys for developers like ARKit, 

February 2018 • Macworld   53
FEATURE
new photo and video formats (HEIF/HEVC), 
improvements to Siri, indoor Maps, the list is 
extensive. Nowhere is iOS 11 a bigger deal than on 
iPad. iPads with iOS 11 are capable of serious work 
thanks to a new Dock, changes to multitasking, 
drag-and-drop support, and a smart new keyboard 
feature called QuickType. 
iOS 11 is so big and ambitious that a couple of 
its key features didn’t make the initial release. 
Apple Pay Cash just landed in iOS 11.2, and 
we’re still waiting on Messages in iCloud. 
Nonetheless, from a features standpoint, iOS 
iOS 11 makes the iPad 
dramatically more functional

54   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
11 is a massive improvement that mostly gets 
things right. Except...
Software bugs abound
iOS 11 is full of bugs, and Apple just can’t seem 
to shake them. Every iOS release coincides with 
complaints about it “slowing down my iPhone,” 
many of them imagined. iOS releases also prompt 
cries of, “it ruined my battery life,” but in iOS 11 
there seems to have been some real bugs that 
caused serious battery life problems for a big 
number of users.
Apple’s problems with iOS 11 seem never-ending. 
A quick 11.0.1 update fixed a problem with Exchange 
email servers. 11.0.2 fixed a problem that caused 
some iPhone 8 and 8 Plus owners to hear crackling 
in their earpieces. Then there was a problem with 
haptic feedback on some iPhones, fixed in 11.0.3. 
The 11.1 release added lots of new emoji, but 
introduced a really obvious bug: typing a capital 
‘I’ autocorrected to a capital ‘A’ followed by an 
undecipherable unicode symbol.
Oh, but then some iPhone X users found 
that their touchscreens stopped working in cold 
weather, and that had to be fixed in 11.1.2 (along with 
a bug with Live Photos).
Apple even had to kick out iOS 11.2 in the middle 
of the night on a weekend, because it fixed a bug 
whereby daily notifications would cause iPhones to 
reboot starting at 12:15am on 2 December. 
Apple didn’t end the year on a high note, 
confirming what many iPhone users had 

February 2018 • Macworld   55
FEATURE
speculated: the power management built into iOS 
can slow down performance on iPhones with old 
batteries. This isn’t a bug, however, and Apple’s 
reasoning makes sense on a technical level; the 
company is trying to preserve battery life and 
prevent crashes and shutdowns on older iPhones as 
batteries lose their ability to supply peak voltage. 
But Apple screwed up the delivery of this feature 
and its messaging to users, and it’s led to a number 
of class-action lawsuits that will probably be settle 
sometime next year.
Amateur-hour bugs like these are the antithesis 
of the Apple marketing pitch – that when you 
control the hardware and the software, ‘it just 
Nobody should have to try a 
workaround to type a capital ‘I’

56   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
work’. Lest iOS have all the fun with dumb bugs 
that should have been caught, macOS got in on the 
fun with a the very serious Root Bug. The company 
responded very quickly, but then botched that by 
breaking file sharing and re-introducing the bug 
if you upgraded to 10.13.1 after installing the fix. 
Wasn’t the whole point of macOS High Sierra to 
focus on reliability and performance instead of 
introducing major new features?
Apple’s had a rough year with software. iOS 
11 has a ton of big improvements, but some of its 
features didn’t make release and the reliability has 
been far below the company’s usual standards. 
Even some of the releases that weren’t bug-ridden 
caused headaches, like when iTunes 12.7 dropped 
support for iOS apps. It’s a necessary step in de-
cluttering the bloated mess that is iTunes, but it 
could have been handled in a way that didn’t catch 
so many users off guard.
Delays, delays, and more delays
As much as Apple has done this year, it was 
supposed to do more. Delays are a normal part of 
tech, but this is rarely true of Apple; the company 
develops in secret, only announcing something 
when it is sure it is going to release when promised.
But we’re still waiting on Messages in iCloud. We 
had to wait months for Apple Pay Cash. 
Thanks to manufacturing difficulties, the 
iPhone X had to launch six weeks after the iPhone 
8 and 8 Plus, and was set to be in very limited 
supply for many weeks thereafter. Apple and its 

February 2018 • Macworld   57
FEATURE
partners have done a great job fixing supply issues 
and improving availability, but it’s a delay that 
shouldn’t have happened.
HomePod is already a year or two behind its 
competitors in the home speaker space, and now 
it’s going to miss 2017 entirely. Missing this holiday 
season will certainly impact sales – Alexa and 
Google Home are hot items, and people don’t want 
to buy another smart speaker just a few months 
later. Especially one that, at £349, costs way more.
In some cases, Apple promised a release by the 
end of the year and just barely squeaked in under 
the wire. Amazon Prime Video on Apple TV dropped 
in December (six months after its announcement) 
and the iMac Pro shipped with just a couple weeks 
Apple’s complex TrueDepth 
camera array caused a 
delayed launch for iPhone X, 
and shipping shortages. It 
was rectified quickly, at least

58   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
left in 2017 – and you can’t even buy the big 14- and 
18-core configurations.
Here’s to a smoother 2018
We put a lot of pressure on Apple. We constantly 
expect new market-defining, groundbreaking 
products on the scale of the iPhone or iPad. If a year 
passes without an Apple Car, or Apple AR Glasses, 
or an Apple over-the-top streaming television 
service, we read scores of op-ed missives about 
how Apple has lost its ability to innovate. 
I think more important than Apple’s ability 
to disrupt new industries is its implicit promise 
to its users: that complete vertical integration 
and fanatical attention to detail makes Apple 
products more reliable, performant, and secure 
than their counterparts.
2017 was a year marked by a bunch of exciting 
new Apple releases in both hardware and 
software, but a heaping pile of shameful bugs and 
product delays cast doubt about Apple’s ability to 
execute at the quality level we expect. If there’s 
one thing we want most from Apple in 2018, it’s a 
commitment to improving quality.
And a new Mac Pro.

February 2018 • Macworld   59
FEATURE
Should you  
buy an iMac Pro?
Apple most powerful Mac is an attractive computer. Jason 
Snell asks whether you really need it
A
pple’s biggest sellers have been on store 
shelves for a while now, but for fans of 
high-powered Macs, Christmas came 
early last year with the release of the iMac Pro. It’s 
undoubtedly going to take the crown as the most 
powerful Mac ever made – and will undoubtedly 

60   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
hold onto that distinction until a new Mac Pro 
arrives on the scene.
There’s a lot to be said for the iMac Pro. It’s the 
first Mac with workstation-level processors with a 
plethora of processor cores (8 and up) since the 
Mac Pro in 2013. The Radeon Pro Vega is the most 
powerful graphic processor ever in a Mac.
If you’re someone who uses a 5K iMac to get 
work done today, should you consider buying the 
iMac Pro or not? Here’s a list of reasons why you 
should – and also a few reasons you might want to 
keep that credit card in your pocket.
Not every workflow is built equally. Though 
modern processors usually feature multiple cores 
capable of executing code simultaneously, not all 
software is written to spread the workload across 
those cores. There are certain audio plug-ins I use 
Apple’s Activity Monitor can be 
found in Applications > Utilities

February 2018 • Macworld   61
FEATURE
that will absolutely swamp a single core of the i7 
processor in my 5K iMac – while the other cores 
remain entirely untaxed.
But the right tools, written to grab as many 
cores as possible and use them to their fullest, will 
absolutely fly when given the ability to max out the 
eight to 18 cores in the iMac Pro.
Talk to professionals and you’ll probably find 
that they know exactly what their most processor 
intensive tool is: for me, it’s the Spectral De-Noise 
filter in the audio processing package iZotope RX 6. 
That filter, which does a remarkable job of removing 
background noise from audio tracks, will max out 
my iMac’s cores. Even with that, it still takes a very 
long time to do its job, which is why an iMac Pro 
would probably be a big time saver for me.
If you don’t know if harnessing many processor 
cores can help you do your job, open the CPU 
Monitor window in the Activity Monitor app. It’ll 
show you all your cores (including ‘virtual cores’ 
used in Intel processors supporting hyper-
threading), and you can see whether the most 
intense work you do is spread across all your Mac’s 
processor cores, or is limited to just one.
If you feel the need for more speed and your 
apps are already pushing your Mac’s cores to the 
limit, the iMac Pro would probably give you a big 
speed boost.
If you need graphics power
Powered by the Radeon Pro Vega, the iMac Pro is 
a workstation with graphics abilities that outstrip 

62   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
any current Mac. If you’re interested in working 
in advanced graphics, or VR development, while 
remaining on the Mac platform, this is the Mac 
that’s going to be the most capable.
But beyond sheer processing power, the iMac 
Pro supports twice the number of external displays 
as the 5K iMac. If you’re someone who needs 
two eternal 5K displays, or four external 4K HDR 
displays, you need the iMac Pro.
If you want the best 5K iMac
Priced at £4,899, the base model iMac Pro comes 
with 1TB of flash storage and 32GB of RAM. The 

February 2018 • Macworld   63
FEATURE
top-of-the-line iMac, outfitted with the fastest 
processor available on that model and with RAM 
and storage specs to match the iMac Pro, costs 
£3,509. That extra £1,260 nets you a much faster 
processor with twice the cores, a major graphics 
power boost, and more. (In fact, if you max out the 
specs on the 5K iMac, you can get one for £4,949, 
more than the iMac Pro’s starting model. But that 
model has more RAM and more flash storage than 
the base model iMac Pro.)
My point is this: if you’re in the market for a high-
end iMac anyway, it’s worth considering the iMac 
Pro. The leap in price isn’t as dramatic once you’re 
maxing out the specs of the 5K iMac in order to get 
the most powerful model.
If you want Space Grey peripherals
Here’s a reason not to buy an iMac Pro: yes, it 
comes with Space Grey versions of the Magic 
Keyboard, Magic Mouse, and Magic Trackpad, 
colour variations that are not available anywhere 
else – at least for now. 
While I have no doubt that these keyboards and 
input devices will be hot items on eBay, please do 
not buy a £5,000 computer for a keyboard in a 
slightly darker shade of silver.
(Look, I am not the fashion police: Buy what 
you want. It just seems a bit silly to spend that 
much money on a colour variation of the same 
input devices we’ve had for ages. The iMac itself 
is a similar story: if you’ve always wanted a Space 
Grey iMac, you can get one now. But the ‘black tax’ 

64   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
for this model is much higher than the one for that 
black MacBook back in the day.)
If you like installing aftermarket RAM
The iMac Pro, unlike the 5K iMac, doesn’t have a 
RAM door on the back, which means you can’t buy 
the lowest amount of RAM possible from Apple and 
then install cheaper RAM from a third party later. 
Yeah, that’s kind of a downer; that’s what I did when 
I bought my 5K iMac. If you’re frustrated with Apple 
blocking the very last bit of user upgradeability on 
the 27in iMac line, I get it.
If you’re afraid of first-generation hardware
This is a brand-new model. The iMac Pro, first of 
its name, with new processors and hardware (and 
even an Apple-built ARM co-processor, the T2, 
which probably won’t bring about judgment day). 
The conventional wisdom has always been, first-
generation hardware has quirks and bugs, so it’s 
best to let the brave jump in on the first go, while 
the savvy shoppers wait a year for the first hardware 
iteration that stamps out all the unexpected bugs.
It’s not a bad strategy, if you’re a patient person. 
Are you patient? If you’ve waited this long for a 
new professional Mac desktop, maybe you are.
If you’re really in the market for a Mac Pro
We know literally nothing about the composition 
of the Mac Pro whose existence Apple executives 
acknowledged earlier this year. They made no 
commitments about when it would ship or what it 

February 2018 • Macworld   65
FEATURE
would contain. We can assume 
that it will be more powerful than 
the iMac, and possibly more 
expandable (it couldn’t be less), 
and won’t ship with a 27in display 
attached to its front.
If you simply don’t want to own 
an iMac, if you really would prefer 
a (potentially) more expandable 
and powerful Mac Pro, then it’s 
probably a good idea to wait. But 
if you’re someone who uses Macs 
to get work done, and who needs 
the fastest Mac in existence to do 
that job, you might consider this: 
There will probably be a robust resale market for the 
iMac Pro when the Mac Pro comes out. You could 
always buy this thing and use it until 2018 or 2019 
or whenever the Mac Pro arrives, then sell it and 
put that money toward the Mac Pro.
Maybe you’ve been so patient waiting for this 
iMac that you’re willing to be even more patient. Or 
maybe you’ve waited long enough. In the end, the 
difference between those two states may be the 
ultimate factor in deciding whether the iMac Pro 
is right for you.

66   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
The T2 chip marks the 
start of a Mac revolution
Sure, it’s the fastest Mac ever made, but the T2 chip is what 
really makes it different. Jason Snell reports
I
’ve spent the past week with Apple’s new iMac 
Pro, and in most ways it’s just a faster Mac. It’s 
the first pro Mac desktop in over three years and 
the fastest Mac yet made, granted, but still entirely 
familiar. And yet in many ways – some noticeable, 
some entirely invisible – this new Mac is completely 
different from all past Mac models.

February 2018 • Macworld   67
FEATURE
The iMac Pro may be an outlier today, but in the 
future we’ll probably look back on it as the start of a 
new era for the Mac, all because of the Apple-built 
T2 chip it carries inside. Here’s how the T2 makes 
this iMac Pro unlike all other Macs.
The power behind the throne
The T2 processor isn’t doing the heavy lifting in 
the iMac Pro – that’s the Intel Xeon processor with 
between 8 and 14 processor cores. The T2 is the 
brain behind that brain, running the subsystems 
of the iMac Pro from a single piece of Apple-built 
silicon. The result is a simplified internal design 
that doesn’t require multiple components from 
multiple manufacturers.
On most Macs, there are discrete controllers for 
audio, system management and disk drives. But the 
T2 handles all these tasks. The T2 is responsible for 
controlling the iMac Pro’s stereo speakers, internal 
microphones, and dual cooling fans, all by itself.
A FaceTime camera like no other
The iMac Pro’s FaceTime camera can capture 
1080p video, an upgrade from the 5K iMac’s 
720p resolution. But this new FaceTime camera 
is driven by the T2 processor, which means it’s 
got intelligence that previous FaceTime cameras 
lacked. Like its cousin processors that drive the 
iPhone, the T2 has an Apple-designed image signal 
processor that detects faces in order to properly set 
exposure and white balance, dynamically adjusts 
exposure, and a whole lot more – all in the service 

68   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
of producing a better image, just like what happens 
when you shoot photos or video with your iPhone.
What flash storage?
The iMac Pro offers between 1- and 4TB of flash 
storage, also commonly referred to as an SSD, or 
‘solid-state drive’. This is hardly the first Mac to 
include SSDs, but it’s a very different approach 
to storage than previous models.
Most solid-state drives, whether they fit into a 
drive bay like a spinning hard drive or are reduced to 
a chip that slides into a slot somewhere, are self-
contained – they’re a bank of memory combined 
with a controller. On the iMac Pro, though, that’s 
In addition to all this external 
I/O, the iMac Pro has crazy-
fast striped SSDs, encrypted 
and controlled by the T2

February 2018 • Macworld   69
FEATURE
not the case – the SSD that comes with the iMac 
Pro is actually two banks of NAND memory. (Every 
iMac Pro has two banks that are ‘stripped’ together 
into a single drive – if you get the 1TB model, your 
iMac Pro has two 512GB NAND banks; the 4TB 
model has two 2TB NAND banks.)
As for the disk controller? There isn’t one – or 
more accurately, the disk controller is built into the 
T2 itself. This gives the T2 complete control over 
internal storage on the iMac Pro. This has some 
major benefits in terms of speed and security. 
Every bit of data stored on an iMac Pro’s SSD is 
encrypted on the fly by the T2, so that if a nefarious 
person tried to pull out the storage chips and read 
them later, they’d be out of luck.
(For additional security, Apple strongly suggests 
you turn on FileVault, which ties SSD encryption 
to your password. This provides an additional level 
of security, because your disk can’t be decrypted 
without the proper hardware and your password.)
All this encryption happens invisibly, so the 
SSDs in the iMac Pro still operate at full speed 
– approximately 3GB per second.
Boot twice for safety
You know you’re a Mac nerd when you have 
opinions about the keys you need to hold down 
when rebooting while troubleshooting a problem. 
But on the iMac Pro, booting and rebooting is 
different – very different. In essence, it’s a two-
stage process, first driven by the T2, then driven 
by the more traditional system boot process.

70   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
When you start up the iMac Pro, the familiar 
Apple logo appears. This is a sign that the T2 is 
taking control. For security reasons, the T2 is the 
iMac Pro hardware’s ‘root of trust’, and it validates 
the entire boot process when the power comes 
on. The T2 starts up, checks things out, loads 
its bootloader, verifies that it’s legitimate and 
cryptographically signed by Apple, and then moves 
on to the next part of the boot process.
This new boot process means there’s also a 
new utility for Mac users to get to know: Startup 
Security Utility, which you can only access by 
booting into Recovery mode by holding down 
Command-R while starting up. Startup Security 
Utility gives the T2 guidance about just how strict 
it should be when judging whether it should boot 
your computer. By default, security is set to Full, 
which means that only the current operating 
system or another OS version signed and 
trusted by Apple – meaning it hasn’t 
been tampered with in any 
way – can be booted 
by the computer. This 
version requires a 
network connection 
when you attempt 
to install any OS 
software updates, 
because it needs 
to verify with 
Apple that the 
updates are 

February 2018 • Macworld   71
FEATURE
legitimate. You can also set the security level lower, 
to Medium (which allows older version of macOS 
to run regardless of Apple’s level of trust), or turn 
the feature off entirely, emulating the way all other 
Macs currently start up.
(This goes for Boot Camp, too – the T2 respects 
Microsoft’s signing authority for Windows 10 
beginning with 2017’s Fall Creators Update, so 
Boot Camp users can reboot into Windows 10 
while remaining fully secure.)
A hybrid Mac? Not quite.
Before the iMac Pro was released, there was a lot 
of speculation that it was part of a trend toward 
creating a ‘hybrid Mac’ that is driven by both an 
Intel processor and an Apple-designed ARM chip 
like those found in other Apple devices. The iMac 
Pro is definitely a hybrid of a sort, but probably not 
the one people were expecting. With the T2, Apple is 
using its chip-design prowess to take more control 
over parts of the Mac hardware that were previously 
outsourced to other controllers, and reaping the 
benefits of integrating them all together.
The iMac Pro isn’t running iOS apps, but it does 
get to take advantage of most of the work Apple 
has done to bolster the security of iOS devices 
and enhance the quality of photos and video taken 
by iPhone cameras. Apple will almost certainly 
continue to push this technology into more future 
Mac models, because it allows Apple to use the 
work it’s already done on iOS to improve the 
features and security of the Mac.

72   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
What’s next for Face ID?
iPhone X is the first Apple device to incorporate Face ID, but 
it’s a solid bet that it won’t be the last, writes Dan Moren
A
head of the iPhone X’s announcement 
back in September, there had been plenty 
of rumours about it including biometric 
security based on facial recognition, as well as 
whether or not Apple was struggling to incorporate 
Touch ID into this new model. Unsurprisingly, 
there was a lot of hand-wringing over this move, 
with plenty of pundits who insisted that Face ID 
was only a sop until Apple could figure out how to 
incorporate Touch ID into its new all-screen phone. 

February 2018 • Macworld   73
FEATURE
Now that the iPhone X has finally made its 
way into the world, we’ve gotten a little more 
perspective on the matter. Not only have we seen 
how Face ID is a major departure from previous 
facial recognition systems, but we’ve also had 
Apple executives point out that the company 
had long ago made the decision to ditch Touch 
ID for Face ID, which we should have all logically 
considered when the rumours were flying, as the 
company’s not going to be struggling with design 
decisions mere months before they ship millions 
of devices. But now that Face ID is about to 
become part of many of our daily lives, it’s worth 
considering what else might be in store for this 
technology. Because if the company’s moving 
away from Touch ID in its flagship device, you 
can bet that Face ID is here to stay. 
More faces  
As good as the early reviews say Face ID is, the 
technology isn’t without its limitations. Some of 
these are on the minor side: for example, certain 
types of sunglasses might not be compatible 
because they block the wavelength of light needed 
for the infrared-based equipment in the True 
Depth cameras. Likewise, those of us in colder 
climes might need to pull down our scarves in 
order for the camera to recognize us. Hardly deal-
breakers, but inconveniences. (Let’s not laud Touch 
ID and pretend it didn’t have its own problems, or 
have you never had to retrain the sensor when your 
skin was too dry?) 

74   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
But in one way Face ID does take a step back 
from Touch ID: it only supports enrolling a single 
face. For many people that may be no problem at 
all, but for those users who allow others to use their 
device – a partner, child, parent, or so on – it can 
be frustrating to have to revert back to sharing a 
strong, possibly hard to remember passcode (and 
your passcode is strong, right?). 
Similarly, sharing a password is a bigger security 
risk, since it allows for access to many protected 
parts of iOS that are otherwise inaccessible. And 
if you wanted to revoke the access you’d given 
someone with Touch ID, it was easy enough to 
remove a fingerprint from the device; changing 
your passcode is definitely more annoying.

February 2018 • Macworld   75
FEATURE
In some ways this is easy to reconcile with 
Apple’s philosophy – the company has always 
pushed the idea that an iPhone is really for a single 
user. (Ever tried to buy or download apps with 
multiple iTunes accounts?) But I’m also convinced 
that the company will eventually expand Face ID’s 
purview to handle different people accessing the 
same device, for one very good reason. 
More devices
Although the iPhone X is the first Apple device to 
incorporate Face ID, it’s a solid bet that it won’t 
be the last. The simplest reason is that if it does 
indeed provide the most reliable and most powerful 
form of biometric security, why restrict it to just a 
single device? Moreover, Apple would no doubt 
like to offer the feature on other devices to allow 
users to have a single authentication method on 
all their devices. 
The iPad is the most obvious choice for the 
next device to get Face ID, at least if it follows 
the previous example of Touch ID. Bringing 
the system to another iOS device ought to be 
relatively straightforward, and Apple would no 
doubt like to get rid of the home button on its tablet 
and free up valuable space there as well. (Plus, 
the swiping up gesture to bring up the Dock and 
multitasking interfaces on the iPad in iOS 11 is 
already reminiscent of the iPhone X’s replacement 
for the home button.)
More interesting, however, is the Mac. Touch ID 
has been slow to migrate to the Mac, appearing 

76   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
only on the Touch Bar-enabled MacBook Pros. But 
the Touch Bar has been one of the company’s less 
popular features of recent years, and while many – 
myself included – had expected the company might 
integrate Touch ID into a Magic Keyboard or Magic 
Trackpad, it certainly seems plausible that the 
company decided to skip that entirely once it had 
made the decision to bet on Face ID.
And unlike iOS devices, Macs don’t generally 
suffer from the same limited space or power 
problems that Apple has to balance on phones and 
tablets. Plus it opens up a better experience for 
using Apple Pay on your Mac, and let’s be honest: 
it’ll probably be even more reliable than logging in 
to your Mac using your Apple Watch.
Both iPads and Macs are far more likely to 
be shared between multiple users, and Macs of 
course have explicit support for multiple accounts 
– which, on Touch ID-enabled MacBook Pros, 
even supports user-switching via fingerprints. 
So it seems a pretty good bet that Face ID would 
follow in that feature’s footsteps. And hey, maybe 
it will even encourage Apple to acknowledge 
that iPads get shared between different users 
as well, and finally bring the multi-user support 
enabled for education into mainstream usage, but 
perhaps that’s a topic for another day.

February 2018 • Macworld   77
FEATURE
Help Desk
Glenn Fleishman answers your most vexing Mac problems
APP STORE AND iTUNES PURCHASES: 
YOU CAN’T DELETE HISTORY 
We don’t typically run one-word answers to reader 
questions, but it’s worth it in this case, because we 
regularly receive a question similar to this one from 
Macworld reader JLR:
“I want to dump, forever, some music and iPhone 
apps from my iTunes account and not have to deal 
with them just ‘hiding’. Is this possible to do?”

78   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
No. Okay, I can’t help myself, I need to give 
a complete answer here. Apple lets you hide 
purchases from appearing where they typically 
display in a list or are available via Family Sharing, 
but the purchase remains part of your account 
information and can be viewed when you examine 
your account. Apple hasn’t explained why you 
can’t delete your purchase history. 
IS THERE A DRAWBACK TO USING 
WI-FI CALLING ON AN IPHONE?
Wi-Fi Calling is a feature that lets an iPhone 
effectively re-route mobile calls over the Wi-Fi 
network to which you’re connected – if it has the 
right qualities instead of using the cellular network. 
Most carriers support Wi-Fi Calling.
Turning on Wi-Fi 
Calling seems 
to have no 
drawbacks

February 2018 • Macworld   79
FEATURE
Macworld reader Steve wonders if there’s a 
drawback to Wi-Fi Calling. His iPhone typically 
picks up a stronger Wi-Fi signal than a cellular one.
There’s none that I can think of, even though 
carriers mostly offer no benefit to you off-loading 
phone calls from their networks to your own or 
someone else’s. (At one point, T-Mobile’s Wi-Fi 
calling option had some real cost advantages.)
Voice calls over 3G and 4G networks are just 
data, anyway. Calls use up very little bandwidth, so 
even on a lower-speed broadband network or one 
that has usage caps, the data consumed is minimal.
Wi-Fi Calling also optionally lets you connect 
all other kinds of Apple devices using the same 
iCloud account so you can make calls from them 
even if the iPhone is powered down or not on 
the same Wi-Fi network. That’s a big advantage 
depending on how you work.
Apple doesn’t reveal the specific means by 
which it tests that a Wi-Fi network has suitable 
characteristics for Wi-Fi Calling, but I expect it 
performs a quick test for data loss and latency, 
or the time it takes for data to start transmitting 
rather than its overall speed.
FUSION DRIVE OR HYBRID DRIVE: 
WHICH ONE SHOULD YOU USE?
Solid-state drives (SSDs) are expensive, especially 
if want a capacity above 1TB. That’s why hard 
drives still rule the roost, even though they don’t 
offer the speed of an SSD. Apple’s software-
based Fusion Drive provides a compromise: it 

80   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
uses a small amount of high-performance SSD 
alongside a higher-capacity HDD. macOS caches 
frequently used drive-based data in the SSD, 
boosting performance. When deciding on a drive 
for an iMac I purchased earlier this year, I felt that 
the performance I’d get from the £700 jump from a 
1TB Fusion Drive to a 1TB SSD simply wasn’t worth 
it. Apple pairs a 32GB SSD with its 1TB hard drive, 
and 128GB with its 2- and 3TB options.
Macworld reader Terence would like to upgrade 
an older iMac to a newer version of macOS, and 
wants to create his own Fusion Drive. Apple’s 
technical support told him, he says, that he can 
migrate to High Sierra and then use it to create a 
Fusion Drive with bring-your-own-drive options. 
I’d say the far better option, if you’re purchasing 
new drives anyway, is to find a hybrid drive with 
a good reputation and go with it. A hybrid drive 
is a single drive that combines a SSD with a hard 
drive. These seem to mostly max out at about 8GB 
of SSD, but can cost under £100 for a 1TB/8GB 
model. The caching happens below the driver level, 
so the drive winds up ‘responsible’ for making the 
choices, but there’s less to fail, too.
DROPBOX OR iCLOUD DRIVE: WHICH 
IS BETTER FOR FILE SHARING?
iCloud Drive isn’t quite like Google Drive or 
Dropbox. As with most Apple digital and cloud 
services, it’s tied to a single identity without 
much in the way of sharing. iCloud Drive’s sharing 
features seem a bit tacked on.

February 2018 • Macworld   81
FEATURE
Macworld reader Howard writes in asking about 
an aspect of this. “I was hoping also to have my 
wife’s iCloud drive show up on my Mac’s Finder the 
way I do with Dropbox. I haven’t been able to get 
this to work.”
It’s not you, Howard. You can only mount a given 
iCloud Drive associated with an iCloud account on 
an account in macOS logged into that same iCloud 
account. With some previous Apple cloud storage 
systems, you could use the credentials (user name 
and password) to mount a drive without having 
your system logged into the same account. You can 
select individual files in macOS, the iOS app, or via 
Only individual files can 
be shared in iCloud Drive

82   Macworld • February 2018
FEATURE
iCloud.com and share them. But access is solely via 
the web, and you can’t share folders.
Apple lets you share iCloud storage using Family 
Sharing, but it doesn’t provide any way to share 
files among those family members, either. Howard’s 
family bumped up their storage and has now 
bumped against this limit.
Dropbox is a very reasonable way to have a 
shared folder, the contents of which are constantly 
synced among those connected to the folder. One 
other option would be to use Internet file storage 
via Panic’s Transmit 5 (fave.co/2COwsxt), which 
allows several kinds of servers and cloud hosts 
to be mounted as Finder volumes. However, this 
doesn’t use sync: you’re really opening and saving 
files live over the Internet, which can add lag unless 
you have a relatively fast broadband connection. 

February 2018 • Macworld   83
I
t’s the start of the year, so we’ve rounded up 
the biggest and brightest new releases. Deus 
Ex: Mankind Divided, Battle Chef Brigade, 
and Bridge Constructor Portal are among the 
most notable games released over the past few 
weeks, but there are several more compelling 
options within.
Latest Mac games
Andrew Hayward looks at this month’s best new releases
ROUND-UP

84   Macworld • February 2018
ROUND-UP
1. Deus Ex: Mankind Divided
Price: £39.99 from Steam (fave.co/2CQyJvf)
Been waiting since the finale of the great Deus 
Ex: Human Revolution to see how Adam Jensen’s 
story continues? If so, you’re in luck – because 
Square Enix’s Deus Ex: Mankind Divided is 
finally on Mac. Mankind Divided takes place 
in a futuristic, cyberpunk world in which tech-
augmented humans (like Jensen) are segregated 
from their fully flesh-and-blood counterparts.
It blends stealth action with intense melee 
combat and cool cybernetic customizations, all 
within a huge, beautiful world. It needs heavy-duty 
hardware, though: Feral Interactive’s port only 
works with AMD graphics cards for now, which 
means a select few Macs can handle it.

February 2018 • Macworld   85
ROUND-UP
2. Battle Chef Brigade
Price: £15.49 from Steam (fave.co/2CSZSOa)
Battle Chef Brigade is surely the only cooking-
themed, anime-inspired puzzle and combat game 
you’ll ever encounter, as you fight monsters to snag 
ingredients and then cook them up by matching 
together items in your cauldron with Bejeweled-
esque elemental gems. Yes, that is quite the unique 
premise. Battle Chef Brigade follows an Iron Chef-
like tournament, albeit in a fantasy world of wild 
creatures and big personalities, and you’ll need to 
defeat the competition by whipping up the most 
inventive dishes you can. This indie game delight 
has scored with professional critics and Steam 
users alike, and there’s nothing else quite like it.

86   Macworld • February 2018
ROUND-UP
3. Getting Over It with Bennett Foddy
Price: £5.79 from Steam (fave.co/2CCH9mF)
Bennett Foddy tends to make a certain kind of 
game in different ways: they’re incredibly difficult 
to control, yet that near-impossibility makes 
them absolutely addictive. We’ve seen it with web 
games like QWOP and GIRP, and now he’s done it 
again with Getting Over It. You control a man who 
is firmly lodged inside a cauldron, who must use 
only a hammer to propel himself up a huge, jagged 
mountain, and you can’t save your progress. How 
long will it take you to finish a run? Will you discover 
new depths of frustration in the process? Find out 
for just eight bucks, if you dare.

February 2018 • Macworld   87
ROUND-UP
4. Bridge Constructor Portal
Price: £6.99 from Steam (fave.co/2CD90U2)
Bridge Constructor Portal merges one physics-
based game with another, blending the 
bridge-building simulation of the former with 
the teleportation shenanigans, humour, and 
presentation of Valve’s beloved latter series.
It’s an unexpected pairing, but it’s one that 
seems to have landed well with fans of both 
series. You’ll put together intricate bridges and 
structures to guide the little forklifts through the 
familiar Portal test chambers, which gradually 
become more and more complex with the addition 
of portals and other hazards. With 60 levels, a 
cheap price, and enough of the Portal aesthetic 
in tow, this seems like a fun little brain-teaser.

88   Macworld • February 2018
ROUND-UP
5. Reigns: Her Majesty
Price: £2.09 from Steam (fave.co/2CDLIgL)
Reigns is an experience best suited for an iPhone 
or iPad, given its swipe-centric gameplay and 
portrait-view presentation, but if you’d rather play 
on Mac, it’s available at the very same price. Like 
2016’s great original, the new Reigns: Her Majesty 
is a breezy monarchy simulator, letting you rule one 
decision at a time as you attempt to stay in power. 
As the title suggests, Her Majesty shifts the focus 
over from the king to the queen, and while the core 
gameplay is essentially unchanged from the first 
game, there’s a much different slant to the queen’s 
experience. Her Majesty expertly weaves its 
commentary on sexism and the patriarchy into the 
narrative while still providing fun along the way.

February 2018 • Macworld   89
ROUND-UP
6. Opus Magnum
Price: £15.49 from Steam (fave.co/2COxiOd)
Zachtronics’ games (like Shenzhen I/O and 
TIS-100) might not look like the most accessible 
puzzlers out there, but they are beloved by their 
fans. It’s also been hailed as the studio’s most 
ambitious, yet also most accessible game to date. 
Opus Magnum is a game about alchemy, and as 
a young alchemist, you’ll have to solve problems 
by creating machines to carry out the various 
processes. It has a bit of a programming feel, like 
other Zachtronic games, but the open-ended 
puzzle design means you may be able to trial-and-
error your way to a solution. However, creating an 
efficient solution will take plenty more fiddling and 
experimentation.

90   Macworld • February 2018
ROUND-UP
7. Finding Paradise
Price: £6.99 from Steam (fave.co/2CSWGCw)
Looking for a game that has the potential to get 
you all choked up? Finding Paradise might be 
your best bet – the trailer alone nearly brought a 
quiver to my lip. Like the earlier, much-loved To The 
Moon, it’s a game about doctors that help dying 
people mentally fulfil their unachieved wishes 
from life. It takes the form of an old-school, 16-
bit role-playing game, but what the game lacks in 
flashy visuals it seems to more than make up for 
with powerful moments and storytelling. Finding 
Paradise essentially repeats the premise from To 
The Moon, which you should play first (£6.99 from 
fave.co/2CDYiMQ), but player reviews suggest that 
it’s another amazing adventure.

February 2018 • Macworld   91
ROUND-UP
8. Tiny Metal
Price: £19.99 from Steam (fave.co/2CFRgHo)
Nintendo has an incredible stable of game 
franchises from over the years, but sometimes 
they’re left dormant for ages – and besides, 
they’re not coming to Mac anytime soon. Luckily, 
fans of Nintendo’s Advance Wars series have a 
new spiritual successor to check out: Tiny Metal, 
which is published by rival gaming giant Sony. It’s 
a visually enhanced, lightly tweaked take on the 
classic Advance Wars formula: a streamlined, turn-
based tactical strategy game in which opposing 
military forces attempt to defeat the other. Steam 
reviews suggest it’s rough around the edges 
especially with online play still in the works, but it 
could have a lot of upside for tactical combat fans.

92   Macworld • February 2018
ROUND-UP
9. Gang Beasts
Price: £14.99 from Steam (fave.co/2CDYc7P)
After a lengthy Early Access period, Gang Beasts 
has finally been released, and it looks hilarious. 
And I do mean looks: this is a game that appears 
to be just as much fun to watch as it is to play, as 
goofy-looking, Claymation-esque characters battle 
it out in raucous four-player skirmishes. It’s mainly 
a silly, anything-goes brawler, but Gang Beasts also 
bundles in a soccer mode and battles against waves 
of computer-controlled foes. And whatever mode 
you’re in, it’s hard to believe that anyone won’t 
crack a smile while playing.

February 2018 • Macworld   93
ROUND-UP
10. Riot – Civil Unrest
Price: £8.99 from Steam (fave.co/2CT6iwK)
As you might surmise from the title, Riot – Civil 
Unrest has the potential to be very controversial. 
It truly is a riot simulator, letting you jump into 
violent conflicts between angry demonstrators and 
police forces, with the game including historical 
skirmishes in locales such as Spain, Egypt, 
Oakland, Paris, and Italy. And you can play as 
either side in those scenarios. Riot’s creators claim 
they don’t take sides in presenting these playable 
recreations of extremely grim events, and you’ll 
have to decide just how sensitively it handles such 
things. However, it is an intriguing concoction, as 
you control an entire mob pressing for action or 
the police forces that try to limit the damage.

94   Macworld • February 2018
HOW TO
How to: Use GOG.com to 
play old games on a Mac
Whether you prefer 1980s gaming or cutting edge, GOG.com 
is a must if you’re a Mac gamer. Craig Grannell shows how
M
ac owners where’s the best place to find 
and buy new games, and they’ll likely 
suggest Steam – or perhaps the Mac 
App Store. But there are other digital distribution 
platforms of note, one of which is GOG.com.
A quick glance at the GOG.com website might 
make you question why you should pick it over 

February 2018 • Macworld   95
HOW-TO
Steam. Its entry page looks perfectly nice, but 
nothing out of the ordinary. And if you delve deep, 
you’ll soon find the catalogue is smaller than 
Steam’s. However, there’s good reason to consider 
GOG.com for at least some of your Mac gaming.
Why to buy from GOG.com
Perhaps the most obvious reason to check out 
GOG.com is shopping around. Like every other 
distributor, it has regular sales, and these often 
enable you to take advantage of big discounts. 
Unless you’re desperate to have all your game 
purchases under the same distribution umbrella, 
comparing prices across stores is a smart idea.
The second reason is its DRM-free nature. This 
means when you buy a game, you own it; there’s no 
activation and no online connection requirement. 
You can back up files you download, and install 
them on multiple Macs, if you like.
The final main reason to look at GOG.com is 
evident when you know its original name: Good Old 
Games. Although the site has since shifted focus, 
the service’s original goal was to get classic games 
into the hands of a modern audience. And, yes, 
we know you can install emulators on your Mac to 
run ancient titles, but GOG.com wanted to remove 
the hassle, and also ensure people who owned the 
rights to old games still got paid.
Get started 
If you’ve never visited GOG.com before, head to 
the site, click Sign In, and then Create Account.

96   Macworld • February 2018
HOW TO
You’ll need to choose a user name, add your 
email, and enter a password to secure your 
account. Once you’ve done all that, the site will 
bid you welcome, and suggest you buy a bunch of 
games, offering you deals that only stick around 
for 48 hours.
To manually check out what the site has to offer, 
go to Store > Browse all games. You can then filter 
the site’s collection to only Mac-compatible titles 
by clicking All games for Mac.
At the time of writing, there were over 2,000 
games to choose from - far more than you’d 
have any hope of playing in a single lifetime. 
Fortunately, GOG.com’s filters provide the 
means to quickly refine the selection further.

February 2018 • Macworld   97
HOW-TO
To do so, click any one of the menus and tick a 
checkbox. Hankering after cheap retro fare? Tick 
Release > Pre 2000 and Price > Under £4. Still 
after a bargain but not wedded to games from a 
particular era? Clear the Release filter by clicking 
the cross on its menu.
How to buy games 
It’s important to know whether a game you’re keen 
to buy will run on your Mac. Find your Mac’s specs 
by going to About This Mac in the Apple menu. On 
a GOG.com game’s page, system requirements are 
listed part-way down on the right-hand side, and 
newer games are usually more demanding.
Limbo (2011), for example, will run on pretty 
much any Intel Mac running macOS 10.9+. But 
Firewatch (2016) demands an Intel Core i5, and 
1GB of graphics RAM. The Witness (also 2016) has 
even higher demands, recommending a 2.4GHz 
processor, and a Mac capable of running Metal.
Once you’ve found a game you want to play, 
and that your Mac is capable of running, click 
the price (or ‘free’ badge) on a results list – or 
Add to cart on the game’s page – to add it to 
your shopping cart. Click the cart icon and Go 
to checkout to continue, and then Pay for your 
order now. If your cart’s only full of free games, 
they’ll now be sent to your account.
Otherwise, you’ll need to choose a means of 
payment, such as PayPal, a credit/debit card, or 
GOG.com Wallet. (The last of those is a fund you 
manually top up from another payment source. For 

98   Macworld • February 2018
HOW TO
many people, it won’t be worth consideration; but 
it’s handy to control a budget for yourself or a child. 
Also, added funds never expire.)
Be warned that GOG.com also sells soundtracks 
and add-ons for some games, and so always be 
sure of what you’re buying. You don’t want to buy 
what looks to be a gaming bargain, without reading 
the description, and find it’s just some music – even 
if it’s really good music!
Install purchases
Once you’ve gone through the checkout process, 
you’ll get an email notification, and the game will be 
ready to install from the account section of GOG.
com. Click your name on the GOG.com toolbar, and 
then Games. Click the game you’d like to install, 
and you’ll see what’s available.
To download a traditional installer, click the 
game’s title under the Classic game installers 
header. The installer will then be sent to your ~/
Downloads folder, and can be installed just like any 
other app. Note that because these games have 
been downloaded from the Internet, macOS will 
warn you when you first try to launch them.
It’s worth noting that many games offer 
related ‘goodies’, which are listed to the right 
of the installers list. Said goodies may include 
manuals and wallpapers. Some go further – retro 
platformer VVVVVV provides early prototypes 
you can play in a web browser. Each game’s 
downloads page also has a More button that’s 
worth investigating; click that to access links to 

February 2018 • Macworld   99
HOW-TO
the game’s store page and forum, the latter of which 
may come in handy if you get stuck.
Install and use GOG Galaxy
Another button conspicuously sits on every game’s 
downloads page: Try GOG Galaxy. Click that and 
you’re sent to the GOG Galaxy page, which is also 
accessible from About > GOG Galaxy. A large 
Download GOG Galaxy button then invitingly 
urges you to click it.
But what is GOG Galaxy, and why might it 
interest you? In short, it’s what GOG.com describes 
as an ‘optional client’ – a piece of software you can 
use to make your GOG experience a little easier 
and more convenient, but that you can at any point 

100   Macworld • February 2018
HOW TO
abandon if you don’t like it. If you do download and 
install GOG Galaxy, opening it reveals something 
almost identical to the GOG website, and where you 
can perform basically the same tasks – browsing 
the store, buying games, and so on. But the sidebar 
will also list titles you’ve installed using GOG 
Galaxy (note that it cannot magically detect any 
GOG games you’ve installed manually).
This games list can be searched, and clicking a 
game loads its page, presenting a big Play button, 
outlining your activity with the game to date, and 
providing access to other content (including the 
‘goodies’, forums, and support pages) by way of the 
More button. You can also just double-click a game 
in the sidebar to launch it, or right/Control-click it 
to rapidly access settings and support links.
GOG Galaxy itself also has settings, accessed 
by going to GOG Galaxy > Preferences. In General, 
you can decide whether the app launches on 
system start-up, and whether the starting page is 
the store or your games library. Other important 
options include automatic game updates in 
Features, installation and download folders in 
Downloads, and for what reasons the app will 
attempt to gain your attention in Notifications.
To reiterate, though, GOG Galaxy is entirely 
optional. Stop using it and you can still launch your 
games from /Applications. There’s no lock-in.
Four GOG.com classics to install on your Mac
Finally, given that we bigged up the retro side of 
GOG.com earlier, here are some old games you 

February 2018 • Macworld   101
HOW-TO
can buy that are still worth your time. Note you 
need a two-button mouse or joystick to get the 
most from them.
Star Wars: TIE Fighter Special Edition B
Price: £7.49 from fave.co/2CQKPVb
Be the bad guys in this seminal space shooter. 
Hugely ambitious for the time, and still playable 
(and really tough) today, this game finds you 
recruited to the Imperial Navy, tasked with saving 
Imperial lives and wiping out those pesky Rebels.

102   Macworld • February 2018
HOW TO
Sensible World of Soccer 96/97
Price: £4.59 from fave.co/2CT3zUf
SWOS is from a time before football games were 
trying very hard to look like what you see on the 
telly. Its fast-paced overhead footie almost recalls 
pinball at times, but it feels superb - like you 
imagine football to be in your head.
Cannon Fodder
Price: £4.59 from fave.co/2CSq0Je
Eager conscripts are hurled into the fray in this 
once hugely controversial arcade/stealth/shooter/
puzzler mash-up. The combination of tactics and 
reflexes remains intoxicating.
The only snag is this PC take lacks the superb 
audio from the Amiga original.
Populous
Price: £4.59 from fave.co/2CCQevL
This god simulator from way back in 1989 has you 
influence rather than directly control the tribe 
ambling about the planet’s surface. Mostly, this 
is achieved by raising and lowering the land, to 
help them build larger buildings. Once your tribe’s 
powerful enough, it can then duff up the opposition.

February 2018 • Macworld   103
OPINION
Apple off to a promising 
start with revamped iMac
Dan Moren believes the iMac Pro points to an exciting future
S
o, the iMac Pro is shipping. After many 
years’ worth of fretting, Apple once again 
has a pro-level desktop that boasts the 
modern technology. And all is right with the world.
But is it? There’s no disputing that the iMac 
Pro is a capable machine: with up to 18 cores, a 

104   Macworld • February 2018
OPINION
maximum of 128GB of RAM, and a hefty video card, 
the benchmarks indicate that this is a machine that 
can take everything you throw at it.
And yet it’s not Apple’s whole “pro” story. In an 
interview with select outlets back in April of this 
year, Apple executive Phil Schiller had multiple 
shoes to drop, including this morsel:
“With regards to the Mac Pro, we are in the process 
of what we call ‘completely rethinking the Mac Pro.’ 
We’re working on it. We have a team working hard 
on it right now, and we want to architect it so that 
we can keep it fresh with regular improvements, 
and we’re committed to making it our highest-end, 
high throughput desktop system, designed for our 
demanding pro customers.”
In other words, pro Mac users have a lot to look 
forward to in 2018 and beyond.
One size doesn’t fit all
Let’s just put it out there: Impressive as it is, the 
iMac Pro isn’t for everybody. In that same interview, 
Schiller called the iMac “our most popular desktop 
with pros,” though that’s a bit disingenuous if you 
consider that the Mac Pro, at that point, had not 
been updated in close to four years. The iMac, 
meanwhile, had rolled on to become better and 
better, so if you were looking to buy a pro-level 
desktop from Apple, you only really had one choice.
While the iMac Pro’s performance is hard to 
dispute, those who do take issue with the machine 

February 2018 • Macworld   105
OPINION
point to what they see as its major weakness: a 
lack of internal upgradeability and expandability. 
When you configure an iMac Pro for purchase, 
you’re mostly stuck with any decisions you make 
at the time. Nothing, including the RAM, is user-
upgradeable (at least not without voiding a 
warranty), continuing the trend that’s been well-
established across the Mac line over the past 
decade or so.
That’s where the hypothetical Mac Pro comes 
in again. Schiller has said that “it is, by definition, 
a modular system,” which seems like a response to 
the biggest criticism of that 2013 Mac Pro redesign. 
Apple tried to anticipate what pros wanted, merged 
The next Mac Pro 
probably won’t 
look like its tower 
predecessor, but it will 
be a modular system

106   Macworld • February 2018
OPINION
Third-generation 
iPod shuffle
it with the company’s own philosophy about the 
hardware that it built, and the result was pretty 
and impressive – but it kind of missed the mark 
for the intended audience.
It certainly seems like Apple’s not about to 
make the same mistake twice.
Pros, not cons
The fact that Apple has dedicated so much 
attention to pro-level customers – not just with 
the iMac Pro but the recent revisions of the 5K 
iMac, and the upcoming Mac Pro – should go a 
long way to assuaging the concerns of power 
users. After all, it seems clear the company does 
care about the professional market. But it’s 
this forthcoming modular Mac Pro that’s going 
to show us whether the company cares about 
listening to its customers. The 2013 Mac Pro 
is poised to be the third-generation iPod 
shuffle (the one with no buttons) – elegant, 
attractive, and an impressive achievement 
academically, but ultimately not at 
all what people wanted.
Don’t buy into the fallacy, though: 
not every power user is buying an 
iMac just because they can’t get 
a Pro. Some people seem to 
genuinely prefer the compact 

February 2018 • Macworld   107
OPINION
form factor, the simplicity and beauty of the built-in 
screen, and so on. It’s a mistake thinking all pros 
are cut from the same cloth.
But that goes both ways. Apple too has hopefully 
recognized that the iMac Pro and the cylindrical 
Mac Pro before it weren’t a panacea to the ails 
of Mac users clamouring for professional-level 
equipment. While the tide has certainly swept 
towards computers that are more appliance-like, 
with a minimum of moving parts and a lack of 
internal expansion, that’s not going to address the 
needs of all pros. Expansion and modularity are, 
for a segment of the population, mission critical.
That doesn’t mean we’ll get a return to the 
Mac Pro of yesteryear, the hefty cheese grater 
with plenty of space under the hood. I think it’s 
clear that Apple believes that form factor has 
sailed. With the upcoming Mac Pro, Apple has set 
itself a task that’s about delivering the expansion 
capabilities that a section of the pro market wants 
but staying true to the kind of hardware that the 
company would feel proud to deliver.

HOW TO

