THE WORLD’S BEST-SELLING APPLE MAGAZINE
HOW TO BLOCK ADS ON A MAC
DECEMBER 2017
FROM IDG
Apple’s best
ever handset
Apple TV  
4K
FULL 
REVIEW
macOS APPS
iPhone X: 
BEST FREE


December 2017 • Macworld   3
CONTENTS
NEWS
REVIEWS
ROUND-UP
HOW TO
FEATURES
Apple releases macOS 
10.13.1 High Sierra update       4
iOS 11.2 set to introduce raft 
of new features       6
Apple’s sales could top 
$90bn in its next quarter       9
iPhone X      12
Apple TV 4K    32
Adobe Photoshop Elements    42
 Best free macOS apps    82
Latest Mac Games    106
Block ads on a Mac in Safari and Chrome    117
Reinstall iTunes 12.6.3 on a Mac    124
Set up an iPhone X    52
iPhone X’s new touch 
gestures and commands    64
Guide to Animoji    68
Help Desk    74
12
4
82

4   Macworld • December 2017
NEWS
Apple releases macOS 
10.13.1 High Sierra update
Apple updates its desktop OS. Roman Loyola reports
A
pple has released an update to macOS 
High Sierra, the company’s operating 
system for Macs. According to the release 
notes, the macOS 10.13.1 update, “improves the 
security, stability, and reliability of your Mac, and 
is recommended for all users.” 
The update coincides with the release of iOS 
11.1. You’ll need both updates to take advantage 
of the 70 new emoji that are now available. 

December 2017 • Macworld   5
NEWS
According to Apple, the update also:
•  Fixes a bug where Bluetooth appeared as 
unavailable during Apple Pay transactions.
•  Improves the reliability of Microsoft 
Exchange message sync in Mail.
•  Fixes an issue where Spotlight does not 
accept keyboard input.
•  Improves the reliability of SMB printing.
•  Makes Touch ID preferences accessible while 
logged in as a mobile account on MacBook 
Pro with Touch Bar.
•  Adds support for unlocking a FileVault-encrypted 
APFS volume using a recovery keychain file. For 
details, enter man diskutil in Terminal.
Apple also released iTunes 12.7.1, which includes 
minor app and performance improvements.
How to install the update
First, make sure you have an Internet connection. 
Launch the App Store app (in the Applications 
folder) and click on Updates. You should see an 
entry for ‘macOS 10.13.1 Update 10.13.1’. Click 
on the Update button. The App Store app will 
download the update and begin the installation. 
You will need to restart your Mac.

6   Macworld • December 2017
NEWS
iOS 11.2 set to introduce 
raft of new features
iOS 11 is a huge update and a lot of its important features 
are coming in point releases, writes Jason Cross
i
OS 11 is the biggest change to Apple’s mobile 
operating system in years. It’s so ambitious in 
scope that many of it’s promised features still 
haven’t shipped yet. iOS 11.1 mostly fixed bugs 
and brought us a bunch of new emoji, so we’re 
hoping that 11.2 is more substantial. I mean, I 
love emoji as much as the next person but I really 

December 2017 • Macworld   7
NEWS
want Apple Pay Cash and Messages in iCloud. 
Here’s what we know about 11.2 so far. What’s 
in it, when it’s coming, and how you can grab 
the beta right now.
New features
The big stuff we’re all waiting on – Messages 
synced through iCloud and Apple Pay Cash – 
have made no appearance yet in the iOS 11.2 
betas. But there’s still time before release.
So far we’re only up to the first public beta, 
and the changes appear to be mostly small bug 
fixes and a little extra polish. Notably, Apple fixed 
a bug in the Calculator app where your input was 
waiting for long animations to play out (if you hit 
1+2+3 you’d get 24, because it didn’t register 
the second plus sign).
There are a number of small visual changes. 
Album art in the Command Centre is in a square 
icon, a few emojis have new art, there’s a new 
waiting animation for the Live Photo effects (loop, 
bounce, and long exposure), and you can access 
the same wallpapers that came with the iPhone 8 
and X on other iPhone models.
In terms of new features, the most prominent 
is the ability to control AirPlay 2 devices in Control 
Centre. You can switch between controlling 
multiple different playback destinations 
independently. This is important groundwork for 
the coming HomePod release, but it works with 
Apple TV (4th generation or 4K) right now if you 
update that device to the tvOS 11.2 beta as well.

8   Macworld • December 2017
NEWS
Release date
We don’t have an official release date for iOS 
11.2, but the release of another Apple product can 
help us narrow it down a little. iOS 11.2 appears 
to lay some important groundwork for HomePod, 
including controlling multiple AirPlay 2 devices in 
control Centre and the Music app. HomePod ships 
first in the UK, US, and Australia in December, so 
iOS 11.2 is going to have to be released before then.
Get the 11.2 public beta
If you want to try out the changes for yourself, 
you can help Apple test the latest iOS update. The 
first iOS 11.2 beta for developers was released on 
30 October, and the first public beta was made 
available on 1 November.
Once you log in to the Beta Software Program 
page, you’ll see a link to Enrol your iOS device. 
Apple will remind you to make a backup (you 
should definitely back up to iTunes, and Apple 
recommends you ‘archive’ the backup to make 
sure it’s saved), and then you’re instructed to go to 
beta.apple.com/profile on the iOS device that you 
want to put the beta on, in order to download and 
install a configuration profile. That will make the 
beta available as an over-the-air software update 
in the Settings app.

December 2017 • Macworld   9
NEWS
Apple’s sales could top 
$90bn in its next quarter
Company’s $52.6bn fourth quarter is nothing compared to 
what it expects to do next quarter, reports Michael Simon
I
t seems that the iPhone 8 isn’t selling as poorly 
as reported. In the quarter ending 30 September, 
Apple reported revenue of $52.6 billion, an 
increase of 12 percent from the year-ago quarter’s 
$46.9bn, and quarterly earnings per diluted share 
of $2.07, up 24 percent from $1.67 in 2016.

10   Macworld • December 2017
NEWS
Apple’s international sales were particularly 
strong, accounting for more than 60 percent of the 
quarter’s revenue. The all-important Greater China 
market was up 12 percent year over year.
Apple sold 46.7 million iPhones, 10.3 million 
iPads, and 5.4 million Macs during the quarter, all 
healthy increases over the prior year. The Mac and 
iPad units both saw double-digit increases in year-
over-year sales. Apple CFO Luca Maestri said sales 
of MacBook Pros drive Mac growth, while iPad sales 
were up more than 25 percent in China.
Perhaps more importantly, Apple’s guidance 
for the all-important holiday quarter is extremely 
strong, with a range of between $84bn and $87bn. 
That would set an all-time record that eclipses 
last year’s $78.4bn, which included an extra week 
of sales that won’t be included in the upcoming 
quarter. And keep in mind that Apple is extremely 
conservative with its guidance, so revenue could 
easily top $90bn.
The fourth quarter also represented Apple’s 
best for Services, which includes Apple Music, 
App Store sales, and Apple Pay. And its ‘Other’ 
category, which contains Apple Watch and Apple TV 
sales, was up more than 36 percent over the same 
quarter last year. In the earning call, Tim Cook said 
Apple Watch sales were up more than 50 percent 
for the third consecutive quarter.
Apple announced its earnings on the eve of 
the iPhone X launch, and its holiday guidance 
suggests it expects to sell a whole lot of the new 
handset. Supplies are extremely constrained, 

December 2017 • Macworld   11
NEWS
but Apple clearly expects that to alleviate as the 
holiday shopping season commences. Last year 
Apple sold 78.3 million iPhones, but the guidance 
here would likely mean iPhone sales top 80 million 
this holiday season. During the call, Cook vaguely 
said Apple “is going to get as many of them to 
customers as soon as possible”.
Additionally, he had this to say about Apple’s 
earnings: “With fantastic new products including 
iPhone 8 and iPhone 8 Plus, Apple Watch Series 3, 
and Apple TV 4K joining our product line-up, we’re 
looking forward to a great holiday season, and with 
the launch of iPhone X getting underway right now, 
we couldn’t be more excited as we begin to deliver 
our vision for the future with this stunning device.”

12   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
I
t’s 10 years since Steve Jobs unveiled the first 
iPhone and Apple has marked the occasion 
with a new handset that doesn’t just jump one 
generation, it jumps several. The firm has leaped 
straight from iPhone 7 (via the iPhone 8) all the 
Apple iPhone X
From £999 inc VAT from fave.co/2iyEGRo
RATING:

December 2017 • Macworld   13
REVIEW
way to iPhone X, bypassing the iPhone 7s and 
leapfrogging the iPhone 9 altogether.
Despite rumours of limited stock, thousands 
of people queued around blocks the world over to 
pick up the new handset, in scenes we haven’t seen 
for a few years. All Apple had to do to get so much 
attention was redesign the iPhone. That sounds 
easy, but the redesign involved the removal of the 
Home button, and to make that possible Apple had 
to rethink the way you interact with the phone.
Face ID
The iPhone X feature that’s received the most 
attention is Face ID, Apple’s technology for 
unlocking the iPhone X and authenticating your ID. 
It replaces Touch ID, Apple’s 
fingerprint technology that 
served the same purpose. 
Setting it up is easy. In 
a process similar to Touch 
ID, where the Home button 
records several impressions 
of your fingerprints, the 
you’ll need to move your 
head in different angles 
as the TrueDepth camera 
system records different 
spots on your face. It 
takes a few minutes, and 
then it’s ready to go.
Face ID only allows a 
single person to register 
Setting up Face ID is easy and 
takes a couple of minutes

14   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
their face. Touch ID lets you register different 
fingers; you can use this capacity to register the 
fingerprints of other people who you want to have 
access to your device. This is handy if you’re okay 
with, say, your other half having access to your 
iPhone. Maybe Face ID’s one-face limitation will 
change if Apple decides to use Face ID on the iPad, 
a device that’s more likely to have multiple users.
By default, Face ID requires your eyes to be open 
in order for it to work, But if you go into Settings 
> Face ID & Passcode and turn off the Require 
Attention for Face ID setting, Face ID will work 
when you have your eyes closed.
I had some concerns about Face ID because 
I’ve got so used to Touch ID, which feels like it has 
seamlessly integrated with how I use my iPhone. 
But for me, there was actually nothing to really be 
concerned about. Face ID 
is much closer to the idea 
of seamless integration 
than I imagined with 
Touch ID.
By default, Face ID 
requires your eyes to 
be open in order for it to 
work, But if you go into 
Settings > Face ID & 
Passcode and turn off the 
Require Attention for Face 
ID setting, Face ID will 
work when you have your 
eyes closed

December 2017 • Macworld   15
REVIEW
When it works, Face ID works really well. To 
access your iPhone X after it’s been sitting in your 
pocket, purse, bag, desk, and so on, you need to 
unlock it using Face ID. At first, I had a tendency to 
wait for the lock icon on the screen to unlock. But 
the key is to not wait. You should swipe up to get to 
the Home screen as you’re looking at the iPhone 
X. It takes some practice, but before too long, 
unlocking your phone will feel effortless.
I’ve had some conversations with Android 
users who have tried the iPhone X, and their main 
beef with Face ID is that it’s too slow compared 
to a fingerprint scanner. In their limited time with 
the iPhone X, they’re not 
accessing the Home screen 
in the manner I described 
above – and since they’re 
not invested in the iPhone, 
they’re not willing to learn, 
either. It’s still true that 
access to the Home screen 
using Face ID isn’t as fast as 
using a fingerprint scanner, 
but it’s maybe a second 
slower. If that one second 
is all the difference to you, 
then I hope you’re using 
that time wisely.
Using Face ID with some 
third-party apps is done in 
a manner similar to that of 
Touch ID. For example, with 
Third-party apps such as 
Dropbox have updated its 
apps with Face ID support

16   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
the app for my bank and with Dropbox, the login 
screen appears, and then a Face ID icon appears, 
and then the app unlocks. It’s really no different 
than how Touch ID was implemented in those two 
apps, this, it’s no more convenient.
Face ID has a certain viewing angle you need 
to be within to work, which is where I have a very 
minor issue with the technology. I try to keep my 
personal correspondence on my iPhone when I’m 
using my work laptop, and the iPhone X lays on my 
desk to the side. When I get a text, I can see it on 
the iPhone’s lock screen. On the iPhone 6s Plus, 
I use Touch ID to unlock my handset while it’s still 
at my side. But with the iPhone X, my face is out 
of range of the TrueDepth Camera. The solution 
to this minor issue: Move the iPhone X in a new 
location so it’s within range of my face. I have also 
found that Face ID works when the iPhone X is in 
my car mount, which is attached to an air vent to 
the right of the steering wheel.
Apple is very confident in Face ID’s security, 
stating that it’s much more secure that Touch ID. 
Many other publications have tried to see if they 
can trick Face ID, with their results matching what 
Apple has said, that twins can get by Face ID. Since 
I don’t have access to twins, I didn’t test this, but 
Face ID wasn’t fooled when I tried to have my two 
sons access the iPhone X.
Apple has said a lot about how it believes 
augmented reality is going to be a big deal, and 
we’ve seen AR apps, like Ikea, The Machines, and 
AR MeasureKit. There are even rumours of Apple 

December 2017 • Macworld   17
REVIEW
working on an AR wearable The TrueDepth camera 
will have a big role in AR, and Apple demonstrated 
how it can be used with its recent release of Clips 
2.0. Clips uses the TrueDepth camera so it can 
filter out background objects for its Selfie Scene 
feature, and the app can use you in the foreground 
for a virtual scene. Other than some issues with 
clipping your foreground image, the Selfie Scene 
implementation works quite well. Expect to see a lot 
of fun and innovative apps that use the TrueDepth 
camera coming soon in the App Store.
Display
The other feature that 
demands your attention is 
the iPhone X’s screen. It’s the 
first iPhone with an organic 
light-emitting diode (OLED) 
display. It’s also the biggest 
iPhone display, measuring 
5.8 inches diagonal.
I can’t emphasize enough 
how much I love the iPhone 
X’s screen. I can say it’s 
gorgeous, but that feels 
like an understatement. The 
colours are rich and pop, text 
looks clean and sharp, and 
the black is so deep that I 
actually find it mesmerizing. 
I’ve seen lots of screens that 
don’t look black – more like 

18   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
a 98 percent grey – and as stupid as it sounds, I 
like to gaze at the black gap on the second page 
of my Home screen. This is the best screen I’ve 
seen on an iPhone.
OLEDs are currently susceptible to burn-
in, the effect where you can see a shadow of an 
image when something else is on screen. This was 
evident in Google’s Pixel 2 phone, which also uses 
an OLED. Apple has even stated in a knowledge 
base article that burn-in on the iPhone X’s display 
is ‘expected behaviour’ and that the company has 
done what it can to minimize burn-in. I haven’t 
noticed it in the nearly two weeks since I’ve had 
the iPhone X, but it is something I’ll keep an eye 
on and will update this review accordingly should 
anything change.
When first using the iPhone X, I had to get over 
the false impression that the iPhone X’s screen 
is smaller than what I’m used to on the iPhone 6s 
Plus. Based on diagonal measurement, the iPhone 
X is bigger (5.8 inches) than the iPhone 6s Plus 
(5.5 inches, the same as the iPhone 7s Plus and the 
iPhone 8 Plus). The iPhone X’s screen is a slightly 
narrower, though, and noticeably taller. Overall, 
it’s a bigger screen.
But it’s not the screen that gave me the 
impression that the iPhone X’s is smaller. It’s the 
bezel on the Plus iPhones. The black border on 
the Plus iPhones, even though they aren’t part 
of the screen, unconsciously became part of the 
screen in my head. It took me a few days to clear 
this psychological hurdle (or optical illusion, if you 

December 2017 • Macworld   19
REVIEW
will). While showing the iPhone X to other people, 
some of them also were fooled into thinking that 
the iPhone X’s screen is smaller, so I think this 
could be a phenomenon experienced by many 
new iPhone X owners.
What didn’t take me long to get over was the 
notch. Yes, the notorious notch, the one that 
houses the TrueDepth camera system. I found it 
a distraction at first, but it was yet another head 
game I played on myself – what really bugged me 
wasn’t the actual notch, but that I feel like the notch 
goes against Apple’s design aesthetic. But I was 
able to realize that in typical use, I don’t notice 
The notch does get in the way when watching a full-screen video. You 
have the option of resizing the video so that the picture avoids the notch

20   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
the notch at all. Even with full-screen videos, the 
notch doesn’t bother me. (There is an option to 
resize videos so that the avoid the notch, but that 
means video is smaller than full-screen.)
Gestures
Apple had to come up with a new set of gestures 
to make up for the lack of a Home button on the 
iPhone X. I learned these new gestures quickly 
– you use them a lot, so if you need ‘practice’ for 
the muscle memory to kick it, you’ll get it.
We have a complete list of the new gestures 
you’ll need to learn. Most of them are simple, 
like swipe up from the bottom to get to the 
Home screen, or swipe down from the top of the 
display’s right side to get to Control Centre.
To use the Flashlight or Camera from the lock screen, you 
perform a hard press on each button, similar to a 3D Touch

December 2017 • Macworld   21
REVIEW
Speaking of the Control Centre swipe, it’s the 
one new gesture I don’t like – you really need to 
reach to the top of the screen area next to the 
notch, and this requires more effort than the 
previous Control Centre gesture (swipe up from 
the bottom of the screen, which works on the 
iPhone 8 and older iPhones).
The iPhone X’s lock screen has two quick 
access buttons, one for the flashlight, and another 
for the camera. They’re easy to get to at the bottom 
of the screen, but simply tapping each button 
doesn’t activate it. You need to do a hard press, 
like you do for 3D Touch. A hard press is necessary, 
because you don’t want these buttons activating 
while in your pocket, and these lock screen 
functions don’t require Face ID verification to work. 
But there’s nothing in the included documentation 
that tells you how to use these buttons.
People’s tolerances for UI vary, and I can see 
how someone would absolutely hate not having a 
Home button. If you’re one of those people, then 
the iPhone X is not for you. But keep in mind, 
the Home button is probably not in the iPhone’s 
long-term plans. It could be five or six years 
before we see Apple completely abandon the 
Home button, but it will happen eventually.
The cameras
The iPhone X’s rear camera has a 12Mp dual lens 
camera with a ƒ/1.8 wide-angle aperture, ƒ/2.4 
telephoto aperture, optical zoom, 10x digital zoom, 
and optical image stabilization on both lenses.

22   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
The pictures from the iPhone X are excellent, 
with vibrant colours and great sharpness. The 
iPhone X seems better at handling a wide array 
of lighting situations compared to other iPhones 
I’ve used in the past. As someone who has no skill 
at adjusting camera settings and prefers to rely 
on automatic settings, the iPhone X produces 
results that make me very happy. 
The camera feature that I really want is the 
optical image stabilization on both lenses. My 
lack of a steady hand (or my heavy-handedness 
with pushing the shutter) often results in jitter 
Shot with no flash at 1x zoom

December 2017 • Macworld   23
REVIEW
that creates blur, and I found that with the 
iPhone X, I had more good pictures than blurry, 
unacceptable ones.
The iPhone X comes with the new Portrait 
Lighting mode, a special camera mode that applies 
different lighting effects to portraits. (On the iPhone 
X, this feature is available on both the front and 
rear cameras.) The results you’ll get with Portrait 
Lighting are mixed. I found that the Natural Light 
setting worked the best, producing even results and 
nice bokeh. Contour Light and Studio Light seemed 
to create hot spots depending on the angle of your 
Landscape shot at night, no flash, 1x zoom

24   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
subject, but emphasized different detail elements to 
change the emotion of a picture.
Two of the Portrait Lighting modes, Stage Light 
and Stage Light Mono, are just…well, I’ll say that 
I’m not going to use them. The pictures I took using 
these settings – as well as a vast majority of the 
pictures I’ve seen from other people – look cheesy, 
and they’d be used as examples of bad image 
Portrait Lighting mode on the iPhone X can be hit or miss

December 2017 • Macworld   25
REVIEW
editing. Apple decided to label Portrait Lighting 
mode as beta, seemingly as an excuse for the 
mixed results, so let’s hope we see improvements 
in the near future.
The rear camera is capable of shooting 4K video 
at 24 frames per second, 30- or 60fps. Shooting 
4K video at 60 fps feels overindulgent, and if you 
have only 64GB of storage, it’s probably a setting 
you will seldom use. But gosh, it looks so buttery 
smooth and the detail is amazing. If you have a 4K 
TV and love shooting your own videos, 4K at 60 
fps is the reason why you need to get 256GB of 
storage. If you don’t want to shoot any kind of 4K 
video, you’ll be happy with the 1080p and 720p 
video from the iPhone X.
My favourite new feature of the video camera 
is the Super Slo-mo mode, which captures video 
at 240fps at 1080p resolution. It’s another space-
hogging camera mode, but it’s a lot of fun.
Speaking of fun, I have to mention the new 
Animoji, since they’re exclusive to the iPhone X (for 
now). Animoji uses the TrueDepth camera to sync 
your head and facial movements to an animated 
emoji. You’ve surely seen them all over the Internet, 
and it’s guaranteed to make you laugh. You can 
learn more in our Animoji guide on page 68.
Performance
The iPhone X sports Apple’s new A11 Bionic 
processor, a 64-bit six-core beast. It has a pair of 
performance cores that Apple says are 25 percent 
faster than its predecessor, the A10 Fusion. And 

26   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
Apple says the A11 Bionic’s four efficiency cores are 
70 percent faster. We used the Geekbench 4 app 
to get an idea of the speed of the A11 Bionic in the 
iPhone X.
Obviously, the A11 Bionic is faster than the A10 
Fusion, but what’s of note here – and not surprising 
– is that the iPhone X essentially performs the 
same as the iPhone 8. These two phones have the 
same processor, so if all you want in a new iPhone 
is faster performance and you could not care less 
about new features like Face ID or the cameras, 
get an iPhone 8 and save some serious cash.
Overall, the iPhone X feels like a snappy phone 
when launching apps, unlocking the phone, 
Geekbench 4 CPU test. Longer bars/higher scores are better

December 2017 • Macworld   27
REVIEW
playing videos (streaming and stored on the 
iPhone), and other tasks. When I tried doing simple 
video edits in iMovie, or when I created a short 
video in Clips, the iPhone X rolled along smoothly, 
though the higher the resolution of the video, the 
more performance was hit, but never to a point 
where I was left frustrated.
Battery life
Apple states the following stats for battery life:
•  Up to 21 hours talk time
•  Up to 12 hours internet use
•  Up to 13 hours wireless video playback
•  Up to 60 hours wireless audio playback
No one performs only a single task on their 
phone. When was the last time you spent a day 
using your iPhone just for phone calls? What’s 
important is whether or not you can get through a 
day on a single battery charge, using your phone for 
different tasks. And the more power you have left on 
your phone at the end of the day, the better.
The day I decided to keep a close eye on battery 
life was a particularly busy day for the iPhone X. I 
used the phone for email, texts, and a phone call of 
five minutes. I looked up a recipe on the internet, 
tracked my fantasy football team throughout the 
day, and got driving directions for a 30-minute 
trip. I shot 129 photos and nine short videos, and 
uploaded them via Wi-Fi to my Dropbox account. I 
watched a couple of steaming YouTube videos (one 

28   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
over Wi-Fi, the other over LTE) for a total of about 
30 minutes. And at the end of the day, I took my dog 
for a walk for over an hour, during with time I played 
Pokémon Go (which is a battery killer).
After all that, the iPhone X’s battery life was at 
52 percent – before I went on my Pokémon Go dog 
walk, the battery was at 68 percent. Typically, I’m 
not this busy with my phone, so I can get through 
a working day without worrying about charging the 
iPhone X. Of course, your mileage may vary.
Mostly glass design
With the 2017 iPhones, Apple decided to go back to 
a glass from and back. The main reason for this is so 
that the phone can support wireless charging. The 
iPhone X works with wireless chargers that adhere 
to the Qi standard.
The back of the iPhone X uses glass to allow for wireless charging

December 2017 • Macworld   29
REVIEW
I don’t have a wireless charger to work with the 
iPhone X, and frankly, I think wireless charging 
is overrated. Sure, it’s convenient; just place the 
iPhone X on the charging pad (if it’s in a non-metal 
case, you can keep it on), and that’s it, the pad does 
all the work and charges the phone. Of course, you 
have to place the iPhone X properly; if it’s slightly 
off to the side, it won’t charge. To me, it’s not that 
much of an effort to plug a Lightning cable into the 
iPhone X. And you have to pay extra for a wireless 
charger, whereas the iPhone X comes with a 5W 
adaptor and a Lightning cable. Finally, there’s no 
speed advantage (as of yet) to using a wireless 
charger. But hey, just because it’s not something 
I’m interested in doesn’t mean it’s not right for you. 
I just don’t see wireless charging as something you 
need to think about when deciding if you want to 
buy an iPhone X or not.
The glass construction feels nice in the hand, 
and on the silver iPhone X that I have, the silver 
steel frame between the two pieces of glass 
sparkles and dazzles – it looks so good that it’s a 
shame that I keep my iPhone X in a case. Because 
after all, glass, even as strong as the glass on 
the iPhone, still isn’t as strong as metal and can 
shatter after a fall.
The back of the iPhone X, like other iPhones, is 
still saddled with a camera bump. As I mentioned 
earlier, I often use my iPhone by my side when I’m 
on my work computer, and the phone can’t lay flat 
on its back, rocking in a teeter-totter motion when 
I tap on the screen. Fortunately, the case I use 

30   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
provides enough thickness to compensate for the 
camera bump and let the iPhone X lie flat. But it 
sure would be nice if the bump went away, either by 
advancements in camera technology, or by making 
the iPhone thicker (maybe add more battery?).
Macworld’s buying advice
As I mentioned in the introduction, 2017 marks 
the tenth anniversary of the iPhone. What I 
remember most about the first iPhone was the 
sense of astonishment. Sure, it had its flaws, but 
I felt like I was holding the future of computing in 
the palm of my hand.
However, with each new generation of iPhones 
introduced, I started to feel less and less like the 
iPhone was a harbinger of what’s to come. The 
new features felt more like incremental steps that 
helped solve a current problem than giant leaps 
that made you wonder what incomprehensible 
thing will be unleashed. That’s not to say that those 
iPhones were bad products; on the contrary, they 
were great. But they weren’t inspirational.
And now we have the iPhone X, and that sense 
of astonishment and inspiration is back, for me. 
That’s mostly because of the TrueDepth camera 
and the A11 Bionic – AR development could really 
take off, and it’s going to be fun to see what comes 
of it. Other features, like the spectacular quality of 
the OLED screen, the bigger screen in a smaller 
footprint, and the cameras, complete the package.
All of this comes at a price – the iPhone X is 
Apple’s most expensive phone. Is it worth it? If you 

December 2017 • Macworld   31
REVIEW
simple want a great tool for the job, you’ll probably 
be fine with the iPhone 8. But if you are a true 
iPhone fan, or you like the idea that the future is in 
your hand, you need the iPhone X. Roman Loyola
Specifications
•  5.8in (2436x1125, 458ppi) Super AMOLED display
•  iOS 11.0
•  Apple A11 Bionic processor
•  Hexa-core (2x Monsoon, 4x Mistral)
•  Apple GPU
•  3GB RAM
•  64/256GB storage
•  Dual 12Mp, f/1.8 and f/2.4, phase detection 
autofocus, OIS, 2x optical zoom, quad-LED flash
•  7Mp, f/2.2, 1080p at 30fps, 720p at 240fps, face 
detection, HDR, panorama
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO, QZSS
•  Wi-Fi 802.11ac
•  Bluetooth 5.0
•  NFC
•  Lightning Connector
•  IP67 certified
•  2,716mAh non-removable lithium-ion battery
•  143.6x70.9x7.7mm
•  174g

32   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
F
or a device that was at the forefront of the 
home streaming revolution, Apple TV has 
always been a bit behind the times. The first 
generation required a computer to stream content. 
Third-party app support didn’t arrive until the fourth 
generation. And it’s only the most recent model 
that embraces the most popular video standards.
It would be easy to dismiss Apple TV 4K as 
a me-too release. Had Apple TV 4K launched in 
2015, HDR10 and Dolby Vision would have been 
Apple TV 4K
From £179 inc VAT from fave.co/2iExGT5
RATING:

December 2017 • Macworld   33
REVIEW
pioneering features, but in 2017 they’re practically 
obligatory. Apple had no choice but to add 4K 
support just to ensure Apple TV isn’t completely 
overlooked by videophiles.
It’s late to the party, but it just so happens that 
Apple TV 4K doesn’t feel like an afterthought. 
It might not bring anything to the table that you 
don’t get with the far-less-expensive Chromecast 
Ultra, Roku Streaming Stick Plus, or Fire TV with 
4K Ultra HD, but Apple’s elegant simplicity, ease 
of use, and iTunes advantage are all on full display 
here. If you have a 4K television, this is the model 
you’ve been waiting for.
Still hip to be square
Other than the ability to play 2160p content, there’s 
not a whole lot that’s different about the new Apple 
TV. It’s dressed in black with the exact same cubic 
dimensions as the fourth-generation model. The 
only changes to speak of are a gigabit ethernet 
port (another overdue addition) and the removal of 
the USB diagnostic port.
A 10/100/1000 port is great for those who have a 
weak wireless connection but still want lag-free 4K 
streams. However, I suspect most developers (and 
this reviewer) will lament the loss of the USB port, 
if for no other reason than it was an easy way to 
record the screen and take screenshots.
Internally, the same 32GB and 64GB storage 
options remain but the processor has been 
upgraded to an A10x Fusion, the same silicon you’ll 
find in the iPad Pro. That’s three full generations 

34   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
ahead of the A8 chip in non-4K model – apps launch 
quicker, navigation is faster, and streams (even 4K 
ones) start nearly instantly. With the 4K content 
library ever expanding, the extra power will help.
Plug and play
Setup on Apple TV has always been one of its 
strongest suits, and the 4K model hasn’t changed 
that. Hooking it up is as simple as plugging it in and 
attaching it to your 4K TV via an HDMI 2.0 cable. 
Apple still doesn’t supply an HDMI cable in the 
box, and its £179 price tag would be a lot easier 
to swallow if it did.
Apple has utilized the 
same one-tap setup method 
it introduced with AirPods, 
and it’s just as magical here. 
Instead of using the Siri Remote 
to tediously type your lengthy 
iCloud as and Wi-Fi passwords, 
your Apple TV will automatically 
pull over all that information from 
your iPhone. As long as your 
phone is within range, a message 
will pop up on your screen that 
will quickly walk you through the 
authentication process.
After setup, however, the new 
Apple TV’s main input device is 
still the Siri remote, and if you 
hated it before, you’ll probably 
hate this one just as much. It’s 
If you have an iPhone 
nearby, setting up your 
new Apple TV is easy

December 2017 • Macworld   35
REVIEW
nearly identical, save one difference – there’s a 
white plastic ring around the menu button. While it 
seems like a passive aggressive move to appease 
the critics, it actually does make it a little easier 
to use in the dark by feeling for the menu button. 
But otherwise, the remote has the same minimal 
six-button functionality.
4K quality at HD prices
When you get to the home screen, the 4K difference 
is instantly noticeable. App icons are crisper and 
clearer than before, and the dark mode (which can 
now be set to change automatically) is particularly 
impressive. But all you’re going to want to do is 
find 4K content. Apple has kindly updated your 
iTunes collection with any available 4K titles, 
an great perk if you’re someone who has a large 
digital movie collection. This includes any movies 
that were purchased through the iTunes Store or 
digital copies that came with Blu-ray discs, so if you 
haven’t been dutifully entering them, dig them out.
Unfortunately, the Movies apps won’t break 
down your iTunes library by resolution, so you’ll 
need to go title by title to find out which ones have 
been updated. You can ask Siri for help, but it’ll only 
retrieve a small list of newly released 4K movies, 
not necessarily ones that are in your library. To 
see if a title can be streamed in 4K, navigate to a 
movie, click on it, and look at the resolution box 
next to the year of release.
Of note, Disney hasn’t agreed to the terms of 
Apple’s 4K updates, so any Pixar or Marvel flicks 

36   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
won’t get the 4K treatment. (Star Wars movies, 
too, but they aren’t available anywhere in 4K yet.) 
There are two notable Marvel exceptions, however: 
Deadpool and Spider-Man: Homecoming are 
distributed by Fox and Sony, so Disney doesn’t 
have control over them. 
While Apple TV certainly enough internal storage 
for several 4K movies, you can only stream 4K 
movies, not download them, so the strength of your 
connection will be a factor, as will any bandwidth 
caps imposed by your broadband provider.
The hunt for 4K content
Elsewhere, 4K content is pretty limited. You can 
find some titles in the Netflix app, but the Movies 
To check if a video is available in 4K, click on a title and 
look at the resolution icons next to the year of release

December 2017 • Macworld   37
REVIEW
Anywhere and Hulu apps only play in 1080p, and 
the Amazon Video player is still MIA. And Apple TV 
4K also doesn’t support YouTube’s 4K content.
However, most of the iTunes titles I tested were 
quite impressive. My television supports 4K but not 
HDR10 or Dolby Vision, but video quality is still way 
sharper than on my 1080p set. Newer movies such 
as John Wick 2 or The LEGO Batman Movie were 
simply stellar, with deep blacks and minimal motion 
blur, but older flicks weren’t as good. My copy of 
Goodfellas looked much better in 1080p, and the 
4K benefits on Blade Runner: The Final Cut were 
hit and miss.
Your Apple TV 4K will automatically detect your 
TV’s output capabilities as before, but you can 
This image doesn’t do them justice, but 
the 4K aerial screenshots are remarkable

38   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
change them by heading to the Audio and Video 
option inside the Settings app. From there, you’ll 
see a TV Resolution menu that will let you switch 
back to 1080p. You can’t select which version of a 
stream you want to play, so for some movies you’ll 
want to revert to HD.
One thing that’s consistently stellar on the 4K 
Apple TV are the aerial screen savers. There aren’t 
any new ones, but it’s like you’re looking at them 
for the first time. Every video has been updated 
and optimized for 4K, and quite honestly, they 
might be reason enough to plunk down £179 on 
a new box. Seriously, they’re that good.
The best OS gets even better
Above all, Apple’s main Apple TV advantage 
is tvOS. The interface is leaps and bounds 
above Roku’s and Amazon’s, and far superior to 
Chromecast’s beam-and-stream method. Even with 
the Siri remote, it’s a joy to use.
tvOS 11 doesn’t bring too many changes to 
Apple TV 4K, but there are a couple of notable 
improvements. My favourite is Home Screen Sync, 
which uses your iCloud account to keep your apps 
in order across your various Apple TVs. This is a 
feature that seems tailor-made for Apple TV 4K, 
since most people will be shuffling older models off 
to older TVs (at least that’s the case in my house).
Apple has also made it easier to connect 
AirPods. Apple’s wireless earbuds will automatically 
show as a speaker when in Bluetooth range, 
bringing the one-tap pairing from iOS to tvOS. 

December 2017 • Macworld   39
REVIEW
tvOS 11 also brings AirPlay 2 support, which lets 
you stream audio to multiple rooms and speakers, 
but the feature isn’t available yet. Neither are the 
new live news and sports tab for the TV app.
A few steps from perfect
Apple TV 4K is awfully close to being an iTunes 
fan’s dream cutting-edge home cinema streamer, 
but it’s missing one key component. Apple TV 4K 
supports the same Dolby Digital Plus 7.1 surround 
sound as the non-4K Apple TV, which means it 
won’t sound quite as good as some of its peers.
That’s because it doesn’t support Dolby Atmos, 
the latest in 3D sound tech. Granted, you’ll need 
a system that supports it and the vast majority of 
listeners won’t be able to tell the difference even 
Siri on Apple TV will show you 4K content, but it 
won’t let you know which ones are in your library

40   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
if they do, but if you’re spending £179 on a 4K 
streaming box, you’d expect it to check off every 
box. Apple told The Verge that it will be adding 
support in a future update, but that doesn’t make 
it any less of an unfortunate limitation, especially 
since Roku’s Streaming Stick Plus and Amazon’s 
Fire TV with 4K Ultra HD both support it.
Siri is also something of a disappointment. 
It’s not all that much smarter than it was before. 
For example, if you ask to see 4K movies in your 
iTunes library, it will take you to the Movies app but 
won’t suggest any titles. And while you can use 
your Echo to control Fire TV or your Google Home 
to send videos to Chromecast, Siri is still mostly 
a navigation tool on Apple TV 4K, accessible via 
the bundled remote or the iOS app. It’s possible 
that HomePod changes that when it arrives in 
December, but Apple hasn’t tipped us off to that 
level of functionality. It would be nice to say, “Hey 
Siri, put on the Warriors game,” some day, but 
that may have to wait until the next revision.
Macworld’s buying advice
Before you buy one, ask these three questions:
•  Do I have a 4K television?
•  Do I have a large iTunes collection?
•  Do I mind paying a premium for interface design 
and ease of use?
If your answers are yes, yes, no, then Apple TV 
4K is just right for your living room. There may be 

December 2017 • Macworld   41
REVIEW
other digital media players that can match Apple TV 
4K can when it comes to picture quality and even 
beat it with sound, but none of them can rival the 
experience it delivers. From the ease of setup to 
the interface, Apple TV offers an unrivalled system 
that never needs an ounce of troubleshooting or 
a restart. Even if you just use it to look at screen 
savers all day. Michael Simon
Specifications
•  tvOS 11
•  A10X Fusion chip with 64-bit architecture
•  32/64GB
•  HDMI 2.0a3
•  802.11ac Wi-Fi with MIMO
•  Gigabit Ethernet
•  Bluetooth 5.0 wireless technology
•  IR receiver
•  Siri Remote
•  98x98x32mm
•  425g

42   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
P
hotoshop Elements 2018, Adobe’s consumer 
photo editor, concentrates on giving its 
targeted family-oriented users new ways to 
jazz up mundane snaps for sharing with friends, 
family, and social media pals. It features a flurry of 
new guided edits, an easy-to-use selection tool, 
and improved integration of its Adobe Sensei AI 
and machine learning framework.
Adobe Photoshop 
Elements 2018
From £86 inc VAT from tinyurl.com/y9e8gxj5
RATING:

December 2017 • Macworld   43
REVIEW
Photoshop Elements 2018 also introduces a 
convenient new naming convention for its annual 
updates, substituting old-fashioned sequential 
version numbers with the upcoming year.
Organizer app
Like Photoshop’s Bridge, the Elements Organizer 
helper app that ships with both Photoshop 
Elements and the Premiere Elements video editor, 
provides the bedrock for locating, selecting, 
and searching your photo collection for the best 
shots to edit, share, create an artwork or build a 
slideshow. The Organizer gets a significant refresh.
Auto Curate lets you use a 
slider to choose how many of 
your best shots you want to see

44   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
This year’s Organizer debuts Auto Curate, an 
AI-derived feature that analyses photos for quality 
parameters like composition, exposure, and faces, 
choosing just a small fraction among thousands of 
images. A slider lets you dictate how many photos 
you want to include in the results. The app’s Smart 
Tag feature, introduced last year, helps Auto Curate 
identify image content. I found the results hit or 
miss, as some overexposed and underexposed 
photos were included among the best results.
Slideshow tool
Ease of use is the hallmark of the revamped 
Slideshow tool, which works in concert with Auto 
Curate to automatically select the best shots, 
Auto Curate is the brains behind 
the images chosen for slideshows

December 2017 • Macworld   45
REVIEW
Choose from a modest selection of themes
Generic royalty-free music is included

46   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
letting you choose from among several built-
in animated themes and soundtracks. You can 
customize slideshows with your own soundtracks 
from iTunes, add captions to the images, 
rearrange slide order, or import additional images 
and videos. It takes just a few clicks and a few 
minutes to pump out a sharable slideshow.
Auto Select
For amateurs and pros alike, selecting objects 
or people and separating out foregrounds from 
backgrounds, evokes major time-sucking anxiety. 
With the new Auto Select feature, all you have to do 
is draw a box or Ellipse around a subject, and the 
tool immediately recognizes the foreground and the 
background for a surprisingly accurate selection.
Auto Select makes quick work of complex selections, 
though many will still need some tweaking

December 2017 • Macworld   47
REVIEW
Of course, Auto Select may not get every 
last bit correct the first time, but you can add 
or subtract from the selection until you are 
satisfied with the result. From there, you can 
switch out the background for the object, 
person, or animal you have selected or use it 
for a different composition or slideshow.
Open Closed Eyes
This AI-inspired fix can substitute open eyes for 
closed ones in a given portrait, letting you use eyes 
from a different shot of the same person. Subbing 
eyes can be tricky because lighting and skin colour 
should be roughly similar for results to look really 
natural. Oddly, this tool also lets you substitute 
eyes from different people – but that’s creepy.

48   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
New guided edits
Photoshop Elements 2018 features several new 
guided edits – Watercolour, Swap Backgrounds, 
Shape Overlay, and Double Exposure – which, 
aided by the new Auto Selection tool, add useful 
effects to the Elements arsenal of cool photo 
moves. On the whole, though, this new crop is less 
inspired and original than some in the past. That’s 
partly because any number of consumer programs, 
mobile apps, and online resources feature tools 
that let you do most of these things.
No support for HEIF
With iOS 11, owners of iPhone 7 and later now 
save photos in HEIF (High Efficiency Image File) 
Elements can substitute open eyes for closed eyes, 
naturally integrating open eyes from a second photo

December 2017 • Macworld   49
REVIEW
Swap background takes this little 
dog off the street and to the beach

50   Macworld • December 2017
REVIEW
format, rather than the traditional JPEG. This new 
image container offers higher quality and better 
compression for high resolution images or image 
sequences so you can shoot without maxing 
out your device storage. The new macOS High 
Sierra works with this format in Apple Photos and 
other native apps.
Photoshop Elements 2018 does not support 
HEIF as yet, and the company advises iPhone 
shooters to continue shooting traditional 
JPEGs by setting Camera app preferences to 
Most Compatible rather than High Efficiency.
Macworld’s buying advice
Photoshop Elements 2018 builds on a solid 
foundation of consumer photo editing that lets 
anyone achieve advanced photographic special 
effects without being a photo jockey, and its 
increasingly integrated use of AI and machine 
learning are timesavers for busy households that 
want to quickly share images and slideshows.
The 2018 version also augments Elements’ 
established and growing complement of guided 
edits to help families create a memorable catalogue 
of their lives. I have no specific complaints about 
how these new guided edits worked, but I found this 
year’s admittedly useful entries more utilitarian and 
somewhat less imaginative and inspiring than in the 
past. Some minor stability problems arose while 
testing the Organizer with the new macOS High 
Sierra, but the intermittent freezing and crashing 
seemed to dissipate after repeated use.

December 2017 • Macworld   51
REVIEW
If you were satisfied 
with last year’s version of 
Photoshop Elements, and 
have not been driven half-
mad by family members 
who can’t keep their eyes 
open long enough to beat 
the shutter, you might 
be tempted to skip this 
version. However, despite 
some initial flaws in the 
Auto Curate feature, 
this is a potentially vast 
time saver for those with 
thousands of images 
and its assistance in 
creating quick, sharable 
slideshows, is definitely worth a second look, while 
Auto Select is worth the price alone. Jackie Dove
System requirements
•  64-bit multi-core Intel processor
•  macOS X 10.11 or later
•  4GB of RAM
•  5GB of available hard-disk space to install 
applications; additional 2GB to download all 
optional content
•  1280x800 display resolution (at 100 percent 
scale factor)
•  DVD-ROM drive (for installation from DVD)
•  Internet connection required for product 
activation and content download

52   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
Set up an iPhone X
Before you even peel the plastic off your new iPhone X, read 
Jason Cross’s guide to setting up Apple’s latest handset
S
o that £1,000+ sticker shock didn’t put you 
off from buying the phone that Apple calls 
“the future”, did it? We don’t blame you – 
we bought the iPhone X, too. I know you want to 
dive right in the moment you get the box in your 
hands, but wait up. We have a little setup advice 

December 2017 • Macworld   53
FEATURE
you’re going to want to pay attention to. Sure, it 
seems like a drag right now, but this stuff is going 
to save you time and frustration later.
1. Back up and restore
That’s right, you’re going to want to back up your 
old iPhone after you have your new iPhone X in 
hand, so the backup is as up to date as it can 
possibly be. You can back up via iCloud or iTunes:
For an iTunes backup: Connect your old iPhone 
to your Mac, launch iTunes, select your iPhone by 
clicking the little phone icon in the toolbar, and 
under Backups, choose This Computer. Checking 
Encrypt local backup is a good idea, so your 
account passwords and Health data gets backed 
up too – just choose a password you won’t forget. 
Click the button to Back up now.
When the backup is done, connect your new 
iPhone X, then tell iTunes you want to restore from 
the backup you just made. Or, skip down to our 

54   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
second tip below and use Quick Start. Later, you 
can switch back to iCloud backups if you prefer, in 
Settings > iCloud > Backup. But it never hurts to 
run a backup on your own Mac every now and then. 
For an iCloud backup: No need to connect your 
iPhone to your Mac. Just launch Settings and tap 
on your Apple ID profile listing at the top, then go 
to iCloud > iCloud Backup and select Back up now. 
When setting up your new iPhone X, you can restore 
your iPhone from this backup once you’ve logged 
into your new device with your Apple ID.
If you happen to be coming from an Android 
phone there’s a Move from 
iOS Android app that can 
assist you with setting up your 
Google account data in Mail, 
Calendars, and Contacts, moving 
your camera roll over, even 
transferring your Chrome 
bookmarks to Safari.
2. Update your old iPhone and 
use Quick Start
iOS 11 introduces a great feature 
called Quick Start. It’s sort of like 
magic. You just hold your new 
phone next to your old phone, 
and a little card pops up asking 
if you want to transfer all your 
stuff to the new device. You’ll then
point your old phone’s camera 
Setting up a new iPhone 
is easy with Quick Start

December 2017 • Macworld   55
FEATURE
at your new phone (which displays a cloud of little 
dots) and enter your old phone’s six-digit passcode. 
You’ll go through the rest of the setup process, 
like enabling Face ID, and then your phone will 
be ready to go, set up just like your old iPhone. 
It’ll even prompt you to update your old iPhone’s 
backup if it hasn’t been backed up in awhile. 
Setting up your phone this way transfers over 
most of your settings, the arrangement of your 
home screen, and more. It does, however, require 
iOS 11, so if you haven’t updated your old phone to 
iOS 11 for some reason, you’ll want to do that ASAP. 
You don’t want to have to wait through a big update 
process once you have your iPhone X in hand.
After setting up your phone this way, you’ll want 
to give it a few minutes to re-download all your 
apps. Initially, your phone will show placeholders 
for your apps, all arranged and stuffed into folders 
exactly as on your old iPhone. But every time 
you download an app from the App Store, your 
phone actually grabs a unique version specifically 
optimized for that iPhone model. So your new 
phone has to download the apps again, but your 
user data and settings get transferred over.
3. Set up Face ID and Apple Pay
Yes, you should use Face ID for maximum security 
– it’s the quickest way to unlock your iPhone X, 
and will let you set a more complicated passcode, 
since you don’t have to type it in every time. Setting 
up Face ID is much faster than Touch ID, too – the 
setup screen will prompt you and ask you to slowly 

56   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
look around in a circle a couple times. It’s a lot 
quicker than tapping the home button dozens of 
times to register a fingerprint.
Worried about your privacy with Face ID? Don’t. 
No photos of your face nor any other biometric 
data ever leave your phone. And it isn’t accessible 
by other apps, just as other apps weren’t able to 
access your fingerprints with Touch ID. .
Since you need to have Face ID enabled in order 
to use Apple Pay, this would be a good time to jump 
into Apple’s Wallet app to set that up. If you’re new 
to Apple Pay, just follow the instructions within 
Wallet to add a credit card. If you already had Apple 
Pay on your old iPhone, you’ll notice that your 
credit cards have disappeared on your new iPhone. 
Why? For your security, of course. Your Wallet 
history will still be there, but you’ll have to re-enter 
any payment cards you’d like to use with Apple Pay. 
4. Update your apps
Great, now you should be on your home screen 
at last. Go to the App Store first – you’ll want the 
latest versions of all of your apps in order to take 
advantage of all the new abilities Apple has given 
developers in iOS 11. If you’ve used Quick Setup, 
most of your apps should be up to date already.
While you’re there, check out the App Store’s 
new iOS 11 redesign. You’ll find collections of cool 
apps curated in magazine-style articles, interviews 
with up and coming app developers, game trailers, 
and more goodies over in the Today section. This 
changes daily, so you can come back tomorrow to 

December 2017 • Macworld   57
FEATURE
see what else is new. Don’t forget you can have your 
apps auto-update by flipping the Updates switch 
in Settings > iTunes & App Stores. Or, you can 
manually update your apps and just check out the 
‘What’s New’ release notes to see what changed. 
5. Pair your Apple Watch
If you use an Apple Watch you’ll need to pair it to 
your new iPhone to keep the Activity data flowing to 
your Health database, and keep your new phone’s 
This is the new App Store on an iPad. You 
get these app packages on the iPhone, too

58   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
notifications flowing to your watch. First you have 
to unpair your watch from your old iPhone, either in 
the Apple Watch app on your old iPhone (tap your 
watch, then the ‘i’ icon, then Unpair Apple Watch, 
then enter your iCloud password when prompted), 
or on the watch itself (Settings > General > Reset).
Then, launch the Apple Watch app on your new 
iPhone X, which will walk you through the pairing 
process including setting a passcode, unlocking 
behaviour, and Apple Pay.
If your Apple Watch isn’t already running 
watchOS 4, you’ll want to update it. To upgrade, 
your Apple Watch needs to be connected to its 
charger, in range of your iPhone, and at least 50 
percent charged. Then look for the Software Update 
option in the Apple Watch app. Upgrade your watch 
all the way to watchOS 4.1, which adds awesome 

December 2017 • Macworld   59
FEATURE
new music features for Series 3 watches and 
important security updates for everyone.
6. Learn the new gestures and commands
Where the Home button used to be, you now have 
an extra half-inch or so of glorious OLED display. 
So how do you do everything you used to use the 
home button for? How does the app switching 
work? Or taking a screenshot? Here are a few 
basic commands you’ll need to re-learn now that 
your iPhone is ‘home free’.
Return Home: Just swipe up from the bottom of 
the screen. 
Jump between apps: Swipe left or right along 
the bottom edge of the phone to jump back and 
forth between apps. You can sort of ‘flick’ from the 
bottom corners, moving your finger up and over, 
to ‘bounce’ between the apps, or just slide directly 
side-to-side along the bottom edge.
App switcher: Swipe up from the bottom edge and 
pause for a second with your finger still on the 
display. App cards will quickly pop up, and you can 
lift your finger off and swipe around through them.
Close an app: If you need to kill an app from the 
app switcher, you do it a little differently. On the 
iPhone X, you press and hold on the cards until 
red (-) symbols appear in the corners. Tap those 
to close the apps. 

60   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
Take a screenshot: Press the side button and the 
volume up button at the same time.
There are lots of other new commands and 
gestures to learn. See our guide on page 64.
7. Try out Portrait Lighting
The iPhone 8 and X support a 
brand new camera technology 
called Portrait Lighting. Just 
launch the Camera app and 
select Portrait from your camera 
modes at the bottom of the 
screen, and then swipe through 
the different lighting options at 
the bottom. On the iPhone 8, 
portrait mode is only available 
on the back cameras. But on the 
X, the front-facing selfie camera 
can use it, too.
The iPhone X has most of 
the same camera improvements 
as the iPhone 8 Plus – better 
low-light performance, more 
accurate colour, and up to 4K 
60fps video. But the iPhone 
X has optical image stabilization (OIS) on both 
the regular and the telephoto rear cameras.
8. Customize your Control Centre
Control Centre is one of the biggest changes in 
iOS 11. Instead of spreading your utilities out over 
Portrait Lighting will take 
your iPhone X portrait 
shots to the next level

December 2017 • Macworld   61
FEATURE
three sliding pages, Apple condensed them into 
one screen with a uniform-looking set of icons. On 
the iPhone X, you access Control Centre by swiping 
down from the top of the screen, to the right of 
the sensor notch. Apple’s default Control Centre 
utilities include your camera, flashlight, calculator, 
and alarm clock; you’ll also find two sliding controls 
for your volume and screen brightness, plus toggles 
for rotation screen lock, Do Not Disturb, screen 
mirroring, and all of your wireless controls. This is 
also where you’ll find your iPhone X’s remaining 
battery life percentage, since it can’t fit on the 
screen anymore (thanks, Face ID notch). 
One of the best parts about iOS 10’s Control 
Centre was the full page of controls just for audio 
iOS 11’s Control Centre is customizable (the default configuration is at 
far right). Individual items can be expanded to reveal additional controls

62   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
playback, like when you’re listening to a podcast 
or streaming from Apple Music. In iOS 11, your 
audio controls are condensed into a small box 
featuring just a play/pause button and some skip 
controls. However, if you 3D Touch on the audio 
control box, it will expand and reveal a full suite of 
options for better control.
In fact, several of your Control Centre utilities 
have hidden 3D Touch features – just long-press 
on any control to expand it. A light tap will turn 
that feature on or off, but a longer 3D Touch 
gesture will expand it some more.
There are a boatload of other features you can 
add to your Control Centre panel, too – head on 
over to Settings > Control Centre > Customize 
Controls, and add any feature that sounds 
interesting. Looking for something new? Check 
out Do Not Disturb While Driving, a feature that 
automatically enables Do Not Disturb once your 
iPhone detects that you’re in a moving vehicle, 
and Screen Recording, which lets you record 
what’s on your iPhone’s screen and then share it.
9. Charge it up
There’s a reason your new iPhone X has that shiny 
glass back, and that’s not because it’s a throwback 
to the iPhone 4. No, that glass back is for wireless 
charging support. To use this feature, you’ll need a 
compatible wireless charging pad that utilizes the 
Qi standard. If you have one of those laying around, 
all you have to do is set your iPhone onto the pad 
and watch it start to power up. Say goodbye to the 

December 2017 • Macworld   63
FEATURE
jumble of Lightning cables on your bedside table. Of 
course, you can charge your iPhone X via Lightning 
if you want to. In fact, this is still the fastest way 
to charge your phone, provided you use the right 
adaptor and cable.
The iPhone 8 and X support fast charging using 
the USB-C Power Delivery (USB-PD) standard. You 
can use Apple’s own 29W USB-C power adaptor, or 
the USB-C power adaptor for a modern MacBook 
Pro. But third-party USB-C power adaptors should 
work as well, as long as they support the USB-PD 
standard. You’ll need to buy a Lightning-to-USB-C 
cable and a new adaptor, because you’ll only find 
that same old slow 5W adaptor and a USB-A 
lightning cable inside your iPhone X box.
10. Send Animoji to your friends 
I know it’s silly, but the best way to brag about 
your new Future Phone is to send someone an 
iMessage that shows the Fox Emoji perfectly lip-
synced and following your facial expressions as 
you sing Bohemian Rhapsody. First, make sure you 
have an Internet connection. Launch the App
Store app (in the Applications 
folder) and click on Updates. 
You should see an entry for 
‘macOS 10.13.1 Update 10.13.1’. 
Click on the Update button. The 
App Store app will download 
the update and begin the 
installation. You will need to 
restart your Mac.

64   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
iPhone X’s new touch 
gestures and commands
Now there’s no Home button, Jason Cross reveals what to do
T
he Home button has been the one constant 
on the iPhone over the past decade. From 
day one, you would press the Home button 
to return to the home screen. As Apple added 
features to the iPhone, the Home button took on 
more capabilities.
But it’s time for a new era, one that kicks the 
home button to the curb. With the iPhone X, 
Apple pushes the display right up to very edge 

December 2017 • Macworld   65
FEATURE
of the phone and eliminates the Home button. If 
Apple says the iPhone X is “the future”, the Home 
button is ancient history.
How do you even use an iPhone without a Home 
button? Here’s a quick guide to all the new gestures 
and button combinations you’ll need to relearn as 
you acquaint yourself with the iPhone X.
Return Home: Let’s start with that most basic 
of Home button features: returning to the home 
screen – swipe up from the bottom of the screen. 
Wake it up: You can still raise the phone to wake it 
like you can on other modern iPhones, or tap the 
side button. But the iPhone X also supports tap-to-
wake. Just tap the display to wake it up.
Jump between apps: Swipe left or right along 
the bottom edge of the phone to jump back and 
forth between apps. You can sort of ‘flick’ from 
the bottom corners, moving your finger up and 
over, to ‘bounce’ between the apps, or just slide 
directly side-to-side along the bottom edge.
App switcher: Want to see all your running apps? 
Swipe up from the bottom edge and pause for a 
second with your finger still on the display. App 
cards will quickly pop up, and you can lift your 
finger off and swipe around through them.
Close an app: You shouldn’t have to do this often, 
but if you need to kill an app from the app switcher, 

66   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
you do it a little different. On other iPhones, you 
swipe up on the app card. On the iPhone X, you 
press and hold on the cards until a red (-) symbol 
appears in the corners. Tap those to close the 
apps. It’s very similar to the way you delete apps 
from your home screen.
Take a screenshot: Simply press the side button 
and the volume up button at the same time.
Reachability: This isn’t enabled by default on the 
iPhone X. You’ll have to go to into Settings to turn it 
on. Once you do, swipe down from the bottom edge 
of the screen – the little dark bar that indicates 
where the gesture area is. Your entire display will 
shift downward so you can reach the 
top of your apps more easily.
Notifications: With the iPhone X, 
there are two ‘swipe from the top 
of the screen’ gestures, so swipe 
from the left side of the sensor 
notch to get to your notifications.
Control Centre: With the bottom 
of the screen consumed with 
other home gestures, the control 
Centre swipe has moved to the 
top of the screen. Just swipe from 
the right side of the sensor notch. 
The right ‘horn’, if you will. The 
left side is Notifications.

December 2017 • Macworld   67
FEATURE
Invoke Siri: Press and hold the side button. You 
can still use your voice by saying, “Hey, Siri!”
Apple Pay: Tap the side button twice. You’ll have 
to authenticate the purchase with either Face ID or 
your passcode. You’ll notice that with Siri and Apple 
Pay, you just use the side button as you used to use 
the Home button, so it should be pretty familiar.
Power off and SOS: To get the power off slider and 
SOS button, press and hold the side button and 
either volume button for a few seconds.
Force reset: Quickly tap the volume up button, 
then the volume down button, then press and 
hold the side button.
Accessibility: If you’ve turned on the Accessibility 
Shortcut feature in Settings > General > 
Accessibility, you invoke it by triple-pressing the 
side button.
Generally, most of the gestures that have you 
swiping from the edge of the screen don’t require 
a lot of precision. Apple indicates the bottom 
‘gesture area’ with a horizontal bar. Some apps 
have their own screen-edge gestures. If you’re 
using an app that has a screen-edge gesture the 
same as a general iPhone X command, just repeat 
it. The first swipe should perform the game’s 
command, but the second swipe should perform 
the iOS system command.

68   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
Guide to Animoji
Want to record Animoji Karaoke? Jason Cross shows how
A
talking fox. A pig doing stand-up. A singing 
pile of poo. A robot reciting slam poetry. 
You’re going to see all these things and 
more all over your iMessages and social media 
feeds in the coming months. They’re called ‘Animoji’ 
and they’re Apple’s frivolous, fun, and downright 
addictive way to show off the capabilities of the 
TrueDepth camera in the  iPhone X.
If you want to know how they work and what you 
can do with them, read on. Once you learn a few 

December 2017 • Macworld   69
FEATURE
tricks, they’re a lot more flexible and fun than just 
sending an iMessage to your friend as a talking pig.
What are Animoji?
The word Animoji is a portmanteau of ‘animated’ 
and ‘emoji’, and that’s exactly what these are. It’s 
a feature exclusive to the iPhone X that uses the 
front-facing TrueDepth camera to scan your face 
and make an emoji follow your facial expressions 
and mouth position. When you talk, or squint, or 
shake your head, the Animoji will do the same thing. 
Animoji and Face ID data
No. No apps can use your Face ID data. The 
operating system doesn’t even have access to 
it. It’s locked away in the Secure Enclave on your 
iPhone, and is never sent to Apple nor shared 
with any apps at all. Developers do, however, 
have access to the TrueDepth camera through the 
ARKit interface, which takes the regular front-
facing camera input and combines it with a course 
3D mesh of your face. They can’t use this info to 
unlock your phone, or analyse it to produce a set 
of data that could unlock your phone. In practice, 
it’s not really more dangerous than taking a selfie. 
In other words, Animoji (and other apps) use 
the same hardware as Face ID, but Face ID is a 
different, totally separate set of data.
Where to find them
Animoji are found in the iMessage app, built right in 
to iOS 11 on the iPhone X. Just launch Messages, 

70   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
and then start a new message or open a thread to 
reply to someone. Look for the little monkey face 
at the bottom. Tap the monkey to get into Animoji. 
Once you start up the iMessage app, you’ll notice 
that the animated character begins tracking your 
facial expressions and mouth movement. Press 
the red button to record, or scroll through the list 
on the left to change characters. Tap the up arrow 
to make the Animoji app window bigger, so you 
can more easily see all the available emoji.
Which emojis are available as Animoji?
Apple hasn’t made every emoji into an animated 
3D cartoon, but were sure more will be added. 
How long can an Animoji recording be?
Animoji recordings are limited to just 10 seconds. 
That’s enough for a quick message to your friend, 
but not nearly long enough to sing a song, or 
deliver one of your favourite movie monologues.
How to Animoji save recordings
Once you have sent an Animoji message, or if 
you receive one, tap on it to play it. You’ll notice a 

December 2017 • Macworld   71
FEATURE
Share button in the lower left. Tap the Share button. 
Then tap Save Video. Now it’s in your camera roll.
How to use Animoji in other apps
You’ll do the same thing as the above step, only 
instead of pressing Save Video, you’ll press the 
share icon of whatever social media or other app 
you want to use.
If the app doesn’t have a share icon, no problem 
– just Save Video, then open up the app you want 
to use and deploy your Animoji recording exactly 
as you would any other video.

72   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
How to make Animoji Karaoke
Animoji Karaoke, where people lip-sync to their 
favourite tunes using Animoji and share them on 
social networks, is growing in popularity. But how 
do you sing along to your favourite song if Animoji 
recordings can only be 10 seconds long?
You go around the time limit using iOS 11’s 
built-in screen recording.
Step 1: Find a song and play it from a source other 
than your iPhone X. Music playback stops when 
the Animoji interface comes up, so you’ll need to 
play it from another sound source, loud enough 
for your iPhone’s microphone to clearly hear.
Step 2: Open up Messages and the Animoji 
interface. Pick your Animoji.
Step 3: Open Control Centre (swipe down from 
the upper-right edge of the screen) and tap on the 
screen recording button. You may want to press 
firmly to open the 3D Touch interface for it, and 
make sure the Microphone Audio option is On.
Step 4: Close control Centre and perform your 
lip-sync. Don’t bother pressing the Animoji record 
button. When you’re done, press the side button 
(which stops screen recording without opening 
Control Centre).
Step 5: You now have a full-screen capture stored 
to your iPhone. You’ll need to edit it down, though. 

December 2017 • Macworld   73
FEATURE
You can trim the ends easily enough using Photos 
on your iPhone, or iMovie. But if you want to really 
crop out the Animoji and remove all the interface 
stuff, you’ll need to download another app.
That’s the quickest and easiest way to make 
Animoji Karaoke. If you really want it to look 
at sound great, you should use a video editing 
program to replace the audio track with a quality 
recording. And you can use a split-screen effect to 
use multiple Animoji recordings to do duets, too.
Record your Animoji Karaoke performance 
with screen recorder, and edit it later

74   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
Help Desk
Glenn Fleishman answers your most vexing Mac problems
SAFARI BOOKMARK SYNC OUT OF 
WHACK? HERE’S THE SOLUTION
iCloud has a feature that lets you sync your Safari 
bookmarks across your Macs, iPhones, and iPads. 
However, Macworld reader Mark has a tale that 
sounds nearly appropriate for this time of year: 
disappearing and haunted bookmarks:
I upgraded my MacBook recently and transferred 
everything across surprisingly easy. After a few 
weeks, the bookmarks disappeared in favour of 
the defaults (Apple, Netflix, BBC iPlayer, YouTube, 
Facebook). I recovered following your advice with 

December 2017 • Macworld   75
FEATURE
Time Machine, but after a few minutes or hours or 
even days, they switch back to default again.
I suggested to Mark that this sounded like 
an out-of-phase synchronization problem. With 
iCloud enabled to sync Safari in iOS and macOS, 
it sounds as though iCloud decided the ‘truth’ 
of the bookmark state was the defaults loaded 
before his upgrade. Every time he restored to an 
earlier version via Time Machine, iCloud sync kept 
deciding that was out of date and replaced it with 
what it thought was ‘newer’.
My advice was to disable Safari in the iCloud 
system preference pane. Restore the bookmarks. 
Let things settle down. Then re-enable. Sure 
enough, that stopped the default/correct 
bookmark flapping.
WHY APPLE SHOWS A STRANGE 
LOCATION FOR A TWO-FACTOR 
LOGIN CONFIRMATION
Erich Riehl uses Apple’s two-factor authentication 
(2FA) system with his iCloud account. This is the 
system that Apple released in September 2015, 
and which replaces the older two-step system 
entirely in iOS 11 and macOS 10.13 High Sierra. 
(If you’re using two-step and upgrade to either 
of those, Apple converts you to 2FA.)
The first step in Apple’s 2FA is a location alert 
that appears on every computer and iOS you own 
logged into the same Apple ID account. The notion 
is that you should validate that the location is 

76   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
correct before you proceed to get the code. Clicking 
Don’t Allow terminates the login attempt.
For Erich, however, he’s seeing a login attempt 
from Monroe, Louisiana, which he found confusing. 
He gets this alert when he is trying to log in at 
iCloud.com, and wondered if it were legitimate.
Because Apple doesn’t explain when you log in 
that it’s going to alert you on all your connected 
devices, this can seem counter-intuitive when 
you’re using a browser – because the device 
from which you’re logging in tells you there’s a 
login attempt.
The location can also be imprecise. My wife 
routinely is told she’s logging in from about 
30 miles south, although on the same home 
network, it’s more accurate for me. If we both 
had this issue, I’d expect that the IP address of 
our network was misplaced in whatever geo-

December 2017 • Macworld   77
FEATURE
identification system Apple relied on to match 
IPs with a rough place on the globe. 
If you’re using a VPN (virtual private network), 
you may be told that you’re logging in from far 
away as well. Keep that in mind if you’re worried 
about someone intercepting your connection – the 
far end of your session, where Apple ‘sees’ you 
connecting to the Internet, is almost always going 
to be one of the data centres at which the VPN 
service has its servers located.
I wrote earlier about whether it’s a good idea to 
allow you to confirm your identity from the same 
machine you’re trying to log in from.
HOW TO REMOVE OLD SENT 
MESSAGES FROM MAIL IN MACOS
Email is one of those programs that you use, and 
then you realize that you have files dating back 
from a long time ago. Macworld reader Chris want 
to take control of the message in Apple’s Mail, 
specifically the messages he has sent.
I used to be able to control how long my sent 
mailbox kept old sent messages – I’m sure I set 
it to one month. Now, however, I cannot find any 
pop-up or drop-down menus (like Junk Mailbox, 
which I have set to erase after one week). I don’t 
want all my old Sent messages from 1998.
I don’t recall a way to delete sent messages 
automatically in Mail. However, you can create a 
rule that will solve the problem for you.

78   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
Step 1: Select Mail > Preferences and click the 
Rules button.
Step 2: Click Add Rule.
Step 3: Name the rule ‘Delete Sent Messages’ or 
however you’d like to identify it.
Step 4: From the conditions area, choose Date 
Sent, Is Greater Than, and then enter the number 
of days. In this example, I used 365 days.
Step 5: In the Perform the Following Actions 
section, choose Delete Message.
Step 6: Click OK.
Step 7: You’re prompted to apply to existing 
messages. If you click Apply, this will immediately 
(and irrevocably) delete all sent message that 
meet that criteria.
Now, Mail won’t apply this rule after this point, 
because active rules apply only to your inboxes. 
However, you can every once in a while select the 
Sent mailbox in the Mailboxes list and then choose 
Message > Apply Rules. You can choose a different 
tactic if you just want to archive messages locally. 
Create an archive mailbox in the On This Mac 
section of the Mailboxes list: hover over On This 
Mac, click the +, and then name the mailbox. In step 
5, choose Move Message and then pick the mailbox 
you created under On This Mac.

December 2017 • Macworld   79
FEATURE
HOW TO BETTER MANAGE 
YOUR iCLOUD FILE STORAGE
Apple’s iCloud is handy in that it lets you have 
access to your files on multiple devices that have 
Internet access. But what’s actually stored in 
iCloud isn’t that obvious to the user. This seems to 
be the case for Macworld reader Izabella. She asks 
why iCloud isn’t reducing storage on her MacBook 
more than it is. She sees iCloud storage on her 
computer taking up 80GB of storage but says 
she’s paying for 200GB of iCloud storage. “I want 
to use this space for other things,” she notes.
iCloud doesn’t necessarily save you storage, 
as confusing as that is, because it’s a mix of 
synchronization and cloud-based storage options.
Step 1: iCloud Photo Library syncs all your photos 
and videos, but unless you set Photos (in Photos > 
This rule deletes old Sent mail, but has to be 
triggered manually after the initial creation

80   Macworld • December 2017
FEATURE
Preferences > iCloud to Optimize Mac Storage), the 
full-resolution file for each piece of media remains 
on your Mac. Check that box, and you could save 
80- to 90 percent of a library’s size.
Step 2: iCloud Music Library also syncs music, but 
lets you keep local files unless you take action. 
You can select songs or albums and Control-click 
to select Remove Download, which deletes locally 
stored files and leaves the backups in iCloud. (Be 
sure you have a backup of your music files before 
you do this. Things can go wrong.) If you want to 
know which songs are only in the cloud, create 
a Smart Playlist with the criteria Location Is Not 
On This Computer.
You can dump gigabytes of locally 
stored files on your Mac by using System 
Information’s storage recommendations 

December 2017 • Macworld   81
FEATURE
Step 3: iCloud Drive is always synced: a copy is 
always on your computer and in iCloud for 
everything listed except for the next item.
Step 4: Desktop & Documents is an option 
(introduced in macOS 10.12 Sierra) to shift and 
sync less-used files from those two Home folder 
locations to the cloud, and only download them 
locally as needed. You can access that option via 
Command > About This Mac > Storage and click 
Manage (or via Applications/Utilities/System 
Information, and choose Window > Storage 
Management), and then click Store in iCloud. You 
want a high-speed broadband connection for the 
times you need macOS to retrieve those files.
Step 5: Also in the storage manage tab of System 
Information, you can opt to delete what can turn 
out to be gigabytes of downloaded media that 
remains available for retrieval or streaming on 
demand from the iTunes Store.
Making a few changes could free up tens to 
hundreds of gigabytes of storage, depending on 
the amount of media and kinds of documents you 
store on your Mac.
A warning, though: you’re relying on iCloud and 
Apple to keep all that data safe for you. I’d rather 
have more storage on my computer, keep all the 
iCloud items copied from and to my main Mac, 
and separately clone and archive all those files 
myself in addition to iCloud. 

82   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
Best free macOS apps
From useful utilities to handy archivers, Michael Simon reveals 
25 free yet powerful apps you can download today
T
here’s a misconception when it comes to the 
Mac. While powerful tools like Final Cut Pro 
certainly have high price tags, many of the 
greatest OS X apps won’t cost you a penny. 
A quick note before we begin. Apple has changed 
its security settings in recent version of macOS, so 
you’ll need to allow your system to open a couple 
of these apps. If a dialog box pops up telling you a 
certain app was blocked from opening, head over to 

December 2017 • Macworld   83
ROUND-UP
System Preferences, click the Security & Privacy 
tab in the first row, and select the General tab. 
At the bottom of the screen, you’ll see an ‘Open 
Anyway’ button next to the name of the app. Click it 
and then open the app as normal to properly launch 
it. You’ll only need to do this once for each app.
1. VLC media player
Download from tinyurl.com/k3jyx4d 
Video formats are constantly changing, and you 
no doubt have all sorts of movie files littering your 
Mac’s drive. But if they haven’t been encoded in 64-
bit or MPEG, the newest version of QuickTime might 
not be able to play them. That’s where VLC comes 
in. Open-source and omnipotent, the media player 
will play, stream, or convert just about any video 
format you can throw at it, while sporting a clean, 
minimal interface that strips away unnecessary 
controls and puts the focus on the content. 
1.

84   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
2. The Unarchiver
Download from tinyurl.com/y8x2LLe5
Zips and Rars might not be as prevalent as they 
were when OS X was named after big cats, but 
if you still have expanding and extracting needs, 
then The Unarchiver’s immediate processing will 
help you quickly get at the files hidden inside. With 
dozens of supported formats and simple one-click 
operation, the app will extract and expand all sorts 
of extensions, in numerous languages and virtually 
any compression method.
3. iBooks Author
Download from tinyurl.com/Ln7t7nx
Independent publishing has never been so 
accessible. What used to require months of training 
2.

December 2017 • Macworld   85
ROUND-UP
and an expensive suite of software can now be 
accomplished with a single free app. With an array 
of templates and tools and a breathtakingly easy 
interface, iBooks Author can get you from outline to 
upload in no time. Its iWork-style workflow will help 
you build rich, interactive ebooks that bring your 
ideas to life with diagrams, video and 3D objects, 
letting your words literally leap off the page.
4. Alfred
Download from tinyurl.com/pjjgksz
Mac veterans have been singing Alfred’s praises 
for years, but some of Apple’s newer users might 
not have heard about the mighty app launcher. 
Free to all but the most serious professionals, 
Alfred will supercharge your productivity with its 
3.

86   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
unique system of shortcuts and keystrokes, letting 
you launch apps, find files, solve calculations, 
and control your Mac with swift precision. As 
customizable as it is powerful, you might say it 
puts a spotlight on macOS’s shortcomings.
5. Pocket
Download from tinyurl.com/y8jyf63j
Read-it-later pioneer Instapaper may have 
transformed the way we absorb information, but 
Pocket’s Mac app is like your own personal DVR 
for the web. It’s not just for things you read; its 
advanced, versatile web clipper will save any 
photos, videos, and articles that you find and store 
them inside its infinite queue until you have time for 
them. And of course, everything will be presented 
4.

December 2017 • Macworld   87
ROUND-UP
in a beautiful stripped-down view, all without the 
ethical quandary of an ad blocker.
6. Dropbox
Download from tinyurl.com/ykeogbj
One day iCloud Drive will be able to handle all of 
our file storage needs, but until it arrives, Dropbox 
is an essential tool. But while its website is fine 
for quickly uploading small files, the Mac app 
turns the service from a simple digital locker into 
a seamless storage syncing solution. Launch it 
once and your Dropbox folder will integrate with 
the Finder, so adding a file is as easy as saving it 
to your Documents folder. And the handy menu 
5.

88   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
bar component keeps tabs on everything that’s 
been uploaded and altered.
7. Simplenote
Download from tinyurl.com/y895a2s9
Don’t let Simplenote’s name fool you – the only 
thing simple about it is the decision to download 
6.
7.

December 2017 • Macworld   89
ROUND-UP
it. No matter how or what you write, Simplenote 
promises to fit neatly into your workflow, with a 
syncing and organizational system that rivals the 
most powerful note-takers around. The deceptively 
powerful app puts a premium on speed and 
efficiency, offering a clean, lightweight interface 
that lets you breeze in and out of your notes, 
organize your thoughts, and quickly find things 
buried under a mountain of text snippets.
8. Chrome
Download from tinyurl.com/qbud93e
The debate over which is the better browser is 
one that won’t be settled anytime soon, but in the 
meantime, every Mac user should have a copy of 
Chrome alongside Safari in their Dock. Fast, smart, 
and endlessly customizable, Google’s browser is 
8.

90   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
an excellent alternative to Apple’s, with speedy 
surfing, smart syncing, and Google Assistant-
style voice searches. And with a dedicated store 
filled with extensions and themes, finding ways 
to enhance it is way easier than it is on Safari.
9. uTorrent
Download from tinyurl.com/9rLwL
Torrent files get a bad rap (or not, depending on 
your views about stealing music and movies), but 
they’re not all about illegal content. There is an 
array of perfectly legal albums, books, and games 
ready to be downloaded, but to get at them you’ll 
need a way to unbundle the files. You can’t go wrong 
with uTorrent, one of the most popular free clients 
on the Mac. Torrents will instantly start downloading 
without hogging any of your system’s precious 
resources, and an array of features give you full 
automation and remote control over your files.
9.

December 2017 • Macworld   91
ROUND-UP
10. Itsycal
Download from tinyurl.com/Lfc4rvh
Having the date and time in our menu bar is super 
helpful, but if you want a little more control over 
your appointments, Itsycal is the clock replacement 
of choice for menu bar tweakers. As its name 
suggests, Itsycal adds a tiny but enormously 
useful calendar to your menu bar, complete with 
appointment dots and a list of any upcoming 
meetings. You can also add an event without 
needing to launch Calendar, but the best reason 
to download Itsycal is how good it looks, whether 
you like things light or dark.
10.

92   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
11. Onyx
Download from tinyurl.com/y7s4ac3v
Mac maintenance might not be as vital to the 
day-to-day operation of your Mac as it once was, 
but slow-downs still happen. And when they do, 
Onyx will clear them up. A general-purpose utility 
with more tools than a Swiss Army knife, Onyx 
packages maintenance scripts, cache cleaning, 
and permissions repairers to keep your Mac in tip-
top shape. Its simple interface makes it quick and 
painless to run all kinds of cleaning solutions, but 
its best feature might be the individual optimized 
versions Titanium Software offers, going all the 
way back to Jaguar.
11.

December 2017 • Macworld   93
ROUND-UP
12. Amphetamine
Download from tinyurl.com/ybrc45vd
Mac veterans will forever be devoted to Caffeine, 
but since it hasn’t been updated since Snow 
Leopard, retina and dark mode lovers will get 
the same results using Amphetamine to keep 
their Mac awake. Featuring a similar menu bar-
based interface, the app lets you temporarily 
override your Mac’s sleep schedule (even when 
the lid is closed) and even adds a few features 
that Caffeine never had (like activating only when 
connected to specific Wi-Fi networks and keeping 
only certain drives awake). But you’ll probably 
still need a cup of coffee.
12.

94   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
13. HandBrake
Download from tinyurl.com/Lx4sxh4
The art of ripping DVDs might be lost on today’s 
optical drive-challenged Macs, but that doesn’t 
mean you don’t need a good video converter on 
your Mac. Open-source, multi-platform, and free 
for life, HandBrake excels at turning DVDs into 
digital files, but it’s not just for physical media; the 
app can convert video from just about any source 
into something your Mac, iPhone, or Apple TV can 
read, distilling complicated processes into a single 
button. And you’ll also get the best Dock icon of all 
time.
14. BBEdit
Download from tinyurl.com/y97fL8bx
Professional software developers have been 
singing BBEdit’s praises for years, but you don’t 
13.

December 2017 • Macworld   95
ROUND-UP
need to spend a bundle to get on board. While 
TextWrangler is still available in the Mac App Store, 
it’s no longer supported by BareBones. But you can 
get all of the features and more in the free version 
of BBEdit. Even without spending anything, BBEdit 
is a full-featured editor in its own right, sporting 
powerful features such as multiple clipboards, 
automatic backups, live search and syntax-
highlighting support for more than 20 programming 
languages. But you don’t have to be a Swift coder 
to appreciate it – anyone who writes and edits large 
chunks of text on their Mac should grab a copy.
14.

96   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
15. Wunderlist
Download from tinyurl.com/od3tszr
Whether it’s to-dos, reminders, wishes, or 
groceries, we all make lists. And if you make them 
on your Mac, Wunderlist is just as amazing as it 
sounds. Simple, fast, and elegant, the app will let 
you write, share, and assign as many lists as your 
life needs, with a friendly interface that keeps 
everything neat and organized. But it’s more than 
the price that’s wonderful; Wunderlist is one of the 
most powerful task managers around, seamlessly 
augmenting your workflow with smart lists and 
Calendar integration, and making sure you never 
forget anything that needs to get done. We’re 
not sure how long Microsoft plans on keeping it 
around, so grab a copy while you still can.

December 2017 • Macworld   97
ROUND-UP
16. Dr. Cleaner
Download from tinyurl.com/yap8c9x7
Macs may have a reputation for being free from 
viruses and spyware, but that doesn’t mean they 
don’t still get clogged with gunk. So if your Mac 
is feeling a little run-down, make an appointment 
with Dr. Cleaner. With a simple interface and a 
lightweight, menu bar-based app, the good doctor 
will optimize your memory and clean out the hidden 
files that bog down your hard drive. With a click, 
it’ll surgically remove caches, logs, and temporary 
files as it frees up disk space and makes sure your 
Mac gets a clean bill of health.
17. Tomahawk
Download from tinyurl.com/okj2cyo
Back before iTunes was a bloated beast that 
handles far too many of your Mac’s media files, it 
16.

98   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
was one of the best music players around. If you’re 
nostalgic for those days, Tomahawk might be the 
player of your dreams. With a clean interface that 
kind of looks like an updated version of the original 
iTunes Player, you’ll be able to play all of your music 
files, including ones from streaming services like 
Spotify, Google Play Music, and YouTube (but not 
Apple Music). You can also create playlists and 
curate your own radio stations, and since it’s open 
source, new features and big fixes will be instantly 
available in the nightly builds.
18. Pages, Numbers, Keynote
Download from tinyurl.com/b4j26Ls, 
tinyurl.com/LLc756w, tinyurl.com/Locfknh
Apple’s productivity suite has been a benefit to 
new Mac buyers for years, but now everyone can 
17.

December 2017 • Macworld   99
ROUND-UP
get them. With professional features, powerful 
collaboration, and tremendous cross-platform 
versatility, Apple’s office suite of Pages, Numbers, 
and Keynote can stand shoulder-to-shoulder with 
apps sporting much higher price tags. Things like 
Touch ID protection and real-time tracking belie its 
free status, and of course, there are iOS companion 
apps that are also free so you can work wherever 
you are. And don’t worry if you have a mountain of 
Word, Excel, or PowerPoint files – it’ll work with 
those, too.
19. Slack
Download from tinyurl.com/ycm2xzd4
Slack has quickly become the first name in business 
collaboration and messaging since it launched 
in 2013, and its free Mac app is the best way to 
18.

100   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
keep in touch with your team. Bringing everything 
you love about the web interface to your Dock, 
the Slack desktop app lets you quickly switch 
between groups, change your status, drag and 
drop files, and, of course, communicate with your 
team members. A lightning-fast search gives you 
instant access to buried messages, and granular 
notifications will keep you apprised of only the most 
important correspondences. It’s so good, you might 
not want to turn it off at the end of the work day.
20. Simple Recorder
Download from tinyurl.com/y7y7ob6f
Sometimes, you just need a quick way to record 
audio on your Mac, and QuickTime doesn’t exactly 
19.

December 2017 • Macworld   101
ROUND-UP
live up to its name. That’s where Simple 
Recorder comes in. Once you install it, a 
record button is never more than a click 
away, sitting in your menu bar until called 
upon. The free version is pretty light on 
the features, but you can change the 
sample rate, switch between mono and 
stereo, adjust the volume, and save your 
recording right from the menu bar. A £4.99 
in-app purchase will unlock a few extra 
features like mp3 recording and keyboard 
shortcuts, but the free version will be more 
than capable for most users.
21. Duplicate File Finder
Download from tinyurl.com/y9sfum9m
If you’ve been using your Mac for a while, there’s a 
good chance you have accumulated duplicate files 
20.
21.

102   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
along the way. And some of them could be eating 
up precious space on your drive. You could run a 
full disk cleaner to find and root them out (in fact, 
Dr. Cleaner on this list will do the trick), but if you 
want to quickly find double files and get on with 
your day, make space for Duplicate File Finder in 
your Applications folder. Simply drag a folder onto 
its window and within seconds you’ll have a full 
report of the duplicates on your machine, letting 
you see what they are and where they’re hiding, and 
letting you delete them in a snap. Unless you opt for 
the £4.99 pro version, you’ll have to deal with the 
occasional ad, but it’s indispensable nonetheless.
22. Spark
Download from tinyurl.com/y9ynbzzn
Apple’s default email client gets better with each 
macOS revision, but if you’re looking for something 
22.

December 2017 • Macworld   103
ROUND-UP
different, Spark will be a refreshing change of pace. 
Smart, stylish, and speedy, Spark will help you get 
control over your inbox with powerful filters that 
help you focus on the messages that need your 
attention. It works with Gmail, iCloud, Outlook, 
and just about any other email address, and its 
companion iOS apps will keep all of them perfectly 
synced. With a deceptively powerful interface 
and a slew of advanced features, Spark just might 
ignite your passion for email again. Or at least 
make you not hate it as much.
23. Backup and Sync from Google
Download from tinyurl.com/p5sogj9
Even the most stalwart Mac fans have to admit 
that Google does photos better than Apple. With 
unlimited storage, instant syncing across virtually 
any device, and an amazing search engine, Google 
23.

104   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
Photos is everything we wish Apple Photos would 
be. But you might not know that there’s a super 
easy way to get photos from your Mac into your 
Google Photos library. Google offers a small utility 
called Backup and Sync that will automatically 
upload images stored on your Mac. The simple 
menu bar app works with your Google Drive to 
continuously scan for images in folders of your 
choosing to keep your photo library in sync. And 
it’s so efficient, you won’t even know it’s working.
24. Polarr Photo Editor Lite
Download from tinyurl.com/yc3xvutu
While most photo storage apps offer a rudimentary 
set of editing tools, serious Instagrammers are 
going to need a little more creativity. Look no 
further than Polarr Photo Editor. Don’t be fooled 
by ‘lite’ in the title. The free version of Polarr offers 
the same great interface as the £19.99 full version, 
with enough tools, filters, brushes, and slides to 
24.

December 2017 • Macworld   105
ROUND-UP
turn your bland selfies into social-media worthy 
masterpieces. You’ll be able to add text, tweak 
colours, remove spots, and apply masks like you 
can with Photoshop, just without the subscription 
to Creative Cloud.
25. Audacity
Download from tinyurl.com/m7p4w7e
A robust desktop client for recording and editing 
multitrack projects, Audacity will let you edit and 
add effects just like you would with Logic Pro X 
without needing to spend hundreds of pounds on 
a bunch of features you won’t need. Granted, the 
interface is outdated, but you need only spend a 
few minutes with it to see just how powerful it is. A 
killer tool for podcasting, recording audio books, 
and creating video voice-overs, Audacity will turn 
your Mac into a multitrack recording studio, and 
it won’t cost you a penny.
25.

106   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
N
ormally, about this time of year, the release 
schedule gets pretty crowded for PC and 
console players, and while Mac doesn’t 
see quite the same load (maybe someday), there’s 
still a nice stack of new releases. Super Mario-
esque platform game A Hat in Time is one of this 
month’s big standouts, along with cyberpunk horror 
adventure Observer and frantic fighter Brawlhalla, 
and those are just the tip of the iceberg. We’ve 
picked out 10 of the most exciting new Mac games.
Latest Mac games
Andrew Hayward looks at this month’s best new releases

December 2017 • Macworld   107
ROUND-UP
1. A Hat in Time
Price: £22.99 from Steam (tinyurl.com/y7vzk9xq)
We’ll never see Nintendo’s brilliant new Super 
Mario Odyssey on Mac, but if you’re in the mood for 
a classic 3D platform-action experience along the 
lines of Super Mario 64, give A Hat in Time a strong 
look. This long-awaited indie game captures the 
magic of the cartoonish action games from the N64 
era as you control Hat Girl, a space-exploring kid 
with a knack for stitching together magical hats.
Each of the five colourful worlds you explore is 
bursting with creative challenges, and much like 
this year’s Yooka-Laylee, it only lightly modernizes 
this beloved genre. 

108   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
2. Observer
Price: £22.99 from Steam (tinyurl.com/y848ug5o)
Observer is an atmospheric, cyberpunk-themed 
horror game that has you hack into the minds of 
both criminals and their victims. Chances are great 
that you won’t find sunshine and rainbows in there, 
especially in this gritty, futuristic world. Observer 
has a strong Blade Runner influence running 
through it, from the visual design of the world to 
the soundtrack – and even the use of Rutger Hauer 
as the voice actor behind neural detective Dan 
Lazarski. Reviews suggest that there’s a bit more 
style than substance in this first-person exploration 
game, but boy, the style alone sure seems worth it.

December 2017 • Macworld   109
ROUND-UP
3. Brawlhalla
Price: Free from Steam (tinyurl.com/mgx9gww)
Brawlhalla was clearly built in the mould of the 
Mario-starring Super Smash Bros, as a 2D, 
party-friendly fighting game that takes place on 
a series of platforms. But this one features all 
original characters, plus it’s free to play. It offers 
up a rotating selection of six of its fighters free 
each week, with others unlocked via in-game 
gold, or you can spend £15.99 once to unlock all 
fighters forever. Otherwise, it lacks any freemium 
limitations, and all other premium items are purely 
cosmetic. This fast-paced brawler can be played 
online with up to eight players or in a local four-
player mode – or you can go it solo, if you please.

110   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
4. Road Redemption
Price: £14.99 from Steam (tinyurl.com/y8t3oskf)
Got an itch for the classic Road Rash games, or 
do you just relish the idea of raising a little hell on 
two wheels? In either case, Road Redemption is 
probably right up your alley. Like EA’s classic series, 
this spiritual successor lets you race motorcycles 
on busy roads and turn to blunt objects, firearms, 
and grenades to get a violent edge along the way.
It’s fast, gruesome fun, and after an extended 
Early Access polishing period on Steam, this 
tribute looks like it’s finally up to speed. There’s 
both online and multiplayer competition available, 
while the extensive loot system lets you improve 
your rider, bike, and weapons as you rise through 
the racing world.

December 2017 • Macworld   111
ROUND-UP
5. Battle Chasers: Nightwar
Price: £24.99 from Steam (tinyurl.com/yd5yjmvk)
Battle Chasers: Nightwar’s existence as a released 
product might surprise fans of the original comic 
book, seeing as the last issue came out 16 years 
ago… and the story arc still isn’t unfinished. But 
creator Joe Madureira’s pivot from comics to 
games has finally brought this steampunk-fantasy 
franchise back to life. The game takes the form of 
a turn-based role-playing inspired by Japanese 
classics, and it boasts a vibrant world based on 
Madureira’s distinctive drawing style, plenty of 
dungeons to explore, and some exciting combat 
along the way. Knowing the source material surely 
helps, but this is an intriguing RPG all the same, 
the likes of which we rarely see on Mac.

112   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
6. Bomber Crew
Price: £14.99 from Steam (tinyurl.com/yaxm9q75)
Bomber Crew is currently blowing up the Steam 
charts, and while its little cartoonish pilots and 
engineers might seem adorable, this game is 
anything but breezy and lightweight. Sort of like 
a World War II take on the beloved FTL: Faster 
Than Light, Bomber Crew challenges you to keep a 
fighter plane up and running behind enemy lines.
You’ll build and train a persistent crew that 
works your missions, but when one of them gets 
gunned down, they’re gone forever – a harsh 
edge to this silly-looking game. It’s a challenging 
simulation, and everything is procedurally 
generated, which means you’ll get a fresh 
experience every time you take flight.

December 2017 • Macworld   113
ROUND-UP
7. The Jackbox Party Pack 4
Price: £14.99 from Steam (tinyurl.com/yay72Ljj)
We had a lot of fun with the XCOM-inspired 
SteamWorld Heist, but Image and Form’s 
steampunk-esque franchise charts a different 
path in SteamWorld Dig 2 – and it’s straight down 
below the surface. Like the original Dig, this 2D 
action game finds you exploring underground as an 
adventurous robot, as you mine for minerals and 
battle the threats found beneath. 
SteamWorld Dig 2 takes its cues from classics 
like Super Metroid and Castlevania, as you unlock 
new abilities that expand out the world and deepen 
the adventure. Press reviews have been even 
stronger than the original, continuing this indie 
series’ impressive run over the last few years.

114   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
8. High Hell
Price: £8.99 from Steam (tinyurl.com/y7g559vu)
Devolver Digital publishes some of the most 
weirdly wonderful games today, from Hotline Miami 
to Dropsy, and High Hell seems to continue that 
traditional well. It’s a first-person shooter, albeit 
one with a stark neon look, boxy enemies in suits, 
a pulsing soundtrack, and some odd sights along 
the way. You’ll drop into the skyscraper of a criminal 
organization to destroy nearly everything in sight, 
whether it’s bad guys or drug money, but you’ll save 
the goats, of course. You can play tactically or just 
run headlong into every battle, with run-and-gun 
blasting seeming like the more thrilling option of the 
two. It’s pegged as being short but sweet, with the 
Steam listing claiming a one- to two-hour campaign.

December 2017 • Macworld   115
ROUND-UP
9. Heliborne
Price: £15.49 from Steam (tinyurl.com/y9ehseto)
Helicopter combat simulations might seem cool, 
but it isn’t exactly a bustling game genre these 
days. Heliborne aims to fill that gap. It offers up 
more than 40 realistic helicopters to command, 
ranging from 1950s classics to modern-day options, 
and you’ll take the stick as you battle through 
real-world skirmishes in places like Vietnam and 
Afghanistan. Beyond single-player and cooperative 
modes, you can also hop online for 16-player 
competitive battles in multiple modes, and the 
game can be controlled via gamepad, keyboard and 
mouse, or even a flight stick. Games like this are 
typically niche in appeal, but Heliborne seems to be 
finding a pretty sizeable audience on Steam so far.

116   Macworld • December 2017
ROUND-UP
10. The Signal From Tölva
Price: £14.99 from Steam (tinyurl.com/y7hf8obL)
If you’re in the mood to explore a big, beautiful 
planet – and then blast through a bunch of robots 
along the way – then you might find your destination 
in The Signal from Tölva. Tölva is the planet in 
question, and it’s a ‘hand-crafted, hand-painted 
world’ filled with warring ‘bots on various sides of 
the battle. And you can reprogram and recruit them 
for your own needs. The game  swaps between quiet 
exploration and tense combat amidst a cool sci-fi 
universe, but reviews have been a bit mixed, with 
some claiming that the game can be plodding and 
sometimes tedious. Tölva might be worth the trip.

December 2017 • Macworld   117
How to: Block ads on a
Mac in Safari and Chrome
David Price reveals how to stop annoying online adverts
A
nnoyed by adverts online and want to get rid 
of them? You’ve come to the right place. In 
this article we explain how to block adverts 
on your Mac, using a variety of free and paid-for 
tools on the Safari and Chrome web browsers.
We have a separate guide if you specifically wish 
to block autoplay videos on Mac. And another for 
those who wish to block ads on iPhone or iPad.
HOW-TO

118   Macworld • December 2017
HOW TO
Before we proceed, please bear in mind that 
the site whose adverts you’re blocking probably 
relies on revenue from advertising. That may not 
worry you, and we know that some of the online 
advertising out there really does cross a line in 
terms of intrusiveness. Just don’t complain if a 
site you love suddenly closes, or starts to charge 
visitors, because people refused to view its adverts.
Safari
We’ll start with blocking adverts in the Mac version 
of Apple’s own web browser, Safari.
Reader
Strictly speaking, if you want to block adverts 
in Safari on the Mac you’ll need to install third-
party ad-blocking software – and we’ll talk about 
that in a moment. But a far simpler approach is 
to use Safari’s built-in Reader mode, which is 
practically as good.
Reader isn’t quite an ad blocker, because it 
blocks a bunch of other visual distractions too: 
sidebars, mastheads, comments, social elements, 
videos. (It’s the same principle as the ‘Read later’ 
services we discuss at the end of this article.) You 
just get the text and the pictures.
As a general rule, you can activate Reader mode 
at any time: depending on the version of Safari 
you’ll need to click the Reader button next to the 
URL bar, select View > Show Reader or hit Shift-
Command-R. (Some pages won’t open in this form, 
however: home pages, for example, tend not to.)

December 2017 • Macworld   119
HOW-TO
But in Safari 11, the version that comes with 
macOS High Sierra, you can be more sophisticated 
and tell Safari to always open article pages from 
particular domains in Reader mode – or even to 
use Reader by default all the time.
When you’re on a site you want to give this 
treatment, go to Safari > Settings for This Website 
(or you can right-click the URL box and choose 
Settings for This Website). Under the heading 
‘When visiting this website’, put a tick next to ‘Use 
Reader when available’.
You can remove domains from the Reader list in 
Safari’s Preferences page. Go to the Websites pane 
and select Reader in the left-hand column. Select a 
website, click the menu to the right of it and select 

120   Macworld • December 2017
HOW TO
Off. At the bottom of this page you’ll see another 
option: ‘When visiting other websites’. Set this to 
On and Reader will be activated by default on all 
compatible web pages.
Pop-up adverts
A quick tip that will stop unwanted pop-ups: go 
to Safari Preferences and select the Security tab. 
Now put a tick next to ‘Block pop-up windows’.
Third-party ad blockers
If you want to block the adverts but leave the rest 
of the visual elements intact, you need to install a 
third-party ad blocker. There are lots of them out 
there, plenty of which are free, but tread carefully.
Our recommendation would be the donation-
ware Safari extension AdBlock, which deals with 
graphical ads, text ads and even ads in YouTube 
videos. It also lets you whitelist sites whose adverts 
you do want to see, to support them or because the 
ads may be useful. You can download AdBlock from 
tinyurl.com/gqrnumr.
If you’re looking for something a little more 
advanced, we recommend AdGuard (tinyurl.com/
zh3qszn). It comes in two forms: a free-to-use 
Safari extension and a $20 (£15) app with a 14-day 
free trial. While the Safari extension is decent and 
acts in a similar way to AdBlock, the desktop app 
provides advanced features across macOS, not 
dependent on a particular browser. 
As well as blocking ads and pop-ups from 
websites, you’re able to block tracking from most 

December 2017 • Macworld   121
HOW-TO
online sources and even be warned of malicious 
websites that you might stumble across online. It 
provides granular control over your ad blocking 
settings, allowing you to whitelist sites and self-
promoting ads, and is incredibly simple to use. 
Ad tracker blockers
There’s a growing suspicion that Apple isn’t overly 
fond of the advertising industry, and beyond the 
Reader mode discussed above we wouldn’t be 
surprised if the company added full-on ad blocking 
features to Safari at some point in the future.
For the time being, however, it has only added 
the ability to block ad trackers to macOS (and 
iOS, for that matter). If you’ve got High Sierra, you 
can prevent advertisers from installing cookies 
that track your movements around the web – that 

122   Macworld • December 2017
HOW TO
apparently crucial strategy that allows products 
to ‘follow’ you from one site to another.
Actually, it would be more accurate to say that 
the feature, called Intelligent Tracking Prevention, 
requests that advertisers do not track you - but 
most major and reputable ad networks should 
honour this request.
Open Safari’s preferences. (Click Safari > 
Preferences.) Select the Privacy icon, and look in 
the ‘Website tracking’ section. Select the option 
‘Ask websites not to track me’.
Chrome
Google’s Chrome browser is a 
popular alternative for Mac 
users, and even though Google 
is a full paid-up member of 
the advertising fan club, it 
allows plenty of scope for 
ad-blocking.
Pop-ups
Let’s start by disabling pop-ups, 
something which can be done from Chrome’s own 
settings - no need to install any extensions.
Open Chrome’s settings by selecting Chrome 
> Preferences, or press Cmd and the command 
button. Scroll down and click ‘Show advanced 
settings’. Below the heading Privacy, click 
the button labelled ‘Content settings’. Scroll 
down again and look for the heading Pop-ups. 
Choose ‘Do not allow any site to show pop-ups 

December 2017 • Macworld   123
HOW-TO
(recommended)’ – or select ‘Manage exceptions’ 
if you want to let some websites get away with it.
Ad blockers
As with Safari, Chrome won’t actually block 
adverts for you – and there isn’t an easily accessed 
equivalent of Reader mode. (Google has publicly 
discussed something similar called Distill Mode, 
but there’s no straightforward way for Mac users 
to turn this on without recourse to extensions.)
Many well known ad blockers are browser-
agnostic, fortunately. The two suggested above 
– AdBlock and AdGuard – are both able to deal 
with adverts in Chrome.
‘Read later’ services
If you decide you don’t want to install an ad blocker, 
an alternative solution is to use a read-later service. 
These are simple systems that let you easily save 
an article in a form that strips out the adverts; you 
can then read if later (or right away, for that matter) 
without being troubled by all the visual tomfoolery.
Our favourite such service is Instapaper. Sign up 
to the service and you’ll be able to create a ‘Read 
later’ button as a bookmark in Safari, Chrome or 
whichever other browser you like. Open an article, 
click the button and it’ll save to your account. You 
can then read the ad-free version online (from any 
machine) or, best of all in our experience, offline 
using the iPhone app.

124   Macworld • December 2017
HOW TO
How to: Reinstall iTunes 
12.6.3 on a Mac
Hate iTunes 12.7 and want to be able to install and manage iOS 
apps in iTunes? Roman Loyola shows how
i
Tunes 12.7 removed the iOS App Store, which 
meant you couldn’t buy or manage your iPhone 
and iPad apps when your devices are connected 
to your Mac. Some people don’t like it, and if you 
really don’t want to change your ways, there’s a 
workaround: You can install iTunes 12.6.3 and get 
back access to the iOS app store.
There is a catch, though. Apple provides support 
only for the latest version of iTunes, which means 

December 2017 • Macworld   125
HOW-TO
that iTunes 12.6.3 is not supported by the company 
and you can’t get technical support if you need it.
Install iTunes 12.6.3
If you’ve already installed iTunes 12.7, you can run 
the installer for version 12.6.3 and it will replace 
version 12.7. But there are a few additional steps 
you need to perform to get 12.6.3 to work.
If you are using iTunes 12.6.2, you don’t 
have to upgrade to 12.6.3. Click the following 
link to download iTunes 12.6.3 for Mac:  
tinyurl.com/y7z6r47a.
Here are the instructions to installing iTunes 
12.6.3 over iTunes 12.7:
Step 1: After downloading the installer, double 
click the disk image file called iTunes12.6.3.dmg. 
(It should be in your Downloads folder, or whatever 
folder you’ve designated as the download location.)
Step 2: In the window that opens, you can read 
the Read Before You Install iTunes document. 
Double-click on Install iTunes to run the installer.

126   Macworld • December 2017
HOW TO
Step 3: As you navigate through the installer, you’ll 
need to enter your user password to proceed. The 
installation takes a few minutes.
Step 4: When the installer finishes, it will ask if 
you want to move it to the Trash. Click Move to 
Trash. After that, you’ll find iTunes 12.6.3 in your 
Applications folder.
Fix the ‘iTunes Library.itl’  
problem with iTunes 12.6.3
If you had iTunes 12.7 and want to replace it with 
iTunes 12.6.3, there are a few more steps you need to 
do. You have to reassign the library that iTunes uses, 
because iTunes doesn’t like it when you are using a 
previous version to access a library created by the 
current version. You’ll see the message below. Click 
Quit. Do not click Download iTunes, because this will 
download iTunes 12.7. Here’s how to fix it:

December 2017 • Macworld   127
HOW-TO
Step 1: Go to your Applications folder and look for 
the iTunes icon. Hold down on the Option key while 
you double-click iTunes.
Step 2: You should see the message below. You can 
click Create Library, and this will make a brand-
new library. If you click Choose Library, you might 
be able to access an older library, like the one you 
had before installing iTunes 12.7. You can click on 
Choose Library, and it should automatically take 
you to your iTunes folder; if not, you’ll find it in your 
Music folder. You may have a folder called Previous 
iTunes Libraries (see below). Open that folder, and 
then look for a recent .itl file. Select it and click 
Open. If it’s not the library you want, you can redo 
these steps and select a different .itl file.
Step 3: After you select your library file (or create 
a new one), iTunes will launch and you’ll find the 
iOS app store, as well as the sections to organize 
your iOS apps. 

HOW TO

