THE WORLD’S BEST-SELLING APPLE MAGAZINE
HOW TO FIX HIGH SIERRA ROOT BUG
JANUARY 2018
FROM IDG
Best Mac
antivirus software
Adobe Photoshop  
CC 2018
REVIEW: 
MAC SECURITY TIPS
+
MAC 
GAMES
MAC
LATEST


January 2018 • Macworld   3
CONTENTS
NEWS
REVIEWS
ROUND-UP
HOW TO
FEATURES
11
4
77
macOS High Sierra ‘root’ 
security bug uncovered       4
Apple delays  
HomePod till 2018       8
Adobe Photoshop CC 2018      11
Mac security tips    27
How Apple turns chores into 
exciting features    54
What to do when breaking  
up a shared Apple ID    59
Help Desk    65
Mac antivirus software    77
Latest Mac Games    84
Prevent a Mac joining a Wi-Fi network    95
HOW TO
Why iOS has a desktop future    99

4   Macworld • January 2018
NEWS
macOS High Sierra ‘root’ 
security bug uncovered
Roman Loyola reveals what it is and how to fix it
I
n November, a macOS 10.13.1 security issue was 
revealed – a flaw that allows root access to a 
Mac without the need for a password. Developer 
Lemi Orhan Ergin tweeted that anyone can log 
into a Mac by entering the user name root without 
a password. The first time you try to login, it won’t 
work. But if you try it again, you will be granted 
access. Here’s Ergin’s tweet:

January 2018 • Macworld   5
NEWS
Dear @AppleSupport, we noticed a HUGE security 
issue at macOS High Sierra. Anyone can login as 
“root” with empty password after clicking on login 
button several times. Are you aware of it @Apple?
As Apple’s support document notes, root 
is a ‘superuser’ that grants access to areas 
of the system that are often used by system 
administrators. At Macworld, we tried it on our 
own MacBook Pro running macOS 10.13.1, and the 
root login worked. 
This issue seemed to work only after you are 
logged into a Mac under a different user name. I 
wasn’t able to use root and no password at the 
Mac’s user login screen that appears at startup.
An Apple spokesperson sent Macworld the 
following statement:
We are working on a software update to address 
this issue. In the meantime, setting a root password 
prevents unauthorized access to your Mac. To 
enable the Root User and set a password, please 
follow the instructions here: tinyurl.com/ydxolll3. 
If a Root User is already enabled, to ensure a blank 
password is not set, please follow the instructions 
from the ‘Change the root password’ section.
How to fix the root security issue
Apple has issued an OS X 10.13.1 Security Update 
at tinyurl.com/ybtsxlug, which patches the flaw. In 
the description, Apple urges users to “Install this 
update as soon as possible.”

6   Macworld • January 2018
NEWS
However, while this patch will fix this issue, you’ll 
want to change the password for root to protect 
against future security issues. Here’s what to do:
1. In the Finder, click on the Go menu and select 
Go to Folder.
2. Enter the following: /System/Library/
CoreServices/Applications/ and then click Go.
3. Find the Directory Utility app and launch it.

January 2018 • Macworld   7
NEWS
4. Click the lock in the lower left to make changes. 
In the pop-up window, enter your user name and 
password, then click Modify Configuration.
5. Click on Edit in the menu bar and select 
Change Root Password.
6. In the pop-up window, enter a password and 
verify it. Click OK.
7. In the main window of Directory Utility, click the 
lock to lock it and prevent further changes.
8. Quit Directory Utility. You are done.
If you try to enter root without a password at a 
login prompt, the prompt will shake and reject your 
login. You’ll need to enter your new password to 
gain root access.

8   Macworld • January 2018
NEWS
Apple delays 
HomePod till 2018
Deck the halls with Alexa instead. Michael Simon reports
H
ere’s one Apple product you won’t find 
under the tree this year: HomePod. While 
Apple had originally planned to release 
its HomePod smart speaker in December, it has 
now announced that it will be pushed back until 
early 2018.
In a statement to Macworld, Apple said, “We 
can’t wait for people to experience HomePod, 
Apple’s breakthrough wireless speaker for the 
home, but we need a little more time before it’s 

January 2018 • Macworld   9
NEWS
ready for our customers. We’ll start shipping in the 
US, UK and Australia in early 2018.”
HomePod might not quite have the appeal of 
iPhone X, Apple Watch Series 3, or even Apple TV 
4K, but it’s still an important product in Apple’s 
catalogue. It’s more important, however, to get it 
right. We’ve already seen Google deal with issues 
related to its mini Google Home unknowingly 
recording people, and Apple can hardly afford a 
similar gaffe on its first smart speaker. Amazon’s 
Echo has turned the home speaker into a must-have 
product, and Apple’s entry needs to be perfect. 
Missing the important holiday shopping season is 
tough, but if it means more features and a better 
experience, than we’re all for it.
Smart competition
Announced at the Worldwide Developers 
Conference last June, the £349 HomePod is 
Apple first crack at a smart speaker to rival 
Amazon  Echo and Google Home. With a seven-
tweeter array and a high-excursion woofer, it was 
the first product of its kind to put a premium on 
sound, but competing products from Google and 
Sonos have since been announced.
The upcoming release of iOS 11.2 introduces 
SiriKit for HomePod, which suggest that third-
party apps will require a nearby iOS device to 
interact with HomePod rather than running 
natively on the speaker itself.
The delay in HomePod’s ship date doesn’t 
come as a complete surprise, as Apple hasn’t 

10   Macworld • January 2018
NEWS
mentioned its new speaker since its unveiling, 
even skipping the opportunity to promote the 
product at its iPhone X event. It’s unclear when 
HomePod will actually arrive, as early 2018 could 
mean February or March.

January 2018 • Macworld   11
T
he Photoshop CC 2018 update has plenty 
to look forward to beyond the typical annual 
upgrade of Adobe’s subscription desktop 
photo/graphic design app. It integrates support for 
emerging technologies like 360-degree spherical 
panoramas and the HEIF (High Efficiency Image 
Format) image file format adopted by Apple for 
macOS 10.13 and iOS 11. 
Combined with new features like variable 
fonts, paint stroke smoothing, a symmetry tool, a 
Curvature Pen tool, direct social media sharing, 
Adobe Photoshop CC 2018
From £23.99 inc VAT per month from fave.co/2BxFZb9
RATING:
REVIEW

12   Macworld • January 2018
instant access to synced Lightroom photos, 
enhanced search, brush management, layer 
copy and paste, and more, Photoshop CC 2018 
welcomes newcomers by incorporating training 
directly into the app.
In-app learning
While Adobe pioneered step-by-step post-
process recipes in its consumer Elements line, it 
always relied on photo pros to use documentation 
or tutorials to figure out the right moves for 
REVIEW
You can view step-by-step instructions, 
but only on Photoshop’s sample images

January 2018 • Macworld   13
themselves. That 
changes with Photoshop 
CC 2018 wherein 
interactive software how 
tos are now incorporated 
into the interface via the 
new Learn panel. It’s 
not exactly the same 
as Elements, where 
you can choose which 
photos to put through 
the process.
Instead, Photoshop 
CC 2018 provides 
annotated steps using 
REVIEW
Workflow recipes arrive 
with Photoshop CC 2018
Tool Tips are enhanced with tiny animations

14   Macworld • January 2018
REVIEW
its own sample images covering categories like 
Photography, Retouching, and Graphic Design, 
each containing three to five instructional modules. 
You can follow the steps in the example or bring up 
the additional text instructions, available from the 
Help icon. It would be even better if you could start 
with your own photos in the interactive examples, 
but it’s a step in the right direction.
Also new are Rich Tooltips – enhanced labels 
complete with tiny graphics and animations – that 
demonstrate how each tool works, though not every 
tool has annotated instructions. Perhaps Adobe 
will build out that feature so the majority of tools 
have visual tips, but this is a good start. Photoshop 
jockeys who know every tool by heart, can disable 
the feature in the preferences.
Easy access to Lightroom
Photoshop users can now hook into their Lightroom 
photos via the cloud, with all synced images 
accessible from the app’s Start screen. All you 
need to do is click on the photo you want, and it 
will be imported directly into the app. No fuss, 
no muss, and a genuine time saver. Most of the 
time I was able to access photos from the cloud 
fairly instantaneously. However, occasionally, 
downloading was slow or failed entirely.
Alas, Adobe giveth and Adobe taketh 
away. How? For several years, Photoshop has 
been available only by subscription, either 
via the standard Creative Cloud for £49.94 
per month (fave.co/2jgM19o) or the Creative 

January 2018 • Macworld   15
REVIEW
Cloud Photography Plan for £9.98 per month  
(fave.co/2jgM19o), but Lightroom was still available 
as a perpetual license. That has changed. With 
Photoshop CC 2018 and a rebranded Lightroom 
Classic CC for desktop, Lightroom is now 
subscription-only. The standalone Lightroom 6 
will continue to be sold, but it’s the last perpetual 
Lightroom version, with Adobe’s support for 
camera updates coming to a halt at the end of 2017. 
Photography Plan subscribers get both Lightroom 
Classic CC and a simplified, mobile-oriented, cloud-
friendly Lightroom CC (formerly Lightroom for 
Your Lightroom library is now accessible from the Start screen

16   Macworld • January 2018
REVIEW
mobile) with their subscription, along with 20GB of 
cloud storage and the Spark suite of cloud apps.
Adobe’s Sensei artificial intelligence engine 
also springs to life in the Photoshop Start screen, 
letting you search directly for untagged photos 
or visual content from your synced images. It also 
automatically integrates relevant Adobe Stock 
content and instructional videos.
Brush revolution
Adobe has overhauled its brush management 
workflow to ease and enhance handling and 
organization. You can now drag and drop to organize 
brushes and group them into folders and subfolders 
for easier, more intuitive access. Say you’re working 
on a painting for which you have gathered a specific 
brush collection, you can now 
access all those brushes in a 
single folder. You can now save 
options like opacity, flow, blend 
modes, colour, and size within 
brush presets and convert all 
your current brush tool presets 
into brush presets in one go. But 
Drag and drop brushes to 
organize and access them in any 
order or group you want

January 2018 • Macworld   17
REVIEW
you can still work the old way, 
if you prefer.
Photoshop CC 2018 
features new brushes by 
designer Kyle T. Webster, 
whose company, KyleBrush.
com Adobe just purchased. 
Over 1,000 of Webster’s 
custom designed brushes are 
now available for free via the 
Get More Brushes menu.
Brush stroke smoothing, 
which can now be controlled 
more granularly in the Options 
Bar, removes the jaggies 
from your brush, eraser, 
pencil, and mixer brush strokes. The smoothing 
feature has several modes and an optional tiny 
marker called a leash tail so you can follow the 
brush path visually as you draw.
360 degree editing for VR
The new Photoshop lets you open and edit 
360-degree equirectangular spherical panoramas 
that you can export for use with VR and panoramic 
viewers. Editing 360-degree panos works only in 
Photoshop’s 3D workspace, but with it you can 
accomplish most of the effects you are accustomed 
to on your 2D images, which is quite impressive.
Adjust your brush view

18   Macworld • January 2018
REVIEW
Once you import your 360-degree pano, you can 
edit it by drawing, painting, adding adjustments, 

January 2018 • Macworld   19
REVIEW
removing objects, hiding seams, or adding text. For 
non-destructive layer based edits, you can choose 
the spherical map, and in the Layers panel, add 
layers with various edits. When you’re done, you 
can export and post to Facebook and other media 
that can display this format.
Pen Tool love
Photoshop’s Pen Tool isn’t going anywhere, but if 
you’d rather have an easier way to create paths, 
Adobe has introduced a Curvature Pen tool. Like 
the similar tool in Illustrator, it is designed to easily 
create curved or straight paths, path segments, or 
The Curvature Pen tool arrives on Photoshop, and 
not a moment too soon. Add and remove points at will

20   Macworld • January 2018
REVIEW
shapes by clicking 
points instead of 
adjusting Bezier 
curves. You can 
then grab any point, 
adjust, or add 
points to better fit 
the selection.
The Curvature 
Pen tool is 
accompanied by 
another ease-of-use 
update to path lines, 
which define your 
paths on screen. You 
can choose bright 
colours and adjust 
line thickness to make paths easier to see. These 
path updates are optional features, but ease the 
way for newcomers to work effectively with paths.
Variable Font
For designers who work extensively with type and 
are picky about how type looks on their layouts 
(name one who is not), Photoshop CC 2018’s 
Variable font, a new OpenType font format that 
has been described as “a single font file that 
acts like multiple fonts,” lets you control and 
customize parameters like width, weight, slant, 
or optical size. Just search for the Variable name 
in the Font pull-down menu. Once you land on the 
variable font, it is highly visual and easy to use, 
Ever struggle to follow the path? No 
longer. You can alter path thickness 
and colour so they are easier to spot

January 2018 • Macworld   21
REVIEW
You have to search for Variable in order to access these 
specific fonts, or check the label on the font name
Use the slider controls to 
adjust a font’s characteristics

22   Macworld • January 2018
REVIEW
offering speed and flexibility in adjusting font 
variations and weights on the fly.
Select and Mask
This enhanced command has been outfitted with 
an updated algorithm that gives you quick and 

January 2018 • Macworld   23
REVIEW
easy results for separating foreground and 
background for hard-to-select elements like hair, 
fur, and feathers. It does a quick, accurate job with 
relatively little effort.
Camera Raw Range Masks
Photoshop CC 2018 has some updated goodies 
for Camera Raw 10. Colour and Luminance Range 
Masking controls let you define more precise 
masking areas for local adjustments. The range 
masking tools use either colour or tone to precisely 
pinpoint areas of your image according to colour 
or tonal values. You can make quick selections 
with the Adjustment Brush or the Radial Filter/
Graduated Filter and later refine the selection 
with the range masks. Slider tools let you select a 
Updated algorithm makes selections 
easier, faster, and more accurate

24   Macworld • January 2018
REVIEW
wider or narrower range. All adjustments are non-
destructive. This is not the most intuitive control 
I’ve ever seen, but once you get the hang of it, it 
offers a sure-fire way to shield certain parts of your 
raw image from local adjustments.
Tech previews
Preserve Details 2.0 and Enable Paint Symmetry, 
both tech previews you can switch on optionally in 
the preferences, are powered by Adobe’s Sensei AI 
framework. Preserve Details, on by default, uses 
deep learning to more accurately upscale photos 
without sacrificing detail, preserving texture and 
edge details, including hard edges and text, or hair 
The new Camera Raw Range Masking feature makes precise 
adjustments by colour or luminance. The red parts are the mask

January 2018 • Macworld   25
REVIEW
and skin tones, and even food, that can appear soft 
or distorted with previous resampling techniques.
For most images, even upscaled to 300 percent, 
I did not notice a huge improvement. You may 
start to see the effects a bit more by pushing 
enlargements to 400 percent and beyond, but 
overall, I found the improvement to be subtle for 
Bump up your image size while retaining more detail

26   Macworld • January 2018
REVIEW
most of the shots I tried. Photoshop now lets you 
paint symmetrically while using the Brush, Pencil, 
and Eraser tools, a feature whose ease and fluidity 
targets painters, sketchers, and designers. Just 
click the Butterfly icon in the Options bar and select 
from among several symmetry types, which are 
simply preset paths. Strokes are reflected in real 
time across the line of symmetry. Any path can be 
designated a symmetry path, so you can easily 
create your own.
Macworld’s buying advice
Photo and graphic professionals and serious 
hobbyists should be really pumped about 
Photoshop’s extensive variety of new tools and 
enhancements for a wide spectrum of creative 
output. Performance was rock solid: I noted exactly 
one crash for the entire testing period. The Wow 
headliner – 360-degree editing – recruits a whole 
new class of users, as does the in-app training.
Photoshop’s updates and new features reflect a 
profound thought process about meeting changing 
user needs – from variable fonts to Lightroom 
integration to brush organization – that may well 
encourage non-subscriber pro users to fork over 
a monthly fee for it and its Lightroom companion 
apps, both desktop and mobile. That said, Adobe 
is targeting photo pros and advanced enthusiasts 
for Creative Cloud subscriptions, and is steering 
consumers to its Elements line of powerful, but 
traditionally licensed software. Jackie Dove 

January 2018 • Macworld   27
Mac security tips
Mac security is important, but often overlooked. It’s time to 
start taking Mac security seriously. Keir Thomas reports
M
aintaining privacy and keeping data secure 
are hugely important. Yet many of us give 
it scant attention and do little more than 
the bare minimum, if anything at all to ensure that 
hackers, opportunists and, yes, even the authorities 
are able to access as little of our personal data as 
possible. Yet, macOS makes securing your data 
very simple, thanks to a host of tools in System 
Preferences and Safari, and third-party apps.
There are two places threats to your data are 
likely to come from: over a network like the internet, 
FEATURE

28   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
or from someone with direct access to your Mac. 
Taking steps to protect yourself will minimize both.
One thing we’d normally recommend when it 
comes to Mac security is to make sure the macOS 
software is up-to-date, however, from time to time 
Apple has been caught out by security flaws in the 
Mac operating software, such as the High Sierra 
Root bug that made it possible for a hacker to 
access all the settings on a Mac just by logging in 
as root in System Preferences (see page 4).
Luckily Apple has various measures in place 
to guard against such threats, as we explain in 
this article about how Apple protects you from 
malware. We will address the various system 
settings you can use to protect your Mac below.
1. Security & Privacy settings
Let’s start with the basic Mac settings you should 
be checking to ensure security is watertight.
The first thing you should do is pay a visit to the 
Security & Privacy pane in System Preferences. 
Here, you’ll find four tabs that control various 
aspects of security. To change settings you’ll need 
to click on the padlock at the bottom of the screen 
and type in your user name and password. If you 
have an administrator account, you’ll be able to 
make changes that affect the whole Mac, if not 
they’ll only apply to your account.
2. Turn on the Firewall
The first step to securing any Mac is enabling the 
firewall, which blocks any unwanted incoming 

January 2018 • Macworld   29
FEATURE
network connections. You might think the firewall 
is enabled by default but it often isn’t. (And, no, 
we have no idea why not.) Luckily, enabling it is 
dead easy and doing so is entirely wise.
Here’s how to turn on the Firewall on a Mac
•  Click the Firewall tab in the System Preferences > 
Security & Privacy pane we just opened.
•  Click the padlock icon at the bottom left to unlock 
system settings (you’ll need to type your login 
password when prompted).
•  Click the Turn On Firewall button.
•  Then click the Firewall Options button and, in the 
dialog box that appears, click the Enable Stealth 
Mode box. This last step means your computer will 

30   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
be largely invisible on public networks, such as 
shared Wi-Fi in a cafe.
•  In the Firewall tab, click Firewall Options to 
make changes. Here, you’ll see a list of apps 
and services which are able to receive inbound 
connections. To add one to the list, if, say you try 
to run an app and it displays an error telling you 
it has been prevented from accepting an inbound 
connection, click the ‘+’ beneath the list. 
It’s important to note that macOS’s Firewall, 
while useful, offers only limited protection from 
malware. That’s because it shields you from 
inbound traffic only. It’s job is to limit which apps 
and services can accept incoming connections. 
It doesn’t provide any control over outbound 
connections, in other words apps and services 
which initiate connections. So, for example, if you 
download a piece of malware, OS X’s Firewall won’t 
stop it connecting to the internet.
Some people choose to block outgoing network 
connections too, so that certain apps can’t “phone 
home” without their knowledge. This also means 
accidentally installed malware is unable to leak your 
data without you being made aware.
As we said, OS X/macOS offers no built-in way 
of blocking outgoing connections but third-party 
apps like Little Snitch (€45, around £40, from  
fave.co/2jeD7Jt) and Hands Off (£38.41 from  
fave.co/2jgWzFy), or an outbound firewall found 
in anti-malware tools from the likes of Intego, 
Sophos and Symantec, will do the job with aplomb.

January 2018 • Macworld   31
FEATURE
3. Use a password
Let’s go back to the first tab in the Security & 
Privacy pane: the General section.
There are three settings here you should pay 
attention to. The first is the one which allows you 
to set a password for your account if you haven’t 
already done so. You should have a password. 
The next allows you to specify if a password is 
needed to unlock your Mac when it goes to sleep 
or a screen saver begins.
If you work in an office with other people, you 
should consider switching this setting on.
You can specify how soon after sleep or the 
start of a screen saver the password is required. 
The most secure setting is ‘immediately’ but, like 
everything else to do with security, you need to 
balance security and convenience. So choose a 
time period that makes sense to you.

32   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
While we’re on the subject of passwords, we’ll 
remind you that good passwords should be difficult 
to remember. They should also not be written down. 
That, of course, presents a problem, particularly if 
you don’t want Safari to auto-complete them.
The solution is a password manager such as 
1Password (£3.99 per month from tinyurl.com/
y92foLu2) or Dashlane (£38.99 per year from 
tinyurl.com/y79mrorj). These apps allow you to 
create and store robust passwords and sync them 
across all your devices. Crucially, however, they 
encrypt the data and allow access when you type in 
the master password.
4. Disable automatic login
The next setting to address is the Disable automatic 
login setting. You should check this, particularly if 
you use a mobile Mac. If your Mac gets stolen, you 
don’t want the thief to be able to access your data.
5. Mac security tips: Apps
At the bottom of the General page are two options 
relating to which apps can run on your Mac.
The safest, but most limiting option, is to 
only allow apps from the App Store to run.
The other option is a good compromise, 
allowing you to run apps from the App Store 
and from developers known to Apple. In older 
versions of the operating system there was an 
option to allow apps from Anywhere. If you have 
this option we would advise against using it. You 
will be able to run an app that doesn’t come from 

January 2018 • Macworld   33
FEATURE
the App Store or an identified developer, but you 
will have to approve it before it will run.
6. Turn on FileVault
With FileVault turned on all the files in your user 
account will be encrypted.
To decrypt them, you’ll need to type in either 
your account password or the recovery key 
created when you switch File Vault on.
For most users, the inconvenience of having to 
type in a password to open a file, together with the 
tine it takes initially to encrypt all the files on your 
Mac, outweighs the security advantages.
But if you have reason to keep data as secure 
as it can be, switch it on.
7. Check your privacy settings
The last tab, Privacy, covers a number of different 
controls and settings. These are listed in the 

34   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
window on the left of the pane. Location Services 
allows you to control which apps have access 
to your location data. You can switch Location 
Services off completely here, or prevent individual 
apps from accessing data.
Likewise, Contacts, Calendar, and Reminders 
allow you to specify which apps on your Mac can 
access the information stored in those core OS X 
apps. If you click on Photos you’ll see all the apps 
that have requested access to your Photos library.
If you’ve added your Twitter, Facebook, and 
LinkedIn details to the Internet Accounts System 
Preferences pane, you can control which apps 
have access to those accounts here.
Then there’s the Accessibility section. Despite 
sharing a name, this, confusingly, has nothing to 
do with the settings available in the Accessibility 
pane in the main System Preferences window. Here, 
you can control which apps are able to control your 
Mac in some way. For example, Deeper and Onyx 
allow you change settings which would normally 
require Terminal commands. To use them, you’ll 
need to enable them here.
Finally, a new option in High Sierra is Analytics, 
which allows Apple and app developers to 
improve their products based on data gathered 
about your use of their apps. You can choose not 
to share this data here.
8. Check Safari privacy settings
Away from System Preferences, Safari has several 
settings that allow you to control privacy.

January 2018 • Macworld   35
FEATURE
The first is New Private Window, from the File 
menu, which allows you to visit websites, without a 
record of where you go being stored in the History 
menu, or anywhere else on your Mac.
The second is Clear History, in the Safari menu, 
which if you click it periodically, erases cookies 
and other cached data from the sites you visit and 
removes them from the History menu.
In Safari’s Preferences, the Privacy section 
allows you to prevent websites tracking you, and 
control which sites can store cookies on your Mac. 
It used to be possible to specify how your 
location data is made available from this window, 
but in High Sierra these settings are addressed 
under a separate tab, in Websites > Location. 
Here you can choose to set Safari to always deny 
location information, or allow specific websites to 
access your location.
And if you’re concerned about storing website 
username and passwords, or personal data, go to 
the Auto Fill and Passwords sections and uncheck 
the boxes that enable those services.

36   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
9. Check what you’re sharing
Your Mac is able to share files with other Macs, and 
can share data in various other ways too – including 
sharing the whole screen to facilitate remote 
working. Once a sharing service is enabled it’s like 
fitting a new door or window to your house
Yes, that door or window might be considered 
secure – people will need a password to utilise 
screen sharing, for example – but there might 
be a flaw in the door or window that makes it not 
quite as impenetrable as you might think. In simple 
terms, it’s a good idea to turn off any sharing 
service you’re not using, and the majority of Macs 
used in the home environment should have all 
sharing services turned off.
To do so, open System Preferences and click 
the Sharing icon.
Go through the list on the left, and look closely 
for any ticks in the boxes beneath the On heading.
Remove any ticks you see but if in doubt take a 
look at the following list to make absolutely sure 
you’re OK disabling that particular sharing service.
10. Screen Sharing & File Sharing
Screen sharing: Used mostly in corporate 
environments to let tech support workers see 
or control your screen, and perhaps perform 
repairs/updates. Windows and Linux computers 
can also use it to control your Mac’s screen 
via VNC. Not heard of VNC, not in a corporate 
environment, and never access your Mac 
remotely? Ensure it’s turned off.

January 2018 • Macworld   37
FEATURE
File sharing: Lets other computers on the 
network access your computer’s file system, 
including Linux and Windows computers – 
technically speaking, it enables Windows File 
Sharing (SMB), Apple Filing Protocol (AFP), and 
Network File Service (NFS). Notably, the file 
sharing system is also used by the Back To My 
Mac service, which is part of iCloud and allows you 
to access your Mac’s files from another Mac via 
the internet (although it has absolutely nothing 
to do with iCloud Drive, which performs a similar 
function). If you’re not sharing files across the 
network, and not using Back To My Mac, then 
this option should be switched off.

38   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
11. Printer Sharing, Remote Login and more
Printer sharing: Shares any printer connected to 
your Mac with other computers on the network, 
again including PCs. Should be turned off if you’re 
not sharing your printer, or if you don’t even have a 
printer attached to your Mac.
Remote login: Allows connection to your Mac via 
SSH/SFTP, and mostly used by techies to work 
at the command-line when away from their Macs. 
Should be turned off if that description doesn’t 
apply to you - and we’re pretty sure it won’t!
Remove management: Used in the corporate 
environment to let administrators access your Mac 
to do things like perform upgrades, or make fixes. 
Should be turned off in all other circumstances.
12. Remote Apple Events, internet  
sharing and Bluetooth Sharing
Remote Apple Events: One of Apple’s many Good 
Ideas From Long Ago, this lets one Mac control 
another to print, or do just about anything, in fact, 
thanks to tie-ins with AppleScript, at one point 
a cool joke among Mac fans was to use Remote 
Apple Events to make another Mac speak, via 
speech synthesis.
The user of that Mac would be scared half to 
death when his computer seemingly came to life. 
However, if you need Remote Apple Events in our 
modern age then you’ll already know all about it. 
The rest of us can switch it off without worry.

January 2018 • Macworld   39
FEATURE
Internet sharing: Lets one Mac share a Net 
connection with other Macs. This was created in the 
days of dial-up internet. It’s extremely unlikely to be 
used now that broadband, Wi-Fi routers and home 
networking are the norm, so should be switched off.
Bluetooth sharing: Lets a Mac send and receive 
files to and from another Bluetooth-enabled device, 
such as a mobile phone. iPhones and iPads can’t 
share files this way, so you’re only likely to use it 
if you’ve got an Android phone. You’ll find guides 
online telling you how to do this. However, in all 
other situations this option should be turned off.
13. Apply a firmware password
Mac OS X/macOS turns on FileVault encryption by 
default nowadays, which means the entire boot disk 

40   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
is encrypted and impossible to access unless it’s 
unlocked at login via the user’s password.
However, that doesn’t stop somebody using a 
USB memory stick to boot the Mac and potentially 
wipe all the data from the hard disk, or simply 
reinstall OS X/macOS.
The solution is to apply a firmware password. 
Unlike with a PC’s so-called BIOS password, the 
Mac’s firmware password prompt will only appear 
if anybody tries to boot your Mac in a non-standard 
way, which is to say, via a USB stick, or if they try 
and boot to the Recovery Console. Most of the 
time you won’t see the password prompt.
In fact, it’s from the Recovery Console that 
you’ll need to activate the firmware password, so 
restart the computer and, just before the Apple 
logo appears, press and hold down Cmd+R. 
When the boot-time progress bar appears you 
can lift your fingers from the keyboard.
Select your language and location when 
prompted, then click the Utilities > Firmware 
Password Utility menu item. Follow the 
instructions. Be extremely careful here! If you 
forget the firmware password then only Apple can 
unlock your computer. This is probably why this 
feature is optional!
14. Enable guest user
If you know anything about computer security you 
might be wondering if we’ve gone mad: we’re asking 
you to enable the guest user? Doesn’t that let 
anybody who’s stolen your Mac actually use it?

January 2018 • Macworld   41
FEATURE
Well, it’s more that we’re asking you not to turn 
it off, because it’s a vital tool within the Find my 
Mac service, which is a part of iCloud that lets you 
attempt to track down a lost or stolen Mac.
Apple says the following: “The guest account 
works with the Find My Mac feature of iCloud, which 
can help you find your Mac if you lose it. You can 
locate your Mac if someone finds it, logs in as a 
guest, then uses Safari to access the internet.”
So, don’t turn off the Guest account if you have 
Find my Mac enabled in iCloud. To check, open 
System Preferences, click the iCloud icon, and then 
ensure there’s a tick alongside Find My Mac at the 
bottom of the list at the right.
15. Disable the FileVault ‘Security Hole’
Those who take computer security very seriously 
indeed point out that, when your Mac enters sleep 

42   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
mode (if you close the lid of a MacBook Pro, for 
example), there’s a potential security hole in 
the fact that the password required to decrypt 
FileVault is stored in memory.
In theory somebody could wake the computer 
and somehow – and we genuinely don’t know how 
– retrieve this key, and thereby have access to 
the entire disk’s contents without the need for a 
login password.
The only people out there likely to take 
advantage of this are government agencies that 
employ extraordinarily clever people and have 
unlimited budgets. It’s certainly too difficult for 
a burglar who steals your Mac to exploit, or a 
nosey colleague.
However, if you’re truly security paranoid then 
here’s how to stop the FileVault key being stored in 
memory. The only actual difference this will make in 
everyday use of the Mac is that sometimes you’ll be 
prompted to type your login password twice when 
waking your Mac, and your Mac will be a little slower 
when waking from sleep mode.

January 2018 • Macworld   43
FEATURE
We need to do two things. First, switch the Mac 
to enter standby mode, rather than sleep mode, 
whenever you do something like close the lid of a 
MacBook Pro. In Standby mode the contents of 
memory are saved to disk and the computer put into 
a deep sleep mode that uses only a trickle of power.
Secondly, tell the computer to not hold the 
FileVault key in memory while in Standby mode.
Both these two steps can be achieved by 
opening a Terminal window (you’ll find it in Utilities 
folder of the Applications listing in Finder) and 
then pasting in the following:
sudo pmset -a destroyfvkeyonstandby 1 
hibernatemode 25
To turn off this feature, and re-enable the 
security ‘hole’, again open Terminal and type:
sudo pmset -a destroyfvkeyonstandby 0 
hibernatemode 3
Then reboot.
16. Check for persistent apps
Some apps on your Mac are designed to start 
invisibly each time you boot, and remain invisible 
while you’re using the computer. These are 
called persistent apps, and examples include the 
update checker apps that Google and Microsoft 
install to ensure Google Chrome and Microsoft 
Office are always up to date. Adobe installs a 

44   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
handful of persistent apps too as part of the 
Creative Cloud package.
However, malware also uses persistent apps 
to do their nastiness without you noticing and, to 
make matters worse, there are many locations in 
the file system where malware can hide in order to 
have itself started at each boot-up. We could advise 
you to keep an eye on each and every location, but 
it’s a mammoth task.
Luckily, there are two free apps that will do a 
lot of the hard work for you. KnockKnock (fave.
co/2BCgXrv) scans these locations and will tell you 
what’s there. It’s not a malware scanner, so won’t 
tell you if what you find is dangerous or not.
That’s between you and a search engine, 
although a helping of common sense will do 
no harm – for example, the aforementioned 
apps for Microsoft, Google and Adobe apps are 
easy to spot (although as a caveat we suppose 
we ought to point out that it’s possible some 

January 2018 • Macworld   45
FEATURE
malware might masquerade as an app from one of 
these companies).
The second app is from the same clever 
people who make KnockKnock, and it’s called 
BlockBlock (fave.co/2BzE06i). This runs in the 
background of your Mac via a menu bar icon and 
monitors all the locations in which persistent 
apps install themselves.
If any app attempts to install persistently then 
a pop-up dialog box will appear telling you, and it’s 
down to you whether you allow it or ban it. Again, 
BlockBlock is not an anti-malware tool so doesn’t 
know what’s legitimate or not. That’s for you to 
work out. But as forms of malware protection both 
KnockKnock and BlockBlock are effective.
17. Scan for malware
Although it’s true there’s more malware targeting 
Macs these days, we’re still nowhere near the tidal 
wave that Windows users face on a daily basis. 
This is also true of the malware attack that crippled 
the NHS – it targets only Windows PCs. 
Because of this, and because OS X/
macOS already features a powerful, always 
running yet invisible anti-malware tool called 
Xprotect (tinyurl.com/p8o4ddp), we reckon 
that antimalware software is still not a standard 
requirement for a Mac.
However, for peace of mind you can occasionally 
fire up an app like Bitdefender Virus Scanner 
(tinyurl.com/lgg3mhw), which simply scans 
through your files in order to uncover malware.

46   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
Unlike Windows antimalware apps, it doesn’t 
install any system monitoring software that can 
slow the computer down. The best news is that 
Bitdefender Virus Scanner is free and very easy 
to use. Be aware that it also finds and reports 
Windows malware, though.
For example, scanning my system typically 
shows a handful of spam mail messages containing 
attachments into which Windows malware has 
been hidden. This can be alarming but is actually 
harmless and, generally speaking, Windows 
malware can be identified because the name of it 
usually begins with ‘Win32’ or ‘Win64’. Even though 
this is harmless to Mac users, Bitdefender Virus 
Scanner will still remove it.
In addition to Bitdefender Virus Scanner, 
we also recommend the occasional use of 
Malwarebytes Antimalware (fave.co/2BCkp5g). 
It focuses mostly on uncovering and removing 
adware, which is to say, hidden code within 
certain apps that aims to hijack your computing 
experience to show adverts on the desktop or in 
your web browser. Again, you can run Malwarebytes 
Antimalware infrequently to scan your system.
18. Enable two-step everywhere
Two-step authentication is a system whereby your 
login to services or websites requires more than 
just your username and password. It requires an 
additional numeric code. This is either sent to you 
as something like a text message or it’s generated 
by a special app that runs on your mobile phone 

January 2018 • Macworld   47
FEATURE
(there are many such apps but for the iPhone we 
recommend Authy, tinyurl.com/yavn2jd5).
Two-step verification is sometimes referred 
to by its more technical name of two-factor 
authentication, or TFA. 
We very, very strongly recommend you set it up 
because it presents an insurmountable brick wall 
to hackers trying to gain access to your account. In 
fact, stop reading this now and go and do it if you 
haven’t already. We’ll wait here until you’ve finished.
Done it? Terrific. But now you should go off 
and enable two-step it for all the other sites and 
services you access. For example, if you use any 
Google services like Gmail, then you can also 
enable two-step verification. You can enable it for 

48   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
Microsoft services and sites too, and for Dropbox. 
Not all sites or services offer two-step verification 
just yet – notable hold-outs for UK users are 
Amazon and eBay – but a surprising number are 
on-board. Sites like twofactorauth.org provide a 
continually-updated list of those that do, although 
they tend to be biased towards American use.
Setting-up two-step verification is easy. Some 
sites and services text you a number when you’re 
logging in, that you then enter when prompted, 
so to set them up all you need do is provide your 
mobile number.
For those services or sites that use an 
authenticator app, like the aforementioned Authy, 
you’ll need to switch to the app on your mobile 
or tablet, then choose to add a code and simply 
point the device’s camera at a barcode that the 
site displays when you opt for two-factor setup. It’s 
pretty straightforward.
If your device doesn’t have a camera then you 
can type the authorization code in manually, and 
usually it appears just below the barcode.
Subsequently logging in to the service once two-
step verification is setup will involve opening the 
app and typing when prompted the code displayed 
(usually after you’ve entered your password), or 
waiting for the text message/voice call to arrive and 
typing it when prompted.
19. Encrypt web page look-ups
The ages-old Domain Name System, or DNS, 
converts the addresses we humans can read and 

January 2018 • Macworld   49
FEATURE
remember – such as www.macworld.co.uk – into the 
numeric internet addresses that computers better 
understand, such as 104.16.71.73.
All computers connected to the internet consult 
DNS servers. They’re provided by the Internet 
Service Provider as part of the overall package. The 
problem is that, like many things online, DNS is in 
no way secure.
It was invented in a different era, back when 
people just didn’t think about things like that. In 
other words, any and all requests you make for 
websites via DNS can be snooped upon by others 
while the data is in transit.
The DNSCrypt app and project (dnscrypt.
org) overcomes this by simply encrypting DNS 
requests both to and from the DNS server. You can 
download the app from the project’s home page 
and setup is pretty simple once it’s installed - just 
open System Preferences, click the DNSCrypt 

50   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
icon at the bottom, then select the General tab 
and put checks alongside Enable DNSCrypt 
and Automatically Disable if Blocked. See our 
screenshot on page 49 for an example.
You won’t notice any difference to everyday 
internet tasks such as web browsing when 
DNSCrypt is in use, although it adds a menu bar 
icon so you don’t forget it’s running (right-clicking 
this and selecting the hide option gets rid of this 
until you next reboot). However, with DNSCrypt 
running your web page look-ups are immediately 
more secure.
20. Use a VPN
Never assume your Mac is safe when using a shared 
network, whether that’s out and about in a café, or 
even in location such as an office. Unfortunately, 
it’s extremely easy for malicious interests to spy on 
data you send to and from websites.
While out and about many people chose to 
utilise a virtual private network (VPN) service. 
This encrypts all data and routes it to an end point 
operated by the folks who run the VPN service.
Tasks such as browsing and downloading are 
entirely unaffected as far as the user is concerned, 
but anybody on the same physical network – such 
as another computer on the café’s shared Wi-Fi 
service – is blocked entirely from snooping on 
your Mac’s data.
Because a VPN service encrypts your data, you 
can also it at home to overcome internet censorship 
imposed by the British government and ISPs.

January 2018 • Macworld   51
FEATURE
A variety of companies offer VPN services and 
they’re usually paid for via monthly subscription 
fees of around $5-$10. Just search Google and 
you’ll find many examples. However, there’s been 
an increasing trend recently for some companies to 
offer lifetime subscriptions to their VPN services 
for a one-off fee of around $40. For the more casual 
user such deals are ideal. For impartial and expert 
advice, try out Macworld’s article Best VPNs for 
Mac at tinyurl.com/ycbnb572.
Typically, VPN services come with an app that 
you run when you want to make use of the VPN 
connection, although OS X/macOS comes with a 
built-in VPN tool that you can use instead – just 
open System Preferences, click the Network icon, 

52   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
then click the plus button at the bottom left beneath 
the list of connections.
In the dialog box that appears, click VPN from 
the drop-down list alongside Interface, then select 
the service type from the list beneath (usually it’s 
L2TP). Then click the Create button, and fill in the 
server/login details provided by the VPN service.
21. HTTPS everywhere
For historical reasons most data is transmitted on 
the web in plain form and this means anybody can 
eavesdrop at any stage of transit. The exception is 
secure connections such as those made to banks, 
webmail services and online shopping sites. These 
use secure HTTP, and you can tell because the 
website address starts with https://.
Wouldn’t it make sense if every site used 
HTTPS? Making a website secure in this way is a 

January 2018 • Macworld   53
FEATURE
bit more complicated and expensive than running a 
basic site but nonetheless there is a slow revolution 
happening and many sites are making the switch.
You could try adding an S to the middle of each 
web address – so that http://example.com becomes 
https://example.com. There’s an https:// version 
of the Google home page, for example. However, 
an easier way if you’re using a browser that isn’t 
Safari – such as Chrome or Firefox – is to install the 
HTTPS Everywhere browser extension. This simply 
(and invisibly) consults a database of sites that 
have an optional https:// entrance and switches 
you automatically should you try to access one.
Alas, because of the way it works, a true 
HTTPS Everywhere extension for Safari is 
presently impossible to implement in a way that 
provides maximum security. Nonetheless, the 
SSL Everywhere extension brings something very 
similar to Apple’s browser.
The only difference is that the initial data 
transmission when you access a site isn’t 
encrypted, which can provide interested hackers 
or snoops with a little more information than is 
ideal. However, once you’ve been switched over 
to secure HTTP – which essentially happens 
immediately from the user’s perspective – then 
everything is, of course, encrypted.

54   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
How Apple turns chores 
into exciting features
Apple has a history of taking boring chores and turning them 
into selling points. Dan Moren reports
W
hen Apple comes to mind, it probably 
conjures images of slick, carefully 
engineered devices with innovative, 
envelope-pushing features. And the company’s 
surely had more than its fair share of those, but it’s 
also managed to pull off a subtler but far greater 
feat that goes under appreciated. 

January 2018 • Macworld   55
FEATURE
The company has not only figured out how to 
make us eat our vegetables – technologically 
speaking – but it’s also turned those very features 
into selling points. Because it’s one thing to sell 
a flashy, shiny device; it’s quite another to get 
people excited about the mundane necessities 
of the technology world. 
Baby got backups 
In autumn 2007, I’d only recently started working 
at Macworld, and I was assigned to cover what was 
the biggest of big deals in those days: the launch 
of Apple’s latest version of Mac OS X, code-named 
Leopard. As these were still the days where you had 
to get yourself a physical disc to install a new OS 
(and pay for the privilege), I hauled myself down to 
my local Apple Store. What I found was a decent 
length line of people all queued up to get their 
copies of the new operating system. 
I talked to a few folks in the line and what 
surprised me was how many were eager to try 
out one particular new feature of Leopard: Time 
Machine. This was, after all, a feature that let you 
back up your computer to an external hard drive – 
nothing new in what it was doing, but a significant 
change in that it was now included as part of the 
core operating system.  
But the idea of people being excited about 
backing up their data was mind-boggling. This was 
historically a chore, the kind of thing that people 
knew they should do for their own benefit, but just 
ended up putting off. From Apple’s perspective, it 

56   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
was a feature to draw more people to the platform 
and perhaps even to lock them into the platform by 
committing their data to its own backup scheme. 
But it also made life easier for the company itself: 
for example, insuring that customers could easily 
back up their data before bringing their Macs in 
for service, or even forestall customer support 
questions related to data loss. Since users no 
longer had to go and buy expensive backup 
software separately, it removed a major excuse for 
not backing up. 
And, indeed, Time Machine paved the way for 
iOS’s iCloud Backup feature. Now it’s probably 
Thanks to Time Machine backing 
up your Mac is no longer a chore

January 2018 • Macworld   57
FEATURE
the rare person who doesn’t back up their Macs 
and iOS devices, though Apple could still stand 
to increase the default iCloud space and provide 
a similar cloud backup service for Macs. Thanks 
to Time Machine and its successors, backing up 
has become a habit rather than a chore.
Security touchdown
In the earliest days of personal computing, 
security wasn’t necessarily something that most 
people spent a lot of time thinking about. Mostly 
because it wasn’t until much later that we started 
storing our most important information digitally 
or connecting them to networks that opened us 
to new threats. But it got even more challenging 
when we started carrying our data-laden devices 
around with us. 
Even in those earliest days, I don’t think most 
people bothered to put passcodes on their iPhones. 
Especially when the device was new, users didn’t 
want to be slowed down by having to punch in a 
four-digit code. As smartphones became increasing 
targets for theft and people started using more and 
more apps to access sensitive or personal data, 
passcodes became de rigueur – only the industry 
default of four-digit passcodes, which cashpoints 
had long accustomed us to, were quickly deemed to 
be not secure enough. 
So, what to do? You want to encourage people 
to use longer passcodes, but you want to balance 
that security with the convenience of not having 
to thumb-type a lengthy string of letters and 

58   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
numbers every time you want to access even the 
most basic feature on your phone.
Touch ID was the major selling point of the 
iPhone 5s, just as Face ID has been for the iPhone 
X, and once again Apple got us to all think about 
improving our digital hygiene practices. Because 
once you set up Touch ID or Face ID, you could have 
a lengthy secure passcode and not have to 
worry about entering it all the time. Of course, 
neither biometric security option provides perfect 
protection – as we’ve seen, people will always 
try to come up with ways to trick them – but if it 
encourages people to use longer, more secure 
passcodes, then Apple’s still managed to pull off 
that impressive feat of getting us to do something 
we know is good for us, even when we don’t want to. 
Thus Touch ID was born

January 2018 • Macworld   59
FEATURE
What to do when breaking 
up a shared Apple ID
Glenn Fleishman explains what steps you should take
A
pple’s cloud services (iTunes, iCloud, and 
so on) require you to create an Apple ID, 
which is essentially your key to access. 
Each person using Apple’s services should have a 

60   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
unique Apple ID, but sometimes people share IDs 
for convenience. That could led to some issues, 
however. For example, if an Apple ID is being shared 
by a couple, it can create a problem if the couple 
breaks up. A reader writes in with such a story:
My partner and I broke up. We shared the same 
iTunes account. Everything downloaded on one 
phone appears on the other. How do I stop this?
While the question is about iTunes, an iTunes 
account is a form of Apple ID: you can use it just for 
purchasing, or with iCloud for calendar, contacts, 
email, photos, and music, as well as macOS 
access and elements associated with Continuity 
(iOS/macOS interactions).
Before I offer the rest of my advice, can you 
negotiate with this former partner over custody? 
If so, you might be faced with different choices. If 

January 2018 • Macworld   61
FEATURE
you’ve purchased apps, music, videos, audiobooks, 
and other items using this Apple ID, you might have 
to figure out how one party reimburses the other for 
stuff they want to keep and still use.
If that’s the case, one person could be left with 
the account and simply change the password. 
(This is a good time to also enable two-factor 
authentication and review the phone numbers and 
email addresses associated with the Apple ID, to 
make sure they’re all yours; or encourage your ex 
to do the same.
Let’s assume you are willing to abandon the 
account or have granted custody to your partner.
First, you’ll want to copy all media and other 
items that aren’t purchases that are tied to the 
account. If you’re using the Apple ID just for 
iTunes, that’s everything. With apps and videos, 
usage is tied to an Apple ID login, and you can use 
them without logging in. (The music files have no 
protection on them, but if both you and your partner 
retain copies, that’s a copyright violation.)
If you’re also using iCloud sync for contacts, 
calendars, email, photos, or music, you’ll want to 
make sure you have the copies you want of all your 
stuff stored locally before deleting it. The last stage 
of what you’ll after the below bullet points is log out 
of the iTunes or iCloud account you’re using.
(I’m assuming no one will do something malicious 
here and delete media or other information that 
the other person has a right to have, but given the 
complicated nature of relationships, I’m going to let 
you all work out those details.)

62   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
Contacts: You can use the Contacts app in macOS 
to select contact entries and then use File > Export 
> Contacts Archive to create a file that you can 
import on another Mac. You can then delete those 
selected Contacts before logging out. Quit after 
deleting, because otherwise, deletion can be 
undone. There’s no way to export contacts from 
iOS’s Contacts app or from iCloud.com. However, 
you can use third-party apps that access your 
iOS address book to group, copy, excerpt, and 
delete entries.
Calendar: If you’ve shared a single calendar, it’s 
harder to separate these entries and, as with 
Contacts, you have to use macOS (or possibly 
a third-party iOS app) to export entries. You 
may want to use Calendar in macOS to export 
an entire calendar, and then selectively delete 

January 2018 • Macworld   63
FEATURE
entries related to you, especially those with phone 
numbers, addresses, and people’s names.
Email: If you’re using options to store email on 
a server with Apple’s Mail app, retrieve it on a 
Mac to store locally by dragging messages or 
mailboxes to entry under On My Mac that appear 
in the sidebar. All messages you drag to that 
section are moved from the server to your Mac. 
You don’t need to do anything else. If you’re using 
a different email program, consult the directions 
for moving messages and mailboxes from server 
storage to local Mac storage.
Photos: With iCloud Photo Library enabled, every 
photo you upload using a Mac, iOS device, or via 
iCloud.com while logged into that Apple ID will be 
copied to all other devices logged into the same one 
(and available via iCloud.com). Copy the files you 
want to retain, and then delete them from Photos in 
iOS or macOS or via iCloud.com. Deleting images 
from iCloud Photo Library deletes them from every 
device on which they appear. To make sure they’re 
permanently gone, check for the Recently Deleted 
album. If they’re still there, select them and choose 
delete, which removes them forever.
Music: Apple lets you sync music files in your library 
across devices. (This is distinct from iTunes Match, 
which finds high-quality versions of any music 
you’ve ripped or purchased elsewhere, and makes 
those available.) You’ll want to make sure to copy 

64   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
any music files that belong to you before logging 
out of the Apple ID account.
After having done all of the above, on all your 
devices, log out from that account. If you’re using 
a single Apple ID for both iTunes and purchases 
and for iCloud, log out from both places.
1.  In macOS, go to the iCloud system preference 
pane, click Sign Out, and follow prompts.
2.  In iOS to sign out of iCloud, go to Settings, tap 
your name, and swipe down. Then, tap Sign Out. 
For iTunes, tap iTunes & App Store and then tap 
the ‘Apple ID: email@domain.com’ link. Finally, 
tap Sign Out.
3.  If you’re using third-party contact, calendar, or 
email software, you may also need to sign out of 
or delete your Apple ID from those locations.
Assuming you don’t have another Apple ID 
you’re already using with iCloud, create a new Apple 
ID at appleid.apple.com, then log in via Settings in 
iOS and the Sharing preference pane in macOS. 
You can now copy all the stuff you exported and 
saved back into your various  apps. 

January 2018 • Macworld   65
FEATURE
Help Desk
Glenn Fleishman answers your most vexing Mac problems
WHY PHOTO COUNTS MIGHT DIFFER 
BETWEEN PHOTOS IN IOS, MACOS, 
AND ICLOUD.COM
Computers are supposed to be good at counting, 
right? So why do the numbers sometimes not add 
up for photos? Macworld reader Jeffrey asks a 
question that’s similar to ones asked by others:
The photo count between my Mac and my iPhone 
are not the same. I use iTunes syncing along with 
My Photo Stream to keep the devices identical. 
Something has gone amiss. I don’t have any idea 

66   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
how to troubleshoot the image counts since iTunes 
is supposed to be syncing the images. How might 
I determine if a problem really exists, and if so, how 
do I fix it? 
There are long-running discussions on Apple’s 
forums about iTunes syncing not matching up 
numbers in iPhoto and Photos for macOS and iOS 
devices. These seem to stem from deleted photos 
where corresponding thumbnails remain in the 
library databases. If that’s the case, you can rebuild 
an iPhoto library with these instructions (tinyurl.
com/yaxulo99) and repair a Photos library by 
following these directions (tinyurl.com/y935k6cg).
However, I’ve noticed even with iCloud Photo 
Library, which I use, there can be discrepancies. 
Let’s look at my library in Photos for iOS, Photos 
for macOS, and iCloud.com:
A collage of the various totals from Photos 
in iOS and macOS and at iCloud.com

January 2018 • Macworld   67
FEATURE
•  Photos for iOS reports 34,928 photos, 653 
videos, and 1 ‘item’ (35,582 total)
•  Photos for macOS reports 54,808 photos and 
2,503 videos (57,311), but “21,729 items on This 
Mac Only” for a net of 35,582
•  And iCloud.com reports 35,583 photos and videos 
as a single number
You can see it’s mostly consistent, although 
confusing. Why is there one more item at iCloud.
com than in iOS and macOS? What is “1 item”? 
(Apple offers no insight on that.)
The most explicable thing, however, is the ‘on 
This Mac Only’ label: Photos in macOS allows 
both imported and referenced images. In Photos > 
Preferences > General, if the box next to Importing 
is checked, whenever you drag media in or use 
the File > Import option, images and videos are 
copied to your Photos library. Uncheck that, and the 
image is referenced from the location on your Mac, 
including external drives. Referenced images are 
not synced to iCloud Photo Library.
If you’re trying to figure out which are referenced 
and which are not, Apple puts a subtle icon in the 
corner of all referenced images – it looks like a 
rectangle with an arrow pointing to the middle right 
from the lower right.
But you can also create a smart album that 
collects all these.
•  Select File > New Smart Album.
•  In criteria, choose Photo, Is, Referenced.

68   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
•  Name the album something descriptive
•  Click OK
You can select any referenced media and then 
choose File > Consolidate, and you’ll be prompted 
to copy the media into your Photos library, which 
will also re-point that thumbnail reference to the 
imported one.
UPGRADE A DRIVE WITH  
HIGH SIERRA AND APFS
Apple Notes 4.5 High Sierra: How to create a table, 
add and rearrange rows and columns (0:54)
The new Apple File System (APFS) that replaces 
the long-running HFS+ in macOS caused a lot of 
concern and confusion, because it seemed like a 
massive change, but the effects aren’t noticeable to 
end users, except in improving the speed of SSD-
only Macs. (Apple doesn’t upgrade hard drives 
to APFS, and hasn’t yet released a Fusion APFS 
update for its mixed SSD/hard drive systems.)
APFS restructures how files are stored in 
a disk partition, but it doesn’t change how 
A Smart Album lets you figure out which 
images are referenced in Photos

January 2018 • Macworld   69
FEATURE
programs access files within the operating 
system. When copying individual files or cloning a 
drive with Disk Utility, SuperDuper ($27.95 from  
fave.co/2BC1S9r, or Carbon Copy Cloner (£30.75 
from fave.co/2BARFdr), macOS continues to 
abstract interaction with files, so you don’t have 
to learn anything about the file system to use it or 
to use cloning software. (That’s just so long as the 
cloning software is up to date. Carbon Copy Cloner 
released a major update for APFS weeks ago, and 
SuperDuper finished its beta testing and released 
an APFS-ready version 3.0 on 8 November.)
Macworld reader Doyle wonders if any of this 
causes issues when migrating from one drive to 
another. He wants to upgrade from his existing 
SSD to one that’s larger, and he’s previously 
relied on Disk Utility. Because Apple has provided 
much detail about APFS, he’s concerned that this 
might not work this time out. He’d prefer to use 
Disk Utility, but isn’t opposed to buying a piece of 
software to clone if it would provide extra abilities.
The good news is you can use Disk Utility just 
as you have in previous releases to migrate a drive. 
You need to format the new drive with APFS before 
initiating the clone, and you can boot into Recovery 
as in the past to perform the clone.
However, there’s one thing that Disk Utility 
cannot manage: installing a new Recovery Disk on 
a freshly formatted macOS drive. For that, you need 
Carbon Copy Cloner or SuperDuper, both of which 
can clone an existing Recovery Disk onto another 
drive. Apple only supports creating this very critical 

70   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
piece of macOS troubleshooting, also required for 
using FileVault, when you perform a full macOS 
installation. (SuperDuper can’t use HFS+ as a 
destination for cloning a Recovery Disk, however.
If you want to use an all-Disk Utility method in 
High Sierra, you need to follow these steps:
1.  Run macOS Installer for High Sierra and complete 
a full installation on the new drive.
2.  When finished, restart and choose Recovery 
(Command-R at startup).
3.  Launch Disk Utility from the Recovery startup 
list.
4.  Control-click the new main partition on your new 
drive and choose Restore.
5.  Select your old drive’s main partition in the 
Restore From menu and click Restore.
With Carbon Copy Cloner or SuperDuper, you 
can follow either program’s instructions to clone 
the Recovery partition, and skip step 1 above. 
This eliminates installing macOS, which can take 
Disk Utility lets you restore from another mounted 
drive or a disk image, effectively cloning a drive

January 2018 • Macworld   71
FEATURE
some time. Then, you can follow steps 2 to 5 and 
complete the clone.
If you need to swap a drive out of your Mac 
instead of having both connected at once, I’d 
recommend using either SuperDuper or Carbon 
Copy Cloner to help with that after either installing 
macOS on the external drive or using Carbon Copy 
Cloner or SuperDuper to clone Recovery. Then:
1.  Make a clone of your current drive either as 
a complete partition or as a disk image on an 
external drive using either app (or update an 
existing clone).
2.  Shut your Mac down and swap the internal drive 
for the new one.
3.  Boot into Recovery.
4.  Launch Disk Utility from the Recovery startup 
list.
5.  Control-click the new main partition on your new 
drive and choose Restore.
6.  Select the clone if it’s a partition or click Image to 
select a disk image backup and click Restore.
CAN YOU SHORTEN THE AVAILABLE 
WI-FI LIST IN MACOS AND iOS? 
Unfortunately, no. macOS and iOS displays a list of 
the Wi-Fi networks in your area, whether they are 
private or not. This can be helpful, but how often are 
you able to really use a private network you can see 
but know nothing about?
Macworld reader Michael is irritated by the huge 
list of Wi-Fi networks around him whenever he tries 

72   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
to connect in iOS. He’s in a densely populated city, 
and neighbours’ networks are all around him. Since 
he’s connected to his own network and he’ll never 
connect to any of the others, is there a way to make 
them not appear in his list?
It’s a good question and one I honestly never 
thought about in 17 years of writing about Wi-Fi. 
The network scanning features built into Wi-Fi user 
interfaces on every platform I can think of that let 
you select a network are designed to maximize what 
you see. They weren’t created for crowded network 
environments, and a re-think would make a lot of 
sense, since we mostly don’t want to connect to any 
network, nor see them.
However, for now you’ve got to ignore it. When 
you click the Wi-Fi menu in macOS or visit Settings 
> Wi-Fi in iOS, you’ll always see the currently 

January 2018 • Macworld   73
FEATURE
connected network at the top, but all the other 
networks will always appear.
There is one not-so-convenient-and-easy way 
you could solve this problem. Install a wire mesh 
in the floor, ceiling, and the inside portion of your 
home’s exterior walls to create a Faraday cage 
– which blocks penetration of a lot of forms of 
electromagnetic fields – and you’ll likely only see 
other networks when you open the front door.
WHAT ARE OFFLOADED APPS IN  
iOS 11 AND HOW DO THEY WORK?
Prior to iOS 11, once an app was installed on an iOS 
device, you either kept it or removed it. Removing it 
would cause iOS to prompt you first with a warning 
that all associated data on your device would also 
be removed. Some iOS apps get around this by 
using web-based or app-based accounts or other 
associations, so if you later reinstall the app, you 
can relink your data.
iOS 11 introduced a wrinkle that Macworld 
reader Audrey unintentionally asked a question 
about, because it came up in a different context 
when she was restoring an iCloud backup from 
an older phone to her iPhone 8 Plus, and she was 
prompted to enter the password of an Apple ID 
she hasn’t used in six years:
Several of my apps appeared with ‘ghost cloud’ 
little icons next to their names on the iPhone 
screen. Apple Store specialists said those were 
tied to that old Apple ID, but that wasn’t true. Many 

74   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
NEW apps I recently got or paid for with my current 
Apple ID had those ‘ghost clouds’ and did NOT 
show up on my Purchases list in the App Store app.
The old Apple ID part, I don’t know what that’s 
about. Apple should only prompt you for an Apple 
ID for iCloud. If you use a separate account for 
purchases from the App Store and other Apple 
stores, you may be prompted for that password, 
too. If you have apps or content installed 
registered to another account, you can also be 
prompted, but Audrey says that’s not the case and 
she hasn’t been prompted through years of other 
updates and phone transfers. Let’s put that to the 
side, as I don’t have an answer.
I can explain what’s going on with the cloud icon, 
however. If you see an iCloud download icon to the 
left of an app’s name, it’s supposed to indicate that 
you offloaded the app. Offload App is a new option 
that I can’t find Apple has documented in a support 
note, and it’s only available if you go to a specific 
spot in Settings to use it.
An offloaded app has a tiny iCloud icon before its name

January 2018 • Macworld   75
FEATURE
Deleting an app via the home screen removes it and 
its associated data and settings
Offloaded apps are removed, reducing the 
storage burden of their core program, but any 
associated documents and data remain on 
your iOS device. The app icon remains, which 
is useful for recalling it to life. You can then tap 
to reinstall it and be returned to the state you 
were in when you deleted it, rather than having 
to reconfigure it. It’s a neat compromise. (A 
handy extra feature: these offloaded apps show 
up in Siri searches, and you can tap the search 
result icon, and it will start downloading the app 
without additional intervention.)
I wondered if Apple wasn’t ready to promote the 
feature, since I can’t find a mention of it outside of 
developer documents and forums that are publicly 
reachable via a Google search.
When you delete an app, you know the drill:

76   Macworld • January 2018
FEATURE
1.  Hold down on any app on any home screen for 
a couple seconds. (On a device with 3D Touch, 
don’t pop or peek, just place your finger on the 
app on the screen without force.)
2.  All the app icons and folders jiggle.
3.  Tap the X in the upper-left corner of an app.
4.  In the dialog that appears, tap Delete.
However, to offload an app, Follow these steps:
1.  Go to Settings > General > iPhone storage.
2.  Wait for apps to load at the bottom of the screen.
3.  Scroll to an app you want to offload and then 
tap it.
4.  Tap Offload App.
5.  Confirm your action by tapping Offload App in the 
explanatory dialog that appears.
I’m baffled both about Apple’s lack of 
information and Audrey’s experience, but at least 
I can explain the ghost cloud. 

January 2018 • Macworld   77
Mac antivirus software
Matt Egan’s guide will help keep you Mac safe
C
omputer security is a major concern 
for consumers of late, following the 
WannaCry ransomware attack that hit 
huge organizations including the NHS earlier this 
year, and Petya, a second big ransomware attack. 
The good news is that if you take steps to keep 
your machine patched and up to date and install a 
good security software product you have nothing 
to worry about.
If you’ve got a Mac and are wondering whether 
you need an antivirus, and which Mac antivirus you 
ROUND-UP

78   Macworld • January 2018
ROUND-UP
should choose, you’ve come to the right place. 
Here, we reveal the best AV programs for macOS.
How we test
We use AV-Test.org’s own testing data to ascertain 
the effectiveness of each antivirus when it comes 
to preventing malware from infecting your Mac. 
But security is only half the story. In order for an 
antivirus to work effectively it also needs to be 
unobtrusive. AV-Test also looks at the impact 
of these pieces of software on your system: in 
layman’s terms, how much the antivirus slows down 
your Mac, if at all.
For each of the security solutions we outline 
here, we have tested their ability to keep your Mac 
safe, and balanced that against the impact on your 
Mac’s performance.
You’ll see that even though the best free 
antivirus programs are good at protection, they 
tend to hurt your Mac’s speed much more than paid-
for software. So you need to balance cost against 
performance impact when selecting a product.
There are some antivirus solutions that we don’t 
have AV-Tests results for and therefore haven’t 
included in this article. These alternatives include 
Avira and Avast, but we can’t confidently say how 
safe they’ll keep you or how much they’ll affect the 
performance of your machine.
Do Macs need an antivirus?
Plenty of Mac aficionados will tell you that Apple 
computers are inherently secure and don’t require 

January 2018 • Macworld   79
ROUND-UP
protection. We’d argue that they are wrong – or a bit 
overconfident, at least.
Macs are generally more secure than their 
Windows brethren for two reasons. On the 
technical side, macOS is a Unix-based operating 
system. As a Unix-based operating system macOS 
is sandboxed. It’s like having a series of fire doors: 
even if malware gains access to your Mac, it is 
unable to spread to the heart of the machine. Macs 
are not unhackable, but they are more difficult to 
exploit than Windows PCs. The second reason is 
that, right now, there are far fewer Macs than there 
are Windows PCs. Fewer targets, and these are 
harder to hack. Is it any wonder that cybercriminals 
focus on the Windows world?
However, Macs are not entirely safe, and as 
they grow in popularity and cybercriminals become 

80   Macworld • January 2018
ROUND-UP
smarter and greedier, the risk is increasing. Threats 
such as ransomware are on the rise, and have 
recently hit huge organizations including the NHS.
WannaCry was big news earlier in 2017, while 
news broke of Petya – a second ransomware attack 
– in late June. Also in June, users were warned by 
security firms Fortinet and AlienVault that there are 
new variants of malware targeting Macs after being 
published on the Dark Web.
A report from Malwarebytes in August 2017 
shows that Mac malware has increased 230 percent 
since July 2016. As a result, cyber security is more 
important than ever, and a good antivirus is the best 
place to start if you want to stay safe.
1. Norton Security for Mac
Price: £24.99 from fave.co/2jbcODi
 Norton by Symantec is one 
of four security security 
packages in AV Test’s most 
recent report that managed 
to detect 100 percent of 
viruses. It hardly makes a 
dent in system performance, 
either, so you can be confident 
that it’ll keep your Mac safe 
without slowing it down.
Norton Security retails for 
£24.99 for a single Mac. Step 
up to £29.99 and you can 
protect up to five devices, which 

January 2018 • Macworld   81
ROUND-UP
can include Windows PCs and smartphones as well 
as Macs, which is pretty cool... albeit arguably a 
little pointless on the smartphone front. You can get 
further discounts by buying a two-year licence.
There is currently a special introductory offer for 
new users, meaning you can get 50 percent off. You 
can sign up to Norton Security and take advantage 
of that promotion here.
2. Kaspersky Mac Security
Price: £39.99 from fave.co/2BAxLPB
Another of the best antivirus options 
for Mac is Kaspersky, which like Norton 
offers 100 percent threat detection 
according to tests carried out by AV 
Test. In addition to 100 percent threat 
detection, you’ll get anti-spyware, 
safer banking software and the rest. 
Oh, and there’s a 30-day trial. A year 
of Kaspersky Internet Security costs 
£34.99 for one device, £44.99 for three devices or 
£54.99 for five. 
3. Bitdefender Antivirus for Mac
Price: £24.99 from fave.co/2jgFsnc
 Another of the best antivirus for Mac options 
is Bitdefender Antivirus. Like Kaspersky and 
Norton, AV-Test’s lab, Bitdefender Antivirus 
for Mac blocked 100 percent of the threats 
thrown at it. The catch? Greater impact 
ons 
and
rus 
s 

82   Macworld • January 2018
ROUND-UP
on system performance than some of the other 
products we list in this story, although not by much.
There is also a free 30-day trial if you want to try 
before you buy.
4. Intego Mac Internet Security X9
Price: £31.99 from fave.co/2jiP1T1
The only other antivirus tested by AV-
Test to manage to detect 100 percent of 
the viruses thrown at it was Intego, but 
the downside is that it put the biggest 
strain on the Mac during testing, slowing 
it down more than any others in this 
round-up. However, if you want to try 
it for yourself to see whether you’re 
content with the pace of your machine with Intego 
running, you can sign up for a free trial before 
committing to £31.99 for a year.
5. Trend Micro Antivirus for Mac
Price: £29.97 from fave.co/2jhhkkp
Trend Micro managed to catch 
99.5 percent of viruses according 
to AV-Test, so falls just behind the 
four front-runners we’ve mentioned 
but by a tiny margin. It manages to 
slow things down less than ESET 
and Bitdefender, too. The price has 
recently been reduced to £29.97 
for one device over one year, and 

January 2018 • Macworld   83
ROUND-UP
there’s no free trial available. There is, however, a 
30-day money back guarantee available.
6. Sophos Antivirus for Mac
Price: Free from fave.co/2jgIyYm
Sophos Anti-Virus requires of you only 
that you cough up some personal details. 
And even though it costs you nothing, the 
software detects 98.4 percent of threats. It does 
have a minor impact on performance, however. That 
may be enough for you to notice the difference, 
depending on what specification machine you have. 
The paid products above it in our chart are better, 
but Sophos is a compelling product.
7. ESET Antivirus for Mac
Price: £29.99 from fave.co/2BBdutn
Another paid-for Mac antivirus: say 
hello to the excellent ESET. This 
reasonably priced tool offers 98.4 
percent threat detection, and scores 
quite well in speed tests. You can 
get ESET Cyber Security for £29.99 
for one device and for one year. If 
you’d like to try before you buy, a 30-day trial is 
available too.

84   Macworld • January 2018
ROUND-UP
N
ormally, It’s that time of year, and chances 
are good that your next few weeks will be 
packed with spending time and money on 
gifts for loved ones. But while that’s all well and 
good, you should also gift yourself something to 
keep yourself entertained. This month, we’ve a 
nice variety of options, including the seriously slick 
racing simulation Dirt Rally, the newly free-to-
play version of Blizzard’s brilliant StarCraft II, an 
expanded edition of Hitman, and plenty more.
Latest Mac games
Andrew Hayward looks at this month’s best new releases

January 2018 • Macworld   85
ROUND-UP
1. Dirt Rally
Price: £39.99 from Steam (fave.co/2BAiizc)
Codemasters’ previous Dirt off-road racing 
games skirted the line between hardcore and 
accessible, presenting rally racing amidst other 
types of events and keeping the challenge fairly 
approachable. But Dirt Rally delivers arguably the 
most realistic rally racing game experience to date.
And now you can play it on Mac thanks to Feral 
Interactive’s new port of the 2015 PC original. You’ll 
race across more than 70 worldwide stages using 
45+ licensed rally rides, with crisp graphics and 
cross-platform multiplayer that’ll match you up 
against Windows and Linux opponents. If you’re 
up for the challenge of realistic racing in rough 
conditions, Dirt Rally can provide it in spades.

86   Macworld • January 2018
ROUND-UP
2. StarCraft II
Price: Free from fave.co/2jfbTCE
No, StarCraft II isn’t new – in fact, it’s seven years 
old. So why are we including Blizzard’s hugely 
popular real-time strategy game on our list? 
Because now it’s free, which it certainly hasn’t 
been before this month. Blizzard rolled out the 
big change recently, meaning anyone who hasn’t 
played the excellent strategy pick should jump 
on it right about now. What’s free, exactly? Well, 
you can play the entire original Wings of Liberty 
campaign, along with the ranked multiplayer ladder 
featuring units from StarCraft II and its expansions. 
And if you want the game’s expansion campaigns, 
they’re still available. It’s a smart way for Blizzard to 
rejuvenate interest in the aging game.

January 2018 • Macworld   87
ROUND-UP
3. Hitman: Game of the Year Edition
Price: £42.47 from Steam (fave.co/2BCaa13)
It was only a few months ago that IO Interactive’s 
episodic Hitman reboot series hit Mac all at once, 
offering the opportunity to command a master 
assassin in tense missions across the world. 
But now there’s a Game of the Year Edition, and 
whether you’re starting fresh or upgrading from the 
standard version, it brings some pretty significant 
additions to the mix. Beyond the six main episodes, 
each of which provides a new locale with myriad 
missions, this edition adds a new Patient Zero 
mission arc, in which Agent 47 attempts to stop 
the start of a global pandemic. It also adds other 
new missions and disguises to wield, along with 
40+ extra challenges. 

88   Macworld • January 2018
ROUND-UP
4. Tannenberg
Price: £13.99 from Steam (fave.co/2BB3GQ0)
We’ve seen loads of World War II-themed games 
over the years, but World War I tends not to 
get quite as much attention. Verdun is the rare 
example of a really strong and thoughtful WWI 
shooter experience, and now the same studio is 
back with Tannenberg. The game sticks to the 
same fundamentals as Verdun but amps up the 
experience, delivering 64-player battles across 
larger, open terrain. It’s still a squad-based first-
person shooter experience, and still a multiplayer-
centric affair, but it seems to build upon the 
previous game’s successes. Early Access means 
it’s unfinished and could be buggy, but it’s feature-
complete and will be finalized by early 2018.

January 2018 • Macworld   89
ROUND-UP
5. Hand of Fate 2
Price: £23.79 from Steam (fave.co/2jf1qY4)
The original Hand of Fate found a fair number of 
fans back in early 2015, and now Hand of Fate 2 
is here to lightly expand upon the debut’s unique 
balance of deck-building and melee combat. As 
before, you’ll construct a deck of cards used in 
a battle against the mysterious dealer, but then 
you’re tossed right into dungeon-crawling, hack-
and-slash action when cards are played. 
Hand of Fate 2 brings the expected 
improvements, including glossier graphics and 
new kinds of cards, but it also shakes things up a 
bit by introducing fresh companion characters and 
some mini-games along the way. 

90   Macworld • January 2018
ROUND-UP
6. Football Manager 2018
Price: £37.99 from Steam (fave.co/2jfpk5p)
Sega’s long-running soccer simulation series 
returns with a fresh entry, only as the title suggests, 
you won’t be out there on the pitch showing off your 
flashy skills. Instead, you’re the guy on the sidelines 
with the clipboard, the vision, and the battle plan, 
helping your team rise from a pack of players to 
hopeful legends on the world stage.
Football Manager 2018 builds upon the 
fundamentals of previous entries, and is still 
primarily a menu-driven affair, letting you build your 
roster, manage your organization, make strategic 
calls during games (which are now rendered in 
3D), and shoot for success without ever directly 
controlling the players. 

January 2018 • Macworld   91
ROUND-UP
7. Pako 2
Price: £7.19 from Steam (fave.co/2BBzeW5)
We’re fond of the original Pako, but Pako 2 marks 
a significant deviation from the original premise. 
While the first game found you driving through 
crowded parking lots and highways to evade 
the cops, using only your steering skills to stay 
alive, Pako 2 is all about unleashing firepower to 
remain on the lam. 
You’re still a getaway driver here, but instead of 
just dodging obstacles and other cars, you’ll fire 
your gun in all directions to take out pursuing cops 
and clear pathways. It also brings in heist elements, 
as you pick up fellow crew members and try to 
escort them to safety. Still, it seems to keep the 
frantic fun and stylish look of the debut intact.

92   Macworld • January 2018
ROUND-UP
8. Sphinx and the Cursed Mummy
Price: £13.99 from Steam (fave.co/2BAsF6b)
We’ve seen a surge of remastered games release on 
consoles and computers in recent years, as older 
3D games are given a higher-resolution makeover 
to be more appealing for newer audiences. And 
while these are often already-popular, widely-
beloved games, occasionally we see overlooked 
games given a second lease on life. Sphinx and the 
Cursed Mummy is definitely one of those games.
Sphinx is a cartoonish action-adventure game 
that bounces between action/platform sequences 
as the titular character and stealth/puzzle-solving 
missions as his mummy ally. It probably feels a bit 
dated at this point, as older 3D games tend to be, 
but Steam users rate the re-release.

January 2018 • Macworld   93
ROUND-UP
9. Sky Gamblers – Infinite Jets
Price: £4.99 from fave.co/2BCdJnX
You’ll have to head over to the Mac App Store for 
this one: Atypical Games is back with Sky Gamblers 
– Infinite Jets, its latest dogfighting game that’s 
available for the same low price on both Mac and 
iOS. Unlike the World War II-set Storm Raiders, 
the last entry to make its way to Mac, this one’s 
all about modern super-planes soaring over major 
cities around the world. Jets offers an action-
packed single-player campaign and frantic online 
7-on-7 multiplayer battles. It also looks pretty slick, 
although it ought to be pretty comparable between 
the Mac and iOS versions.

94   Macworld • January 2018
ROUND-UP
10. Space Pirates and Zombies 2
Price: £14.99 from Steam (fave.co/2jfq8qX)
Zombie games are done to death at this point, 
and science fiction games certainly aren’t in short 
supply – but zombies in space? Well, Space Pirates 
and Zombies 2 might be on to something new there, 
even if it is a sequel. This uncommon pairing of 
concepts comes through as a space shooter with 
role-playing and real-time strategy elements thrown 
in. It actually takes place after the zombie threat is 
vanquished, with the galaxy in array and different 
factions popping up to try and amass power. You 
can create your own faction and battle against 
other A.I.-controlled captains in space, and the 
action looks really vibrant and appealing. 

January 2018 • Macworld   95
How to: Prevent a Mac 
joining a Wi-Fi network
Glenn Fleishman shows how to stop a Mac joining automatically
W
i-Fi hotpots: as convenient as they are, 
they can be very annoying, as well. 
Especially when you’re using a Mac 
or iPhone that’s trying to connect to a hotspot 
when you don’t want it to. Macworld reader 
Martin Joseph wants to ditch one company’s Wi-Fi 
hotspot in particular:
I wonder if you can figure out a way to set a Mac 
to never ever connect to Xfinity Wi-Fi? It would 
HOW-TO

96   Macworld • January 2018
HOW TO
be great to eliminate this in my iPhone, too. I 
have found that deleting it from the list of known 
networks isn’t the best choice, and I usually resort 
to leaving it, but at lowest priority.
Apple’s Wi-Fi network control in macOS became 
kind of primitive many releases ago, and then Apple 
made it worse, removing a few features that haven’t 
returned. You can delete networks, as Martin notes:
1.  Open the Network system preference pane.
2.  Click your Wi-Fi entry in the adapter list at left.
3.  Click the Advanced button.
4.  In the Wi-Fi tab, select a network or networks you 
want to remove, and click the minus (-) sign.
5.  Click OK, and then click Apply.
You can also rearrange connection priority 
in step 4, so that you put preferred networks on 
top. This scrolling list can wind up with hundreds 
of entries, as they collect over time, and there’s 
no way to search through the list, see when the 
network was added, get geographic information 
about them, or any other data.
What Martin might be encountering is iCloud-
based sync for Wi-Fi network entries. If you have 
iCloud Keychain enabled, every Mac and iOS device 
logged into the same iCloud account syncs all 
Wi-Fi network passwords. You may have noticed 
this if you log in to a hotspot at a cafe that has a 
password on your Mac, and then turn to an iPhone 
– it’s already synced the password over the cellular 

January 2018 • Macworld   97
HOW-TO
network, and has connected to the local network. 
However, it’s possible that deleting network entries 
from macOS doesn’t remove the corresponding 
Keychain entries that are being synced, and thus 
when an iPhone connects to an Xfinity network, 
the connection details are synced back. (Xfinity 
uses a web-based login process, but I believe 
Apple passes that information to its hotspot login 
system, which intercepts portal screens and fills 
them with stored information.)
A way to test this and potentially solve this 
persistent problem is to use Keychain Access in 
macOS, as you can’t manage Keychain entries 
directly in iOS. (You can ‘forget’ a network via 
Settings > Wi-Fi > tap a network in the vicinity and 
Keychain Access lets you peer into stored 
passwords for logins, including for Wi-Fi portals

98   Macworld • January 2018
HOW TO
then tap Forget This Network and confirm. But it 
may not delete the Keychain entry, either.)
Follow these steps:
1.  Launch Keychain Access (found in Applications 
> Utilities).
2.  Search for the network name (like xinifity).
3.  Select the entry or entries and select Edit > 
Delete.
4.  Confirm the deletion.
Now return to the Network preference pane 
and follow all the steps above to be sure the entry 
doesn’t persist, either. 
It’s possible this is just an iCloud Keychain sync 
issue, but there’s no harm in cleaning out unwanted 
entries in Keychain Access, either.We have a 
separate guide if you specifically wish to block 
autoplay videos on Mac. And another for those 
who wish to block ads on iPhone or iPad.

January 2018 • Macworld   99
Why iOS has  
a desktop future
Jason Snell believes Apple’s next laptop should run iOS
T
he dividing lines between Apple products are 
clear. Apple makes phones and tablets that 
run iOS, and laptops and desktop computers 
than run macOS. But it’s time for Apple to start 
breaking down those barriers and experimenting 
with new kinds of products that cross the streams. 
It’s time for Apple to expand beyond the MacBook 
and MacBook Pro. It’s time for the first iOS laptop.
OPINION

100   Macworld • January 2018
OPINION
Consider the iPad Pro. With screens that 
measure 10.5 and 12.9 inches diagonally, they’re 
practically the size of Apple’s old MacBook Air 
models. The iPad Pro was the first iOS to ship with 
an Apple-designed keyboard, the Smart Keyboard. 
When the Smart Keyboard is engaged, at a glance 
the iPad Pro already looks like a strange laptop.
The problem with the iPad Pro is that it’s 
literally not a laptop: You can’t comfortably set it 
in your lap and get work done. (Yes, you can kind 
of balance the Smart Keyboard on your lap, but 
it’s not the same as using a laptop – in terms of 
stability or adjustability.) This year I’ve been using 
my iPad Pro with the Brydge keyboard, a Bluetooth 
keyboard with two clamps that turn the iPad Pro 
into something that looks an awful lot like a laptop 
– albeit one with no trackpad.
My year spent with this keyboard has convinced 
me that an iOS laptop would have appeal to a lot of 
people. It would be thin and light, like a MacBook; it 
would have a touchscreen, unlike the MacBook and 
MacBook Pro; and like the iPad Pro itself, it would 
A 12.9in iPad Pro with 
Smart keyboard

January 2018 • Macworld   101
OPINION
have all the power of a laptop. iOS 11’s multitasking 
features make it even more appealing.
When my iPad’s in laptop mode, it is absolutely 
a ‘real computer’. I’ve used it to shoot photos at 
Apple media events, process them, and upload 
them to the web; to write tens of thousands of 
words on deadline; to edit web templates and SSH 
into Linux servers and, yes, even control Macs 
from remote locations.
Would an iOS laptop be for everyone? Absolutely 
not, but there are lots of people who might want 
a laptop but don’t need anything more than what 
iOS offers. Apple will still make MacBooks, and 
hopefully has plenty of innovation yet to come in 
that area. And some people really do prefer working 
with laptops over tablets, all other things being 
equal – not just writers, but people who watch a lot 
of video. My daughter is a great example: She loves 
watching Netflix on her laptop and has refused to 
consider switching to an iPad.
A good comparison product might be Google’s 
Pixelbook, a fancy £999 Chromebook with a 12.3in 
touchscreen and the ability to run Android apps. 
The Pixelbook is, likewise, not a laptop for everyone 
– but it’s thin and light and powerful enough for 
many people’s needs.
Then there’s the Pixelbook’s keyboard – it’s got 
a 360-degree hinge, meaning that you can fold 
the keyboard all the way behind the screen and 
use it as a tablet. It’s not quite the same as the 
detachable keyboard of the Microsoft SurfaceBook, 
nor does it offer the peel-and-forget elegance of a 

102   Macworld • January 2018
OPINION
thin magnetic keyboard like the Smart Keyboard or 
Microsoft’s Surface keyboards. But it does make 
the Pixelbook a laptop that can act like a tablet.
For people who want a tablet that can act like 
a laptop on occasion, the iPad Pro is the right 
product. But I’d love to see Apple make a product 
just on the other side of that divide – a product 
that’s a laptop first and foremost, but can act more 
or less like a tablet when it wants to. Such a product 
will never be as good a tablet as an iPad, but that’s 
okay – because it would be a better laptop.
A lot of digital ink has been spilled about the 
possibility that Apple might one day merge macOS 
and iOS, something Apple executives have been 
insisting is not going to happen for many years 
now. Rumors of Apple dumping Intel and building 
MacBooks running its own A-series processors 
have also bubbled for a while.
But Apple can keep macOS and iOS separate 
and still design a laptop that looks an awful lot 
like the MacBook, one powered by one of its 
A-series processors. Add a touchscreen, remove 
the trackpad, and maybe add a hinge that lets 
the device tuck away the keyboard when it’s not 
needed. I don’t know what they’d call it – can we 
bring back the iBook? – or what they’d charge 
for it. But I’d love to see it. And while we’re at it, 
yes, I’d also like Apple to make an iOS desktop 
in the style of the Microsoft Surface Studio. With 
all the improvements in iOS 11, it’s time to start 
considering all the places iOS can go that it 
hasn’t been able to go before.

FROM IDG
ISSUE 126
iPhone X
•  Master the new 
touch gestures 
and commands
•  How to set up 
Apple’s latest 
handset
SPECIAL
hone X
ew 
es 
ds
p
t
SPECI
FULL
REVIEW
Guide to 
Animoji
Take great 
photos with 
your iPhone

HOW TO

