FEBRUARY 2018  |  MACWORLD.COM
FINALLY, A MAC FOR 
POWER USERS
INSIDE: GET YOUR NEW iPHONE SET UP WITH WIRELESS CHARGING

Stand Up To Cancer is a division of the Entertainment Industry Foundation (EIF), a 501(c)(3) charitable organization.
This Public Service Announcement was made possible by a charitable contribution from  
Jimmy Smits, SU2C Ambassador
Photo By: Timothy White
Your immune system may be the key to beating cancer.
lmmunotherapy, a new approach to cancer treatment, is bringing hope 
to cancer survivors everywhere. lmmunotherapy works by empowering 
your body’s own immune system to correctly identify and eradicate 
cancer cells. This approach has been used to effectively ﬁ ght many 
types of cancer, with new research leading to greater hope each day. 
Speak with your doctor and visit standuptocancer.org/immunotherapy 
to learn if immunotherapy may be right for you.
YOUR BODY
      YOUR HOPE

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   3
MACUSER
Meltdown and Spectre CPU flaws  7
GeForce Now beta impressions  11
The T2 chip makes the iMac Pro the start 
of a Mac revolution  17
No man’s land: The lack of MacBook 
middle ground 21
Hot Stuff  24
iOSCENTRAL
Why Apple’s next laptop should run iOS 
29
If Face ID is Apple’s future, where will
we see it next? 32
Play these 10 awesome, optimized 
games on your iPhone X 35
Apple and Shazam: It’s not just about
identifying songs 42
iOS Central Reviews  47
What’s new at the App Store  55
Must-play iOS games 56
WORKINGMAC
Apple’s revamped pro Mac lineup  77
Should you buy an iMac Pro? 80
FCC votes to kill net neutrality  84
The once and future OS for Apple 87
PLAYLIST
There’s no place like HomePod  91
Shinola Canfield over-ear headphones
review 95
Edifier Luna e25 HD Bluetooth speaker 
review 101
B&O Beoplay M3 review  105
HELPDESK
Mac 911: App Store purchase history, wi-fi
calling on iPhone, Dropbox vs iCloud  
109
iMac Pro  
ﬁrst look  
62
February 2018   CONTENTS
INCORPOR AT I NG MAC U S E R
Wireless chargers 
for your iPhone X   
71
COVER IMAGE COURTESY OF APPLE

4   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MASTHEAD
EDITORIAL DIRECTOR Matt Egan
EDITOR IN CHIEF, CONSUMER BRANDS Jon Phillips
DESIGN DIRECTOR Robert Schultz
SENIOR EDITOR Roman Loyola
Editorial
STAFF WRITERS Jason Cross, Michael Simon
SENIOR CONTRIBUTORS Glenn Fleishman, Rob Griffiths,  
Joe Kissell, Kirk McElhearn, John Moltz, Dan Moren, Jason Snell
COPY EDITOR Sue Voelkel
Design
DESIGNER Rob Woodcock
Advertising Sales
SALES MANAGER Duane Hampson 415/978-3133
INTERNATIONAL DATA GROUP CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD  
Walter Boyd
IDG COMMUNICATIONS, INC. CEO  
Kumaran Ramanathan

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   5
HOW TO CONTACT MACWORLD SUBSCRIPTION SERVICES
Access your subscription account online—24 hours a day, 7 days a week—at www.macworld.com/customer_service or service.
macworld.com. You can use online subscription services to view your account status, change your address, pay your bill, renew 
your subscription, report a missing issue, get the answers to frequently asked questions, and much more. 
To start subscribing, visit subscribe.macworld.com. 
 U.S. MAIL 
Macworld Subscriptions Department 
 
 
 11 Commerce Boulevard, Palm Coast, FL 32164 
 
 
 (If you are writing about an existing account, please include your name and address at which you subscribe.)
 
EMAIL 
 subhelp@macworld.com (Send your full name and the address at which you subscribe; do not send attachments.)
 
PHONE 
800/288-6848 from the U.S. and Canada; 515/243-3273 from all other locations 
The one-year (12-issue) subscription rate is $34.97; the two-year rate, $59.97; and the three-year rate, $79.97. Checks must 
be made payable in U.S. currency to Macworld. Please allow 3 to 6 weeks for changes to be made to an existing subscription.
MACWORLD EDITORIAL
The editors of Macworld welcome your tips, compliments, and complaints. Some stories and reviews from past issues can 
be located at www.macworld.com. We are unfortunately unable to look up stories from past issues; recommend products; or 
diagnose your Mac problems by phone, or email. You can contact Apple toll-free, at 800/538-9696, or visit the company’s 
website, at www.apple.com. 
HOW TO CONTACT MACWORLD STAFF
Our offices are located at 501 Second Street, 6th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94107; phone, 415/243-0505; fax, 415/243-3545. 
Macworld staff can be reached by email at firstinitiallastname@macworld.com.
BACK ISSUES OF MACWORLD
Starting with the June 2003 Macworld, back issues can be downloaded in digital format, from www.zinio.com ($6.99; Mac OS 
X 10.1 or later required).  
REPRINTS AND PERMISSIONS
You must have permission before reproducing any material from Macworld. Send email to permissions@macworld.com; 
please include a phone number. 
MAILING LISTS
We periodically make lists of our customers available to mailers of goods and services that june interest you. If you do not wish 
to receive such mailings, write to us at Macworld, 11 Commerce Boulevard, Palm Coast, FL 32164, or email us at macworld@
emailcustomerservice.com.
PUBLICATION INFORMATION
February 2018, Volume 35, Issue 2 
Macworld is a publication of IDG Consumer & SMB, Inc., and International Data Group, Inc. Macworld is an independent 
journal not affiliated with Apple, Inc. Copyright © 2018, IDG Consumer & SMB, Inc. All rights reserved. Create, Playlist, 
Mac User, Macworld, and the Macworld logo are registered trademarks of International Data Group, Inc., and used under 
license by IDG Consumer & SMB, Inc. Apple, the Apple logo, Mac, and Macintosh are registered trademarks of Apple, Inc. 

Stand Up To Cancer is a division of the Entertainment Industry Foundation, a 501(c)(3) organization. 
American Airlines and the Flight Symbol logo are marks of American Airlines, Inc. © 2017 American Airlines, Inc. All rights reserved.
Offer valid on contributions made online at www.SU2C.org/americanairlines. Minimum $25 donation required. For charitable deduction purposes, each mile is valued at 3 cents per mile. The receipt of  
miles may reduce the tax deductibility of your donation. Mileage cap for a 12-month period is 600,000. Bonus miles do not count toward elite-status qualiﬁcation. Please allow up to eight weeks for the  
bonus miles to be posted to your account. Donations can only be accepted in U.S. dollars. Donations made in connection with AAdvantage® bonus miles program are not refundable.
Pictured:   Stand Up To Cancer Ambassador, Bradley Cooper 
along with American Airlines team members currently  
ﬁghting, surviving and co-surviving cancer.
Stand Up with us
Support Stand Up To Cancer today to help 
cancer patients become cancer survivors.
Give $25 or more to Stand Up To Cancer through the Miles To Stand Up program and 
you’ll receive 10 American Airlines AAdvantage® miles for every dollar donated.
Donate and earn at standuptocancer.org/americanairlines

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   7
Meltdown and Spectre CPU flaws: 
Protect your Mac and iOS devices  
Stay safe out there. 
BY MICHAEL SIMON
MACUSER
News and Analysis About 
Macs, OS X, and Apple
S
urely by now you’ve heard 
about the Spectre and 
Meltdown CPU flaws (go.
macworld.com/msfq), but you 
might not fully understand what the 
issue is and how you can protect yourself 
against the risks. We’re here to help. 
Here’s how these vulnerabilities (go.
macworld.com/vuln) affect your Apple 
devices and what you can do to keep 
them safe. 
MELTDOWN AND SPECTRE FAQ
One more time, what is the issue here?
There are three separate potential security 
issues (go.macworld.com/3iss) at play here, 
one named Meltdown and two named 
Spectre. They all take advantage of 
IMAGE: GOOGLE/NATASCHA EIBL 

8   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
MELTDOWN AND SPECTRE CPU FLAW
something called speculative execution. 
Basically, modern CPUs try to speed 
things up by taking educated guesses to 
predict what the next operation will be, and 
will go so far as to execute them ahead of 
time. If the prediction is correct, the CPU has 
an answer all ready to go. If it’s incorrect, the 
“speculative execution” is removed. The 
whole process is nearly instantaneous and 
should be invisible to the software and OS. 
The Meltdown and Spectre bugs allow 
hackers to read and access this information 
in the OS kernel memory by taking 
advantage of the delay in its rollback.
What devices do they effect?
In a nutshell, all of them. If you have a 
Power Mac G5 or an iPhone 3GS, you’re 
probably okay, but all modern Macs and 
iOS devices are affected. While Meltdown 
mainly affects Intel-based Macs and PCs, 
in Apple’s case it also affects iOS devices. 
Spectre affects all iOS, macOS, and tvOS 
devices. watchOS is unaffected by the 
Meltdown and Spectre flaws.
What’s Apple doing to fix it?
Well, there isn’t really a real fix. These 
exploits rely on flaws baked right into the 
very design of the CPUs themselves. The 
best Apple or anyone can do is mitigate 
the risk, and Apple is already taking steps 
to do so. In December, Apple released 
macOS 10.13.2 (go.macworld.com/m132), 
iOS 11.2 (go.macworld.com/i112), and tvOS 
11.2 with mitigations to lessen the risk, and 
iOS 11.2.2 (go.macworld.com/i122) also 
“includes security improvements to Safari 
and WebKit to mitigate the effects of 
Spectre.” Additionally, Safari 11.0.2 (go.
macworld.com/s112) includes mitigations 
against Spectre on macOS. Apple says 
more mitigations are on the way.
What about older OSs?
It’s unclear from Apple’s statement, but 
presumably it will issue security updates to 
address the issue, as evidenced by this 
support page (go.macworld.com/scup). If 
you have a system new enough to run 
macOS High Sierra and iOS 11, your best 
bet is to update. If you have an older 
system for which those operating systems 
are not supported, you don’t have any real 
choice but to hold tight.
I’ve heard about slowdowns. Will my 
device be affected?
It’s too early to say, but Apple assured 
users that there won’t be any noticeable 
performance impact. It says it ran the 
December update through GeekBench, 
Speedometer, JetStream, and ARES-6 and 
saw “no measurable reduction in the 
performance of macOS and iOS.” 
Additionally, it has tested its Safari 
mitigations with the similar results, 
including an impact of less than 2.5 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   9
percent using the JetStream benchmark.
HOW CAN I PROTECT MY 
DEVICE FROM ATTACK?
Update your OS
This is the obvious answer, but it’s also the 
best one. As we said, there is no real fix 
for Meltdown or Spectre, just ways to 
make exploits harder to pull off. Apple has 
already begun taking steps to protect 
users, but they will only be effective if 
they’re installed.
So, if you can update your Mac and iOS 
device to High Sierra and iOS 11, 
respectively, do so. Apple has squashed 
many of the early bugs and the latest 
versions are running smoothly, so if you 
want the best possible protection from 
Meltdown and Spectre, the latest version 
of the latest operating systems are the 
best way to do it.
Update Safari, Firefox, and Chrome
Apart from macOS, iOS, and tvOS, Apple is 
also updating Safari to address a possible 
JavaScript exploit of the Spectre flaw. This 
will be arriving soon, so check the Updates 
tab in the App Store app to install it once it 
arrives. Firefox 57.0.4 (go.macworld.com/
ff57) adds protections to that browser, and 
Chrome 64 (go.macworld.com/ch64; to be 
released on January 23, 2018) will do the 
same for Google’s browser. In the 
meantime, an optional feature called 
Your best protection is to download the latest versions of the latest operating system.

10   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
MELTDOWN AND SPECTRE CPU FLAW
Site Isolation can help reduce risk in 
Chrome—read more about that at go.
macworld.com/stis.
Don’t download apps from untrusted 
developers
Hackers can’t get into your system unless 
you let them in, so be mindful of where 
your apps are coming from, especially on 
the Mac. Obviously, the Mac App Store is 
the safest way to download apps, but 
there are a number of totally legit 
developers that offer apps outside 
Apple’s store. Most of 
them are safe to install, 
but you should do some 
research before hitting 
the download button. 
macOS already alerts 
users by default when 
launching apps from 
unidentified developers, so pay attention 
to any prompts you get when opening an 
app for the first time.
Stay vigilant 
As Apple says, the risk to users is fairly 
low, but the scale here is massive. With 
hundreds of millions of vulnerable devices, 
hackers are going to be working overtime 
to exploit these flaws, so be aware of 
anything amiss with your device or 
accounts, and take the appropriate action 
if necessary. ■
The latest version of Firefox adds protection to the browser.
With hundreds of millions of vulnerable 
devices, hackers are going to be working 
overtime to exploit these flaws, so be aware of 
anything amiss with your device or accounts, 
and take the appropriate action if necessary.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   11
GeForce Now beta: Streaming 
PC games to Mac isn’t perfect, 
but it’s definitely impressive  
Nvidia’s cloud service puts high-end PC games on even low-end Macs,  
and it’s free to use in beta. 
BY ANDREW HAYWARD
M
acs see a fair number of new 
games—enough for us to 
comfortably pick 10 strong 
options for our monthly 
roundup (go.macworld.com/rdup), at 
least—but the selection still lags well 
behind Windows PCs. Release parity has 
gradually climbed over the past few years, 
but while we get a lot more indie games 
day-and-date with or soon after their PC 
IMAGE: APPLE

12   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
GEFORCE NOW BETA
counterparts, most big-
budget, AAA games arrive 
late on the Mac, if at all.
Hopefully that situation 
continues to improve over 
time, but Nvidia has another 
solution in mind: PC games 
streamed over the internet 
to your Mac with minimal 
delay. It’s a service called 
GeForce Now, and it’s 
currently available in a free, 
open beta for the Mac. 
Essentially, Nvidia has powerful, GTX 1080 
GPU-equipped servers running high-end 
Windows games remotely, and you can 
stream them directly to your Mac over a 
strong connection.
It’s not a new idea (OnLive did this 
years ago [go.macworld.com/onlv]), but 
GeForce Now (go.macworld.com/gfnw) is 
impressively easy to use, the list of 
supported games is large and enticing, 
and the games run startlingly well for the 
most part—although not every game is 
ideal for this kind of setup. I’ve been 
playing around with the beta lately and 
came away largely impressed: here’s why 
it’s worth checking out.
GETTING STARTED
Announced back at CES 2017 (go.
macworld.com/ces7), GeForce Now 
brings a couple of big benefits to Mac 
players. It allows you to play glossy, lavish 
games on even an older or low-specced 
Mac, eliminating the need to shell out for 
fresh hardware. It also opens up the 
doors to loads of great PC games that 
aren’t currently on the Mac and may 
never reach the platform. Usage costs 
may eventually be prohibitive for some 
players (more on that later), but with the 
free beta test continuing on for the 
foreseeable future, now is the ideal time 
to give it a shot.
Head over to the GeForce Now 
website (go.macworld.com/gfnw) to 
download the beta client on your Mac 
and get started. Right now, it’s freely 
open to users in North America, as 
Nvidia has several servers spread 
around the United States, while 
European users can request access to 
the invitation-only test due to fewer EU 
Overwatch and PUBG on the Mac? It’s OK to squeal with joy.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   13
servers at this point. You’ll need a free 
Nvidia account to access the service.
Once logged in, you’ll find the list of 
supported PC games that you can play on 
your Mac. Take note: GeForce Now isn’t 
an unlimited, Netflix-like, all-you can play 
service. You’ll actually need to own the 
games via Steam, Blizzard, or Epic Games’ 
platforms, while free-to-play games like 
League of Legends require their own 
accounts. Nvidia is just giving you the 
remote hardware to run the games you 
already own or have access to, not 
actually providing games to play.
Nvidia does ease the process of 
getting up and running in key ways, 
however. Supported games are already 
installed on their remote servers, so while 
the launcher will pull up the PC version of 
Steam and prompt you to hit the Install 
button, it’ll finish in an instant. Furthermore, 
some of the games on the list are already 
optimized to deliver the highest-quality 
experience over the internet, meaning you 
shouldn’t need to tweak any settings to 
start playing.
Patches and driver updates are 
handled automatically on their side, and 
you can usually get into a game in about 
30 seconds. Also, game saves can be 
synced to the cloud and accessed across 
multiple devices, in case you have more 
than one Mac that you might play on. All of 
that is super handy.
HOW IT RUNS
How do the games actually play? 
Impressively well, actually. I’m using a 
mid-2014 13-inch MacBook Pro running 
macOS Sierra, with a 2.6GHz Intel Core i5 
processor and 8GB of 
RAM. It’s good enough 
to run some lower-end 
and indie Mac games 
natively, but it can’t 
handle anything big or 
new. It’s not a gaming 
machine by any stretch 
of the imagination—but 
with GeForce Now, the 
heavy lifting isn’t being 
done locally. It’s all 
handled remotely, 
provided you have a 
You’re “installing” to the cloud server, but supported games are 
already there and ready.

14   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
GEFORCE NOW BETA
strong enough internet connection to 
handle the load.
Given that, games looked and played 
pretty spectacularly in my testing, using 
home Wi-Fi that usually ranges between 
50 to 100 Mbps and typically playing within 
10 feet of my router—playing further away 
made games more prone to choppiness. 
PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds (PUBG), a 
100-player shootout to the death, is the 
biggest thing in PC gaming right now with 
more than 20 million paying users this year 
alone. It’s not on the Mac and I hadn’t had 
a chance to try it out until now, but it runs 
beautifully over GeForce Now.
As you might expect, the remote 
gameplay approach means there’s the 
slightest hint of delay to your interactions. 
Nvidia shoots for a slim 30ms-or-less ping 
time from the service across the United 
States, and I’m pretty close to a server 
just outside of Chicago—but when you 
press a button or click the mouse, it does 
feel ever-so-slightly slower than it would 
be when playing natively on your own 
computer. However, so much of 
PlayerUnknown’s Battlegrounds is spent 
quietly wandering open terrain in search 
of prey, although tense firefights 
ultimately surface. Still, it looked and 
PUBG, the PC phenomenon, plays pretty well on the Mac via GeForce Now.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   15
played almost as good as it would 
running on a local PC.
I also tried id Software’s wonderfully 
thrilling Doom reboot from last year, and 
again saw very little impact from the 
streaming delay. In the single-player 
campaign, the levels and demonic foes all 
looked impressively crisp and ran 
smoothly, and the split-second difference 
between clicking the trigger on my 
gamepad and seeing buckshot fly into a 
hellish beast barely registered as a delay. 
I could see myself playing through the 
entire game with that setup.
Rocket League, the brilliant cars-
playing-soccer sensation, was a slightly 
different story—and I say that as a devout 
fan who has pumped hundreds of hours 
into the game. However, I’ve played it 
almost entirely on a PlayStation 4, as my 
Mac can just barely handle running it on 
low settings. Over GeForce Now, the 
game looked fantastic and ran at a smooth 
clip, but in a twitch game like that where 
split-second reactions are needed to block 
balls and notch perfect shots, I could feel 
the streaming delay holding me back 
during online matches.
And yet I still had a lot of fun with it, 
and I still played solidly well even with 
some miscues. On paper, if I had to 
choose between playing it natively on 
a Mac with rougher performance but 
better responsiveness, or streaming 
Doom’s frenetic action still looks impressive when streaming to your Mac.

16   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
GEFORCE NOW BETA
with much-improved visuals but a slight 
delay, I’d have to go for the native option. 
But Rocket League is choppy on my Mac 
anyway, so there’s no perfect pick here. 
The GeForce Now experience is good 
enough for casual fun, certainly, but not 
for precise, high-level competition.
GIVE IT A SHOT
But that’s the market that GeForce Now 
can best serve: the casual player who 
uses a Mac but doesn’t play enough 
games to warrant buying a high-end PC 
or a game console. For most games, 
Nvidia’s service works well enough to get 
the job done—and it’s early days still. 
Since launching the open beta this fall, 
Nvidia has made several improvements to 
the GeForce Now service, including 
adding more servers, improving mouse 
responsiveness, adding microphone 
support, and supporting higher frame 
rates via an Ultra Streaming Mode. More 
improvements will undoubtedly come.
As Nvidia explained earlier in 2017, 
there’s still a long road ahead for a service 
like this (go.macworld.com/r0ad). It’s not 
perfect, and it’ll take more servers, more 
iteration, and faster internet speeds to 
really nail the experience. Also, there’s the 
cost equation: when it fully launches, 
GeForce Now access will cost $25 for 20 
hours of play, or $1.25 per hour. For the 
occasional gamer, that might be better 
than buying a gaming PC or a console, but 
heavy users would probably be better off 
investing in hardware over the long haul. 
But in this early beta state, without 
any costs or limitations on access, 
now’s the time to try it out and get 
familiar with GeForce Now. You’ll be 
able to play huge, non-Mac games 
like Overwatch, PlayerUnknown’s 
Battlegrounds, The Witcher III, Destiny 2, 
and Call of Duty: WWII without having to 
shell out for a new computer, and even if 
you opt to play games that are already 
available on the Mac, they might run 
significantly better than they would 
natively. It might blow your mind to see 
what your Mac can play with a little bit of 
outside muscle. ■
Since launching the open beta this fall, Nvidia has made several 
improvements to the GeForce Now service, including adding 
more servers, improving mouse responsiveness, adding 
microphone support, and supporting higher frame rates via an 
Ultra Streaming Mode. 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   17
The T2 chip makes the iMac Pro 
the start of a Mac revolution   
Sure, it’s the fastest Mac ever made, but the T2 chip is what really makes it different. 
BY JASON SNELL
A
pple’s new iMac Pro is mostly 
just a faster Mac. It’s the first 
professional Mac desktop the 
company has released in over 
three years and the fastest Mac yet 
made, granted, but still entirely familiar. Yet 
in many ways—some noticeable, some 
entirely invisible—this new Mac is 
completely different from all past 
Mac models.
The iMac Pro may be an outlier today, 
but in the future we’ll probably look back 
on it as the start of a new era for the Mac, 
all because of the Apple-built T2 chip it 
carries inside. Here’s how the T2 makes 
this iMac Pro unlike all other Macs.
IMAGE: IFIXIT

18   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
T2 CHIP
THE POWER BEHIND THE 
THRONE
The T2 processor isn’t doing the heavy 
lifting in the iMac Pro—that’s the Intel Xeon 
processor with between 8 and 14 
processor cores. The T2 is the brain 
behind that brain, running the subsystems 
of the iMac Pro from a single piece of 
Apple-built silicon. The result is a simplified 
internal design that doesn’t require 
multiple components from multiple 
manufacturers.
On most Macs, there are discrete 
controllers for audio, system management 
and disk drives. But the T2 handles all 
these tasks. The T2 is responsible for 
controlling the iMac Pro’s stereo speakers, 
internal microphones, and dual cooling 
fans, all by itself.
A FACETIME CAMERA LIKE NO 
OTHER
The iMac Pro’s FaceTime camera can 
capture 1080p video, an upgrade from the 
5K iMac’s 720p resolution. But this new 
FaceTime camera is driven by the T2 
processor, which means it has intelligence 
that previous FaceTime cameras lacked. Like 
its cousin processors that drive the iPhone, 
the T2 has an Apple-designed image signal 
processor that detects faces in order to 
properly set exposure and white balance, 
dynamically adjusts exposure, and a whole 
lot more—all in the service of producing a 
better image, just like what happens when 
you shoot photos or video with your iPhone.
WHAT FLASH STORAGE?
The iMac Pro offers between 1TB and 4TB 
Among the T2’s tasks is control over the new iMac cooling system.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   19
of flash storage, also commonly referred to 
as an SSD, or “solid-state drive.” This is 
hardly the first Mac to include SSDs, but it 
has a very different approach to storage 
than previous models have.
Most solid-state drives, whether they 
fit into a drive bay like a spinning hard 
drive or are reduced to a chip that 
slides into a slot somewhere, are self-
contained—they’re a bank of memory 
combined with a controller. On the iMac 
Pro, though, that’s not the case—the SSD 
that comes with the iMac Pro is actually 
two banks of NAND memory. (Every iMac 
Pro has two banks that are “striped” 
together into a single drive—if you get the 
1TB model, your iMac Pro has two 512GB 
NAND banks; the 4TB model has two 2TB 
NAND banks.)
As for the disk controller? There isn’t 
one—or more accurately, the 
disk controller is built into the 
T2 itself. This gives the T2 
complete control over 
internal storage on the iMac 
Pro. This has some major 
benefits in terms of speed 
and security. Every bit of data 
stored on an iMac Pro’s SSD 
is encrypted on the fly by the 
T2, so that if a nefarious 
person tried to pull out the 
storage chips and read them 
later, they’d be out of luck.
(For additional security, Apple suggests 
you turn on FileVault, which ties SSD 
encryption to your password. This provides 
an extra level of security, because your disk 
can’t be decrypted without the proper 
hardware and your password.)
All this encryption happens invisibly, so 
the SSDs in the iMac Pro still operate at full 
speed—approximately 3GB per second.
BOOT TWICE FOR SAFETY
You know you’re a Mac nerd when you 
have opinions about the keys you need to 
hold down when rebooting while 
troubleshooting a problem. But on the 
iMac Pro, booting and rebooting is 
different—very different. In essence, it’s a 
two-stage process, first driven by the T2, 
then driven by the more traditional system 
boot process.
In addition to all this external I/O, the iMac Pro has crazy-fast 
striped SSDs, encrypted and controlled by the T2.

20   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
T2 CHIP
When you start up the iMac Pro, the 
familiar Apple logo appears almost 
immediately. This is a sign that the T2 is 
taking control. For security reasons, the T2 
is the iMac Pro hardware’s “root of trust,” 
and it validates the entire boot process 
when the power comes on. The T2 starts 
up, checks things out, loads its bootloader, 
verifies that it’s legitimate and crypto-
graphically signed by Apple, and then 
moves on to the next part of the boot 
process.
This new boot process means there’s 
also a new utility for Mac users to get to 
know: Startup Security Utility (go.macworld.
com/stsu), which you can only access by 
booting into Recovery mode by holding 
down Command-R while starting up. Startup 
Security Utility gives the T2 guidance about 
just how strict it should be when judging 
whether it should boot your computer.
By default, security is set to Full, which 
means that only the current operating 
system or another OS version signed and 
trusted by Apple—meaning it hasn’t been 
tampered with in any way—can be booted 
by the computer. This version requires a 
network connection when you attempt to 
install any OS software updates, because 
it needs to verify with Apple that the 
updates are legitimate. You can also set 
the security level lower, to Medium (which 
allows older versions of macOS to run 
regardless of Apple’s level of trust), or turn 
the feature off entirely, emulating the way 
all other Macs currently start up.
(This goes for Boot Camp, too—the T2 
respects Microsoft’s signing authority for 
Windows 10 beginning with 2017’s Fall 
Creators Update, so Boot Camp users can 
reboot into Windows 10 while remaining 
fully secure.)
A HYBRID MAC? NOT QUITE.
Before the iMac Pro was released, there 
was a lot of speculation that it was part of 
a trend toward creating a “hybrid Mac” 
that is driven by both an Intel processor 
and an Apple-designed ARM chip like 
those found in other Apple devices. The 
iMac Pro is definitely a hybrid of a sort, but 
probably not the one people were 
expecting. With the T2, Apple is using its 
chip-design prowess to take more control 
over parts of the Mac hardware that 
were previously outsourced to other 
controllers, and reaping the benefits of 
integrating them all together. 
The iMac Pro isn’t running iOS apps, but 
it does get to take advantage of most of the 
work Apple has done to bolster the security 
of iOS devices and enhance the quality of 
photos and video taken by iPhone cameras. 
Apple will almost certainly continue to push 
this technology into more future Mac 
models, because it allows Apple to use the 
work it’s already done on iOS to improve 
the features and security of the Mac. ■

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   21
No man’s  
land: The  
lack of  
MacBook  
middle ground   
The USB-C MacBook isn’t always a good fit… but 
neither is the MacBook Pro. What’s a Mac user to do? 
BY DAN MOREN
R
ecently, in taking stock of my 
primary computing hardware, I 
noticed an interesting trend: 
Over the course of the last year, 
I’ve swapped out almost all of the devices 
that I use every day. I replaced a 2011 iMac 
with a new 2017 5K model. My iPad Air 2 
got superseded by a 10.5-inch iPad Pro. 
And, of course, my iPhone 7 was turned in 
for an iPhone X. 
Some of this is the nature of the job. I 
write about tech, and people want to know 
about the latest and greatest devices, and 
there’s not much to say if I don’t have 
IMAGE: ADAM PATRICK MURRAY

22   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
LACK OF MACBOOK MIDDLE GROUND
access to those devices. But some of it is 
about my own usage, too. That iMac was 
getting too long in the tooth for some of 
the things that I do every day (namely 
podcast editing); I wanted to get an Apple 
Pencil, which didn’t work with the iPad Air 
2…and so on.
But usage also can be an impediment 
to adoption. Case in point, the one 
machine that I didn’t upgrade: the very 
11-inch MacBook Air on which I’m writing 
this column. Because for my usage, this 
early-2014 laptop still fills a niche that can’t 
be addressed by either the MacBook Pro 
or the new MacBook.
MACBOOK PROS AND CONS
Not too long ago, my dad’s 2008 
MacBook came to the end of its life. If you 
can’t remember back quite that long, it 
was the weird one-off unibody aluminum 
MacBook that had no FireWire port. It 
served my father well for quite some time; 
I’d even installed an SSD at one point to 
eke a little more life out of it.
When it finally came time to replace it, 
we opted to get him a 13-inch MacBook 
Pro, since it felt pretty similar to his old 
computer and he was more comfortable 
with it than, say, making the jump to an 
iPad. Here’s the thing, though: it’s way 
more power than he needs.
I wouldn’t say that the MacBook Pro 
would be more power than I need, but the 
trade-offs from the 11-inch MacBook Air 
aren’t inconsiderable. It’s more than half-a-
pound heavier, for one thing, and though 
the dimensions have gotten closer and 
closer to even an 11-inch MacBook Air, its 
slightly bigger size is enough to make me 
think twice. I just can’t see myself needing 
that much laptop to replace my beloved 
11-inch Air. 
MACBOOK, LIMITED EDITION
On the other end of the spectrum is the 
MacBook. It’s mostly smaller than the Air 
(although, like the MacBook Pro, just 
slightly deeper), and has the lightweight 
form factor that I love about my 11-inch Air. 
It even manages to cram in a Retina 
display. If I were going purely by form 
factor, the MacBook would be a winner.
However, there’s style and then 
there’s substance, as my recent binge-
watching of The Great British Bake-Off 
has impressed upon me. And the 
MacBook is heavy on the former and light 
on the latter. The small size of the device 
means significant trade-offs, some of 
which come in the form of power (its 
default Core m3 processor, for example) 
while others come in expandability (like 
the laptop’s sole USB-C port).
That last point can have a substantial 
impact on usability. Being unable to 
connect, say, a microphone to a machine 
while also connecting it to power (without 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   23
it’s not hard to imagine Apple sticking to its 
guns and keeping only a single USB-C 
port on the device, convinced as the 
company seems to be of where the future 
is headed.
Apple’s laptops have made up the 
lion’s share of the Macs it’s sold for years 
now, and clearly the company isn’t 
suffering too badly for the indecision of me 
and people like me. Perhaps I’m amongst 
a rare few who fall into the cracks between 
these laptop options, but I doubt that I’m 
alone. Though Apple did off the 11-inch 
MacBook Air last year, it’s still kept the 
13-inch model on sale at present, giving 
some credence to the idea that there’s a 
market that Apple’s more modern 
notebook computers just haven’t 
addressed yet. ■
Apple’s butterfly-switch keyboards are less than impressive.
an expensive add-on 
adapter) is an issue 
for using the machine as 
a portable podcasting 
recording studio.
My job also involves a 
heck of a lot of typing, 
and neither the MacBook 
nor the MacBook Pro’s 
keyboards are quite up 
to snuff compared to my 
three-year-old MacBook 
Air. In trying to get the 
thinnest laptops on the 
market, Apple has put a 
lot of energy into creating slim profile 
butterfly-switch keyboards, but the results 
have been less than impressive (go.
macworld.com/ltim).
STUCK IN THE MIDDLE  
(WITH YOU?)
The problem is that a middle ground just 
doesn’t exist. Apple’s laptops seem to be 
for pros or for consumers who don’t 
exceed very specified bounds. If my 
MacBook Air died tomorrow and I had to 
find a replacement, I frankly might end up 
just trying to do more on my iPad Pro 
(though it faces its own challenges).
Apple hasn’t yet showed us a 
significant revamp of the MacBook line, 
which has only gotten meager yearly 
updates since its first release in 2015. But 

24   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
What We’re
Raving About
This Month
Hot Stuff
NEST CAM IQ 
OUTDOOR
nest.com
The all-new IQ Outdoor 
shares many traits with the 
Nest Cam Outdoor, includ-
ing a 130-degree field of 
view, up to 1080p video, and a 
similar sturdily built cup-style 
design. But in every other way, the 
IQ Outdoor is a leap forward, with 
features such as a 4K color sensor, 
High Dynamic Range (HDR), and 
person detection. If the IQ Outdoor 
sees a human, it will zoom in up to 12x 
without any loss in clarity and follow 
the person’s movements. It will also 
balance lighting conditions so that 
details aren’t blown out in highlights or 
lost in deep shadows.—MICHAEL ANSALDO

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   25
iHOME IAVS16B
ihomeaudio.com
The iHome iAVS16B is an alarm clock and 
speaker combo that is fully internet-connected, 
so in addition to, you know, telling the time, it 
includes a live weather readout, plus an inte-
grated connection to internet radio services, 
including iHeartRadio and Spotify. And because 
it supports HomeKit, it can also access your 
iTunes library from any HomeKit-con-
nected device. With 
built-in Alexa support, you 
can ask the iAVS16B to 
play trivia games just like 
you would an Amazon 
Echo, or use it to control 
your smart home 
devices.— CHRISTOPHER NULL

26   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MACUSER
Hot Stuff
YAMAHA YAS-207
usa.yamaha.com
Yamaha’s YAS-207 is a slimline soundbar and wireless 
subwoofer package. It is the first soundbar to add DTS 
Virtual:X technology that analyzes an incoming audio 
signal and uses the Yamaha’s speakers to simulate a 3D 
sound stage—including creating virtual speakers where 
none exist. You don’t need programming mastered with 
DTS:X (the company’s 3D audio technology) for Virtual:X 
to work its magic. That’s the really cool thing about the 
technology. It will work on pretty much any audio source 
you feed it.—THEO NICOLAKIS


TO BE A PERFECT PARENT.
There are thousands of kids in foster care who will take you just the way you are.
888. 200. 4005   
AdoptUSKids.org
YOU
DON’
T HA
VE T
O BE
PER
FEC
T

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   29
Apple’s next laptop should run iOS   
BY JASON SNELL
iOSCENTRAL
The Latest on the iPhone, iPad, 
Apple Watch, and App Store
T
he dividing lines between Apple 
products are clear. Apple makes 
phones and tablets that run 
iOS, and laptops and desktop 
computers that run macOS. But it’s time for 
Apple to start breaking down those barriers 
and experimenting with new kinds of 
products that cross the streams. It’s time for 
Apple to expand beyond the MacBook and 
MacBook Pro. It’s time for the first iOS 
laptop.
Consider the iPad Pro. With screens 
that measure 10.5 and 12.9 inches 
diagonally, they’re practically the size of 
Apple’s old MacBook Air models. The iPad 
Pro was the first iOS to ship with an Apple-
designed keyboard, the Smart Keyboard. 
When the Smart Keyboard is engaged, at a 
glance the iPad Pro already looks like a 
strange laptop.
The problem with the iPad Pro is that 
it’s literally not a laptop: You can’t 
comfortably set it in your lap and get work 
done. (Yes, you can kind of balance the 
Smart Keyboard on your lap, but it’s not 
the same as using a laptop—in terms of 
IMAGE: APPLE

30   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
APPLE’S NEXT LAPTOP SHOULD RUN IOS
stability or adjustability.) This year I’ve 
been using my iPad Pro with the Brydge 
keyboard (go.macworld.com/brge), a 
Bluetooth keyboard with two clamps that 
turn the iPad Pro into something that looks 
an awful lot like a laptop—albeit one with 
no trackpad.
My year spent with this keyboard has 
convinced me that an iOS laptop would 
have appeal to a lot of people. It would be 
thin and light, like a MacBook; it would 
have a touchscreen, unlike the MacBook 
and MacBook Pro; and like the iPad Pro 
itself, it would have all the power of a 
laptop. iOS 11’s multitasking features make 
it even more appealing.
When my iPad’s in laptop mode, it is 
absolutely a “real computer” (go.macworld.
com/real). I’ve used it to shoot photos at 
Apple media events, process them, and 
upload them to the 
web; to write 
tens of 
thousands 
of words 
on deadline; to edit web templates and 
SSH into Linux servers and, yes, even 
control Macs from remote locations.
Would an iOS laptop be for everyone? 
Absolutely not, but there are lots of people 
who might want a laptop but don’t need 
anything more than what iOS offers. Apple 
will still make MacBooks, and hopefully 
has plenty of innovation yet to come (go.
macworld.com/inov) in that area. And 
some people really do prefer working with 
laptops over tablets, all other things being 
equal—not just writers, but people who 
watch a lot of video. My daughter is a 
great example: She loves watching Netflix 
on her laptop and has refused to consider 
switching to an iPad.
A good comparison product might be 
Google’s Pixelbook (go.macworld.com/
pxbk), a fancy $1,199 Chromebook with a 
12.3-inch touchscreen and the ability to run 
Android apps. The Pixelbook is, likewise, 
not a laptop for everyone—but it’s thin and 
light and powerful enough for many 
people’s needs.
Then there’s the Pixelbook’s 
keyboard—it’s got a 360-degree hinge, 
meaning that you can fold the keyboard all 
the way behind the screen and use it as a 
tablet. It’s not quite the same as the 
A 12.9-in iPad 
Pro with Smart 
Keyboard.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   31
detachable keyboard of the Microsoft 
SurfaceBook, nor does it offer the peel-
and-forget elegance of a thin magnetic 
keyboard like the Smart Keyboard or 
Microsoft’s Surface keyboards. But it does 
make the Pixelbook a laptop that can act 
like a tablet.
For people who want a tablet that 
can act like a laptop on occasion, the 
iPad Pro is the right product. But I’d 
love to see Apple make a 
product just on the other 
side of that divide—a 
product that’s a 
laptop first and 
foremost, but 
can act more or 
less like a tablet when it 
wants to. Such a product will 
never be as good a tablet as an 
iPad, but that’s okay—because it would 
be a better laptop.
A lot of digital ink has been spilled 
about the possibility that Apple might one 
day merge macOS and iOS, something 
Apple executives have been insisting is 
not going to happen for many years now. 
Rumors of Apple dumping Intel and 
building MacBooks running its own 
A-series processors have also bubbled 
for a while.
But Apple can keep macOS and iOS 
separate and still design a laptop that 
looks an awful lot like the MacBook, one 
powered by one 
of its A-series 
processors. Add a 
touchscreen, remove the 
trackpad, and maybe add a 
hinge that lets the device tuck 
away the keyboard when it’s not needed.
I don’t know what they’d call it—can 
we bring back the iBook?—or what 
they’d charge for it. But I’d love to see it. 
And while we’re at it, yes, I’d also like 
Apple to make an iOS desktop in the 
style of the Microsoft Surface Studio. 
With all the improvements in iOS 11, it’s 
time to start considering all the places 
iOS can go that it hasn’t been able to  
go before. ■
Google Pixelbook.

32   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
If Face ID is Apple’s future, where 
will we see it next?
iPhone X is the first Apple device to incorporate Face ID, but it won’t be the last. 
BY DAN MOREN
A
head of the iPhone X’s 
announcement back in 
September, there had been 
plenty of rumors about it 
including biometric security based on 
facial recognition, as well as whether 
Apple was struggling to incorporate 
Touch ID into this new model. 
Unsurprisingly, there was a lot of hand-
wringing over this move, with plenty of 
pundits who insisted that Face ID was 
only a sop until Apple could figure out 
how to incorporate Touch ID into its new 
all-screen phone.  
Now the iPhone X is here, we’ve 
gotten more perspective on the matter. 
Not only have we seen how Face ID is a 
major departure from previous facial 
recognition systems, but we’ve also had 
Apple executives point out that the 
IMAGE: APPLE

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   33
company had long ago made the 
decision to ditch Touch ID for Face ID—
which we should have all logically 
considered when the rumors were 
flying, as the company’s not going to  
be struggling with design decisions 
mere months before they ship millions 
of devices. 
But now that Face ID is about to 
become part of many of our daily lives, it’s 
worth considering what else might be in 
store for this technology. Because if the 
company’s moving away from Touch ID in 
its flagship device, you can bet that Face 
ID is here to stay. 
MORE FACES  
As good as the early reviews say Face ID 
is, the technology isn’t without its 
limitations. Some of these are on the 
minor side: for example, certain types of 
sunglasses might not be compatible 
because they block the wavelength of 
light needed for the infrared-based 
equipment in the True Depth cameras. 
Likewise, those of us in colder climes 
might need to pull down our scarves in 
order for the camera to recognize us. 
Hardly deal breakers, but these are 
inconveniences. (Let’s not laud Touch ID 
and pretend it didn’t have its own 
problems, or have you never had to 
retrain the sensor when your skin was 
too dry?) 
But in one way Face ID does take a 
step back from Touch ID: it only supports 
enrolling a single face. For many people 
that may be no problem at all, but for those 
users who allow others to use their 
device—a partner, child, parent, or so 
on—it can be frustrating to have to revert 
back to sharing a strong, possibly hard-to-
remember passcode (and your passcode 
is strong, right?). 
Similarly, sharing a password is a 
bigger security risk, since it allows for 
access to many protected parts of iOS that 
are otherwise inaccessible. And if you 
wanted to revoke the access you’d given 
someone with Touch ID, it was easy 
enough to remove a fingerprint from the 
device; changing your passcode is 
definitely more annoying.
In some ways this is easy to reconcile 
with Apple’s philosophy—the company has 
always pushed the idea that an iPhone is 
really for a single user. (Ever tried to buy or 
download apps with multiple iTunes 
accounts?) But I’m also convinced that the 
company will eventually expand Face ID’s 
purview to handle different people 
accessing the same device, for one very 
good reason. 
MORE DEVICES
Although the iPhone X is the first Apple 
device to incorporate Face ID, it’s a solid 
bet that it won’t be the last. The simplest 

34   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
FUTURE OF FACE ID
reason is that if it does indeed provide 
the most reliable and most powerful form 
of biometric security, why restrict it to just 
a single device? Moreover, Apple would 
no doubt like to offer the feature on other 
devices to allow users to have a single 
authentication method on all their 
devices. 
The iPad is the most obvious choice 
for the next device to get Face ID, at 
least if it follows the previous example of 
Touch ID. Bringing the system to another 
iOS device ought to be relatively 
straightforward, and Apple would no 
doubt like to get rid of the home button 
on its tablet and free up valuable space 
there as well. (Plus, the swiping up 
gesture to bring up the Dock and 
multitasking interfaces on the iPad in iOS 
11 is already reminiscent of the iPhone X’s 
replacement for the home button.)
More interesting, however, is the Mac. 
Touch ID has been slow to migrate to the 
Mac, appearing only on the Touch Bar–
enabled MacBook Pros. But the Touch 
Bar has been one of the company’s less 
popular features of recent years, and 
while many—myself included—had 
expected the company 
might integrate Touch ID 
into a Magic Keyboard 
or Magic Trackpad, it 
certainly seems 
plausible that the 
company decided to skip that entirely 
once it had made the decision to bet on 
Face ID.
And unlike iOS devices, Macs don’t 
generally suffer from the same limited 
space or power problems that Apple has 
to balance on phones and tablets. Plus it 
opens up a better experience for using 
Apple Pay on your Mac, and let’s be 
honest: it’ll probably be even more reliable 
than logging in to your Mac using your 
Apple Watch (go.macworld.com/lgin). 
Both iPads and Macs are far more 
likely to be shared between multiple 
users, and Macs of course have explicit 
support for multiple accounts—which, on 
Touch ID–enabled MacBook Pros, even 
supports user-switching via fingerprints 
(go.macworld.com/fngr). So it seems a 
pretty good bet that Face ID would follow 
in that feature’s footsteps. And hey, 
maybe it will even encourage Apple to 
acknowledge that iPads get shared 
between different users as well, and 
finally bring the multi-user support 
enabled for education into mainstream 
usage—but perhaps that’s a topic for 
another day. ■
The iPad is the most obvious choice for the 
next device to get Face ID, at least if it 
follows the previous example of Touch ID. 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   35
Play these 10 awesome, optimized 
games on your iPhone X
No black bars here: just super-fun games that look super great on that screen. 
BY ANDREW HAYWARD
T
here’s nothing more frustrating 
than firing up your luxurious 
new smartphone, tapping one 
of your favorite apps or games 
from your last device, and finding that it 
just doesn’t look right. In the case of the 
iPhone X, apps not updated for the new 
extra-tall, notch-adorned OLED display 
have black bars bookending the 
experience on the top and bottom.
It’s fine, but you don’t want fine with 
the iPhone X—you want the best, right? 
Games that fill the full frame of the iPhone 
X really pop without all of that extraneous 
IMAGE: ANDREW HAYWARD

36   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
GAMES OPTIMIZED FOR iPHONE X
bezel, too. With that in mind, here are 10 
of the top games you can play on Apple’s 
new phone, and every last one of them 
has been optimized for that dazzling 
screen. Some are newer releases and 
others are old favorites, but they’ll all look 
fantastic on your brand-new handset.
1. MONUMENT VALLEY 2 
Price: $4.99 from go.macworld.com/mnv2
If you haven’t gotten around to playing 
Monument Valley 2, now is definitely the 
time to do so. Ustwo’s sequel looks 
gorgeous on any screen you can find it 
on, but that’s especially true with the 
iPhone X, as the vivid colors dazzle on 
the 5.8-inch OLED display and the 
extra screen real estate gives you 
an even better view of the mind-
boggling environmental puzzles. 
Much like the original game, 
Monument Valley 2 is all about 
trying to solve your way out of 
these odd structures and levels, 
which don’t always conform to 
real-world rules. But that’s a large 
part of the draw, as you experiment 
with moving around platforms and 
dials to find a way out. Of course, 
you should play Monument Valley 
first (go.macworld.com/mnv1)—even if 
it’s not yet iPhone X–optimized.
2. SUPER MARIO RUN
Price: Free from go.macworld.com/smru
Nintendo might still be fairly new to this 
whole mobile thing, but Super Mario Run 
has thankfully shown that the legendary 
gaming company is hip to the idea of 
keeping its iOS games updated with 
fresh content. Chief amongst those 
updates is the addition of iPhone X full 
screen compatibility, with the vibrant 
game expanded to fit the taller frame.
But that’s not all. Last year’s holiday 
gift also recently got a nice burst of 
added content, with a new world of 
courses added to the World Tour (if 
you’ve completed the rest), plus a new 
1. 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   37
Remix 10 mode that sends you blasting 
through a series of teeny-tiny stages. It’s 
still $10 to unlock the full game after the 
free taste, but we think it’s worth it for 
classic Mario made mobile (go.macworld.
com/mrio).
3. IMPOSSIBLE ROAD
Price: Free from  
go.macworld.com/imro
Even after four years of 
release, Impossible Road is 
one of those games we keep 
coming back to. It’s a 
perfectly distilled arcade-
style challenge that finds you 
guiding a rolling ball down a 
twisting and turning rollercoaster-
like course. You’ll need to avoid 
swiftly falling off into the void, but if 
you can guide yourself back onto a 
later part of the track within a few 
seconds, you can massively boost 
your score. That’s a feature, not a 
bug. With the default white-and-
blue theme, the notch is 
unavoidable—although the ultra-
minimal aesthetic remains striking. 
But the alternate black-and-orange 
looks perfect on the iPhone X 
screen (although tough to capture 
in screenshot form), and the game 
has seen a couple other UI tweaks 
in this update.
4. ANIMAL CROSSING: 
POCKET CAMP 
Price: Free from go.macworld.com/cros
Nintendo is now three-for-three in 
bringing its beloved console and 
2. 
3. 

38   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
GAMES OPTIMIZED FOR iPHONE X
handheld franchises to the App Store, as 
the brand new Animal Crossing: Pocket 
Camp shows (Fire Emblem Heroes [go.
macworld.com/fire] is the other, FYI). If 
you haven’t encountered the series on 
Nintendo’s own systems, it’s essentially a 
low-key life simulator, albeit one filled 
with cute animals 
and addictive 
activities.
This new 
mobile rendition 
puts you in charge 
of your own 
campsite and 
roving camper, 
both of which 
you’ll decorate by filling them with 
items…which you’ll obtain by 
completing tasks around the island. 
It’s a calm, compelling little game 
that you can play in little chunks 
throughout the day. And the bright, 
cartoonish style is incredibly 
charming to boot. Animal Crossing 
has never looked better.
5. ALTO’S ADVENTURE 
Price: $4.99 from  
go.macworld.com/alt0
We’re so glad to see Alto’s 
Adventure pumped up and looking 
extra-beautiful on the iPhone X’s 
screen. This is a game we loved on 
previous iPhones and iPads (go.
macworld.com/advt), as well as on the 
Apple TV (go.macworld.com/aplt), and it’s 
one that deserves as much screen as 
you can devote to it: Snowman’s side-
scrolling, super-chill snowboarding game 
4. 
5. 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   39
is really that gorgeous.
You’ll glide down a mountain for as 
long as you can, evading pursuing 
elders, grinding on bunting lines, and 
rescuing runaway llamas, all while a 
cheery jingle loops in the background. 
While you ride, time passes fabulously, 
as the lighting and weather conditions 
shift and the layered backgrounds 
showcase all of that beauty on your 
large, handheld screen.
6. MODERN COMBAT VERSUS 
Price: Free from go.macworld.com/cmbt
The iPhone X might not be a dedicated 
game console, but a game like Modern 
Combat Versus might fool you with its 
glossy, TV-ready 3D graphics. Gameloft’s 
series has always been cutting-edge 
visually, even dating back several years 
to the earliest editions, and this latest 
version takes things a step further with 
crisp environments and player models, 
plus loads of detail in the mix.
As the title suggests, Modern Combat 
Versus is all about multiplayer action, as 
you pop online for frantic 4-on-4 live 
battles that challenge you to maintain 
control of a point on the map. It’s a 
freemium game, so there’s a grind here 
for unlocking additional gear and 
agents…or you can spend cash to speed 
things up. But you can still have plenty of 
quick fun for free.
7. CHAMELEON RUN
Price: $1.99 from go.macworld.com/cham
Here’s another side-scrolling favorite 
that’s been around a little while, but it’s 
much, much different in tone from 
6. 

40   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
GAMES OPTIMIZED FOR iPHONE X
something like Alto’s Adventure. 
Chameleon Run is crazy-tough, sending 
you leaping across far-flung platforms in 
the hopes of making it to the end goal in 
each stage. And if you mistime a jump or 
land on the wrong platform, you’re toast. 
Game over, man. 
How you avoid the latter issue is by 
tapping the screen to change color, 
going from yellow to pink or vice versa. 
You can only land on platforms of the 
same color as your lizard body, so you’ll 
need to rapidly swap to make it through 
most of these challenges. It’s a really 
slick-looking game in 
motion, and even 
more so on the 
iPhone X’s great 
screen.
8. THE WITNESS 
Price: $9.99 from 
go.macworld.com/
wtns
Undoubtedly one of 
the best-looking 
games you can put on 
your iPhone X, The 
Witness drops you 
onto a lush island full 
of puzzles to solve. 
How many puzzles? 
More than 500, 
actually, which start 
simply enough with line puzzles on signs 
posted throughout the world, but soon 
become quite a bit more challenging and 
engrossing. 
Between the puzzles, you’ll unlock a 
gorgeous environment filled with vividly-
colored plant life, spectacular 
architecture, and a quiet sense of 
mystery all about the island. 
Given its massive stack of challenges, 
you might be tempted to play The Witness 
for weeks and weeks (or more), so it’s a 
good thing the game looks so fabulous in 
full-screen on the iPhone X.
7. 
8. 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   41
9. OLD MAN’S JOURNEY
Price: $4.99 from go.macworld.com/olmj
We recommended Old Man’s Journey a 
few months back thanks to its gorgeous 
hand-drawn look, emotional story beats, 
and evocative soundtrack, and we’d like 
to offer that grand thumbs-up once more 
now that the game is properly optimized 
for the iPhone X. 
Truth be told, there isn’t that much 
“game” to Old Man’s Journey: it’s like a 
storybook adventure with just enough 
interactivity to hook you in. As the titular 
elder beset by unfortunate news, you’ll 
travel the countryside and fiddle with 
some breezy puzzles as you 
trek to fulfill your sudden 
quest—and take breaks every 
so often to reminisce about the 
good times and bad decisions 
of his past. It’s sweet, and so 
very beautiful on Apple’s latest 
handset.
10. OCEANHORN
Price: $7.99 from 
go.macworld.com/ocen
On a list with a couple 
of legit Nintendo 
games, here’s one that 
looks and plays like 
another one of the 
company’s classics, 
even if it actually isn’t one. Oceanhorn 
does an impeccable impression of The 
Legend of Zelda, delivering an epic (yet 
mobile-friendly) adventure on both land 
and sea. 
You’ll explore dungeons, solve 
puzzles, battle enemies, and try to find 
out the real story behind the titular sea 
beast, and while Oceanhorn may not be 
a real Zelda game, it captures the 
essence quite well in a portable 
package. And even though this game 
has been out for a few years now, it has 
been gradually enhanced and refined 
over the years, and it still looks really 
slick on the iPhone X. ■
9. 
10. 

42   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
Apple and Shazam: It’s not just 
about identifying songs
Apple’s purchase of Shazam might not be as splashy (or as expensive) as its $3.2 billion 
Beats buy, but it means much more to the iPhone.  
BY MICHAEL SIMON
S
hazam was a true game-
changer as one of the first apps 
to appear in the App Store back 
in July 2008. With just a tap, 
Shazam could identify nearly any song you 
heard without needing to know anything 
about it. Shazam was a magical app that I 
used to show off my iPhone, and unlike all 
those other apps whose novelty wore off 
in just a few weeks (anyone remember 
iBeer?), Shazam has only gotten better 
over the years.
Apple has long partnered with Shazam 
to power Siri’s song identification service, 
IMAGE: THINKSTOCK

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   43
but now the Cupertino giant has confirmed 
(go.macworld.com/conf) that it is buying 
the company outright for a cool $400 
million, a relative bargain in today’s tech 
dollars. On the surface, a Shazam 
purchase ensures that Siri will always be 
able to recognize the song you’re 
listening to and will provide a boost to 
Apple Music, but I think Apple has much 
bigger plans for the service.
Like everything else Apple seems to 
be doing now, it’s about augmented reality 
and machine learning. And it could be the 
thing that finally puts Siri back at the front 
of the pack.
LISTEN UP
Shazam’s main strength is music 
identification, and that fits well into 
Apple’s current strategy. It’s not just Siri 
on our phones: AirPods (go.macworld.
com/a1rp), the HomePod (go.macworld.
com/h0me), and the Apple Watch (go.
macworld.com/apwa) could all benefit 
from Shazam’s uncanny ability to name 
that tune.
And we might not even have to ask. On 
the new Pixel phones (go.macworld.com/
pxel), Google has 
implemented a feature 
that displays the name of 
a song playing nearby 
even if Assistant hasn’t 
been asked. It’s a neat 
feature that’s all done locally, and I use it 
far more often than I thought I would. A 
similar feature would be great on the 
iPhone, and with Shazam’s massive library 
at Apple’s disposal this kind of feature 
would be far superior to Google’s version. 
But where Shazam could really help 
Siri’s ears is with the HomePod. Apple 
wants its new home speaker to “reinvent 
home music,” but if all it does is sound 
good, that’s hardly revolutionary. If Apple 
could leverage its Shazam acquisition to 
build some serious smarts into the 
HomePod, it could be a difference maker. 
We will already be able to ask Siri to play 
things like the most popular song in 1986, 
but Shazam could amplify its knowledge 
considerably. It would be great to tap your 
AirPods and ask “Play the song that goes 
like this …” or “Play that Ed Sheeran song 
about Ireland.” Shazam might not be able 
to do that now, but the groundwork is 
certainly in place, particularly when paired 
with Apple’s own AI musical capabilities.
And it could go beyond simple song 
identification too. Apple could use 
Shazam to create personalized playlists 
right on the HomePod, based on your 
Apple wants its new home speaker to 
“reinvent home music,” but if all it does is 
sound good, that’s hardly revolutionary.

44   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
APPLE AND SHAZAM
listening habits and 
tastes. Apple Music 
already creates 
mixes that are pretty 
great, but Apple’s 
machine learning 
could use what it hears 
to create customized 
playlists for the time of 
day that only play in 
our homes. That alone 
could be a reason to 
spend $350 on a 
HomePod. 
SEEING IS BELIEVING
Shazam may be a household name 
when it comes to song identification, 
but the underlying technology has 
much broader application. Back in 
2015, Shazam added visual recognition 
(go.macworld.com/virc) to its portfolio, 
and while it hasn’t caught on quite as well 
as Shazam’s audio capabilities, Apple’s 
new AR push could definitely benefit from 
this addition.
Even with ARKit (go.macworld.com/
arkt), Apple is lagging when it comes to 
augmented reality, especially on the AI 
side of things. Most notably, Google has 
introduced a technology with the Pixel 2 
called Lens, which works with Assistant 
to identify and interact with real-world 
objects. For example, you could point 
your phone at a building and Assistant 
will tell you about it, or you can scan a 
business card and it will automatically be 
added to your contacts. Google will soon 
be rolling out Lens to all Android 
phones, and once it does, Siri on the 
iPhone will seem even more outdated 
than it already does.
But Shazam could give Apple a real 
boost here. The public face of Shazam’s 
visual recognition has mainly focused on 
brands—for instance, scanning a movie 
poster to access a trailer—but Apple 
could tap into Shazam’s engine to give 
Siri a whole new class of intelligence. 
We’ve read enough rumors about the 
Apple car and Apple glasses to see that 
AR is the next area of focus, and Shazam 
could help bring that future into view. We 
Google Lens can ID paintings and buildings.  

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   45
know that Shazam will amplify Siri’s 
ears, but the tech could be a boost to 
its vision too.
BETTER BUT NOT EXCLUSIVE
When Apple bought Beats, I expected 
the tech giant would force users to buy 
an iPhone if they wanted a new pair of 
headphones. That hasn’t happened. 
Instead, Apple has made the listening 
experience better on the iPhone with 
seamless pairing, a feature I suspect has 
actually sold more iPhones than forcing 
people to switch.
I expect something similar to happen 
with Shazam. While conventional thinking 
would suggest that Apple would shutter 
the Android app in a few months, I don’t 
think that will be the case. However, I do 
think Shazam will be better on iOS. 
Android users will get the same song-
identifying Shazam that’s available today 
while iOS users will enjoy more features, 
even beyond what’s baked into the newer 
products. Apple likely won’t cut people off, 
but the company will add enough cool 
features for people to notice. I think we’ll 
see a delineation between the Shazam 
app on the Play Store and the one on the 
App Store, as Apple enhances its 
capabilities on iOS and adds exclusive 
features.
Apple’s purchase of Shazam might 
have been a bigger deal three years ago, 
but it could have much more of an impact 
on your Apple devices now. TechCrunch 
reported that Spotify and Snap were also 
interested in purchasing Shazam, so the 
potential here is more 
than just cornering the 
market on song 
identification. Apple is 
poised to leap into the AI 
and AR race with both 
feet, and Shazam could 
be the perfect technology 
to vault Apple to the head 
of the class. 
And if not, well, at least 
Siri will be better than 
Assistant and Cortana at 
ID’ing songs. That’s worth 
$400 million, right? ■
Don’t worry, Android users, Apple probably won’t take Shazam 
away from the Play Store.  


FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   47
PHOTOGRAPHY
CASCABLE 3 FOR 
iOS: USE YOUR 
iPHONE AS A FULL-
FEATURED REMOTE 
FOR YOUR WI-FI 
ENABLED DSLR 
CAMERA 
BY JEFF CARLSON
A Wi-Fi–enabled DSLR or mirrorless 
camera, paired with a smartphone or tablet, 
offers several advantages, such as wireless 
transfer of images, the ability to review 
shots on a screen larger than the LCD on 
the camera body, remote shutter control, 
and other features. All of that requires good 
software, and too often the manufacturer’s 
efforts are basic or unreliable.
Cascable 3 for iOS (go.macworld.com/
cas3) is the better alternative that adds 
features many of the camera companies 
don’t. It’s available for free with a limited 
but solid set of capabilities. An in-app 
The Latest iOS Products 
Reviewed & Rated REVIEWS
iOSCENTRAL
IMAGE: CASCABLE

48   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
REVIEW: CASCABLE 3
purchase adds Cascable Pro features.
REMOTE SHUTTER
One of the main reasons to use Cascable is 
to control the camera without being near it. 
Instead of setting a timer and dashing into a 
family photo, you can compose the shot on 
the iPhone using a live preview of what the 
camera is seeing (“Move left, Mom. A little 
more. Perfect.”) and trigger the shot when 
everyone is smiling. An Apple Watch app 
with a giant white button makes it less 
obtrusive that you’re 
remotely firing the trigger.
Even better is the ability 
to adjust the image settings 
from the app itself. Tweak 
shutter speed, aperture, ISO, 
and exposure compensation 
using easy-to-use controls. 
Tap on the screen to set the 
camera’s focus point. You 
can display a live histogram 
to help you avoid over- or 
under-exposing areas, and a 
focus peaking option 
highlights sharp areas in red 
to aid in getting your focus 
correct (especially helpful 
when shooting in the 
camera’s manual focus 
mode, although then you 
need to be near the camera 
to adjust the lens manually).
In general, these remote features 
worked great, but sometimes Cascable 
would get stuck on an exposure; even 
though I could manipulate the shutter 
speed, for instance, it made no change in 
the preview or in the captured shot. I had 
to disconnect from the camera, turn it off 
and back on, and make a new connection.
Some features are dependent upon the 
camera model. On my Fujifilm X-T1, 
Cascable doesn’t let me change the 
autofocus mode or drive mode (such as 
Remotely control your DSLR or mirrorless camera using 
Cascable’s live preview and exposure controls.  
This shot is stuck at being overexposed, even though I’ve 
adjusted the shutter speed to compensate.  

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   49
single or multiple-shot bursts). Some 
cameras will display a preview of a shot 
after you take it, but not mine. I have to exit 
the live view mode and browse the photos, 
allowing a few seconds to download the 
preview from the camera. Fujifilm cameras 
also limit Wi-Fi image transfer to JPEG files 
only, not raw files. For cameras that do, the 
Quick Proof feature presents an editing 
interface to adjust raw files, taking 
advantage of the native Display P3 color 
gamut of devices such as the iPhone X. 
Check the Cascable camera compatibility 
list for details (go.macworld.com/camc).
SHUTTER ROBOT
The Shutter Robot feature offers several 
options for remote shooting. It’ll work as a 
simple timer, of course, if you like jumping 
into frame; the advantage with Cascable is 
that you can set seconds or minutes as the 
delay, not just the typical 3 or 10 seconds. 
As an intervalometer, you can choose to 
snap images on a schedule, such as once 
every minute, with the option to stop after a 
fixed number of shots or amount of time.
A Bulb Timer keeps the shutter open for 
long periods. Exposure Bracketing sets the 
number of photos to take and the 
difference in exposure between them; for 
example, you could choose to capture 5 
images at different exposure settings to get 
the brightest and darkest values for a 
scene, then combine them in software later 
to create an HDR (high dynamic range) 
composition.
GEOTAGGING, CALCULATIONS, 
AND MORE
Cascable can use the iPhone’s GPS 
capability to save a record of your location 
over time. That record can then be 
exported as a GPX format file, which, when 
imported into an application such as 
Lightroom Classic CC, assigns locations to 
photos based on their timestamps.
A Calculations screen is purely 
informative, but helpful. Enter a lens 
size and your camera’s crop sensor, 
and Cascable will tell you how long 
to keep your shutter open to capture starry 
Time lapses 
are easily 
configured 
using the 
Shutter Robot.  

50   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
REVIEW: CASCABLE 3
mmmm
Cascable 3
PROS
•  Control a Wi-Fi–equipped 
camera remotely with a live 
view.
•  Automate some capture 
tasks, such as timelapse 
and bracketed exposures.
CONS
•  Exposure settings 
sometimes stuck during 
testing, requiring restart of 
the camera and app.
PRICE
Free (in-app purchases)
COMPANY
Cascable
skies without blurring them. Or, calculate 
shutter speed when using 
neutral density filters.
Cascable incorporates the iOS 
Files infrastructure, which means 
other apps that use it, including 
the Files app, can open or copy 
images directly from Cascable’s 
app storage—no need to round-
trip through the Camera Roll. On 
the iPad, images can be dragged 
and dropped between apps.
PRICING
Cascable on its own is free. 
Upgrading to Cascable Pro via an in-app 
purchase unlocks the Raw support, 
automatic location tagging in the 
background, the GPX file export, the Shutter 
Robot features (beyond the basic timer), 
instant previews, and a Night mode that 
gives the app a dark interface. The pricing 
itself is interesting, with three options:
•  Pay for a one-time purchase of $30.
•  Use the Pro features as a free trial for 
three days, then pay $3 per month, billed 
monthly (or $36 per year).
•  Use the pro features free for one week, 
and then pay $2.00 per month, billed 
quarterly (or $24 per year).
These plans seem to target everyone: 
people who want to pay once and not worry 
about it; people who want to use the app for 
a short amount of time, or have 
the flexibility to cancel during any 
month; or people who don’t mind 
an ongoing quarterly payment.
BOTTOM LINE
Too often, the Wi-Fi feature built 
into some cameras goes ignored 
because the manufacturer’s 
software is limited or half-baked. 
Cascable takes full advantage of 
the ability to control and 
communicate with the cameras 
from an iPhone or iPad. ■
Calculate the best shutter speed to keep 
stars sharp during long exposures.  

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   51
Anker’s ever-expanding line of 
smartphone accessories and products is 
impressive. Case in point is the Anker 
PowerDrive Speed 2 car charger ($25 on 
Amazon at go.macworld.com/ankr).
The charger, which features an 
attractive carbon fiber pattern, fit snugly 
enough in our test car’s power 
port that we had no worry about 
it coming loose on a bumpy ride.
The charger features two 
ports, each one capable of 
Quick Charge 3.0 speeds—
eliminating any guesswork. If you 
have two QC3.0-compatible 
devices plugged in, both ports 
will continue to charge at full 
speed. The blue ports are 
IMAGE: ANKER
illuminated, making them easy to locate it 
in a dark vehicle or an obscured nook.
In our tests, the Anker PowerDrive 
Speed 2 charged an iPhone X at 5V/1.4A. 
Testing with a Galaxy S8 immediately 
triggered Fast Charging, with the car charger 
using 9V/1.5A. In other words, it performed in 
line with Anker’s claims.
The PowerDrive Speed 2 
comes without cables or a 
carrying case. Anker offers its 
standard 18-month warranty.
BOTTOM LINE
If you’re willing to pay a premium, 
the Anker PowerDrive Speed 2 
car charger is a powerful and 
well-designed charger. ■
MOBILE
ANKER 
POWERDRIVE 
SPEED 2 CAR 
CHARGER: ANKER 
LIGHTS THE WAY  
BY JASON CIPRIANI
mmmm
PowerDrive Speed 2 
car charger
PROS
•  Lit USB ports.
•  Quick charging.
CONS
•  A bit expensive.
PRICE
$24.99
COMPANY
Anker

52   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
iOSCENTRAL
The Anker PowerLine+ (go.macworld.com/
pwln) is basically everything you want in a 
Lightning cable. This premium, nylon-
wrapped cable is super durable, comes in 
a variety of colors and lengths, and it 
won’t leave you broke. It’s not dirt cheap—
the 3-foot cable costs about $14—but 
even the longest version is a couple of 
dollars cheaper than Apple’s Lightning 
cable. It’s not necessarily the cable to 
get if you’re on a rice-and-beans budget, 
but you’ll save over Apple’s cable and 
also get a better-looking and better-
performing cable.
The PowerLine+ comes in four colors 
(gold [go.macworld.com/g0ld], gray [go.
macworld.com/gray], red [go.macworld.
IPHONE ACCESSORY
ANKER POWERLINE+ 
LIGHTNING CABLE: 
EVERYTHING YOU 
WANT IN A 
LIGHTNING CABLE   
BY SARAH JACOBSSON PUREWAL
IMAGE: ANKER

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   53
mmmmh
Anker PowerLine+
PRICE
$13.99
COMPANY
Anker
com/redd], and white [go.macworld.com/
whte]) and four sizes (1 foot [go.macworld.
com/1fot], 3 feet [go.macworld.com/3fot], 6 
feet [go.macworld.com/6fot], and 10 feet 
[go.macworld.com/10ft]), and costs 
between $13 (for the 1-foot version) and 
$17 (for the 10-foot version). The slim, 
round cable is made with ultra-strong 
aramid fiber and is wrapped in a double-
braided nylon sheath. The Lightning 
connector and the USB plug are housed in 
tough plastic, which is laser-welded to a 
more flexible rubbery material at the 
cable’s stress point. 
One of the only caveats here is the 
Lightning connector’s housing—it’s at least a 
full millimeter larger than the housing around 
the Lightning connector in the Apple cable, 
and this could be an issue if you have a 
snug, waterproof case on your phone. I 
didn’t have any problems with my waterproof 
Catalyst case, but there are a handful of 
other waterproof cases—such as LifeProof’s 
cases—with smaller port openings that this 
cable probably wouldn’t fit into.
The PowerLine+ feels pretty rugged. 
The company says this cable is up to 10 
times more durable than other 
Lightning cables, thanks to its 
reinforced stress points. The 
cable should be able to 
withstand more than 6,000 
bends and has “exceptional 
tensile strength,” according to 
the company. I didn’t try bending it 6,000 
times, but it did hold up well next to the 
other more overtly rugged cables.
The cable comes with a cool little felt 
pouch for storage and shortening, and the 
red braided cable is particularly vibrant 
and attractive. Anker’s lower-tier braided 
cable costs $10 for the 3-foot version 
(instead of $14), while its non-braided 
cables are as low as $6 for the 3-foot 
version—even cheaper than Amazon’s 
ultra-cheap basic cable.
The PowerLine+ is Anker’s premium 
cable. The company also offers lower-level 
cables, including a PVC-wrapped cable 
that’s similar in price and durability to 
Amazon’s AmazonBasics cable.
BOTTOM LINE
The PowerLine+ is the fanciest 
and priciest of the Anker cables, 
and you’re definitely paying a 
little (but just a little) for the 
premium look and feel. ■
Anker PowerLine+ 
Lightning cable.   


   MACWORLD   55
iOSCENTRAL
WHAT’S NEW AT THE 
APP STORE
ANIMAL CROSSING: 
POCKET CAMP
We’ve already gone in-depth on Nintendo’s 
latest iOS game, but in case you haven’t 
heard, Animal Crossing: Pocket Camp (go.
macworld.com/acpc) is a charming and 
adorable spinoff of one of the company’s 
beloved console franchises. You’ll create a 
little avatar, interact with various animal pals, 
complete odd jobs to help woo new friends, 
and build up the best campsite you can.
Lineage II: Revolution
Vast and beautiful 
massively-multiplayer 
online games are usually 
found on computers, but 
Lineage II: Revolution (go.macworld.
com/l2r) manages to streamline the 
experience enough to work on 
mobile—and it’s no less attractive as a 
result. Lineage II is a 3D stunner that 
effectively looks like a glossy Mac 
game running on your iOS device.
Far From Noise
Many games deal with 
death, but very few 
actually bother to 
contemplate it, or focus 
on the moments before its seeming 
imminence. Given that, Far From 
Noise (go.macworld.com/ffn) feels like 
a very distinctive experience. You 
see a car teetering over a cliff with 
the ocean below, and there’s a 
woman inside. You’re the woman, 
and you’re kind of freaking out.
Puzzle Fighter
Capcom’s Super Puzzle 
Fighter II Turbo is one of 
the all-time great puzzle 
games, pairing col-
or-matching gem maneuvering with 
Street Fighter characters that lob 
attacks when you clear big chunks 
from the screen. The new Puzzle 
Fighter for iOS (go.macworld.com/pf) 
keeps that same core approach while 
bringing in characters from other 
games. —ANDREW HEYWARD
FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   55

56   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MAC
The App Store sent 2017 out with a bang as developers unleashed several of the year’s best 
iPhone and iPad games during December. Some are ports of celebrated games from consoles 
and computers, while others are delightful debuts—but whatever their origins, December’s top 
iOS games collectively pack a huge punch.  By Andrew Heyward
10 MUST-PLAY iOS GAMES
INSIDE ($7)
go.macworld.com/insi
Playdead’s Limbo is an absolutely mesmerizing game—a shadowy journey through the wilderness, 
just a boy and his wits against unseen dangers. And the studio’s new game, Inside, essentially builds 
upon that same premise. It’s still a side-scrolling game starring an unarmed boy, it’s still a bit 
bleak-looking, and it still doesn’t feature any dialogue or overt storytelling. But it’s just as marvelous. 
Inside finds your young hero exploring a factory where some seriously bizarre experiments are taking 
place, and the atmosphere builds steadily as you enter and even participate to evade capture. It’s 
unsettling, to say the least, but the environmental puzzles are clever and the atmosphere is fantastic. 
iOSCENTRAL
56   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018

SID MEIER’S CIVILIZATION VI ($60)
go.macworld.com/smcv
What’s more surprising about this listing: that the full-blooded Sid Meier’s Civiliza-
tion VI has made the move from Mac over to iPad, or that there’s a $60 iPad 
game? Both are pretty surprising, but if any tablet game can warrant the expense, 
it’s surely the latest and greatest entry in Firaxis Games’ brilliant turn-based 
strategy franchise. At first glance, it’s every bit the Civilization VI experience you’ll 
find on a computer, letting you guide historical civilizations to greatness via the 
“4X” approach: “explore, expand, exploit, and exterminate.” Luckily, it’s a free 
download that lets you play 60 turns before needing to shell out for the full game, 
giving you a robust opportunity to try it out. 
FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   57

58   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MAC
LIFE IS STRANGE ($3)
go.macworld.com/listr
Episodic narrative adventures have proven popular on iPhone and iPad, as seen with Telltale’s 
Walking Dead and Batman series (among others), but Square Enix’s Life is Strange strikes a 
different tone. It’s a story about teenagers and some of the very real stresses and dilemmas 
they face, with an unexpected level of authenticity within… oh, and the ability to control time. So 
it’s a bit supernatural too, but Life is Strange still excels with its emotional storytelling while 
building some larger stakes with heroine Max’s newfound ability. She uses it to try and reverse 
some sad happenings around her, but expectedly, that kind of power has some drawbacks too.
iOSCENTRAL
10 MUST-PLAY GAMES
58   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018

FEZ POCKET EDITION ($5)
go.macworld.com/fpe
Finally reaching iPhone and iPad a few years after its Mac, PC, and 
console release, Fez Pocket Edition makes the beloved indie game 
much easier to play wherever you’d like. Fez is a puzzle game dis-
guised as an old-school platform-action affair, and it’s not as 2D as it 
looks: its biggest gameplay hook is that you can rotate the game world 
90 degrees at a time to find unseen paths and secrets. It’s a really neat 
twist that changes how you look at the pixel environments, and the 
ultra-charming graphics and music should keep you pleasantly puz-
zle-solving even in the complicated later bits. 
FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   59

60   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
MAC
iOSCENTRAL
BRIDGE CONSTRUCTOR PORTAL ($5)
go.macworld.com/bcp
It’s been almost seven years since the last proper Portal game released, and given 
Valve’s surprising shift away from development of late, it may be a long while before 
we see another one—if ever. But the physics-based puzzle classic takes on a new 
approach with Bridge Constructor Portal, a mash-up with another physics-centric 
franchise. Instead of navigating a person through various portals, you’ll instead build 
bridges of increasing complexity to guide little forklifts to their proper destinations. 
This spin-off keeps the humor and familiar aesthetic of Portal, and remains clever 
even if it doesn’t hit quite the same mind-blowing heights as the core Portal games.
60   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
10 MUST-PLAY GAMES

GETTING OVER IT ($5)
go.macworld.com/goi
Getting Over It is a game designed to delight… in your frustration, that is. Like creator Bennett 
Foddy’s QWOP, GIRP, and other games, it is purposely difficult to control—and that somehow 
makes it all the more irresistible to the persistent players that figure out how to overcome its 
intentional kludginess. In this case, Getting Over It drops your hero into a large metal pot and 
gives you only a sledgehammer, which you’ll use to somehow propel yourself up a very large 
and jagged mountain. Overcoming trees and cliffs requires ample trial-and-error maneuver-
ing, and it could take you hours to make your way to the top. Sound exhilarating? 
FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   61

62   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
FEATURE
FEATURE
62   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   63
IMAGE: APPLE
Made for video editing, 3D graphics, VR, and software 
development, Apple’s new pro Mac is an engineering feat.
By Roman Loyola
iMAC PRO 
FIRST LOOK: 
APPLE’S MOST 
POWERFUL 
MAC IS 
A MULTI-
PROCESSING 
BEAST

64   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
FEATURE
T
he long-awaited iMac Pro (go.
macworld.com/impro) is finally 
here. On Thursday, December 14, 
Apple’s new workstation-class 
Mac became available on the company’s 
website. The 8- and 10-core iMac Pro ships 
immediately, while the 14- and 18-core 
models ship in January.
The release of the iMac Pro is significant 
for Apple. The Mac Pro, released in 2013, 
has had only one minor update in four years, 
and Apple earlier this year admitted that the 
machine is a mistake (go.macworld.com/
iam). And while the company could say that 
a top-of-the-line iMac has plenty of process-
ing power, it’s not the workstation-level 
computer that demanding professionals 
want. This machine is a sign that Apple still 
values pro users and wants to offer a Mac 
that can meet their demands. During an iMac 
Pro media event (attended by Macworld), 
company executives and third-party devel-
opers in attendance hammered that point 
home.
iMac Pro pricing starts at $4,999 for the 
8-core baseline configuration. The 10-, 14- 
and 18-core processors are offered as 
configure-to-order options, along with 
iMAC PRO FIRST LOOK

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   65
RAM (32GB, 64GB, or 128GB), flash stor-
age (1TB, 2TB, or 4TB), and graphics.
iMAC PRO: PROCESSOR  
AND GRAPHICS
At the heart of the iMac Pro is an Intel 
Xeon processor. Specifically, the Xeon W 
(go.macworld.com/xw), a workstation-class 
CPU targeted at workstation-class soft-
ware that uses multiple processing cores. 
The processors incorporate Advanced 
Vector Extensions 512 (go.macworld.com/
ave, AVX 512), Intel’s instruction set for 
512-bit SIMD (single-instruction, multi-
ple-data) operations.
Apple offers four different processor 
configurations: 8-core, 10-core, 14-core, and 
18-core. Apple considers the 10-core model 
the one that will appeal to most users, 
hitting a sweet spot between price and 
performance; it also offers the highest 
Turbo Boost frequency of the four models 
at 4.5GHz. The 14-core iMac Pro was not 
previously announced as part of the lineup.
Pushing the pixels to the iMac Pro’s 
display are AMD Radeon Pro Vega graphics. 
Base configurations come with 8GB Radeon 
Pro Vega 56 graphics, with an option to 
upgrade to the 16GB Radeon Pro Vega 64.
Apple reiterated throughout the event 
that these processors and GPUs were the 
fastest ever used in a Mac. In software 
demos of Adobe Dimension CC (go.
macworld.com/adcc), Osirix (go.macworld.
com/osi), TwinMotion (go.macworld.com/
tmo), Maxon Cinema 4D (http://maxon.net/), 
high-resolution 3D images rendered on 
the fly in real time, with barely any notice-
able jitter or lag. In VR demos with Gravity 
Sketch (go.macworld.com/gs) and Servios’ 
(go.macworld.com/sur) new Electronauts, 
3D objects and animation flowed smoothly. 
Most impressive was a demo of Apple’s 
Xcode (go.macworld.com/axc), which ran 
several UI tests and VMware Fusion virtual 
machines at the same time without the 
iMac Pro breaking a sweat.
iMAC PRO: DISPLAY  
AND DESIGN
Just as the iMac Pro’s processor and 
graphics are the best ever in a Mac, so too 
is the the display, according to Apple.
The specifications of the display cer-
tainly are impressive. Sporting a 
5120-by-2880 resolution and 500 nits of 
brightness, the 27-inch Retina display is 
capable of displaying billions of colors and 
uses the P3 (go.macworld.com/p3x) color 
gamut. It is not, however, an HDR display. At 
the event, it wasn’t possible to spend any 
time really examining the display’s picture 
iMac Pro ports (left to right): 
headphone, SD card, 4 USB 
3 ports, 4 Thunderbolt 3 
connectors, 10Gb ethernet.

66   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
FEATURE
quality and performance, and the specs 
match up with the current 27-inch 5K iMac. 
Apple’s iMac displays have always been of 
top quality, and chances are this display will 
follow suit.
As for the external design, Apple made 
a conscious decision to maintain the look 
of the iMac that we all know; it even has 
similar dimensions to the iMac. One main 
difference is that the iMac Pro allows for 
user–configurable VESA mounting (go.
macworld.com/vesa)—the consumer iMac 
must be configured with a VESA mount at 
the time of purchase. Other differences 
include the obvious space gray finish 
(which is quite impressive in 
person) and rear air vents.
Speaking of the air 
vents, that brings us to the 
internal design of the iMac 
Pro. Though you’ll probably 
never see the insides, 
Apple made a great effort 
to address the cooling 
needs of this Mac. The iMac 
Pro doesn’t use a hard 
drive or a separate solid-
state-drive mechanism; all 
of the flash storage is on 
the motherboard. This 
allowed Apple to install a 
massive heat sink and dual blowers, which 
Apple says results in 80 percent better 
cooling than the iMac’s design.
In the software demos I mentioned 
previously, not once did I notice any fan 
noise. Not a whirl or the white noise of air 
blasting through the vents. During the 
Xcode demo we were encouraged to feel 
the back of the iMac Pro for a heat check, 
and it was warm to the touch, but I think 
I’ve felt more heat from my MacBook Pro.
A design decision that some users 
won’t agree with is the inability for users to 
access the iMac Pro’s RAM. Fortunately, 
the RAM is installed in DIMM slots, not 
soldered on to the motherboard, so if you 
have the ability to open up the iMac Pro, 
you can upgrade the RAM. You don’t have 
iMAC PRO FIRST LOOK

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   67
to order more RAM than you need at the 
onset, but if you want to upgrade later, 
Apple considers this task one that needs 
to be done by a service provider.
iMAC PRO: NEW T2 CHIP FOR 
SECURITY
In the MacBook Pro with Touch Bar, Apple 
introduced the T1 chip, which handles 
processing and display for the Touch Bar 
and provides the secure enclave for Touch 
ID. With the iMac Pro, Apple debuts the T2, 
which controls components and tasks that 
were once covered by other discrete chips, 
such as the FaceTime camera, LEDs, and 
storage devices. The T2 essentially frees 
the main CPU from these menial tasks so it 
can focus on serious processing.
The T2 chip also provides a new set of 
security features. The T2 provides a 
secure enclave for file encryption (File-
Vault) and a new startup security feature, 
which, unfortunately, wasn’t demonstrated 
at the event. Apple says that the iMac Pro 
will include a software utility for configuring 
the secure boot process.
Apple doesn’t usually comment on future 
products, so the company won’t say if the T2 
will be used in other Macs. But if you’ve 
been following the business side of Apple, 
you’ve probably heard about Apple’s deal-
ings with third-party chip fabricators and the 
company’s desire to make their own silicon. 
It’s a foregone conclusion that we’ll see the 
T2 or a later generation of the chip in other 
Macs, it’s just a matter of when.
iMAC PRO: SPACE GRAY  
INPUT DEVICES
A space gray iMac Pro wouldn’t be com-
plete without space gray accessories, and 
Apple includes a Magic Mouse 2 and a 
Magic Keyboard with Numeric Keypad that 
properly match the iMac Pro. For $50 
Want the space gray keyboard, mouse, and trackpad without buying an iMac Pro? No doubt 
you’ll see them on eBay by iMac Pro owners who have other preferred input devices.

68   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
FEATURE
No doubt you’ll see them on eBay by iMac 
Pro owners who have other preferred 
input devices.
iMAC PRO: SHOULD YOU BUY 
ONE?
The iMac Pro itself is a beast, both in power 
and price tag, capable of handling the most 
difficult processing tasks you can throw at it. 
If you aren’t sure whether an iMac Pro is the 
Mac for you, take a look at the reasons why 
you should or should not buy an iMac Pro 
(go.macworld.com/why). Macworld will do a 
full review of the iMac Pro once we’ve had 
time to really put it through its paces. ■
iMAC PRO FIRST LOOK
more, you can get a space 
gray Magic Trackpad 2 
instead of a mouse, or you 
can pay an additional $129 to 
get both.
Color aside, these devices as 
the same as offered with Apple’s 
iMacs, so if you hate the flat feel 
of the keyboard keys, you’ll hate 
the feel of the space gray 
keyboard. And I’m not a fan of 
the Magic Mouse 2, but man, the 
space gray mouse is gorgeous.
Apple wouldn’t say if these 
devices will be available for 
sale separately, but there’s 
always a possibility if the demand is great 
enough.
Want the space gray keyboard, mouse, 
and trackpad without buying an iMac Pro? 
iMAC PRO: WATCH THE 
MACWORLD PODCAST
Watch Macworld Podcast episode 
586, with our take on the new iMac 
Pro: go.macworld.com/pod.

 a hairbrush.
Recycle me.

MAKE BREAKFAST
HAPPEN 
SO KIDS
CAN BE
HUNGRY
FOR 
MORE
 Hunger Is® is a joint initiative of the Albertsons Companies Foundation and the 
Entertainment Industry Foundation, which are 501(c)(3) charitable organizations. 
Viola Davis, Hunger Is Ambassador 
Photo By: Peggy Sirota
I was one of our nation’s hungry kids growing up. Today, 1 in 5 children in America 
struggle with hunger. But when they get breakfast, their days are bigger and brighter. 
Learning, attention, memory and mood improve. Together, we have the power to 
get breakfast to kids in your neighborhood — let’s make it happen. Go to hungeris.org 
and lend your time or your voice.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   71
FEATURE
WIRELESS CHARGERS
FOR YOUR iPHONE X:
These are the features, specs, and design considerations 
to keep in mind when buying a wireless charger for your 
iPhone X or iPhone 8  By Jason Cross
WHAT TO BUY

72   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
FEATURE
W
ith the iPhone 8 (go.
macworld.com/ipho8) and 
iPhone X (go.macworld.
com/iphox), Apple has 
finally joined the wireless charging revolu-
tion. For years, many Android users have 
had the ability to simply plop their phone 
on a pad to juice it up, but to do that with 
an iPhone used to require a special (and 
bulky) case.
Wireless charging isn’t always a great 
substitute for plugging in, but it’s a very 
convenient way to keep your phone 
topped off through most of the day. A 
wireless charger on your desk means no 
more plugging and unplugging throughout 
the day and a full charge when you head 
home from work. A wireless 
charger next to your bed 
makes it easy to grab 
and go in the 
morning, or just 
pick up your 
phone to 
“check one 
thing” without 
fussing with the 
lightning cable.
We have 
some general 
buying advice that 
will help ensure you 
get a wireless charger 
you’ll be happy with.
QI VS. PMA
There are two major standards for wireless 
charging: PMA (Power Matters Alliance) 
and Qi (pronounced “chee”). If you see a 
charger that only supports PMA, keep 
moving. The new iPhones only support Qi.
Fortunately, Qi is by far the most 
common standard for consumers, so you 
shouldn’t have much trouble finding a 
compatible charger. What’s more, every Qi 
compatible charger should work just fine 
with the iPhone 8, 8 Plus, and X, even if it 
doesn’t specifically list support for them on 
its packaging or marketing materials. 
You can buy a charger at an Apple 
Store if you really want to guarantee com-
patibility, but you’ll limit yourself to the two 
models currently sold there: The 
Belkin Boost Up ($59.95 at 
Apple.com, go.macworld.
com/bbu) and the 
Mophie Wireless 
Base ($59.95 at 
Apple.com, go.
macworld.com/
mwba). Both of 
these chargers 
are also available 
on Amazon, which 
we link to in the 
boxes below.
iPHONE X WIRELESS CHARGERS
Belkin Boost Up Wireless 
Charging Pad

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   73
5W VS 7.5W PERFORMANCE
The new iPhones shipped with initial 
wireless charging limited to just 5 watts. 
That’s pretty slow, but then again, the 
in-box power adapter is also only 5 watts 
(go.macworld.com/5w). So wireless 
charging really isn’t any slower than the 
(admittedly pitiful) power adapter that 
comes in the box.
The iOS 11.2 update (go.macworld.
com/112) increased the maximum wireless 
Belkin Boost  
Up 15-Watt Qi  
Compatible Wireless  
Charging Pad & Charger
charging speed to 7.5 watts. That’s 50 
percent faster, but charging speeds vary, 
and they slow down a lot as the battery 
gets full. Still, if you want the best perfor-
mance in a wireless charger, look for one 
that can support 7.5 watts or more.
Some pads, like RAVPower’s Fast 
Wireless Charger, support faster charging 
speeds only on some Android phones, but 
are limited to 5 watts on iPhones.
RAVPower makes another charger, also 
simply called the Fast Wirelss Charger, that 
supports the faster speed on iPhones. 
Same brand, similar name, but different 
chargers with different capabilities on 
iPhones. Be sure to read the fine print!
FLAT OR STANDING?
You’ll see two types of wireless chargers 
on the market: flat pads, and angled 
stands. A flat pad is simple and easy, but 
you might want to consider a stand. With a 
stand it’s a lot easier to use your phone 
while it’s charging up.
RAVPower Fast Wireless Chargers QI Wireless 
Charging Pad Quick Charge 5W for iPhone X

74   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
FEATURE
And with the iPhone X, a standing 
charger makes it easy to unlock your 
phone with Face ID (go.macworld.com/idf) 
without picking it up.
Want the best of both worlds? We’ve 
had no problems using the Samsung 
Convertable Stand, which has a luxurious 
padded top and slides easily between flat 
pad and angled stand.
PORTRAIT AND LANDSCAPE 
ORIENTATION
If you get a stand instead of a flat charger, 
you’d be wise to make sure it’s made to 
work with your phone in both landscape 
and portrait orientation.
Most of the time, you’ll plop down your 
phone standing upright. And Face ID on 
the iPhone X only works when the phone 
is upright, too.
But a charger that works well with your 
phone in landscape mode makes it easy 
to play certain games, and of course watch 
videos, without taking your phone away 
from those precious free electrons.
Some stands even guarantee better 
charging performance with your phone set 
either way by having two charging coils, 
like the Anker PowerPort.
CASE CONCERNS
If you keep a case on your phone, you 
shouldn’t worry too much about whether it 
will work with a wireless charging pad or 
stand. The vast majority of cases will work 
just fine.
There are three types of cases that can 
pose problems, however:
Samsung Fast Charge  
Wireless Charging  
Convertible  
Stand
Anker  
PowerPort  
Wireless 5  
Stand
iPHONE X WIRELESS CHARGERS

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   75
The first is a case with a metal back (or 
a battery case). That Betteck battery case 
($33.99 at Amazon, go.macworld.com/
bbca) may seem attractive with its extra 
5,200 mAh of extra juice, but it won’t work 
with wireless chargers.
The second is a wallet case. A particu-
larly thin one like this Silk iPhone X Wallet 
Case ($24.99 at Amazon, go.macworld.
com/sipx) might actually work, but electro-
magnetic induction and credit card stripes 
just don’t mix. If you don’t want to screw 
up your cards, don’t put them between 
your phone and a wireless charging stand.
The third is especially thick cases. Most 
chargers will work fine on any case up to 
3mm thick, and some can go through a 
5mm case with ease. But maybe you’re a 
demolition derby racer and also work 
construction plus you’re a rodeo 
clown on the weekends. Maybe 
you have an extra-rugged case. If 
so, it’s probably too thick to get a 
wireless charge going, even if it 
doesn’t have a metal back (as 
many extra-rugged cases do).
WAIT FOR AIRPOWER?
Of course, if you bristle at the 
idea of buying non-Apple stuff, 
you can just wait for the Air-
Power wireless charging pad 
(go.macworld.com/apwc).
Apple’s pad uses Qi charging together 
with its own custom extensions that let it 
charge several different devices at once, 
along with reporting charge levels. You 
can charge your iPhone, Apple Watch 
Series 3, and AirPods (you’ll have to get a 
new wireless-enabled charging case) all at 
the same time!
AirPower will charge three devices at 
once, and your phone will even display 
charge levels for everything.
Unfortunately, Apple has not yet 
revealed the price nor release date for the 
AirPower pad nor the wireless case for 
AirPods. Both are coming in 2018, and 
that’s all we know. ■

To donate or volunteer, go to UNITEDWAY.ORG. 
BECAUSE GREAT THINGS HAPPEN WHEN WE LIVE UNITED.
Thanks to our work with NFL PLAY 60, we’ve brought fun ﬁ tness programs 
to more than 35,000 kids. And it can happen here too.
WHAT THIS PLACE NEEDS
IS ACTIVE PLAY EVERY DAY.
WHAT THIS PLACE NEEDS
IS ACTIVE PLAY EVERY DAY.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   77
WORKINGMAC
Tips, Tricks, and Tools to Make You 
and Your Mac More Productive
S
o, the iMac Pro (go.macworld.
com/imcp) is shipping (see 
page 62). After many years’ 
worth of fretting and worrying, 
Apple once again has a pro-level desktop 
that boasts the modern technology. And 
all is right with the world.
But is it? There’s no disputing that the 
iMac Pro is a capable machine: with up to 
18 cores, a maximum of 128GB of RAM, 
and a hefty video card, the benchmarks 
indicate that this is a machine that can 
take everything you throw at it.
And yet it’s not Apple’s whole “pro” 
story. In an interview with select outlets 
back in April 2017 (go.macworld.com/prst), 
Apple executive Phil Schiller had multiple 
shoes to drop, including this:
IMAGE: APPLE
Apple off to  
a promising  
start with its  
revamped pro Mac lineup  
BY DAN MOREN

78   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
WORKINGMAC
APPLE’S PROMISING PRO MAC REVAMP
With regards to the Mac Pro, we are in 
the process of what we call ‘completely 
rethinking the Mac Pro.’ We’re working 
on it. We have a team working hard on it 
right now, and we want to architect it so 
that we can keep it fresh with regular 
improvements, and we’re committed to 
making it our highest-end, high 
throughput desktop system, designed 
for our demanding pro customers.
In other words, pro Mac users have a 
lot to look forward to in 2018 and beyond.
ONE SIZE DOESN’T FIT ALL
Let’s just put it out there: Impressive as it 
is, the iMac Pro isn’t for everybody. In that 
same interview, Schiller called the iMac 
“our most popular desktop with pros,” 
though that’s a bit 
disingenuous if you 
consider that the Mac 
Pro, at that point, had not 
been updated in close 
to four years. The iMac, 
meanwhile, had rolled 
on to become better and 
better, so if you were 
looking to buy a pro-
level desktop from 
Apple, you only really 
had one choice.
While the iMac Pro’s 
performance is hard to 
dispute, those who do take issue with the 
machine point to what they see as its 
major weakness: a lack of internal 
upgradeability and expandability. When 
you configure an iMac Pro for purchase, 
you’re mostly stuck with any decisions you 
make at the time. Nothing, including the 
RAM, is user-upgradeable (at least not 
without voiding a warranty), continuing the 
trend that’s been well-established across 
the Mac line over the past decade or so.
That’s where the hypothetical Mac Pro 
comes in again. Schiller has said that “it is, 
by definition, a modular system,” which 
seems like a response to the biggest 
criticism of that 2013 Mac Pro redesign. 
Apple tried to anticipate what pros wanted, 
merged it with the company’s own 
philosophy about the hardware that it built, 
The next Mac Pro probably won’t look like its tower predecessor, 
but it will be a modular system.   

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   79
and the result was pretty and impressive—
but it kind of missed the mark for the 
intended audience.
It certainly seems like Apple’s not 
about to make the same mistake twice.
PROS, NOT CONS
The fact that Apple has dedicated so much 
attention to pro-level customers—not just 
with the iMac Pro but the recent revisions 
of the 5K iMac, and the upcoming Mac 
Pro—should go a long way to assuaging 
the concerns of power users. After all, it 
seems clear the company does care about 
the professional market. But it’s this 
forthcoming modular Mac Pro that’s going 
to show us whether the company cares 
about listening to its customers. The 2013 
Mac Pro is poised to be the third-
generation iPod shuffle (the one with no 
buttons)—elegant, attractive, and an 
impressive achievement academically, but 
ultimately not at all what people wanted.
Don’t buy into the fallacy, though: not 
every power user is buying an iMac just 
because they can’t get a Pro. Some 
people seem to genuinely prefer the 
compact form factor, the simplicity and 
beauty of the built-in screen, and so on. It’s 
a mistake thinking all pros are cut from the 
same cloth.
But that goes both ways. Apple too has 
hopefully recognized that the iMac Pro 
and the cylindrical Mac Pro before it 
weren’t a panacea to the ails of Mac users 
clamoring for professional-level 
equipment. While the tide has certainly 
swept toward computers that are more 
appliance-like, with a minimum of moving 
parts and a lack of internal expansion, 
that’s not going to address the needs of all 
pros. Expansion and modularity are, for a 
segment of the population, mission critical. 
That doesn’t mean we’ll get a return to 
the Mac Pro of yesteryear, the hefty 
cheese grater with plenty of space under 
the hood. I think it’s clear that Apple 
believes that form factor has sailed. With 
the upcoming Mac Pro, Apple has set itself 
a task that’s about delivering the 
expansion capabilities that a section of the 
pro market wants but staying true to the 
kind of hardware that the company would 
feel proud to deliver. ■
Third-generation iPod shuffle.   

80   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
WORKINGMAC
IMAGE: APPLE
Should you buy an iMac Pro? Here 
are the reasons why and why not  
Apple most powerful Mac is an attractive computer. But do you really need it?  
BY JASON SNELL
A
pple’s sure-sellers for the 
holiday season have been on 
store shelves for a while now, 
but for fans of high-powered 
Macs, Christmas came early with the 
release of the iMac Pro (go.macworld.com/
imcp). It’s undoubtedly going to take the 
crown as the most powerful Mac ever 
made—and will undoubtedly hold onto that 
distinction until a new Mac Pro arrives on 
the scene.
There’s a lot to be said for the iMac Pro. 
It’s the first Mac with workstation-level 
processors with a plethora of processor 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   81
cores (8 and up!) since the Mac Pro in 2013. 
The Radeon Pro Vega is the most powerful 
graphics processor ever in a Mac.
If you’re someone who uses a 5K iMac 
to get work done today, should you 
consider buying the iMac Pro or not? 
Here’s a list of reasons why you should—
and also a few reasons you might want to 
keep that credit card in your pocket.
IF YOU NEED MULTICORE 
PROCESSOR POWER
Not every workflow is built equally. Though 
modern processors usually feature 
multiple cores capable of executing code 
simultaneously, not all software is written 
to spread the workload across those 
cores. There are certain audio plug-ins I 
use that will absolutely swamp a single 
core of the i7 processor in my 5K iMac—
while the other cores remain untaxed.
But the right tools, written to grab as 
many cores as possible and use them to 
their fullest, will absolutely fly when given 
the ability to max out the eight to 18 cores 
in the iMac Pro.
Talk to professionals and you’ll 
probably find that they know exactly what 
their most processor intensive tool is: For 
me, it’s the Spectral De-Noise filter in the 
audio processing package iZotope RX 6. 
That filter, which does a remarkable job of 
removing background noise from audio 
tracks, will max out my iMac’s cores. Even 
with that, it still takes a very long time to do 
its job, which is why an iMac Pro would 
probably be a big time-saver for me.
If you don’t know if harnessing many 
processor cores can help you do your 
job, open the CPU Monitor window in the 
Activity Monitor app. It’ll show you all 
your cores (including “virtual cores” used 
in Intel processors supporting 
hyperthreading), and you can see 
whether the most intense work you do is 
spread across all your Mac’s processor 
cores, or is limited to just one.
If you feel the need for more speed 
and your apps are already pushing 
your Mac’s cores to the limit, the iMac 
Pro would probably give you a big 
speed boost. 
IF YOU NEED  
GRAPHICS POWER
Powered by the Radeon Pro Vega, the 
iMac Pro is a workstation with graphics 
abilities that outstrip any current Mac. If 
you’re interested in working in advanced 
graphics, or VR development, while 
remaining on the Mac platform, this is the 
Mac that’s going to be the most capable.
But beyond sheer processing power, 
the iMac Pro supports twice the number of 
external displays as the 5K iMac. If you’re 
someone who needs two external 5K 
displays, or four external 4K HDR displays, 
you need the iMac Pro.

82   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
WORKINGMAC
SHOULD YOU BUY AN iMAC PRO?
IF YOU WANT THE BEST  
5K iMAC
Priced at $4,999, the base model iMac Pro 
comes with 1TB of flash storage and 32GB 
of RAM. The top-of-the-line iMac, outfitted 
with the fastest processor available on that 
model and with RAM and storage specs to 
match the iMac Pro, costs $3,699. That 
extra $1,300 nets you a much faster 
processor with twice the cores, a major 
graphics power boost, and more.
(In fact, if you max out the specs on the 
5K iMac, you can get one for $5,299, more 
than the iMac Pro’s starting model. But that 
model has more RAM and more flash 
storage than the base model iMac Pro.)
My point is this: If you’re in the market 
for a high-end iMac anyway, it’s worth 
considering the iMac Pro. The leap in price 
isn’t as dramatic once you’re maxing out 
the specs of the 5K iMac in order to get 
the most powerful model.
IF YOU WANT SPACE GRAY 
PERIPHERALS
Here’s a reason not to buy an iMac Pro: 
Yes, it comes with Space Gray versions of 
the Magic Keyboard, Magic Mouse, and 
Magic Trackpad, color variations that are 
not available anywhere else—at least for 
now. While I have no doubt that these 
keyboards and input devices will be hot 
items on eBay, please do not buy a 
$5,000 computer for a keyboard in a 
slightly darker shade of silver.
(Look, I am not the fashion police: Buy 
what you want. It just seems a bit silly to 
spend that much money on a color 
variation of the same input devices we’ve 
had for ages. The iMac itself is a similar 
When you purchase an iMac Pro, you can choose these wireless accessories in space gray.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   83
story: If you’ve always wanted a Space 
Gray iMac, you can get one now! But the 
“black tax” for this model is way, way 
higher than the one for that black 
MacBook back in the day.)
IF YOU LIKE INSTALLING 
AFTERMARKET RAM
The iMac Pro, unlike the 5K iMac, doesn’t 
have a RAM door on the back, which 
means you can’t buy the lowest amount of 
RAM possible from Apple and then install 
cheaper RAM from a third party later. Yeah, 
that’s kind of a downer; that’s what I did 
when I bought my 5K iMac. If you’re 
frustrated with Apple blocking the very last 
bit of user upgradeability on the 27-inch 
iMac line, I get it.
IF YOU’RE AFRAID OF FIRST-
GENERATION HARDWARE
This is a brand-new model. The iMac Pro, 
first of its name, with new processors and 
hardware (and even an Apple-built ARM 
co-processor, the T2, which probably 
won’t bring about judgment day). The 
conventional wisdom has always been, 
first-generation hardware has quirks and 
bugs, so it’s best to let the brave jump in 
on the first go, while the savvy shoppers 
wait a year for the first hardware iteration 
that stamps out all the unexpected bugs.
It’s not a bad strategy, if you’re a 
patient person. Are you patient? If you’ve 
waited this long for a new professional 
Mac desktop, maybe you are.
IF YOU’RE REALLY IN THE 
MARKET FOR A MAC PRO
We know literally nothing about the 
composition of the Mac Pro whose existence 
Apple executives acknowledged earlier this 
year. They made no commitments about 
when it would ship or what it would contain. 
We can assume that it will be more powerful 
than the iMac, possibly more expandable (it 
couldn’t be less!), and won’t ship with a 
27-inch display attached to its front.
If you simply don’t want to own an iMac, 
if you really would prefer a (potentially) 
more expandable and powerful Mac Pro, 
then it’s probably a good idea to wait. But if 
you’re someone who uses Macs to get 
work done, and who needs the fastest Mac 
in existence to do that job, you might 
consider this: There will probably be a 
robust resale market for the iMac Pro when 
the Mac Pro comes out. You could always 
buy this thing and use it until 2018 or 2019 
or whenever the Mac Pro arrives, then sell it 
and put that money toward the Mac Pro.
Maybe you’ve been so patient waiting 
for this iMac that you’re willing to be even 
more patient. Or maybe you’ve waited 
long enough. In the end, the difference 
between those two states may be the 
ultimate factor in deciding whether the 
iMac Pro is right for you. ■

84   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
WORKINGMAC
IMAGE: FCC
FCC votes to kill net neutrality  
in an unsurprising move.  
What happens now? 
The fight is only just beginning.  
BY MICHAEL SIMON
T
hat noise you heard recently 
was the sound of millions of 
modems across the U.S. crying. 
As expected, the FCC voted (go.
macworld.com/vote) 3-2 to kill its own net 
neutrality rules, and the internet as we 
know it could be forever changed.
Under the current net neutrality rules 
(classifying ISPs under Title II of the 
Communications Act), which were only just 
enacted in 2015 (go.macworld.com/enct), 
internet service providers are required to 
deliver all online content with the same 
speed and accessibility, meaning they can’t 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   85
charge more for faster Netflix speeds or 
restrict YouTube access. There are particular 
exceptions for medical services, public 
safety communications, and other data that 
is deemed to be in the public good.
Telecom providers claim that these 
regulations hindered growth and 
innovation, while supporters of net 
neutrality—including Apple, Google, and 
Facebook—argue that weakening them 
threatens the openness of the internet.
The impact on you at home: This is big. 
Net neutrality has prevented ISPs such as 
Comcast and Verizon from nickel-and-
diming customers based on their internet 
usage, or gouging Google to make sure 
YouTube isn’t throttled. But even more 
important than Netflix and Hulu HD streams 
is the access to information. Millions of 
people depend on the internet for basic 
services, and the repeal of net neutrality 
protection may threaten their access to it.
Recently the Verge published an open 
letter (go.macworld.com/oplt) from the 
presidents of the New York public libraries 
underscoring the threat the net neutrality 
repeal poses: “This proposal directly 
impacts the 
public’s ability to 
access library 
collections and 
materials—the 
very tools that 
have helped 
even the playing field for so many in this 
country for centuries.” The internet isn’t 
just a place to binge Stranger Things. For 
many people, it’s a vital connection to the 
world around them. And that’s worth 
fighting for.
NEUTRAL NO MORE
The push to kill net neutrality’s been led by 
FCC chairman Ajit Pai, who has been a vocal 
opponent of the rules ever since he was 
appointed to the five-member board by 
then-President Barack Obama. Despite a 
wave of opposition to the proposal, the FCC 
pushed ahead with the vote, seemingly 
ignoring the vast majority of public 
comments and holding no public hearings.
In her dissent, Democratic Commissioner 
Mignon Clyburn called out this very point 
and decried the commission’s process: 
“Unlike its predecessors this FCC has not 
held a single public hearing on net neutrality. 
There is no shortage of people who believe 
Washington is not listening to their concerns, 
their fears, and their desires. Add this 
agency to the list.”
These concerns seemed to fall on 
The push to kill net neutrality’s been led by FCC 
chairman Ajit Pai, who has been a vocal opponent of 
the rules ever since he was appointed to the five-
member board by then-President Barack Obama. 

86   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
WORKINGMAC
FCC KILLS NET NEUTRALITY
deaf ears. Pai posted a light-hearted 
video to conservative site Daily Caller  
(go.macworld.com/dcal) to illustrate what 
you’ll still be able to do on the internet. 
Critics decried it as tone-deaf and 
condescending (go.macworld.com/cond), 
and it only served to fuel the fire of 
protesters, who rallied outside the 
hearing room to no avail.
In a statement preceding the vote, Pai 
said that by returning to the Title I 
framework, the FCC will be “helping 
consumers and promoting competition. ... 
This means there will be more competition 
among broadband providers. It also means 
more ways that startups and tech giants 
alike can deliver applications and content 
to more users. In short, it’s a freer and 
more open Internet.”
Opponents 
argue that ISPs 
could turn the 
internet into an à la 
carte service like 
cable, dividing sites 
into tiers and 
charging people 
extra fees to stream 
video or use social 
media sites. It could 
also affect future 
internet-based 
companies’ ability 
to innovate, as 
access to sites and services are 
affected. In the most extreme case, ISPs 
could charge a flat rate for “basic” 
internet access and tack on extra fees 
for access to popular sites and services 
like Twitter, Facebook, or Instagram. 
Additionally, critics fear that ISPs could 
limit or degrade access to streaming 
services in an effort to boost its own 
products.
However, this ruling doesn’t mean 
the net neutrality fight is over. A court 
battle is almost certain to kick off 
immediately, one that may well reach the 
Supreme Court. And lawmakers in 
Congress could get in on the act as well, 
passing legislation to define a list of 
consumer protections into laws that ISPs 
must follow. ■
FCC chairman Ajit Pai has been a vocal opponent of net neutrality rules.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   87
The once and future OS for Apple  
BY DAN MOREN
F
or Apple watchers, the company 
is always a bit like the proverbial 
duck: floating seemingly calm 
and placid above the water while 
paddling furiously just below it. Which is 
why it’s often hard to gauge exactly what 
the company is up to, especially when the 
current is changing.
In the last few weeks, both my 
colleague Jason Snell and I have looked 
ahead to what Apple might be envisioning 
for the future of its devices. I’ve opined on 
ARM-powered Macs (go.macworld.com/
armp); Jason’s wondered about the 
possibility of a laptop running iOS (go.
macworld.com/lios). In a recent 
conversation—on our secret podcast (go.
macworld.com/podc), which you should 
check out—we started to put some pieces 
together and conjectured that maybe 
these aren’t two different stories but rather 
one larger tale of what Apple’s future 
might hold. 
What if, to paraphrase the late Steve 
Jobs himself, these aren’t two platforms, 
but one platform with a bunch of devices?
TEAM PLAYERS
Yes, I know: people have been worried 
about the peanut butter of iOS getting into 
the chocolate of their macOS since the 
iPhone’s. But this isn’t necessary about the 
IMAGE: APPLE

88   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
WORKINGMAC
APPLE’S ONCE AND FUTURE OS
Mac getting iOS-ified anymore than it is 
iOS getting Mac-ced. This is about Apple 
taking what it’s learned from the last 
thirty-plus years of the Mac and the last 
decade of the iPhone and trying to create 
something new from the ground up.
Both iOS and macOS have individual 
strengths to bring to the party. In iOS, 
Apple has created a platform with 
unparalleled security down to its roots. 
There’s no platform in existence that is 
deployed on the number of devices as 
iOS—in the hundreds of millions!—that also 
boasts its impressive security record. And 
in macOS, the company has not only 
developed a platform that has stood the 
test of time, adapting to multiple 
architecture shifts over the course of 
decades, but also one that brings power 
and customizability to users.
But where they each have strengths, 
they also feature commensurate 
shortcomings. iOS still can’t match the 
multitasking ability of the Mac. The Mac 
aspires to the ease of use that iOS’s 
touch-based UI brings, but doesn’t quite 
get there. And that’s okay—they’re 
different things.
So what if there were a third thing?
UNIFICATION, NOT 
CONVERGENCE
Tim Cook has made no bones about his 
distaste for “toaster fridges,” devices 
like Microsoft’s Surface, which try to 
straddle the line between traditional 
PCs and touch-based tablets. That’s 
understandable: most devices that have 
tried to exist in both spheres have been 
underwhelming at best. But that’s in large 
part because they’ve felt like jury-rigged 
attempts to cram already existing systems 
into boxes they were 
never meant to go into. 
We haven’t really seen a 
major platform-maker 
take a crack at what 
happens if they rip it all 
down to the foundation 
and start fresh.
So, instead of, say, considering tablets 
and laptops two entirely different 
platforms, what if they were two devices 
built atop a single platform—the same way 
that laptops and desktops both run macOS 
or phones and tablets both run iOS. The 
same software platform, different 
hardware.
It’s just a different way of slicing the pie. 
Instead of making our axis touchscreen 
There’s no platform in existence that is 
deployed on the number of devices as 
iOS—in the hundreds of millions!—that also 
boasts its impressive security record. 

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   89
versus physical-keyboard-based, we could 
be looking at a single operating system 
that could accommodate everything from 
desktops down to phones. Rather than 
making trade-offs based on which user 
interface you prefer, you could do so 
based on the physical form factor that suits 
you best. Some might even be able to 
adapt between multiple form factors, i.e. a 
laptop or tablet.
I know: it sounds crazy. But it’s also, to 
my mind, inevitable. Maintaining two major 
connected but independent platforms has 
got to be a challenge for the company. 
And, frankly, when you get down to it, iOS 
devices have more commonalities with 
Macs than 
differences. And 
those commonalities 
seem like a pretty 
good place to start.
WHAT’S NEXT?
The next big thing is 
coming. It may not 
arrive next year, the 
year after that, or five 
years from now. But 
Apple’s not simply 
sitting up in its 
shining city on a hill 
counting its money. 
The company invests 
hugely in research & 
development, and it’s always looking 
towards the future, even if—like that 
frantically paddling duck—it’s not always 
obvious from the outside.
Remember, Apple started developing 
Mac OS X while macOS was still a 
going concern, and the former is now 
about the age the latter was when it 
started getting phased out. Likewise, the 
company had its Intel-based Macs 
running for years before they made their 
way to market.
Honestly, the bigger gamble would be 
suggesting that Apple isn’t working on 
whatever it is that comes next, because in 
this business, sitting still is suicide. ■
Microsoft’s Surface tries to straddle the line between PCs and tablets. 

TO FIND YOUR NEAREST DONATION CENTER GO TO GOODWILL.ORG
DONATE STUFF.
CREATE JOBS.
YOUR CLOTHES 
THAT ARE TOO 
SMALL CAN DO
BIG THINGS FOR OTHERS. 
YOUR DONATIONS TO GOODWILL
® HELP 
FUND JOB PLACEMENT AND TRAINING 
FOR PEOPLE IN YOUR COMMUNITY.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   91
PLAYLIST
Everything You Need to Know About iOS, 
iTunes, and Mac-Based Entertainment
L
ate last year, Apple announced 
that it would delay the promised 
release of its HomePod smart 
speaker to early 2018. It was a 
disappointment for those customers 
hoping to score one for the holiday 
season, but in an interview with Dutch site 
Bright.nl (go.macworld.com/brgt), Apple 
senior vice president Phil Schiller said 
Apple needed “more time to make it right.”
IT’S MORE IMPORTANT TO BE 
RIGHT THAN FIRST
That’s hardly a new sentiment for the 
company to espouse. Apple’s reputation 
has long been to do things right instead 
of rushing them out the door just to 
compete. And when it comes to the 
HomePod, the competition already 
promises to be fierce: Amazon and 
Google are already entrenched, while 
IMAGE: APPLE
There’s no place like HomePod  
Apple’s delay comes with raised expectations and stiffer competition.  
BY DAN MOREN

92   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
PLAYLIST
NO PLACE LIKE HOMEPOD
functional prototype. Those to whom 
Apple gave access reportedly got a 
demonstration of the device’s 
audio quality, but not much beyond that.
MORE THAN MUSIC
One challenge for Apple is that the 
HomePod can’t succeed merely on the 
basis of its sound, impressive as it might 
be. Wireless speakers are already an 
established market, but they’re also on the 
niche side—that’s one reason that Sonos, 
probably the foremost in that field, has 
launched its own smart speaker to tap into 
the immense consumer interest in virtual 
assistants.
Apple, of course, 
already has a smart 
assistant in its 
arsenal, which should 
ease its way into the 
market, but Siri has 
itself become a 
popular target for 
those looking to point 
to how the company 
has fallen behind its 
rivals in the space: 
everybody from Lenovo 
to Sonos has been 
jumping in with me-too 
offerings.
A new report from 
Canalys (go.macworld.
com/cnls) says that the 
smart speaker market is forecast to spike 
this year, outpacing other technologies like 
augmented reality and virtual reality. In a 
rare moment of transparency, Amazon said 
it had sold tens of millions of Echo devices 
(go.macworld.com/s0ld) during the 
holidays. (Though many of those sales are 
likely for the low-cost devices that Apple 
won’t compete with.)
But still, Apple is playing it casual.
By all accounts, the version of the 
HomePod shown to the press during 
Apple’s Worldwide Developers 
Conference last year was far from a fully 
Canalys estimates a surge in smart speaker sales this year.
By all accounts, the version of the HomePod 
shown to the press during Apple’s Worldwide 
Developers Conference last year was far 
from a fully functional prototype.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   93
Google’s Assistant offers better answers 
for many queries related to web searching 
while Amazon’s Alexa boasts a strong 
third-party ecosystem.
That suggests the relative success of 
Siri on the HomePod might be in 
narrowing its focus. It wouldn’t be the first 
time Apple reined in the virtual assistant’s 
areas of responsibility either: on the Apple 
TV, for example, the assistant may not 
have the full range of commands available 
on the iPhone or iPad, but it does offer 
options specific to watching video, such as 
turning on captions or skipping forward 
and backward.
In a similar fashion, indications are that 
Siri’s features on the HomePod will be 
targeted mostly toward music and home 
automation. That’s probably a wise move, 
as those are no doubt the features for 
which consumers mainly use smart 
speakers. But if Apple’s going to focus 
those features, then the ones that are 
included had better be bulletproof.
APPLE ONLY
Apple has so far opened up Siri only to 
specific third-party features, and it doesn’t 
seem as though the HomePod will feature 
any of those. As with many of Apple’s 
previous products, integration with the 
company’s own ecosystem is not only in 
the forefront, but is often the only option. 
So if your smart home devices won’t work 
No matter how impressive the HomePod sounds, it’s going to need serious smarts, too.

94   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
PLAYLIST
NO PLACE LIKE HOMEPOD
with HomeKit out of the box, it will 
be up to you to find a workaround.
Likewise, the chances that the 
HomePod natively supports music 
services other than Apple Music are 
slim to none. (It sounds as though 
using AirPlay is an option, but it 
certainly removes some of the 
convenience.) It’s not even clear at 
present whether the HomePod can 
access all music from Apple’s 
iCloud Music Library, or only that 
which is available via the paid Apple 
Music service.
Some of this insularity won’t be a 
substantial detriment to many 
consumers, who are probably coming 
to the device as happy Apple 
customers. The Apple Watch and 
Apple TV have proved that selling directly 
into a base of users of existing Apple 
products is a viable strategy for the company. 
That harmonizes nicely with Apple’s ethos of 
doing things right, since its customers will 
often wait for the Apple version of a product. 
(Or buy a cheaper competitor in the 
meantime and discard it later.)
SO WHAT’S THE HOLDUP?
But all of this brings us back around to 
Apple’s delay of the product. Was this simply 
a production hiccup? Or was some part of 
the device in need of final tuning? All the 
pieces seem to have been accounted for, 
from the audio hardware to Siri, and it would 
be foolish at this stage for Apple to be doing 
anything more than minor adjustments. Or, in 
other words, don’t expect the HomePod to 
look significantly different from the version 
showed off last year.
What’s most likely to vary is the 
software under the hood, but since we 
haven’t gotten a look at what it should be, 
we might very well never know exactly 
what was behind the HomePod delay. 
Regardless, though, the stakes are 
upped: after pushing such a product 
back, the pressure’s on to make sure it is 
indeed “right.” ■

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   95
D
etroit—car capital of 
America—has had difficulty 
recovering from a decade-
long economic downturn. 
Many companies have left the Motor City, 
outsourcing their manufacturing, assembly, 
and materials production overseas. 
Shinola is bucking that trend, 
manufacturing headphones, luxury 
watches and watch straps, hand-built 
bicycles, and high-end leather goods here. 
(You can read the larger story behind 
IMAGE: SHINOLA
Shinola Canfield over-ear 
headphones: These cans are 
made for hipsters, not audiophiles    
Styling and build quality hit all the high notes, but sonic reproduction falls flat. 
BY THEO NICOLAKIS

96   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
PLAYLIST
REVIEW: SHINOLA CANFIELD
product, a factor that helps them sell at 
high-end retailers such as Nieman Marcus, 
Nordstrom, and Bloomingdales. Their build 
quality is reminiscent of the classic 
American spirit of well made and built to 
last—a motto the company displays on 
some of its other products, including its 
wristwatches. The Canfield are made of 
stainless steel with alternating brushed 
and mirror finishes. They’re gorgeous, 
without a hint of plastic on any critical 
component.
The Canfield are wrapped in luxurious, 
high-quality leather that Shinola sources 
from Chicago’s Horween Leather 
Company (go.macworld.com/hrwn). You’ll 
immediately note that you’re purchasing a 
crafted piece of audio gear, not simply 
another pair of headphones.
The magnetic, 
memory-foam ear cups 
are covered in soft 
lambskin that feels great 
against your skin. The 
magnetic ear cups snap 
into place perfectly. Be 
warned, however, that the 
ear cups fall off when 
enough force is applied. 
If you’re accustomed to 
packing your 
headphones in a 
backpack, you’ll find 
occasions when you pull 
Shinola’s drive to bring manufacturing 
back to the U.S. at go.macworld.com/
manf). It’s a noble effort to be sure, but it’s 
not enough to make Shinola’s Canfield 
over-ear headphones worthy of their 
substantial price tag.
THE CANFIELD ARE 
LUXURIOUS HEADPHONES
Shinola’s $595 Canfield headphones are 
designed, assembled, and tested in 
Detroit. Most of the components inside 
them, however, are manufactured 
overseas. The Canfield display meticulous 
attention to detail. My review pair came in 
the company’s cognac shade, though you 
can opt for black and silver or gloss black. 
Gloss black carries a $55 premium.
These headphones feel like a luxury 
The Canfield are made of stainless steel and trimmed with top 
grain leather.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   97
them out sans ear cups. It happened to 
me. In my book, B&W’s headphones are 
the goldilocks standard for how magnetic 
ear cups should be designed.
Two shades of top-grain leather 
envelop the cushioned headband, which 
Shinola says gets more comfortable over 
time. The Canfield definitely need 
significant breaking in. They will feel tight 
at first and exhibit some initial pressure on 
the top of the headband. They reminded 
me of the feel of the B&W P7 headphones 
(go.macworld.com/bw7h), which also 
needed a break-in period. In this case, 
however, I never reached the point during 
my review period where the Canfield 
headphones felt entirely comfortable.
The other issue I noted was that the 
infinitely 
adjustable 
headband was 
difficult to adjust 
when wearing. I 
had to take the 
headphones off to 
adjust them. 
Otherwise, I 
sometimes 
couldn’t get them 
to open or close 
easily. All the 
while I was 
thinking, “This is 
something a little 
WD-40 could fix.”
The Canfield have a 50mm dynamic 
transducer with a frequency response of 
20Hz to 24kHz. At 41 ohms and an 
efficiency of 115db SPL/V @ 1kHz, you won’t 
have a lot of trouble driving them with an 
average smartphone. I used an iPhone 7 
and iPad Air without issue. But, as you’ll 
see, you should never purchase a pair of 
headphones—or any piece of audio gear 
for that matter—purely on specs. Always 
audition your gear.
The inline remote control is located at 
the collar of the left and right ear cup 
cables. It makes it easy to find and natural 
to use without looking. The round play/
pause button in the center helps you get 
oriented. The top button increases volume 
The stainless steel styling has alternating brushed and polished surfaces 
for a gorgeous look that nods to the company’s wristwatch line.

98   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
PLAYLIST
REVIEW: SHINOLA CANFIELD
while the lower button decreases it. You 
have 16 volume steps in total. The steps 
were a tad too much of a jump for my 
taste, and I lost granular control of the 
volume. Pressing the play/pause button 
twice advances to the next track, while 
triple pressing it will go to the previous 
track. Rewind and 
advance, however, 
didn’t always work for 
me as advertised. I 
sometimes got a 
paused song when I 
actually wanted to 
skip to the next one 
or go back to the 
previous.
The microphone 
sits on the right cable, 
falling just below your 
jaw. I placed a few 
calls with the Shinola 
Canfield and people on the other end 
always heard me just fine—even in some 
windy New York City conditions.
These headphones’ features and 
accessories are both Spartan: There’s no 
wireless, noise canceling, or any other 
high-tech features. You get the 
headphones, a hard carrying case, a 
pouch for the headphone cable, and a 
certificate of authenticity. That’s it. There’s 
no 1/4-inch adapter for high-end DACs or 
an airline adapter for travel. It’s not a 
deal-breaker to be sure, but most 
headphones supply one or both of those 
accessories. I do wish that the included 
carrying case had a mesh pocket either on 
the inside or outside to hold the 
headphone cable.
Speaking of the headphone cable, it’s 
The inline remote is simple to use.
The ear cups are magnetic and easily removable. That isn’t always a 
good thing if you like to throw your headphones in your backpack.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   99
soft and highly flexible, wrapped in a nylon, 
tangle-free braid. It’s the perfect length for 
using with a digital audio player (DAP) but 
might be too short if you envision using it 
with a dedicated headphone amplifier 
unless you’re sitting right next to it.
CAN’T KEEP PACE WITH ITS 
SONIC PEERS
I tested the Shinola Canfield on a variety of 
devices, including the Astell&Kern AK70 
(go.macworld.com/astl), Pioneer XDP-100R 
hi-res DAPs (go.macworld.com/100r), and 
an iPhone 7. I played a variety of files 
including lossy AAC-encoded and lossless 
FLAC, ALAC, and DSD files. I had a similar 
experience across devices and my 
comments here are specific to lossless 
files played through the Pioneer and 
Astell&Kern hi-res DAPs.
My nephew and his girlfriend are 
musicians. Their band has several albums 
on Spotify, Tidal, and Apple Music. My 
nephew spends lots of time with 
headphones mixing music. When they 
visited over the Thanksgiving holiday, I had 
them try the Shinola Canfield and compare 
them to a half-dozen other headphones in 
my reference collection. They both loved 
the look, feel, and style of the Canfield, but 
felt that they couldn’t compete sonically 
with the likes of the Meze 99 Classics (go.
macworld.com/mz99), B&W P9 Signature 
(go.macworld.com/bwp9), or Oppo PM-2 
(go.macworld.com/opm2).
Compared to the B&W P9 Signature, 
for example, the Shinola Canfield’s 
midrange was more syrupy and its top end 
lacked crispness. 
When playing Michael 
Jackson’s “Bad” 
(24-bit/48kHz FLAC) 
from the eponymous 
album, the Canfield 
failed to convey the 
same clarity and air 
that the B&W’s could. 
The top end was 
muted and the 
midrange bloated. 
The B&W’s, in 
contrast, created a 
much better musical 
The included accessories are few and far between. You get just a 
hardshell carrying case and bag for the headphone cable.

100   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
PLAYLIST
REVIEW: SHINOLA CANFIELD
presentation with a nicely layered 
soundstage with solid air and placement. 
The same held true when I compared the 
Canfield on the same tracks using 
Beyerdynamic’s Amiron Home (go.
macworld.com/byam) and the Oppo PM-2.
The Canfield’s voicing also delivered a 
sub-par performer on Patricia Barber’s 
Café Blue. The hi-res FLAC track sounded 
more like a compressed MP3, with 
glaringly flat dynamic range. Bass bloat 
was apparent on “Too Rich for My Blood.” 
Bass lines were sloppy and unrefined. The 
crispness and immediacy of the cymbals 
played throughout the track were 
significantly muted. The Meze 99 
Classics—coming in at almost half the 
price of the Canfield—did a far better job 
of conveying the recording’s openness, 
dynamics, and timbral accuracy.
I next turned to some classical music 
and played Bach’s Suites for Solo Cello in 
G and D Major performed by Janos Starker 
(24-bit/176.4kHz FLAC). Played through the 
far more expensive and outstanding Focal 
Clear headphones (go.macworld.com/focl), 
“BWV 1007 Prelude” was intoxicating as 
rich cello notes bust forth from a spacious 
soundstage. The energy and delicacy of 
each bow stroke could be discerned as 
though I was there, in front of the 
performer. Sonics took a significant hit 
played through the Canfield. It was as 
though I was listening to the performance 
through a veil or behind a door. Bow 
strokes lost their precision and detail. 
Worst of all, my musical involvement 
suffered.
TRAGICALLY HIPSTER
No offense to the great Canadian rock 
band The Tragically Hip (go.macworld.
com/trgc), but the Canfield are hipster cans 
with gorgeous styling, luxurious leather, 
and solid build quality. Everyone who saw 
these headphones during my review 
period fell in love with their looks. But 
everyone also agreed that they don’t 
belong in the big leagues in terms of 
performance, falling sonically short even 
when compared to some less-expensive 
competitors.
Heads will turn your way with the 
Canfield on your head, but the music 
pouring into your head won’t sound as 
good as it should. ■
Each pair of Shinola Canfield headphones 
comes with a certificate of authenticity.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   101
D
iscovering that Edifier’s retro/
modern-styled Luna e25 HD 
Bluetooth stereo speaker pair 
costs only $250 was a bit of a 
shocker. After two days of hands-on 
without reading the press release, I 
figured they had to cost twice or perhaps 
three times that. They’re that good. 
They’re not portable, and they require a 
cable strung between them to ply their 
trade, but if you’re looking for something 
to blast sound about the living room, 
they’re the real deal.
SPEAKER DESIGN
What we’re dealing with in the Luna e25 
HD is a sort-of-classic or retro-modern 
ovoid. I tested the red version that 
evoked thoughts of a Pac-Man who’d 
eaten a few too many pellets. They’re 
also vaguely reminiscent of a certain 
recent period in kitchen appliance 
IMAGE: EDIFIER
Edifier Luna e25 HD Bluetooth 
speaker: Great sound, sci-fi looks, 
surprisingly affordable   
The sixties sci-fi look will be a turn-off for some, but these stationary speakers deliver 
fantastic sound for the money.   
BY JON L. JACOBI

102   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
PLAYLIST
REVIEW: EDIFIER LUNA E25
the case here. The cables are a good 
match for the overall solid construction of 
the speakers.
Edifier also supplies a remote with on/
off and volume up/down buttons, so you 
don’t need to get off your sofa to reach the 
stylishly integrated touch controls found on 
the left side of the primary speaker.
Bluetooth pairing happens automatically. 
There’s no button to press or password 
required. The first device to grab it, gets 
it—with no thought of security. As they are 
meant to be used in your home, that’s not a 
big deal. 
One thing about the odd shape: You’ll 
need to set them on something. Without a 
flat side or back, apart from the bottom, it’s 
manufacturing. Yes, that’s why they pay 
me the big bucks.
Obviously, the pictures do a better job 
of describing these 8.34-inch high, 8.74-
inch deep, 4.8-inch wide speakers than I 
can, but I’ll give it a go: the Luna HD are 
vaguely egg-shaped, with about 20 
percent sliced away at an angle in the 
front to allow the 3-inch woofers and 
0.75-inch silk dome tweeters to pump air. 
There’s also a horizontal hangar deck 
midway down the back of the speaker that 
allows an upward-facing passive radiator 
to move air.
On the back of one Luna HD are the 
combo 3.5mm auxiliary/optical digital 
input, AC jack, and 6-pin speaker 
connector which 
transmits both power 
and audio signals to the 
second Luna HD. A 
matching 6-pin 
connector is all that 
you’ll find on the 
secondary speaker.
The power, auxiliary, 
and optical cables 
Edifier includes are 
impressively thick. 
That’s usually a sign of 
quality design and 
manufacturing, and after 
using them, that 
certainly seems to be 
Most people will use wireless connections, but the Luna HD can 
also accommodate 3.5mm analog or optical digital sources.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   103
pretty much impossible to mount them on 
a wall. You could look at that as an 
opportunity to play up the style of the Luna 
HD and their existence in your abode with 
the Luna Series flamingo (my adjective, not 
theirs) stands ($100 at Amazon [go.
macworld.com/ss01]). These raise the 
speakers 2.5 feet above the floor.
HD AND DSP?
DSP stands for digital signal processing 
and is advertised as a feature of the Luna 
HD (which stands, in turn, for high 
definition—whatever that means in this 
case). Digital signal processing is a very 
broad term that simply says that 
something’s being done to the audio 
signal. This could be just about anything 
from EQ to psychoacoustics.
Edifier also touts dynamic range 
compression (DRC), which is another of 
myriad possible DSP functions. The 
company’s website says it’s to prevent 
distortion, but that’s generally handled in 
the input gain staging, as compression 
imparts its own color to sound. In mass-
market audio, DRC generally refers to 
quieting the overly loud passages in 
movies, so that you don’t wake up the 
neighbors. If you’ve ever heard this 
applied, you’ll notice a squashed flavor to 
the audio. There was no squash that I 
could hear from the Luna HD.
Not to pick on Edifier, but the boutique 
audio business is rife with terms that 
sound impressive, but are basically 
meaningless. These aren’t, they’re just 
used in a semi-meaningless fashion. But 
boutique also means high-quality 
construction and components. So for me 
to mention the $250 Luna HD as having a 
boutique feel (aside from the part 
concerning marketing drivel) and boutique 
sound is high praise and slightly amazing. 
Amazing, because $250 in boutique audio 
is what some vendors charge for a cable.
AUDIO PERFORMANCE
I’ve already killed the suspense for this 
topic, but…Stereo separation, how I’ve 
missed thee! Seriously, there are only so 
many portable (and stationary) single-body 
The Luna HD features DSP and DRC, but all 
you need to know is that they sound good.

104   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
PLAYLIST
REVIEW: EDIFIER LUNA E25
speakers you can listen to before you 
want to run screaming into the night in 
search of right and left pan. Perhaps not at 
the beach, but indoors? You get good 
separation with the Luna HD, as well as 
excellent sonority.
The frequency response is largely flat 
where you want it (okay, where I want it), 
with a mild accent at the low end. They’re 
not studio monitors, but they sound far 
better than the average Bluetooth product. 
They’re loud (the amp sends 22 watts to 
each woofer and 15 watts to each tweeter), 
clear, and with no discernible distortion. 
There are also none of the occasional 
subtle glitches that you sometimes get 
with true wireless stereo (TWS). I could 
wish for a wee bit more top-end sparkle, 
but that’s being picky at this price.
That said, the Luna HD lack any sort of 
EQ function, so if that’s missing from your 
playback source, you won’t be 
able to pump up the bass or roll 
off the treble. With “DSP” on 
board I find that odd. Yes, that 
was a wisecrack. I personally 
never really felt an overpowering 
desire to twiddle, but tastes vary. 
They sound very, very good as is.
Edifier also markets a $450 
system that appears to be the 
Luna HD with the addition of a 
like-styled subwoofer. Not my 
thing, but if you throw dance 
parties, check it out. There are also the 
non-HD Lunas, which have the same 
styling but cost only $200. I haven’t heard 
either product, so I can’t tell you how they 
compare sonically, but extrapolating from 
the Luna HD, probably quite good. That’s 
not a promise.
BOTTOM LINE
The Edifier Luna HD are excellent 
Bluetooth bookshelf speakers and a huge 
step up in quality from the average single-
body product—both in sound and 
construction. Stereo! I personally love the 
style, and I even liked the color. I’m 
guessing a lot of people will opt for the 
more neutral white or black, though the 
shape will still likely provoke conversation.
I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention the 
VaVa Voom 22 (go.macworld.com/vv22) 
stereo speaker pair available at a similar 
price point ($220). The VaVa 
Voom don’t sound or feel quite 
as solid as the Luna HD, but they 
are portable and consequently 
more versatile as to where they 
can be placed, as well as 
featuring a more classic profile. 
I really, really like the Luna 
HD. They’re the best-sounding 
Bluetooth product I’ve tested, 
which is where the buck stops as 
far as I’m concerned. Given the 
price, they’re absolutely ace. ■
mmmmh
Edifier Luna e25 HD 
Bluetooth speakers
PROS
•  Excellent sound for the 
price.
•  Attractive retro/modern 
design.
CONS
•   Cable required for stereo 
operation.
PRICE
$199
COMPANY
Edifier

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   105
G
iven the brand’s reputation 
and the traditionally steep 
price of its hardware, I expect 
a lot from a Bang & Olufsen 
product. True to form, B&O’s Beoplay M3 
multiroom speaker is an excellent choice—
for the right set of ears. At $300, the 
lowest price for a B&O multiroom speaker 
yet, corners were cut in the name of 
affordability. These cuts were made in the 
area of audio quality. Understand that this 
speaker sounds very, very good. But the 
monaural listening experience it provides, 
in concert with the digital signal 
processing B&O employs, might be 
unappealing to audio purists.
IMAGE: B&O
B&O Beoplay M3: A small 
multiroom powerhouse   
Bang & Olufsen’s most affordable multiroom speaker is a strong value.  
BY SÉAMUS BELLAMY

106   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
PLAYLIST
REVIEW: B&O BEOPLAY M3
an electrical outlet. In keeping with the 
speaker’s minimalistic design, B&O hid 
where the M3’s power cord connects to it, 
underneath a hatch built into its baseplate. 
You’ll also find a micro-USB port for 
charging portable devices here, along with 
the M3’s 3.5mm audio port. Once the 
hatch is closed, any connected cables are 
channeled through the back of the 
speaker. Nice and neat.
The speaker will accept input via 
Bluetooth 4.2, Apple AirPlay, or Google 
Chromecast, making it easy to add the 
speaker to your existing multiroom setup. 
Or, if you want to kick it old-school, you 
can use the 3.5mm input for a wired 
connection. Noticeable by its absence is 
Spotify Connect—a feature that comes 
baked into B&O’s more expensive Beoplay 
M5, as well as some less-expensive 
multiroom competitors 
(including the Sonos One [go.
macworld.com/s0n1]).
The M3’s only physical 
controls can be found on the 
back of the speaker: volume 
controls and a multifunction 
button that can be used to 
play/pause music or switch 
between audio sources. As 
most people control their 
music via a connected device 
these days anyway, I don’t 
consider this lack of 
DESIGN
Sized at 5.9 by 4.4 by 5.5 inches, the M3’s 
footprint is small enough to sit on a 
countertop or shelf without eating up too 
much space. A rubber baseplate, along 
with the speaker’s 3.2-pound heft, ensure 
that when it’s placed, you won’t have to 
worry about it being knocked over or 
dragged off a table. The M3 can be had in 
a gray (as tested) or matte black finish. 
There’s no handholds or nooks built into 
the M3 to pick it up by. But its rubberized 
exterior provides enough grip that you 
won’t drop it during transport.
The M3 has a removable cloth speaker 
grille that can be swapped out for another 
color and material options—provided you 
pay for them. While its size could allow it to 
pass for a portable speaker, the M3 won’t 
do anything unless it’s drawing power from 
A look under the M3’s grille reveals some impressive drivers.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   107
on-device controls to be a big deal. While 
you’ll be able to use your phone’s music, 
podcast, or video apps to feed audio into 
the speaker or control its volume, any 
further tweaking of the M3 requires that 
B&O’s free Beoplay app be loaded onto 
your smartphone.
With the app, you’ll be able to easily 
shape the speaker’s sound profile, for use 
in an open environment, or for when it’s 
tucked up against a wall or in a corner. 
The app’s EQ is dead simple to use, too—
you’ll find no sliders 
here. In their place is a 
series of concentric 
circles, split into four 
zones: Warm, Bright, 
Excited and Relaxed. 
Moving the dot within 
these concentric circles within a given 
zone changes the speaker’s sound. It’s 
dead easy. Once you hit upon a setting 
that you like, it can be saved as a preset. 
B&O also provides a few presets of its 
own to get M3 users started.
SOUND
Inside of the M3, you’ll find a 3.75-inch 
woofer and a 0.75-inch tweeter, which 
bring the noise via 40 watts of 
amplification. To test the speaker, I used 
my iPhone 7 Plus as an audio source, 
listening to music, podcasts, and the 
occasional video over the course of a 
week. I also spent an hour listening to a 
playlist of five songs that I know inside and 
out: “Feel Right” (Mark Ronson, featuring 
Mystikal), “Up & Rise” (Hazmat Modine), 
“Shake Your Hips” (The Legendary Shack 
Shakers), “Déjà Loin” (Yann Tiersen), and 
“I’m a Little Mixed” (Diana Krall). I tend to 
use these songs for testing as they span 
multiple genres and feature strong, deeply 
layered performances. No matter what I 
listened to, the M3 delivered excellent 
audio experience.
With the app, you’ll be able to easily shape 
the speaker’s sound profile, for use in an 
open environment, or for when it’s tucked up 
against a wall or in a corner. 
Aside from these volume controls and a 
multifunction button, the M3 is controlled 
entirely by your audio source.

108   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
PLAYLIST
REVIEW: B&O BEOPLAY M3
There’s no shortage of bass response 
here—at times, such as while listening to 
“Feel Right,” the bass seemed to step on 
the mid and high frequencies—but only a 
bit. Once I adjusted the speaker’s EQ 
settings, the song retained all its thump 
without losing the shrill clarity of the 
track’s brass work. This followed with the 
other tracks on my playlist as well: B&O 
designed this speaker to offer a beautiful 
level of audio separation in a compact 
package at volumes that’ll fill a midsize 
room with sound with no distortion at 
most volume levels. You should know, 
however, that it’s sound won’t be loved by 
everyone, for a few reasons.
To keep the audio from distorting 
at higher levels, B&O employs digital 
signal processing (DSP) to limit the 
amount of low-frequency sound that 
the speaker kicks out. The good news 
is that DSP allows the speaker 
to maintain the same awesome 
audio separation at high levels 
as it does at low levels, with 
no distortion. The bad news is 
that DSP messes with what 
your music sounds like—
providing listeners with less 
bass than the artist and the 
track’s audio engineers 
intended. This could be a 
letdown to audiophiles. 
Additionally, like similar small 
multiroom speakers from Sonos and 
Bose, the Beoplay M3 is a monaural 
affair. If you’re after stereo sound, you’ll 
have to look elsewhere or buy two.
THE BOTTOM LINE 
Thanks to the plethora of 
connection options, minimalistic 
design, and rich bass-heavy 
sound, the B&O Beoplay M3 is an 
excellent choice for anyone 
interested in building a multiroom 
speaker system for their home. 
But, as it’s more expensive than 
many of its competitors with 
similar specs, produces monaural 
audio, and utilizes DSP, it may not 
be everyone’s cup of tea. ■
mmmm
B&O Beoplay M3
PROS
•   Rich, deep bass and a wide 
soundstage
•   Supports Chromecast and 
Apple Play as well as 
Bluetooth.
CONS
•   No Spotify Connect 
functionality.
PRICE
$299
COMPANY
Bang & Olufsen
Like all B&O products, the M3’s design is 
sleek and minimalistic.

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   109
Mac 911
Solutions to your most vexing Mac problems. 
BY GLENN FLEISHMAN
HELPDESK
Answering Your Questions and Sharing Your 
Tips About Getting the Most From Your Mac
App Store and iTunes 
purchases: You can’t delete 
history 
We don’t typically run one-word answers 
to reader questions, but it’s worth it in 
this case, because we regularly receive 
a question similar to this one from 
Macworld reader JLR:
I want to dump, forever, some music and 
iPhone apps from my iTunes account 
and not have to deal with them just 
“hiding.” Is this possible to do?
No.
OK, I can’t help myself, I need to give a 
complete answer here. Apple lets you 
hide purchases (go.macworld.com/hide) 
from appearing where they typically 
display in a list or are available via Family 
Sharing, but the purchase remains part of 
your account information and can be 

110   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
HELPDESK
MAC 911
viewed when you examine your account. 
Apple hasn’t explained why you can’t 
delete your purchase history. 
Is there a drawback to using 
Wi-Fi Calling on an iPhone?
Wi-Fi Calling is a feature that lets an 
iPhone effectively re-route mobile calls 
over the Wi-Fi network to which you’re 
connected—if it has the right qualities 
instead of using the cellular network. Most 
carriers support Wi-Fi Calling.
Macworld reader Steve wonders if 
there’s a drawback to Wi-Fi Calling. His 
iPhone typically picks up a stronger Wi-Fi 
signal than a cellular one.
There’s none that I can think of, even 
though carriers mostly offer no benefit to 
you offloading phone calls from their 
networks to your own or someone else’s. 
(At one point, T-Mobile’s Wi-Fi calling 
option had some real cost advantages.)
Voice calls over 3G and 4G networks 
are just data, anyway. Calls use up very 
little bandwidth, so even on a lower-speed 
broadband network or one that has usage 
caps, the data consumed is minimal.
Wi-Fi Calling also optionally lets you 
connect all other kinds of Apple devices 
(go.macworld.com/dvcs) using the same 
iCloud account so you can make calls from 
them even if the iPhone is powered down 
or not on the same Wi-Fi network! That’s a 
big advantage depending on how you 
work.
Apple doesn’t reveal the specific 
means by which it tests that a Wi-Fi 
network has suitable characteristics for 
Wi-Fi Calling, but I expect it performs a 
quick test for data loss and latency, or the 
time it takes for data to start transmitting 
rather than its overall speed.
Fusion Drive or hybrid drive: 
Which one should you use?
Solid-state drives (SSDs) are expensive, 
especially if want a capacity above 1TB. 
That’s why hard drives still rule the roost, 
even though they don’t offer the speed of 
an SSD. Apple’s software-based Fusion 
Drive provides a compromise: it uses a 
small amount of high-performance SSD 
alongside a higher-capacity HDD. macOS 
Turning on Wi-Fi Calling seems to have no 
drawbacks.  

FEBRUARY 2018   MACWORLD   111
caches frequently used drive-based data 
in the SSD, boosting performance.
When deciding on a drive for an iMac I 
purchased earlier this year, I felt that the 
performance I’d get from the $700 jump 
from a 1TB Fusion Drive to a 1TB SSD 
simply wasn’t worth it. Apple pairs a 32GB 
SSD with its 1TB hard drive, and 128GB 
with its 2TB and 3TB options.
Macworld reader Terence would like to 
upgrade an older iMac to a newer version 
of macOS, and wants to create his own 
Fusion Drive. Apple’s technical support 
told him, he says, that he can migrate to 
High Sierra and then use it to create a 
Fusion Drive with bring-your-own-drive 
options. The folks at OWC have a detailed 
blog post about the technical steps to pull 
this together (go.macworld.com/fusn). 
(Terence also wonders about how to set 
this up given that High Sierra will force 
APFS on an SSD (go.macworld.com/apfi), 
but since it doesn’t work with Fusion 
Drives yet, I don’t think that’s an issue.)
I’d say the far better option, if you’re 
purchasing new drives anyway, is to find a 
hybrid drive with a good reputation and go 
with it. A hybrid drive is a single drive that 
combines a SSD with a hard drive. These 
seem to mostly max out at about 8GB of 
SSD, but can cost under $100 for a 
1TB/8GB model. The caching happens 
below the driver level, so the drive winds 
up “responsible” for making the choices, 
but there’s less to fail, too.
Dropbox or iCloud Drive: Which 
is better for file sharing?
iCloud Drive isn’t quite like Google Drive or 
Dropbox. As with most Apple digital and 
cloud services, it’s tied to a single identity 
without much in the way of sharing. iCloud 
Drive’s sharing features seem a bit tacked on.
Macworld reader Howard writes in 
asking about an aspect of this. “I was 
hoping also to have my wife’s iCloud drive 
show up on my Mac’s Finder the way I do 
with Dropbox. I haven’t been able to get 
this to work.”
It’s not you, Howard. You can only 
mount a given iCloud Drive associated 
with an iCloud account on an account in 
macOS logged into that same iCloud 

112   MACWORLD   FEBRUARY 2018
HELPDESK
MAC 911
account. With some previous Apple cloud 
storage systems, you could use the 
credentials (user name and password) to 
mount a drive without having your system 
logged into the same account.
You can select individual files in 
macOS, the iOS app, or via iCloud.com 
and share them. But access is solely via 
the web, and you can’t share folders.
Apple lets you share iCloud storage 
using Family Sharing, but it doesn’t provide 
any way to share files among those family 
members, either. Howard’s family bumped 
up their storage and has now bumped 
against this limit.
Dropbox is a very reasonable way to 
have a shared folder, the contents of 
which are constantly synced among 
those connected to the folder. One other 
option would be to use internet file 
storage via Panic’s Transmit 5 (go.
macworld.com/pnic), which allows several 
kinds of servers 
and cloud hosts to 
be mounted as 
Finder volumes. 
However, this 
doesn’t use sync: 
you’re really 
opening and saving 
files live over the 
internet, which can 
add lag unless you 
have a relatively 
fast broadband 
connection. ■
Ask Mac 911
We’ve compiled a list of the most commonly 
asked questions we get, and the answers 
to them: go.macworld.com/mac911faq to 
see if you’re covered. If not, we’re always 
looking for new problems to solve! Email us 
at mac911@macworld.com including screen 
captures as appropriate. 
Mac 911 can’t provide direct email re-
spons es or answers for every question and we 
don’t provide direct troubleshooting advice. 
For that, turn to AppleCare, an Apple Store 
Gen ius Bar, or the Apple Support Communities.
Only individual files can be shared in iCloud Drive.  

