
© 2012, All Rights Reserved First edition Magnetic Messaging by Bobby Rio (TSB Magazine) 
and Rob Judge (Date Hotter Girls, LLC) © 2012, All Right Reserved
“i use texting as 
a replacement 
for meaningful 
conversation”
       —Anonymous

This book is copyright 2012 with all rights reserved. It is 
illegal to copy, distribute, or create derivative works from 
this book in whole or in part or to contribute to the copy-
ing, distribution, or creating of derivative works of this 
book. When you purchased this book, you agreed to the 
following statement:
“©2012, All Rights Reserved. You understand that the 
information contained in this book is an opinion, and 
it should be used for personal entertainment purposes 
only. You are responsible for your own behavior, and 
none of this book is to be considered legal or personal 
advice.”

Part 1: Introduction...The Principles of Phone Game
Welcome to Phone Game.................................................................7
A Quick Word on the Terms & Phrases in this Book..............................10
Just like Pizza: The Three Ingredients of Attractive Phone Use....13
Sparking Emotions: The Dough of Phone Use......................................15
Making Connections: Adding Some Sauce..........................................17
Handling Logistics: The Cheese on Top.................................................19
The Three Ingredients: Further Defined.........................................22
Sparking an Emotion: Stand Out with Language.........................22
Making Connections: Be Specific...................................................25
Handling Logistics: Ask—and Ask Well.............................................27
When and How Much: Phases of a Textship.......................................28
Part 2: First Phase...You Want to Date Her
Got Her Number...Now What?..................................................29
First Text: Stick to the Formula......................................................31
When to Text—and What to Expect..........................................35
First Text Blues: Troubleshooting the First Text.............................38
“Who is this?” How to Respond............................................38
“What Do You Look Like?” How to Proceed................................42
Meeting Up With Her: The Key-lock Sequence...........................45
Avoid Becoming Her New “Texting Buddy”.....................................45
The Key-Lock Sequence—Key-Turn-Push..............................................48
If She’s Difficult: Getting Out Flaky and Unresponsive Girls......59
What if She Doesn’t Respond..........................................................59
Low Interest: How to Get Her Excited for a Date.............................62
Some Interest: Getting More of a Connection....................................72
Overcoming Time: How to Revive an Old Number.................................76
Table of Contents

Girls You’re Unable to Meet: The Holding Pattern................................79
The Bad Behavior Files: When Good Girls Go Bad...........................82
Shred-Her Negative Response...........................................................83
Pop Culture Sniper Shot and Scattershot...................................85
Overcoming Excuses: Changing Her Mind........................................94
When to Call: The Final Resort.................................................98
Part 3: Second Phase...You are Sort of Dating Her
First Date and Beyond...................................................................102
Arriving to the Date: Set Yourself Up for Success..................105
Getting the Second Date: Keeping Her Interested and Invested..108
The Days After: How to Keep It Sizzling.................................108 
Setting Up the Second Date............................................................112
Texting a Girl You Just Slept With..................................................116
Bantering with Her: The Art of Bullshitting...............................119
How to Compliment in an Attractive Way....................................119
How to Create Anticipation...............................................................124
How to be Funny.................................................................................127
Calling to Connect: Using the Phone to have a Conversation........131
Part 4: Third Phase...You’re Dating Her
Creating a Relationship................................................................133
Calling Because You Care................................................................135
Keeping It Fun: Maintain the Spark of Your Relationship.........137
Use Typos as Comedy Cues......................................................138
Have a “Style”.................................................................................143
Avoiding Patterns........................................................................145
Keeping It Sexual: How to Heat Things Up Over the Phone.........150
How to Begin Sexting.....................................................................150
Bringing Up Threesomes.................................................................154

Getting Her to Send Naked Pictures......................................................158
Keeping It Real: How to Bring Your Relationship to Life..................161
Genuine Compliments........................................................................161
Finally, Don’t Forget to Keep Handling Logistics!....................................165
Part 5: Appendix...Common Questions & Mistakes
“But What About...”........................................................................167
Phone Bloopers: Avoiding Common Mistakes of Phone Game...178
Part 6: Final Thoughts...Afterword from Rob
Dialing Emotion.................................................................................185

1
The Principles of Phone Game
Y
ou’ve probably never thought about it, but the cell 
phone has revolutionized dating. Our cell phones 
act as our pocket dating secretaries. They organize 
our contacts, take messages, and screen our calls. 
Most importantly, they add another stage to the 
dating process: phone game.
Before cell phones, talking on the phone was straightforward. 
You called. You spoke. You made plans. 
Today, things aren’t so simple—and that can be a good thing. 
Phone game—when applied correctly—gives you another 
chance. It rights some wrongs. It can even become an “extra 
  introduction...
Welcome to Phone Game
7

8
life.” 
Conversely, weak phone game can cause a woman to second-
guess herself, change her mind, and even “flake”—which 
means abruptly canceling on you and sometimes even ignor-
ing you altogether.  
Like it or not, phone game has made dating a three-part pro-
cess:
1.	Initial meeting
2.	Phone game
3.	The date
While the initial meeting sets much of her expectations for 
this “three act play,” improving your phone game can dramat-
ically increase how many girls meet you for a date. Moreover, 
phone game will improve the quality of those dates by excit-
ing a woman beforehand. Undoubtedly learning to use your 
phone in an attractive way will boost your dating success. 
Proper phone game is more than just pressing buttons or mak-
ing phone calls. Solid phone game comes from an understand-
ing of attractive communication. In fact, practicing phone game 
is one of the fastest ways to improve the way you communi-
cate with women. 
That’s because, when using your phone, time is on your side. 
Everything that happens over the phone happens slower than 
Welcome to Phone Game

9
a face-to-face interaction. You can put more consideration into 
what you say, what she says, and how to respond. These low-
pressure situations will make you a better communicator with 
women. With that in mind, this book is written with two goals:
1.	Using your phone to get you enjoying more success with 
women right now, and 
2.	Teaching you the principles of attractive communica-
tion—when using the phone and beyond.
This book will supply you with plenty of examples and tem-
plates, as well as a step-by-step game plan, so you can instant-
ly improve your phone game. If you just send the “prescribed” 
texts from this book, you’ll enjoy a significant boost in your 
dating success. 
More important though, this book will strengthen your un-
derstanding and application of attractive communication. You 
will learn the principles and dynamics that constitute flirting, 
bantering, making a connection, and humor. 
You are going to learn how to better relate to women from a 
classroom that fits into the palm of your hand. If you stick with 
this book for just three months, you will transform your inter-
actions with women. Phone game is much more than simply 
using your phone. It’s about using language in an attractive 
and effective way. 
Welcome to Phone Game

10
M
ore than anything, phone game should be fun. 
When you have a woman’s number, you have 
a unique opportunity to interact with her on 
your time. All the nervousness and awkward-
ness of an in-person interaction falls away 
when you pull out your phone.
Therefore, you should see phone game as enjoyable—not a 
chore. To underscore the fun aspect of phone game, this book 
has it’s own set of words and phrases. The purpose of this 
“phone game vocabulary” is simply to remind you that it’s just 
a game. Enjoy yourself and don’t take it too seriously!
Cinderella Effect—A “phenomenon” that commonly hap-
pens when meeting girls at bars and nightclubs, where 
a woman seems like a total sweetheart the night you 
meet her. But, when you try to contact her afterwards, 
she turns into something else. Whether she turns mean, 
cold, disinterested, or just nonresponsive, she’s display-
ing the “Cinderella Effect.” 
The Sixth Sense Syndrome—Like Bruce Willis’ character 
Welcome to Phone Game
A Quick Word on the Terms & Phrases in this Book

11
in the movie The Sixth Sense, you become like a ghost 
to women whose numbers you get. When you call or 
text them, their lack of response makes you feel as if 
you don’t even exist. Unlike that creepy little kid from 
the movie, she DOES NOT “see” dead people!
Chasing the Loss—A gambling term that refers to the fa-
tal mistake of frantically trying to win back your losses. 
Likewise, guys will sometimes overuse their phone in 
a vain attempt to recover the attraction or connection 
they feel they lost. Chasing the loss is an important con-
cept to grasp, as it’s much better to step away from a 
situation temporarily, and return to it when you’re more 
coolheaded. 
Touch Points—The various different modes of commu-
nication outside simply using your phone. Examples of 
common touch points are email, Facebook, and instant 
messenger. 
Pulling the Trigger—A phrase that describes taking the 
initiative and proposing a date or meet up. Often guys 
neglect to “pull the trigger” or wait too long to do so, 
and so end up as a girl’s “phone buddy.” 
Key-Lock Sequence—The specific 3-text sequence you 
apply when setting up a date. The key-lock sequence 
should be applied very early in an interaction—and con-
stantly. The key-lock sequence combines all 3 ingredi-
Welcome to Phone Game

12
Welcome to Phone Game
ents of phone game (which you will read about below).
Play the Numbers—When you text unresponsive girls 
fun and humorous texts. You never know when one of 
those numbers will “hit” and you end up on a date with 
a girl you thought was ignoring you.
Radar Texts—The initial text that simply “gets on a 
woman’s radar.” These texts are sent without expect-
ing a response. Radar texts always end with your name 
because it’s always the first text you send a woman you 
just met.
 
Holding Pattern—A series of texts you send a woman 
that you are waiting to meet up with. Holding patterns 
are used on women who leave town for a few weeks, 
live in other cities, or have some other issue that pre-
vents you from seeing them in the near future.
Shred-Her Responses—A proven response that “shreds” 
a woman’s objections, flakiness, or bad behavior.  

13
T
he next time you’re staring at your phone, wonder-
ing what to text a girl, think of pizza. I know it sounds 
strange, but using your phone can be as simple as 
remembering the ingredients of pizza, which are 
dough, tomato sauce, and cheese. 
Likewise, there are only three “ingredients” to phone and text 
game:
1.	
Sparking emotions
2.	
Making connections  
3.	
Handling logistics
These three ingredients are the fundamentals of using your 
phone in an attractive way. The purpose of this book is to de-
fine each ingredient, supply plenty of examples and templates, 
and explain when—and how much—to use each. If you can 
do that, you will never lose another girl because of a clumsy 
follow up.
Moreover, you’ll never add the wrong ingredients. Notice how 
the three ingredients of phoning and texting are NOT:
Just like Pizza: 
The Three Ingredients of Attractive Phone Use

14
Just like Pizza
•	
Asking questions 
•	
Providing entertainment 
•	
Acting polite
•	
Making small talk
•	
Offering explanations
•	
Reciting soliloquys
•	
Begging  
Adding the wrong ingredients is like trying to make a pizza 
with bananas, mustard, and pita shells. But rather than get-
ting a disgusting dish, you get an unresponsive and uninter-
ested girl. Using the wrong ingredients will douse whatever 
sexual spark you may have had with her.
As with pizza, you can occasionally add a topping like pepper-
oni or peppers. With phone and text, that means it can some-
times help to banter, get logical, or do something else that 
deviates from the three main ingredients. These exceptions, 
however, only come after you’ve mixed the first three ingredi-
ents—just as toppings are sprinkled on top of the pizza.
At this point, with all this talk of pizza, you may find yourself 
confused (or maybe even a bit hungry). In the next sections, 
you will learn more about the three ingredients. The only rea-
son for the pizza metaphor is so that you can easily remember 
how to best use your phone. Once you get it, keeping girls in-
terested becomes as easy as pie—or, in this case, pizza pie.  

15
L
ike pizza dough, everything you do with your phone will 
be built on sparking emotions. You sparked her emo-
tions when she gave you her number, and so you must 
spark her emotions again when you text her. Most of 
the mistakes guys make when using the phone come 
from not sparking emotions. 
Often guys think they can use logic to convince a woman to 
do something (like meet for a date), but this is NOT how wom-
en make romantic and sexual decisions. Whether you want a 
woman to show up to a date, tell you a secret, or think about 
you when you’re apart, you must begin by getting her emo-
tional.
On text, the best way to spark emotions is through humor 
and flirting. When you’re face-to-face with a woman, there 
are many other ways to spark her emotions. However, when 
you’re trying to elicit an emotional response using the phone, 
the easiest (and safest) way to do that is to get her smiling 
and laughing. 
Though, sparking a woman’s emotions is more than just “be-
Just like Pizza
Sparking Emotions: The Dough of Phone Use

16
Just like Pizza
ing funny.” You need to make sure you’re using the right kind 
of humor and flirting. That’s why understanding subtext is so 
important—especially in phone game. You’ll learn the proper 
subtext in a later chapter. For now, just remember the first 
principle of phone and text game:
Principle 1: If you can get her to feel an emotion, you can 
capture her attention.
That may sound obvious, but so many guys overlook this first 
principle. Ask yourself this: have you ever sent a first text that 
said something like, “Nice meeting you” or “Hey, this is Tom”? 
Or maybe you tried asking a woman out with the first text you 
sent? Think back on it (and go through your old text messages 
if you have to), are your first texts sparking a woman’s emo-
tions? If you’re like most guys, the answer is probably no.
As such, she probably saw you as “just another guy.” You 
didn’t make yourself stand out from the crowd. If she was 
even somewhat cute, you can bet there were plenty of other 
guys texting her, as well. Even if you had a great interaction 
in person, an emotionless first text can cause her to second-
guess her initial impression of you. 
But you’re never going to make that mistake again. Just as you 
can’t imagine making a pizza without the dough, you won’t 
be able to fathom using your phone without first sparking an 
emotion. It’s the crust on which you will layer on the other in-
gredients. 

17
A
n aspect of using the phone many guys overlook 
is forming some sort of connection with the girl. 
If a guy neglects this crucial ingredient, he’ll come 
off as a “player,” immature, or even desperate. Ei-
ther way, his chances of getting the girl are slim.
When you think of this aspect of phone game, think of cheese 
bread. Without sauce, you don’t get a pizza—you get cheese 
bread, which is something totally different and not nearly as 
delicious as pizza. Likewise, a guy who fails to establish some 
sort of connection won’t come off as an attractive guy. In-
stead, he’ll be seen as a desperate clown. And clowns aren’t 
very attractive.
The solution is simple: add the sauce. Connecting with a girl 
over something—whether it’s a common interest, inside joke, 
nickname, or even something out of your imagination—is what 
holds a good interaction together. It adds flavor and depth to 
your communication. It gets her to see you as a real person—
which is crucial for eliminating flaking and non-responsiveness. 
But this ingredient comes with a caveat: don’t do too much 
Just like Pizza
Making Connections: Adding Some Sauce 

18
connecting over the phone. Just as too much sauce can de-
stroy a pizza, trying too hard to establish connections with a 
woman can ruin your chances. You only want a thin layer of 
connecting—just enough to hold things together. Real con-
nections aren’t made over the phone; they’re made in person.
With that in mind, here’s the second principle of phone game:
Principle 2: Forming a connection gives her a reason to 
think and care about you. 
By using the formulas, templates, and tips in the later chapters, 
you will learn how to create a connection by either reminding 
her of things you two shared or by inventing new connections. 
By doing this, you demonstrate to her that you’re for real. 
Whether you want a lover, date, girlfriend, or wife, establish-
ing some sort of connection is crucial. Obviously the amount 
of connecting over the phone you’d do with your girlfriend 
would be different from how you’d connect with a girl you 
met for 5 minutes in Starbucks. Exactly how much connecting 
is appropriate during each phase of a relationship is explained 
in later sections.
Just like Pizza

19
Welcome to Phone Game
19
W
hat would pizza be without the cheese? 
Likewise, phone and text game wouldn’t 
work without the final ingredient: handling 
logistics. That may sound like a confusing 
term but handling logistics just means stuff 
like setting up a time to meet, deflecting excuses, and making 
sure that everything is taken care of so that when you meet in 
person, she’s even more excited to see you than the last time 
she saw you in person.
Very often guys add this ingredient in too late—or sometimes 
not at all. If you’ve ever had a text conversation that went on 
and on without ever trying to secure a meet up, you’ve made 
this mistake. Using your phone is a great tool to improve your 
chances with women, but if you neglect to handle logistics 
then you’re just spinning your wheels. 
Make sure that you’re using phone and text for its main pur-
pose: getting dates. While using the phone is a great way to 
warm women up to seeing you, it’s only a means to an end. 
When you handle logistics you’re ensuring that you use this 
“means” to secure a happy ending. In fact, that’s the third and 
Just like Pizza
Handling Logistics: The Cheese on Top

20
final principle of phone game: 
Principle 3: Getting an in-person meet-up (i.e., a date) is 
your ultimate goal when using your phone; everything 
else is just preparation to achieve that goal.
If you think about it, the other two ingredients are only nec-
essary to “grease the wheels” for this third and final ingredi-
ent. If getting an in-person meet-up were as simple as texting 
“Let’s meet tonight at 8p.m. at Tonic Lounge on 27th st” then 
there would only be one ingredient of phone and text game 
(and there probably wouldn’t be a need for this book!).
This, however, isn’t the case. If you’ve ever tried to work a 
woman’s phone number before, you probably know that 
things aren’t this simple. Even when you apply all three ingre-
dients, you may still run into hurdles. Sometimes getting a girl 
to see you again can be challenging. If, however, you know 
how to handle logistics, then you’ll know how to make it hap-
pen—no matter what.
Moreover, you can use this ingredient liberally. Just like “extra 
cheese” makes for a great pizza, handling logistics early and 
often improves your chances with women. Most guys think 
they should only ask for a meet up or date when they think 
she’ll say yes. That’s the wrong attitude!
Remember, handling logistics is an ingredient. Therefore, it’s 
no different from flirting or making a connection. Sometimes 
Just like Pizza

21
Just like Pizza
girls purposely turn you down the first few times you invite 
them out. As long as you don’t get angry or upset, it won’t 
matter. You’ll get these girls out. But you have to treat han-
dling logistics as an ingredient—not as a make-or-break mo-
ment. 
These three simple ingredients are all you’ll ever need when 
using your phone. Any communication that falls outside these 
three ingredients isn’t necessarily wrong, but it should be 
thought of as a “topping” and not “the pizza.” More impor-
tant, you must have the three ingredients in place before you 
start adding toppings. Therefore, until you’ve sparked an emo-
tion, made a connection, and handled logistics, do not try any-
thing else. It’ll only end up working against you.  
 

22
O
n an average day, what gets you to stop what 
you’re doing and pay attention? It may be hard 
to remember the last time something gripped 
you so much that it interrupted your day. Maybe 
it was an advertisement for a movie you’ve been 
waiting to see. Maybe it was a funny looking dog. Maybe it the 
sight of hot woman dressed sexy. 
If you think about it, things that get you to stop have two 
things in common: 
1.	
They’re different, and
2.	
They’re exciting 
Most days, your daily routine takes over, and you tune out dis-
tractions. But every once in a while, something comes along 
The Three Ingredients:  
Further Defined
Sparking an Emotion: Stand Out with Language

23
that captures your full attention. To do this using your phone, 
you must learn how to craft your language so that it stops a 
woman cold, sparks an emotion, and makes her interested in 
what you have to say. 
When you’re considering the language of a “sparking emo-
tions” text, some questions you should be asking yourself are: 
•	What is new, different, or interesting about what I’m 
writing? 
•	What “mental pictures” are my words painting? 
•	Is this clear? Will she immediately “get” what I’m try-
ing to say? 
•	Does this sound like something “every other guy” 
would write?
If you’re still confused—don’t worry. You will learn more about 
sparking emotions in the later sections as well as through the 
examples. But, to help get you thinking more “emotionally” 
right now, here are some ways to instantly improve the unique-
ness of your language: 
•	Substitute signs for words. For example, rather than 
using words like “is,” “was,” or “are” substitute in “=” 
signs (e.g., “Our meeting last night = awesome”; “Me = 
hung over this morning!”). 
The Three Ingredients

24
The Three Ingredients
•	Begin with verbs, exclamations, or one-word sentenc-
es. For example, you can begin a text with an irregular 
verb like “bump” as in “Bump some R. Kelly for me…” 
or you can even break a sentence into smaller sentenc-
es: “Bump. Some. K. Kelly. For me.” 
•	Start with “mock drama.” For example, you can text 
something like, “It’s over” or even “I hate you” to im-
mediately get an emotional response. (Warning: a 
woman should know you’re teasing her when you send 
these texts, so quickly follow up with a text that makes 
it clear that you don’t actually hate her, etc.) 
•	Add funny phrases to simple statements. For example, 
you can “jazz up” any noun by adding a phrase like “…
crafted by the Hand of God” as in “Just had an omelet 
crafted by the Hand of God. Delicious!” 

25
T
he most important aspect of making a connection is 
genuineness. Rather than thinking of making a con-
nection with a girl as a “tactic,” you should want to 
get to know her out of curiosity. If a genuine interest 
isn’t driving you to text this girl, why are you texting 
her in the first place?
Thus, you probably do have a genuine curiosity for the women 
you text. Your problem is that you don’t know how to lever-
age that curiosity in an attractive way. To solve that problem, 
you just need to get more specific—especially in two areas:
1.	
Make specific inside jokes, and 
2.	
Ask specific questions
Here’s a brief explanation of how to use each:
Inside Jokes: Hopefully when you interact with women 
face-to-face, you’re establishing little “inside jokes” be-
tween the two of you. This can be as simple as saying 
something like, “How good are you on text? Why do I 
have a sneak suspicion that you’re like Shakespeare on 
The Three Ingredients
Making Connections: Be Specific 

26
The Three Ingredients
text…?” when you’re asking for her number. If a woman 
laughs as you’re saying that, you have an “inside joke.” 
Later in this book, you’ll read a case study where I said 
I’m a “total text addict” as I was getting a girl’s number. 
So, fittingly, my first text to her was, “I’m indulging my 
text addiction just for you.” Immediately, that text re-
called the fun she had with me, and further connected 
us. No other guy could have texted her that. That was a 
joke only she and I shared.
Likewise, you will have your specific “inside jokes” that 
only you and a woman share. Use them! 
Questions: To make your questions more specific, add 
reasons. Adding “reasons” just means telling her why 
you’re asking her questions. For example, most guys 
ask women, “Where are you from?” But a better way to 
ask that question is, “Where are you from? Your accent 
sounds interesting.” When you add a reason to your 
question, she’ll want to know why you’re asking your 
questions.
Moreover, when you ask her questions with reasons, 
you invite the most common female response, which is, 
“Why do you think that?” Whenever a woman asks you 
questions like this, she’s inviting you to strengthen your 
connection with her. 

27
T
he most important aspect of handling logistics is ac-
tually pulling the trigger. Too often guys play pro-
verbial “grab ass” with women on the phone, en-
tertaining long text conversations that only serve 
to make her realize that she’s never going to meet 
up with them. 
Don’t fall into this trap. Ask women out fast and often. “Fast” 
means you shouldn’t let more than a few texts go by without 
proposing a date; “often” means you shouldn’t let a “rejec-
tion” bother you. The most important thing is to pull the trig-
ger and ask—not whether or not she said yes. As long as a 
woman keeps interacting with you, and you keep proposing a 
meet up, eventually she’s going to say yes.
Though, how you phrase your proposals can sometimes help. 
If you phrase a meet up in a unique or interesting way, it can 
add some emotion. Sometimes that little extra emotion will 
knock a girl over the fence, and she’ll agree to see you. You’ll 
see examples of this throughout the book. 
The Three Ingredients
Handling Logistics: Ask—and Ask Well 

28
F
or the purposes of this book, whenever you go from 
meeting a woman to making her your girlfriend, your 
relationship passes through three phases, which are: 
1.	You want to date her (before the first date) 
2.	You’re sort of dating her (between the first date and 
the fourth or fifth date) 
3.	You are dating her (after the fifth date, or when 
things get more serious)
The way you text a woman during each phase is different. Not 
only does the frequency of how much you text change, but the 
ratio of the three ingredients also changes. As you can prob-
ably guess, you would do much more connecting with your 
girlfriend than with a woman you want to date. 
We break phone and texting into these three phases to keep 
things simple. With the three ingredients in mind, coupled with 
your understanding of the three phases, we can now move 
into the specifics of phone game. Warm up your thumbs!
The Three Ingredients
When and How Much: Phases of a Textship

29
M
aybe you met her at a bar or nightclub. May-
be it was the girl from the coffee shop or the 
cutie who sat next to you on the train. Or per-
haps she was in one of your classes or even 
a “friend-of-a-friend.” It could even be a girl 
from an online dating website, who you exchanged numbers 
with.
Regardless, all these girls fall into the same category: they’re 
girls you want to “date”—or at least go on a date with. This 
phase is where the vast majority of guys mess up and ruin their 
chances with the girls they’re pursuing. 
2
You Want to Date Her
first phase...
Got Her Number...Now What?

30
Got Her Number...
Popular advice and conventional wisdom often stresses the 
amount of time you wait before contacting her via phone or 
text. If you’ve ever seen the movie Swingers, you may remem-
ber the “three-day rule,” which stipulates you must wait three 
days before contacting a woman you’re interested in. 
Not only is this advice wrong (you should never wait that long!), 
it’s also misguided. It emphasizes timing (i.e., when you follow 
up) over delivery (i.e., what you follow up with). While timing 
is somewhat important, delivery is what really counts. 
Attractive delivery comes from following three simple rules:
1.	Avoid sending more than 2 texts without proposing a 
meet up  
2.	Send mostly statements; avoid asking questions (espe-
cially when proposing a meet up)  
3.	Don’t make plans too far in advance. Ideally, text her 
in the morning to meet her later in the evening, espe-
cially on a “date night” (e.g., Mondays, Tuesdays, and 
Wednesdays)
 
You will understand these rules much better—as well as when 
to break them—as you go through this chapter. Feel free to 
skip ahead if you have a specific situation that requires imme-
diate attention. But if possible, read through each section in 
order to fully grasp the essence of effective follow up. 

31
I
t doesn’t matter if you met her in a nightclub, coffee shop, 
class, through friends, or over the Internet—you should 
be the one to send the initial text. Do not wait or expect 
her to text you first! If she does that’s fine, but ultimately 
you want to be the one leading the interaction as much as 
possible.   
When you send the initial text, you get to set the tone of the in-
teraction. Often this is where guys go wrong. Many guys make 
the fatal mistake of setting a logical, neutral, and/or boring 
tone. Texts like, “Nice meeting you” or “Hope you got home 
safe” do not get things off to a good start.
In your first text, you want to mix two of the three phone game 
ingredients together: sparking emotions and making connec-
tions. In other words, you want to send a text that makes her 
laugh or smile but also makes her feel as if she already has a 
connection with you.
Any sort of inside joke the two of you shared works really well 
here. If you’re not currently creating inside jokes with women, 
start getting in the habit of it! It’s not hard to do. An inside 
Got Her Number...
First Text: Stick to the Formula

32
Got Her Number...
joke can be anything that gets her giggling, such as:
•	A nickname you gave her
•	Something you teased her about (her cute accent, her 
“nerd skills,” etc.)
•	Something you did together that was fun (danced to-
gether, had a drink, etc.)
•	A funny thing that happened
Here’s a case study along with a short explanation to illustrate 
the concept of a “radar text”:
When I approached this girl, she was in a large group of 
people, so to get her in a one-on-one situation away from 
her friends I said, “Let’s go on a speed date.” Since she 
seemed to like that idea (enough so that she ditched her 
friends for me!), I used the joke again in my initial text.

33
Got Her Number...
This girl and I ended up talking about French toast and how 
good it is. Both of us claimed to be able to make the “best 
French toast,” so we jokingly said our first date would be 
a French toast making competition like “Top Chef”. 
Notice how these texts spark a little emotion, establish a bit of 
a connection, and end 
with a little nicety (e.g., 
“fun meeting you”) and 
a name. Radar texts 
should come across as 
attractive and normal. 
When crafting an initial 
text be sure to keep it under 5-7 lines. Also, don’t try to stuff 
as many inside jokes in as possible. Keep it short, sweet, and 
simple.
In a perfect world, you’d have a little inside joke with every girl 
you approach. But shit happens. Sometimes you only had 30 
seconds to get her number; sometimes you can’t remember 
what you spoke about, etc. When this happens, don’t worry! 
There’s still hope…
In these situations, simply try to spark her emotions. If you 
can get her feeling good, she’ll enjoy your texts—even if she 
doesn’t remember you or doesn’t recall the conversation you 
had. Here’s a case study you can use (or use it to inspire your 
own) of sparking an emotion with a radar text.
“When crafting an ini-
tial text be sure to keep 
it under 5-7 lines.”

34
Got Her Number...
Notice how this text simply makes a little flirty joke, offers 
an introduction, and leaves a name. This is all you’re look-
ing to establish in the first text! It’s an icebreaker…and 
just an icebreaker. Most guys send out their first text hop-
ing and waiting for a response. If that’s something you do 
change your attitude.
The only purpose of the first radar text is exactly that: to get 
on her radar. She may respond. She may not. It doesn’t mat-
ter. What matters is what you do next, which you will learn 
about below.

35
I
t’s important you don’t let too much time elapse between 
your initial meeting and your first radar text. If you wait 
too long, women will sometimes forget you or think you 
lack the confidence to follow up appropriately. Don’t get 
obsessed with playing “head games” or turn phone game 
into some elaborate pseudo-chess match where you consider 
your every move.
Instead, use your phone like a normal, attractive guy. When 
normal, high self-esteem people exchange contact info they 
follow up with one another naturally. (Only weird manipula-
tive nerds ponder how long to wait and try to encode and de-
cipher hidden meaning in every text.) 
A big part of this book—as well as solid phone game—is learn-
ing to use text as an extension of your playful, attractive, and 
confident personality. Remember: the three ingredients of 
text game don’t include such nonsense as “fake disinterest” 
or manipulative strategies. That stuff is for basement-dwelling 
nerds!
Therefore, you want to follow-up with a woman either the 
Got Her Number...
When to Text—and What to Expect

36
same day (or night) you meet her, or the day after. Waiting 
an extra day isn’t the worst thing, but don’t let any more than 
three days go by without sending your initial radar text.
After you send out that initial text, put your phone away and 
resist the urge to check it for a response every 5 minutes. In 
fact, as mentioned in the previous section, you shouldn’t ex-
pect a response at all. The beauty of sending out a radar text 
is that it doesn’t require a response. You’re not asking her a 
question, fishing for a compliment, or trying to make plans. 
Often girls will respond to your first text. Depending on her re-
sponse you can either 
send back a text, or just 
go silent. Again, you’re 
not “sparking a conver-
sation” with the first 
text, so don’t get into a 
long conversation! Too 
often guys ruin their 
chances for a date by becoming a girl’s text friend. 
She may think your initial text was comedy gold, making her 
excited to text back and forth with you. But fight the temp-
tation to get into a long, drawn out text exchange. While it’s 
gratifying in the short term, it diminishes your chances with 
her in the long term. Once you get a bit more serious with a 
woman, it’s fine to converse with her over text. But for now, 
just send your initial text, get on her radar, and get on with 
Got Her Number...
“Too often guys ruin their 
chances for a date by be-
coming a girl’s text friend.” 

37
Got Her Number...
your life. 
Conversely, she may not respond to your first text. This is to-
tally fine, too. Don’t get upset or freak out. There’s a good 
chance she enjoyed your text, but just didn’t feel the need to 
respond. Don’t second-guess yourself or go into a tizzy over 
one unanswered text. Always remember: the first text is ONLY 
meant to get on her radar.
In rare circumstances, a girl may text back something com-
pletely unexpected, like, “Who is this?” Again, don’t freak out. 
Just read the next section…

38
T
here will come a day where you meet a girl, send 
her a radar text, and get the dreaded “Who is this?” 
response. While you’re more likely to get this from 
girls you meet in bars and nightclubs, it can happen 
with any girl, in any situation.
It may seem like a buzz-kill at the time, but it’s actually not 
that bad. Situations like this are still salvageable—if you make 
the right moves. In “special circumstances” like this, you can 
violate the “Three Rules for the First Text.” 
In this situation, it’s important you first make sure she knows 
you’re not offended or angry. Remember, your attitude should 
be that it’s no big deal. Most hot women don’t invest too much 
of themselves into an interaction, so it always just stays “fun” 
for them.
First Text Blues: 
Troubleshooting the First Text
“Who is this?” How to Respond 

39
First Text Blues
And you should have the same attitude. If you can demon-
strate that you don’t care that much, then she’ll relax and know 
you’re “fun.” Keep in mind: she didn’t sign a social contract to 
see you again. Until it seems “fun” for her, she’s simply not 
going to meet you again.
So, your next text (which you can send anywhere between 
10 minutes to an hour after she asks “who is this”) should be 
something like:
Everything about that text—down to the typos—is in-
tentional. Essentially, you want to give the impression 
that you really don’t take it seriously—you actually find 
it amusing (“lol”). Words like “player” and “mack it” are 
helpful because they’re humorous and also help to reverse 
the roles a bit, evoking some “gender humor.”
After sending the “no big deal” text, wait 10 or 15 minutes. 
Sometimes girls will remember you, other times they won’t. 
Often though, they just don’t respond. Again, don’t sweat 
it—you can still get her out, but you have to work a little more 
text magic.

40
First Text Blues
As such, send a “funny” text that’ll get her laughing. Though, 
you want to be careful with humor over text. Girls sometimes 
misinterpret “text humor” as creepy or offensive. So don’t say 
anything too sexual, weird, or creepy. As you read on, you’ll 
develop more of a sense of how to apply humor over text.
In this situation, you want to send a text like:
This (somewhat) edgy text is a “lol” and not a “wtf” be-
cause of one key word: “COUGAR.” Generally, young, hot 
women have a natural disdain for “cougars.” By making a 
joke about a “grabby cougar” with “arm fat” and a “fan-
ny pack,” you can get her laughing while also developing 
a bit of a connection with her. 
Most likely, she was also “molested” by a few unsavory char-
acters. She might even write back with stories of her own, de-
scribing creepy guys. Oh, and if the girl you’re texting IS a cou-
gar, you might want to substitute “cougar” for “crazy college 
chick.” (Pro tip: young girls and cougars are natural enemies!)

41
First Text Blues
At this point, she should at least be enjoying your texts. Once 
you’ve “warmed up” the interaction, you can proceed as nor-
mal, which means either go silent or even pull the trigger for 
a meet up.
Though, at this point, girls will often text something to the 
effect of, “What do you look like?” Most guys think they’re 
home free at this point since the girl now seems interested…
but it’s a TRAP. The next section explains what to do in that 
situation. 

42
First Text Blues
S
imilar to the “Who is this?” response, girls will some-
times ask what you look like. This not only happens 
to guys who meet women in bar and nightclubs, but 
also guys who meet women online or get set up by 
friends.
Most guys assume they should answer this question logical-
ly, which is the absolute  worst thing you can do. They either 
give a description of 
themselves or send a 
picture. Be warned: if 
you answer with real 
response—or 
worse, 
actually send a picture 
of yourself—you could 
jeopardize the interaction (and it has nothing to do with your 
looks). 
Now, that’s not to say you can never give a real description 
or send a picture. In fact, doing so AFTER you’ve sparked an 
emotion is recommended. But, before you do, you want to 
make sure to spark her emotions.
“What Do You Look Like?” How to Proceed 
“Most guys assume they should 
answer this question logically, 
which is the absolute  worst 
thing you can do.“

43
First Text Blues
Here’s an example of a text that does that: 
Answering her question in a completely illogical (and 
totally playful) way, you demonstrate that you’re FUN. 
She’ll feel MUCH more comfortable meeting up with you 
because she knows you’re not boring or awkward. Also, 
she sees that you don’t take yourself too seriously (a very 
important quality to demonstrate before the first date!) 
Almost any girl will find this funny (and if she doesn’t, is this 
really a girl you’d want to spend a date with anyway?). How-
ever, funny as she may think you are, don’t keep trying to be 
“cute” or “funny” over text. Remember your purpose: to meet 
up with her!
So if a girl writes back with a proclamation of your hilarity (e.g., 
“lololol omg! ur crazy!!”), you can congratulate yourself on 
successfully transitioning from “random guy” to “funny, in-
teresting guy.” And that’s a PERFECT time to propose a meet 
up. 

44
First Text Blues
If you hesitate and keep sending texts, you’re going to turn 
into a “text goofball.” You will learn how to seamlessly pro-
pose a meet up in the next section, but here’s a quick preview 
on a good way to do it in this “troubleshooting” scenario:  

45
A
fter your initial radar text, your next text ex-
change should propose a meet up. Do not fall into 
the trap of having long, drawn-out text conversa-
tions with girls you never meet up with. Having 
longer text conversations is fine once you’ve had 
your first date. It’s even fine if she legitimately cannot make 
the first date (an example of a “holding pattern”). 
It’s NOT okay, however, to just text back-and-forth without 
ever proposing a meet up.
That’s why the first rule of proper phone game is, Avoid send-
ing more than 2 texts without proposing a meet up. After 
the initial text, only give yourself 2 texts before you propose 
a meet. Or, according to the pizza recipe, “adding the third 
ingredient.” Because, as you can probably guess, setting up a 
meet up is a perfect example of “handling logistics.” 
Meeting Up With Her: 
The Key-lock Sequence 
Avoid Becoming Her New “Texting Buddy”

46
Meeting Up With Her
Equally as important as remembering this first rule, you should 
also keep the third rule in mind, Text her in the morning and 
propose meeting her later in the evening on “date nights”—
Mondays, Tuesdays, and Wednesdays. When you’re setting 
up a date, timing is just as important as delivery. And your tim-
ing is this:
Text her the same day you want to see her. 
Many guys adhere to the “old fashioned” dating model of set-
ting up a date a few days in advance. Often guys will text a girl on 
Monday to make plans 
for Wednesday. This is 
completely wrong! To 
get a date Wednesday 
night, text her Wednes-
day morning. If she pro-
poses a different night, 
that’s fine; then it’s 
okay to set up a date in advance. But you should text in the 
morning or afternoon for dates in the evening.
This is true even if you’re texting 2 or 3 new girls. Text all of 
them Monday mornings and propose a meet up that night. If 
all the girls agree, decide which girl you’d like to see that night 
and text the others, “ahh something just came up, can you do 
tomorrow night?” or, “ahh something just came up, can you 
do Wednesday night?”
“To get a date Wednes-
day night, text her 
Wednesday morning.”

47
Meeting Up With Her
The point here isn’t even the meet up—it’s demonstrating 
that you’re serious about seeing her. Lots of guys hide behind 
their phone and think they’re going to seduce girls over text. 
This is the coward’s play, and not something attractive men 
do. Proper phone game isn’t about playing grab-ass over text; 
it’s about getting meet ups that turn into sex and relationships! 
Therefore, it’s very important you establish early on that you’re 
not a coward hiding behind his phone. You do that by keeping 
the first rule in mind. If you go 3 or 4 texts before going for 
a meet up, that’s acceptable. But if you’re sending anything 
more than that, you’re resorting to a coward’s play. And that’s 
going to kill your chances.
Now that you understand the importance of how to text for a 
date, the next section will teach you what to text. 

48
W
hen you’re proposing a date, there’s a 
simple three-text sequence: key, turn, and 
push. Think of it as the “key-lock sequence” 
because it’s like putting a key into a lock, 
turning it, and then pushing the door open. 
That’s essentially what these three texts are going to do. Each 
step of this sequence comes from the three ingredients:
1.	
Key: Spark an emotion
2.	
Turn: Make a connection
3.	
Push: Handle logistics 
 
It really can be that simple! You just want to get her giggling or 
smiling, make her feel a connection to you, and then propose 
a meet up. If you can do that, you can get dates. Let’s look at 
a case study that demonstrates this “key-lock sequence”:
Meeting Up With Her
The Key-Lock Sequence—Key-Turn-Push
Key Text!

49
Meeting Up With Her
This was a girl I’d met on the street at 2a.m. and only had 
30 seconds to get her number, so we really didn’t make 
much of a connection. Therefore, I simply make a humor-
ous statement about my day, sparking a little emotion, 
and getting her attention.
Without waiting for a response, I send another text im-
mediately that makes a connection. Even something as 
simple and trivial as “Hope you’re having a divine morn-
ing” can get a woman to feel a sense of rapport with you. 
Moreover, notice how I mix in a little “inside humor” with 
the word “divine” (which is a reference to God, which I 
made in the previous text). Even though we didn’t have 
an inside joke when we met, I’m creating one for us over 
text (without her having to do anything!). 
Her response may seem pretty lackluster, but it’s actu-
ally excellent. Telling me that she had a “nightmare” is 
her way of making a connection. Even though she prob-
ably doesn’t realize it, she’s beginning to view me as more 
than just a random guy texting her. Whenever girls share 
Turn Text!

50
Meeting Up With Her
personal information like this—as trivial as it may seem—
there’s a very good chance they will meet you for a date.
I acknowledge the connection by agreeing with her, “night-
mares are the worst.” I then add the final ingredient of 
phone game and propose a date. I sprinkle a little inside 
joke in at the end (“it will be the exact opposite of a night-
mare”) only because we had so little connection during 
our initial meeting that I want to establish a little more 
connection while also sparking a bit of emotion.
 
Even though she refuses the request, her suggestion for 
another night indicates that she’s interested. 
Push Text!

51
Meeting Up With Her
Now that the date is established, there’s no need to keep 
texting. In fact, any further texting beyond a simple re-
minder that you’ll text her in the morning can put the 
date at risk. I added “no more nightmares” in this case, 
but even that was unnecessary. 
Ideally all of your text interactions will be as smooth as this. 
If it only takes 3-6 texts to set up a date, there’s absolutely 
no reason to do any more work. Great phone game before 
the first date isn’t about flashy lines or witty banter: it’s simply 
about getting that first date. Once a woman agrees to a date, 
consider your mission complete. 
Unfortunately though, things usually don’t go so smooth. At 
the very least, girls will usually suggest a different night to 
meet up, as what happened here. When that happens, it’s just 
as good as her agreeing to your proposed date. In fact, one 
thing to always remember when using your phone to set up 
dates is this:
If she suggests another time/date, it’s fine. She’s inter-
ested and probably will not flake.
If a woman refuses, but doesn’t suggest another time, then 
you have some troubleshooting to do. Even this isn’t that 
much of a problem…if you know what you’re doing (and you 
will). But before we move into troubleshooting, let’s look at 
another case study of a successful application of the key-lock 
sequence:     

52
Meeting Up With Her
When this girl was putting her number into my phone, I 
told her, “I’m such a text addict. It’s a problem.” She found 
this hilarious, so I made sure to use the joke again on the 
first text. (Pro tip: If you want a simple inside joke for every 
girl whose number you take, just tell them how much of 
a text addict you are as they’re putting their number into 
your phone.) The comment is mostly to spark an emotion, 
but since she’s in on the joke, it also reestablishes our con-
nection.
The “Hahah” she writes back makes it very clear that the 
joke hit, and her emotions are sparked. Moreover, any time 
a girl asks YOU a question (even something as innocent as 
“what’s up?!?”), she’s trying to create a connection. This 
is a very good sign!
Another joke we shared in our initial meeting was I told 
her that I worked in an office “with a battalion of soccer 

53
Meeting Up With Her
moms.” Again, she found this very funny when I said it in 
person, so I reuse the joke again to further establish a con-
nection. I also ask “what u up to” to add a little extra rap-
port since it’s obvious I’ve sufficiently sparked her emo-
tions and got her laughing.
She tells me something about her, which further strengths 
our connection. The happy face is also promising.
Here I begin to handle logistics. Asking her how good she 
is at pool is obviously planting the seed to invite her out 
for a date. If you don’t feel totally comfortable pulling the 
trigger and asking for a date after three texts, you must 
AT LEAST elude to a date, as I do here. 
Her answer is flirty and sexual. It’s almost guaranteed a 
girl will come out if she’s making sexual remarks like this. 

54
Meeting Up With Her
I compliment her then shoot for the meet up. I propose 
a date for later that night, and make a joke about “NYC 
weirdos.”
She doesn’t get the joke; asks for more information. 
I tell her the address and wait for her to confirm.
    (An hour goes by)

55
Meeting Up With Her
After an hour, I get no response (which was irregular be-
cause she was responding in 2-3 minutes before). I send 
another text that restates the logistics and adds a pinch 
of emotion (“un-intense game of pool and/or resplen-
dence”). Also adding “let me know ;]” is an excellent 
phrase to use when you’re looking for a response.
Her response shows interest, but I will need to handle 
more logistics. 
I handle the logistics and then continue to solidify the con-
nection by giving her a compliment (“w/that feisty wit”) 
as well as spark some emotion (“hot magic awaits”)

56
Meeting Up With Her
Finally, here is a case study that shows a “textbook” key-lock 
sequence:

57
Meeting Up With Her

58
Meeting Up With Her

59
A
s you should already know, if a woman doesn’t 
respond to your initial text it’s no big deal. If a 
woman doesn’t respond to your second or third 
text, however, you may need to apply some dam-
age control. There’s a chance one or more the fol-
lowing happened:
1.	You have the wrong number—either she intentionally 
gave you a fake or it got programmed into your phone 
incorrectly  
2.	 Her interest in you was minimal and she only gave 
you her number to be polite 
3.	 She’s somewhat interested but you haven’t sparked 
enough emotion to get her to pay attention 
If She’s Difficult: 
Getting Out Flaky and Unresponsive Girls
What if She Doesn’t Respond

60
If She’s Difficult
4.	 She was attracted to you but doesn’t feel a sense of 
connection so she’s actively avoiding responding to 
you (even though she wants to emotionally)
In those four scenarios, you can only salvage the third and 
fourth. If you have the wrong number or she had little or no 
interest in you, then there’s not much you can do with your 
phone that’s going to change that. Luckily, however, the vast 
majority of girls who go unresponsive fall into the later two 
categories, and you still have a chance. It may be a slim chance, 
but there’s still a glimmer of hope.
To give yourself the best chance of recovery, you need to be 
honest with yourself. 
Ask yourself where you 
think you stand with 
this girl: Did she only 
seem mildly interested 
at the time? Or did she 
really appear genuinely 
attracted? Most guys like to believe that the girl really was at-
tracted, but remain objective! Ask yourself:
•	Did she “isolate” with you in your initial meeting 
(which means did she feel comfortable talking to 
you in a secluded, one-on-one setting, away from her 
friends)? 
•	Did she reinitiate the conversation with you or find you 
“To give yourself the best 
chance of recovery, you need 
to be honest with yourself.”

61
If She’s Difficult
later to talk to you?  
•	Did you kiss her (on the lips) or have any sexual contact 
with her? 
•	Did she suggest giving you her number or mention 
hanging out with you again?
If none of this happened in your initial meeting, she probably 
only has a mild (or possibly low) interest in you. Keep in mind: 
this is not always the case, and there will be plenty of situa-
tions where none of these things happen and the girl does 
feel strong attraction to you. 
But, overall, these “signs” will help you to be more objective 
when assessing what went wrong. Your memory sometimes 
exaggerates how interested a girl was, making you believe she 
was more attracted than she was. You might then apply the 
wrong follow up strategy and completely destroy whatever 
chance you had. 
Once you’ve realistically evaluated the initial meeting, you’ll 
learn in the next two sections how to handle both situations: 
low interest and some interest (with no connection). 

62
W
hen a girl’s interest is low, you need to try 
a few different “keys” before you discover 
the one that fits. Often the first or second 
text you send—no matter how good it is—
won’t get a response. That’s why the two 
most important things to remember when texting “low inter-
est” girls are:
1.	Remain persistent 
2.	Remain playful 
Before explaining those two tenets, be warned that if a girl 
writes any sort of text that asks (or tells) you to stop texting 
her, then you stop. Once a girl says to stop texting her, the 
game’s over. Move on. Not even Shakespeare himself could 
convince her to see you again at that point. Don’t get upset 
or offended by it, just delete her number and try to figure out 
what you could have done differently when you’d met her. 
However, as long as a girl doesn’t tell you to stop texting her, 
it’s game on. You can send as many texts as you like, trying 
all different “keys” until one clicks. Of course, use some com-
If She’s Difficult
Low Interest: How to Get Her Excited for a Date

63
If She’s Difficult
mon sense and only send one text every other day so that you 
don’t come off like a crazy person.
By remaining playful you keep yourself from coming off needy 
or desperate as you keep texting her—even when she’s not 
responding. Instead, you’ll just seem like a fun, confident guy 
who goes for what he wants, but doesn’t need anything. In 
fact, that’s your “test” before sending any text to an unre-
sponsive girl:
Am I secretly expecting a response from this text?
If you answer yes, don’t send it. Equally as important as re-
maining persistent is also remaining playful. And playfulness is 
an end itself. When you’re playful you don’t crave a reaction 
or response. Let’s look at two case studies, demonstrating a 
bad and good example:
Bad!
Good!

64
If She’s Difficult
Now even though those two texts communicate the same sen-
timent, they are very different. The first text is bad because it’s 
an obvious ploy for attention. If you know she likes Nicki Minaj, 
you hope that by referencing her interests she’ll validate you 
with a response. That text secretly expects a response.
On the other hand, saying something random like “It’s shark 
week” is not something girls would usually like. Yet it’s funny. 
Why shark week would make you think of her is offbeat and 
humorous. But since it’s so “random,” it doesn’t beg for a re-
sponse. It simply throws out a little humor, and gives her the 
choice whether she wants to “bite.”  
In fact, when you’re apply this strategy, it’s highly recommend-
ed you simply send the text, switch your phone to silent, slip it 
in your pocket, and forget about it for a few hours. As tempt-
ing as it may be, don’t keep checking every 5 minutes to see 
if she responded. Detaching yourself from the outcome will 
help solidify the mindset you’ll need to make this work. 
Moreover, you should come to enjoy sending these sorts of 
texts. If you’re laughing as you’re writing out the text, you 
know you probably have a winner. Think of it like game: “play-
ing the numbers.” 
You have no idea what behind-the-scenes factors are keeping 
her from responding to you. She might be shy, lazy, in a rela-
tionship, visiting her grandma in the hospital, or a million of 
other things that have nothing to do with you. All you can do is 

65
If She’s Difficult
remain cool and fun and try to spark her emotions by sending 
some romantic comedy over text. Let’s examine a case study 
and break down what’s going on:
Since I’d not gotten a response from this girl for weeks, I 
knew I had to “go big.” I purposely crafted a somewhat 
edgy text because I wanted to make sure that it captured 
her attention and got her laughing. It may appear that 
this text violated the rule of NOT expecting a response 
since it’s asking a question; however, the text was meant 
as a joke, not a serious question. My intention wasn’t a re-
sponse—it was a laugh.
This was a perfect response because I HAD been texting 
this girl about once a week for the past few weeks (none 
of which got a response). Her three-sentence response 
shows some investment on her part, indicating that I’m 
back in the game.

66
If She’s Difficult
Here’s where I pour on a little connection. I answer her 
question, explain what “prompted” me to text her, and 
play on the “inside” joke that got her to respond.
Here she confirms the effectiveness of the “key” by saying 
how my text got her to burst out laughing in class. The two 
questions about 
me further show 
that she’s also 
trying to make a 
connection.
“The two questions about me 
further show that she’s also 
trying to make a connection.”

67
If She’s Difficult
I know it’s time to “push” so I use this text to handle logis-
tics, proposing we “catch up over drinks.”
She’s still not sold on the idea, challenging me to spark 
more emotion.
I try a joke.
It fails.

68
If She’s Difficult
I quickly recover…
…then I spark some more emotions while making a con-
nection.
She hesitatingly gets on board with the idea. More impor-
tant though, she’s playing along.

69
If She’s Difficult
I go into the standard “What do you look” troubleshoot-
ing sequence.
She keeps the joke going, claiming she “had 3 kids” (which 
is obviously a joke because this girl was 20 years old). No-
tice how she adds the disclaimer, “If you’re looking for 
love child material, you may be disappointed.” This is NOT 
something I’m going to debate over text. Remember: if 
she agrees to the meet up, it’s mission accomplished. 
That’s all you’re shooting for in the initial texts.

70
I simply round out the logistics. Notice how I go for the 
same night meet up.
She wants to do Friday night.
I agree.
We finish off by solidifying the logistics.
If She’s Difficult

71
Always keep in mind: she gave you her number because she 
wants you to text her. That means she wants you to win just 
as much as you want to 
win. But, at the same 
time, she also needs to 
see that you’re fun, nor-
mal, and cool. As long 
as you keep the basics 
in mind, you should be 
able to recover some girls who go unresponsive. 
Of course, you will encounter some girls who will never re-
spond to you, no matter how great your texts are. Ultimately, 
it’s up to you to decide how much effort you want to put in. 
But it never hurts to “play the numbers”—especially when 
you’re just writing texts that you find amusing.
If She’s Difficult
“...she wants you to win 
just as much as you want 
to win.”

72
S
ometimes nonresponsive girls come not from a lack 
of attraction, but instead because you’re not a per-
son to her. This actually happens more than most 
guys would expect.  Probably you can remember a 
time where a girl was all over you, maybe even mak-
ing out with you, and then you never heard from her again. 
Obviously she was attracted to you. Why, then, is she not re-
sponding? Well, often guys do so much flirting that they ne-
glect to “solidify” themselves as a person. To her, guys like 
this are just hot, fun, pieces of “man-candy.” 
Before getting into the texts to recover from this, pause to 
take inventory of this problem so you can prevent it from hap-
pening in the future. An irony of becoming better with wom-
en is that some guys become too good for their own good. In 
other words, they learn how to create quick, burning-hot at-
traction without making mistakes or slip-ups. 
This only lets women see their “attractive qualities.” While this 
sounds great to most inexperienced guys, it actually makes 
it much harder to date these women. So, while flirting with 
If She’s Difficult
Some Interest: Getting More of a Connection

73
women is great, also 
make sure she sees 
you as a real person. 
That’s why the “recov-
ery” text sequence 
below really empha-
sizes making a connection. You want to really lay it on thick 
so she gets a sense of the man you are. You can do that by 
sending this text sequence a day or two after a failed key-lock 
sequence (preferably send it in the morning): 
If She’s Difficult
“...while flirting with women 
is great, also make sure she 
sees you as a real person. ”

74
If She’s Difficult
Obviously write YOUR full name, not mine. Also substitute 
YOUR interests/disgusts/secrets in for mine (as the whole 
point is to crystallize YOURSELF as a human). 
Here’s a case study that shows a girl who had some interest, 
but obviously didn’t feel enough of a connection for a date:

75
If She’s Difficult

76
I
f you meet new women often, you probably have a phone 
full of girls’ numbers. And, unfortunately, as the rules of 
the game decree, you probably have never met up with a 
lot of these girls. Whether it was because you failed to fol-
low up, she flaked, or some other calamitous event kept 
you from meeting her, these are numbers that have been un-
used in your phone for over a month. 
In situations like this, time is not on your side. Just as you met 
plenty of new girls, you can be sure she’s meeting plenty of 
new guys. Memories fade and you become nothing more than 
a guy she can’t remember. Though, for some guys, that can be 
a good thing (as weird as that sounds).
If you did something in your initial interaction that turned her 
off, likely a girl will have forgotten your mistakes with time. 
While it’s not recommended, in very rare cases it can some-
times benefit you to let a month or so go by without contact-
ing a woman. Again, this isn’t something you should make a 
habit of doing, but if you really bombed in-person (especially 
if you did something really stupid after she gave you her num-
ber), you might want to consider this strategy. 
If She’s Difficult
Overcoming Time: How to Revive an Old Number

77
If She’s Difficult
You may also find yourself sitting on an unused number in cer-
tain social circle situations. For example, you and girl may have 
hit it off one night, and you got her number. A few days later 
you find out that she began dating someone else or got back 
together with her ex. While you could apply the same strategy 
as you would for a “Low Interest” girl and text her without 
attachment, you’re probably better off simply not contacting 
her at all and waiting until she’s single again. 
As a quick side note, how you apply these phone game strate-
gies is up to you. It depends on how much you like a girl and 
what you feel comfortable doing. While the strategies in this 
book have been proven to work in the real world, they aren’t 
magic spells. Often the effectiveness of a strategy depends on 
how well you apply it coupled with how well it matches your 
personality and style.  
That being said, reigniting an old number is fairly straightfor-
ward. Unlike working a “low interest” number, the most im-
portant aspect of reconnecting with an old number depends 
on just that: reconnecting. These situations call for the “mak-
ing connections” ingredient. Here’s an example of such a text:

78
If She’s Difficult
Don’t set you expectations too high. Reviving an old number is 
very hit-or-miss so don’t get upset if you don’t get a response. 
If she does respond, however, proceed with either the key 
lock sequence or, if her response is lackluster, treat the situ-
ation as if you were texting a low interest girl. Regardless, if 
you get any response, there’s a decent chance you will meet 
up with her.   

79
I
f you’re getting girls’ phone numbers with some consisten-
cy, then you’re bound to encounter a woman that you like, 
who likes you, but something prevents you from meeting 
up. It might be because she’s out of town for a while, lives 
in another city, or some other factor. 
If you’re in such a situation, keeping a girl interested is a simple 
as putting her in a “holding pattern.” This means you text her 
sporadically, keeping the passion smoldering. This prepares 
you to meet her sometime in the future. A holding pattern 
is simply 2/3’s of the key-lock sequence: spark emotions and 
make connections. 
Initiate a holding pattern every 3-4 days, letting the text con-
versations go for about 4-5 back-and-forth texts. Don’t get 
too chatty on text—leave some intrigue for the eventual date. 
The purpose of a “holding pattern” is simply to stay on her ra-
dar. Every once in a while you can even give her a call (if you’d 
like), but, again, don’t let these phone conversations go be-
yond 8-10 minutes. 
Here’s a case study of a holding pattern with a girl met in Ve-
If She’s Difficult
Girls You’re Unable to Meet: The Holding Pattern

80
If She’s Difficult
gas who lived across the country:

81
If She’s Difficult
Also, initiate other “touch points” with her: Friend her on Face-
book, send funny videos to her email, etc. Be sure you’re on 
her mind, but don’t go overboard! Leave some mystery and in-
trigue so that she makes a point to see you in the near future. 

82
S
ometimes, no matter what you do, a girl will behave 
badly. Sometimes it’s a reflection of her—maybe 
she’s insecure, immature, or just plain mean. Some-
times it’s a reflection of you—maybe you didn’t make 
a great first impression or did something to upset 
her. Regardless, bad behavior happens to every guy—and it’s 
your job to overcome it.
Below are some strategies to use either before or after ap-
plying the above strategies. A big part of dating is develop-
ing a system for deal-
ing with flakes, insults, 
and disinterest. The 
techniques you just 
read about give you a 
concrete game plan for 
dealing with these situ-
ations, whereas the techniques below address “bad behav-
ior” with more flexibility. You can use these techniques in any 
situation—phone game and beyond. 
The Bad Behavior Files: 
When Good Girls Go Bad
“A big part of dating is develop-
ing a system for dealing with 
flakes, insults, and disinterest. “

83
T
he concept behind the “shred-her” texts is just like 
jujitsu. In the martial art of jujitsu, you use your op-
ponents force against him. Likewise, with “shred-
her” texts, you use a woman’s bad behavior against 
her in a funny or quirky way. This very often revers-
es her negative opinion of you, helping you turn an interaction 
around.
What’s great about “shred-her” texts is that they work in al-
most every situation. They’re just “shake-and-bake” respons-
es that give you way to “shred” any objection, insult, or dis-
interest. The first “shred-her” response turns a woman’s bad 
behavior on it’s head:
“You know I love ______________ chicks and here you are acting like one!”  
	
	
               (Describe her bad behavior) 
This template works wonders with girls who aren’t giving you 
a response. If a woman is ignoring all your “key” texts, try tex-
ting, “You know I love shy girls named Britney and here you 
are acting like one!” Usually—at the very least—this will get a 
The Bad Behavior Files
Shred-Her Negative Response

84
The Bad Behavior Files
response. 
You can continue to use this template throughout your inter-
action. If a girl keeps breaking plans with you, try saying, “You 
know I love girls who play hard to get and here you are acting 
like one!” You’re essentially taking something negative she’s 
doing and spinning it into a positive. 
Similarly, you accomplish this “spin” using the other “shred-
her” text:
“If by ____________ you mean _________ then you’re right!”
         (Something negative she said)                (Something positive)
So, if she calls you rude, you might say, “If by rude you mean 
totally charming, then you’re right!” Again, you want to save 
this response when a woman displays some form of bad be-
havior. 
An obvious caveat with “shread-her” responses is to avoid 
using them too much. When used sparingly, these responses 
are gold; when used too much, these responses can come off 
very, very immature. 
So keep them up your sleeve whenever a woman is acting in 
a way that’s not helping move your relationship forward. In 
such a situation, “shred” the barrier and move things forward!

85
P
op culture connects people. Popular movies, shows, 
songs, YouTube clips, and advertising slogans pro-
vide a set of “common memories.” Through pop cul-
ture, two strangers have a wide range of topics they 
both understand. This makes it a perfect topic for 
girls you’re getting to know.
You’re probably well aware that women love pop culture. 
They enjoy recognizing and recalling it—even with a man they 
don’t know well. Thus, pop culture should be at the tip of your 
tongue—or, more appropriately, the tip of your thumb—when 
you’re texting a woman. This is especially helpful for women 
who are “flaking.” 
To use this technique effectively, be sure to pick your pop cul-
ture references wisely. Make sure it’s something you know 
she’ll understand. For example, many women do not know 
sports very well. So, while men often establish rapport with 
other men by discussing sports, women are not usually famil-
iar with athletes or sports facts.
It’s much better to discuss things like television, movies, and 
The Bad Behavior Files
Pop Culture Sniper Shot and Scattershot

86
The Bad Behavior Files
music with women. If you were born in the early to mid-1980s, 
you probably grew up watching shows like “Saved by the Bell,” 
“Full House,” “Family Matters,” and “Fresh Prince of Bel Air.” 
Regardless if you’re boy or girl, anyone in the United States 
who grew up during that time understands these shows. So, 
if talking to a girl in her late 20s/early 30s, bringing up one of 
those shows would almost certainly spark an emotion. 
As powerful as pop culture can be, it’s only as powerful as the 
girl you’re interacting 
with. In the example 
above, a girl who grew 
up outside the U.S. or 
born in the 1970s prob-
ably would not be fa-
miliar with any of those 
pop culture references. 
It’s important to consider a woman’s cultural background and 
age range, and then adjust your references accordingly.
There are two ways to go about pop references: the sniper 
shot and the scattershot. The “sniper shot” pop culture refer-
ence has a higher risk of not working, but when it does work 
it’s gold! The “scattershot,” on the other hand, is more topical 
and obvious, so it has a better chance of working but the ef-
fect won’t be as pronounced. 
Here are case studies and explanations of each...
“As powerful as pop culture can 
be, it’s only as powerful as the 
girl you’re interacting with.”

87
The Sniper Shot:
This text references the Holmes Rupert one-hit wonder 
song, “Escape.” The song was popular in 1980, but many 
people are still familiar with it. If a girl gets the reference, 
often she’ll find it very funny because it seems as if you’re 
asking a question, which is taken from the chorus of the 
song. (It’s a song about two people running away togeth-
er.) Many girls, unfortunately, will just answer the ques-
tion as if you were seriously wondering if they enjoy the 
beverage or actually like getting caught in the rain…  
If you think a woman will “get it” (usually girls who like 
bars and rock music), then use this text on an unrespon-
sive girl. Often this will spark such a strong emotion in 
girls who are ignoring you that they’ll be compelled to re-
spond, allowing you to initiate the key-lock sequence.  
Pop Culture Scattershot:
The Bad Behavior Files

88
The Bad Behavior Files
This text references the notorious Kanye West meme that 
came out of his MTV Music Awards fiasco, in which he in-
terrupted Taylor Swift’s acceptance speech. Most likely 
you recognized the quote immediately, as would most 
women. When this “scandal” happened back in 2009, 
this text would have been extremely topical and funny. A 
woman would have immediately got the reference, and 
felt an emotion. 
Keep in mind: almost any woman would “get” the refer-
ence and, because of that, the amount of connection she 
feels would be less (hence why it’s called a “scattershot”). 
In the “sniper shot,” you make a more obscure reference 
so that a woman feels like “only you and her understand 
it” whereas with the scattershot, you simply throw out a 
well-known reference because it’s funny. 
Below is a case study that demonstrates how to transition a 
pop culture reference into a date. This case study happened 
back in the winter of 2010, when The New York Post had pub-
lished a transcript of Tiger Woods’ texts to his mistresses. Ev-
eryone in New York had read the texts and were familiar with 
them, so it was a safe bet that this girl (who lived in New York 
and loved gossip) had read them, too.
Everything in this text conversation plays on elements from 
the Tiger Woods transcript. Even though this girl was unre-
sponsive before, by referencing the Woods’ texts, she got to 
enjoy herself as she played a role. This led to a date—probably 

89
The Bad Behavior Files
because she had so much fun joking around on text.
This opening text comes directly from Woods, who text-
ed a girl “you are wrong I’m bone thugs in harmon” after 
his mistress wrote out a long explanation of how “sweet” 
he is (this, to me, seemed the funniest and most recogniz-
able part of the transcript, so that became my first “key” 
text).
Her response indicates that she’s “in” on the joke. She gets 
the text reference and is now playing along. Once a girl is 
playing along with a pop culture reference, keep it going 
for a few more texts (it strengthens the connection).
In the Woods’ transcript, he wrote “send me something 
very naughty/go to the bathroom and take it.” I use these 
texts to establish a sexual undertone. While I usually would 
NOT be this sexual with a girl I was trying to get on a date, 
since it’s under the guise of pop culture, my texts can be a 

90
The Bad Behavior Files
little edgier (to spark an emotion). 
Here I break out of the pop culture thread, and establish 
a connection (the turn of the key-lock sequence). I claim 
that her understanding of the Tiger Woods reference is a 
reason why we need “to make a lovechild.” This also be-
gins to handle logistics as I slowly introduce the idea of us 
hanging out together.
Her respond may have been sarcastic, but that doesn’t 
matter. Even if a woman seems sarcastic, it’s always best 
to “assume it’s on” and push forward.
I make another humorous pop culture reference (again, 
a scattershot that she will likely understand). I do this to 

91
The Bad Behavior Files
further spark her emotions before pushing for the meet 
up…
Again, her response seems a bit sarcastic—as if she’s not 
taking me seriously.
I go back to the Woods’ pop culture reference, as that 
seemed to be more of an “emotional hot button” with 
her. I again make a very sexual remark, but with the pop 
culture reference to deflate the awkwardness. This sparks 
her emotions without making her feel pressured or de-
graded.
I then follow that text up with yet another reference to Ti-
ger Woods. Tiger’s mistress wrote to him, “u are my first, 
last and only black guy! U should feel special”. I again say 
something very edgy to spark an emotion (which I know 
will help in getting her to agree to a date). I don’t recom-

92
The Bad Behavior Files
mend saying things this edgy and racially charged unless 
you really know what you’re doing. 
Here I purposely misinterpret her sarcastic response. She 
had probably meant that she “finds it hard to believe” 
that I’m going to be her first, last, and only white lover,” 
yet I pretend I thought she meant that she found it hard to 
believe that I was going to “ravish her.” Purposeful misin-
terpretation like this is an excellent technique for steering 
a text conversation in the right direction. 
Moreover, notice how I successfully transitioned from 
“role playing” the Tiger Woods texts to directly saying 
that I am going to “ravish” her. Pop culture can get wom-
en comfortable with the idea of sex, which puts you in a 
position to talk about sex openly and directly.
Even though this text is only 2 words, it says so much. 
“Haha” tells me that she’s enjoying herself and emotion-
ally sparked. “How?” tells me that she’s open to the idea 
of sex (or, at the very least, meeting up). Regardless, it’s 

93
The Bad Behavior Files
time to pull the trigger and handle logistics…
…which I do directly and shamelessly. I tell her to meet 
me for a date that night. I also am direct in describing the 
place, the time, and even what she should wear (although, 
it’s obvious I’m joking). 
This later led to a great date—all from a girl who wasn’t 
even responding to my texts!

94
A 
big lesson of learning “phone game” is anticipat-
ing—and overcoming—a woman’s excuse when 
trying to get her to meet up for a date. No mat-
ter how you met her—whether it was at a bar, 
coffee shop, or even through friends—girls will 
often flake…even when you had a great initial interaction and 
executed the proper steps in setting up a date.
First, understand that it might not be your fault. Some girls are 
just flaky. They flake on their friends, they flake on their fam-
ily, and so they won’t 
give so much as a sec-
ond thought about 
flaking on some guy 
they hardly know. So, 
as solid as your phone 
game may be, it will 
only work some of the time. Here are some case studies that 
dismantle common excuses women make.
The Bad Behavior Files
Overcoming Excuses: Changing Her Mind
“They flake on their friends, they 
flake on their family, and so they 
won’t give so much as a second 
thought about flaking on some guy 
they hardly know.”

95
The Bad Behavior Files
The “I’m Sick” Excuse:
The “I Have Work” Excuse:

96
The Bad Behavior Files
The “I’m Tired” Excuse:
The magic of these texts lies in your ability to stop the flaky ex-
cuses. In a lot of ways, girls’ excuses are like leaks in a ship. The 
more excuses you let in, the more the interaction will “sink.” 
But if you can manage to plug the leaks, you may be able to 
salvage the interaction.
Getting a girl to stop her excuses doesn’t mean you have to 
be a hard-ass or a crybaby. The secret to “flake busting” is just 
two simple elements: humor and persistence.  Keep on trying 
while also keeping it funny. In fact, think of it like this:
When she says “no,” you say, “yes”—but say yes with a 
smile.

97
The Bad Behavior Files
As long as you keep “bumping” whatever objection she makes 
with playful banter, and she keeps responding, you will even-
tually get her out. When using the examples above, girls often 
still try to make excuses, but as long as you just keep joking 
and countering their excuses, you win. Because think about it: 
There are only two things that can eventually happen: 
1.	
She’ll just completely ignore you, or 
2.	
She’ll meet up with you
And if you keep it playful and fun, why would she NOT want 
to meet up with you? As a side note: Playful persistence is not 
only the secret formula for busting through flaky excuses, but 
it’s also the secret formula for all aspects of dating. 

98
Y
ou’ve probably noticed that setting up the first date 
only involves texting. That’s because you want to 
keep it as simple as possible. You may have had a 
perfect first interaction with her, but if you slip up 
for just a few seconds on phone it’s game over. 
And sometimes it’s no fault of your own—girls can misinter-
pret or overreact to something you say on the phone. Even if 
she’s completely wrong, she’s still the one to decide if she’s 
going to meet you or not. As such, it’s always best to minimize 
your “margin of error.”
That’s why text is preferable because it gives you time to craft 
a response and it removes the “awkwardness” of talking on 
the phone. You should always use text unless you have a good 
reason to do otherwise. If a girl liked you initially, she’ll agree 
to meet up with you regardless if you call or text her. But, by 
calling her, you could say something stupid or catch her at a 
bad time, and then ruin your chances to meet up with her.
However, there are some scenarios that require you to actual-
ly make a phone call. For example, if a girl is completely ignor-
ing your texts, and you don’t feel like spending weeks crafting 
When to Call: 
The Final Resort 

99
When to Call
humorous “key” texts, give her a call. 
Another situation would be if a girl makes an excuse not to 
show up to a date. You could handle it via text (as explained 
in the preview section), but sometimes a call works better—
especially if you call as soon as you get her excuse. Since you 
know she’s close to her phone, there’s a better chance she’ll 
answer. 
When you get her on the phone, never yell or act upset. Make 
sure you’re smiling (even if you have to look at yourself in the 
mirror) as you call her—she’ll hear it in your voice. When she an-
swers, pretend like she’s been your girlfriend for ten years. Joke 
around about her excuse, and keep giving her reasons why she 
should meet up with you. Be as comical as you can here while 
remaining persistent. Apply the same mindset as you would if 
you were dealing with a “low interest” girl over text. Remem-
ber to:
1.	
Remain playful
2.	
Remain persistent  
When you call, only hang up if she either dismisses you (e.g., “I 
gotta go”) or she agrees to meet up with you. Otherwise, you 
should keep joking with her and trying to get her out. Let’s ex-
amine a case study transcript of applying this mindset. In this 
situation a girl had agreed to meet, but then wrote a text say-
ing, “I’m really tired…don’t think I’ll be able to meet tonight…” 
immediately the guy calls her...

100
When to Call
Sue! What is this talk about being too tired 
to meet up tonight?
Haha, no I really can’t tonight. I had such 
a long day at work. I just want to 
go home and pass out.
Ah, I hear that. I totally know what 
those long days at work can be like. But 
they recently invented this liquid that 
gets rid of that problem. It’s called 
Red Bull
Hahaha, I hate Red Bull! It’s 
gross!
Did I say Red Bull? I meant a 
double espresso caramel latte. 
It’s delicious!
I love caramel lattes! But seri-
ously, I’m so tired…can I take a 
rain check?
Rain check?! What? It’s not even 
raining! Besides, you have to try a 
caramel latte from this little un-
derground coffee place…only I can 
show it to you because it’s such a 
secret…
What? Starbucks?
Haha, actually I was going to say 
Dunkin Donuts, but thanks for ru-
ining the joke!
Hahaha, I never had a caramel 
latte from Dunkin Donuts. Are 
they even good?
Good? They’re life-changing! 
Look, I’m feeling pretty tired 
today, too. But let’s meet for 
an hour or so, grab a caramel 
latte, and see if we play nice 
with one another.
Alright, where’s this ‘un-
derground’ Dunkin Donuts you want to 
meet?

101
When to Call
The principle of calling girls adheres to the same principle dis-
cussed throughout this section: you are not going to convince 
a girl to meet you for a date with logic; you must appeal to 
her emotions. Really 
consider that principle. 
Most guys think they 
can logically set up a 
time to meet a woman 
and she’s obligated to 
show up. If a woman 
“breaks” that logic, the guy acts as if she’s breached some 
sort of social contract.
There are no “social contracts” in dating. There’s only emo-
tion. No matter what a girl said or did, if she’s not emotionally 
interested when it’s date time, then she’s not going show up. 
Therefore, you shouldn’t take anything seriously when you’re 
setting up a date, and you should always be cognizant of how 
you’re affecting her emotionally. As the old saying goes: if you 
can change her mood you can change her mind.
“... you are not going to con-
vince a girl to meet you for a 
date with logic; you must ap-
peal to her emotions.”

3
You are Sort of Dating Her 
O
nce a girl makes a decision to meet you in-per-
son, one-on-one, for date, you’re “sorta dating” 
her. She’s not your girlfriend, nor is she even a 
girl you’re officially “seeing,” but how you think 
of her should change. She’s no longer a girl that 
you’re chasing, trying to get out on a date. Instead, she’s 
moved one step closer to being a person in your life—hence, 
a girl “you’re sorta dating.”
As such, the way you communicate with her should change, 
also. This section will teach you the attractive and appropri-
ate way to use your phone during this “phase.” Regardless 
whether you’re looking for something casual or serious, the 
second phase...
First Date and Beyond
102

103
First Date and Beyond
principles remain the same. 
The most obvious difference during this phase is how much 
you add the “making connections” ingredient. When she was 
a girl you wanted to date, you relied more on the “sparking 
emotions” ingredient. You put more of an emphasis on get-
ting her feeling good than anything else. And, while you still 
want to spark her emotions, now you also want to get her to 
feel good about you, too. 
Therefore, you want to combine an equal amount of “spark-
ing emotions” and “making connections” during this phase. 
Moreover, the amount of “handling logistics” you’ll need to 
do decreases because it shouldn’t be as difficult to get her out 
again (assuming she enjoyed herself on the first date). This 
gives you more opportunity to banter with her, allowing you 
to develop a sense of rapport over the phone.
In this phase, you can also call girls. Since you’re no longer 
walking the “tightrope” 
where one wrong move 
can end everything, you 
can start using phone 
conversations to fur-
ther solidify the connec-
tion between you and 
a woman. Your options 
really open up after the 
first date. In fact, here’s how “the rules” change in this sec-
“Your options really 
open up after the first 
date.“

104
First Date and Beyond
ond phase:
1.	Text conversations that don’t end in plans to meet are 
fine now; however, don’t have more than 2 text con-
versations without proposing a second meet up 
2.	Send an equal mix of texts that spark emotions and 
create connections  
3.	Feel free to make plans to meet a few days in advance 
(there’s a much lower chance that she’s going to flake 
now)
These “revised rules” will make more sense as you read how 
to apply them in the various different situations you’ll encoun-
ter after the first date. Learning how to navigate this “transi-
tional” phase—between the first date and dating—you will 
come to a much better understanding of how phone game 
works.  

105
W
hen you arrive to your first date, you can al-
ready start using your phone to warm her 
up. Often you will get to the venue before 
her, leaving you wondering whether you 
should call her, text her, or just let her rec-
ognize you when she shows up. 
If you’ve ever been in this situation—especially with a girl you 
barely know—you’re probably aware that the opening min-
utes of a date can be awkward. Sometimes a girl doesn’t rec-
ognize you. Or, if she does, she might greet you as if you’re 
about to sit down for a job interview. You certainly don’t want 
to find yourself in either of these situations.
And that’s where using your phone comes in handy. If you ar-
rive to the venue before her (which you should), then you can 
set the tone for the evening. Probably you want the tone of 
your first date to be light, fun, playful, and flirty. You can set 
that tone by sending a “confirmation” text that sparks her 
emotions. Here are some examples: 
First Date and Beyond
Arriving to the Date: Set Yourself Up for Success   

106
First Date and Beyond
These case studies demonstrate how to set yourself up for 
an awesome date, before you even say hello. Sending quirky 
texts like this will make her feel comfortable with you because 
she’ll see you’re good humored and aren’t taking things too 
seriously. 
Also, it immediately creates material to riff on when she shows 
up. This eliminates the awkward small talk most people strug-
gle through during the first few minutes of a date. Rather than 
setting a boring tone like, “Did you find it okay?” or “Wow, it’s 

107
First Date and Beyond
chilly out!” you can immediately joke around with her, saying 
something like, “You’re like 14 seconds too late…the ice sculp-
ture just melted…I wish you’d seen it…it was marvelous.” 
Most women will laugh and play along. Sometimes it even 
confuses them, and they ask, “Wait, did you really bring an ice 
sculpture?” This is actually a great response because you can 
laugh, and say, “Haha…I’ll tell you over a drink!” This keeps 
her guessing and sends mixed signals—the perfect way to be-
gin an enjoyable first date!

108
A
fter the first date, a lot of guys misuse their phone 
by trying to seem “disinterested” or “non-needy.” 
Waiting too long to follow up after the first date 
is an amateur mistake. If you had an enjoyable 
first date, you should act like a normal person and 
continue the dialogue the following day.
Although, only you know how well the date went. If you had 
a blast, and really connected with her, you can be a bit more 
flirty and forward on text. If, however, the date was brief or 
she seemed a bit standoffish, you may want to restart the ini-
tial text sequence all over, beginning with a radar text.
In either case, after your first date, it’s okay to have longer 
text interactions. Now that you’ve met in person, she knows 
you’re for real and not some coward hiding behind his phone. 
You can send more texts, and you can send those texts over a 
Getting the Second Date: 
Keeping Her Interested and Invested
The Days After: How to Keep It Sizzling  

109
Getting the Second Date
series of days rather than just the day you want to meet her. 
In a lot of ways, this is when phone game begins because you 
now have a chance to have text conversations. For your pur-
poses, a “text conversation” is a series of two or more back-
and-fourth texts. Unlike a key-lock sequence, there’s no pres-
sure to handle logistics or push for a meet up when having 
text conversations. You should, however, keep the two other 
phone game ingredients in mind: spark her emotions and make 
connections.    
Don’t, therefore, start talking about things like the weather or 
some other boring topic just to keep a dialogue going. As you 
write out each text, ask yourself: does it spark an emotion or 
make a connection? If you honestly don’t feel it does, revise it. 
Here’s a case study of a post-first date text interaction that 
demonstrates the perfect balance of these two ingredients: 
When you text her the next day, reigniting the spark can 
be as easy as playfully referencing something that hap-
pened on your date. On this date, we’d played a game of 
pool where we bantered over who was going to win. My 
cocky text was appropriate in this scenario considering 

110
Getting the Second Date
the tone of the date.
She plays along and also makes a cocky joke about how 
good she looks. Her reference to “Father’s Day” shows 
she’s trying to also make a connection.
I playfully misinterpret her cocky remark and reference to 
Father’s Day as her saying she wants to “mother” my chil-
dren. Keep in mind, this “misinterpretation” doesn’t even 
really make sense, yet it sparks an emotion AND makes a 
connection. The ingredients of phone game are more im-
portant than being perfectly logical.

111
Getting the Second Date
She’s getting emotional…
I reference our second date while also continuing to spark 
her emotions and remind her of our connection.
After her text, I go silent. This was a solid text conversa-
tion and I don’t want it to drag on. I can now either follow 
up the next day or the day after and set up our next date 
easily. 
If you’re still having trouble thinking up good emotional and/
or connecting texts, you will learn more about how to “ban-
ter” in the upcoming sections. Or, if you want to send off a 
few texts right now, use the examples provided. Once you’ve 
had a few text conversations, be sure to set up a second date. 

112
T
here’s much less pressure to set up a second date. If 
a woman’s been responding to your texts, there’s a 
very good chance she’ll meet you for another date. 
So put less pressure on yourself when asking. You 
don’t need to craft hilarious texts to spark an emo-
tion. In fact, trying too hard to be funny could actually work 
against you when going for the second date! 
Making a connection is just as important as sparking an emo-
tion at this point. You want to “remind” her of what a good 
time she had on the first date just as much as you want to joke 
around and banter with her. Whenever you’re ready to pro-
pose the date, go for it! You can now set up dates a few days 
in advance.
In terms of timing, you could propose a second date during 
your first text conversation, or even after a few text conver-
sations. You’ll probably find though that the “sweet spot” for 
securing a seamless second date is after two text conversa-
tions. 
So, for example, if you went out with a girl on Monday, you 
Getting the Second Date
Setting Up the Second Date

113
Getting the Second Date
might have one text conversation on Tuesday and another on 
Thursday. During that second Thursday conversation, you’d 
set up a date for Sunday evening.
As a general rule, after you set up the second date, try to only 
have one more text conversation in between—if any at all. 
While the second date is much more “secure” you still don’t 
want to put the interaction at risk by having needless conver-
sations. There’s a slight possibility you might say something 
she’ll deem weird or creepy, and that could hurt your chances 
with her. 
An obvious exception to this rule would be if she texts you. In 
that case, it’s perfectly fine to have a text conversation with 
her, regardless whether you set up the second date. The case 
study below further demonstrates how to set up the second 
date:
Texting her the next day, I immediately reference the last 
joke that we shared (a group of crazy drunks outside a 
bar). This text both re-sparks the fun emotions while re-
establishing the connection we shared the night before.

114
Getting the Second Date
After our little banter, she goes silent. I don’t overreact or 
continue to send her texts. A text conversation happens 
over a series of days—not all at once—so this is no big 
deal.
(A few days later)
I resume by creating a connection, saying I want to hear 
her story. I then begin to add the “handle logistics” ingre-
dient and push for a meet up.

115
Getting the Second Date
I continue to strengthen our connection by saying “an-
other amazing Sunday,” which presupposes that our last 
date was amazing. I then say that “I have the best idea” 
but don’t elaborate on it, creating some anticipation (an 
“extra” ingredient you will learn about in an upcoming 
section).  
Getting the second date is fairly simple as long as you keep 
these fundamentals in mind. Just remember to balance emo-
tion and connection while proposing the second meet up soon 
after. If you have trouble bantering with women, you will learn 
more about that in the upcoming sections. First though, the 
next section is going to walk you through exactly how to fol-
low-up with a girl after sleeping with her for the first time. 

116
M
aybe it happened on the first date, second 
date, or even the first night you met her. Re-
gardless when it happened, you slept with 
her. This puts you in a very good position. Ev-
eryone knows that sleeping with a girl for the 
first time is hard, and everything after is usually much easier. 
Usually if you can figure out how to get her in bed, you can fig-
ure out how to keep her around as your girlfriend, a girl you’re 
“seeing,” or even as a “fuck buddy.” Although, you still want 
to apply proper phone game. This is especially true if you find 
yourself asking: How am I going to transition this into a rela-
tionship? 
Once you sleep with a girl, lots of thoughts are swirling through 
her head. Some of those thoughts are good, but some are 
not so good. She probably feels excited, satisfied, a bit guilty, 
somewhat insecure, and all the other feelings girls usually ex-
perience after sex. Most of all, she’s probably wondering how 
your behavior is going to change.
Once you have sex with a girl, she knows much of the “game” 
Getting the Second Date
Texting a Girl You Just Slept With 

117
Getting the Second Date
is over. Most guys act charming up until they have sex, then 
they transform into introverts who are no longer very inter-
ested after sex. If you have any girl friends, you’ve probably 
heard their woes about such guys.
And most likely the girl you just had sex with probably has had 
(or at least has heard about) a similar experience. Even if you 
are interested in her, and you are showing it, she might still 
act cold or closed-off from you. Past events—or even stories 
she’s heard about other guys—could make her suspicious of 
you, even if you did nothing to warrant that suspicion.
As such, whenever you sleep with a girl for the first time, you 
should expect some skepticism. To allay her fears, it’s very im-
portant you keep this rule in mind: 
Stay in contact with her the next day. 
Most guys try to “play it cool” and not contact a girl they slept 
with for a few days. This is completely wrong. She’s made a 
major investment in you, so you don’t need to keep “gaming” 
her. Instead, you need to show her that your feelings haven’t 
changed since sex. 
That’s why it’s crucial you make some time with her the next 
day. You may find it’s best to keep the next-day meet up short—
but sweet. A great way to do this is telling her that you have 
some stuff to do later, but you’d really like to grab dinner or 
coffee.

118
Getting the Second Date
This “short date” accomplishes a lot of things. It gives you a 
chance to enjoy her company—without sex. This is an excel-
lent way to build trust with her. Since you’re obviously not try-
ing to have sex after the date, she’ll see that you actually want 
to see her again, even if it’s not for sex. This is a key element 
when developing a relationship.
It’s not always that easy, however. Sometimes girls will ac-
tively avoid you the next day, not returning texts or calls. And 
when that happens, this is one case where it’s okay to come 
across a bit “needy.” Keep in mind: you already had sex with 
her. So there’s nothing “needy” about following up with a girl 
you’ve already slept with.
Unfortunately, a brutal truth of dating is this: if she won’t meet 
up with you the day after sex, she’s probably never going to 
meet up with you again. Therefore, if you want any sort of a 
relationship with this girl, it’s very important to get in contact 
with her the next day. Don’t try to “play it cool.” Unless she 
gives you a valid reason for not being able to talk to you the 
next day, do whatever you can to contact her and meet up 
with her.
Once she sees that you’re normal after sex, and that the charm 
you exerted to get her in the sack was genuine, getting into a 
relationship with her will be simple. Remember: relationships 
after sex are based on rapport and connection, not attraction 
and “game.”

119
O
ne of the best ways to pay a compliment to a 
woman is as a “couple.” This means that you say 
something nice about you and her, as a couple. 
This form of compliment is attractive because 
it’s both cocky and kind—a great combination. 
You’re telling her that she’s awesome, but you’re also (indi-
rectly) reaffirming your own awesomeness. Talk about a win-
win situation!
Moreover, giving a “couple compliment” establishes a sense 
of connection and “us-ness” between you and a girl. She’ll feel 
more comfortable around you as well as flattered. When done 
at the right time, these sorts of compliments electrify the mo-
ment and create a great dynamic. Here are some examples:
Bantering with Her:
The Art of Bullshitting
How to Compliment in an Attractive Way

120
Bantering with Her
Notice how these compliments balance flattery and cockiness. 
If you just said, “I’m so good looking, my kids are going to look 
like little Zoolanders!” then you’d sound like an arrogant ass-
hole. If, however, you said, “You’re so good looking, your kids 
are going to look like models!” then you’d sound like an ass-
kisser. But, by combining the two compliments into one, and 
talking about your “future children,” you create an entirely 
new compliment that’s attractive.
While you don’t need to give a compliment as a couple every 
time you want to say something nice, keep it in mind. By re-
phrasing some of your compliments as “couple compliments” 
you’ll find your flattery is more attractive and creates more of 
a shared connection. Here’s a case study that demonstrates 

121
Bantering with Her
this concept in a unique way.   
Here I jokingly bring up how this girl is a “playerette” be-
cause whenever we go out she gets so much male atten-
tion. Even though this is usually considered a “positive” 
thing, I tease her about it and say it’s why we can never 
“seriously date.”  
Her three-text reply indicates that she was affected by my 
tease. While it seemed like just “good fun,” underneath 
the joking and teasing she was getting upset. To remedy 
this, I reach for a compliment…

122
Bantering with Her
Rather than say she’s “perfect” or “perfect for me,” I turn 
it into a playful compliment, saying “we’d be too perfect 
for one another.” I then further add to the humor by add-
ing that we’d “ruin ourselves” for every other person we’d 
ever date. The “couple compliment” here is intended to 
reassure her that we would be good together after all.
She obviously responds positively to this compliment, 
questioning why we’d ever break up.

123
Bantering with Her
I then make a joke about her mothering my future chil-
dren…which we would name after rappers. This conversa-
tion goes on to demonstrate how to keep bantering with 
a woman that you’re sorta dating. Notice the emotional 
humor mixed with the connection…

124
A
fter the first date, it can sometimes help to get a 
woman chasing you. When a woman is chasing 
you, she’s obviously attracted. But getting her to 
chase isn’t so simple. It may almost seem like a 
paradox: as a man it’s your job to make the first 
move on women, so how then can you turn it around and get 
them to chase you.
The answer is simple: get her to invest in you. 
Examples of “investment” are any time a woman asks you 
a question, gets physical with you (kissing and beyond), or 
spends money on you. Even the time a woman spends with 
you is an investment. 
When it comes to phone game, a few simple texts can be all 
you need to get a woman investing. You do this by baiting her 
to ask you questions. If a woman’s asking you questions, she’s 
beginning to chase you. Even if she doesn’t consciously recog-
nize it, unconsciously she’ll rationalize that since she’s chasing 
you, she must like you. (If it sounds like a mind-trick, that’s be-
cause it is.) 
Bantering with Her
How to Create Anticipation 

125
Bantering with Her
Speaking in statements is one way to do this, but another way 
is through “teasers.” A “teaser” is simply something you say 
that makes a woman want to know more. So, when you text a 
woman, “I’ll tell you later,” you’ve baited her to ask you ques-
tions. She’ll keep reminding you and begging, “Tell me!” That’s 
investment! 
Some other teasers for investment are:
Now none of those statements even have to be true, nor do 
you ever have to explain them. Often it’s actually better if you 
don’t. The purpose of the “teasers” is to get a woman invest-
ing. If she’s asking or bugging you, she’s investing!
The best teasers, however, will be totally unique to the woman 
you’re interacting with. Say, for example, you’re texting a girl 
who wants to start a fashion blog. You might say, “Oh, I actu-

126
Bantering with Her
ally just thought of an awesome name for your blog.” When 
she asks what it is, you just say, “Hmm…I’ll tell you later.” 
Teasers like that are even more potent because it has such 
emotional relevance to the woman.
Finally, make sure you don’t overuse teasers. You only need 
one—maybe two, tops—teasers to get an investment from 
a woman. If you use any more than two teasers, it comes off 
fake and try-hard. Here’s a case study that demonstrates an 
appropriate use of a teaser:

127
W
omen love to laugh, but they don’t want a 
clown or even an entertainer. Even the fun-
niest standup comedy routines can fail mis-
erably over the phone. Sometimes even if 
a woman is cracking-up laughing, she’s un-
consciously losing respect and attraction for the same man 
who made her laugh.
Therefore, it’s crucial that you always remember the golden 
rule of attractive humor:
The subtext is more important than the joke.
That means the subtext of the joke—or what the joke im-
plies—is more important than how funny it is. This will guide 
all of your humor when using the phone. Take, as an example, 
these two jokes:
Joke A: What’s the difference between a Cadillac and a 
dead baby? I don’t have a Cadillac in my garage.
Joke B: I was going to wear a button down shirt out to-
Bantering with Her
How to be Funny

128
Bantering with Her
night, but I decided not to because I don’t want you star-
ing at my cleavage all night.
Regardless if you find these jokes funny or not, there are two 
very different subtexts in each joke. The subtext of joke A is 
that you find dead babies funny. The subtext of joke B is that 
you understand how men and women interact. In one joke, 
you show your apathy and insensitiveness, whereas in the 
other joke you demonstrate that you understand gender rela-
tions and social subtleties.  
Most guys find dead baby jokes funny because it’s “cool” to 
be apathetic and insensitive around other guys—that’s the es-
sence of “being tough.” Women don’t find such qualities en-
dearing, however. Most women find insensitive men creepy 
and weird. (Hence why if you text a woman a dead baby joke, 
it’ll usually make her think you’re disgusting…and possibly 
alert the police.)
Keep subtext in mind whenever you’re using humor over text 
or the phone. Indeed, subtext is the most important aspect 
of humor—it’s what women mean when they say they love 
a man who can make them laugh. They’re really saying they 
love a man who can make them laugh using the appropriate 
subtexts.
This is what separates the unattractive clown from the attrac-
tive funny guy. Below is a case study and explanation of hu-
mor and subtext:

129
Bantering with Her
I turn her “bikini” text around. This girl was probably ex-
pecting me to beg for a picture or to react like a cartoon 
character saying something like, “HOT!” Rather than act 
predictable, I use the opportunity for humor—and humor 
with a flirty subtext. 
She plays along, accepting the subtext. By taking on the 
role of “the guy,” we’ve established a humorous and flirty 
subtext. This is the essence of attractive humor.
I play the joke to its conclusion, accusing her of “only think-
ing about cleavage” and saying “I have feelings too.” This 

130
Bantering with Her
not only gets her laughing, it also demonstrates to her that 
I “understand” ogling women is unattractive. Making it 
into a joke shows her that I “get it,” and understand look-
ing at people like slabs of meat is creepy. Attunement to 
these sorts of “social cues” is the definition of charisma. 

131
N
ow that you’ve had your first date, you have some 
more “wiggle room” when it comes to calling. In 
the first phase of phone game, you really don’t 
want to put the date at risk by making a phone 
call. Later though, in this second phase, you’re not 
walking the tightrope you were before the date. Most likely, 
a woman will answer your call. Moreover, she’ll probably be 
happy to hear from you.
Therefore, you can call women after the first date if you’d like. 
If, however, you prefer only texting women, that is perfectly 
fine, too. Indeed, until you’re actually in a relationship with a 
girl, you can use text for all your phone game. But you may 
be the type of guy who enjoys talking on the phone. If so, just 
keep some simple guidelines in mind when you’re calling girls 
that you’re “sorta dating.”
First, don’t immediately call her after the date. Begin by send-
ing her a text the next day. If you get a decent response (a 
text that conveys emotion or interest), then you can rest as-
sured that she enjoyed herself on the date. Once you get this 
“confirmation,” feel free to call her whenever—even later 
that evening.
Calling to Connect: 
Using the Phone to have a Conversation

132
Calling to Connect
When you do call, you may want to have a story in mind. I 
know it might sound a bit weird, but after exchanging hellos, 
a story or social commentary can help carry the conversation 
for the first minute or so. It could be as simple as something 
that happened to you that day or something interesting from 
the news. A quick and punchy anecdote usually greases the 
wheels for a good conversation. Here’s a case study transcript:
“Oh my God—I just had to call you! I just 
had the creepiest encounter with this crazy 
homeless guy! Get this…” 
(Go into brief story about a funny thing that happened 
that day involving a crazy homeless guy)
When you make a call, often it also helps if you’re “distract-
ed.” In other words, try calling when you’re out doing things. 
It may seem counter-intuitive, but the less focused you are on 
the call the better. Instead of sitting in front of the phone, 
fretting over the outcome, calling while you’re out keeps the 
conversation light, spontaneous, and fun.
Finally, if you get her voicemail, do not take it as an opportu-
nity to deliver a soliloquy. If you project a weird vibe on the 
voicemail, not only will she not call you back, she might even 
play your voicemail for the enjoyment of her friends. Avoid 
the situation altogether and keep it simple. Just deliver the 
facts: a hello, your name, and an invitation to return your call.

4
You’re Dating Her 
I
f you’ve gone on a few dates with a woman, and you feel 
like you’re starting to really get to know her, you’re dating 
her. Even if you haven’t changed your Facebook status, 
and even if you’ve never discussed it with her, for all you’re 
concerned, she’s become more than just “some girl.” 
Traditionally, most people would say she’s your “girlfriend.” 
Though, these days it’s socially acceptable to have relation-
ships with a few girls so long as you don’t lie to them. But, 
regardless if she’s your girlfriend or just a girl you like spend-
ing time with, the way you text her during this phase doesn’t 
change. 
third phase...
Creating a Relationship 
133

134
Creating a Relationship
The main phone game ingredient now becomes making con-
nections. In this phase, however, you can start adding those 
“toppings” alluded to in the introduction. At this point, you’ve 
made several “pizzas” with this girl, which means you’ve run 
standard phone game a number of times. You’ve sparked her 
emotions. You made connections. You handled logistics. That’s 
how you got to this point in your relationship.
By now traditional “pizza” may be getting…a bit boring. In 
this section, you’ll learn how to sprinkle on more humor, ex-
tend your bantering, and even how to get her sexually aroused 
with “sexting.” You’ll learn how to get her to send you NSFW 
(“not safe for work”) pictures while also getting her to feel 
genuinely special. 
Even though a relationship is created during moments you 
spend together, proper phone game can solidify and electri-
fy those moments. Moreover, these “extra ingredients” re-
inforce the core concepts of sparking emotions, making con-
nections, and handling logistics (so keep reading even if you’re 
not currently dating any women). 
Learning to create a relationship will put you on the road to 
communication mastery. There is no better way to learn about 
women, and how to communicate with them, than by doing it 
on a day-to-day basis with someone you have feelings for.   

135
I
n the two other phases, calling was relegated to the end of 
the section. This placement was intentional. When you’re 
trying to get a girl out on a date, calling often hurts your 
chances. Later, when you’re sorta dating her, calling her 
is acceptable but since texting is simpler it’s still the pre-
ferred medium.
In a relationship, however, calling becomes crucial. Often just 
texting will not cut it 
with a girl you’re in a re-
lationship with. In fact, 
often girls will call you—
and you shouldn’t avoid 
the calls and defer to 
text. As the relationship 
becomes more personal 
and intimate, so does the way you communicate.
As such, get excited to have phone conversations with your 
girl. As a guy, you probably don’t particularly enjoy spending 
45 minutes yapping on the phone—but your girl does. Part of 
being in a relationship is give-and-take. If you do things that 
Creating a Relationship
Calling Because You Care 
“As the relationship becomes 
more personal and intimate, 
so does the way you communi-
cate.”

136
Creating a Relationship
make her happy, she’ll return the favor—often in very enjoy-
able ways.
In terms of advice, there’s no structure to navigating phone 
conversations at this point. You should talk on the phone ex-
actly as if you were talking to her on a dinner date. If you’ve 
gotten this far in the relationship, you obviously know how to 
talk to her.
Still, the principles in this section can improve your phone con-
versations, even though they’re designed for text. So, with 
that in mind, read on.

137
I
n any relationship, it’s important to always keep things fun. 
There’s an old marriage proverb that states, “Treat your 
wife as if she were your girlfriend.” For you, treat the girl 
you’re dating as if she were a girl you were seducing. Too 
many guys let their relationships go stale because they let 
the fun, flirting, and playfulness die out. 
Don’t neglect phone game when you’re in a relationship with 
a woman! Keep things fun and exciting for her by following 
the techniques below...
Keeping It Fun: 
Maintain the Spark of Your Relationship

138
W
hen you’re looking to be playful and flirty, 
you don’t have to look far—especially on 
text. Many of the texts girls will send you 
are chock full of “cues” that let you set a 
flirtatious context. But you have to be on 
the look out.
Anytime you’re “shifting gears” and transitioning into more 
flirty dialogue, it’s always best to make it seem as if it were her 
idea. A classic strategy for this is misinterpretation—where you 
“misinterpret” something a girl says as coming onto to you or 
as flirty. Likewise, you can accomplish the same effect over 
text using typos, mistakes, and even phone malfunctions.   
Because texting is so informal, it lends itself to sloppiness. 
Words get misspelled, grammar gets garbled, and meaning 
becomes muddled…which creates great humor and flirting 
opportunities. You can use those typos and mistakes to tease 
a woman and, more importantly, transition into a flirty or sex-
ual topic. 
A simple example would be something like:
Keeping It Fun
Use Typos as Comedy Cues

139
Keeping It Fun
While this technique is extremely powerful, it can also be easi-
ly misapplied. Teasing her about mistakes isn’t meant to come 
off mean or condescending. Moreover, don’t start acting like 
a surly twelve year old who adds, “That’s what she said!” after 
every comment.
In fact, sometimes the best misinterpretations compliment a 
woman. If you look closely, even the most trivial typo can be-
come an inside joke. As you know, inside jokes further solidify 
your connection. The case study below exemplifies how a very 
simple typo can bring two people closer: 

140
Keeping It Fun
Don’t just limit your misinterpretations to typos either. You 
can use pocket dials, texts sent to the wrong person, and even 
phone malfunctions to create humor. Here’s a case study that 

141
Keeping It Fun
demonstrates that:

142
Keeping It Fun

143
H
aving a style means using interesting words and 
offbeat punctuation. You want to put a fingerprint 
on every text you send. A woman should be able 
to know it’s a text from you just by reading it.
To think of this, just think of the cartoon character Homer 
Simpson. If you received two texts, one that read, “Hey what’s 
up!” and one that read “Doh!” would you be able to tell which 
text came from Homer? If you’ve ever watched an episode of 
the Simpsons, you’d certainly know that Homer would write 
“Doh!”—it’s his trademark line!  
Now you don’t need to act like a cartoon character, or even 
have trademark lines, but you should have an idiosyncratic 
way of communicating that’s congruent to your personality. 
It can be as a simple as what you call your girl. For example, 
some examples:
•	
“Missing you lady!”
•	
“Thinking of you love…”
•	
“What you up to bb?”
Keeping It Fun
Have a “Style”

144
Keeping It Fun
This technique works even better if you have a nickname for 
her. By using your nickname, you breath life into every text 
you send. Rather than just looking at a phone screen with a 
generic message, a woman gets a sense of you every time she 
reads your texts. This strengthens your connection, which 
builds your relationship. 
Some other quick examples are:
•	Rather than write “Haha” or “lol” you write “Hardy-
harharhar”
•	Try sometimes talking in a character, like a caveman, 
“Me want to see Annie tonite”
•	Creatively spell words
•	Even have a “trademark” way of saying hello, like 
“Holler!” 
 
If you need further clarification of this concept (or just want 
to see a great application of it), check out a few episodes of 
the sitcom How I Met Your Mother. The character Barney Stin-
son has a whole lexicon of trademark phrases he says. A text 
that read “Suit up!” or “Leg-end-ary!” could only have come 
from Barney. 

145
W
hen people get into relationships, they of-
ten have a tendency to fall into patterns. At 
first this feels good. The comfort of routine 
is reassuring. But, fall into a pattern for too 
long, and the relationship will become pred-
icable and emotionless.
It’s your job to keep things passionate. If you want an exciting 
relationship with great sex and a loyal partner, then you have 
to work at it. Do not leave it up to your girl to spice things up. If 
she does, great; but don’t count on it.
That’s why it’s your job to recognize patterns, and break them. 
If, for example, you’re texting a woman “sweet dreams” ev-
ery night before she goes to sleep, stop doing that for a few 
nights. Instead you should text her at different times of the 
day, like after breakfast or when she finishes work. Remem-
ber:
Don’t fall into complacency—that is the cancer of rela-
tionships!
Keeping It Fun
Avoiding Patterns

146
Keeping It Fun
Also, have fun mixing up the patterns. You’re essentially al-
ways “remixing” your relationship to keep it fresh. To do this, 
there’s not any specific text or technique other than remain-
ing aware of the “cancerous pattern.” If you catch yourself 
falling into a pattern, simply do something unexpected.
Maybe it’s giving a genuine compliment. Maybe it’s sparking 
some playful banter, beginning by teasing her about some-
thing. Maybe it’s just going silent when she expects a response. 
But, ultimately, it’s your job to keep things a bit unpredictable 
so that she enjoys the gift of feeling emotional and invested in 
your relationship. 
You can even notice patterns on a “micro” level, as patterns 
sometimes form in single text conversations. The case study 
below demonstrates this. Notice how as soon as a “pattern” 
begins and the girl starts getting “comfortable” with the 
thread of “being ambitious” I quickly turn it around, effective-
ly breaking the conversational pattern.

147
Keeping It Fun

148
Keeping It Fun

149
Keeping It Fun
No matter when you notice a pattern, try and break it. It may 
be an ongoing thread in a conversation or an ongoing theme 
over several conversations. You don’t have to abandon the 
pattern altogether, but you should temporarily break it just to 
reignite her emotions and keep things unpredictable. 

150
S
exting—the texting equivalent of dirty talk, phone 
sex, or cybering—is something that interests some 
guys. Rest assured: if sexting isn’t your thing, you 
won’t do any harm to your relationship by having 
weak sexting skills. If, however, you’re into sexting, 
or you’re dating a girl who’s into sexting (which is more com-
mon than you’d think), then it can’t hurt to know a thing or 
two about sexting.
The first and most important rule of sexting states:
Sexting is more about connection than it is about spark-
ing emotions or saying sexual things. 
This may sound strange—especially considering that sex is 
very emotional. But keep in mind: sexting isn’t sex. It’s based 
on sex, but it’s more about the feelings of connection that 
Keeping It Sexual: 
How to Heat Things Up Over the Phone
How to Begin Sexting 

151
Keeping It Sexual
come with sex. That’s probably why so many women enjoy 
sexting: it makes them feel more comfortable with their man.
As such, you should make sure your sexts emphasize you and 
her. It’s not just about you. It’s not just about her. It’s about 
the two of you together, exploring your sexual relationship 
over text. And like a good sexual relationship, sexting should 
happen organically. You shouldn’t force it or even suggest it. 
In fact, the second rule of sexting dictates:
Let sexting unfold naturally—never directly reference it.
Obviously this means you should never ask something like, 
“Feel like sexting?” Instead, an “organic” transition into sex-
ting happens through word association. 
Notice how this text exchange begins completely nonsex-
ual. In fact, it’s a textbook example of a “key” text. 

152
Keeping It Sexual
The bantering back and forth gets her in a flirty mood.
Here she makes a very subtle sexual reference. This girl was 
very sexually open and really enjoyed dirty talk. When she 
said “do something magical to me,” I assume it’s a sexual 
innuendo.  
We continue the bantering, mixing the “coffee joke” with 
sexual talk. This is the essence of word association: one 
topic (coffee) symbolizes another topic (sex).

153
Keeping It Sexual
Here I further mix the word play and use a very explicit 
sexual word (“pussy”). I’ve now successfully transitioned 
into a sexting conversation.
She confirms her interest in the topic by saying it’s “kinda 
hot.” We then went on and exchanged several dirty and 
sexual texts (which are omitted from this case study for 
privacy reasons). 

154
B
ringing up a threesome via text may sound ridicu-
lous. However, if done right, it can actually improve 
your chances of getting one. That’s because bring-
ing up the subject via text introduces a woman the 
idea without putting a lot of pressure on her. It gives 
her a chance to consider it, without making it seem like you’re 
forcing the idea down her throat.
And, as any guy who has enjoyed a threesome will tell you, 
the way to get a girl to say yes is by making it sound fun for 
her. If you just make having a threesome seem like a fun thing 
that you want to do, she’ll only say yes if she’s absolutely in-
fatuated with you. If, on the other hand, you present the idea 
of a threesome as an experience that she’ll enjoy, it becomes 
much more attractive to her.
Now, obviously, only try this with girls who are very open 
about their sexuality. If she’s sexually adventurous, try bring-
ing threesomes up over text. If, however, she’s shy and con-
servative, then avoid bring up threesomes (and definitely not 
on text!). Pushing a girl who isn’t on board with the idea will 
only turn her off and weaken the connection you have.
Keeping It Sexual
Bringing Up Threesomes 

155
Keeping It Sexual
But with sexually open girls, threesomes can actually improve 
your connection. In fact, making connections is the ingredient 
you need to apply liberally to make a threesome work. Con-
stantly remind her how fun it will be for you, how it’ll bring you 
closer as a couple, and how you’re going to enjoy another girl 
together. Connect over your adventurousness, sexual open-
ness, and “joint seductive power.” 
You can even sprinkle some humorous banter on top, joking 
that you’re going to be the new Batman and Robin of seduc-
ing women. Here’s a case study that demonstrates how this is 
done:

156
Keeping It Sexual

157
Keeping It Sexual
In the case study above, it’s obvious this girl is very sexual-
ly open. Her comment about “having a fun night” with an-
other girl shows that she’s not jealous or envious of other 
girls. Moreover, her response to the initial text shows that 
she’s not even slightly offended or put off by the idea of a 
threesome. In fact, the only “problem” is that she’s out of 
town. 
When you apply this technique, you should know after the first 
text whether or not a woman is game for a threesome. Even 
if she seems like she is, remember that text is only the first 
stage of getting a threesome. You still have to discuss it with 
her in person and then find and seduce another girl. Still, using 
text to bring up the topic is a great first step.  

158
G
etting a girl to send you naked pictures can be fun, 
but also risky. If you ask a girl you don’t know very 
well to send you some naked pictures, you could 
turn her off so much that you’ll never get to see 
her naked in real life (where it counts). That’s why 
this section comes so late in the book.
Now, you probably know a guy who has a collection of na-
ked pictures from women he just met. That, however, is the 
exception—not the rule. You will certainly meet some sexu-
ally open women, who enjoy sending naked pictures—maybe 
even more than you enjoy receiving them! And, if you meet a 
girl like this, go for it! 
Beware though: identifying these types of girls is difficult. And, 
since the only way to “identify them” is by asking her to send 
naked photos, you’re really going “all in.” Should she not end 
up being a girl who likes sending naked pics, you may disgust 
her. This very well may prevent you from ever seeing her—
which is the entire purpose of phone game!
Even when you ask a woman you’re in relationship with for 
Keeping It Sexual
Getting Her to Send Naked Pictures

159
Keeping It Sexual
dirty pics, there’s still a chance you could damage the connec-
tion she feels with you. Many women find these requests of-
fensive. Not only that, they may think you want the pictures 
for future blackmail purposes. Surely every girl has heard a 
horror story about a friend of hers who sent some naked pho-
tos and had it come back to haunt them.
So, again, proceed with caution. When bringing up the subject 
of naked pictures, you may want to start small. For example, if 
she has a sexy tattoo or pair of lingerie you love seeing her in, 
ask her to send a picture of that first. For example:
If you get a favorable response (like a picture), then up the 
ante:

160
Keeping It Sexual
Often it’s good to be vague about her sending you a naked 
picture. By saying “send me a not work appropriate pic,” you 
still have some deniability. If she gets offended or upset, you 
can pretend you didn’t mean anything vulgar. If, on the other 
hand, she complies with this request, you can get more ex-
plicit and specific about the types of pictures you want her to 
send. 
Again, receiving naked pictures can be fun—especially as a 
way to entertain yourself when you’re trying to get through a 
boring day at work. However, don’t lose sight of the ultimate 
goal of phone game: having great face-to-face interactions. 
Therefore, if you really want some naked pictures, ease into 
the request. Don’t simple text, “SEND NAKED PIX PLS” unless 
you seriously want to jeopardize your future relationship with 
a woman!

161
A
n attractive compliment isn’t just a string of flat-
tering words. Just similar to humor in that a sub-
text always underscores your compliments. You 
may feel like telling a woman she’s the most beau-
tiful girl you’ve ever seen, but there’s a more at-
tractive way to phrase that compliment than just blurting out 
how you feel—especially over the phone.
How you phrase your compliment communicates more than 
just how you feel. It also implies how you view yourself, wom-
en, relationships, etc. You may have just gotten into a relation-
ship with your “dream girl,” and everything may seem per-
fect, but if you proclaim that she’s the most beautiful girl in 
the world and you’d do anything for her, it could damage your 
relationship.
Compliments sometimes work against you because they can 
Keeping It Real: 
How to Bring Your Relationship to Life
Genuine Compliments 

162
Keeping It Real
make you appear lame or pathetic. She may very well be the 
most beautiful girl you’ve ever dated, but telling her that is 
like going to buy a house and saying to the broker, “This is the 
only house I ever want to live in. I will pay anything for it.” In 
both situations, you’ve admitted you are powerless. 
If you can’t live without someone or something, you’re pa-
thetic. It means you have no life outside that person or thing. 
The chase is over. You’ve shown your hand, and now you have 
to take whatever you can get. And it all happened because of 
how you phrased what you said. If you’d just been a bit more 
cognizant of what you were saying, you could have retained 
your power while showing interest.  
Since it’s your words that do the talking, then, when compli-
menting a woman, be careful with words and phrases like:
•	
Beautiful
•	
Perfect 
•	
Incredible
•	
Best ever
•	
Can’t live without you
Unless you’ve been in a relationship with a woman for a very, 
very long time, avoid telling her how beautiful, perfect, or in-
credible she is. Don’t say she’s the best and especially don’t 
tell her that you can’t live without her. Try to use more playful 
words when complimenting a woman, such as:
•	
Cute
•	
Awesome

163
Keeping It Real
•	
Badass
•	
Adorable
•	
Hotty 
Words like this convey fun. Most women prefer hearing that 
they’re “cute” rather than “beautiful” because it’s less formal 
and awkward. Telling a woman she’s beautiful may be appro-
priate after you’ve been dating her for a while, but say it to a 
girl you’re still flirting with and you’re going to come off weird 
and awkward. This isn’t a movie. This isn’t the 1800’s. Don’t 
use formal words.  
Be genuine with your compliments, but also remain aware of 
the subtext of what you’re saying. The case study below dem-
onstrates the appropriate way to compliment a woman you’re 
dating:
Inside joke: this girl liked to complain about my bed. It be-
came a fun bantering topic between us, as I’d often joke 
about the “awesomeness” of my bed while she’d com-
plain about it. I bring up this joke as a way to compliment 
her—mixing fun and genuineness. 

164
Keeping It Real
Her saying she “kinda misses it too” is actually a compli-
ment. She usually complains about how much she hates 
it.
I now move into a more “sexualized” subtext: us cuddling 
after sex. (Inside joke: this girl hated cuddling, so I nick-
named her the “non-cuddler”)
I keep the sexual subtext boiling, saying I miss “how she 
looks in my tshirts.”
The genuine and attractive compliments turn her on—
much better than simply “flattering her” with sweet 
words.

165
T
he final reminder of phone game is to always “pull 
the trigger” and handle logistics. Just as you can’t 
let the passion die, you also can’t stop pushing for 
the meet up and going on dates. A common pitfall 
of learning great phone game is an overreliance on 
phone game.
Indeed, this book has come full circle. You fully understand 
how to use your phone in any attractive. Yet, you must al-
ways remember that the 
only reason you learned 
phone game was to im-
prove your face-to-face 
interactions.
Only when a girl is actual-
ly in front of you can you 
progress your relationship. Even if you’re texting your wife, 
you should always remember to handle logistics and push for 
in-person dates, activities, and meet ups. The phone can make 
you seem more attractive, but it’s only a bridge to escalating 
your interactions. If you don’t actually escalate those interac-
Keeping It Real
Finally, Don’t Forget to Keep Handling Logistics! 
“Yet, you must always remember 
that the only reason you learned 
phone game was to improve your 
face-to-face interactions.”

166
Keeping It Real
tions—even long-term relationships—then you’re simply a 
guy pushing buttons. That applies both figuratively and liter-
ally.
Thus, this section of phone game concludes with the same ca-
veat you learned throughout this book: the meet up is all that 
matters. Don’t glorify phone game anymore than it needs to 
be glorified. It’s just a means to an end…and a “happy end-
ing” at that!

5
Common Questions & Mistakes
Do I have to respond every time a woman calls or texts 
me? When is it best NOT to respond to a text or pick 
up a woman’s call?
Y
ou absolutely do NOT have to respond to every call or 
text from a woman. This is especially true when a wom-
an does something that gets you upset or angry. For ex-
ample, if you had plans with a woman and she texted you 15 
minutes before you were supposed to meet and said, “Not 
gonna make it” then you are not obligated to text her back. If 
you want to try an anti-flaking technique, that’s fine—but you 
appendix...
“But What About...”
167

168
“But What About...”
don’t owe any response to bad behavior.
Though, be aware of the pitfalls of not responding—especial-
ly when you don’t know a girl well. Often guys think they’re 
being crafty by not responding to women’s texts. They usu-
ally believe that, by not responding, they’re making a woman 
want them more. They’re not. Probably the biggest factor in 
early-stage relationships is availability. That means being avail-
able to text, talk, and meet up is crucial with a girl you just met.
If you ignore women early on or purposely take a long time to 
respond, they may misinterpret that as disinterest or immatu-
rity. And if she’s even somewhat cute, you can be sure there 
are plenty of other guys who are also texting and calling her. 
Most likely, she’ll just defer to a guy who’s sparking her emo-
tions and making connections rather than a guy who’s pre-
tending to act coy by not responding.
While you don’t need to respond the instant you get a text from 
a woman, you should respond within a reasonable amount of 
time. If you’re uncertain as to what’s a reasonable amount of 
time, apply the “friend barometer,” which states:
If one of your best friends texted you, how long would 
you wait to respond?
Likely you’d respond within a few hours (at the very latest). 
Do the same with women you’re trying to get dates with. Lat-
er on, however, you don’t need to worry about responding as 

169
“But What About...”
quickly. If you’ve established a good connection with a wom-
an, then it’s no longer a matter of availability. She knows you 
like her, and she likes you. If you don’t respond to her text, 
she won’t think that you lost interest nor will she start texting 
other guys.
If you do this too much, however, she will think you lost inter-
est and she may even start texting other guys. Therefore, be 
courteous when you respond to a woman. When you’re in a 
relationship with a woman, not responding once or twice can 
be a good pattern breaker; not responding more than that can 
be a good relationship ender. So, to sum it up:
•	Bad behavior requires no response
•	Girls you just met require a fast response (remember: 
availability) 
•	Girls you know well require you use your discretion (but 
don’t act rude)
Should I use correct grammar, punctuation, and spell-
ing?
W
hile it’s recommend you do, it’s not necessary—and 
in some situations it’s actually better that you don’t. 
Though, whether you use proper punctuation or 

170
“But What About...”
not, it should be a conscious choice and not something you 
just do out of habit or laziness. Consider the vibe you want to 
give off: 
•	Do you want to come off educated and careful, or 
•	Do you want to come off playful and whimsical? 
You can also use punctuation (or lack there of) for effect. As you 
already read in the examples, sometimes texts should be sent 
with intentional typos and grammatical mistakes. Sometimes 
you want to appear rushed, careless, or playful (as when a girl 
asks “who is this?”). In those instances a formal response—
with perfect grammar and spelling—can make you seem stilt-
ed or that you care too much. 
So the choice is really yours. But keep the pros and cons of 
punctuation in mind when you have your phone in hand. 
What about smiley faces and emoticons? 
I
t’s all about moderation. Smiley faces and emoticons make 
you seem gay if used too much, but when used sparingly, 
add fun and playfulness to your texts. Of course, if you nev-
er used a smiley face or emoticon, you’d be fine. And this is es-
pecially true if it’s incongruent with your personality or if you 
just feel emasculated typing them out.

171
“But What About...”
In addition to using them sparingly, you should also try to add 
some originality to your smiley faces and emoticons. Simply 
using a standard face like :-) is boring (which defeats the pur-
pose of using them in the first place). Adding a symbol or char-
acter that makes your faces look funnier can be very helpful—
even something as simple as (:-]
In the end, don’t overthink it. If you feel like adding a smiley 
face or emoticon will add a little flavor or playfulness to your 
text, go for it. Just don’t have more than one per text. Also, 
don’t send more than two in an entire text conversation (un-
less it’s a girl you’re in a relationship with). 
What about text-speak abbreviations like LOL and 
WTF?
A
bbreviations, like smiley faces and emoticons, are fine 
in moderation. When used sparingly, they convey a 
playful, whimsical attitude (which is often the attitude 
you want on text). But like smiley faces and emoticons, if used 
too much, they can make you seem immature—and even a 
little gay. 
The “text-speak” language of LOLs and WTFs is usually asso-
ciated with adolescents. If you read a text riddled with text-
speak abbreviations, you’d probably assume you were deal-

172
“But What About...”
ing with a teenager. And you definitely don’t want to come off 
like a teenager! Therefore, draw a very firm line when it comes 
to text-speak.
Do not habitually write “LOL” after every witty or cute com-
ment. More importantly, do not “LOL after your own jokes or 
witticisms. In fact, the best way to use text-speak is ironically. 
Using an LOL or a WTF at an unexpected time can spark an 
emotion. For example:
In the above example, the girl is probably expecting a text 
that’s upset or angry. Throwing out an LOL in this situation 
is ironic, because you obviously are not LOLing. But the ironic 
response sends mixed signals and makes her wonder: what’s 
going on in his head? Even if she doesn’t meet up for the date, 
she’s still going to be thinking, “Why did he ‘LOL’ when I broke 
our plans?” 

173
“But What About...”
Do the same principles apply on WhatApp and Kakao? 
How about Facebook chat and instant messengers? 
Y
es and no. Instant message services are similar to text 
in that the formats are identical; however, there are ma-
jor differences. Most notably, “IMing” is different from 
“texting” because it’s less personal. When a girl logs onto a 
chat service, you’re one of many people she can converse with. 
There’s more of an emphasis on chatting than there is on you.
Conversely, when you’re texting with a girl, she’s only texting 
you. Very few people use text like an IM service to casually 
chat with a number of people throughout their day. 
If you understand this key difference, you can understand how 
to use these chat services attractively. If you choose to use in-
stant messaging services, apply more banter and humor. But 
the three ingredients of text no longer apply (because you’re 
not using text). You can still use the key-lock sequence—how-
ever, use it over a longer period of time. You might spend 10 
back-and-forth messages sparking an emotion, and then 10 
more creating a connection. 
Though, if possible avoid using these IM services for flirting 
and setting up dates. Since they’re so impersonal, girls often 
won’t take you very serious if you flirt with them on IM. Even if 

174
“But What About...”
they flirt back, it’s just “fun” to them. You have a much better 
shot of getting a girl out using your phone.
Once you’re comfortable with a girl, and have gone on a few 
dates with her, then using these services is fine. However, 
even then, make sure to continue to use your phone. If your 
relationship becomes a series of IM conversations then that’s 
not much of a relationship at all, is it? You have phone game. 
So use it the way it was intended: with your phone. 
Should I ever send pictures? 
A
bsolutely! Pictures are great for both sparking emo-
tions and making connections. 
Some great pictures to spark emotions are:
•	Funny, bizarre, or interesting things you see as you go 
about your day 
•	Delicious food
•	Funny-looking animals
Some great pictures to create connections are:
•	A picture that reinforces an inside joke you shared 
•	A picture of the place you met or somewhere special to 
your relationship
•	Something she told you she liked

175
“But What About...”
•	Something you told her that you liked
Absolutely avoid any pictures that could be construed as brag-
ging. Obviously this includes flattering self-portraits or pic-
tures that “name drop” (e.g., pictures that show you at an ex-
clusive club, etc.). Also, beware of subtlety bragging pictures. 
Ask yourself before sending the picture: is the purpose of me 
sending this to look cool? If you’re honest with yourself, and 
you answer yes, don’t send it.
Also, be careful with sending pictures to women you don’t 
know well. Sometimes women have older phones that don’t 
accept picture files. Sometimes guys freak out and think their 
texts are being ignored, when in actuality the girl never even 
received them. 
Be sure that a woman has a phone that can accept pictures 
and that she’s cool with you sending her pics before you go 
ahead and do it. This can be as simple as texting:
Finally, there may come a time when a woman asks you to 
text a serious picture of yourself. Usually these requests come 

176
“But What About...”
from girls you meet on online dating sites or girls who don’t 
remember what you looked like. In these cases, play it cool. 
Send a chill photo of yourself where it’s obvious you’re not 
trying too hard. 
Pictures you take while driving or doing something are ideal. 
Even a picture of you working at your computer is fine. Remem-
ber: it’s not how you look in the picture that’s attractive—it’s 
how you seem that’s attractive. 
Should I ever send pictures of my wiener? 
I
f politicians taught us anything, they taught us that sending 
naked pictures can come back to bite us in the ass! There-
fore, be very cautious with sending naked pictures over text. 
However, it would be hypocritical for you to ask a woman for 
naked pictures without supplying your own. If you’re a sexual-
ly open person, and feel comfortable sending naked pictures, 
then go ahead. But be prepared for that picture to get sent 
around to other people, posted on websites, or even forward-
ed to your mom (yes, it really can happen)!
While you may think you know a girl, you have no idea what 
she’ll be like when you break up with her. She may want to 
get revenge by posting embarrassing pictures of you on the 
Internet or elsewhere. Not only that, if she loses her phone 

177
“But What About...”
(or you lose yours), anyone can gain access to those pictures, 
and may use them for malicious purposes.
To cite a personal example, a friend of mine went on a date 
with a guy. She didn’t give this guy a second thought until 
months later when she started receiving all sorts of naked pic-
tures from him. She found this behavior very bizarre and out 
of character. A few weeks later, she got a call from him apolo-
gizing for the pictures and explaining that someone stole his 
phone, found some naked pictures he took of himself, and 
thought it’d be “funny” to text them to all his contacts. 
Yup. That’s right. Not only did she receive his private pics, so 
did his family, coworkers, and even his clients (this guy was 
a salesman who had some of his clients saved on his phone). 
The guy ended up losing his job over the fiasco! Because of a 
few naked pictures!
This is a cautionary tale: be careful with sending naked pic-
tures! If you do send them, you may want to consider imme-
diately deleting them off of your phone in case you ever lose 
it. Also, you may want to avoid full naked pictures that show 
your face. At least if your face isn’t in the picture, you have 
some deniability. 

178
I really like a girl. Since she’s special to me, I think I 
should try something different. Even though I know 
this is probably the wrong move, I’m going to con-
vince myself “telling her how I feel” is a good idea. 
I’ll deceive myself into thinking that I’m applying con-
cepts like “sparking an emotion” and “creating a con-
nection” when I’m really just doing what feels good in 
the short term.  
T
he biggest mistake guys make when using their phone 
is the mistake of self-deception. Even though a guy may 
know how he should use his phone, he still sometimes 
does what “feels right.” This usually means: 
•	Texting or calling a girl too much
•	Paying her gushing compliments
•	Telling her exactly how he feels
Phone Bloopers: 
Avoiding Common Mistakes of Phone Game

179
Phone Bloopers
•	Not proposing a meet up because he’s afraid she’ll say 
no
Guys don’t consciously think they’re doing anything wrong or 
incorrect when they act like this. Instead they usually rational-
ize things like, “Telling her that I really enjoyed meeting her 
and that I think she’s really special is a great way to spark her 
emotions and make a connection. I’m gonna do it!” Any objec-
tive reader of this book knows that merely telling a girl “how 
you feel” does not spark an emotion or make a connection.
Yet, when a guy’s feelings overwhelm him, his subjective view 
of the situations deceives him into seeing the situation differ-
ently. If you find yourself saying, “This girl’s different—I need 
to do something different with her” then you’re probably 
falling into the self-deception trap. Every guy will have these 
thoughts at some point. Just learn to recognize them.
This book works on every girl—no matter how attractive, spe-
cial, or “different” she is. The methods, techniques, and texts 
from this book appeal to women—all women. Moreover, 
once you see the success for yourself, don’t second-guess it. 
The same phone game you used to seduce that “cute” girl will 
work exactly the same when you apply it to the “perfect 10” 
girl. A more attractive girl does not require a different set of 
skills. 
What works works. Period.

180
Phone Bloopers
If you really like a girl, and cannot think objectively, then use the 
examples from this book verbatim. You’re better off “sticking to 
the script” rather than jeopardizing your chances with self-de-
ception. Even guys who are amazing with women still fall victim 
to self-deception; however, these guys are skilled enough to re-
alize it and do what they know works—not what “feels good.” 
I’m not sure I like the idea of “phone game.” Wouldn’t 
it just be better to “be myself” and say whatever’s 
on my mind? I feel like “crafting” texts and thinking 
about it too much is manipulative and insincere. 
W
hen it comes to dating advice, there’s a big difference 
between “being yourself” and doing what “feels 
good.” In the media, we often hear advice like “fol-
low your heart” or “go with your gut.” This often leads people 
to do what “feels good.” 
Unfortunately, when it comes to interacting with women, 
what “feels good” to most guys is validation. Many guys “feel 
good” when they have a woman’s attention or when a wom-
an says nice things to them. For example, a woman might say 
nice things like how “nice” or “sweet” you are, but she has ab-
solutely no interest in dating or sleeping with you. Even still, it 
“feels good” because such compliments provide instant vali-

181
Phone Bloopers
dation.  
This is no different from a guy who pigs out on junk food, feel-
ing “good” as he stuffs his face with sugary and fatty foods. 
Even though this guy is damaging his body and his health in the 
long run, as he’s stuffing his face with food, he “feels good.” 
When it comes to phone game, this is why guys do stupid 
things that they later regret: complimenting a woman too 
much; confessing their feelings; calling and texting her con-
stantly. As they’re doing this, they think, “I’m being myself!” 
They crave validation, so they do things that feel good in the 
short term. They’re convinced that they’re being more “hon-
est” or “true to themselves” by acting like this.
But that just isn’t case. They’re only doing what feels good in 
the short term.
Learning phone game isn’t learning how to act like someone 
you’re not. Nowhere in this book are you told to lie, act ma-
nipulative, or do anything immoral. Learning phone game is 
exactly that: learning the rules so you can play the game. 
As much as it contradicts the popular media portrayal of dating, 
there are certain “rules” to the game of dating. Any guy who 
isn’t enjoying success with women doesn’t need to change his 
identity—he just needs to learn “the rules.” If you’ve read this 
far, you now know what those rules are for phone game. But 
it’s up to you to apply them.

182
Phone Bloopers
Like the analogy used in a previous section, it’s a lot like go-
ing to buy a house. When you’re negotiating a buying price, 
there are certain things you can do to get a better deal. You 
wouldn’t tell the real estate agent that the house you want 
is your dream house and you’d pay any price for it. If you did 
that, the agent would know she has you by the balls. She’d see 
that you’re desperate to buy the house so she can rip you off.
In dating, women often won’t even bother ripping you off—
they’ll just avoid you. The metaphor of buying a house is just 
that: a metaphor. When it comes to dating, women like the 
thrill of the chase. They like the uncertainty of not knowing your 
full intentions. They like to play the game—probably more so 
than you do. Therefore, give her the gift of excitement, fun, 
and emotion. Play phone game by the rules and you’ll create 
an experience for her that she’ll find unique and thrilling.  
I sent a stupid text without thinking. I’m going to send 
her another text to make up for it. 
W
hile every guy sends a stupid text now-and-then, ab-
solutely do not send another text! One bad text is 
still better than a bad text with a “follow up” text. 
Nothing you can text after texting something stupid will be 
attractive. If you wrote something dumb, let it go. There’s al-
ways tomorrow or the next day. 

183
Phone Bloopers
I’m following all the steps of phone game but I’m not 
even getting a response. My phone game must suck. 
W
hen learning to become more successful with wom-
en, many guys succumb to this common fallacy: 
what you’re doing wrong is where you’re getting 
stuck. So, for example, if a guy were having problems landing 
“the kiss,” often he’d think he was doing something wrong in 
the moments leading up to the kiss. He’d attribute his “stick-
ing point” to sexual escalation.
This, however, is probably not his sticking point. Most often 
your “sticking point” is what happened a stage or two before 
where you’re getting stuck. So, for a guy who’s fumbling over 
the kiss, it might be because he’s not creating a flirty enough 
vibe—something that happens long before sexual escalation.
Likewise, if girls aren’t even responding to your texts or calls, 
it’s probably not your phone game. Instead, ask yourself what 
you were doing in the minutes before you got her number dur-
ing the initial interaction. Here are some “sticking points” that 
make girls unresponsive on text:
•	Was she really attracted? Did she seem genuinely 
happy to give you her number? 
•	Did you make a connection with her? How many “in-

184
Phone Bloopers
side jokes” or commonalities did you share? 
•	Did you sexually escalate? Did this girl understand 
that you were interested in a romantic/sexual rela-
tionship, and not a friendship?
Problems with your actual phone game happen when a girl 
responds to your texts, but never meets up with you. Or if it 
takes you a very long time to get her out on a date. Or if, when 
she does show up, she doesn’t look happy to be there. If you’re 
having these sorts of problems, then maybe your phone game 
does suck.
Most guys, however, think their phone game sucks when it 
doesn’t. The real issue is they’re taking numbers from girls 
who aren’t interested in them. Just because a girl gives out 
her number doesn’t mean she’s signed a social contract to 
date you, see you again, or even like you. Girls sometimes give 
their number out to be polite, to avoid an awkward situation, 
or even to get rid of a persistent guy! Sorry to say, but if you’re 
not getting a response, you may be falling into this category. 
If this sounds familiar, examine what you’re doing during the 
initial interaction. Try to pinpoint the moments you think may 
be causing a woman’s disinterest. Once you strengthen the 
impression you’re making during the initial encounter, you will 
be “in the game” when you go to use your phone. 

6
Afterword from Rob
B
ecoming fluent in dating means learning to speak 
in emotions. It doesn’t matter if you’re staring at a 
cell phone screen or at a beautiful girl across a bar, 
if you want to capture her attention, you must cap-
tivate her emotions.
Most of the problems you’re experiencing with women stem 
from this one concept. Often, guys delude themselves into 
thinking they’re getting somewhere with women by applying 
logic. Even if you’re executing dating advice—and even if that 
dating advice is good—if you think meeting women is a puzzle 
you need to solve, you’re not thinking of it in the right way. 
Dating is an emotional game—you must feel emotions and 
final thoughts...
Dialing Emotions
185

186
Dialing Emotions
she must feel emotions.
This may sound as if I’m advocating you to act gushy or flam-
boyant. When most guys hear that they need to get women 
emotional, they think they need over-the-top behavior as if 
they were actors in a soap opera. This is completely wrong.
Getting women emotional is all about subtly. It’s getting her 
to smile, to laugh, to punch you on the arm and say, “You’re 
crazy!” It’s the outgrowth of flirting and teasing. Sparking a 
woman’s emotions is directly proportional to how much of 
your personality you let her see.
The antithesis of your emotion-eliciting personality is logic. By 
definition, logic is objective and universal. My logic is no differ-
ent from your logic. It isn’t unique, subjective, or shocking. As 
such, logic will never inspire emotions.
Too often this is forgotten. The temptation to get logical is 
alluring. It often begins with the proclamation, “If she could 
only see…” or “If she only knew…” 
Perhaps she would change her mind if she could only see what 
a successful guy you are. And maybe she would fall in love with 
you if she only knew how good you’d treat her. But it’ll never 
happen. It’ll never happen because you’re not saying, “How 
can I get her to feel…” 
Indeed, getting a woman to “feel” something trumps every 

187
Dialing Emotions
shred of logic. How often do girls end up falling for guys who 
are horrible for them, treat them shitty, or are just downright 
unsavory characters? From an outside perspective it may seem 
as if this happens because “Girls only go for jerks” or because 
“Assholes finish first and nice guys finish last.”
But that’s missing the forest for the trees. It isn’t the bad be-
havior that causes a woman to choose these losers—it’s emo-
tions. Like it or not, the guy who she chose over you got her to 
feel something you didn’t. 
It may be the way he looks at her, the way he talks to her, or 
just the way he can get her to laugh. But rest assured, he didn’t 
outdo you with logic. It was emotions. 
To unlock the very same emotions, unshackle your personal-
ity. Guys often make the fatal mistake of “holding back” their 
wit, humor, anecdotes, and commentaries around women. 
They often think their personality isn’t “enough” to attract re-
ally beautiful women, and so they search for answers outside 
themselves—often in the form of logic.
Don’t make this mistake ever again. It doesn’t matter if you’re 
sitting down to text a girl you met over the weekend or you’re 
sitting across from your dream girl on your first date, let your 
personality loose. Don’t be afraid to make that joke, tell that 
story, or give her your opinion on something. Be as transpar-
ent as possible.

188
Dialing Emotions
Don’t, however, use this advice as an alibi to kiss a woman’s 
ass or deliver gushing soliloquys about how much you like her. 
In fact, doing so is a perfect example of “logic.” By telling a 
woman “how you feel,” you’re hoping that your proclamation 
will get her to feel the same way. Whenever you do one thing 
to get another thing, you’re succumbing to logic. 
So if you’re telling her about your accomplishments or even 
how well you’d treat her, you’re falling victim to logic. Don’t 
do that.
Appeal to her emotions. Unlike logic, emotions are an end in 
themselves. When you act in alignment to your personality, 
you’re just “being you.” The side-benefit of that alignment is 
eliciting a woman’s emotions. And the side-benefit of eliciting 
those emotions is attraction.
Thus, as you go out into the world to apply the tenets of phone 
game, always remember that emotion is the language you 
need to speak. As you set forth on this journey to improve the 
quality of your dating life, you will certainly hear the siren song 
of logic tempting you to try and “prove” or “manipulate” your 
way into a woman’s affections. Resist the temptation. And, in-
stead, tell her that story you know will get her doubled over in 
laughter. 
That’s emotions.

189
Make Small Talk Sexy: 
Conversation Escalation
Conversation Escalation  is a step-by-
step system that will show you 
how to use flirtatious and sexy 
“small talk” to quickly engage, 
connect with, and “turn on” a 
woman…
The program is jam packed with 
step by step instructions and word-for-
word examples of exactly what to say (and 
how to say it)… so that your words nestle their way 
in, and take complete control of her emotions…
And will completely IMPLANT the skill of carrying a 
“flirtatious” conversation with a woman into your 
game, brain, and personality, and make it a PERMA-
NENT part of you. (So you never struggle again)
http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/secrets
Further Resources: 
Dating Advice from Bobby and Rob

190
The 4 Elements of Game: 
Date the Girls You REALLY Want
The 4 Elements of Game won Dating Skills Re-
view Editor’s Choice award for its simple ef-
fectiveness. This classic of men’s dating ad-
vice makes improving your ability to meet 
and attract women a simple process.
Written by award-winning writer Rob 
Judge, this easy-to-read book isn’t go-
ing to dramatically change your per-
sonality. Instead, it’s going to teach 
you how to use BALANCE to attract 
more women with less effort. 
Women will see your MOST AT-
TRACTIVE personality whether you 
are the life of the party or more of 
the QUIET and CHILL type. This book 
will teach you a dating philosophy that fits to YOUR 
personality like an expensive, perfectly tailored suit. 
http://ebook.datehottergirls.com
Further Resources

191
The Natural Approach
I call this program “The Natural Approach” because it allows 
you to learn to meet women in the same way you learned ev-
erything else you’re good at... Naturally
…And, it allows you to still be your natural, authentic self 
while still doing things that actually work and attract dozens 
of women into your life…
You will learn a simple secret that gets rid of your fears of ap-
proaching women, and actually makes it a lot easier.
http://www.makesmalltalksexy.com/natural
The Advanced Dating Strategies
The Advanced Dating Strategies translates the exact behavior 
that women find sexy into an easy-to-follow system that you 
can master. Whether you want to meet and date more women 
or just attract one special woman, The Advanced Dating Strat-
egies will give you everything you need to display your most 
attractive personality. 
Unlike any other dating product, The Advanced Dating Strat-
egies is completely revolutionary because it’s a compressive 
training course. 
http://www.advanceddatingstrategies.net/go/
Further Resources

